

===== BOOK: osi.txt =====


    
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

  

OCCULT SCIENCE IN INDIA

  

AND AMONG THE ANCIENTS.

  

WITH AN ACCOUNT OF THEIR MYSTIC INITIATIONS AND THE HISTORY OF SPIRITISM.

 

 

  

BY

  

LOUIS JACOLLIOT

  

CHIEF JUSTICE OF CHANDENAGUR (FRENCH EAST INDIES) AND OF TAHITI (OCEANICA).

 

  

TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH BY

  

WILLIAM L. FELT.

 

  

LONDON

  

WILLIAM RIDER & SON, LIMITED

  

8 PATERNOSTER ROW, E.C.

  

[1919]

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, June 2008, by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

Click to enlarge
Dust Jacket Front Cover and Spine

Click to enlarge
Title Page

     
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. v]

  

PREFACE.

WE will lay aside, for the present, our inquiries into the general subject of the primitive civilizations of the far East, and the people who have sprung from the Brahminic stock in the old world, in order to publish the result of such researches as we have been able to make, during our long residence in India, into the subject of occult science, and the practices of those who have been initiated into the sect of the Pitris, which is Sanscrit for spirits or ancestral shades.

This is neither a doctrinal book nor a work of criticism.

We are not called upon to decide, either for or against, the belief in spirits, either mediating or inspiring, which was held by all who had been initiated in the temples of antiquity, which is to-day the keystone of the philosophical and religious instruction of the Brahmins, and to which many of our Western thinkers and scientists seem inclined to assent.

Being neither an advocate of this belief, nor the opposite, we are, on that account, better able to write its history.

An ardent partisan would have been too credulous, and would have taken everything upon trust. A rabid opponent would have made it his business to disparage and discredit it.

We shall give the words themselves, and set forth things

[p. iv]

as they actually were; we shall interpret and explain the Agrouchada-parikchai, which is the philosophical compendium of the Hindu spiritists; we shall tell what we saw with our own eyes, and shall faithfully record such explanations as we received from the Brahmins.

We shall pay particular attention to the phenomena which the Fakirs produce at will, which some regard as the manifestations of a superior intervention, and others look upon as the result of a shrewd charlatanism.

Upon this point we have but a word to say.

The facts which are simply magnetic are indisputable, extraordinary as they may seem.

As to the facts which are purely spiritual, we were only able to explain those in which we participated, either as actor or spectator, upon the hypothesis that we were the victims of hallucination--unless we are willing to admit that there was an occult intervention.

We shall describe things just as we saw them, without taking sides in the dispute.

These doctrines were known to the Egyptians, to the Jewish Cabalists, to the people of Finland, to the school of Alexandria, to Philo and his disciples, to the Gauls and to the early Christians, and, as in the case of the Hindus, they set them apart for the use of those who had been initiated. As for the ancient Chaldeans, the practice of popular magic and sorcery seems to have been the utmost limit of their attainments in this direction.

They have also given birth to a peculiar system of moral philosophy, whose place in the general scale of the metaphysical speculations of mankind we shall take occasion to point out.

[p. v]

ON the evening before the funeral sraddha is to take place, or on the day itself, he who gives the sraddha should, with all due respect, invite at least three Brahmins, such as those which have been already mentioned.

The Brahmin who has been invited to the sraddha of the spirit of the deceased should be entire master of his senses. He should not read the sacred Scriptures, but only recite, in a low tone, the invocations which it is his office to utter. as he should do, likewise. by whom the ceremony is performed.

The ancestral spirits, in the invisible state, accompany the Brahmins who have been invited; they go with them, under an aerial form, and occupy a place by their side when they sit down.--(MANU, book iii., slocas 187188-189.)

For a long time previous to their laying aside their mortal envelope, the souls which have practised virtue, like those which inhabit the bodies of Sanyassis and Vanasprathas--Anchorites and Cenobites--acquire the faculty of conversing with souls that have gone before to the swarga; that is a sign that the series of their transmigrations upon earth is ended.--(The words of the ancient Bagavatta, quoted in the Proem of the Agrouchada-Parikchai.)

     
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[] []

  

FIRST PART.

___________

  

THE DOCTRINE OF THE PITRIS AND THE OCCULT SCIENCES IN INDIA.

[] []

Remember, my son, that there is only one God, the sovereign master and principle of all things, and that the Brahmins should worship Him in secret; but learn also that this is a mystery, which should never be revealed to the vulgar herd:--otherwise great harm may befal you.--(Words spoken by the Brahmins upon receiving a candidate for initiation according to Vrihaspati.)

[] []

          A
   CREATION

     
      U
   PRESERVATION

       M
   TRANSFORMATION

     
   [p. 12] [p. 13]

  

OCCULT SCIENCE IN INDIA.

  

I.

  

SPIRITISM.

  

CHAPTER I. THE INITIATED AT THE ANCIENT TEMPLES.

IT is not to the religions writings of antiquity, such as the Vedas, the Zend-Avesta, or the Bible, that we are to look for an accurate expression of the highest thought of the period.

Written to be read, or rather chanted, in the temples, upon great festivals, and framed mainly with a view to priestly domination, these books of the law were not intended to make known to common people the secrets of a science which occupies the leisure moments of the priests and initiated.

"Bear in mind, my son," said the Hindu Brahmin to the neophyte, "that there is but one God, the sovereign master and principle of all things, and that every Brahmin should worship him in secret. Learn also that this is a mystery which should never be revealed to the vulgar herd; otherwise great harm may befal you."

We constantly meet with a similar prohibition in Manu.

[p. 14]

The primitive holy syllable, composed of the three letters A, U, M, and comprising the Vedic trinity, should be kept secret (Manu, book xi., sloca 265).

These three letters symbolize all the initiatory secrets of the occult sciences.

The honover, or primordial germ, is defined in the Zend-Avesta as follows:

"The pure, the holy, the prompt Honover, I tell. you plainly, O wise Zoroaster! existed before the sky, before the sea, before the earth, before the animals, before the trees, before fire, son of Ormuzd, before the pure man, before the deous, before the whole world; it existed before there was any substance"--should it not be explained, in its essence, to the magi alone? The common people cannot even know of the existence of this venerated name under penalty of death or madness.

The ancient Cabalists received a similar prohibition in the following passage from the Mishna:

"It is forbidden to explain the history of creation to two persons: or even the history of the Mercaba--or, the history of the chariot, treating of the attributes of the unrevealed being--to one alone, unless he is a wise and intelligent man, in which case it is permitted to intrust to him the headings of the chapters."

We are indebted to Mr. A. Frank, of the Institute, the eminent Hebraist, for an explanation of this curious passage of the Jewish Cabala. It will be seen that he confirms the opinion that we have just expressed, that an accurate interpretation of the beliefs of the sacerdotal castes and of the initiated, is not to be found in the works the multitude were allowed to see.

"Evidently this cannot refer to the text of Genesis, or that of Ezekiel, where the prophet describes the vision he saw upon the banks of the Chebar."

"The whole Scriptures, so to speak, were in every body's mouth. From time immemorial, the most scrupulous observers

[p. 15]

of tradition had deemed it their duty to go through it, at least once a year, in the temple. Moses himself is constantly recommending the study of the law, by which he always means the Pentateuch. Esdras, after the return from the Babylonish captivity, read it aloud before the assembled people. The prohibition, which we have just quoted, cannot possibly refer to the history of the creation or to Ezekiel's vision, which any one might seek to explain himself, or to interpret to others. It refers to an interpretation, or rather to a known, secretly taught doctrine--to a science, whose forms, as well as principles, were fixed, since we know how it was divided and that it was separated into chapters, each of which was preceded by a heading. Now, it is to be noted that Ezekiel's vision is totally unlike this; it contains a single chapter and not several--the first one in the works attributed to that prophet."

We see also that this secret doctrine contains two parts, which are not considered equally important, for one could be taught to two persons, while the whole of the other could never be divulged to any one person, even in case of compliance with the severity of the required conditions.

If we are to believe Maimonides, who was a stranger to the Cabala, though he could not deny its existence, the first half, entitled The History of the Genesis or Creation, taught the science of nature. The second, entitled Mercaba or the history of the chariot, contained a treatise on theology. This is the accepted opinion of all Cabalists.

Here is another fact which shows the same thing, not less conclusively.

"The Rabbi Jochanan said, one day, to the Rabbi Eliezer: 'Let me teach you the Mercaba.' The latter answered him: 'I am not old enough for that.' When he had grown old, the Rabbi Jochanan died, and after a while the Rabbi Assi came in his turn: 'Let me teach you the Mercaba,' said he; he replied: 'If I had thought myself

[p. 16]

worthy, I would already have learned it from the Rabbi Jochanan, your master.'"

This shows that, in order to be initiated into the mysterious science of the Mercaba, an eminent position and exalted intellect were not all that were required. The candidate must also have reached a certain age, and even when that condition, which is also observed by modern Cabalists, had been complied with, he did not always feel sure of possessing intellect or moral strength enough to assume the burden of the fearful secrets, which might endanger his religious convictions and the material observances of the law.

Here is a curious example, taken from the Talmud itself, in allegorical terms, of which it afterward gives an explanation.

According to the teachings of the masters, there were four who entered into the garden of delights, and their names are as follows: Ben Asai, Ben Zoma, Acher, and Rabbi Akiba.

Ben Asai was over-inquisitive and lost his life. We may apply to him this verse of Scripture: What a precious thing in the eyes of the Lord is the death of his saints.

Ben Zoma also looked, but he lost his reason. His fate justifies the sage's parable: Did you find honey? eat enough to suffice you, for fear that if you take too much your stomach may reject it.

Acher committed ravages among the plants.

Lastly, Akiba entered quietly and came out quietly; for the saint, whose name be blessed, had said: "Spare this old man! he is worthy to serve with glory."

It is hardly possible to construe this passage literally, or to suppose that it refers to a material vision of the splendors of another life, for there is no example in the Talmud of the use of the very mystical language here employed--as applied to paradise, How can, we allow, besides, that

[p. 17]

the contemplation, during life, of the powers who wait upon the elect in heaven, should have caused the loss of life or reason, as in the case of two of the persons mentioned in this legend.

We agree, with the most esteemed authorities of the synagogue, that the garden of delights, which the four doctors entered, was merely that mysterious science before spoken of--"terrible for weak intellects, since it often leads to insanity."

We have a reason for giving this long extract in full; apart from the support it lends to our theory, it enables us to show the intimate connection that exists between the doctrines of the ancient Jewish Cabalists and those of the Hindu votaries of the Pitris--or spirits. The latter, indeed, as we shall soon see, only admitted old men to initiation, and their scientific book, the Agrouchada-parikchai, as well as the books of the early cabalists--The Account of the Creation and the Mercaba, and finally, The Zohar--is divided into three parts, treating:

First.--Of the attributes of God.

Second.--Of the world.

Third.--Of the human soul.

In a fourth part, the Agrouchada-parikchai sets forth the relations of universal souls to each other, and indicates the modes of evocation by means whereof the Pitris may be induced to manifest themselves to men, and teach them everlasting truth, according to the higher or lower degree of perfection to which they may, individually, have attained through their good works.

The works of the Jewish Cabala, and especially the Zohar, do not contain this fourth part. (Not that the Cabalists deny that these disembodied souls can enter into relations with those souls which have not yet laid aside their fleshly envelope.) The evocation of the soul of Samuel, by the witch of Endor in the presence of Saul, as well as of numerous other biblical apparitions, are sufficient to show

[p. 18]

that the belief existed. But they made it the subject of an initiation, and these terrible secrets were only taught by word of mouth in the mysterious recesses of the temples.

It was not the study of God or the world which drove weak intellects into madness, as mentioned in that passage of the Talmud before spoken of, but rather the cabalistic practice of evocation in the supreme initiation.

"Whoever," says the Talmud, "has learned this secret and keeps it vigilantly, in a pure heart, may reckon upon the love of God and the favor of men; his name inspires respect; his science is in no danger of being forgotten, and he is the heir of two worlds--that we live in, and the world to come."

How can we know the secrets of the world to come, except by communicating with those who live there already.

We shall see that the Zohar of the Cabalists, and the Agrouchada-parikchai of the Hindus, profess the same ideas as to the primordial germ or God, the world and the soul. We incline, therefore, to the belief that we are correct in thinking that the practises openly taught by the Hindus, were also taught, so to speak, by word of mouth, by the ancient Thanaims of Judaism.

We find Indian pagodas, indeed, where the fourth part of the Agrouchada is separated from the three others, and forms, so to speak, a book by itself, which would lead to the supposition that it was revealed last and only to a small number of adepts.

We may add that the Cabalists of Judea and the votaries of the Pitris in India, used the same expression to designate the adepts of the occult sciences:

"He has entered the garden of delights."

No doctrinal work upon these matters has come down to us from the Egyptians or the ancient Chaldeans, but the fragmentary inscriptions we do possess show that a higher initiation also existed among both. The great name, the

[p. 19]

mysterious name, the supreme name, which was known only to Ea, was never to be uttered.

Thus, there is no doubt that the initiation in ancient times did not consist of a knowledge of the great religious works of the age, such as the Vedas, the Zend-Avesta, the Bible, etc., which everybody studied, but rather of the admission of a small number of priests and savants to an occult science, which had its genesis, its theology, its philosophy, and its peculiar practices, which it was forbidden to reveal to the vulgar herd.

India has preserved all the manuscript treasures of its primitive civilization. The initiated have never abandoned any of their old beliefs or practices.

It is, therefore, in our power to lift the veil completely from the Brahminic initiations.

After comparing the philosophical doctrines of the adepts of the Pitris with those of the Jewish Cabalists, we shall go on to show the relations or connection between the initiated of other nations and the initiated of the Hindu pagodas.

     
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 20]

  

CHAPTER II.

  

THE BRAHMINS.

Before touching upon the main point of our subject, it may not be amiss to say a few words about the Brahmins. We do not propose, however, to raise the question of their real origin, which has been the subject of so much scientific controversy. According to some, who have certain ethnological theories of their own to support, they came from the sterile and desolate plains, which extend from the eastern shore of the Caspian Sea to the banks of the Oxus. According to others, who agree with the sacred books and pundits of India upon that point, they originated in the country comprised between the Ganges and the Indus on the one side and the Godavery and the Kristnah on the other. With regard to the former hypothesis we have said elsewhere, [*1] "Such a theory seems singular, to say the least, when it is known that this country, which is held out to us as the cradle of the ancient Hindu race, does not possess a ruin, a tradition, a trace, which can furnish an ethnological foundation for such an opinion. This land, which is said to have produced the most astonishing civilization of ancient times, has not a monument or tradition of any sort to show for itself. It would be quite as logical, indeed, to make the Aryans or Brahmins originate in the sandy deserts of Sahara."

According to the second theory, the Brahmins came

[p. 21]

originally from the plains of Central Hindustan. This opinion has historic and geographical truth in its favor, as well as the authority of all the learned pundits and of Manu, whose celebrated words are well known:

"Courouckchetra, Matsya, and the land of Boutchala, which is also called Cauya-Cobja (the Mountain of the Virgin), and Souraswaca, also called Mathoura, form the country adjacent to that of Brahmavarta, the country of virtuous men, or, in other words, of the Brahmins."

These countries are included in the quadrilateral formed by the four rivers just named. We shall not dwell upon this point further, however, as it is not our intention to discuss ethnological problems in the present work, but rather to set forth and elucidate religious conceptions.

Manu, the legislator, who sprang from the Temples of India, attributes to the Brahmins a Divine origin.

For the propagation of the human race, from his mouth, from his arm, from his thigh, from his foot, the Sovereign Master produced the Brahmin, priest--the Xchatrya, king--the Vaysia, merchant--the Soudra, slave.

By his origin, which he derives from the most noble member, because he was the first-born, because he possesses the Holy Scriptures, the Brahmin is, by right, the Lord of all creation.

Everything that the world contains is the Brahmin's property; by his primogeniture and his eminent birth, he is entitled to everything that exists.

The Brahmin eats nothing that does not belong to him, receives no garment that is not already his, and bestows

[p. 22]

no alms from the property of others that does not also belong to him. It is through the Brahmin's generosity that other men enjoy the goods of this world. (Manu, book i.)

This is the original source of the doctrine of divine right.

For several thousand years the Brahmins (priests) ruled over India without dispute. The kings, or, as we might rather say, the chiefs, were only their agents. The mass of the people, like a flock of sheep, maintained the upper classes in luxury and idleness by their labor.

In the temples, which were vast sacerdotal storehouses filled with the treasures accumulated by the toil of the laboring classes, the priests appeared before the eyes of the assembled multitude, clad in gorgeous vestments. Kneeling before idols of wood, granite, or bronze, of their own contrivance, they set an example of the most absurd . Their principal motive in the performance of their religious duties was the maintenance of their temporal supremacy, and when the sacrifices were over, the Vaysia and Soudra returned to their tasks, the chiefs to their pleasures, and the priests to their mysterious abodes, where they engaged in the study of the sciences and of the highest philosophical and religious speculations.

The hour came when the Xchatrias, or kings, made use of the people to throw off the theocratic yoke, but when they had conquered the priests, and assumed the title of Lords of Creation, they abandoned their late allies, and said to the Brahmins:

"Preach to the people the doctrine that we are the elect of God, and we will give you all the wealth and privileges you desire."

That was the basis of their agreement, and for twenty thousand years and more the Soudra, the servum pecus, the people, have never been able to break it up.

Reduced to a purely religious role, the Brahmins used

[p. 23]

all their power to keep the multitude in ignorance and subserviency. Mistrustful lest some members of their order more ambitious than the rest might, one day or other, seek to further their own ends by stirring up the lower classes to revolt, they placed the secret of their religious belief, of their principles, of their sciences, under the shield of an initiatory ceremony, to the highest grade of which those only were admitted who had completed a novitiate of forty years of passive obedience.

There were three degrees of initiation.

The first included all the Brahmins of the popular cult, or those who officiated at the pagodas, whose business it was to work upon the credulity of the multitude. They were taught to comment upon the three first books of the Vedas, to direct the religious ceremonies, and to perform sacrifices. The Brahmins of the first degree were in constant communication with the people. They were its immediate directors, its gurus.

The second degree included the exorcists, the soothsayers, the prophets, and the evocators of spirits, whose business it was, in times of difficulty, to act upon the imagination of the masses, through supernatural phenomena. They read and commented upon the Atharva-Veda, which was a collection of magical conjurations.

In the third degree the Brahmins had no direct relations with the populace, the study of all the physical and supernatural forces of the universe being their only occupation. They never appeared outside except through awe-inspiring phenomena, which spectators were not allowed to scrutinize too closely. According to the celebrated Sanscrit sorits, the gods and spirits were at their disposition:

Devadinam djagat sarvam.
 Mantradinam ta devata.
 Tan mantram brahmanadinam.
 Brahmana mama devata.

[p. 24]

Everything that exists is in the power of the gods.

The gods are in the power of magical conjurations.

Magical conjurations are in the power of the Brahmins,

Therefore, the gods are in the power of the Brahmins.

It was impossible to arrive at the highest degree without having passed through the first two, where a process of weeding, as it were, was constantly going on, having regard to the ability and intelligence of the candidates.

It would have been impossible to conceive of a more effective instrument of social conservatism, and our modern doctrinaires may well regard it with a jealous eye.

Those who were too intelligent, or who were not sufficiently amenable to discipline, owing to their inflexibility of character, were soon lost amid the crowd of bigots and fanatics of the first degree, who were as submissive and free from ambition as could possibly be desired. The lower clergy, if we may be allowed to use the expression, were not much above the level of the rest of the Hindu people, whose superstitions they shared, and whom they taught, perhaps, honestly. Absorbed in the ordinary observances of religious worship, that independence of mind which usually accompanies knowledge was not to be apprehended from them. It was not until twenty years had elapsed that promotion was possible from the first to the second degree, where the veil of the occult sciences first began to be uplifted, and the same period of time was necessary in order to surmount the mysterious barriers of the third degree. That class of initiates studied the Agrouchada-Parikchai, or the Book of Spirits.

Above this last degree of initiation was the Supreme Council, under the presidency of the Brahmatma, or supreme chief of all those who had been initiated.

Only a Brahmin who had passed his eightieth year could exercise this pontificate. He was the sole keeper of

[p. 25]

the elevated formula, which included a summary of all knowledge, and was contained in the three mystic letters--

A

U          M

[paragraph continues] --signifying Creation, Preservation, Transformation. He commented upon them only in the presence of the initiate.

Residing in an immense palace, surrounded by twenty-one walls, the Brahmatma showed himself to the multitude only once a year, encompassed with such pomp and pageantry that his  impressed the imagination of all who saw him, as though they had been in the presence of a God.

The common people thought that he was immortal.

In fact, in order to maintain this belief in the minds of the masses, the death of the Brahmatma and the election of his successor were kept profoundly secret, and were never known by them. Everything occurred in the silence of the temples, and those who had been initiated in the third degree alone took part in his election. Only those who were members of the Supreme Council were eligible.

"Whoever among those who have been initiated into the third degree shall reveal to a profane person a single one of the truths, a single one of the secrets entrusted to his keeping, shall be put to death." [*1] The recipient of the revelation met a similar fate.

Finally, to crown the whole system, there existed a higher word than the mysterious monosyllable A, U, M--which made him who possessed the clue to it, almost it equal to Brahma himself. The Brahmatma alone possessed it and transmitted it to his successor in a sealed box.

Even now, when the Brahminic authority has sunk so

[p. 26]

low before Mongol and European invasion; when every pagoda leas its Brahmatma; this unknown word has been revealed to no human power, and has been kept a profound secret. It was engraved in a golden triangle and carefully kept in a sanctuary of the Temple of Asgartha, of which the Brahmatma alone had the keys. For this reason, also, he wore, upon his tiara, two crossed keys upheld by two kneeling Brahmins, as a sign of the precious deposit which had been entrusted to his care.

This word and triangle were also engraved upon the gem of the ring, which this religious chief wore as a sign of his dignity. It was also set in a golden sun, which stood upon the altar upon which the supreme. pontiff offered every morning the sacrifice of the Sarvameda, or sacrifice to all the forces of nature.

At the death of the Brahmatma, his body was burned upon a golden tripod and his ashes secretly thrown into the Ganges. If, in spite of every precaution, a report of his death was bruited abroad, the priests adroitly spread abroad the rumor that the supreme chief had ascended for a time to Swarga (heaven) in the smoke of the sacrifice, but would soon return to the earth.

Numerous revolutions have so thoroughly disturbed the social and religious condition of India, that Brahminism no longer possesses any supreme chief. Each pagoda has its three degrees of initiation, and its own private Brahmatma. The chiefs of these temples are often at open hostility with each other. However, this does not seem to have affected their religious belief, as yet, and we shall see, as we study the methods in use in the three different classes of initiation, that the Hindu Brahmins still cling to their old religious prescriptions.

Footnotes

^20:1 The Genesis of Humanity.

^25:1 The Sons of God.

     
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 27]

  

CHAPTER III.

  

THE BRAHMIN--FROM HIS BIRTH TO HIS NOVITIATE--THE CEREMONY OF THE DJITA CARMA.

When a Brahmin's wife has given birth to a son, her husband is careful to note upon his tablets the hour, the day, the year, and the epoch, of the occurrence, together with the stars under whose auspices the child has just been born.

He carries this information to the astronomer of the pagoda, who casts the horoscope of the new-born child. Nine days thereafter a stand is erected and decorated with flowers and foliage, upon which the mother takes her seat, with the boy in leer arms.

An officiating Pourohita, or Brahmin belonging to the first class of initiation, then performs the poudja, or sacrifice to Vischnou, in front of the stand. He pours a little lustral water upon the child's head, and into the hollow of the hands of the father and mother, who drink it, and then he sprinkles all those present with the same liquid.

The father then brings a dish of earthenware, bronze, or silver, according to his means, upon which is a little betel, and a present for the Pourohita.

By this ceremony the child is purified from all the uncleanness attached to his birth.

From this time, the mother, who since her confinement, has stayed in a separate room, is obliged to live ten days longer by herself in a retired place, at the end of which time she is allowed to go to the temple, to purify herself from her uncleanness.

[p. 28]

It is unnecessary to call attention to the fact that a similar custom in such cases prevailed among the Jews.

The Ceremony of the Nahma-Carma.

Twelve days afterward the ceremony of the giving of the name, or of the Nahma-Carma, as it was called, took place.

The house was decorated as if for a festival, and all the relatives and friends of the Brahmin caste alone were invited.

The father, after performing an oblation to the fire and the nine principal divinities which rule the planets, transcribed with a brush upon a wooden tablet the horoscope of his son, which was cast at the pagoda, with the name that he proposed to give him.

He then uttered three times in a loud voice the name which he had just written, which all present repeated after him. He closed with the following words:

"Blessed be the name of Brahma. This is my son and his name is Narayana [or any other name]. Listen attentively in order that you may remember it."

He then went out of the house at the head of a procession consisting of all his guests, and planted in his garden, or in front of the dwelling, a cocoanut, tamarind, or palm tree, according to the section of country where he resided, saying:

"In the name of the powerful and just Brahma, all you who are here present, bear this, in mind. This tree is planted on Narayana's name-day, in the thirty-fifth year of the fifth lunar century of the third divine epoch" (or any given date).

This, as the reader will understand, is given merely as a matter of form.

At the close of the ceremony, a grand feast is given, of

[p. 29]

which all present partake. Previous to their departure, the father presents to each a cup of cedar- or sandal-wood, upon which is engraved the horoscope, or more generally the monogram of the child.

The object of this present is to furnish evidence, in case any dispute should thereafter arise as to the legitimacy of the child's birth. When summoned as witnesses before the caste tribunal, the guests appear with their cups in their hands, and testify as follows:

"In the name of the powerful and just Brahma; the words which proceed front my mouth are strictly true. This cup was given to me by Covinda, on Narayana's name-day, in the thirty-fifth year of the fifth lunar century of the third divine epoch. There can be no doubt that Narayana is the son of Covinda."

The Pourohita, or Brahmin who is present at the ceremony, then offers a sacrifice to the Pitris, or ancestral spirits, and asks them to protect the new-born child.

The father then distributes betel among the guests and makes a present to the officiating priest according to his means.

The Ceremony of Anna-Prassana.

When the child is in the seventh month of his age, rice is given him to eat for the first time. This festival is called the Anna-Prassana.

As in the case of the other ceremonies the father invites all his relatives and friends and sends to the pagoda for a Brahmin to officiate. After a general bath in the tank of ablutions, upon which the Pourohita has scattered a few drops of lustral water, all the guests take their seats upon a stand decorated with branches of fruit-trees in full bearing, and the priest offers a sacrifice to the lunar spirits that protect the family.

Meanwhile, the women sing an appropriate psalm and

[p. 30]

perform the ceremony of aratty (which has the property of driving away evil spirits) above the child's head for the first time.

The priest then blesses the Brahminical girdle which is a sign of his caste, and which is bound around the child's loins for the first time. A little boiled rice is then put in his mouth, and everybody sits down to the repast.

The ceremony terminates with the distribution of betel and a present to the officiating priest.

The Ceremony of the Tchaoula.

When a child reaches the age of three years, the ceremony of the Tchaoula, or the Tonsure, is performed.

This festival is much more solemn than the preceding, for the child, who is present, is able for the first time to murmur the name of the divinity, as well as the names of the protecting spirits of his home and family.

After bathing and decorating the child with a necklace and bracelets of mingled coral and sandal-wood beads, he is led beneath a pandal, which is a sort of dais formed of trees procured for that purpose and of flowers of every description.

He is surrounded by his relatives and guests and the priest offers an oblation to all the Pitris, or family and ancestral shades, in both branches, on the father's and mother's side.

The statue of Siva-Lingam, the image of perpetual fruitfulness, is brought in covered with flowers and fruits.

At this point of the office the barber commences. After prostrating himself in the presence of the god, in the midst of female singing, accompanied by the musicians from the pagoda, he proceeds to shave the child's head, leaving a small lock of hair on the back part, which is never cut.

During this operation the child's female relatives perform the aratty upon the heads of those present, in order

[p. 31]

to drive away evil spirits, and everybody preserves a religious silence.

Having finished his duties, the barber retires with his pay, which consists of a certain quantity of rice, and the priest cleanses the child from any impurity which he may have derived from unclean contact with the barber.

The child's toilet is then made anew, and after a fresh bath in the sacred tank of ablutions, in order to propitiate all the spirits and genii of the plants to which that day is consecrated the ceremony closes as before with a repast and presents.

Until the age of nine years the Brahmin remains in the hands of the women until the term for commencing his novitiate arrives.

     
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 32]

  

CHAPTER IV.

  

THE BRAHMIN--FROM HIS NOVITIATE TO HIS RECEPTION INTO THE FIRST DEGREE OF HIS INITIATION.

The Ceremony of Oupanayana.

[Taken from the Nitia-Carma, the first part of the Agrouchada-Parikchai, or book of the occult sciences of the Brahmins.]

The word Oupanayana signifies introduction to the study of the sciences. We give this passage of the Agrouchada in the form of verses, as it was written:

It is now time for the virtuous father, who possesses a son over whose head has rolled three times three years, the figure of the tutelary spirits, to perform the ceremony of the Oupanayana.

He should procure vessels of gold, silver, bronze, or earthenware, according to his means, which are to be distributed to the Brahmins after the repast.

He should lay in an abundant supply of rice, seeds, fruit, oil, butter, sugar, vegetables, and milk, for he has not only to entertain his guests, but the larger part should be offered as an oblation to the Pitris, or set apart for the poor and orphans.

When the father of a family gives food to the suffering,

[p. 33]

to returning travellers, to pilgrims, and to little children who look in curiously at the feast with envious eyes as they pass, when, like a sower, he scatters outdoors handfuls of seeds for the little birds, the spirits and his ancestral shades are content.

The festival should last four days, and new vessels and fresh and pure provisions should be used daily.

He should prepare powdered vermilion, sandal-wood, and saffron, in order that the women may trace magic circles around the house to drive away evil spirits and attract good spirits.

These preparations being completed, the father should ask the Pourohita to name a day of auspicious omen. It should never be at the commencement nor at the end of the moon. It should never either be an odd day.

The pandal should then be erected with consecrated flowers and foliage, among which the lotus flower should predominate. He should then spread upon the ground a thick layer of cousa grass, and he should invite his relatives, commencing with those in the ascending line on the father's side, after which he should bid his friends and all Brahmins who have reached the age of one hundred years.

The women should sumptuously decorate the pandal with hanging garlands and bouquets of flowers so as to form alternate bands of red and white.

All the guests before going to the place where the ceremony

[p. 34]

is to be held, should perform the usual purifications in the sacred tank of the pagoda.

When the parents and friends are all assembled the Pourohita should be introduced with all due marks of respect. He should bring with him a girdle and the skin of a gazelle. A gazelle's skin is always pure, and he who sits thereon does not contract any uncleanness.

The Pourohita should then perform the san-colpa, or preparation of the soul, in which he is absorbed in the contemplation of Vischnou, who is represented as the author and preserver of the universe.

He should regard him as a distributor of every favor, and as one who crowns with success all our enterprises. With this view he should pronounce his name three times and offer him adoration.

He should then contemplate the infinite perfection of Brahma. He should ponder over the three triads, [*1] which have sprung from him, and have created the eight million four hundred thousand kinds of living creatures, at the head of which is man.

He should then ponder over the existence of the universe, which is to last a hundred years of the gods, [*2] which are divided into four periods, of which the first, second, and half of the third have already elapsed. He should then perform an oblation to the universe.

[p. 35]

He should think of the different incarnations of Vischnou, and of that of the boar under whose form the god vanquished the giant Hirannia.

He should prostrate himself before the fourteen categories of celestial (Pitris) and inferior spirits by which the universe is filled.

He should perform an oblation to the pure fluid which is called Agasa, and which is the essence of life.

He should pronounce the mysterious monosyllable which was to be kept from the knowledge of the multitude, by merely moving his lips.

He should offer sacrifice to Swayambhouva, the self-existent being.

He should evoke the spirits of his ancestors and ask them to be present at the ceremony.

He should drive away all evil spirits whose presence might otherwise disturb the sacrifices.

He should propitiate the superior spirit Poulear, who presides over obstacles and brings enterprises to a successful issue.

All the guests should repair again to the sacred tank of ablution, where they purify themselves according to their method prescribed.

[p. 36]

Upon their return the Brahmatchary, or neophyte, should take his place beneath the pandal of flowers, and all the married women present should chant consecrated psalms and at the same time anoint his limbs with perfumed oil and saffron and rub his eyelids with antimony.

When his toilet is finished the father and mother of the neophyte should take their place by his side beneath the pandal, and the women should perform upon their heads the ceremony of the aratty, in order to remove evil omens.

The Poudja, or sacrifice, is then offered to all the tutelary spirits of the family, as well as the firstlings of all the dishes prepared for the repast.

All the men and women should then sit down on cocoanut leaves covered with lotus leaves, and should turn their backs so that they may not see each other eat.

Rice, clarified butter, oil, sugar, fruits, and vegetables are then brought in for the feast, and at the close of the repast the father distributes betel and gives a present to the Pourohita, after which everybody retires.

Such was the first day of the Oupanayana.

The next day was called Mouhourta, or the great day, for it was that on which the neophyte was to be invested with the girdle.

The Brahmatchary should take his place beneath the

[p. 37]

pandal, between his father and mother, and all three should turn their faces toward the East.

The Brahmatchary should have his loins girt around with new linen of pure material, and the women should gently rub his chest and arms with the powdered saffron and sandal-wood mingled, and should sing consecrated psalms.

The Pourohita should then advance with a silver furnace filled with burning coals: he should perform the sacrifice to the spirits, by evoking them around the fire, and should throw incense and powdered sandal-wood upon the fire, to gratify their sense of smell.

This fire should be carefully kept until the end of the festival Oupanayana, for if it should happen to be extinguished, great harm might ensue, and the familiar spirits might desert the house.

The preservation of this fire should be given in charge to nine Brahmins and their wives.

All the Married women who happen to be among the guests should go in great pomp to the consecrated tank, preceded by musical instruments, and bearing a copper vessel, which they are to fill with water.

Upon their return to the house they should cover the mouth of the vessel with mango leaves, and hang above it a branch of a banana tree, freshly cut, with all its fruits.

[p. 38]

They should all then go together to the neighboring forest, where, having found a nest of white ants, they should fill ten earthen pots with earth beaten and sifted by these animals.

Returning then to the other guests, they should plant in these pots ten different kinds of seeds, which they should sprinkle with water taken from the sacred tank.

When this has been done, the Pourohita should bring all the pots together and stretch over them a fine cloth; he should recite the invocation to the tutelary spirits and ask them to manifest their power by auspicious omens.

Imposing his hands above the cloth, he should then pronounce in a low voice, unheard by those present, the following magic words:

Agnim-Pa-Patra.

Paryaya.

Paroxa.

These are Sanscrit words, signifying:

Agnim--sacred fire,

Pa--holy water,

Patra--purified vessel,

Paryaya--magic vegetation,

Paroxa--invisible.

The Pourohita should utter these words nine times nine times. The tutelary spirits will then manifest themselves and the cloth is gradually raised during the continuance of the invocation.

The Pourohita should then remove the cloth, and he will find that the ten seeds have appeared above the earth

[p. 39]

in the ten pots, and ten shrubs have grown as high as the Pourohita's forehead, bearing flowers and fruits each after its kind.

The Brahmatchary's mother should then weave a crown of flowers gathered from these trees, and should place it upon her son's head. The Pourohita should then distribute among all of those present the fruits which have grown beneath the cloth, which the guests should eat, repeating the following words three times:

The auspicious omen has manifested itself.

The auspicious omen has manifested itself.

The auspicious omen has manifested itself.

The Brahmatchary then receives the triple cord of the novitiate.

A new invocation was then made to the spirits of the planets and ancestors, thanking them for their protection and intervention, and a piece of consecrated saffron was attached about the young Brahmin's neck.

The barber should then shave the neophyte's head and cut the nails of his feet and hands to the sound of the women's songs, accompanied by the musician from the pagoda.

The young Brahmin is then required to take a bath in the tank of ablution, in order to remove any impurity which he may have contracted by being in contact with the barber, who is unclean, and the women attire him in new and pure linen garments.

The Pourohita then advances to his side and, by the imposition of hands, removes his ignorance and qualifies him

[p. 40]

for the study of the sciences, which will now occupy every moment of his time. He should then gird about his waist a triple girdle, woven from the sacred grass of the Darba.

Reciting the conjurations of the neck and bosom, the Pourohita then decorates the neophyte with the triple girdle of the Brahrninic initiation, and consecrates him Brahmatchary or candidate for initiation.

At this time a Guru, or master of the sacred science, is chosen for the young Brahmatchary. He must be more than sixty years old.

The Guru should take his new pupil aside, and turning his face toward the East, he should say to him, "Oh! my son, you have now taken your seat by the side of men, may your body be free from all impurity; may your thoughts always turn toward the good, for Brahma will now commence to know you by your actions.

"Know that the shades of your ancestors in an aerial form will attend you in all your studies, and will reveal to you hereafter, if you are worthy, the grand secret of being.

"Always bear in mind that what you will now learn should never be revealed to the vulgar herd, and that you will never arrive at the end of your initiation if you are unable to hide the secret of things in the deepest recesses of your heart."

Having uttered these words, the Guru for the first time calls the young Bramatchary, Donidja, which means twice born.

[p. 41]

The first birth is merely the advent into material life, the second birth is the entrance to a spiritual life.

So ends the second day.

On the third day the Brahmatchary for the first time offers a sacrifice to fire, and performs an oblation to the spirits and to his ancestral shades, in the presence of all the guests.

On the fourth day the father of the young Brahmin who has just received the investiture should make suitable presents to all the Brahmins who were present at the ceremony, and should not forget to give a cow and a hundred manganys of rice to his son's Guru.

Having repeated the san-colpa, the Pourohita should perform an oblation to all the spirits that he evoked to be present at the festival, and he should thank them for answering his summons.

All present should say as they separate, "The child is dead, a man is born."

We purposely refrain from accompanying this curious passage from the Agrouchada-Parikchai with any comments of our own. As we have said before, we merely propose to give an impartial account of these strange customs.

We will say, however, that in this ceremony of the Oupanayana or investiture of the sacred girdle, which makes a man of the boy, the Pitris, or spirits, and the ancestral shades take the most prominent part. They are evoked

[p. 42]

by a Pourohita, they are present during the whole festival, and they almost exclusively receive the sacrifice, oblations, and firstlings of all the dishes prepared for the repast which terminates the mysterious celebrations of each particular day.

Vischnou, as well as Brahma, the lord of all beings, and the master of gods and men, is only evoked by the Pourohita in order to prepare himself for the ceremony by the contemplation of the perfections of the creator and preserver of the universe.

The Brahmatchary continues his studies as novice until the time of his marriage, which takes place about the sixteenth or eighteenth year of his age. During this period he lives with his Guru, or director, and engages in the study of the sacred books, and of the mathematical and astronomical sciences.

He is not yet admitted to the study of the occult sciences, whose first principles he will only begin to learn when he has reached the degree of Grihasta, or head of a family, or of Pourohita, or officiating priest.

The following instructions are taken from Manu:

After the initiation of the Brahmatchary, the Guru teaches him the duty of purity and morality, the maintenance of the sacred fire, and the morning, noon, and evening sandyas, which are a kind of prayers.

After having performed the prescribed ablutions, and before opening the Veda, turning his face toward the East, the Brahmatchary should pay homage to the sovereign master of the universe.

During the reading of the Veda he should control his senses, and stand with clasped hands in an attitude of homage before the sacred scriptures. At the commencement

[p. 43]

and close of the reading, he should kiss the feet of his director, and not commence nor stop until he hears the Guru tell him to begin his studies or to desist.

Always, at the commencement or end of his reading, he should pronounce the sacred monosyllable, A, U, M, which contains the mystery of the Trinity. That will make him remember what he has learned, otherwise it will vanish like letters traced upon the waters.

He should pronounce this mysterious monosyllable, which is an invocation to the Trimourti and which expresses the substance of the Veda, according to Brahma himself, with face turned toward the East; he should be free from all impurity, should hold his breath, and have in his hands a stalk of sacred cousa grass.

The Brahmatchary should never cause the  trouble to the Guru who has undertaken to educate him and to instruct him in the knowledge of the sacred scriptures. He should venerate him like a father and mother.

It nowhere appears in the Agrouchada-Parikchai that it is lawful for the Brahmatchary to make use of the invocation of the mysterious monosyllable, A, U, M, as he is allowed to do by Manu, but the ancient legislator uses the word here in its vulgar sense, in which it represents the religious triad; as for the mystical signification of the three letters, he forbids its explanation, like the book of the Pitris.

The primitive holy syllable, composed of the three letters, in which the vedic trinity is comprised, should be kept secret. (Manu, book xi., sloca 265.)

[p. 44]

We shall not describe in the present work the Brahmatchary's marriage ceremony nor his funeral, in case of his death before his novitiate is completed. The restricted limits of a single volume will not allow us to dwell upon these matters except at the expense of the more interesting parts of our subject.

The real practice of the occult sciences did not commence until the second or third degree of initiation. It is mainly important that we should make ourselves acquainted with these, the novitiate and the first class of initiation being only preparatory to the higher degrees.

Suffice it to say that the evocation of the ancestral shades of the Pitris always formed a prominent feature, both of the marriage ceremony and of the funeral rites. They could not take place without their being present.

Footnotes

^34:1 Nara-Nara-Viradj  Ayni-Voya-Sourya * Brahma * Vischnou-Siva.

^34:2 Each year of the gods is equal to several thousands of the lunar years.

     
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 45]

  

CHAPTER V.

  

THE FIRST DEGREE OF INITIATION--ABLUTIONS--PRAYER--CEREMONIES--EVOCATION.--EVOCATION.

[Taken from the Agrouchada-Parikchai.]

After his marriage, the Brahmatchary left the class of neophytes, but he did not, however, enter that of the Grihastas, or heads of family, who had been admitted to the first degree of initiation. In order to do so, it was requisite, first, that he should have paid his ancestors' debt by the birth of a son, who would perpetuate their race; second, that he should be deemed worthy, upon the report of his Guru, of taking this step.

Upon admission he might remain a simple Grihasta, or he might be attached to the service of a pagoda, in the capacity of a Pourohita; in either case, he was now a member of the great sacerdotal family, and during twenty years all the acts of his daily life would be instrumental in the preparation, both mentally and physically, by meditation, prayers, sacrifices, ablutions, and the strictest attention to personal cleanliness, for the superior transformation which was now the object of all his efforts.

According to the first part of the Agrouchada-Parikchai, . which we have already quoted, and which is called the Nittia-Carma, the following is an account of the innumerable corporeal and spiritual purifications which were enjoined upon him, and none of which could be neglected under the severest penalties.

They are divided in the original work in the following manner:

[p. 46]

  

PROEMIUM.

The Grihasta should leave his mat every morning before sunrise, and his first words, upon leaving his bed, should he an invocation to Vischnou.

He should then address the great essence, whose number three is contained in one, as well as the superior spirits, saying, Brahma! Vischnou! Siva! and you, superior Genii of the seven planets, cause the day to appear.

The second name which he should pronounce, is that of the Guru under whom he has accomplished his novitiate. He should say:

O holy Guru, I offer you my adorations and I love you as a superior spirit who has already left the world. It is through your wise lessons that I have been able to avoid evil.

He should then pray to the superior Being, to descend into his heart, saying:

Brahma is now within me, and I shall enjoy the most perfect happiness.

He should then address Vischnou, saying:

O God, who art the purest of spirits, the principle of all things, the master of the world, and the fertilizer of nature, it is by thy orders that I have left my couch and have ventured among the shoals of life.

He should then ponder over the duties of the day, and the good works and meritorious actions which it is his duty to perform.

[p. 47]

He should remember, in order to be agreeable to the gods, that all his actions should be performed with fervor and piety, not negligently or perfunctorily.

Having set his mind upon the performance of every duty, the should then utter aloud the thousand names of Vischnou.

The Agrouchada gives the whole litany of Vischnou, which is actually composed of a thousand names. They commence as follows:

Hail to Vischnou!
 Hail to Hary!
 Hail to Narayana!
 Hail to Covinda!
 Hail to Kechva! etc.

The reader will gladly dispense with the rest.

  

FIRST PART.

The Regular Ablutions.

Taking in his hand a copper vessel, he should go to some isolated place, at least an arrow's flight from his dwelling, to perform his needs.

It is impossible for us to give these singular precepts in full. They are alike among all Eastern people. We read in Deuteronomy, chapter 23, verses 12 and 13. (Habebis locum extra castra ad quem egrediaris ad requisita naturae, gerens paxillum in balteo; cumque sederis, fodies per circuitum, et egesta humo operies.)

In the choice of a suitable place he should avoid the ground of a temple and the banks of a river, or a tank, a well, a much-travelled road, or a sacred wood.

[p. 48]

He should not wear the pure cloth which he uses as a garment.

He should suspend the triple cord, which is a sign of his dignity, from his left ear.

He should stop in a place where he is sure of not being seen, and while he stays there he should not have in mind or sight, the gods, the Pitris, the ancestral shades, the sun, the moon, the seven planets, or fire, or a Brahmin, a temple, a statue of the divinity, or a woman.

He should maintain the profoundest silence.

He should chew nothing and have no burden upon his head.

Upon his departure, after washing his feet and hands in the water contained in a covered vessel, he should go to the banks of a river or tank to perform the ablution of his secret parts.

Having come to the banks of the river or tank where he proposes to purify himself, he should choose a suitable place, and a little fine sand which he should use in conjunction with the water to effect his purification.

He should know that there are several kinds of impure earths which he should not use, to wit: earth thrown up by ants, that from which the salt has been extracted, clay, the earth upon a high road, that which has been used for making lye, that which is found under a tree or in the

[p. 49]

grounds of a temple, or in a cemetery, or that which is found near holes made by rats.

He should select a fine sandy earth, free from vegetable or animal detritus of any kind.

Having provided himself with suitable earth, he should approach the water without entering it and should fill his copper vessel. If he has no vessel, he should make a hole in the sand upon the banks of a river.

Taking a handful of earth saturated with water, he should rub and wash the unclean parts three times, and his other secret parts once.

Then, after cleaning and washing himself with plenty of water, he should rinse out his mouth with the pure liquid and should swallow three mouthfuls while uttering the name of Vischnou.

In cleaning his teeth he should use a small bit of wood taken from the outanga, rengou, neradou, visouga, outara, or revanou tree or from any lacteous or thorny bushes.

Upon cutting off a branch he should address the spirits of the woods as follows:

Spirit of the forest, I cut one of these little branches to clean my teeth. Grant me, by means of the act which I am about to accomplish, a long life, strength, honors, and understanding.

[p. 50]

Having terminated this invocation, he should cut a long stick from a palm tree, the end of which he should soften in his mouth, like a brush.

Sitting upon the edge of the water, with his face turned toward the East, he should rub all his teeth with the stick of wood and should rinse out his mouth three times with pure water.

It is not lawful for him to cleanse himself thus every day. He should abstain the sixth, eighth, ninth, eleventh, and fourteenth day of the new and full moon.

He should abstain on Tuesday of every week, and on the day presided over by the constellation beneath which he was born, as well as upon the day of the week and month corresponding to that of his birth.

He should abstain during eclipses, planetary conjunctions, equinoxes, solstices, and other inauspicious periods; upon the anniversary of his father's or mother's death he should understand that all this is absolutely forbidden.

  

SECOND PART.

Rules for General Ablutions.

Upon going to the river or tank of ablutions the Brahmin should change the water of the river or tank, by the power of the following invocation, into the sacred waters of the Ganges:

Invocation.

O Ganges, you were born from the bosom of Brahma, whence you descended upon the head of Siva and the

[p. 51].

feet of Vischnou, and came down to earth to wipe out the sins of mankind, to purify them from their uncleanness, and to obtain happiness for them; you are the refuge and stay of all animated creatures that live on this earth. I have confidence in you; take back again your holy water from this river in which I am about to perform my ablutions; in this manner you will purify my soul and body.

He should think of the spirits who preside over the sacred rivers, which are seven in number--Ganges, Yamouna, Sindou, Godavery, Sarasvatty, Nerbouda, and Cavery.

Then entering the water he should direct his attention toward the Ganges, and imagine that he is really performing his ablutions in that river.

After bathing he should turn toward the sun, and taking some water in his hands three times, he should perform an oblation to that luminary three times, letting the water drip slowly from the end of his fingers.

He should then come out of the water, gird his loins with a pure cloth, put another upon his shoulders, and sit down with his face turned toward the East, and with his copper vessel full of water standing near him: he should then rub his forehead with ground sandal-wood and trace the red mark called Tiloky, according to the practice of his caste.

He should then hang from his neck three garlands of flowers of different colors prepared by his wife, and should finish by suspending from his neck a chaplet of the red seed called Boudrakchas.

[p. 52]

He should then think of Vischnou and should drink of the water contained in his vase three times in his honor. He should again perform three libations to the sun, pouring a little water upon the earth.

He should perform a similar libation in honor of the celestial Trimourti--Brahma, Vischnou, Siva; and of the superior spirits--Indra, Agny, Yama, Neiritia, Varouna, Vahivou, Couverd, and Isania.

To the air, to the ether, to the earth, to the pure fluid, Agasa, to the universal principle of force and life, and to all the Pitris and ancestral shades, uttering the names of all those which occur to his mind.

He should then arise and pay homage to Vischnou, reciting in his honor the prayers which are most agreeable to him.

Turning around slowly three times, he should pronounce the names of the divine Trinity, nine times at every revolution. Then uttering slowly the three names contained in the mysterious monosyllable--Brahma, Vischnou, Siva--he should make nine revolutions at each repetition thereof.

When he pronounces the mysterious monosyllable itself in a low tone, he should rapidly make nine revolutions and recite the following invocation to the sun:

Invocation.

O Sun! you are the eye of Brahma at day-break, the eye of Vischnou at noon, and that of Siva at evening.

[p. 53]

[paragraph continues] You are the diamond of the Infinite, the precious stone of the air, the king of day, the witness of all actions that take place in the universe. Your warmth fertilizes nature. You are the measure of time. You regulate days, nights, weeks, months, years, cycles, calpas, yuyas, seasons, and the time for ablutions and prayer. You are the lord of the nine planets. You remove all the impurities of the globe. You scatter darkness wherever you appear. In the space of sixty gahdias you survey from your chariot the whole of the great mountain of the north, which extends for ninety millions six hundred yodjomas. I offer you my adoration, as to the superior spirit which watches over the earth.

In honor of his tutelary star and of the spirit which animates it, he then turns around twelve times, twenty-four times, or if his strength enables him twenty-four times, forty-eight times. [*1]

In this manner he disciplines the body, increases his strength, and prepares himself for mysterious evocations. He then goes toward the tree, Assouata, and, after resting himself in its shade, he addresses to it the following invocation:

Invocation.

O Tree Assouata! [*2] you are the king of the forests and the image and symbol of the gods. Your roots represent Brahma, your trunk Vischnou, and your branches Siva; thus you represent the Trimourti. All those who honor you in this world by performing the ceremony of

[p. 54]

imitation, by turning around you, and by celebrating your praises, obtain the knowledge of things in this world and a superior form in another.

He then revolves around the tree seven, fourteen, twenty-one, twenty-eight, thirty-five times and more, until his strength is exhausted, always increasing the number of revolutions by seven.

When he is rested he should engage, for a while, in devout meditation; he should then clothe himself with clean garments, and, after plucking a few flowers with which to offer sacrifices to the domestic spirits, he should return to the house, with his vessel full of water.

  

THIRD PART.

Acts after Ablutions.

Upon returning home the Grihasta performs the sacrifice to the fire and can then attend to his other duties.

At noon, after ordering his mid-day meal, he should return to the river for the purpose of repeating the sandya and of reciting the prayers which will be hereafter given in the ritual.

Then he should return home, and try to keep himself pure by carefully abstaining from touching or walking upon anything capable of contaminating him.

If he should come in contact with any person of an inferior caste, or should step upon any vegetable or animal

[p. 55]

detritus, upon any hair or bones, he should return to the river and repeat his ablutions.

He should be in a state of perfect purity in order to offer the sacrifice to the Pitris which it now becomes his office to perform.

After preparing himself for this important ceremony, he should thoughtfully enter the room in his house re- served for the domestic spirits which he is accustomed to evoke, and should engage in the ceremonies preparatory to evocation.

Evocation in the First Degree.

After darkening a part of the room he should deposit in that portion of it a vase full of water, a lamp, and some powdered sandal-wood, boiled rice, and incense.

Snapping his fingers together, and turning around upon his heels he should trace before the door the magic circles as taught him by the superior Guru, in order to prevent the entrance of any bad spirits from the outside and to confine within it any which have already penetrated to the sanctuary of the Pitris.

With earth, water, and fire, breathed upon three times, he should compose a new body for himself, and with a part of his, should form a body for the spirits which he intends to evoke for the sacrifice.

He should then compress the right nostril with his thumb and pronounce the monosyllable Djom! sixteen

[p. 56]

times. Breathing in strongly by his left nostril he should by degrees separate the particles of which his body is composed.

With the thumb and fore-finger he should then press both nostrils and pronounce the word Rom! six times. He should stop breathing and summon fire to his aid in order to disperse his body.

He should pronounce the word Lom! thirty-two times, when his soul will escape from his body, and his body will disappear and the soul of the spirits he has evoked will animate the new body he prepared for it.

His soul will then return to his body, the subtile parts of which will unite anew, after forming an aerial body for the spirits which he has evoked.

Pronouncing the sacred word Aum! three times and the magic syllable Djom! nine times, he should impose his hands above the lamp and throw a pinch of incense upon the flame, saying:

O sublime Pitri! O illustrious penitent narada! whom I have evoked and for whom I have formed a subtile body from the constituent particles of my own, are you present? Appear in the smoke of incense and take part in the sacrifice that I offer to the shades of my ancestors.

When he has received a suitable answer and the aerial body of the spirit evoked has appeared in the smoke of

[p. 57]

the incense, he should then proceed to perform the oblations and sacrifices as prescribed.

The sacrifices having been offered, he should hold converse with the souls of his ancestors concerning the mysteries of being and the transformations of the imperishable.

Having extinguished his lamp, in darkness and silence he should then listen to the conversation of the spirits with each other, and should be present at the manifestations by which they reveal their presence.

Lighting his lamp, he should then set at liberty the evil spirits confined in the magic circles, after which he should leave the asylum of the Pitris. It is lawful for him then to take his repast.

As soon as he has finished it, he should wash his hands, rinse his mouth twelve times, and eat nine leaves of basil, in order to facilitate his digestion.

He should distribute betel and cashew nuts to the poor whom he has invited to his table, and when they are gone he should engage for a time in the perusal of the sacred scriptures.

Having finished his reading, it is lawful for him to take some betel and to attend to his other business and to visit his friends, but he should be very careful, during every moment of his public life, never to covet the property or wife of another.

[p. 58]

At sunset, he should return to the river to perform the ceremony of ablution, the same as in the morning.

Upon returning to the house, he should again perform an oblation to the fire, and should recite the thousand names of the Hary-Smarana, or the litanies of Vischnou.

He should then repair to the temple to hear the lesson given by the superior Guru to the Grihastas and Pourohitas who have passed through the first degree of initiation.

He should never enter the temple empty handed. He should carry as a present either oii for the lamps, or cocoanuts, bananas, camphor, incense, or sandal-wood, which are used in the sacrifices. If he is poor, he should give a little betel.

Before entering the temple he should make a circuit of it three times, and perform before the door the Schaktanga, or prostration of the six limbs.

After hearing the lessons and taking part in the evocations of the Pitris, with the other members of his order, he should perform his devotions and return home, being careful to avoid any impurities, in order to take his evening repast, after which he should immediately lie down.

He should never pass the night in a place consecrated to the spirits. When travelling, he should be careful not to lie down in the shadow of a tree, or in a ploughed or moist field, or in places covered with ashes, or by the edge of a cemetery.

[p. 59]

Upon lying down he should offer his adoration to the divine Trimourti, and should recite the invocation to the spirit called Kalassa, which is agreeable to Siva.

Kalassa.

May the spirit Bahirava preserve my head from accident, the spirit Bichava my forehead; the spirit Bouta-Carma my ears; the spirit Preta-Bahava my face; the spirit Bouta-Carta my thighs; the spirits Datys (who were endowed with immense strength) my shoulders; Kalapamy my hands; Chanta my chest; Ketrica my stomach; Pattou my generative organs; Katrapala my ribs; Kebraya my mouth; Chidda-Pattou my ankles, and the superior spirit Yama my whole body. May fire, which is the essence of the life of both gods and men, preserve me from all harm, wherever I may be. May the wives of these spirits watch over my children, my cows, my horses, and my elephants; may Vischnou watch over my native land.

May God, who sees all things, watch over my family and everything else, and also watch over me, when I am in any place which is not under the care of any divinity.

He should conclude by the invocation to Brahma, the lord of creatures.

Invocation to Brahma.

O Brahma! what is this mystery which is repeated every night after the labors of the day are over, and every one has returned from the fields, and the flocks are all in their folds, and the evening repast is over?

Behold, every one lies down upon his mat and closes his eyes, and the whole body ceases to exist, and is abandoned

[p. 60]

by the soul in order that it may hold converse with the soul of its ancestors.

Watch over it, O Brahma! when, forsaking the body, which is asleep, it floats hither and thither upon the waters, or wanders through the immensities of the heavens, or penetrates the dark and mysterious recesses of the valleys and forest of Hymavat.

O Brahma! God all-powerful, who commandest the storms, the God of light and darkness, let my soul not forget, after its wanderings, to return in the morning, to animate my body and remind me of thee.

He should then stretch himself upon his mat and go to sleep. Beneficent spirits will watch over his repose. (Agrouchada-Parikchai.)

Footnotes

^53:1 This is undoubtedly the origin of the Bonzes and whirling dervishes.

^53:2 All Brahmins plant them about their temples and dwelling-houses.

     
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 61]

  

CHAPTER VI.

  

THE FIRST DEGREE OF INITIATION.--(Continued.)

Morning, Noon, and Evening Sandyas. [*1]

When ten years have been spent in the first degree of initiation and there still remains an equal period of time before the Grihastas and Pourohitas can become Sannyassis and Vanaprasthas, or, in other words, call arrive at the second degree of initiation, many prayers must be added to the morning, noon, and evening ceremonies of ablution.

When he has reached this period of his life the candidate is no longer his own master. He spends almost all of his time in prayers, fastings, and in mortifications of every description. His nights are partly devoted to ceremonies of evocation in the temple under the direction of the superior Guru. He eats only once a day, after sunset. All the occult forces are put in operation to modify his physiological organization and give his powers a special direction. Few Brahmins ever arrive at the second degree of initiation. The mysterious and terrible phenomena which they produce cannot be put in operation without the exercise of a supernatural power, which very few are enabled to master.

Most Brahmins, therefore, never get beyond the class of Grihastas and Pourohitas. We shall see, however, when we have finished with the prayer and external formula, the object of which is to discipline the intellect by the daily repetition of the same acts, and when we approach

[p. 62]

the subject of the manifestations and phenomena, which the initiates of the first degree claim to perform (a claim which is apparently well founded), that their faculties have been developed to a degree which has never been equalled in Europe.

As for those who belong to the second, and particularly the third classes, they claim that time and space are unknown to them, and that they have command over man and death.

The following are the prayers which, during the second period of ten years of the first degree of initiation, are to be added to the ceremonies and invocations previously prescribed as acts of intellectual discipline intended to prevent the subject from remaining for a single instant under the influence of his own thoughts.

The evocations which we give below are met with, with slight deviations, in all the dialects of India, and are claimed by religious sects. They are also in strict conformity with the rite of the Yadjour-Veda.

The Morning Sandya.

At the end of ten years and during the ensuing ten years, if he feels strong enough to attain the imperishable, the Grihasta should recite the following prayers at his morning ablutions, in addition to those already prescribed.

He should commence all his exercises by the following evocation:

Apavitraha, pavitraha sarva vastam.
 Gatopiva yasmaret pounkarikakchan.
 Sabahiabhiam terra souchihy.

[p. 63]

The man who is pure or impure, or who is in a perilous situation, whatever it may be, has only to invoke him whose eyes are of the same color as the lotus (pond lily) to be pure internally as well as externally, and to be saved.

He should continue by the invocation to the water:

Invocation to the Water.

O Water! consecrated by the five perfumes and by prayer, thou art pure, whether taken from the sea, from rivers, from tanks, or from well; purify thou my bode from all uncleanness.

As the traveller, weary with the heat, finds relief in the shade of a tree, so may I find in the sacred water relief from every ill and purification from all my sins.

O consecrated water! thou art the essence of sacrifice and germ of life. In thy bosom all germs have been begotten, all beings have been formed.

I invoke thee with the confidence of a child who, at the appearance of danger, rushes into the arms of his mother, who loves him tenderly. Purify me from my faults and purify all men with me.

O water! consecrated at the time of the pralaya-chao--Brahma, or the supreme wisdom--Swayambhouva, or the being existing by his own strength, dwelt under thy form. Thou wert confounded with him.

He suddenly appeared upon the vast billows which ruffled the surface of infinite space and created a form in

[p. 64]

which he revealed himself and separated the land from the waters, which when assembled together in one spot form the vast ocean.

The unrevealed being, Brahma, who seated on the waves of the vast ether, drew from his own substance the three-faced Trimourti, which created the heavens and the earth, the air, and all the inferior worlds.

Upon terminating, he should sprinkle a few drops of water upon his head with three stalks of the sacred darba grass.

He who addresses this invocation to the water at morning, and who is thoroughly penetrated with its mystic meaning, has arrived at a high degree of sanctity.

Joining then his hands, he should say, "O Vischnou! I do this to preserve my dignity as a Grihasta."

He should then think of the superior and inferior worlds, of the spirits which inhabit them, of the spirits of the fire, of the wind, of the sun, and of all the spirits of the earth.

Raising his hand to his head, he should then call to mind all the names of Brahma, and closing his eyes, and compressing his nostrils, he should perform the evocation of that God, as follows.

Come, Brahma! come down to my bosom.

He should then figure to himself this supreme deity as

[p. 65]

having had no beginning and as possessing all knowledge, like the Guru, the eternal principle of all things.

And he should say, Hail Brahma! thou who art the essence of everything that exists, of water, of fire, of air, of the ether, of space, and of infinity: I offer thee my adoration.

He should then evoke Vischnou, and should figure him to himself as emerging from the bosom of the water in the midst of a lotus flower.

He should then evoke Siva, saying, You who destroy and transform everything, destroy and transform everything that is impure in me.

The Grihasta should then address the following prayer to the Sun.

Invocation to the Sun.

O Sun! whose fire purifies everything, and who art the spirit of prayer, purify me from the faults which I have committed in my prayers and sacrifices, from all those which I have committed at night in thought or action, from those which I have committed against my neighbor by calumny, false witness, or coveting another's wife, by eating prohibited food, at unlawful hours, or by communication with vile men, and finally from all the impurities which I may have contracted, whether during the day or during the night.

O Sun! you give birth to fire and it is from you that the spirits receive those subtile particles which unite to form their aerial bodies.

[p. 66]

He should trace around him the magic circles which prevent evil spirits from approaching hire.

Addressing the immortal Goddess, Nari, who is an emblem of nature in the Hindu mythology, he should then express himself in the following terms.

O illustrious Goddess! I pay homage to you; grant that when I lay aside presently this perishable envelope I may rise to higher spheres.

Placing then both hands above the copper vessel filled with water, he should then evoke the son of Kasiappa, or any other sage of past time, asking him to listen to the praises that he addresses to Nari and to recite them with him.

The spirit having appeared he should repeat in a loud voice the following words, in honor of the universal mother.

Invocation to Nari.

O divine spouse of him who moves upon the waters, preserve me, both during the day and during the night. You are of a spiritual nature.

You are the light of lights.

You are not subject to human passions.

You are eternal.

You are all-powerful.

You are purity itself.

You are the refuge of men.

You are their salvation.

You are knowledge.

[p. 67]

You are the essence of the sacred scriptures.

By your constant fruitfulness the universe is sustained.

You are the figure of evocation.

You are prayer.

To you all sacrifices should be addressed.

You are the dispenser of every good.

Everything is in your hands; joy, sorrow, fear, hope.

You are present in the three worlds.

You have three figures.

The number three forms your essence.

Nari, the immortal virgin.

Brahmy, the universal mother.

Hyranya, the golden matrix.

Paramatma, the soul of all beings.

Sakty, the Queen of the universe.

Lakny, the celestial light.

Mariama, perpetual fruitfulness.

Agasa, the pure fluid.

Ahancara, the supreme conscience.

Conya, the chaste virgin.

Tanmatra, the union of the five elements: Air, fire, water, earth, ether.

Trigana, virtue, riches, love.

Conyabava, eternal virginity.

He should then make a vow to recite this sublime invocation, which is a source of all life and all transformation, at least three times a day.

Noon Sandya.

He should repeat the same prayers after the noon ablutions, and should perform the evocation of spirits by water.

[p. 68]

Midnight Sandya.

Having offered the sacrifice to fire, he should then evoke the spirits of night, in the smoke of incense, saying:

Spirits of the waters,
 Spirits of the forests,
 Spirits of unfrequented roads,
 Spirits of public places,
 Spirits of sandy plains,
 Spirits of the jungles,
 Spirits of the mountains,
 Spirits of burial places,
 Spirits of the ocean,
 Spirits of the wind,
 Spirits of the tempest,
 Destructive spirits,
 Ensnaring spirits,
 Spirits of salt deserts,
 Spirits of the East,
 Spirits of the West,
 Spirits of the North,
 Spirits of the South,
 Spirits of darkness,
 Spirits of bottomless gulfs,
 Spirits of heaven,
 Spirits of the earth,
 Spirits of hell,

Come all and listen, bear these words in mind.

Protect all travellers, and caravans, ail men who work. who suffer, who pray, or who rest, all those who, in the silence of night, carry dead bodies to the funeral pyre, those who travel deserts, or forests, or the vast ocean.

O spirits, come and listen. Bear these words in mind and protect all men. (Agrouchada-Parikchai.)

Footnotes

^61:1 Translated from the Agrouchada-Parikchai.

     
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 69]

  

CHAPTER VII.

  

THE SECOND DEGREE OF INITIATION.

Having spent twenty years of his life after receiving the first degree of initiation, during which the body is mortified by fasting and privations of every kind, and the intellect is trained and disciplined by means of prayers, invocations, and sacrifices, the candidate finally takes his place in one of the three following categories:

Grihasta--he remains at the head of his family until his death, and attends to his social duties and business, whatever it may be. Of all that he has been taught he only retains the power to evoke the domestic spirits, or in other words, those in the same genealogical line as himself, with whom it is lawful for him to communicate within the sanctuary which it is his duty to reserve for them in his house.

Pourohita--he becomes a priest attached to the popular cult and takes part in all ceremonies and family festivals, both in temples and private dwellings. Phenomena of possession come exclusively within his province: he is the grand exorcist of the pagodas.

Fakir--he becomes a performing Fakir, and from this moment forward all his time is employed in the manifestation of occult power by means of the public exhibition of exterior phenomena.

Neither Grihastas, Pourohitas, nor Fakirs are ever admitted to the second degree of initiation. Their studies are ended, and with the exception of the Fakirs, who are constantly in communication with those who have been

[p. 70]

initiated into the higher degrees, in order to augment their magnetic and spiritual power, they take no part in the mystic instruction, which is given in the temples.

Only a few among those who have distinguished themselves in their studies for the first degree are able to pass through the terrible ordeal of the higher initiation or arrive at the dignity of a Sannyassi or Cenobite.

The Sannyassi lives exclusively in the temple, and the is only expected to appear at remote intervals, on solemn occasions, in cases where it is important to impress the popular imagination by a superior class of phenomena.

The Agrouchada-Parikchai is silent as to the course of training they have to undergo. The formulas of prayer and evocation were never committed to writing, but were taught orally, in the underground crypts of the pagodas.

We are able therefore to prosecute our investigations into the subject of the second degree of initiation only by studying the phenomena produced by the Sannyassi, a list of which we find in the second book of the Agrouchada.

     
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 71]

  

CHAPTER VIII.

  

THE THIRD DEGREE OF INITIATION.

It is not until he has spent a further period of twenty years in the study of the occult sciences and manifestations that the Sannyassi becomes a Sannyassi-Nirvany or Naked Cenobite, so called because he was not to wear any garments whatever, thus indicating that he had broken the last tie that bound him to the earth. We are limited to such means of information as are obtainable by the uninitiated. The book of the Pitris, or spirits, which is our guide in this inquiry, contains no explanation with regard to the mysterious occupations in which the Sannyassis-Nirvanys, who have been initiated in the third degree, engage. The chapter devoted to this subject merely gives the following magical words, of which the Brahmins would furnish us no explanation whatever, which were inscribed in two triangles. They were:

          L'OM

       SHO'RHIM

     
      L'RHOM-SH'HRUM.

       RAMAYA-NAMAHA,

     
   We can only study the subject of the highest initiation in its philosophical teachings regarding God and man. The phenomena performed by the Nirvanys are not described in the book of Pitris.

We have not been able to glean much from private conversations with Pourohitas, with regard to the actions of their superiors. It seems that they live in a constant state of ecstatic contemplation, depriving themselves of sleep as far as possible, and taking food only once a week, after sunset.

[p. 72]

They are never visible either in the grounds or inside the temples, except on the occasion of the grand festival of fire, which occurs every five years. On that day they appear at midnight upon a stand erected in the centre of the sacred tank. They appear like spectres, and the surrounding atmosphere is illumined by them by means of their incantations. They seem to be in the midst of a column of light rising from earth to heaven.

The air is filled with strange sounds, and the five or six hundred thousand Hindus who have come from all parts of India to see these demi-gods, as they are esteemed, prostrate themselves flat in the dust, calling upon the souls of their ancestors.

     
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 73]

  

CHAPTER IX.

  

THE GRAND COUNCIL.

In the present chapter we will merely give a few verses from the Agrouchada-Parikchai treating of the Supreme Council.

"Seventy Brahmins more than seventy years old are chosen from among the Nirvanys to see that the law of the Lotus, or the occult science, is never revealed to the vulgar, and that those who have been initiated into the sacred order are not contaminated by the admission of any unworthy person."

None should be chosen unless they have always practised the ten virtues, in which, according to the divine Manu, the performance of duty consists.

Resignation, the action of returning good for evil, temperance, probity, purity, chastity, the subjugation of the senses, a knowledge of the sacred scriptures, that of the supreme soul, the worship of the truth, abstinence from anger--such are the principles which should be the rule of conduct of a true Nirvany.

He who is called to rule over others should first yield obedience to all the precepts of the sacred books.

[p. 74]

He should not desire death; he should not desire life; like the reaper who patiently waits at evening for his wages at his master's door, he should wait till his time has come.

He should purify his steps by taking heed where he sets his foot; he should purify the water he drinks, in order that he may not cause the death of any animal; he should purify his words by truth; he should purify his soul by virtue.

He should endure bad language, insults, and blows patiently, without returning them; he should carefully avoid cherishing ill-will against any person on account of anything connected with this miserable body.

Meditating upon the delights of the supreme soul, needing nothing, beyond the reach of any sensual desire, with no society save his own soul and the thought of God, he should live here below in the constant expectation of everlasting happiness.

He should never resort to places frequented by Grihastas or Pourohitas, unless they have entirely renounced the world. (Manu.)

He should avoid all meetings, even when Brahmins alone are present. He should be careful, as he regards his eternal salvation, not to resort to places used for bird or dog fights.

A wooden platter, a gourd, an  vessel, and a bamboo basket--such are the pure utensils authorized by Manu; he should keep nothing in the precious metals.

[p. 75]

He should reflect that the vital spirit, after leaving the Great All, undergoes ten thousand million transformations, before clothing itself with a human form.

He should observe the incalculable ills which grow out of the practice of iniquity, and the great happiness that springs from the practice of virtue.

He should bear constantly in mind the perfections and invisible essences of a Paramatma, the great soul, which is present in all bodies, the lowest as well as the highest.

He should know that an atom is an exact representation of the Great All.

The Nirvany should expiate his faults by solitary reflection, by meditation, by the repression of every sensual de- sire, by meritorious austerity; he should destroy all the imperfections of his nature that may be opposed to the divine nature.

Such is the rule of conduct by which those Sannyassis-Nirvanys are governed who aspire to enter the Supreme Council. It possesses the largest disciplinary powers in  order to prevent the divulgation of the mysteries of initiation.

The following are some of the terrible penalties it is commanded to inflict.

Whoever has been initiated, no matter what may be the degree to which he may belong, and shall reveal the sacred formula, shall be put to death.

[p. 76]

Whoever has been initiated into the third degree and shall reveal the superior truths he has been taught, to the candidates for initiation into the second degree before the proper time, shall suffer death.

Whoever has been initiated into the second degree and shall act likewise with those who have been initiated into the first degree, is declared impure for the period of seven years, and when that time has elapsed, he shall be turned back to the lower class (the first degree).

Whoever has been initiated into the first degree, and shall divulge the secrets of his initiation to the members of the other castes, who are forever debarred from knowing them, as though they were contained in a sealed book, shall be deprived of sight, and after his tongue and both hands have been cut off, in order that he may not make an improper use of what he has learned, he shall be expelled from the temple, as well as from his caste.

Any one belonging to the three lower castes, who shall gain admission to the secret asylums, or shall surreptitiously acquire a knowledge of the formula of evocation, shall be burned to death.

If a virgin should do so, she shall be confined in the temple and consecrated to the worship of fire. (Agrouchada-Parikchai.)

In addition to its attributes as an initiatory tribunal, the council of the elders also had charge of administering the pagoda property, from which it made provision for the wants of its members, of the three classes, who lived

[p. 77]

entirely in common. It also directed the wanderings of the Fakirs, who have charge of the exterior manifestations of occult power.

The Brahmatma was elected by it from its own number.

     
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 78]

  

CHAPTER X.

  

THE ELECTION OF THE BRAHMATMA.

I have not much to add to what I have already said about the Brahmatma.

The requisite qualifications for the position were that the candidate should have been initiated, that he should have taken the vow of chastity, and that he should be a member of the Supreme Council.

That this vow was a serious matter will be readily understood when it is known that any Brahmin taking it in the commencement of his career must necessarily persevere until he arrives at the dignity of Yoguy, unless he wishes to repeat upon earth a series of transformations. Not having paid the debt of his ancestors, by the birth of a son, who can continue his genealogical line and officiate at his funeral, he would be obliged to come back after death, under a new human envelope, to accomplish that final duty.

The Yoguys, or members of the Council of Seventy, by reason of their high degree of sanctity, had no new transmigrations to undergo: it was a matter of indifference whether they had been heads of families or whether they had always maintained their chastity. But in view of the small number admitted into this sanhedrim, if we may so call it, the Brahmin who should pronounce this terrible vow, as it is termed in the book of the Pitris, at the close of his novitiate, was in danger of having to go through a succession of new lives, from the first monad, by which

[p. 79]

the smallest particle of moss is animated, to man, who is, so far, the most perfect expression of the vital form.

While the Brahmatma could only be chosen from among those Yoguys who had taken the vow of chastity, his election was not due to any supposed degree of sanctity on his part resulting therefrom, for he had hardly been elected, when, notwithstanding his advanced age of eighty years, in order that his election might be held valid, he had to furnish evidence of his virile power in connection with one of the virgins of the Pagoda, who was given him as a bride.

If a male child sprang from this union he was placed in a wicker basket, and turned adrift upon the river to float with the current. If perchance he was washed ashore he was carried to the temple, where he was at once, and by virtue of that very fact, regarded as having been initiated into the third degree. From his earliest childhood, all the secret mentrams, or formulas of evocation, were made known to him.

If, however, the child floated down the stream with the current, he was rejected as a Pariah, and handed over to the people of that caste to be reared by them.

We never could discover the origin of this singular custom. Upon comparing other ancient usages with the manners and customs of the sacerdotal castes in Egypt, which are so similar in many respects to those of the Indian temples, we have often asked ourselves the following questions, which we now propound for the reader's consideration:

Might not Moses, the leader of the Hebraic revolution, have been a son of the Egyptian high priest, who stood at the head of the order of the initiated, and might he not have been brought to the temple, because he had been cast ashore by the Nile?

Might not his brother Aaron, on the contrary, have been cast aside as one of the servile class, because when he was

[p. 80]

set adrift likewise upon the river he floated along with the current without being cast ashore?

May we not regard the friendship of the two brothers for each other, when informed subsequently of their common origin, as one of the causes that impelled Moses to abandon the sacerdotal caste, of which he was a member, in order to place himself at the head of the Egyptian slaves, and lead them into the desert in search of that promised land which the pariahs, helots, and outcasts of every degree have always looked forward to in their dreams as the sunny land of peace and liberty?

We suggest the question, however, we repeat, merely as a supposition. Perhaps ethnographic science, by which the second half of the present century has been so brilliantly illustrated, will show, some day, that it is something more.

     
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 81]

  

CHAPTER XI.

  

THE YOGUYS.

Previous to a more thorough investigation into the doctrine of the Pitris, and the external manifestations by whose aid the Hindus attempt to prove the existence of an occult power, we have a few words further to say about the Yoguys.

Although none but those who had passed through the third degree of initiation and were consequently members of the Council of the Elders, and who had always abstained from carnal intercourse, ever attained the degree of Yoguy, it was, says the Book of Spirits, a state so sublime that those who were versed in its mysteries were entitled to a greater degree of merit during their lives than most men could acquire during ten million new generations and transmigrations.

"The Yoguy is as much superior to those who have gone through the highest degree of initiation, as spirits are superior to men."

"A passing feeling of spite or enthusiasm," says the Agrouchada-Parikchai, "should never induce a Brahmin to take the vow of chastity. His vocation should be the well-considered result of careful examination, and its motive should be, not the ambition to rise to the highest dignities, but a feeling of disgust with the world and its pleasures, and an ardent desire to arrive at perfection."

He should feel as though he could readily dispense with all earthly pleasures of whatever kind or degree. If he still cherished, in his inmost heart, the slightest hankering

[p. 82]

for those treasures that others esteem so highly, and strive for so ardently, that alone was quite enough to counterbalance any advantage or benefit that he might otherwise have derived from his penitence.

When the Brahmatchary has ended his novitiate and has fully considered his future course, he repairs to a meeting consisting of all the initiates and informs them of his determination. He asks them to proceed with the usual forms and ceremonies, to the reception of the momentous vows he desires to pronounce.

On the day appointed for this solemn act the candidate first purifies himself by ablutions: he then provides himself with ten pieces of cloth large enough to cover his shoulders. Four of these are intended for his own use, while the other six are given as presents to the officiating Pourohitas.

The chief Guru who presides at the ceremony, hands him a bamboo stick containing seven joints, some lotus flowers, and powdered sandal-wood, and whispers in his ear certain mentrams of evocation, which are only made known to persons in his condition.

This stick is not intended to help support his steps or to be of any assistance to him in walking. It is the magic wand used in divination and all the occult phenomena.

It is involuntarily suggestive of the rod of Moses, Aaron, Elisha, and all the prophets, of the augural wand, and of the seven-knotted wand of the Fauns, Sylvans, and Cynics.

When the ceremony is finished, the Yoguy takes up his magic wand, a calabash for drinking purposes, and a gazelle's skin, to be used as a bed. These articles comprise his whole store, and he never leaves them; they are the omnium mecum porto of the Stoics. He then departs, repeating the magical formulas which he has just learned from the superior Guru.

In addition to the usual ablutions, ceremonies, and

[p. 83]

prayers, which he has to perform, like all who have been initiated, the following prescriptions are imposed upon him.

"Every morning after performing his ablutions he should smear his entire body with ashes; others only rubbed their foreheads. Christianity still retains a symbolic remnant of this ceremony--homo pulvis es, etc.

"He should only eat daily, after sunset, as much rice as he can hold in the hollow of his hand.

"He should abandon the use of betel.

"He should avoid the company of women and he should not even look at them.

"Once a month he should have his head and face shaved.

"He should wear only wooden sandals.

"He should live by alms."

"Although a Yoguy," says the work to which we have referred as our guide, "has the right to demand alms, it is more becoming for him to receive them without asking. Consequently, when he is hungry, he should present himself among this world's people, without saying anything or telling them what he wants. If anything is given to him voluntarily, he should receive it with an air of indifference, and without expressing his thanks. If nothing is offered, he should withdraw quietly, without expressing anger or dissatisfaction; neither should he make any complaint if anything that is given him is not to his taste."

"He should not sit down to eat.

"He should build a hermitage by the side of a river or tank, in order that he may perform his ablutions with greater facility."

"When travelling, he should abide nowhere, and should only pass through populous places.

"He should look at all men alike, and should regard himself as superior to anything that may happen. He should look upon the various revolutions by which the

[p. 84]

world is agitated and powerful empires are sometimes overturned, as matters of perfect indifference to him."

"His only care should be to acquire the spirit of wisdom, and that degree of spirituality by means of which he will finally be reunited to the Divinity, from whom all creatures and passions tend to keep us apart. In order to accomplish that object, he should have his senses under the most perfect control, and entirely subdue the sentiments of anger, envy, avarice, lust, and all disturbing and licentious thoughts. Otherwise he will derive no benefit whatever from having taken the vow or from his repeated mortifications."

Every evening, the Yoguy repairs to the pagoda, with his magic wand, his calabash, and his gazelle's skin, where he .passes several hours in contemplation in the most profound darkness. He there endeavors to accustom his soul to forsake his body, in order that it may hold converse with the Pitris in infinite space. He ends the night with the study of manifestations and incantations, in which he is further instructed by the superior Guru.

When, in his eightieth year, in consequence of his superior sanctity, or for some other reason, he has been chosen by the Council for the post of Brahmatma, he goes back again, so to speak, to life, and spends his last years in the most unbridled indulgence and dissipation. We have often heard the Brahmins say, though we have had no opportunity to verify their statements, that, in consequence of their long practice of asceticism, the Yoguys often preserved all the virile powers of mature age until far advanced in life, and it was no unusual thing for Brahmatmas to live much more than a hundred years, and leave behind them a numerous progeny.

We have now concluded these brief notices with regard to those who have passed through the various degrees of initiation. It was necessary that we should give them, in order that our main subject might be more fully understood.

[p. 85]

[paragraph continues] Though some of the details are rather dry, we hope that our readers will give them their careful attention. They are essential to the proper understanding of what is to follow.

One word more, however, about the Yoguy's seven-knotted stick.

There is a certain degree of sacredness attending the number seven in India. We may judge of the veneration in which it is held by the Brahmins, by the many objects and places the number of which is always divisible by seven, to which they attach an extraordinary magical power.

Some of them are as follows:

Sapta-Richis, the seven sages of India.

Sapta-Poura, the seven celestial cities.

Sapta-Douipa, the seven sacred islands.

Sapta-Samoudra, the seven oceans.

Sapta-Nady, the seven sacred rivers.

Sapta-Parvatta, the seven holy mountains.

Sapta-Arania, the seven sacred deserts.

Sapta-Vrukcha, the seven celestial trees.

Sapta-Coula, the seven castes.

Sapta-Loca, the seven superior and inferior worlds, etc.

According to the Brahmins, the mystical meaning of the number seven contains an allegorical representation of the unrevealed God, the initial trinity, and the manifested trinity; thus:

Zyaus
 (The Unrevealed God).
 The immortal germ of everything that exists.

The initial trinity,
 Nara--Nari--Viradj.

Zyaus, having divided his body into two parts, male and female, or Nara and Nari, produced Viradj, the Word, the Creator,

The manifested trinity,
 Brahma--Vischnou--Siva.

[p. 86]

The initial trinity, which was purely creative, changed into the manifested trinity, as soon as the universe had come out of chaos, in order to create perpetually, to preserve eternally, and to consume unceasingly.

We should not forget that the Jews also attached a mystical meaning to the number seven, which shows indisputably its origin.

According to the Bible:

The world was created in seven days.

Land should rest every seven years.

The Sabbatic year of jubilee returned every seven times seven years.

The great golden candlestick in the temple had seven branches, the seven candles of which represented the seven planets.

Seven trumpets were blown by seven priests for seven successive days around Jericho, and the walls of that city fell down on the seventh day after the Israelitish army had marched round it for the seventh time.

In John's Apocalypse, we find:

The seven churches.

The seven chandeliers.

The seven stars.

The seven lamps.

The seven seals.

The seven angels.

The seven vials.

The seven plagues.

In like manner, the Prophet Isaiah, desiring to give an idea of the glory surrounding Jehovah, says:

"That it is seven times greater than that of the sun, and equal to the light of seven days combined."

We shall now see in how many points and how closely, the Jewish Cabala and the Hindu doctrine of the Pitris, resemble each other.

     
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 87]

  

SECOND PART.

  

THE PHILOSOPHICAL TENETS OF THE INDIAN INITIATES.

  

REGARDING THE FIRST CAUSE, AND THE PART PERFORMED BY THE SPIRITS IN WORLDLY MATTERS.

[p. 88]

Regarding the ten Pradjapatis, or lords of creatures, who are Maritchi--Atri--Augiras--Poulastya--Poulaha--Cratou--Pratchetas--Vasichta--Brighou--Narada, they have no beginning, nor end, nor time, nor space, for they proceed, from the sole essence of the one spirit, at a single breath. This is a fatal secret, close thy mouth in order that no part of it may be revealed to the rabble, and compress thy brain so that none of it may get abroad. (Agrouchada-Parikchai, "The Book of the Pitris.")

[p. 89]

  

THE PHILOSOPHICAL DOCTRINES 

  

OF THE

  

INDIAN INITIATES.

________________

  

CHAPTER I.

  

THE DEGREE OF SANCTITY WHICH THE INITIATES MUST HAVE ATTAINED BEFORE RECEIVING THE SACRED FORMULA AND THE FATAL SECRET.

In order that there may be no misunderstanding as to our meaning, we will now define the different attributes of those who had been admitted to the various degrees of initiation.

It appears from what we have already ascertained:

First, that those who had been admitted into the first degree of initiation were subjected to a course of treatment, which was designed to subdue their will and enslave their intellect, and by fasting, mortifications, privations of every kind, and violent exercises in the same circuit, to change, so to speak, the direction of their physiological faculties. The outward manifestation of occult power was the utmost limit of the attainments of this class of Brahmins.

Second, that those who had been initiated into the second degree went but one step further in the line of evocations and external phenomena, and, while they exhibited

[p. 90]

the highest expression of manifested power, they never arrived at the degree of philosophical initiation.

Third, that those who were initiated into the third degree (the Sanyassis-Nirvanys and Yoguys) alone were admitted to a knowledge of the formulas behind which the highest metaphysical speculations were hidden.

The principal duty of persons of that class, was to arrive at a complete forgetfulness of all worldly matters.

The sages of India compared the passions to those heavy clouds which sometimes shut out the view of the sun entirely, or obscure the brilliancy of its light; to a violent wind, which agitates the surface of the water so that it cannot reflect the splendor of the vault above; to the envelope of the chrysalis, which deprives it of liberty; to the shell of certain fruits, which prevent their fragrance from diffusing itself abroad.

Yet, say they, the chrysalis gnaws through its envelope, makes itself a passage, and wings its way into space, thus conquering air, light, and liberty.

"So it is with the soul," says the Agrouchada. "Its prison in the body in which earthly troubles and tumultuous passions keep it confined, is not eternal. After a long series of successive births, the spark of wisdom which is in it being rekindled, it will finally succeed, by the long-continued practice of penitence and contemplation, in breaking all the ties that bind it to the earth, and will increase in virtue until it has reached so high a degree of wisdom and spirituality, that it becomes identified with the divinity. Then leaving the body, which holds it captive, its soars freely aloft, where it unites forever with the first principle, from which it originally emanated."

Having reached the third degree of initiation, it is the duty of the Brahmin to improve, to spiritualize himself by contemplation; he was supposed to pass through the four following states:

First, Salokiam.

[p. 91]

Second, Samipiam.

Third, Souaroupiam.

Fourth, Sayodjyam.

Salokiam signifies the only tie. In this state the soul seeks to lift itself in thought to the celestial mansion, and to take its place in the presence of divinity itself; it holds converse with the Pitris who have gone before into the regions of everlasting life, and makes use of the body as an unconscious instrument to transcribe, under the permanent form of writing, the sublime teachings it may have received from the shades of its ancestors.

Samipiam signifies proximity. By the exercise of contemplation and the disregard of all earthly objects, the knowledge and idea of God become more familiar to it. The soul seems to draw nearer to him. It becomes far-seeing and begins to witness marvels, which are not of this world.

Souaroupiam signifies resemblance. In the third state the soul gradually acquires a perfect resemblance to the divinity, and participates in all its attributes. It reads the future, and the universe has no secrets for it.

Sayodjyam signifies identity. The soul finally becomes closely united to the great soul. This last transformation takes place only through death, that is to say, the entire disruption of all material ties.

The work which we are now analyzing explains the passage of the soul through these four states by the following comparison

"When we wish to extract the gold from a compound mass, we shall never succeed if we subject it to the process of fusion only once. It is only by melting the alloy in the crucible several times, that we are finally able to separate the heterogeneous particles of which it is composed, and release the gold in all its purity."

The two modes of contemplation most in use, are called Sabda-Brahma and Sabda-Vischnou, or intercourse with Brahma and Vischnou.

[p. 92]

It is by fasting and prayer in the forest and jungles, among the wild beasts, whom they rule by the power of the pure agasa fluid, and upon the desert banks of torrents, that the Nirvanys (naked) and the Yoguys (contemplative) prepare themselves for these lofty meditations.

There have been critical periods in the history of India, when the members of the sacerdotal caste were called upon to strike a decisive blow, in order to bring the people back to their duty and reduce them to submission. At such times they came flocking in from their habitations in the deserts, or their sombre haunts in the interiors of the temples, to preach to the masses the duty of obedience and self-renunciation.

They were accompanied by tigers and panthers, which were as gentle and submissive as so many lambs, and they performed the most extraordinary phenomena, causing rivers to overflow their banks, the light of the sun to pale, or words denouncing the Rajahs who persecuted the Brahmins to appear upon the walls of their palaces, through some unknown power.

The study of philosophic truth does not relieve them from the necessity of the tapassas, or bodily mortifications. On the contrary, it would seem that they carry them to the greatest extremes.

Once a week some sit naked in the centre of a circle formed by four blazing fires which are constantly fed by neophytes.

Others cause themselves to be buried up to their necks in the hot sand, leaving their bare skulls exposed to the blazing sun.

Others still stand upon one foot until the leg is swollen and covered with ulcers.

Everything that affects or consumes the body, everything that tends to its annihilation, without actually destroying it, is thought to be meritorious.

Every evening, the Nirvanys and Yoguys lay aside their

[p. 93]

exercises and studies at sunset, and go into the country to meditate.

Several centuries previous to the present era, however, these bodily mortifications had assumed a character of unusual severity.

To the contemplative dreamers of the earliest ages in India, who devoted the whole of their time to meditation, and never engaged in practices involving physical suffering oftener than once a week, had succeeded a class of bigoted fanatics, who placed no limit to their religious enthusiasm, and inflicted upon themselves the most terrible tortures.

A spiritual reaction, however, occurred, and those who had been initiated into the higher degrees took that opportunity to abandon the practice of the tapassas, or corporal mortification. They sought rather to impress the imagination of the people by excessive severity in opposition to the laws of nature. A profound humility, an ardent desire to live unknown by the world, and to have the divinity as the only witness to the purity of their morals, took possession of them, and though they continued the practice of excessive abstemiousness, they did so perhaps more that they might not seem to be in conflict with the formal teachings of the sacred scriptures.

That kind of austerity is the only one now enjoined upon all classes of initiates.

The Fakirs appear to have gradually monopolized all the old modes of inflicting pain, and have carried them to the greatest extremes. They display the most unbounded fanaticism in their self-inflicted tortures upon all great public festivals.

Ever since the temporal power of the Brahmins was overthrown, the higher class of initiates have been, in short, nothing more than cenobites, or hermits, who, either in the desert or in the subterranean crypts of the temples, spend their lives in contemplation, prayer, sacrifice, the

[p. 94]

study of the most elevated philosophical problems, and the evocation of spirits, whom they regard as intermediate beings between God and man.

The spirits with whom they communicate are the shades of holy personages, who have quit the world after leading a life of privation, good works, and virtuous example: they are the objects of a regular worship, and are invoked as the spiritual directors of their brethren, who are still bound by the ties of their earthly existence.

The earliest Christians with their apparitions, their apostles who received the gift of tongues, their thaumaturgists, and their exorcists, only continued a tradition which has existed from the earliest times without interruption. There is no difference between the disciples of Peter and Paul and the initiates of India, between the saints of the Christianity of the Catacombs and the Pitris of the Brahmins.

Subsequently, the chiefs, in the interest of their temporal and religious domination, discouraged both the belief and practice, and, by slow degrees, the old system of ancient worship assumed the more modern form with which we are familiar.

It was not until they had passed through the first three of the contemplative states to which we have alluded that the Nirvanys and Yoguys were admitted to a  of the higher philosophical studies, and they were thus made acquainted with the secrets of human destiny, both present and future.

When he who had been initiated into the third degree had passed the age of eighty, and was not a member of the Supreme Council, who all remained in active life until their death, he was supposed to have abandoned his pagoda, or the hermitage that he occupied, to have renounced all pious practices, ceremonies, sacrifices, and evocations, and to have retired to some lonely and uninhabited spot, there to await the coming of death. Be no longer received

[p. 95]

food or nourishment, except by chance, and passed away in the contemplation of the infinite.

"Having abandoned all his duties," says Manu, "and 'relinquished the direction of the sacrifices and the performance of the five ablutions, having wiped away all his faults by the prescribed purifications, having curbed all his organs and mastered the vedas to their fullest extent, he should refer all ceremonies and the offering of the funeral repast to his son for performance."

Having thus abandoned every religious observance, every act of austere devotion, applying his mind solely to the contemplation of the great first cause, exempt from every evil desire, his soul already stands at the threshold of swarga, although his mortal envelope still palpitates and flutters like the last flames of an expiring lamp.

     
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 96]

  

CHAPTER II.

  

THE SUPERIOR GURU--THE SACRED DECADE.

Upon reaching the third degree of initiation, the Brahmins were divided into tens, and a superior Guru, or professor of the occult sciences, was placed over each decade. He was revered by his disciples as a god.

The following is a portrait of this personage, as drawn in the Vedanta-sara:

"The true Guru is a man who is familiar with the practice of every virtue; who, with the sword of wisdom, has lopped off all the branches and cut through all the roots of the tree of evil, and, with the light of reason, has dispelled the thick darkness by which he is enveloped; who, though seated upon a mountain of passions, meets all their assaults with a heart as firm as diamond; who conducts himself with dignity and independence; who has the bowels of a father for all his disciples; who makes no distinction between his friends and his enemies, whom he treats with equal kindness and consideration; who looks upon gold and jewels with as much indifference as if they were bits of iron and potsherds, without caring more for one than for the other; and who tries with the greatest care to remove the dense darkness of ignorance, in which the rest of mankind is plunged."

If we had not positively stated in a former part of this work (which is simply designed to give the reader some idea of the doctrines and practices of the believers in the Pitris of India) that we should refrain from the expression of any personal opinion, we might well ask ourselves

[p. 97]

whether modern Hierophants, with all their intolerance and all their pride in the morality they preach, have anything to present which will compare with the precepts here given in this, which is one of the oldest passages in the Brahminical books. Modern Gurus know full well the value of gold and precious stones, and as for the ignorance of the masses, we know what means they take to remove it.

With the aid of the Agrouchada-Parikchai, we will now take a complete survey of the higher course of philosophy pursued by the sacred decade under the direction of its Guru.

     
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 98]

  

CHAPTER III.

  

THE GURU--EVOCATIONS.

From noon to sunset the sacred decade was under the orders of the Master of Celestial Science, or Philosophy: from sunset to midnight it passed under the direction of the Guru of Evocations, who taught the manifested part of the occult sciences.

The Book of Spirits in our possession is silent as to the formulas of evocations taught by them. According to some Brahmins, the most fearful penalties were inflicted upon the rash man who should venture to make known to a stranger the third book of the Agrouchada, treating of those matters. According to others, these formulas were never written: they were and still are verbally communicated to the adepts, in a suppressed voice.

It is also claimed, though we have had no opportunity to verify the truth of the assertion, that a peculiar language is used to express the formulas of evocation, and that it was forbidden, under penalty of death, to translate them into the vulgar tongue. The few expressions that have come to our knowledge, such as L'rhom, H'hom, Sh'rhum, Sho'rhim, are very extraordinary and do not seem to belong to any known idiom.

The Book of the Pitris gives the following portrait of the Guru of Evocations:

The Guru of Evocations is a man who knows no other god than himself, since he has all the gods and spirits at his command." The term "gods" is here used as meaning the superior spirits. "He offers worship to Zyaus

[p. 99]

alone, the type spirit, the primordial germ, the universal womb. At his voice, rivers and seas forsake their beds, mountains become valleys and valleys become mountains. Fire, rain, and tempests are in his service. He knows the past, the present, and the future. The stars obey him, and, armed with his seven-knotted stick, he is able to confine all the evil spirits in the universe within a single magic circle." (Agrouchada-Parikchai.)

After examining the philosophical doctrines of the believers in spirits, the Pitris, we can only study the teachings of the Guru of Evocations, in the total absence of documents, as we have already taken occasion to say, in the manifestation of occult power, or exterior phenomena, produced by his disciples, the Nirvanys and Yoguys.

     
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 100]

  

CHAPTER IV.

  

THE FRONTAL SIGN OF THE INITIATES ACCORDING TO THE AGROUCHADA-PARIKCHAI.

Every morning those who have been initiated into the third degree, after terminating their ablutions, and before going to the pagoda to listen to the discourse on the occult sciences, should trace upon their foreheads, under the direction of the Gurus, the accompanying sign, which is a symbol of the highest initiation. The circle indicates infinity, the study of which is the object of the occult sciences.

The border of triangles signifies that everything in nature is subject to the laws of the Trinity.

Brahma--Vischnou--Siva.

The germ--The womb--The offspring.

The seed--The earth--The plant.

The father--The mother--The child.

The serpent is a symbol of wisdom and perseverance. It also indicates that the multitude are not to be admitted to a revelation of the higher truths, which often lead weak minds to insanity and death. The seven-knotted stick represents the seven degrees of the power of evocation and external manifestation, which form the subject

[p. 101]

of study to those who have been initiated into the various degrees with which we are acquainted:

Grihasta--or House-Master.

Pourohita--or Priest of Popular Evocations.

Fakir--Performing.

Sanyassis--Superior Exorcists.

Nirvanys--Naked Evocators,

Yoguys--Contemplative.

Brahmatma--Supreme Chief.

     
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 102]

  

CHAPTER V.

  

THE INTERPRETATION OF THE VEDAS AND OTHER WORKS OF SACRED SCRIPTURES.

Before searching the Book of the Pitris in order to see what it teaches, it may not be amiss to say a few words regarding the question of how the sacred books are to be interpreted. We deem the matter of sufficient importance to make it the subject of a separate chapter. It stands at the very threshold of our subject like a sentinel on duty.

On the first palm leaf composing the second part of the work in question we find the following words written, like an inscription, with a sharply pointed stick:

"The sacred scriptures ought not to be taken in their apparent meaning, as in the case of ordinary books. Of what use would it be to forbid their revelation to the profane if their secret meaning were contained in the literal sense of the language usually employed?

"As the soul is contained in the body,

"As the almond is hidden by its envelope,

"As the sun is veiled by the clouds,

"As the garments hide the body from view,

"As the egg is contained in its shell,

"And as the germ rests within the interior of the seed,

"So the sacred law has its body, its envelope, its cloud, its garment, its shell, which hide it from the knowledge of the world.

"All that has been, all that is, everything that will be, everything that ever has been said, are to be found in the Vedas. But the Vedas do not explain themselves, and

[p. 103]

they can only be understood when the Guru has removed the garment with which they are clothed, and scattered the clouds that veil their celestial light.

"The law is like the precious pearl that is buried in the bosom of the ocean. It is not enough to find the oyster in which it is enclosed, but it is also necessary to open the oyster and get the pearl.

"You who, in your pride, would read the sacred scriptures without the Guru's assistance, do you even know by what letter of a word you ought to begin to read them--do you know the secret of the combination by twos and threes--do you know when the final letter becomes an initial and the initial becomes final?

"Wo to him who would penetrate the real meaning of things before his head is white and he needs a cane to guide his steps."

 

These words of the Agrouchada, warning us against conforming to the strict letter of the sacred scriptures of India, remind us of the following words, in which Origen expresses himself like one of the initiates in the ancient temples:

"If it is incumbent upon us to adhere strictly to the letter, and to understand what is written in the law, after the manner of the Jews and of the people, I should blush to acknowledge openly that God has given us such laws--I should consider that human legislation was more elevated and rational--that of Athens, for instance, or Rome, or Lacedaemon.

"What reasonable man, I ask, would ever believe that the first, second, or third day of creation, which were divided into days and nights, could possibly exist without any sun, without any moon, and without any stars, and that during the first day there was not even any sky?

"Where shall we find any one so foolish as to believe that God actually engaged in agriculture and planted trees

[p. 104]

in the garden of Eden, which was situated in the East--that one of these trees was the tree of life and that another could impart the knowledge of good and evil? Nobody, I think, will hesitate to consider these things as figures having a mysterious meaning."

The old Jewish Cabalists, whose doctrines, as we have seen, appear to have been closely allied to those taught in the Indian temples, expressed a similar opinion in the following language:

"Wo to the man who looks upon the law as a simple record of events expressed in ordinary language, for if really that is all that it contains we can frame a law much more worthy of admiration. If we are to regard the ordinary meaning of the words we need only turn to human laws and we shall often meet with a greater degree of elevation. We have only to imitate them and to frame laws after their model and example. But it is not so: every word of the law contains a deep and sublime mystery." [*1]

"The texts of the law are the garments of the law: wo to him who takes these garments for the law itself. This is the sense in which David says: 'My God, open my eyes that I may contemplate the marvels of thy law.'

"David referred to what is concealed beneath the vestments of the law. There are some foolish people who, seeing a man covered with a handsome garment, look no farther, and take the garment for the body, while there is something more precious still, and that is the soul. The law also has its body. There are the commandments which may be called the body of the law, the ordinary record of events with which it is mingled are the garments that cover the body. Ordinary people usually only regard the vestments and texts of the law; that is all they look at; they do not see what is hidden beneath the garments, but

[p. 105]

those who are wiser pay no attention to the vestment, but to the body which is clothed by it."

"In short, the sages, the servants of the Supreme King, those who inhabit the heights of Mount Sinai, pay no regard to anything but the soul, which lies at the foundation of all the rest, which is the law itself, and in time to come they will be prepared to contemplate the soul of that soul by which the law is inspired.

"If the law were composed of words alone, such as the words of Esau, Hagar, Laban, and others, or those which were uttered by Balaam's ass or by Balaam himself, then why should it be called the law of truth, the perfect law, the faithful witness of God himself? Why should the sage esteem it as more valuable than gold or precious stones?

"But every word contains a higher meaning; every text teaches something besides the events which it seems to describe. This superior law is the more sacred, it is the real law."

It appears that the fathers of the Christian church, as well as the Jewish Cabalists and the initiates in the Hindu temples, all used the same language.

The records of the law veil its mystical meaning as the garment covers the body, as the clouds conceal the sun.

The Book of the Pitris, which we are about to examine, claims to reveal the essence, the very marrow of the vedas to those who have been initiated, but it is far from clear, except in the cosmological and philosophical portion. Whenever it treats of the rites of evocation and exorcism it resorts to obscure and mysterious formulas, to combinations of magical and occult letters, the hidden meaning of which, admitting that there is a hidden meaning, wrapped as it is in uncouth and unknown words, is quite beyond our comprehension and we have never been able to discover it.

In that portion which we propose to analyze, we shall preserve the dialogue form, as the lessons of the Guru were taught in that manner.

[p. 106]

Apart from the belief in spirits and supernatural manifestations to which human reason does not readily assent, our readers will see that no purer morality ever grew from a more elevated system of philosophical speculation.

Upon reading these pages, they will see that antiquity has derived all the scientific knowledge of life it possessed from India, and the initiates of the Hindu temples were very much like Moses, Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, the Essenes, and the Christian apostles.

Modern spiritualism can add nothing to the metaphysical conceptions of the ancient Brahmins: that is a truth well expressed by the illustrious Cousin in the following words:

"The history of philosophy in India is an abridgement of the philosophical history of the world."

Footnotes

^104:1 A. Franck's translation of La Kabbale.

     
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 107]

  

CHAPTER VI.

  

PSYCHOLOGY OF THE BOOK OF THE PITRIS.

The superior Guru began his lessons to those who had been admitted to the third degree of initiation, with the following aphorisms:

The first of all sciences is that of man: man is the soul; the body is only a means of communication with terrestrial matter; the study of the soul leads to the knowledge of all the visible and invisible forces of nature, to that of the Great All.

Having laid this down, the venerable priest proceeds to unveil to his audience, in the most majestic and poetic language, the mysteries of the soul. We are sorry that we are unable to accompany him as he more fully unfolds his doctrine. Our present space would not suffice. We can only give the substance of his teaching. The soul, or the ego, is a reality which manifests itself through the phenomena of which it is the cause; these phenomena are revealed to man by that interior light which the sacred books call ahancara, or conscience.

This ahancara is a universal fact and all beings are endowed with it more or less. It attains the greatest perfection in man. It is by this sovereign light, that the ego is enlightened and guided. We may say, by the way, according to the divine Manu, that from the plant, in which it seems to be in a state of suspended animation, to the animals and man, the ahancara gradually frees itself from matter by which it is encumbered, and overpowers and masters it, until it arrives at the supreme transformation,

[p. 108]

which restores the soul to liberty and enables it to continue its progressive evolution forever and ever.

Released from these ties, the soul takes no further interest in the world which it once inhabited. It continues to be an active member of the Great All, and, as says the immortal legislator:

"The ancestral spirits in an invisible state accompany the Brahmins when invited to the funeral sraddha; in an aerial form they attend them and take their place beside them, when they take their seats." (Manu, Book iii.)

As the soul approaches its last transformation, it acquires faculties of infinite perfection, and finally its only Gurus are the Pitris, or spirits who have preceded it in a higher world. By means of the pure fluid called Agasa it enters into communication with them, receives instruction from them, and, according to its deserts, acquires the power or faculty of setting in motion the secret forces of nature.

Having set this forth at length, the Guru commences his second lesson by saying that logic alone leads to a knowledge of the soul and body.

Logic is defined to be a system of laws, by the aid of which, the mind being under proper control, perfect knowledge can be attained:

First, of the soul.

Second, of the reason.

Third, of the intellect.

Seventh, of the judgment.

Eighth, of activity.

Ninth, of privation.

Tenth, of the results of actions.

Eleventh, of the faculty.

Twelfth, of suffering.

Thirteenth, of deliverance.

Fourteenth, of transmigration or metempsychosis.

Fifteenth, of the body.

[p. 109]

Sixteenth, of the organs of sensation.

Seventeenth, of the objects of sensation.

The different modes employed by logic to arrive at a knowledge of the truth, are then studied in sixteen lessons, the headings of which are as follows:

First, evidence.

Second, the subject of, study and proof, or, in other words, the cause.

Third, scientific doubt.

Fourth, motive.

Fifth, example.

Sixth, the truth demonstrated.

Seventh, the syllogism.

Eighth, demonstration per absurdum.

Ninth, the determination of the object.

Tenth, the thesis.

Eleventh, the controversy.

Twelfth, the objection.

Thirteenth, vicious arguments.

Fourteenth, perversion.

Fifteenth, of futility.

Sixteenth, of refutation.

It is unnecessary to call attention to the fact that the philosophy of Greece, as well as of modern Europe, seems r to be largely indebted to that of the Hindus.

We shall not dwell further upon these various points. The enumeration is alone sufficient to show how much further they might be developed. Suffice it to say, that they are treated in a most masterly manner by the old philosophers on the banks of the Ganges, whose whole life was spent in study of the most elevated speculations.

Proof in general is made in four ways:

First, by perception,

Second, by induction.

Third, by comparison.

Fourth, by testimony.

[p. 110]

Induction, in its turn, is divided:

First, into antecedent, which separates the effect from the cause.

Second, into consequent, which deduces the cause from the effect.

Third, into analogy, which infers that unknown things are alike from known things that are alike.

After analyzing the soul and body, and testing them in all their manifestations in the crucible of logic, the Book of the Pitris, through the mouth of the Guru, gives the following list of their faculties and qualities:

Faculties of the Soul.

First, sensibility.

Second, intelligence.

Third, will.

Faculties of the Intellect.

First, conscience, or organs of internal perception.

Second, sense, or organs of external perception.

Third, memory.

Fourth, imagination.

Fifth, reason, or organs of absolute notions, or axioms.

Qualities of the Body.

First, color (sight).

Second, savor (taste).

Third, odor (smell).

Fourth, the sense of hearing and touch.

Fifth, number.

Sixth, quantity.

Seventh, individuality.

Eighth, conjunction.

Ninth, disjunction. Tenth, priority.

[p. 111]

Eleventh, posteriority.

Twelfth, gravity, or weight.

Thirteenth, fluidity.

Fourteenth, viscidity.

Fifteenth, sound.

As there is nothing material about anything that proceeds from the soul, it is obvious that those faculties which emanate from the Ahancara, or inward light, and the Agasa or pure fluid, cannot under any circumstances and however thoroughly we may study them, be made the objects of sensation, and it follows that the final end of all science is to free the spirit at the earliest possible moment from all material fetters, from the bonds of passion, and any evil influences that stand in the way of its passage to the celestial spheres, which are inhabited by aerial beings whose transmigrations are ended.

The body, on the contrary, being solely composed of material molecules, is dissolved into its original elements, and returns to the earth from which it sprung.

If the soul, however, is not deemed worthy to receive the fluidic body, spoken of by Manu, it is compelled to commence a new series of transmigrations in this world, until it has attained the requisite degree of perfection, when it abandons the human form forever.

It is impossible to shut our eyes to the extraordinary similarity between this system of philosophy and that of the old Greek philosophers, and especially of Pythagoras, who believed in the doctrine of metempsychosis, and also held that the object of all philosophy was to free the soul from its mortal envelope and guide it to the world of spirits. Although it appears from all the traditions relating to the subject, that Pythagoras went to the Indus in Alexander's train and travelled in India and brought back this system from there, and was the only one of all the old Sophists that taught it, some people who have no eyes for anything that is not Greek, would have us believe

[p. 112]

that India was indebted to the land of Socrates for its earliest knowledge of philosophy. We will merely repeat, in reply, the words of the illustrious Colebrook, who has studied this question for thirty years in India on the spot:

"In philosophy the Hindus are the masters of the Greeks, and not their disciples."

Pythagoras believed in a hierarchy of the superior spirits, exercising various degrees of influence upon worldly matters. That doctrine lies at the very foundation of the occult sciences. It necessarily supposes an acquaintance with the magical formulas of evocation, and while the philosopher only leads us to suppose that he had been admitted to a knowledge of supernatural sciences, there is reason to believe that in this he was deterred from telling all he knew by the terrible oath taken by all those who had been initiated.

The Guru ended his inquiries into the soul and its faculties by the study of the reason.

As the whole logical power of Hindu spiritism rests upon these faculties, we devote a special chapter to the superior Guru's discourse upon this interesting subject. We will give the introduction merely in the form of a dialogue.

We use the modern term spiritism, to designate the Hindu belief in the Pitris, for the reason that no other word exists in our language which sufficiently characterizes it.

The belief in the Pitris is a positive belief in spirits as manifesting themselves to and directing men: it matters little whether the word has any scientific value or not. It is enough that it correctly expresses the idea which we wish to convey.

     
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 113]

  

CHAPTER VII.

  

REASON.

[From the twenty-third dialogue of the Second Book of the Agrouchada-Parikchai.]

VATU [*1] (the Disciple).

Our ablutions have been performed, as prescribed. The regular sacrifices have all been accomplished, the fire slumbers upon the hearthstone. The pestle no longer resounds in the mortar as the young women prepare their evening food. The sacred elephants have just struck upon copper gongs the strokes that divide the night. It is now midnight. It is the hour when you commence your sublime lessons.

THE GURU.

My children, what would you of me?

VATU.

O thou, who art adorned with every virtue, who art as great as Mount Hymavat (Himalaya), who art possessed of a perfect knowledge of the four Vedas and of everything that is explained in the sacred word, thou who possessest all the mentrams (or formulas of evocation), who holdest the superior shades and spirits suspended

[p. 114]

from thy lips, whose shining virtues are as brilliant as the sun, whose reputation is everywhere known, and who art praised in the fourteen heavens by the fourteen classes of spirits who communicate with men, let thy science flow over us, who embrace thy sacred feet, as the waters of the Ganges flow over the plains they fertilize.

THE GURU.

Listen while the vile Soudra sleeps like a dog beneath the poyal of his abode: while the Vaysia is dreaming of the hoards of this world's treasures that he is accumulating, and while the Xchatria, or king, sleeps among his women, faint with pleasure but never satiated, this is the moment when just men, who are not under the dominion of their flesh, commence the study of the sciences.

VATU.

Master, we are listening.

THE GURU.

Age has weakened my sight, and this feeble body is hardly able to unfold to you what I mean: my envelope is falling asunder and the hour of my transfiguration is approaching. What did I promise you for this evening

VATU.

Master, you said to us, I will unfold to you the knowledge of the immortal light, which puts man in communication with infinity and rules his transformations upon earth.

THE GURU.

You will now hear a voice and that voice will be mine, but the thought that arises in my mind is not mine. Listen: I give place to the superior spirits by whom I am inspired.

[p. 115]

The Guru then performs an evocation to the maritchis, or primordial spirits. The following is a brief summary of his discourse.

Every man is conscious within himself of certain absolute notions, existing outside of matter and sensation, which he has not derived from education and which his reason has received from Swayambhouva, or the Self-existent Being, as a sign of his immortal origin.

They are the principles:

Of cause.

Of identity.

Of contradiction.

Of harmony.

Through the principle of cause reason tells us that everything that exists is the result of some cause or other, and though the latter often escapes our notice, we still acknowledge its existence, knowing it to be a fact.

This is the source of all science: we study realities only to trace them back to their producer.

It is not enough to lay down the law of a fact. We must know whom the law proceeds from, and what maintains the harmony of nature.

Through the principles of identity and contradiction, man knows that his ego is not that of his neighbor. That two contrary facts are not governed by the same law; that good is not evil; that two contraries cannot simultaneously be predicated of the same fact.

Through the principle of harmony, reason tells us that everything in the universe is subject to certain immutable laws, and the principle of cause compels us to attribute to these laws an author and preserver.

No faculty of the soul is able to perform any act or motion, except in conformity with these principles, which regulate its interior and exterior life, its spiritual and material nature. Without these principles, to which all are necessarily obliged to submit, and which commend them-

[p. 116]

selves to the reason of all men and people, without these principles, we say, which are the supreme law of all observation, of all investigation, of all science, no one can derive any benefit from tradition, or from the achievements of those who have preceded him. There being no other axiomatic foundation for scientific facts, there can be no science, for no two men will see, think, or judge alike.

Human reason, universal reason, guided by absolute principles--that is the bright light, guiding and uniting all men in a common work for the benefit of all.

Such is a brief abstract of this dialogue, which covers fifty palm-leaves at least of the Book of the Pitris.

It would be impossible for us, as may well be imagined, in the present work, which is merely a brief history or description of the practices of those who have been initiated, and in which, in order to accomplish the task we have set before us, we are obliged to compress the substance of more than fifty volumes, to give any subject a disproportionate or undue importance.

With the help of the axioms laid down by the Guru, reason leads man to the knowledge:

First, of the Supreme Being.

Second, of the constitution of the universe.

Third, of superior and inferior spirits.

Fourth, of man.

We propose now to show what is the belief of those who have been initiated upon each of these matters.

Footnotes

^113:1 This word in Sanscrit signifies novice or pupil; it is applied to any one, no matter what his age may be, who studies under the direction of a Guru.

     
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 117]

  

CHAPTER VIII.

  

A TEXT FROM THE VEDAS.

Nothing is commenced or ended. Everything is changed or transformed. Life and death are only modes of transformation which rule the vital molecule, from the plant up to Brahma himself. (Atharva-Veda.)

     
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 118]

  

CHAPTER IX.

  

A FEW SLOCAS FROM MANU.

The soul is the assemblage of the gods. The universe rests in the supreme soul. It is the soul that accomplishes the series of acts emanating from animate beings.

The Brahmin should figure to himself the great being which is the Sovereign Master of the universe, and who is subtler than an atom, as more brilliant than pure gold, and as inconceivable by the mind, except in the repose of the most abstract contemplation.

Some worship him in the fire, some in the air; he is the Lord of creation, the eternal Brahma.

He it is who, enveloping all beings in a body composed of the five elements, causes them to pass through the successive stages of birth, growth, and dissolution, with a movement like that of a wheel.

So the man who recognizes the supreme soul as present in his own soul, understands that it is his duty to be kind and true to all, and the most fortunate destiny that he could have desired is that of being finally absorbed in Brahma. (Manu, Book xii.)

     
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 119]

  

CHAPTER X.

  

OF THE SUPREME BEING.

[Twenty-fourth dialogue of the Book of the Pitris.]

After giving as a text the words of the Atharva-Veda, and a few verses from Manu, which we have just quoted, the Agrouchada-Parikchai devotes the twenty-fourth lesson of the Guru to the study of the Supreme Being. The principles of cause and harmony lead human reason to the absolute notion of a superior and universal cause.

"He who denies this cause for the whole," says the Book of the Pitris, "has no right to assign any cause to any particular fact. If you say the universe exists because it exists, it is unnecessary to go any further; man lives only by facts, and he has no assurance otherwise of the invariability of natural laws."

Having shown that the belief in a superior and universal cause, in the Supreme Being, lies at the basis of all science and, pre-eminently, of axiomatic truth, the Guru of initiations borrows from Manu and the Vedas the definition of this primordial force, whose mysterious and sacred name it is forbidden to utter.

"It is he who exists by himself, and who is in all, because all is in him.

"It is he who exists by himself, because the mind alone can perceive him; who cannot be apprehended by our sensual organs. Who is without visible parts, eternal the soul of all beings, and none can comprehend him.

"He is one, immutable, devoid of parts or form, infinite,

[p. 120]

omniscient, omnipresent, and omnipotent. He it is who has created the heavens and the worlds out of chaos, and has set them whirling through infinite space. He is the motor, the great original substance, the efficient and material cause of everything."

"Behold the Ganges as it rolls, it is he; the ocean as it mutters, it is he; the cloud as it thunders, it is he; the lightning as it flashes, it is he; as from all eternity the world was in the mind of Brahma, so now everything that exists is in his image."

"He is the author and principle of all things, eternal, immaterial, everywhere present, independent, infinitely happy, exempt from all pain or care, the pure truth, the source of all justice, he who governs all, who disposes of all, who rules all, infinitely enlightened, infinitely wise, without form, without features, without extent, without condition, without name, without caste, without relation, of a purity that excludes all passion, all inclination, all compromise."

The Guru, with the Pouranas, discusses these sublime questions, to which he returns the following answers:

"Mysterious spirit, immense force, inscrutable power, how was thy power, thy force, thy life manifested before the period of creation? Wast thou dormant in the midst of disintegrating matter, like an extinct sun? Was the dissolution of matter in thyself or was it by thy order? Wert thou chaos? Did thy life include all the lives that had escaped the shock of the destroying elements? If thou wert life, thou wert also death, for there can be no destruction without movement, and motion could not exist without thee."

"Didst thou cast the worlds into a blazing furnace in order that they might be regenerated, in order that they might be born again, from their decomposing elements, as an old tree springs again from the seed in the midst of its corruption?"

[p. 121]

"Did thy spirit wander over the waters, thy name being Narayana?

"The immortal germ," went on the Guru, "whose terrible name should not be spoken, is the ancient of days. Nothing existed without him; nothing was apart from him; he causeth life, motion, and light to shine through infinity; everything comes from him and everything goes back to him; he is constantly fertilizing the universe, through an intimate union with his productive thought.

"Hear ye, this has been revealed to the sages in the silence of solitary places, upon the banks of unfrequented torrents, in the mysterious crypts of temples."

This is what no profane ear should hear. This is what has been from all eternity, which never had any beginning and will have no end.

Listen to the hymn of eternal love:

He is one and he is two. He is two, but he is three. The one contains two principles, and the union of these two principles produces the third.

He is one and he is all, and this one contains the husband and the wife, and the love of the husband for the wife, and of the wife for the husband, produces the third, which is the son.

The husband is as ancient as the wife, and the wife is as ancient as the husband, and the son is also as ancient as

[p. 122]

the husband and wife, and the one that contains all three is called

A

U         M

Three in One.

This is given as the meaning of the sublime monosyllable. It is the image of the ancient of days.

The union of the husband and the wife continues forever, and from the transports of their eternal love the son constantly receives life, which he unceasingly drops into infinity, like so many millions of dew-drops fertilized by the divine love.

Every drop of dew that falls is an exact representation of the great al], an atom of the Paramatma or universal soul, and each of these atoms possesses the two principles that beget the third.

So everything goes by three in the universe, from the infinite to which everything descends, to the infinite to which everything ascends, with a motion similar to that of an endless chain revolving about a wheel.

The first appearance of atoms is in the state of fertilized germs. They collect together and form matter which is being continually transformed and improved by the three grand principles of life; water, and heat, and by the pure fluid, called Agasa.

Agasa, the pure fluid, is life itself. It is the soul. It is man. The body is only an envelope, an obedient slave.

[p. 123]

As the seed, which germinates, bursts through its shell, and shoots out of the ground, Agasa lays gradually aside the material veil, beneath which its transformation takes place, and purifies itself. Upon leaving the earth, it passes through the fourteen more perfect regions, and every time it abandons its former envelope, and clothes itself with one more pure.

Agasa, the vital fluid--the soul--animates the human body upon earth. In infinite space, it put on the aerial form of the Pitris or spirits.

Human souls before being absorbed in the supreme soul, ascend through the fourteen following degrees of superior spirits.

The Pitris are the immediate souls of our ancestors, still living in the terrestrial circle, and communicating with men, just as more perfect man communicates with the animal world.

Above the Pitris, but having nothing in common with the earth, are,

The somapas,

The agnidagdhas,

The agnanidagdhas,

The agnichwattas,

The cavias,

the barhichads,

The somyas,

The havichmats,

The adjyapas,

The soucalis,

The sadbyas.

Spirits inhabiting the planets and stars.

[p. 124]

The two highest degrees were those of the Maritchis and of the Pradjapatis, who were superior spirits, and would soon arrive at the end of their transmigrations and be absorbed in the great soul.

This is called the progressive transformation of just spirits who have spent their terrestrial life in the practice of virtue. The following are the transformations of the bad spirits:

The yakchas,

The rakchasas,

The pisatchas,

The gandharba.

The apsaras,

The assouras,

The nagas,

The sarpas,

The souparnas,

The kinnaras.

Bad spirits who are constantly attempting to creep into the bodies of men, and return to terrestrial life, which they have to pass through anew.

These bad spirits are the malign secretions of the universe. Their only means of regaining the degree of purity required for the higher transformations, is through thousands and thousands of transformations into minerals, plants, and animals.

The superior pradjapatis are ten in number; the three first,

Maritchi,

Atri,

Angiras,

represent eternal reason, wisdom, and intelligence.

[p. 125]

The second three,

Poulastya,

Poulaha,

Cratou,

represent the goodness, power, and majesty of the Divine Being.

The last triad,

Vasichta,

Pratchetas,

Brighou,

are the agents of creation, preservation, and transformation. They are the direct ministers of the manifested trinity.

The last, called

Narada,

represents the intimate union of all the Pradjapatis in the mind of the Self-existent Being, and the unceasing production of the thousands of beings by whom nature is constantly being rejuvenated and the work of creation is being perpetuated.

These qualities of reason, wisdom, intelligence, goodness, power, majesty, creation, preservation, transformation, and union, which are being constantly diffused throughout nature, under the influence of the superior spirits, are the unceasing product of the love of the divine husband for his celestial spouse. In this way the great being maintains his eternal life, which is that of all beings.

For all things in the universe only exist and move and undergo transformation, in order that the existence of the Great All may be perpetuated, renewed, and purified.

[p. 126]

That is the reason why nothing exists outside of his essence and substance, and that all creatures contain in themselves the principles of reason, wisdom, intelligence, goodness, power, majesty, creation, preservation, transformation, and union, and are the image of the ten Pradjapatis, who are themselves a direct emanation from the divine power.

The departure of the soul-atom from the bosom of divinity is a radiation from the life of the Great All, who expends his strength in order that he may grow again, and in order that he may live by its return. God thereby acquires a new vital force, purified by all the transformations that the soul-atom has undergone.

Its return is the final reward. Such is the secret of the evolutions of the Great Being, and of the supreme soul, the mother of all souls.

After fully setting forth the above system with regard to God, the soul, and perpetual creation, the most astonishing system, perhaps, that the world has ever produced, and which contains within itself, substantially under a mystical form, all the philosophical doctrines that have ever agitated the human mind, the Book of the Pitris closes the present chapter, from which we have eliminated its interminable invocations and hymns to the creative power, by the following comparison:

"The Great All, which is constantly in motion and is constantly undergoing change in the visible and invisible universe, is like the tree which perpetuates itself by its seed, and is unceasingly creating the same identical types."

[p. 127]

Thus, according to the belief of those who had been initiated, God is the whole, the soul is the atom which undergoes progressive transformation, is purified and ascends to its eternal source, and the universe is the reunited body of atoms in process of transformation.

As man upon earth is in direct communication with the souls of plants and of inferior animals, so the Pitris, having clothed themselves with a fluidic (fluidique) body, and having attained the first of the fourteen superior degrees, are always in communication with man.

There is an uninterruptedly ascending scale, the links of which are never broken:

The Pitris are in relation with the Somapas (spirits).

The Somapas with the Agnidagdhas.

The Agnidagdhas with the Agnanidagdhas.

The Agnanidagdhas with the Agnichwatas.

And so on up to the Pradjapatis, who are in direct communication with God.

 

In each of these categories the spirit assumes a more perfect body and continues to move in a circle of laws, which may be called superterrestrial but which are not supernatural.

The Book of the Pitris says positively that the spirits preserve their sex, whatever may be the superior categories to which they may attain; that they are united together by the ties of a love which is totally unlike every form of earthly passion. These unions are always prolific and give birth to beings who possess all the qualities of their parents, enjoy the same happiness, and are not tied down to the transformations of this lower world.

It is possible, however, as the Pitris enjoy the utmost freedom of will, that they may commit some exceptionally grave fault and be degraded, in consequence, to the condition of man. Upon this point the Agrouchada-Parikchai alludes to a revolt of the Pitris, that happened a long while

[p. 128]

ago, but makes no further explanation. Some of them are supposed to have been cast down to earth again.

There is every reason to suppose, from the close similarity existing between their various religious traditions, that this legend found its way, through the process of initiation, from the Hindu temples into the mysteries of Chaldea and Egypt, and thus gave birth to the myth of the first sin.

Those Pitris which have not passed the degree immediately above that of man, are the only spirits which are in communication with the latter. They are regarded as the ancestors of the human race and its natural directors from whom it derives its inspiration. They are themselves inspired by the spirits of the next degree above them, and so on, from one degree to another, until the divine word or, in other terms, until revelation is imparted to man.

The Pitris are not equal to each other. Each category forms a separate and complete world, in the likeness of our own, only more perfect, in which there is the same diversity of intelligence and function.

According to this theory, it will be readily understood that man cannot live isolated from his ancestors. It is only by the aid of their instruction and help that he can arrive in the shortest possible time at the transformation by means of which he becomes united to them.

Upon this belief is based the whole theory of initiation.

But men upon earth are not fitted to receive communications from a higher world. Some are naturally inclined toward evil and do not care to improve their characters: others still feel the effect of the previous lives which they have spent in the form of animals, and their spirits are entirely dominated by matter. It is only after many generations have been spent in the practice of virtue that the soul becomes spiritualized and the pure fluid called Agasa is developed, by means of which communication is established.

[p. 129]

Hence the natural inequality of men and the necessity that those who have arrived at the highest degree of development should unite in the study of the great secrets of life and of the forces of nature, that they may set them in motion.

"It is only by constant fasting, mortification, prayer, and meditation," says the Agrouchada-Parikchai, "that man can arrive at complete separation from everything that surrounds him. In that case he acquires extraordinary power. Time, space, capacity, weight are of no consequence. Hey has all the Pitris at his command and through them all the superior spirits likewise. He attains a power of thought and action of which formerly he had no conception, and sees through the curtain that hangs before the splendors of human destiny."

But while there are mediating and directing spirits who are always ready to come at his call, to point the way to virtue, there are also others which have been condemned for their misdeeds in this, their earthly life, to undergo again all their previous transmigrations, commencing with mineral and plant life; they float about in infinity until they can seize upon some unoccupied particle of matter, which they can use as an envelope: they employ all the resources of their miserable intellects to deceive and mislead men as to the means by which they can arrive at the supreme and final transformation. These bad spirits are constantly occupied in tormenting pious hermits during their sacrifices, initiates in the midst of their studies, and sannyassis in their prayers, and it is impossible to drive them away, except through the possession of the secret of magical conjurations.

Lastly, the whole system, the Great All, is perpetually preserved, developed, and transformed through love.

The emblem of this love, the Trinity, contains within itself both the husband and wife, and their perpetual embraces give birth to the son by whom the universe is regenerated.

[p. 130]

Everything that exists is composed of atoms that reproduce themselves by threes--the germ, the womb, and the offspring--the father, the mother, the child--after the pattern of that immortal Trinity which is welded together in one being by whom the whole of nature is ruled, and the soul-atom, at the close of its transformations, returns to the ever-living source from which it sprang.

This grand and imposing conception gave birth, in the vulgar cult, to that triple manifestation of the Trinity which was known in India as--

Nara--Agni--Brahma--the Father,

Nari--Vaya--Vischnou--the Mother,

Viradj--Sourya--Siva--the Son.

It was known in Egypt under the following names:

Amon--Osiris--Horus--the Father,

Mouth--Isis--Isis--the Mother,

Khons--Horus--Malouli--the Son.

It was called in Chaldea:

Anou,

Nouah,

Bel.

In Polynesian Oceanica:

Taaroa,

Ina,

Oro.

And finally in Christianity:

The Father,

The Spirit,

The Word.

All the teachings of the temples grow out of the mysteries into which the priests are initiated, and which they change into the grossest symbols, in order to vulgarize them without divulging their secret meaning.

     
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 131]

  

CHAPTER XI.

  

WORDS SPOKEN BY THE PRIESTS AT MEMPHIS.

The vandalism committed by Caesar's soldiers in the destruction of the Alexandrian library has left us nothing but sculptures and inscriptions with which to reconstruct the religious history of Egypt. But that country was so directly allied to India that its ruins speak to us in a voice full of meaning, and its inscriptions are pregnant with significance, when studied from a Brahminical point of view.

We will merely mention, at present, one inscription taken from the Rahmesseum at Thebes, which is a complete summary of the doctrine of the Pitris, as herein set forth.

One of the first expressions that the Egyptian priests made use of in addressing those who had been passed through the process of initiation was as follows:

Everything is contained and preserved in one,

Everything is changed and transformed by three,

The Monad created the Dyad,

The Dyad begat the Triad,

The Triad shines throughout the whole of nature.

     
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 132]

  

CHAPTER XII.

  

THE FORMULAS OF EVOCATION.

After an examination of the part performed by the human soul, and the superior and inferior spirits, as well as by the universe, in the Great All which we call God, and, having established the ties of relationship existing between all souls, in consequence of which, those belonging to the superior groups are always ready to aid souls belonging to an inferior group with their counsel and communications, the Book of the Pitris goes on to discuss the mysterious subject of evocations. Evocations are of two sorts.

They are addressed either to disembodied spirits or to ancestral spirits, in which latter case the spirits evoked can respond to the appeal made to them, whatever may be the superior degree to which they may have attained, or they are addressed to spirits not included in the genealogical line of relationship, and then the evocations are unsuccessful if addressed to spirits who have already passed the degree immediately above that of man.

The following rules may be laid down:

That a man can evoke the spirit of his ancestor under any circumstances, even if the latter has already arrived at the rank of Pradjapati, or supreme director of creation, and is on the point of being absorbed in the Great Soul.

That if any one evokes a spirit not in his genealogical line, he can only obtain manifestations from those who belong to the class of Pitris.

Preparations should be made for the ceremony of evocation by fasting and prayer, for, as the Agrouchada-Parikchai says, these terrible formulas are fatal when not uttered by a pure mouth. In order to evoke a spirit the priest should:

[p. 133]

First, isolate himself entirely from all external matters.

Second, his mind should be absorbed in thought of the spirit whose appearance he has called forth and from whom he desires to receive a communication.

Third, he should enclose all the malign spirits who might disturb him in a magic circle.

Fourth, the should offer up sacrifices to his ancestral shades and to the superior spirits.

Fifth, he should pronounce the formulas of evocation.

A special part of the Book of the Pitris is devoted to these formulas, which all have a cabalistic meaning. We shall make no effort to elucidate this point any further, as we were never able to obtain the key to these various combinations from the Brahmins. We should be careful to avoid attaching greater importance to these matters than they are fairly entitled to.

The first leaf of the chapter on formulas contains the following epigraph, the combinations of words and letters being as simple as they could well be. We give it as a specimen to show what puerile methods the priests resorted to in order to cover up their practices.

As it contains no formula of evocation, the Brahmins had no objection to explain its meaning:

Nid + Nad
 Irt
 Mad + uo--yac--ad
 Irt
 mav--id
 Irt
 sam + ad
 Irt
 mal + ak
 Irt
 Mam + ra + di--yart
 Tag--aj
 Irt.

[p. 134]

By reading from right to left, commencing with the last syllable of each word, we are able to attach the following meaning to this cabalistic sentence:

Tridandin.
 Tridacayoudam.
 Tridivam.
 Tridamas.
 Trikalam.
 Trayidarmam.
 Trijagat.

The language of evocations totally dispenses with all verbs, prepositions, conjunctions, and adverbs, and while names are retained, they undergo the terminations of the different declensions by which the grammatic action of the verbs and prepositions understood, is indicated.

Thus, in the case under consideration:

Tridandin is in the nominative, and signifies the priest who is entitled to three sticks. These three sticks indicate one who has been admitted to the third degree of initiation, and who has power over three things: thought, speech, and action.

Tridacayoudam signifies the divine arm. This word is in the accusative, and is governed by a verb of which Tridandin is the subject.

Tridivam signifies the triple heaven. This word is also in the accusative and is consequently in the same situation as the preceding word.

Tridamas is the name of Agni of three fires. This word is the genitive of a word of which Tridamam is the nominative.

Trikalam signifies the three times, the past, the present, the future. This is also in the accusative form.

Trayidarmam is in the accusative, and signifies the three books of the law.

Trijagat is in the neutral form of the accusative and signifies the three worlds: heaven, earth, and the lower regions.

[p. 135]

According to the Brahmins, this inscription means as follows:

Tridandin--or he who has been initiated into three degrees, who carries the three rods, and who has power over three things: thought, speech, and action.

Tridacayoudam--if he desires to secure possession of the divine arm.

Tridivam--and conquer the power of evocation from the spirit of the three heavens.

Tridamas--must have in his service Agni of the three fires.

Trikalam--and know the three times, past, present, and future.

Trayidarmam--mast possess the essence of the three books of the law.

Trijagat--thus he will be enabled to know the secrets of the three worlds.

We do not propose to dwell at length upon the practice of occult writing, the mechanism of which changes with every form of evocation. Besides, it has been impossible for us, as we have elsewhere stated, to obtain possession of that part of the Book of the Pitris containing these formulas. The priests keep them to themselves and the people are not allowed to know anything about them.

At one time the penalty for divulging a single verse of the Book of Spirits was death. The rank of the accused made no difference. It mattered not that the guilty priest belonged to the sacerdotal caste.

Neither did the Jewish Cabalists limit themselves to the symbolical language with which they covered up their doctrines. They also endeavored to introduce into their writings secret methods almost identical with those of the Indian pagodas.

As for particular ceremonies of evocation, we shall have occasion to study them in all their details when we turn our attention to the external manifestations produced by the different grades of initiates.

     
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 136]

  

CHAPTER XIII.

  

FORMULAS OF MAGICAL INCANTATION--VULGAR MAGIC.

The formulas of magical incantation, addressed to evil spirits, are kept as secret as those used in the evocation of superior spirits. They even form a part of a special book of the Agrouchada called the Agrouchada-Parikchai, treating of magicians.

They are also written, as well as read, in a manner similar to that we have just described, in order to hide from the profane their real meaning. We pass them over, however, and turn our attention to the external manifestations, exorcisms, and cases of demoniacal possession which are so frequent in India.

We propose to give an impartial account of the numerous facts that have fallen under our own observation, some of which are so extraordinary from a physiological, as well as from a purely spiritual point of view, that we hardly know what to say of them.

We merely allude to the chapter of the Agrouchada treating of formulas of incantation and are unable to give any further information as to the magical words, to which the priests attribute so much virtue in exorcising Rakchasas, Pisatchas, Nagas, Souparnas, and other evil spirits that frequent funeral ceremonies, take possession of men's bodies, and disturb the sacrifices.

We have already, in another work, [*1] discussed that portion of the Book of the Pitris, notwithstanding its vulgarity,

[p. 137]

and we see no reason to change the opinion therein expressed, which it may not be amiss to call to the reader's mind. He will excuse us for quoting ourselves:

Magic seems to have established itself in India, as in some highly favored spot. In that country nothing is attributed to ordinary causes, and there is no act of malignancy or of wickedness of which the Hindus deem their magicians incapable.

Disappointments, obstacles, accidents, diseases, untimely deaths, the barrenness of women, miscarriages, epizooties, in short, all the ills that humanity is heir to, are attributed to the occult and diabolical practices of some wicked magician, in the pay of an enemy.

If an Indian,, when he meets with a misfortune, happens to be on bad terms with anybody, his suspicions are immediately directed in that quarter, and he accuses his enemy of resorting to magic in order to injure him.

The latter, however, resents the imputation. Their feelings become embittered against each other, the disagreement soon extends to their relatives and friends, and time consequences often become serious.

As malign spirits are exorcised, pursued, and hunted by the followers of the Pitris, it is the vulgar belief that they enter the service of vagabonds and miscreants, and teach them special magical formulas, by which they seek together to do all possible harm to others.

Several thousand years of sacerdotal despotism, during which every means have been employed to keep the people in ignorance and superstition, have carried popular credulity to its highest pitch.

In the South of India particularly we constantly meet with crowds of soothsayers and sorcerers, vending their oracles to any one who would purchase them, and spreading before rich and poor alike for a consideration the pretended mystery of human destiny.

These people are not much dreaded.

[p. 138]

But there are others, whose diabolical art is thought to be unlimited, and who are supposed to possess all the secrets of magic.

To inspire love or hatred, to introduce the devil into any one's body, or to drive him away, to cause sudden death or an incurable disease, to produce contagious maladies in cattle, or to protect them therefrom, to discover the most secret things, and to find lost or stolen articles--all this is but child's play for them.

The mere sight of one who is supposed to be endowed with such vast power inspires the Hindu with the deepest terror.

These doctors of magic are often consulted by persons who have enemies, of whom they desire to be revenged, by means of sorcery. On the other hand, when any one who suffers from disease attributes it to a cause of this kind, he calls in their aid, that they may deliver him by a counter-charm, or transfer the disease to those who have so maliciously caused it in his case.

The supplementary volume of the Agrouchada-Parikchai, treating of the practices of vulgar magic, does not seem to question them in any respect; it merely attributes them to the influence of evil spirits.

In its view, the magician's power is immense, but he only uses it for evil purposes.

Nothing is easier than for him to afflict any one whom he may meet with fever, dropsy, epilepsy, insanity, a constant nervous trembling, or any other disease, in short. But that is nothing. By his art he can even cause the entire destruction of an army besieging a city, or the sudden death of the commander of a besieged city and of all its inhabitants.

But while magic teaches how to do harm, it also shows us how to prevent it. There is no magician so shrewd that there is not another who can more than match him in ability, or destroy the effect of his charms, and make them rebound upon himself or his patrons.

[p. 139]

Independent of their direct intervention, the magicians have a large assortment of amulets, talismans, and powerful and efficient preservatives against sorcery and enchantments, in which they do a large business and make a great deal of money.

They consist of glass beads, enchanted by mentrams, of dried and aromatic roots and herbs, of sheets of copper upon which cabalistic characters, uncouth figures, and fantastical words are engraved.

The Hindus of the lower castes always wear them upon their persons, thinking that a supply of these relics will protect them from all harm.

Secret preparations to inspire love, to kindle anew an expiring passion, to restore vigor to the weak and infirm, come also within the province of the magicians, and are by no means the least unproductive source of their income. -

It is to them a woman always applies first when she wishes to reclaim a faithless husband, or prevent his becoming such.

It is by the aid of the philters they concoct that a young libertine or a sweetheart usually tries to beguile or captivate the object of his passion.

The Agrouchada also discusses the subject of incubi. "These demons in India," says Dubois, "are much worse and more diabolical, than those spoken of by Delrio the Jesuit, in his 'Disquisitiones Magicae.' By their violent and long-continued embraces they so weary the women whom they visit in the form of a dog, a tiger, or some other animal, that the poor creatures often die of fatigue and exhaustion."

It then speaks at some length of the means by which weapons may be enchanted or bewitched.

These arms upon which magical mentrams have been pronounced, have the virtue of producing effects which will compare in every respect with those caused by the

[p. 140]

celebrated sword of Durandal, or the lance of Argail, by which so many were disabled.

The Hindu gods and giants, in their frequent wars with each other, always made use of enchanted arms.

Nothing could withstand, for instance, the arrow of Brahma, which was never unsheathed without destroying an entire army; or the arrow of the serpent Capel, which, whenever it was cast among his enemies, had the property of throwing them into a state of lethargy which, as may well be imagined, put them at a great disadvantage and contributed largely to their defeat.

There is no secret that magic does not teach. There are magical secrets how to acquire wealth and honors; to render sterile women prolific by rubbing the hands and feet with certain enchanted compounds; to discover treasures buried in the earth, or concealed in some secret place, no matter where; and to make the bearer invulnerable, or even invincible, in battle.

The only thing they are not so clear about is the subject of everlasting life; and yet who can tell how many alchemists have grown white in the crypts of the pagodas, and how many strange philters have been there concocted in order to learn the secret of immortality

To become expert in magic the pupil must learn from a magician himself, whom the sorcerers call their Guru, like the believers in the philosophical doctrine of the Pitris, the formulas of evocation, by means of which the malign spirits are brought into complete subjection.

Some of these spirits the magician evokes in preference to others, probably on account of their willingness to do anything that may be required of them.

In the first rank are the spirits of certain planets. The name, Grahas, which is used to designate them, means the act of seizing or taking possession of those whom they are commanded, by a magical incantation, to torment.

In the next rank come the boutams, or demons from

[p. 141]

the lower regions, representing each a principle of destruction, the pisatchas, rakchasas, nagas, and other evil spirits.

The chaktys are female genii, who force men whom they meet at night.

The malign spirits are Kali, the Goddess of Blood, Marana-Devy, the Goddess of Death, and the others whom we have enumerated.

In order to set them in motion the magician has recourse to various mysterious operations, such as men-trams, sacrifices, and other different formulas. He should be nude when he addresses himself to goddesses, and modestly clothed when he addresses himself to male spirits.

The flowers that he offers to the spirits evoked by him should all be red, and the boiled rice should be colored with the blood of a young virgin, or a child, in case he proposes to cause death.

The mentrams, or prayers, which have such efficacy in all magical matters, exercise such an ascendancy upon the superior spirits themselves that the latter are powerless to refuse to do whatever the magician may order, in heaven, in the air, or upon the earth.

But those which are most certain and irresistible in their effects are what are called the fundamental mentrams, and consist of various fantastical monosyllables, of uncouth sound and difficult pronunciation, after the manner of those which we have already given while speaking of the formulas used by the priests.

Sometimes the magician repeats his mentrams in a respectful tone, ending all his evocations with the word Namaha, meaning respectful greeting, and loading the spirit that he has evoked with praises. At other times he speaks to them in an imperious and dictatorial tone, exclaiming in angry accents:

"If you are willing to do what I ask you, that is enough; if not, I command you in the name of such and such a god."

[p. 142]

Thereupon the spirit had to submit.

It would be impossible to enumerate the different drugs, ingredients, and implements that compose the stock-in-trade of a magician.

There are some spells in which it is necessary to use the bones of sixty-four different kinds of animals, neither more nor less, and among them are included those of a man born on the first day of the new moon, or of a woman, or a virgin, or a child, or a pariah.

When all these bones, being mingled together, are enchanted by mentrams and consecrated by sacrifices, and are buried in an enemy's house or at his door, upon a night ascertained to be propitious, after an inspection of the stars for that purpose, his death will infallibly follow.

In like manner, if the magician, in the silence of night, should bury the bones in question in an enemy's camp at the four cardinal points of the compass, and then, retiring to a distance, should pronounce the mentram of defeat, all the troops there encamped would utterly perish, or else would scatter to the four winds of heaven, of their own accord, before seven days had elapsed.

Thirty-two enchanted arms thrown among a besieging army would cause such a fright that a hundred men would seem like a thousand.

Of a mixture of earth taken from sixty-four most disgusting places--we refrain from accompanying the Hindu author in his enumeration of the places in question--mingled with his enemy's hair and nail-clippings, small figures are made, upon whose bosom the name of the person upon whom it is desired to take revenge is inscribed. Magical words and mentrams are then pronounced over them, and they are consecrated by sacrifices. As soon as this is done, the grahas, or evil genii of the planets, take possession of the person who is the subject of animosity, and he is subjected to all sorts of evil treatment.

[p. 143]

Sometimes these figures are transfixed with an awl, or are injured in various ways, with the object of really killing or disabling him who is the object of vengeance.

Sixty-four roots Hof various kinds of the most noxious plants are known to the magicians, which in their hands become the most powerful weapons for the secret infliction of the deadliest blows upon those at whom they are aimed.

Notwithstanding, the occupation of a magician is not without danger by any means. The gods and evil genii are very vindictive and never obey the injunctions of a miserable mortal very good-humoredly. It often happens that they punish him very severely for the brutal way in which he orders them about.

Woe to him if he makes the slightest mistake, if he is guilty of the most insignificant omission of the innumerable ceremonies which are obligatory upon him in the performance of an evocation. All the ills that were intended for others are incontinently showered down upon his own head.

He is constantly in fear; it seems, lest some other member of the same confraternity, of greater ability than himself, may succeed in making his own imprecations rebound upon himself or his patrons.

All these superstitious doctrines still exist in India, and most of the pagodas belonging to the vulgar cult possess, apart from the higher priests whom they are compelled to lodge and feed, a body of magicians whose services are let out to the lower castes, in precisely the same way as those of the Fakirs.

Now they undertake to rid a woman from the nocturnal embraces of an incubus: at another time they undertake to restore the virile power of a man where it has been lost in consequence of a spell cast by some opposing magician.

At other times, they are called upon to protect flocks, that have been decimated through the enchantments of others, against all noxious influences.

From time to time; in order to keep alive in the public

[p. 144]

mind the belief in these sacred doctrines, these jugglers send out challenges to other pagodas, and publicly engage in contests, in the presence of witnesses and arbitrators, who are called in to decide which of the two champions is the more accomplished in his art.

The object of the contest is to obtain possession of an enchanted bit of straw, a small stick, or a piece of money.

The antagonists are both placed at the same distance from the object, whatever it may be, and they both make believe to approach it, but the mentrams they utter, the evocations they perform, the enchanted powders which they reciprocally throw at each other, possess a virtue which repels them: an invincible and overpowering force seems to stand in the way; they make fresh attempts to advance but they are forced back; they redouble their efforts; they fall into spasms and convulsions, they perspire profusely and spit blood. Ultimately one of them obtains possession of the enchanted object and is declared the victor.

It sometimes happens that one of the combatants is overthrown by the power of his adversary's mentrams. In that case he rolls on the ground as though he were possessed by a demon, and remains there motionless for some time, appearing to have lost his mind.

At last he recovers the use of his senses, arises in an apparent state of fatigue and exhaustion, and seems to retire covered with shame and confusion. He returns to the pagoda and does not make his appearance again for some time. A serious sickness is supposed to have ensued in consequence of the incredible, through ineffectual, efforts he has made.

There is no doubt that these pitiable farces, with which those who have been honestly initiated into the genuine worship of the Pitris are in no way connected whatever, are all concerted in advance, between the priests belonging to the vulgar cult of the rival pagodas and the charlatans

[p. 145]

by whom they are performed, and the victory is ascribed to each in turn. But the multitude who witness these spectacles, and who pay generously for them, are filled with fear and admiration of the sorcerers themselves, and are firmly persuaded that their contortions are due to supernatural causes.

There is one fact of which there can be no doubt, and that is, that these men perform their part with extraordinary truthfulness and expression, and that within the domain of pure magnetism they are really able to produce phenomena of which we have no idea in Europe. They are, however, inferior in ability to the Fakirs, belonging to the first class of initiates.

When, however, we come to consider the external manifestations by means of which the believers in the Pitris display their power, we shall look upon the performances of the magicians as trifling in comparison and unworthy of further consideration. They are obviously due to trickery and deception; we have already devoted quite enough space to them to give the reader an idea of what they can do.

There also exists in India another kind of enchantment, which is called drichty-dotcha, or a spell cast by the eyes. All animated beings, all plants, all fruits are subject to it. In order to remove it, it is customary to erect a pole in all gardens or cultivated fields, at the top of which is attached a large earthen vessel, the inside of which is whitened with whitewash: it is placed there, being a conspicuous and noticeable object, in order to attract the attention of any passing enemy, and thus prevent his looking at the crops, which would certainly be thereby injured.

We have rarely seen a rice-field in Ceylon or India that was not provided with one or more of these counter-charms.

The Hindus are so credulous upon this point that they are continually fancying that they cannot perform a single act of their lives, or take a single step, however insignificant

[p. 146]

it may be, without danger of receiving from a neighbor, or a mere passer-by, or even a relative, the drichty-dotcha. There is nothing in the appearance of those who possess this fatal gift to indicate that they are so endowed Those who have it are often unconscious of it themselves. For this reason every Hindu, several times a day, causes to be performed in the case of himself, his family, his fields, and his house, the ceremony of the arratty, the design of which is to counteract any harm that might otherwise befall him from spells cast by the eyes.

The arratty is one of their commonest practices, whether public or private. It may almost be elevated to the height of a national custom, so general is it in every province. It is always performed by women, and any woman is qualified to perform it except widows, who are never admitted to any domestic ceremony, their mere presence alone being unlucky.

The ceremony is performed as follows:

A lamp full of oil, perfumed with sandal-wood, is placed on a metal plate. It is then lighted, and one of the women of the household when her father, or husband, or any other member of the family, comes in from outdoors, takes the plate in her hand, and raises it as high as the head of the person upon whom the ceremony is to be performed, and describes therewith either three or seven circles according to his or her age or rank.

Instead of a lighted lamp, a vase is often used containing water perfumed with sandal-wood and saffron, reddened by vermilion, and consecrated by the immersion of a few stalks of the divine cousa grass.

The arratty is publicly performed several tunes a day upon persons of distinction, such as rajahs, provincial governors, army generals, or others of elevated rank. It is a ceremony to which courtiers are bidden, as formerly with us to the king's levee. One practice is quite as ridiculous to us as the other, and judging from what we have

[p. 147]

ourselves seen, in certain provinces in the Deccan, where the English have allowed a few phantoms of rajahs still to remain, the courtiers in this country are quite as degraded and servile a class as with us. They pay for the crumbs they receive and the favors they enjoy by the sacrifice of every feeling of conscience or dignity. It is the same everywhere. We must say, however, to the credit of the Hindu courtiers, that they never made their wives or daughters the mistresses of their rajahs.

As a general thing, a Hindu of any caste would blush to owe his own preferment to the dishonor of his wife.

Whenever persons belonging to a princely rank have been obliged to appear in public, or to speak to strangers, they never fail, upon returning to their palaces, to summon their wives or send for their devadassis from the neighboring temple to perform this ceremony upon them, and thus prevent the serious consequences that might otherwise result from any baleful glances to which they may have been exposed. They often have in their pay girls specially employed for that purpose.

Whenever you enter a Hindu house, if you are regarded as a person of distinction, the head of the family directs the young women to perform the ceremony of arratty. It is also performed for the statues of the gods.

When the dancing-girls at the temples have finished their other ceremonies, they never fail to perform the arratty two or three times over the gods to whose service they are attached.

This is also practised with still more solemnity when their statues are carried in procession through the streets. Its object is to avert any bad consequences resulting from glances which it is as difficult for the gods to avoid as simple mortals. Finally, the arratty is generally performed upon elephants, horses, domestic animals, and particularly upon the sacred bullocks, and even sometimes upon growing fields of rice.

[p. 148]

Beside the more elevated doctrines taught by those who believe in the Pitris, vulgar magic in India takes its place as a degenerate descendant. It was the work of the lower priesthood and intended to keep the people in a constant state of apprehension. In all times, and in all places, by the side of the most elevated philosophical speculations, we always find the religion of the people.

We have dwelt at some length upon the practice of magic and sorcery in India, though they have nothing whatever to do with the higher worship which initiated Brahmins pay to the shades of their ancestors and the superior spirits, for the reason that nothing was better calculated to prove the Asiatic origin of most of the nations of Europe than a detailed description of these strange customs, which are identical with many that we meet with upon our own soil, and of which our historical traditions furnished us no explanation until we made the discovery that we were related to the Hindus by descent.

People in the middle ages believed implicitly in succubi and incubi, in the efficacy of magical formulas, in sorcery and the evil eye. Corning down to a period nearer our own times, we have not forgotten those fanatical leaguers, who carried their superstition to such a pitch that they used to make little images of wax representing Henry III. and the King of Navarre. They were accustomed to transfix these images in different places and keep them so for a period of forty days. On the fortieth day they stabbed them to the heart, fully persuaded that they would thus cause the death of the princes they were designed to represent. Practices of this kind were so common that, in 1571, a pretended sorcerer named Trois-Echelles, who was executed on the Place de Greve, declared in his examination that there were more than three thousand persons engaged in the same business, and that there was not a woman at court, or belonging to the middle or lower class, who did not patronize the magicians, particularly in love matters.

[p. 149]

The execution of Gauffredy, the cure, and of Urbain Grandier, by Richelieu's orders, sufficiently demonstrate that the greatest minds of the time were not able to withstand the influence of these superstitions.

We read in Saint Augustine's Book, called "The City of God," that disbelief in the power of evil spirits was equivalent to a refusal to believe in the Holy Scriptures themselves.

The Bible, which is taken from the sacred books of antiquity, believed in sorcery, and the sorcerer must stand or fall with the authority of the Bible.

It is scarcely a century since persons convicted of magic were burnt at the stake, and we are struck with amazement by some of the sentences rendered by magistrates, still highly esteemed by their countrymen, according to which, upon the mere charge of sorcery, poor people suffered death by fire as charlatans, who, at the most, were only guilty of having cheated their neighbors out of a few sols by contrivances which were rather calculated to excite mirth than to do any serious injury.

It is difficult to understand these sentences, except by supposing that the magistrates themselves were in the occult power of the sorcerers.

In 1750, a Jesuit named Girard had a narrow escape from being burnt alive by a decree of the parliament of Provence, for having cast a spell upon the fair Cadiere. He was saved by the disagreement of his judges, who were equally divided in opinion as to his guilt. He was given the benefit of the doubt.

A nun of the noble Chapter of Wurtzburg was burnt at the stake in the same year for being guilty of magical practices.

Since that time, fortunately, we have made some progress.

When we threw off the yoke of the Romish priest, from that day common sense, conscience, and reason resumed their sway, and while our Hindu ancestors, who are yet

[p. 150]

under the dominion of their Brahmins and Necromancers, still slumber on in the last stages of decrepitude and decay, we have made great strides in the path of scientific progress and intellectual liberty.

We always meet the priest and sorcerer upon the same plane of social charlatanism. They are both products of superstition and grow out of the same causes.

From an ethnographic point of view, it is interesting to observe that the Romans also inherited similar opinions from their Hindu ancestors.

We remember what Ovid said of Medea, the magician:

Per tumulos erat passis discincta capillis,
 Certaque de tepidis colligit ossa rogis,
 Devovet absentes, simulacraque cerea fingit
 Et miserum tenues in jecur urget acus.

Horace also speaks of two magicians, named Canidia and Sagana, whose apparatus contained two figures, one of wool and the other of wax.

                                       Major
 Lanea, quae poenis compesceret inferiorem:
 Cerea suppliciter stabat: servilibus utque
 Jam peritura, modis.

We must confess, however, that the Lydian singer was not very much in earnest in speaking of them, when we consider the noise--Proh pudor!--by whose aid he caused them to be put to flight by the god of gardens, who was annoyed by their enchantments.

Horace would certainly not have sent his two witches to the stake.

The same ideas with regard to visual influences also existed among the Romans, as shown, among other things, by the following line from Virgil:

Nescio quis teneros oculus mihi fascinat agnos.

[p. 151]

They had their god Fascinus and their amulets of that name, which were designed to protect children from injury from that source. The statue of the same god, suspended from the triumphal car, was a protection to its occupants from any harm that might otherwise befall them from the evil eye of envy.

The object of the present work is not so much the study of magic in ancient times, as that of the more elevated religious beliefs, under whose guidance the vital atom successively progressed from one transformation to another, until it was absorbed in the Great All; which look upon the world of souls as being nothing but a succession of offspring and ancestors, who never forget each other: beliefs which indeed we may not entertain, but which are embalmed in a most mysterious and consolatory creed and are entitled to our respect.

The present chapter with regard to Hindu magic is merely an episode which we do not propose to extend further; otherwise we might show that the popular traditions with regard to sorcery in India found their way also into Greece, Rome, and ancient Chaldea.

One word  about this latter country, which, as claimed by Berosus, Aeschylus, and Herodotus, was colonized by a multitude of unknown people and mixed tribes, speaking different languages.

India, with its hundred and twenty-five dialects and its various castes, so different from each other, was the only country, at that time, from which emigration was constantly going on, in order to avoid sacerdotal persecution, and from which, consequently, the countries bordering upon the Tigris and the Euphrates could possibly have been colonized.

To all the ethnographic facts, which go to show that the assertion here made is historically correct, may be further added the great similarity existing between the magical practices and beliefs of the Hindus and Chaldeans.

[p. 152]

The following are some of the Assyrian inscriptions relating to magical enchantments, taken from a recent publication by Messrs. Rawlinson & Norris, which show how largely Chaldea was indebted to India.

"The form of the Chaldean conjurations against evil spirits," says the eminent Assyriologist, "is very monotonous. They are all cast in the same mould. They begin with a list of the demons to be overcome by the conjuration, together with a description of the character and effects of their power. This is followed by the expression of a desire to see them driven away, or of being protected from them, which is often presented in an affirmative form. The formula finally concludes with a mysterious invocation, from which it derives all its efficacy. 'Spirit of Heaven, remember; Spirit of Earth, remember.' That alone is necessary and never fails; but sometimes similar invocations to other divine spirits are also added.

"I will give as an example, one of these conjurations to be used against different bad demons, maladies, or acts, such as the evil eye.

 

--The pestilence, or fever, that lays waste the country. The plague that devastates the land, bad for the body, and injurious to the bowels.

--The bad demon, the bad Alal, the bad Gigim.

--The evil man, the evil eye, the evil mouth, the evil tongue, may they come out of the body, may they come out of the bowels of the man, son of his God.

--They shall never enter into possession of my body.

--They shall never do any harm before me. They shall never walk after me.

--They shall never enter into my house.

--They shall never cross my frame.

--They shall never enter the house of my habitation.

--Spirit of Heaven, remember! Spirit of Earth, remember!

[p. 153]

--Spirit of Moul-ge, lord of countries, remember!

--Spirit of Nin-gelal, lady of countries, remember!

--Spirit of Nin-dar, powerful warrior of Moul-ge, remember!

--Spirit of Pa-kou, sublime intelligence of Moul-ge, remember!

--Spirit of En-zouna, eldest son of Moul-ge, remember!

--Spirit of Tiskou, lady of armies, remember!

--Spirit of Im, king whose impetuosity is beneficent, remember!

--Spirit of Oud, king of justice, remember!

 

"The following is another, where the final enumeration is not so long:

 

--The evening of evil omen, the region of heaven that produces misfortune,

--The fatal day, the region of the sky bad for observation,

--The fatal day, the bad region of the sky, that advances,

--Messengers of the plague,

--Ravagers of Nin-ki-gal,

--The thunder that rages throughout the country,

--The seven gods of the vast heavens,

--The seven gods of the vast earth,

--The seven gods of the fiery spheres,

--The seven malicious gods,

--The seven bad phantoms,

--The seven malicious phantoms of flames,

--The seven gods of heaven,

--The seven gods of the earth,

--The bad demon,

--The bad alal,

--The bad gigim,

--The bad tilol,

[p. 154]

--The bad god, the bad maskim,

--Spirit of Heaven, remember!

--Spirit of Earth, remember!

--Sprit of Moul-ge, king of countries, remember!

--Spirit of Ningelal, lady of countries, remember?

--Spirit of Nin-dar, son of Zenith, remember!

--Spirit of Tishkou, lady of countries, who shines in the night, remember!

"More commonly, however, there are no such mythological enumerations at the end. As an example of the more simple kind of formulas, I may mention a conjuration against the seven subterranean demons, called maskim, who were reckoned among the most formidable of any.

--The seven! the seven!

--At the lowest bottom of the abyss, the seven!

--Abomination of heaven! the seven!

--Hiding themselves in the lowest depths of heaven and earth,

--Neither male nor female,

--Water, stretched out captives,

--Having no wives and producing no children,

--Knowing neither order nor good,

--Hearing no prayer,

--Vermin, that hidest in the mountain,

--Enemies of the god Ea,

--Ravagers of the gods,

--Abettors of trouble,

--All-powerful by violence,

--Agents of enmity,

--Spirit of Heaven, remember!

--Spirit of Earth, remember!"

We shall dwell no further upon this point, however. The above inscriptions are superabundant proof that the

[p. 155]

practice of magic, as handed down to the ancient Chaldeans from their ancestors, the Hindu emigrants of the lower castes or mixed classes, as Berosus calls them, was the utmost limit of their attainments in that direction.

The pure doctrines, which formed the subject of initiation, the worship of the Pitris and the superior spirits, awoke no echo upon the banks of the Euphrates. The nomads and brick moulders of the Seminar country lived in constant apprehension of the sorcerers and magicians, with no idea even of the existence of the sublime conceptions of Brahminism.

Inscriptions recorded upon granite, marble, stone, or baked earth, invariably contain everything that is most elevated in the popular belief. We do not select the superstitious ideas of the multitude to bequeath to future ages, and, as it were, to immortalize them.

I am all and in all!

says the Trinitarian inscription at Elephanta, in India.

I have begotten the world!

says the record upon the statue of Isis, which was the emblem of mother Nature in Egypt.

Know thyself!

such was the inscription that appeared in front of the temple at Delphi.

And the column erected in the Agora at Athens was inscribed:

To the unknown God!

Mingling in their inscriptions their gods and evil spirits, such as the gigim, the maskim, and other demons, trembling with constant fear in the presence of sexless, wifeless, and childless monsters, before these telals, these ravagers

[p. 156]

of heaven, these enemies of Ea, the King of the Gods, who also seemed to tremble in their presence, the Chaldeans engraved upon their burnt bricks nothing but expressions of the grossest superstition, for the simple reason that they had nothing else to put there. If there is any one thing at which we have a right to express our surprise, it is that some Assyriologists have taken these ridiculous conceptions as a text from which to prove that the ancient Hindus got their first ideas from the primitive Chaldeans.

The Agrouchada-Parikchai, in a fourth book, which we have already alluded to, in which it gives an account of the magic practices, whereby bad spirits are set in motion, but which is entirely ineffectual as far as the Pitris, or the superior spirits, or Swayambhouva, the Supreme Being, are concerned, and which fourth book is entirely disconnected from the other three, which are wholly devoted to the pure doctrine of the Pitris, makes no secret of the fact that magic and sorcery were the only things that had any influence upon the impure Soudras, or the common people and Tchandalas, or mixed classes.

Before passing on to the subject of the phenomena and external manifestations produced by those who had gone through the various degrees of initiation in India, it may not be amiss to compare the doctrine of the Pitris, as we have set it forth, with the beliefs of the Jewish cabalists and of several other philosophers of ancient times, who seem to us to have drank from the same fountain.

Footnotes

^136:1 History of the Virgins.

     
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 157]

  

PART THIRD.

  

THE DOCTRINE OF THE PITRIS AS COMPARED WITH THAT OF THE JEWISH CABALA, OF PLATO, OF THE ALEXANDRIAN SCHOOL, OF PHILO, OF THE PERSIANS, AND OF CHRISTIANITY.

[p. 158]

It is not lawful to explain the history of creation to two persons, or the history of the Mercaba even to one. If, however, he is naturally a wise and intelligent man, he may be intrusted with the heads of the chapters. (Extract from the Mischna, a Jewish cabalistic work, portions of which were translated by A. Franck of the Institute.)

As for the ten Sephiroth, there is no end, either in the future, or in the past, nor in good or evil, nor in depth or height, nor in the east, west, north, or south. The ten Sephiroth are like the fingers of the hands to the number of ten, five on either side, but at the middle lays the point of unity.

Keep your mouth closed that you may not speak of it, and your heart that you may not think of it; and if your heart forgets itself, bring it back again to its place, for that is the reason why the union was formed. (Sephir Jeoziroh, a cabalistic work, translated by A. Franck, of the Institute.)

[p. 159]

  

THE DOCTRINE OF THE PITRIS

  

AND

  

THE JEWISH CABALA.

____________

  

CHAPTER I.

  

ORIGIN OF THE CABALA.

In opposition to the outward observances with which the prescriptions of the Bible are encumbered under the Jewish law, by which all intelligent action, all freedom of the will are crushed out, there arose gradually by its side, in response to a demand for a greater independence of thought, and a wider philosophy, a mysterious doctrine which was known by the name of the Jewish Cabala.

Those who believed in this doctrine, the object of which was to unfold the secrets of the divine nature, as well as of the creation, wrapped themselves up in silence and mystery like initiates in the Indian temples. At distant intervals, says the illustrious Franck, in his admirable book upon this mystic philosophy, [*1] with innumerable precautions they partly opened the doors of the sanctuary to some new adept, who was always chosen among those particularly eminent for their intellectual ability, and whose advanced age offered an additional proof of their wisdom and discretion.

[p. 160]

When a new candidate was initiated into the mysteries of the Cabala, one of the elders murmured in his ears the following words:

"O thou who hast now gone to the fountain-head of all the graces, be careful, whenever tempted to do so, not to reveal the tenet of emanation, which is a great mystery in the judgment of all Cabalists. Another mystery is contained in the following words: 'Thou shalt not tempt the Lord.'"

The necessity of a special initiation, an essential prerequisite of which was that the candidate should be far advanced toward the close of life, and the absolute secrecy which the person initiated was expected to preserve with regard to whatever was revealed to him, were two points of external discipline, in respect to which those who held to the doctrine of the Pitris in India, and the believers in the Jewish Cabala were very nearly agreed, though, in matters of belief, we shall soon see they were united by ties that bound them still closer to each other. In all times science has anxiously sought to discover the origin of the philosophical system of the Hebrews, which presents many points of resemblance with some of the Greek systems of Alexandria and with the mystical beliefs of Arabia.

As the Cabala is manifestly older than the Alexandrian school, it cannot be successfully held to have sprung from the latter, though it may have been influenced by it to some extent. The most that can be claimed is that both systems have drunk from the same source. As for the close connection that seems to exist between it and the mystical philosophy of the Arabs, we may well ask, with Messrs. Franck and Tholuck, who have investigated the subject in all its bearings, "What conclusion are we to draw from these many points of resemblance?"

"They are not of much importance, it is true, for what is similar in both systems is to be found elsewhere in more

[p. 161]

ancient systems. In the books of the Sabeans and Persians, for instance, and also among the Neo-Platonists. On the other hand, the extraordinary form under which these ideas are presented to us in the Cabala is unlike that of the Arab mystics. In order to satisfy ourselves that the Cabala really sprang from intercourse with the latter, we should find among them some traces of the doctrine of the Zephiroth. But not a vestige of it is to be met with. They knew of but one form under which God reveals himself to himself. In this respect the Cabala is much more like the doctrine of the Sabeans and Gnostics.

"No trace, either, is to be found among the Arabs of the doctrine of metempsychosis, which occupies such a prominent position in the Hebrew system. We also search their books in vain for the allegories we are constantly meeting with in the Zohar, for those continual appeals to tradition, for those daring and multitudinous personifications with their endless genealogies, and for those astonishing and extraordinary metaphors which harmonize so well with the spirit of the East."

These multitudinous incarnations and interminable genealogies, or, in other words, these men elevating themselves to the infinite by the improvement of their spiritual nature; this belief in the doctrine of metempsychosis, and the tenet relating to the ten Zephiroth, or the creative faculty of the divinity; such are the recognized bases of the Cabalistic philosophy.

We have seen that the belief in the doctrine of the Pitris is based on similar principles. The ten Zephiroth of the Hebrews are substantially the same as the ten Pradjapatis of India, to whom all creatures are indebted for their existence.

The Zohar, which is the principal work of the Cabala, speaking of the philosophical system therein taught, says that it is precisely the same as the wisdom which the children of the East have known from the earliest times,

[p. 162]

"Evidently," says Franck, "this cannot refer to the Arabs, whom the Hebrew writers invariably call the children of Israel, or the children of Arabia: they would not speak of a foreign and contemporaneous philosophy in such terms--the Zohar would not date it back from the earliest ages of the world."

While the origin of the Cabala cannot be successfully sought for either in the different systems of Greece or in the doctrines of the Alexandrian school, notwithstanding they have many points in common, or in the mystical philosophy of the Arabs; while, on the other hand, the Zohar, tracing it back to the earliest ages, speaks of it as having the East for its cradle; have we not good reason, therefore, in view of the antiquity of India and the similarity in principle of both systems, to say that the doctrine of the Cabala sprang from the doctrine of the Pitris?

We should not forget that India, that immense and luminous centre in olden times, besides spreading its ideas throughout the East, by means of emigration, from the earliest times, was in constant communication with all the people of Asia, and that all the philosophers and sages of antiquity went there to study the science of life. It is not, therefore, surprising that in periods of their captivity the elders of the Hebrews should have been initiated by the Persian Magi into the old conceptions of the Brahmins.

A few extracts from the Sepher Jeszireh and the Zohar, the two highest prized works of the Cabala, as to the nature of God, the creation, and the human soul, will show conclusively that this opinion is historically correct.

We shall be brief, for while we cannot resist the temptation to devote a few pages to the subject of these comparisons, we shall bear in mind that we cannot dwell upon it at any great length, except at the expense of our main subject.

Footnotes

^159:1 The Cabala, or Religious Philosophy of the Jews.

     
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 163]

  

CHAPTER II.

  

HOW THE SACRED BOOKS ARE TO BE INTERPRETED ACCORDING TO THE JEWISH CABALISTS.

In order to show that these things are not to be taken in their literal signification, and that they have a hidden meaning which is contained therein, as in a seed, and has to be extracted from them, the Zohar repeats the following allegory:

Picture to yourself a man living alone in the mountain and unacquainted with the usages of the city. He produced and lived upon wheat, which he ate in its natural state.

One day he went to the city, where he was given some bread of good quality. He asked:

What is this good for?

He was answered,

It is bread to eat.

He took it and liked it, after which he asked again,

What is it made of?

The answer was,

It is made of wheat.

Some time afterward he was given some cakes mixed with oil. He tasted them and asked:

And what is this made of, pray?

He was answered

It is made of wheat.

By-and-by some royal pastry mixed with oil and honey was set before him.

He asked the same question as before.

[p. 164]

What is this?

He was answered, they are cakes made of wheat. He exclaimed,

All these things are at my command. I use them already in their crude state; I use the wheat of which they are made.

So thinking, he was a total stranger to the pleasures they give, which were all lost to him. So it is with those who give their whole attention to the general principles of science, and are ignorant of the pleasures therefrom resulting.

The Zohar concludes as follows: "It is necessary to extract from the letter of the law, the charms of wisdom that are therein hidden."

We find also the following aphorisms in the same book.

Wo to the man who does not look beyond the letter of the law, but regards it as simply a record of events in ordinary language.

The words of the law are the garments, in which it is clothed. Wo to him who takes the garment of the law for the law itself.

There are some foolish people who, seeing a man covered with a handsome garment, never look any further, but take this garment for the body, while there is something which is more precious, and that is the soul.

The law also has its body. There are commandments which may be called the body of the law; the texts that are mingled with them are merely the garments by which they are covered.

[p. 165]

Ordinary people pay heed to nothing but the garments, or to the texts of the law. That is all they know. They see nothing that is hidden beneath this garment. Those who are wiser pay no heed to the garment, but to the body by which it is enveloped.

The servants of the Supreme King, those who live upon the heights of Sinai, heed nothing but the soul, which is the basis of everything else, which is the law itself, and, in future times, they will be prepared to contemplate the soul of that soul which is manifested through the law.

 

By treating the sacred books in this allegorical way, the Cabalists, without doing violence to the Bible or tradition, made the conceptions which were the subject of initiation in ancient times in the East, a part of their religious law.

These last verses seem like a commentary upon the same subject as that which we have been considering, taken from the Book of the Pitris.

We merely call attention to the similarity between the two methods of interpretation, adopted by the adherents of either doctrine, without dwelling upon it any further.

We are reminded of what was said in the Agrouchada-Parikchai:

"As the soul is contained in the body;

"As the almond is concealed by its envelope;

"As the sun is veiled by the clouds;

"As the garments hide the body from sight;

u As the egg is included in its shell;

u And as the germ rests inside of the seed;

"So the sacred law has its body, its envelope, its clouds, its garments, its shell, which hide it from the knowledge of the multitude."

This opinion, that the words of the law were nothing but garments intended to conceal from the common people

[p. 166]

the truths therein contained, led the Cabalists to construct what they called a Cabalistic alphabet, by whose aid they even prevented the material act of reading their mysteries.

According to Reuchlin, "De Arte Cabalistic.," and Wolf, "Bibligr. Hebr.," the method employed in that occult alphabet in order to make it necessary that the mere act of reading should be the subject of a special initiation, was tri-fold.

The first consisted of the substitution of one word for another, to which it was equivalent.

According to the second, the final letter of each word became the initial of another word.

The third changed the value of the letters by putting, for instance, the first in place of the last, and vice-versa.

We have seen that those who believed in the Indian doctrine of the Pitris also indulged in these puerile practices.

     
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 167]

  

CHAPTER III.

  

INITIATION AMONG THE CABALISTS.

We have seen that the mysteries taught in the Indian pagoda comprised three degrees of initiation, in each of which a probation of twenty years was required before being promoted to a higher grade.

The writers on the Cabala have not given us all the secrets of their interior discipline, but there is no doubt that the Hebraic initiation also included several categories.

It is well known, according to the Talmud, that the ancient Hebrews had three names to express the idea of God.

The first, which was composed of four letters, was taught to all who came for instruction to the temple.

With regard to the second and third, which consisted of twelve and forty-two letters respectively, the following are the words of Maimonides:

"Sages taught the name of twelve letters to their sons and disciples; but when the number of the ungodly had increased, it was intrusted only to the most discreet among the priests, and they repeated it in a low tone to their brethren, while the people were receiving the benediction."

The name of forty-two letters was the most sacred of all mysteries. It contained the great secret of the universal soul, and stood for, if we may so express it, the highest degree of initiation.

"It was only taught," says the author whom we have just quoted, "to a man of recognized discretion, of mature age, not addicted to anger or intemperance, a stranger to

[p. 168]

vanity, and gentle and pleasant with all with whom he was brought into contact."

"Whoever," says the Talmud, "has been made acquainted with this secret and vigilantly keeps it in a pure heart, may reckon upon the love of God and the favor of men; his name inspires respect; his knowledge is in no danger of being forgotten, and he is the heir of two worlds, that in which we live, and the world to come."

These three classes of persons, viz.:

First, the disciples, who were taught the name consisting of four letters:

Second, the priests, who studied that of twelve letters; and

Third, the elders, to whom alone the secret of the forty-two letters was revealed,

--seem to us to correspond very closely to the three grades of initiation in India.

It is worthy of remark, according to the last quotation from the Talmud, that the elders who are in possession of this most sacred mystery, are invested with supreme power, not only in the present world but in the world of invisible spirits.

In the Zohar, in the Sepher Jeszirah, in the Guemara, and in the Mischna we are constantly meeting with the prohibition to divulge the secrets of the Mercaba, or creation, to anybody except,

"Men who are invested with the highest dignity and who are known for their extreme prudence."

"Whose heart," according to the original expression, "is filled with anxiety and alarm."

From a text which we quoted in the first chapter of the first part of this work, it appears that a distinguished position, with respect to intellect and accomplishments, was not all that was required from him who aspired to a knowledge of these mysteries, but that he must also have arrived at a certain age.

[p. 169]

The Rabbi Jochanan one day said to the Rabbi Eleazar: "Let me teach you the history of the Mercaba." The latter answered, "I am not old enough for that." When he had grown old enough, the Rabbi Jochanan was dead. Some time afterward, the Rabbi Assi said to him in his turn, "Let me teach you the history of the Mercaba." He replied: "If I had deemed myself worthy, I should have learnt it before, from the Rabbi Jochanan, your master."

Though we may not be able to point out the special practices observed by those who had been initiated into the mysteries of the Jewish Cabala, as they were promoted from one degree to a higher, owing to the silence of their traditions and written works upon that subject, still, we have reason to think, at any rate, that as in India there were three degrees of initiation.

     
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 170]

  

CHAPTER IV.

  

THE DIVINE ESSENCE, ACCORDING TO THE CABALISTS.

Rabbi Simon, having assembled his disciples, seated himself beneath the shade of a sacred forest, and informed them that, before dying, he would reveal to them the great secret of the principle of principles.

"A voice was then heard and their knees shook together for fright. What was that voice? It was the voice of the celestial assembly (including all the superior spirits) which had assembled to listen. Rabbi Simon joyfully spoke as follows: O Lord! I will not say, like one of thy prophets, that upon hearing thy voice I was afraid, for this is not the time to be afraid, but it is the time for love, as it is written: Thou shalt love the eternal, thy God."

The Zohar then puts into his mouth the following description of the Supreme Being:

"He is the Ancient of ancients, the mystery of mysteries, the unknown of those who are unknown. He has a form that appertains to him, inasmuch as he appears to us as a man far advanced in life, as the Ancient of ancients, as whatever is most unknown among those who are unknown, but under this form beneath which he manifests himself to us, he still remains unknown, his garment seems white, and his aspect is that of one whose face is exposed; he is seated upon a throne of thunderbolts, which he uses at pleasure. The white light of his head lights up four hundred thousand worlds. Four hundred thousand worlds, springing from this white light, are the inheritance of the just in the world to come. Every day witnesses the birth of thirteen thousand myriads of

[p. 171]

worlds which receive their subsistence from him, and the burthen of which is entirely supported by him. A refreshing dew drops from his head, which awakes the dead and infuses into them a new life, wherefore it is written; Thy dew is a dew of light; it is the food of the highest order of spirits; it is the manna which is prepared for the just in the life to come. It drops upon the field of sacred fruit. In appearance this dew seems white like diamonds, whose color contains all colors. The length of his face, from the summit of his head is three hundred and seventy times ten thousand worlds. He is called the long-face, for such is the name of the Ancient of ancients."

"Before he created any form in this world, before he produced any image, he was alone, without form, resembling nothing. Who can conceive of him as he was then, previous to creation, inasmuch as he had no form? Therefore it is not lawful to represent him by means of any image or under any form whatever, even by his holy name, even by a letter or a point. Such is the meaning of the words. You saw no figure on the day when the Eternal spoke to us."

"Woe to him who ventures to compare him even to one of his own attributes; much less still should he be compared to man who springs from the earth, and whose destiny is death. He should be conceived of as above all creatures and all attributes."

"Learn, however, that no one is intelligent or wise, except of his own substance, for wisdom does not deserve the name by itself, but on account of him who is wise, and who produces it from the light emanating from himself. Moreover, no one can conceive of intelligence as existing by itself alone, but through him who is an intelligent being and who fills it with his own substance." (Extract from the Zohar, a Cabalistic work.)

"The Ancient of ancients is, at the same time, the most unknown of unknown beings. He is distinct from every-

[p. 172]

thing, and yet he is not separated from anything; for everything is united to him as he is united to everything; there is nothing that is not in him. He has a form and we may say that he has none. Upon assuming a form he gave existence to everything that is. In the first place, he projected from his own bosom ten luminaries--or the ten Zephiroth--which shine by the form they borrowed from hint, and diffuse on all sides a most brilliant light. In the same manner as a beacon spreads rays of lights everywhere around it, the Ancient of ancients, the unknown of all unknown beings, is an elevated beacon, which we know merely by the light, which shines in our eyes with such brilliancy and fulness. What we call his holy name is only this light." (Extract from the Idra-Souata, a Cabalistic work.)

"The Ancient of ancients, whose name be sanctified, is the only form that embraces all other forms. It is supreme and mysterious wisdom, that includes everything." (Extract from the Zohar.)

These extracts contain almost everything that has been written by the Cabalists with regard to the divine nature, and we may say, indeed, that their whole system of philosophical belief is contained in its turn, in the following sayings, taken from the Book of the Pitris:

He is all and in all
 And everything is in him!

[paragraph continues] He is the cause of everything and every effect is in him.

The same pantheism, in an infinite unity, was taught in the works of the Cabala as by those who had been initiated in the Indian temples.- The Ancient of Ancients in the Zohar is precisely the same as the Ancient of Days in Manu, the Vedas, and the Agrouchada-Parikchai. We find the same fundamental ideas at the basis of both philosophies, expressed in almost identical terms.

We shall now show how this most unknown of unknown beings revealed himself in creation.

     
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 173]

  

CHAPTER V.

  

THE TEN ZEPHIROTH.

The ten Zephiroth represent the ten essential qualities, by means whereof the deity is manifested in creation.

These ten attributes, representing goodness, glory, wisdom, power, grace, justice, intelligence, sovereignty, etc., are completely identified with the divine substance, but as God is immutable and is not susceptible of change, the Cabalists always regard him as in action, and the ten Zephiroth as instruments of the Supreme Power, as creatures of a superior nature, as types of all beings.

This is the way in which God reveals himself, and passes from evocation into action.

We will now yield the floor to the illustrious Hebraist whom we have adopted as our guide, and who can furnish a more correct description of this conception than we are able to give ourselves.

"God," says Franck, is "present in the Ten Zephiroth; otherwise he could not reveal himself through them; but he does not abide wholly in them; he is not solely what we are able to find out about him, through these sublime forms of thought and life. In point of fact, the Zephiroth can never comprehend the infinite. The En-Soph, which is the very source of all these forms, and which, in that capacity, has no form, or rather, to speak more correctly, while each Zephiroth has a well-known name, he alone has none and can have none."

God then remains the ever ineffable, incomprehensible, and infinite being, whose place is above that of all the

[p. 174]

worlds which reveal his presence to us, even the world of emanation.

Such is, likewise, the particular nature of each of the ten Pradjapatis of India, and the character of their relations toward Swayambhouva, the unrevealed being.

The analogy between them is so close and striking that any comments we might make would only weaken the force of their resemblance.

According both to the Cabalists and the believers in the Pitris, the Zephiroth and the ten Pradjapatis, who are the lords of creatures, are the attributes of divinity, as embodied in the Ten Superior Spirits, who manifest themselves in creation, and in this manner, the doctrine of the immutability of the Deity, who was only able to reveal himself in action, was not infringed upon in the slightest degree.

The close similarity between these beliefs, in India and Judea, is the more worthy of remark, inasmuch as we meet them in no other philosophical system at that period, and it incontestably indicates how closely the Hindu and Jewish systems are related to each other. This system was not fully set forth in the Cabala much more than a century previous to our era, while Manu, the Vedas, and the Agrouchada-Parikchai had already been in existence for several thousand years.

It may not be amiss to remark also that these Ten Superior Spirits, like the Indian Pradjapatis, are at the head of the immense hierarchy of spirits, both inspiring as well as mediating, who preside over the continual transformations of the vital molecule, and under whose guidance the human soul advances from one degree of perfection to another until it reaches the universal soul.

The Sepher Jeszirah speaks in the following enigmatical manner of these superior manifestations.

"There are ten Zephiroth, ten and not nine, ten and not eleven. Act so that you may intelligently understand them in your wisdom, so that your mind, your speculations,.

[p. 175]

your knowledge, and your thoughts may be constantly engaged in their investigation. Let every thing rest upon its foundation and reinstate the Creator upon his basis.

"As for the Ten Zephiroth, there is no end, neither in the future nor in the past, nor in good nor evil, nor in height nor depth, nor in the east nor the west, nor in the south, nor in the north.

"The Ten Zephiroth are like the five fingers of each hand to the number of ten, five on either hand, but between them is the tie of unity.

"The end of the Zephiroth is united to the beginning, as the flame is united to the firebrand, for the Lord is one, and there is not a second.

Close your mouth that you may not speak of it, and your heart that you may not think of it, and if your heart forgets itself, bring it to its place again, for it is for this reason that they have been united together." (Extract from the Sepher Jeszireh.)

Was not the meaning of the Agrouchada-Parikchai precisely identical, when it said, centuries before the Cabala was in existence:

"As for the Ten Pradjapatis, who are the lords of all created beings, and who are Maritchi, Atri, Angiras, Poulastya, Poulaha, Cratou, Pratchetas, Vasichta, Brighou, Narada, there is no commencement or end, neither in time nor space, for they are the product of the only essence of one spirit at a single breath.

"This is a fatal secret; close thy mouth that no part of it may be revealed to the vulgar herd; compress thy brain in order that no part of it may be spread abroad."

We will say in conclusion that the whole doctrine of the Pitris consists in a knowledge of that vast spiritual hierarchy at the head of which stand the Pradjapatis.

In like manner, the whole of the Jewish Cabala may be summed up as consisting in the mystic knowledge of the Zephiroth.

     
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 176]

  

CHAPTER VI.

  

THE CABALISTIC TRINITY.

"Having divided his body into two parts, the sovereign ruler became half male and half female, and uniting with the female portion, begot Viradj the son." (Manu, sloca 34, book i.)

"I, Viradj, desiring to give birth to the human race, first produced the Ten Pradjapatis, who are the Lords of all created beings, after having practised the greatest austerities." (Manu, sloca 34, book i.)

In such terms as these, the venerable legislator of the Hindus first spake of the primitive triad, from which sprang the ten superior spirits, who first manifested themselves in creation.

We have already seen in what affecting language the Book of the Pitris speaks of the love of the husband for his spouse, and how the universe sprang from that celestial union. In all the pagodas of India, that symbolical trinity is represented by three heads, carved from a single block of granite or marble, in the form of a single head.

It is extraordinary to see how closely this idea, which sprang up on the banks of the Ganges, was copied in the teachings of the Jewish Cabalists.

We are free to confess that what we have said about the Cabala is not derived from our own knowledge upon that subject. All our information about the Hebrews is taken from Mr. Franck of the Institute, and the reader will understand that thereon rests the whole weight of our argument.

[p. 177]

After this digression, we will now go on with our proofs. They seem like demonstrations in mathematics. We proposed to show that the Hebraic Cabala sprang originally from the Hindu temples. The best means at our command, in order to elucidate this problem, which is also interesting from an ethnographic point of view, is simply to confront the doctrine of the Pitris, as we have unfolded it, and the Hindu text, as we have given it, with the Hebraic texts themselves. We have also given the views of an eminent author, who certainly was not thinking of India when he was explaining the mysteries of the Zohar and the Sepher Jeszireh, and who too was wondering what could have been the birthplace of these extraordinary doctrines, which, in spite of certain points of similarity, never grew out of the Grecian or Arabic philosophies.

The following are the exact words of the Zohar, as given by the author in question, accompanied by his comments thereon. They lead from unity to the dyad, and from the dyad to the triad, by the same path which the thinkers in the Hindu pagodas had previously explored:

"In the beginning, was the Ancient. Seen face to face, he is the supreme head, the source of all light, the principle of all wisdom. The only definition that can be applied to him is, unity."

From the bosom of this absolute unity, of which, however, variety is a distinguishing feature, and from all relative unity, issue two principles in parallel lines, which are apparently opposed to each other, but in reality are not incompatible. The male, or active principle is called wisdom; the female, or passive principle is designated by a word that is commonly translated as intelligence.

"Everything that exists," says the Zohar, "everything that has been formed by the Ancient, whose name be sanctified, can only subsist through a male and a female."

From their eternal and mysterious union springs a son,

[p. 178]

who, according to the original expression, takes after his father and mother together, and bears witness to both of them.

This son of wisdom and intelligence, called, on account of his double inheritance, the elder son of God, is knowledge, or science. These three persons contain and include everything that is, but they are united, in their turn, in the White Head, in the Ancient of ancients, for all is he and he is all.

Sometimes he is represented with three heads forming a single one. Sometimes he is compared to the brain, which, without losing its unity, is divided into three parts, and by means of thirty-two pairs of nerves is in communication with every part of the body, as, by the aid of the thirty-two methods of wisdom, the divinity is diffused throughout the universe.

"The Ancient," says the Zohar, "whose name be sanctified, exists with three heads forming a single one, and this head is the most elevated of all elevated things, and because the Ancient is represented by the number three, all the other lights, or, in other words, the ten Zephiroth, are also comprised within the number three."

In another part of the same work we read:

"There are three heads carved one within the other, and one above the other. In this number we reckon first hidden wisdom, which is never without a veil. This mysterious wisdom is the supreme principle of all other wisdom. Above this first head is the Ancient; whatever is most mysterious among mysteries. Finally comes the head which towers above all others, and which is no head. What it contains no one knows, or can know, for it equally escapes our knowledge and our ignorance. That is the reason why the Ancient is called the non-being."

Sometimes the terms or, if it is preferred, the persona of this trinity are represented as three successive and absolutely necessary phases of existence, as well as of thought, as a deduction or evolution which, at the same time, constitutes

[p. 179]

the generation of the world. However surprising it may seem, there can be no doubt about it, when we read the following lines taken from the Zohar:

"Come and see; thought is the principle of everything; but it is at first ignorant and self-contained. When thought succeeds in diffusing itself abroad it has reached that stage when it becomes spirit. When it has arrived at that point it is called intelligence, and is no longer contained within itself as before. The spirit develops itself, in its turn, among the mysteries by which it is surrounded, and a voice comes from it, which is like a reunion of the celestial choirs, a voice which is distinctly heard in articulate words, for it comes from the spirit, but when we think of all these degrees, we see that thought and intelligence, this voice and this language, are one and the same thing; that thought is the principle of everything that is, and that no interruption can exist therein. Thought itself is united to the non-being, and is never separated from it. Such is the meaning of the words; Jehovah is one and his name is one.

"The name, which signifies I am, indicates to us the union of everything that is, the degree where all the methods of wisdom are still hidden, and placed together, without our being able to distinguish one from the other, but when a line of demarkation is once established, when it is desired to distinguish the mother, carrying all things in her womb, and upon the point of giving birth to them, in order to reveal the supreme name; then God says, speaking of himself: I who am. Finally, when all is carefully formed and has issued from the maternal womb, when everything is in its place, and it is proposed both to designate the individual and existence, God calls himself Jehovah, or I am that which is."

We will conclude the present sketch by presenting a most extraordinary resemblance between the doctrine of the Pitris and that of the Jewish Cabalists.

[p. 180]

In the Hindu system, as we have seen, there were three trinities which proceeded successively from Swayambhouva, the self-existent being, and were mingled in him in a supreme union. They are:

First, the initial trinity, which gave birth to the divine thought:

Nara, the producer;

Nari, the mother,

Viradj, the son.

Second, the trinity, as manifested, from which spring the primitive elements, which aid in the formation of the universe.

Agni,

Aya,

Sourya.

Third, the creating trinity:

Brahma,

Vishnou,

Siva.

Franck informs us, upon the authority of the Zohar, that a precisely similar doctrine was held by the Cabalists. He says:

"The ten Zephiroth were divided into three classes. Each presents the divinity to us under a different aspect, but always under the aspect of an invisible trinity.

"The first three Zephiroth are purely intellectual. As a matter of metaphysics, they express the absolute identity of thought and existence, and form what modern Cabalists call the intelligible world. It is the first manifestation of the Deity.

"The three that succeed them have a moral character: on the one hand, they make us conceive of God as identical with goodness and wisdom; on the other hand, they exhibit the Supreme Being as the origin of beauty and magnificence in creation. For this reason, they have been called the virtues, or the sensible world.

[p. 181]

"Finally, we learn by the last three Zephiroth that the universal providence, or the Supreme Artist, is also absolute force or all-powerful cause, and that this cause is, at the same time, the generating element of everything that is. It is the last Zephiroth that constitutes the natural world or nature, in its essence and active principle, natura naturans."

Upon prosecuting our inquiries as to the original source of the philosophical ideas of mankind, it is highly suggestive, to say the least of it, that the Brahminical and Cabalistic notion of the three trinities was almost identically the same.

First, there was an unrevealed God, the primordial and universal germ, the Ancient of Days, as he was called by the Hindus, the Ancient of Ancients, according to the Cabalistic philosophy.

Second, there was then a first trinity, begotten of thought and will.

Third, there was in either case a second trinity, which was the origin of the elements, of the virtues, and of the forces of the sensible world.

Fourth, according to the Hindus, a third trinity had charge of the work of creation; according to the Cabalists, it represents the generative element of everything that is.

Finally, in both doctrines, the active generative element, by perpetual union with the passive or mother element, was continually shooting into space the rays of life, from which souls escape and accomplish their progressive destinies in the universe, and gradually ascend and are absorbed in the immortal source from which they originally spring, or, in other words, in unity.

In order to give a clearer idea of this notion of the Great All, with its two-fold nature, continually begetting everything that exists, and of the universe which is the product, or offspring, perpetually ascending to unity, like

[p. 182]

the links of an endless chain, or a self-feeding flame, the Zohar makes use of the following comparison:

"In order to master the science of the sacred unity, look at the flame which rises from a brightly burning fire, or from a lighted lamp; first we see two lights, the one brilliantly white, the other black or blue. The white light is above the other, and rises in a straight line. The black light is underneath and seems to be the source of the former. They are, however, so closely united to each other that they form but one flame, but the foundation, formed by the blue or black light, in its turn, is connected with the burning matter which is still farther beneath. It should be known that the white light never changes; it always preserves its peculiar color, but several shades are distinguished in that which is beneath. The latter besides tends in two opposite directions. On top it is connected with the white light and below with the burning flame, but this matter is being continually absorbed in its bosom, and is continually ascending toward the superior light. In this manner everything returns to unity."

In view of the extraordinary similarity which we have shown to exist between the doctrines held by the Hindus and those of the Jewish Cabalists, what becomes of the claims of those Semitists who, in imitation of Renan, adopt every method to disseminate their peculiar views, independently of the fact that identically the same opinions were held by other people in Asia and the East.

     
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 183]

  

CHAPTER VII.

  

THE BELIEF IN MEDIATING AND INSPIRING SPIRITS ACCORDING TO THE JEWISH CABALISTS.

"The inferior world has been created in the similitude of the superior. Everything that exists in the superior world appears here below like the reflection of an image, and yet it is all only one thing." (The Zohar.)

"It is needful for you to know that there is the same relation between the shadow and the body, as between the corporeal and spiritual worlds." (Al Gazali, a Cabalistic writer.)

The extraordinary similarity existing between the doctrines taught in the Indian pagodas and those of the Jewish Cabalists, was not, however, confined to their metaphysical conceptions. The Cabalists, as we shall show, also believed in mediating and inspiring spirits, and their belief was nothing but the logical consequence of the principles they held. The whole of creation, the entire universe, being merely a radiation from the divine nature, infinite space is peopled with spirits which have dropped, on the one hand, from the great all in the condition of sparks, or atoms, endowed with life, and who, on the other hand, are returning to it through a constant series of progressive transformations.

This condition of affairs is clearly unfolded in the Zohar, in the form of the following allegory:

"Spirits or the souls of the just," says that celebrated work, "are above all powers. If you ask why from a place so exalted they descend to the earth, so far away

[p. 184]

from their source, this is my answer: Their case is like that of a king, to whom a son was born, and who took him into the country, to be there reared and educated until he had grown older, and had been instructed in the customs of his father's palace. When the king was informed that his son's education was finished, what does his love for him prompt him to do? He sends for the queen, his mother, to celebrate his return. He brings him back to the palace, where the whole day is spent in rejoicing. The saint also had a son by the queen, blessed be his name. This son is the superior and sacred soul. He sends him to the country, or, in other words, into the world, to grow up and become acquainted with the usages of his father's palace. When it comes to the knowledge -of the Ancient of Ancients that his son is grown, and that the time has come to introduce him into his presence, what does his love then prompt him to do? As a mark of honor, he sends for the queen, and brings her son home to his palace. Indeed, the soul has no sooner left the earth than the queen joins him, to show him the way to the king's palace, where she dwells forever and ever. And yet the inhabitants of the country are accustomed to grieve and weep at parting with the king's son. But if there is a wise man present, he says to them, Why do ye weep? Is it not the king's son? Is it not just that he should leave us and dwell in his father's palace? If all the just should know this, they would welcome the day when they muse leave this earth. Is it not the height of glory that the queen, the (Scheinah, or the Divine Presence,) should come down in the midst of them, that they should be admitted to the king's palace, and should live in delight forevermore and enjoy everlasting happiness?"

In the following passage the Zohar shows that the world is full of spirits:

"God animated every particle of matter with a particular spirit. Forthwith, all the celestial armies were formed,

[p. 185]

and stood before him--with the breath of his mouth, he created all his armies. The spirits are the messengers of the Lord."

In order to show conclusively that the Cabalists, precisely like the believers in the Pitris in India, believed also in mediating, directing, and inspiring spirits, as well as in evil spirits, we propose to make one more quotation, which shall be the last, from the eminent translator and commentator to whom we have already so often referred.

"We shall understand still better," he says, "what is meant by the spirits animating all the celestial bodies, and all the elements of the earth, if we pay particular attention to the names and functions attributed to them. In the first place, we must dismiss from our minds all the purely poetical personifications, of whose character there is the slightest doubt. Such are all the angels which are named either after a moral quality or a metaphysical abstraction, such, for instance, as good and evil desires, which are represented as real persons, acting in our presence; Tahariel, the spirit of purity; Rachmiel, the spirit of mercy; Tsadkiel, the spirit of justice; Padael, the spirit of deliverance, and the famous Raziel, the spirit of secrecy, which watches with a jealous eye over the mysteries of Cabalistic wisdom. It is, moreover, a principle recognized by all Cabalists as a part of the general system of being that the angelic hierarchy only commences with the third world, which is called the World of Formation, or, as they say, in the space occupied by the planets and celestial bodies. The chief of these invisible forces is the angel Metratrone, so called because he stands immediately below the throne of God, and alone forms the World of Creation or of pure spirits. His task is to preserve unity, harmony, and motion in all the spheres. His office is precisely the same as that of that blind and indefinite power which it is sometimes proposed to substitute for God under the name of Nature. He has under his orders myriads of

[p. 186]

subjects, who are divided into ten categories, no doubt, in honor of the ten Zephiroth. These subordinate spirits maintain the same relation to the different parts of nature as their chief does to the universe. Thus, one presides over the movements of the earth, another over those of the moon, and the same is true of the other celestial bodies. One is called the spirit of fire, Nouriel; another the spirit of light, Ouriel; a third presides over the distribution of the seasons; a fourth, over vegetation. Finally, all productions, all the forces, and all the phenomena of nature are represented in the same way."

As for the evil spirits, which the Cabalists also believe in, they regard them as grosser and more imperfect forms of existence. In the darkness and impurity in which they move, they are divided, like the superior spirits, into ten categories, personifying evil in all its degrees.

It will be readily seen that upon all these points the Hindu Book of the- Pitris and the Hebrew Zohar are inspired with the same idea. There is the same metaphysical basis, the same belief in good and bad spirits, and the same system with regard to the composition of the universe.

Although we are not in possession of any very precise information with regard to the evocation of spirits by the Cabalists, who probably never transmitted the prescribed formulas, except by word of mouth, still Hebraic tradition is so full to overflowing of the phenomena of evocation and occult manifestations, which are a necessary outgrowth of the beliefs we have just set forth, that it would be puerile to ask whether the ancient Cabalists, like the Hindu priests, ever claimed to exercise supernatural power.

We need only remind the reader of the witch of Endor, evoking the ghost of Samuel, the prophet, before Saul, on the eve of the battle of Gilboa; of Daniel explaining, in the presence of Balthazar, the magical writing upon the

[p. 187]

walls of his palace, by an invisible hand, in the midst of a feast:

Mene--Tekel--Upharsin;

and of the witch Huldah, whom the high priest Hilkiah made use of, in order to influence the people, as well as of hundreds of other similar facts which are clearly nothing but exterior manifestations of an occult power.

We may be told, however, in opposition, that the Jewish Cabala cannot lay claim to such antiquity. It is the unanimous opinion of all Cabalists that this mysterious philosophy sprang originally from the primitive institution of the Levites, and grew out of their desire to arrogate to themselves a belief of a higher order than that which they vulgarly taught.

We are indebted to Cabalistic tradition for the following legend, which we give in conclusion: [*1]

"One day, our Master Jochanan Ben Zachai started upon his travels. He rode a donkey and was followed by Rabbi Eleazar Ben Aroch. The latter asked him to teach him a chapter of the Mercaba. 'Did not I tell you,' answered our master, that it was not lawful to explain the Mercaba unto one alone, if he did not possess the requisite degree of wisdom and intelligence?' 'Is it not lawful,' replied Eleazar, 'at any rate, for me to repeat in your presence what you have already taught me?' 'Well, speak,' said our master. Saying so, he dismounted, drew a veil over his head, and sat down upon a stone in the shadow of an olive tree. Eleazar, son of Aroch, had hardly commenced speaking of the Mercaba, when a fire descended from heaven and enveloped all the trees in the country, which seemed to sing hymns, and in the midst of the fire, a spirit was heard to express his joy at hearing these mysteries."

In the same passage we are told that two others who

[p. 188]

had been initiated, Rabbi Josuah and Rabbi Joseph, following Eleazar's example, recited a chapter of the Mercaba. The most extraordinary prodigies again occurred.

"The sky was covered with thick clouds, a meteor very much like a rainbow appeared in the horizon, and the spirits were seen flocking to hear them, like spectators crowding to witness the passage of a wedding."

Upon learning of the prodigies which had been accomplished by his disciples Jochanan Ben Zachai told of one in his turn, which was as follows:

 

"We had been transported upon Mount Sinai, when from the heavens above a voice was heard, uttering these words: Come up here, where a splendid feast is provided for you, and for your disciples, and for all the generations who may hear these doctrines. You are destined to enter the third category."

 

Thus the phenomena of external manifestations, such as the fire hovering around the trees, and a meteor suddenly exhibiting itself among the clouds; the phenomena of evocation, such as the spirits flocking to hear the mysterious secrets of the Mercaba; the phenomena of transformation, where Jochanan and his disciples were transported upon Mount Sinai to converse with the invisible spirits; and finally, their admission to the third category of initiation, in short, everything in this Cabalistic passage, goes to show that those who believed in the Zohar claimed the power to evoke spirits and to produce external phenomena.

Footnotes

^187:1 Thal. Bab. Traii. Chaguiga, fol. xiv.

     
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 189]

  

CHAPTER VIII.

  

POINTS OF RESEMBLANCE BETWEEN THE DOCTRINE OF THE PITRIS AND THAT OF THE ZEND-AVESTA OF PERSIA, THE PHILOSOPHY OF PLATO, THE ALEXANDRIAN SCHOOL, AND OF CHRISTIANITY.

The Jewish Cabala is not the only philosophical system in ancient times which closely resembles the Brahminical doctrine.

According to Plato, the universe was an emanation from the Supreme Being, created by the Word, or Son, and was a mere reproduction of the eternal types contained in the divine wisdom; like the Hindus he believes in the preexistence of the soul, and metempsychosis, and like them he secretly instructed those who had been initiated in doctrines of which those he popularly taught gave but a faint idea.

If we may apply that expression to him, the philosopher of Egina was what we should call in modern times, an eclectic.

He taught his disciples, in a smaller compass, the traditions of human wisdom, which had been handed down from age to age to his time, by means of the mystic initiations in the temples.

We are positively told so by Proclus, in the following passage:

"Apasan men tou Platunos filosofian, kai ten arxen eklampsai nomizu, kata ten tun kreittonun agathoeidei boylesin ... teis te alles apases emas metoxoos katestese

[p. 190]

[paragraph continues] tou Platunos filosofias, kai koinunous tun en apor'rhetois para tun aytoy presbyterun meteilefe."

There are so many points of analogy between the philosophy of the Alexandrian school, or Neo-platonism, and the Hindu doctrines which we have just been investigating, that we cannot avoid the conclusion that the former was derived from that inexhaustible Oriental fountain. Moreover, it claims, itself, to have sprung from the mysterious traditions of Asia.

Its idea of God is that he is the Great All, from which everything proceeds, and to which everything tends. He is all and everything is in him.

He is unity, to en;

He is the ineffable, ar'rhetos;

He is the unknown, agnustos.

According to Plotinus and his school, the Trinity is an emanation from unity, exactly as held by those who believe in the Pitris.

It receives the following names, taken from its attributes:

to en to agathon, unity or, in other words, the good.

Nous, the soul of the world, or the universal spirit.

Psyke tou pantos, tun olun, the demiourgos, or the creator.

The resemblance between the two systems is not confined, however, to a single point. Each member of this trinity begets, in its turn, a special trinity, and the mission of the three trinities that spring from them, is to produce unceasingly and to perpetuate in this world, first, the good; second, the intelligence or the vital principle; and third, the work of creation.

Under more mystical names they are precisely similar to the three trinities of the Brahmins and the Cabalists. According to the Neo-platonists the Supreme Being,

[p. 191]

with its various symbolic transformations, is a vast and everlasting source, from which are constantly springing those universal races which, through the love of the husband for his spouse, of the unity for the intelligence, are provided with all the different attributes and are thereby impelled to ascend unceasingly, through successive transformations, until they arrive at unity itself.

"By a movement like that of an endless chain about a wheel," as the Book of the Pitris says.

Between the Trinitarian systems of Christianity and those of the Hindus, of the Cabalists, and of the Neo-platonists, the numerous points of similarity are obvious at a glance, and we can readily see the source from which the founders of that religion have derived their revelation.

We say founders, though that is not the proper name to apply to the authors of the four gospels, whose idea it was to create a tradition of their own, for it is now well settled that Christianity, which is as old as the temples of Egypt and the pagodas of India, is a symbolic synthesis of all the beliefs of antiquity.

Scholars living in the primitive ages of the church were not so easily misled. In the third century, the illustrious Manichean, Faustus, wrote these words, which we commend to the attention of all those who have made the life of Jesus the theme of romantic study:

"Everybody knows that the gospels were actually written neither by Jesus Christ nor by his personal disciples, but were carried along by tradition, and long after their time were written by unknown people, who, correctly supposing that their word would not be taken as to things that had not come under their personal observation, placed at the head of these traditional statements the names of the apostles or of apostolic men contemporaneous with them." (Faustus.)

The Council of Nice, under the presidency of Constantine, that odious and criminal despot, whose praises have

[p. 192]

been sung by all the writers of the Church, indeed created a Catholicism, as a means of discipline, which was entirely different from primitive Christianity.

In very guarded language, Franck expresses a similar opinion in the following words:

"Have we not every reason in the world to look upon the Cabala as a precious relic of the religious philosophy of the East, which was transported to Alexandria and became mingled with the teachings of Plato, and whose influence--under cover of the usurped name of Denys, the Areopagite--Bishop of Athens, who was converted and consecrated by Saint Paul--was felt in the mysticism of the middle ages?"

To the question, What is, then, this religious philosophy of the East, whose influence is apparent in the mystic symbols of Christianity? we answer as follows:

The philosophy, of which we find traces among the Magi, the Chaldeans, the Egyptians, the Hebrew Cabalists, and the Christians, is identical with that of the Hindu Brahmins, who believed in the Pitris.

There is one argument in favor of this opinion which is  conclusive, and that is this: Among all ancient countries, India is the only one that possesses the whole of this philosophy, so much so, indeed, that if it were desired to reconstruct it from materials obtained from other sources than the immortal thinkers of the banks of the Ganges, it would be necessary to borrow them at second hand, here and there, from the various quarters wherever found, from Plato, from the Cabala, from the Alexandrian school, from the Magi, and from Christianity.

On the other hand, the high antiquity of the mighty work performed in India is opposed to the supposition, even for an instant, that the Brahminical philosophy was formed of pieces and fragments taken from these different systems, which, being posterior to the Vedas and Manu--that nobody disputes--were not, as admitted even by those who

[p. 193]

hold most firmly to the opposite view, born upon the soil where we now find them.

If the Cabala, if Magism, Plato, the Alexandrian school, and Christianity did not derive their doctrines from original sources, if, on the contrary, we find them in the remotest ages in the philosophical works of ancient India, not as isolated facts but as a complete collection of beliefs, dogmas, and mysteries, which go to make up the whole of what is called the Brahminic civilization, have we not every reason to maintain that they came originally from the country of the Vedas?

It is easy to trace through the ages the path of these lofty speculations. From India they made their way into Persia and Chaldea, both by means of emigration and natural infiltration. It is sufficient to compare the traditions of the Boun-Dehesh and the Zend-Avesta with those that have been the object of our study, in order to recognize their similarity, only the system of the Parsecs and of the ancient Chaldeans is less philosophical than that of the mother country, and concedes to the dews and evil spirits a much greater degree of importance than that which is recognized by the Indian theory, as possessed by the Devas and Pisatchas.

We shall have to descend to the superstitions of vulgar Brahminism, we shall have to go to the religion of the Soudra, in order to find a like severity of conflict between the spirits of good and the spirits of evil. Parseeism and Chaldeaism are a mixture of the gross superstitions of the Hindu populace and of the philosophical conceptions of the Brahmins.

This reminds us of the following lines, which we quote from Amniance Marcellinus and which are confirmed by Agathias.

"The King Hytaspes, having penetrated as far as certain retired places in Upper India, came to some solitary groves, whose silence seem to be favorable to the profound 

[p. 194]

thoughts of the Brahmins. There they taught him, as far as they possibly could, the pure sacrificial rites, and the causes of the movement of the stars and the universe, a part of which he communicated to the Magi. The latter have transmitted these secrets from father to son, together with the science of predicting the future. Since then, during a long succession of ages until now, there have arisen a multitude of Magi, belonging to the same race, who have devoted themselves to the service of the temple and the worship of the Gods."

Egypt, which had never forgotten its early traditions, was constantly drawing new life and vigor from the study of the scientific movement of Upper Asia.

Moses of Chorenus, who lived five centuries before the present era, bears witness to this, in the most positive manner, in the following passage:

"The ancient Asiatics had a multitude of historical works which were translated into Greek, when the Ptolemies established the Alexandrian library and encouraged literary men by their liberality, so that the Greek language became the depositary of all the ancient learning."

It is evident from all this, first, that people in ancient times did not live a more isolated life from each other, as regards the philosophical and religious sciences, than they do now. Second, that there was a large collection of traditions, of which ancient India was the principal source. Third, that a close connection existed between the teachings of the Brahmins and the systems of the Magi, the Chaldeans, the Cabalists, the Platonists, and the philosophers of the Alexandrian School, whose sect called therapeutae kept alive the traditions which afterward became those of Christianity.

By the careful study and comparison of the old civilizations we thus acquire a knowledge of the general drift and tendency of the human intellect in those times, without

[p. 195]

regard to the warring claims of rival sects or the conflicting pretensions of individual pride.

There is not a fact, not a belief, not a discovery, that is independent of tradition, and those who, in order to display their singularity and to make a particular place for their special studies, are constantly meeting with conceptions which lay claim to originality and are said to have borrowed nothing from any that have preceded them, are unmindful of the laws of history and of the evolution of the human mind.

     
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 196] [p. 197]

  

FOURTH PART.

  

EXOTERIC MANIFESTATIONS AND DEMONSTRATIONS AMONG THE INITIATES OF THE SACRED TEMPLES OF INDIA, AS SHOWN BY THE PERFORMING FAKIRS.

[p. 198]

Power belongs to him who knows. (Agrouchada-Parikchai)

He who has penetrated the secret of things, who has lifted himself up by contemplation to the knowledge of the immortal principle, who has mortified his body and developed his soul, who knows all the mysteries of being and not being, who has studied all the transformations of the vital molecule from Brahma to man and from man to Brahma, he alone is in communication with the Pitris and commands the celestial forces. (Atharva-Veda.)

The Boutams (or bad spirits) tremble before him who is shaved, who wears the triple girdle, and is clothed with the yellow vestment, and who carries the seven-knotted stick. (Agrouchada-Parikchai.)

[p. 199]

  

TO THE READER.

THE philosophical part of our work is now ended. In a subject so vast there are many points, no doubt, that might have been more fully developed, but our main purpose has been to give a comprehensive idea of the metaphysical speculations of the Hindu initiates, and to show that their belief in spirits was only a consequence of their system relating to God and his attributes, and to the existence of the universe. In the comparison of this doctrine, which is based upon the Vedas themselves, with those of other ancient people, we devoted most of the space at our command to the Jewish Cabala, because, though not so well known as Magism, the philosophy of Plato, or the Alexandrian school, it also believed in the manifestations of spirits, the power of evocation, and its external phenomena, precisely in the same manner as the philosophy of the Pitris, their traditional ancestor on the banks of the Ganges.

We might also have called attention to the fact that primitive Christianity, with its Thautnaturgists suddenly appearing through closed doors, raising the dead, floating in the air, and receiving the gift of tongues, with its initiation in the Catacombs, its superior spirits, its demons, and its exorcists, was intimately related to the Cabala and the doctrine of the Pitris. We confined ourselves, however, to the statement that that religious revolution in the earlier ages of our era was only a synthesis of the old beliefs of Asia. An exhaustive study of the subject would have required a book by itself, which we might not have the leisure to complete.

[p. 200]

The special scope of the present work forbids any extended excursion into this field. The mere fact of our undertaking it would have necessarily led us to devote the same space to the mysterious initiations of , Chaldea, and Persia, and, as the reader will readily see, it would have compelled us to write a general history of the ancient civilizations of the East, such as forms a part of the ethnographical studies published by us elsewhere.

Before giving an account of the exterior phenomena and manifestations by which the Hindus claim to show that they are in possession of occult power, which is a logical consequence of their religious belief in the part played by spirits in the universe, we desire to disavow any personal responsibility whatever.

We assert nothing positively with regard to most of the facts which we are about to relate. The skill derived from long experience, charlatanism, and even hallucination itself, may assist to explain them. We are bound to say, however, as impartial and faithful observers, that though we applied the severest tests, to which the Fakirs and other initiates interposed no objection whatever, we never succeeded in detecting a single case of fraud or trickery, which, we admit, is far from being a conclusive proof of their honesty.

Hue, the missionary, who also gives an account of similar phenomena, witnessed by him in Thibet, was equally at a loss to account for them.

We are perfectly ready to admit, also, that we never knew a European, either in India or Ceylon, even among the oldest residents, who was able to indicate what means the votaries of the Pitris used in the production of these phenomena.

Is this tantamount to saying that we believe in the intervention of invisible spirits?

We do not believe in spiritualism, but while we believe that scepticism or doubt in all cases, in spite of any amount

[p. 201]

of proof, is something that man, in his weakness, has no right to indulge in, we may add, on the other hand, that no one has a right to assert a thing positively or scientifically, except upon careful investigation, based upon proof upon either side.

We occupy the position which we assumed in our preface, viz.: That of a simple recorder of facts which some regard as occult manifestations and others as skilful jugglery.

There are, however, some phenomena, which, without going too far, we are inclined to attribute to natural forces, the laws of which have not yet been ascertained.

What are these forces? Or rather, what is the force which the Hindus attribute to the pure Agasa fluid, under the direction of the spirits?

We are not an authority upon this point, and when we see the illustrious scientist and member of the Royal Society of London, William Crookes, treated with ridicule and contempt on account of the inquiries he is now making with a view to the discovery of the laws of this force, we are involuntarily reminded of the words of Galvani, to whom the western world is indebted for the earliest experiments in electricity, as follows:

"I am attacked by two classes of persons, the learned and the ignorant. Both of them treat me with ridicule, and say that I am only fit to be a dancing-master for frogs, [*1] and yet I think that I have discovered one of the grandest forces in nature."

In short, with regard to certain physical facts, which have nothing in common with supernatural evocations, apparitions, or manifestations, and which are not in direct opposition to the laws of nature, which are not more wonderful than the results produced by electricity, we think that a denial or affirmation following a thorough

[p. 202]

and scientific investigation, is better than a denial or affirmation a priori.

We know what a denial a priori is worth. It once rejected steam and electricity. The phenomena which we shall describe are all included within the three following categories:

First, facts and phenomena of exterior manifestations, obtained by spiritual force, and generally with the aid of material objects.

Second, facts of a magnetic or somnambulistic character.

Third, the phenomena of evocation and apparition, and the production of material objects by the spirits.

Phenomena of the first class are apparently easily tested. We shall tell what we have done and what our experience has been, without, however, expressing any opinion of our own as to their causes.

As to the last class of cases, we should have omitted them altogether from the present work, as shunning a scientific investigation, if--remembering that in ancient times the belief in evocations and apparitions was universal; that all religions, with Christianity at their head, included such phenomena in their mysteries and miracles--we had not deemed that it would be at least a matter of historical curiosity to set forth the nature of these singular practices--in common use in India at the present day--which are so well adapted to influence the popular mind, and which formed the basis of all the ancient superstitions.

Footnotes

^201:1 Alluding to his experiments on frogs.

     
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 203]

  

CHAPTER I.

  

AS TO WHO ARE INITIATED INTO THE DIFFERENT CLASSES OF OCCULT POWER.

WE have already seen what a long life of prayer, maceration, ablution, and fasting the novices were required to pass in the different degrees of initiation. We now dismiss that branch of our subject.

It may not be amiss, however, to remind the reader that the initiated possessed powers, more or less extensive, according to the class to which they belonged, and to indicate the nature of these powers.

The first class comprised:

First.--THE GRIHASTAS.

Second.--The Pourohitas.

Third.--THE FAKIRS.

The Grihastas or heads of families do not forsake the world. They are a sort of connecting link between the temple and the people. They are formally forbidden to make any manifestations of external phenomena. It is their right, however, and their duty to evoke the souls of their ancestors, in some retired part of their dwelling, and to receive from them, as their direct descendants, only such instruction as they need for their guidance in this earthly pilgrimage.

The Pourohitas, or priests of the popular cult, take part in all family ceremonies. They evoke familiar spirits and drive away evil spirits. They cast horoscopes and preside over births, marriages, and funerals. They perform all the phenomena of auspicious or inauspicious

[p. 204]

omens and intervene in all cases of over-excitement or possession, to remove from the subject all malign influences. They confine themselves strictly to the domain of religion.

The performing Fakirs collect alms and money in the temples, and wander over the country and through the cities. They produce at will the strangest phenomena, entirely contrary to what are conventionally called natural laws. With the aid of spirits, who are present at all their operations, as claimed by the Brahmins, they have authority, as well as power, to evoke them.

The second class includes:

THE SANNYASSIS.

The third class includes:

First.--THE NIRVANYS.

Second.--THE YOGUYS.

In these two higher grades of initiation the power is the same, only differing in degree. They claim to have subjected the visible as well as the invisible world to their will, and only produce their supernatural manifestations in the interior of the temples and, in very rare cases, before the Rajahs or other eminent personages in India.

According to their account, time, space, specific gravity, and even life itself, are nothing to them. They enjoy the faculty of laying aside, or resuming, their mortal envelope. They command the elements, transport mountains, and drain rivers. Upon this point the Oriental imagination, which knows no limits, gives itself the fullest scope, and these spiritual lights are regarded in India as gods.

There is here presented, as we see, a complete organization resting upon the caste system, and adapted to the sup. port of a social state, entirely sacerdotal.

It is claimed that these different initiates undergo, during a period of many years, in the subterranean sanctuaries of the pagodas, a course of training, which modifies their

[p. 205]

organization, from a physiological point of view, and increases to a large extent the production of the pure fluid emanating from them, called agasa. It is impossible for us to obtain any authentic information concerning these occult practices.

It is mainly with reference to the Fakirs that we propose to investigate these different phenomena.

     
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 206]

  

CHAPTER II.

  

AGASA.

IN order to make ourselves understood, where there is as yet no accepted mode of speech, we will say what we mean by the term "spirit force."

By "spirit force" we mean the alliance between the intellect and the physical forces, in order to act upon inanimate objects, without pre-determining, in any way, the cause which sets this force in motion.

The meaning of the word is not strictly, perhaps, that which is generally attached to it. We will therefore say that we use it only to classify the phenomena which we are about to describe, and that the meaning here given expresses accurately the signification of the term used by the Hindus.

The supreme cause of all phenomena, according to the Brahmins, is the pure agasa fluid, or the vital fluid, which is diffused throughout nature, and puts animate or inanimate, visible or invisible beings, in communication with each other. Heat, electricity, all the forces of nature, in short, are but modes of action and particular states of this fluid.

The being who possesses an excess of this vital fluid acquires a proportionate power, both over animate beings not so highly favored, and over inanimate beings. The spirits themselves are sensible to the influence of this universal fluid, and can place their power at the service of those who are able to evoke them.

According to some Brahmins, agasa is the moving thought of the universal soul, directing all souls, who would

[p. 207]

be in constant communication with each other, if the gross envelope of the body did not in a measure prevent. Thus, the more completely the soul disentangles itself from its vestment--the body--by contemplation, the more sensible it becomes to this universal fluid, whereby all beings, whether visible or invisible, are united.

Such is the theory. We merely set it forth and propose to confine ourselves to the role of an interpreter and nothing more.

     
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 208]

  

CHAPTER III.

  

THE PERFORMING FAKIRS.

EVERY European has heard of the extraordinary skill of the Hindu. Fakirs, who are popularly designated under the name of Charmers or Jugglers. They claim to be invested with supernatural powers. Such is the belief of all Asiatic people.

When our countrymen are told of their performances, they usually answer: go to the regular magicians, they will show you the same things.

To enable the reader to appreciate the grounds of this opinion, it seems necessary to show how the Fakirs operate. The following are facts which no traveller has ventured to contradict.

First.--They never give public representations in places where the presence of several hundred persons makes it impossible to exercise the proper scrutiny.

Second.--They are accompanied by no assistant or confederate, as they are usually termed.

Third.--They present themselves in the interior of the house completely naked, except that they wear, for modesty's sake, a small piece of linen about as large as the hand.

Fourth.--They are not acquainted with goblets, or magic bags, or double-bottomed boxes, or prepared tables, or any of the thousand and one things which our European conjurors find necessary.

Fifth.--They have absolutely nothing in their possession, save a small wand of seven knots of young bamboo, as big

[p. 209]

as the handle of a pen-holder, which they hold in their right hand, and a small whistle, about three inches long, which they fasten to one of the locks of their long, straight hair; for, having no clothes and consequently no pockets, they would otherwise be obliged to hold it constantly in their hands.

Sixth.--They operate, as desired by the person whom they are visiting, either in a sitting or standing posture or, as the case may require, upon the marble, granite, or stucco pavement of the veranda, or upon the bare ground in the garden.

Seventh.--When they need a subject for the exhibition of magnetic or somnambulistic phenomena, they take any of your servants whom you may designate, no matter whom, and they act with the same facility upon a European, in case he is willing to serve.

Eighth.--If they need any article, such as a musical instrument, a cane, a piece of paper, a pencil, etc., they ask you to furnish it.

Ninth.--They will repeat any experiments in your presence as many times as you require, and will submit to any test you may apply.

Tenth.--They never ask any pay, merely accepting as alms for the temple to which they are attached, whatever you choose to offer them.

I have travelled through India in every direction for many years, and I can truthfully state that I have never seen a single Fakir who was not willing to comply with any of these conditions.

It only remains for us to ask, whether our more popular magicians would ever consent to dispense with any of their numerous accompaniments and perform under the same conditions.

There is no doubt what the answer would be.

Without drawing any conclusions as to causes or methods, I merely state the facts.

     
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 210]

  

CHAPTER IV.

  

THE LEAF DANCE.

WE select at random some facts that fell under our own observation, as they were noted down at the time, grouping them, however, according to the method adopted by us, to make the Hindu classification more clear.

What we call spirit force is called by the Hindus arta-ahancarasya or the force of I.

I had been a resident of Pondichery, the capital of the French possessions in the Carnatic, for several years, when one morning, between eleven and twelve o'clock, my dobachy or valet-de-chambre informed me that a Fakir wanted to see me.

I had left Europe without the slightest idea of the phenomena which the spiritualists attribute to their mediums. I was ignorant of the very principles lying at the bottom of a faith which I then believed to be new, but which I now know to be as old as the temples of India, Chaldea, and Egypt for all religions commenced with the belief in spirits and outward manifestations, the source of a revelation claimed to be divine. I had not even seen a single case of table-tipping. The extravagances of the faith in invisible spirits in which its adepts sincerely believed, and which always formed a prominent feature of their stories, were so like the ecstasies, the mysterious apparitions, and the whole machinery of the Catholic church, that it had never occurred to me, ardent naturalist as I was, to attend or witness one of the experiments which had stirred up such a general interest in every direction.

As for the Hindu Fakirs, I conceived them to be simple magicians, and I unceremoniously dismissed them whenever

[p. 211]

they presented themselves. Yet I had heard a great deal of their marvellous skill, and I was anxious to see a specimen of it.

The Hindu having been admitted, I received him in one of the interior verandas of my house. I was struck first by his extreme leanness; his face was as thin and bony as that of an anchorite, and his eyes, which seemed half dead, produced a sensation such as I once experienced when looking at the motionless, green orbs of a large deep-water shark.

He was waiting for me in a squatting posture upon the marble floor; when he saw me he arose slowly. Bowing with his hands raised to his forehead, he murmured the following:

"Saranai aya" (I greet you respectfully, Sahib), "it is I, Salvanadin-Odear, son of Canagarayen-Odear. May the immortals watch over your days."

"Salam, Salvanadin-Odear, son of Canagarayen-Odear, may you die upon the sacred banks of the Tircangey, and may that transformation be your last."

"The guru of the pagoda said to me this morning," continued the Hindu, "go and glean at random, like the birds in the rice-fields, and Ganesa, the god of travellers, has led me to your house."

"You are welcome."

"What do you want of me?"

"You are said to possess the faculty of communicating movement to inert bodies without touching them. I should like to see a specimen of your power."

"Salvanadin-Odear has no such power; he merely evokes spirits, who lend him their aid."

"Well, let Salvanadin-Odear evoke the spirits, and show me what they can do."

The words were hardly out of my mouth when the Fakir resumed his squatting position upon the pavement, placing his seven-knotted stick between his crossed legs.

[p. 212]

He then asked to have my dobachy bring seven small flower-pots full of earth, seven thin sticks of wood each about two cubits long, and seven leaves taken from any tree, no matter what.

When these different articles had been brought, without touching them himself, he had them placed in a horizontal line, about two yards from his outstretched arm. He instructed my servant to plant a stick of wood in each pot of earth, and to put on each stick a tree leaf with a hole in the middle.

This being done, all the leaves dropped down the sticks, acting as covers to the pots. The Fakir then joined his hands and raised them above his head, and I heard him distinctly utter, in the Tamoul language, the following invocation:

"May all the powers that watch over the intellectual principle of life (kche'tradjna) and over the principle of matter (boutatoma) protect me from the wrath of the pisatchas (evil spirits), and may the immortal spirit, which has three forms (mahatatridandi, the trinity), shield me from the vengeance of Yama."

At the close of the invocation he stretched out his hands in the direction of the flower-pots, and stood motionless, in a sort of ecstasy. From time to time his lips moved as if he were continuing his occult invocation, but no sound reached my ears.

I watched all these elaborate preparations with considerable interest and amusement, without suspecting what was to follow. Suddenly it seemed to me that my hair was moved by a slight current of air, which blew in my face like one of those gusts that we often see in the tropics after sunset, and yet the large straw curtains of vetivert, hanging in the vacant spaces between the columns of the veranda, were undisturbed. I thought that my senses had deceived me, but the phenomenon was repeated several times.

At the end of about a quarter of an hour, though there

[p. 213]

had been no change of position on the part of the Fakir, the fig-leaves began to move slowly upward along the sticks of wood, and then as slowly descend.

I approached and watched them as they continued their motion with the closest attention. I must confess that when I saw that there was no visible means of communication between the Hindu and the leaves I was very much surprised.

I passed and repassed several times in the space which separated the juggler from the pots of earth, but there was no interruption in the ascent or descent of the leaves.

I asked to examine his arrangements and was unhesitatingly allowed to do so. I removed the leaves from the sticks, and the sticks from the pots, and emptied their contents upon the pavement. Having rung for the cousicara (or cook) I ordered seven goblets to be brought from the kitchen, and some earth and fresh leaves from the garden. I divided the bamboo stick myself into seven pieces, and I arranged everything as it had been done previously, placing it all at about four yards from the Fakir, who looked on unconcernedly during the whole operation, without making any remark or movement whatever.

"Do you think," I then asked him, "that the spirits will act now?"

He made no answer, but merely extended his arms, as he had done before.

Five minutes had hardly elapsed, when the upward and downward motion of the leaves along the sticks was repeated.

I was amazed and it must be confessed that I had ample reason.

Still I would not acknowledge my defeat. I asked the Fakir if the pots of earth were essential to the production of the phenomena, and, being answered in the negative, I had seven holes bored in a plank, in which I placed the

[p. 214]

bamboo sticks. In a short time, the same phenomena occurred as before.

During the next two hours, I repeated the experiment in twenty different ways, but always with the same result.

The only way in which I could account for it was by supposing that I was under some powerful magnetic influence. The Fakir said to: "Is there not some question you wish to put to the invisible spirits before they go?"

The question was totally unexpected, but as I had heard that European mediums use an alphabet in conversing with spirits, as they claim, I explained the matter to the Hindu, and asked him if I could enter into communication with them by any such means.

He answered me in these words, "Ask anything you please, the leaves will remain still, if the spirits have nothing to say. If, on the contrary, those who guide them have any communication to make, they will move upward along the sticks."

I was about to write an alphabet upon a sheet of paper when a very simple device occurred to me. I had a set of raised brass letters and figures upon zinc blocks which I used to stamp my name and a number upon the books in my library. I threw them pell-mell into a small linen bag, and the Fakir having resumed his position of invocation, I thought of a friend, who had died twenty years before, and proceeded to extract the letters and numbers, one by one.

Upon taking up each of the zinc blocks I looked at the letter or figure as I called it off, and kept a watchful eye upon the leaves so that the least movement would not escape me.

I had already taken out fourteen blocks and nothing unusual had occurred, when upon the appearance of the letter A, the leaves began to move, and after ascending to

[p. 215]

the top of the sticks, fell again to the boards in which the pieces of bamboo had been placed.

I could not help betraying some emotion, when I observed that the motion of the leaves corresponded to the appearance of the first letter of my friend's name. When the bag was empty, I put the letters and figures in again, and continued as before. Letter by letter and figure by figure I obtained the following words:

Albain Brunier, died at Bourg-en-bresse (Ain) January 3, 1856.

The name, the date, the place, everything was correct; the blood rushed to my head as I read over and over again, the words which shone strangely in my eyes.

What made my astonishment still greater was the fact that I had no conception of phenomena of this class. I was totally unprepared for them; I wanted to be alone and to reflect. I therefore dismissed the Fakir, without making any further observations on that day. I made him promise, however, to come on the morrow, at the same hour. He was punctual to the appointment.

We repeated the same series of experiments, and the result was the same as before.

The excitement which I had at first experienced, and which was perfectly natural under the circumstances, had disappeared, but I was no nearer than before to a belief in the supernatural and in the reality of the Fakir's evocations. I was merely led to formulate in my own mind the following supposition:

"If these phenomena were not the result of pure charlatanism, magnetic influence, or hallucination, perhaps there is a natural force, the laws of which we are yet ignorant of, and which enables its possessor to act upon inanimate objects, and interpret thoughts, as the telegraph puts two minds in communication in different and opposite parts of the globe,"

[p. 216]

I spent a portion of the night in reflection upon this point. On the morrow I repeated the phenomena of the previous day at an early sitting. I then asked the Fakir to do them over again, and I watched them, having in mind the supposition  named.

When I asked the Fakir, for instance, to repeat the communication of the previous day, I changed in my mind the orthography of the name, dwelling strongly upon each letter. The following variations were the result:

Halbin Pruniet, died, etc.

I may add, however, that when I tried to change the name of the city, or of the date of the occurrence, I was unsuccessful at that time and that the message was always the same and always correct in those respects:

Died at Bourg-en-Bresse (Ain) January 3, 1856.

During fifteen days I had the Fakir at my house every day, and he always submitted, with the utmost readiness, to all my requirements. I varied my experiments as follows:

Bearing in mind always the exact words of the message as I first received it, I wanted to know positively, whether it was possible to effect a complete change in its terms.

At one time I obtained changes in the letters composing the name, so that no one would have recognized it; at another time, the changes referred to the date of the day, of the month, or of the year, but I never obtained the slightest alteration in the name of the city, which was invariably the same:

Bourg-en-Bresse.

Hence I concluded--referring always to the supposition under which I was acting, that there really was a natural force, which had established a communication between myself and the Fakir and the leaves--that I could not sufficiently isolate my mind from the correct orthography of all the words in the sentence.

[p. 217]

On several different occasions I made similar attempts, with different subjects, but with no better result.

While, on the one hand, the material phenomena were repeated with scarcely any variation to speak of, still, there were constant changes in the interpretation of my thoughts, which were sometimes designed on my part, and sometimes, on the contrary, in direct opposition to what I had intended. In the last sitting the Fakir gave, he lowered one balance of a pair of scales simply with a peacock's feather, when the other balance contained a weight of about a hundred and seventy pounds. By the mere imposition of hands, he made a crown of flowers float in  air, the atmosphere was filled with vague and indistinct sounds and a shadowy hand drew luminous figures in space. At that time I considered the two latter phenomena simply as phantasmagoria--I did not even give them the benefit of a doubt. For this reason, my notes of this sitting do not contain a full and accurate account of the facts. I shall describe them farther on with suitable details in the case of other magicians by whom they were also performed.

In short, with regard to purely material facts, I may say that I never detected the slightest deception, and I applied the severest tests in order to discover any fraud.

As for physiological facts, dismissing the hypothesis of supernatural intervention, and on the simple supposition of a spiritual communication between the operator and his assistant, I am bound to say that I personally obtained nothing fixed, nothing invariable.

Such were my first observations at Pondichery. My judicial duties and special studies concerning ancient India did not give me time to continue them, particularly in view of the results obtained, which were positive enough with regard to all material phenomena, it is true, but were doubtful and uncertain with regard to the transmission of mental messages between two persons in full possession of

[p. 218]

their faculties, but claimed to be in spiritual communication.

Perhaps there were grounds that might have warranted a further investigation into this material force, and, supposing that it really existed, for attempting to free it from the elaborate appliances and clap-trap by which it was encompassed, in order to strike the popular imagination. It was not, however, my business to do so, being otherwise occupied, as I have already said, by my professional duties and studies in relation to primitive society in Asia.

Still, while I took no further active interest in these phenomena, I was in the habit of setting apart anything I might meet with, in the course of my studies, relating to the doctrine of the Pitris, with the idea of publishing subsequently whatever I might come across upon a subject which seems to interest the Western, as much as it does the Asiatic world.

From this time forward I also made notes of all the material phenomena by whose aid the Fakirs seek to prove the existence of the power they claim, for it seems to me that such facts were strongly corroborative of their theory.

Although I have been careful to avoid any departure from the part which I have assumed as a simple historian, I have desired, in the present chapter, to give an account of the only attempts I have ever seriously made to inform myself regarding this force which the Fakirs appear to possess and by means of which, they claim, they hold communication with invisible spirits, a claim which many persons of our time, even of the highest intelligence, are disposed to allow. It seems to me that a reply is due to the reader who may ask: Why does the author disavow any personal responsibility? has he no opinion whatever upon this question?

I have indeed no scientific opinion upon this subject, as yet.

[p. 219]

I am convinced that there are in nature, and in man, who is a part of nature, immense forces, the laws of which are yet unknown to us.

I think that man will some day discover these laws, that things that we now regard as dreams, will appear to us, in the future, as realities, and that we shall one day witness phenomena of which we have now no conception.

In the world of ideas, as in the material world, there is a period of gestation, as of birth. Who knows whether this psychic force, as the English call it--this force of the Ego, according to the Hindus, which the humble Fakir exhibited in my presence, will not be shown to be one of the grandest forces in nature?

I may be told that for more than ten thousand years, during which the Hindus have given it their attention, they have never succeeded in formulating the laws of this pretended force, and that we cannot afford to lose our time, now or in the future, as they have done.

The Brahmins have made everything subordinate to their religion, and we know that in religious matters there are no scientific experiments or proof. See what the middle ages produced in the domain of the exact sciences by taking their axioms from the words of the Bible!

From the remotest antiquity the pundits of the pagodas have been in the habit of bursting vessels by the use of compressed steam. They have also observed many electrical phenomena, but that has not led to the construction of railroads or telegraphs. Among ourselves, have we not seen scientific societies of the highest order officially treat Fulton like a crazy man, and regard the telegraph as a toy, only fit for sending messages from one room to another in the same dwelling. In the open air, and with atmospheric disturbances, the telegraph wire was not to be relied upon.

It has now, however, put a girdle round the earth, and we have sunk it at the bottom of the deepest seas.

[p. 220]

See what human society as a whole has done. Every age turns an idea over and over again in all its phases; scientific men develop it and set forth their theory, from which they refuse to swerve; every scientific body has an opinion, to which it stoutly clings. If it does not say in so many words, "Thus far shalt thou go and no farther," everybody knows that it thinks so, for it rejects every idea that does not originate in its own bosom, everything new and startling. Then the new generation comes upon the stage and the sons rebel against their fathers, as behind the time. The screw traverses the ocean, regardless of wind or tide, and the electric fluid transmits thought to the four corners of the globe.

As I have been led to speak of my own views I will say that the conclusion that I have drawn from what I have seen in India, laying aside the clap-trap by which it is surrounded, and of which the Hindus are very fond, is that there is in man a special force acting in an unknown direction, and often intelligently, the laws of which require to be studied by unprejudiced and liberal-minded specialists.

Perhaps it is this force, developed by education and by a certain system of training, that the priests in the ancient temples set in motion, in order to impress the popular imagination by pretended prodigies.

In that case there would seem to be some foundation for the ancient stories and there probably was a real development of a natural force, in connection with an exhibition of the grossest superstition, moving the tree leaves at a distance, as well as the floral garlands and tapestry hung in the temples, adding several pounds to the weight of peacock's feathers, and producing musical sounds by the aid of concealed instruments.

It is to be hoped that our scientists will some day or other make a serious investigation into the production of some of these phenomena, which I saw repeated before

[p. 221]

my eyes, and which left no room for the slightest suspicion of charlatanism. I do not know that such is their intention, but it would be of some use, at any rate, whether it results in the exposure of a fraud, or whether it ends in the discovery of a new force in nature.

As I was putting in order for the press the different portions of this volume, which was written at Pondichery in 1866, and which had slumbered in my drawer until then, for special reasons, I intended at first to omit that part of the present chapter where, departing from my role as a simple observer, I seemed to take sides in favor of a force, purely natural, it is true, but which produced phenomena that were apparently supernatural.

So far, I had rigidly excluded my personal opinions; should I now depart from this rule in that part of my book which treated of the more or less fantastical practices of the Hindus?

On the other hand, should I hesitate to acknowledge what seemed to be the few probably real facts, apart from the supernatural, which seemed to me to result from what I had seen?

I had not yet come to a decision on this point when, through the politeness of Dr. Puel, I was made acquainted with an article upon the psychic force, published by William Crookes, the eminent scientist and member of the Royal Society of London, in the Quarterly Journal of Science, one of the most respectable scientific organs of England.

I was not in England when the article appeared, and distance and my other studies made it impracticable for me to keep up my familiarity with works of this nature.

Imagine my surprise to see that the eminent chemist and physiologist had arrived at the positive conclusion, as the result of experiments similar to those I had seen in

[p. 222]

[paragraph continues] India, that there exists a new force in the human organism, as I had timidly suggested, several years before, as a matter of supposition.

I immediately came to the determination to leave my chapter as I had written it, but to refer the reader to the article in question, as confirmatory of the position I had assumed.

If, in spite of all the precautions I have taken to banish anything in favor of a belief in the supernatural and to express my own opinion in the most hypothetical manner, I have laid myself open to the reproach of being too credulous, I shall bear the blame cheerfully, in the company of one of the most distinguished of English scientists.

It appears that this force, which first suggested itself to my mind in 1866, in order to explain the phenomena which were then taking place in India before my face and eyes (the hypothesis that it was supernatural being totally inadmissible), had recently been recognized by physicians, astronomers, naturalists, and others, members of the Royal Society of London--which contains all who are eminent for their learning in England, as our Academy of Sciences contains men who are known and esteemed for their labors the world over--not, as I had done, by suggesting it as an hypothesis to explain certain phenomena, but by maintaining, after two years of experiments:

First, that there exists a force capable of moving heavy bodies without material contact, which depends in some unknown manner upon the presence of human beings.

Second, that nothing certain was known with regard to the nature and source of this force, but there is conclusive evidence that it exists.

Third, that movements can be produced in solid bodies without material contact by this hitherto unknown force, acting at an indefinite distance from the human organism, and wholly independent of muscular action.

[p. 223]

Fourth, that this force makes solid bodies, which have no contact or visible or material connection with the bodies of any persons present, emit sounds which are distinctly heard by all present, and it is proved that these sounds proceed from these objects, by vibrations which are perfectly perceptible to the touch.

Fifth, that this force is frequently directed with intelligence.

The question is whether this is the force which the Hindus, who have known of its existence for thousands of years, have sought to develop in all subjects who were willing to become their tools, and who have afterward, with a view to religious domination, attributed its manifestations to superior spirits. We rather incline to think so, though we express no opinion as to its nature or origin. It is not with a view to elucidate this question, by showing what arguments may be urged on either hand, that we have given this brief sketch of what has been accomplished by English scientists upon this point. Our intention was simply to show that scientific men in England have officially recognized the existence of a force, independent of muscular action, capable of moving bodies, of sometimes emitting melodious sounds, and which, is frequently directed with intelligence, and to draw the conclusion, from the similarity of the phenomena witnessed in England and in India, that the laws which govern them, in either country, are identical.

If some of the facts observed in India seem to be more wonderful than any which have formed the subject of experiment in England (I speak of the latter more particularly on account of the scientific endorsement they have received), the two following reasons may be given:

It is very possible that the Hindus, in addition to the real force they possess, also display a skill so great that it is difficult to detect them in any act of deception.

Perhaps, too, as they have been in possession, for several

[p. 224]

thousand years, of this special force, they have discovered the laws which the Englishmen were unable to formulate, though they had proved the existence of the force itself.

It would follow therefrom that the discovery of the laws in question may have led to a more marked and decided progress in the production of these phenomena.

With these remarks, and without guaranteeing their scientific value, we will continue our account of the extraordinary manifestations which the Brahmins attribute to superior spirits, and which they hold to be a part of their religion..

We shall continue also, however, to indicate the efforts made by us to test them, as far as we were able. The accounts, as we have said before, are taken from our notes of travel in upper Bengal and the Himalaya Valleys. We have only omitted the descriptive portions and such facts as are of no general importance, being wholly personal.

     
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 225]

  

CHAPTER V.

  

THE BRONZE VASE--MUSICAL ACCOMPANIMENTS.

"In view of the strange phenomena which succeed each other so rapidly, and which are as yet unexplained," says the learned Mr. Crookes, in the article to which we have referred, "I confess that it is difficult to avoid speaking of them in language of a somewhat sensational character."

 

While the incomparable light of a tropic sun and the splendors of Indian scenery form a natural and appropriate setting for these phenomena, and heighten their effect, they make it more difficult, however, for us to avoid the mistake pointed out by the eminent chemist of the Royal Society of London. Still, we think that it is possible to select words that shall express facts without making them more marvellous than they really are, and that shall simply and accurately describe the phenomena as they actually occurred.

We made no attempt to repeat the series of experiments of which we gave an account in the last chapter, but we lost no opportunity, during our long abode in the French possessions in India, and the different voyages we made in that vast country, of attentively observing any manifestations that bore any relation to that subject.

 

Leaving Chandernagor on the 3d of January, 1866, in a dingui, which is a sort of boat peculiar to that country, provided with a small cabin, I arrived at Benares, the Holy City, a fortnight afterward.

[p. 226]

Two servants accompanied me, a cansama, [*1] or valet-de-chambre, and a metor, whose duty it was to prepare my meals.

The crew consisted of a cercar, or head boatman, and six macouas, or rowers, belonging to the caste of fishermen.

Shortly before sunset one evening we were lying off the staircase of Gath near the celebrated pagoda of Siva. It is impossible to describe the spectacle that met my eyes.

"Few cities," says E. Roberts, "no matter how magnificent, are so grand and imposing in appearance as Benares."

When the watchful traveller ascends the Ganges his approach to the great city is first announced by the appearance of the minarets, whose towers, rising above the heavy masses of the surrounding palaces, are scattered in ran apparently disorderly, though picturesque manner, along the crooked banks of the river, for about a couple of leagues.

It is impossible to resist the impression made by the magnificent panorama presented by such a multitude of temples, towers, long arcades supported by columns, elevated quays, and terraces whose balustrades stand out in strong relief, amid the luxuriant foliage of baobab, tamarind, and banana trees; and which, covered here and there with clusters of flowers of various shades, appearing among the heavily carved buildings, rise majestically above gardens, beautifully situated among spacious courts.

The absence of any regular plan, the different styles of architecture, the mingling of the austere and solemn with the light and fantastic, give an odd appearance to some parts of the scene, but its effect as a whole is magnificent, and most of the details possess a beauty of which it is impossible to give any conception.

[p. 227]

The gaths, which are a sort of monument composed of four columns united by a single cornice, and which are situated at the top of the gigantic stairs, whose bottom steps are bathed in the waters of the Ganges, are the only quays possessed by the old city, which was the ancient Massy of the earliest rajahs. From the rising to the setting of the sun they are covered by coolies loading and unloading the small vessels that traverse the Ganges in every direction, bringing to market in upper Bengal all the merchandise of India and Asia.

As I ordered the cercar to moor the boat to the gath of Siva a circumstance struck me with astonishment. The Hindus and Mussulmans who, time out of mind, have been so deeply divided by their old enmity toward each other in the south of India, where they are an insignificant minority of the whole population, were performing their ablutions together promiscuously at the feet of the gaths of Benares.

Though the followers of the Prophet have always fought against idolatry with fire and sword, until the reign of Aurengzeb, they always respected the sacred city of their conquered foe, which seemed to inspire them with a mysterious terror.

The Brahmins claimed that Benares had been built by Siva, in order to serve as an asylum to the righteous, when the earth should be overrun by crime and sorrow; and that it would never experience any of those vicissitudes to which all earthly things are subject.

Aurengzeb, to humiliate their pride, destroyed one of their oldest and most venerable pagodas, and erected in its stead the splendid mosque that bears his name, whose slender spires, covered with leaves of gold, inform travellers that the city is at hand, long before they can see it. To-day, numerous Mussulman temples rise by the side of Hindu pagodas, and the Brahmins witness, without being able to prevent it, but with horror that they are powerless

[p. 228]

to conceal, the slaughter of cattle for sacrificial or culinary purposes in the holy city, which had been polluted by the killing of no animal since the Mogul invasion.

In spite of the vandalism which has destroyed some of the oldest and handsomest monuments in India, and although in other countries subject to their laws the Mussulmans have used every means and shrunk from nothing in order to convert the Hindus to the faith of the Prophet, the Mogul sovereigns always used the largest tolerance at Benares for the religious beliefs, manners, and usages of their conquered foe. It is for this reason, no doubt, that the two nations are on the best of terms in this part of Bengal. However, until I had seen it I would never have believed that the Mussulmans and Hindus would ever consent to perform their religious ablutions in the same place.

In the south of India, a Mussulman who should bathe in the sacred tank of a pagoda would be put to death on the spot.

When I arrived at Benares, I intended to remain there a couple of months. That was by no means too long a stay, in view of the inquiries I desired to make regarding the antiquities of the country, but it was too long to put up at a hotel or bungalow. I therefore determined to hire a house of my own and to go to housekeeping at once. To have a home of one's own in the East, and especially in the far East, is almost one of the first necessaries of life.

I was about sending my cansama upon a voyage of discovery, when the Peishwa, a Mahratta prince at Benares with whom I had become acquainted through the Rajah at Chandernagor, hearing of my arrival, sent to offer me apartments in the magnificent seven storied palace owned by him upon the banks of the Ganges, to the left of the celebrated mosque of Aurengzeb.

It is no uncommon thing for the princes and rajahs of

[p. 229]

[paragraph continues] Hindustan, although they often reside at a great distance from Benares, to build houses in that city, to which they resort during the festivities incident to the celebration of their birthday, and to which they retire in the evening of life, when, weary of the world, they desire to end their days, according to the laws of Manu, in the observance of their religious duties and in the practice of austerity.

According to their religious belief, those who die in the Holy City are not obliged to go through any further transformations, but their souls immediately ascend to the abode of Brahma and are absorbed in the great soul.

Numerous pilgrims daily arrive from all parts of India, who come to perform, either on their own account, or on behalf of wealthy persons who employ and pay them for that purpose, devotional exercises, upon the banks of the sacred river, whose waters are nowhere else considered so propitious as at the feet of the Holy City.

Some bring the bones of Rajahs or other distinguished personages, whose families are able to afford the expense, which are collected after being burnt upon the funeral pyre in little bags which they are instructed to throw into the Ganges. The supreme hope of the Hindu is to die upon the banks of that river, or to transport his remains thither.

To this latter belief I was indebted, during my stay at Benares, for a meeting with the most extraordinary Fakir, perhaps, that I had ever encountered in India. He came from Trivanderam, near Cape Comorin, in the extreme south of Hindustan, and his mission was to take charge of the remains of a rich Malabar, belonging to the caste of commoutys (merchants). The Peishwa, whose family was originally from the South, and who was in the habit of extending hospitality to pilgrims from Travencor, Maissour, Tandjaor, and the old Mahratta country, in the buildings attached to his palace, had found lodgings for him in a small thatched cottage upon the very banks of

[p. 230]

the river in which he had to perform his ablutions, for the next three weeks, in honor of the dead. He had been there a fortnight already before I heard of his arrival. His name was Covindasamy.

After assuring myself of his consent, I had him brought to my apartment one day, at about noon, when the other occupants of the palace, on account of the extreme heat, were indulging in their noonday siesta.

The room in which I received him looked out upon the terrace, which in turn overlooked the Ganges, and was protected against the burning sun, by a movable tent made from woven fibres of vetivert. In the middle of the terrace there was a water-spout which fell in a fine shower into a marble basin and diffused a most delightful coolness.

I asked the Fakir if he wished to occupy any particular place, rather than another.

"As you please," he answered.

I asked him to go out upon the terrace, which was much lighter than the room, and where I would have a better opportunity to watch him.

"Will you allow me to put to you a single question?" said I, when be had assumed a squatting position upon the ground.

"I am listening to you."

"Do you know whether any power is developed in you, when you perform these phenomena? Did you ever feel any change take place in your brain or any of your muscles?"

"It is not a natural force that acts. I am but an instrument. I evoke the ancestral spirits, and it is they who manifest their power."

I have questioned a multitude of Fakirs in relation to this matter, and they have nearly all made the same answer. They look upon themselves only as intermediaries between this world and the invisible spirits. Observing

[p. 231]

that he entertained the same belief, I dropped the subject in order that Covindasamy might go on with his performances. The Fakir was already in position with both hands extended toward an immense bronze vase full of water. Within five minutes the vase commenced to rock to and fro upon its base, and approach the Fakir gently and with a regular motion. As the distance diminished, metallic sounds escaped from it, as if some one had struck it with a steel rod. At certain times the blows were so numerous and quick that they produced a sound similar to that made by a hail-storm upon a metal roof.

I asked Covindasamy if I could give directions, and he consented without hesitation.

The vase, which was still under the performer's influence, advanced, receded, or stood still, according to my request.

At one time, at my command, the blows changed into a continuous roll like that of a drum; at another, on the contrary, they succeeded each other with the slowness and regularity of the ticking of a clock.

I asked to have the blows struck only every ten seconds, and I compared them with the progress of the second hand upon the face of my watch.

Then loud, sharp strokes were heard, for a minute and two-thirds.

Upon the table of the drawing-room attached to my apartments, stood one of those music-boxes of which the Hindus are so fond, and which the Peishwa had no doubt procured from Calcutta. I had it brought out upon the terrace by my cansama, and I asked to have the blows struck upon the vase so as to accompany any air which the instrument might perform.

I then wound up the box in the usual way, and pressed the spring of the clock-work, without knowing what air it would play. A regular whirlwind of notes was the result, and the box played, in time designedly accelerated, no doubt, the tune of Robin of the Wood."

[p. 232]

I listened in the direction of the vase, and quick, sharp strokes accompanied the tune, with the regularity of the baton of an orchestra leader. The air had scarcely finished when I again pressed the spring, and the blows moderated their pace to keep time to the march from the Prophete, which they accompanied exactly.

All this was done without fuss, or parade, or mystery of any kind, upon a terrace of a few yards square. The vase thus put in motion, could hardly, when empty, have been moved by two men. It was hollowed out like a cup, and was so situated as to receive the falling jet of water from the fountain before spoken of. It was used for the morning ablutions, which, in India, are almost equal to a regular bath.

What was the force that moved this mass? that is the question.

I repeated these various experiments a second time, and they were renewed with like order and regularity.

The Fakir, who had neither changed his position, nor left his place, then stood up, and rested the tips of his fingers, for a short time, upon the edge of the vase. It soon began to rock to and fro in regular time, from left to right, gradually accelerating its speed; its base, which rose and fell alternately on either side, made no sound upon the stuccoed pavement.

But what surprised me most was to see that the water remained stationary in the vase, as if there were a strong pressure that prevented its regaining its equilibrium, which the motion of the vessel containing it had disturbed.

Three times during these oscillations the vase rose a distance of seven to eight inches completely from the ground, and, when it fell to the pavement again, it did so without any perceptible shock.

The performance had already lasted several hours, during which I had taken copious and careful notes, and had also taken the precaution to have each phenomenon repeated

[p. 233]

in a different manner, when the sun, which was sinking below the horizon, warned us that it was time for me to commence my usual excursion among the venerable monuments and ruins of ancient Kassy, which was the centre of the religious power of the Brahmins when, after their contest with the rajahs, they had lost their temporal power--as well as for the Fakir to prepare himself in the temple of Siva, by the usual prayers, for the ablutions and funeral ceremonies which he was obliged to perform every evening, upon the banks of the sacred river.

Upon taking his departure the Fakir promised to return every day, at the same hour, as long as he should remain at Benares.

The poor man was very glad to have met me. I had resided for many years in the south of India, and knew the beautiful and sonorous language of the country of Bravida, [*1] which no one else understood at Benares. He had now some one to talk to about this wonderful land and its ancient ruins, its old pagodas and their incomparable vegetation, and its manuscripts, written with a pointed stick centuries before the sea had abandoned the salt deserts of Iran and Chaldea, or the mud deposits of the Nile had joined Lower Egypt to the plains of Memphis and Thebes.

Footnotes

^226:1 In Hindustanee the word cansama means the same as dobachy la Tamoul.

^233:1 The Tamoul.

     
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 234]

  

CHAPTER VI.

  

THE WATER-SPOUT--THE MAGIC STICK.

Covindasamy was punctual in the performance of his engagement.

Gazing at the extraordinary flood of light which the sun poured upon the surface of the Ganges as it rolled by, I stood absorbed in silent contemplation of the magnificent spectacle before me, when the Fakir, lifting one of the curtains which hung before the door leading into the verandah, walked in and sat upon the floor with his legs bent under him after the Hindu manner.

"Salam bere" (good day, sahib), said he, using his mother tongue.

"Salam tambi" (good day, friend), replied I, in the same idiom, "is the Bengal rice equal to the rice of Tandjaor?"

"The rice served to me in the Peishwa's palace at Benares is not equal to that which I gather about my hut at Trivanderam."

"What is the matter with it? is not the curry seed as pure upon the banks of the Ganges as upon the Malabar coast?"

"Listen! the cocoa-tree does not grow here and the water of the sacred river cannot take the place of the salt water. I am a man of the coast, as there is a tree of the coast, and we both of us die when we are separated from the ocean."

Just then a slight southern breeze like escaping steam swept in warm gusts over the drowsy city slumbering in the noon-day heat. The Fakir's eyes glistened.

[p. 235]

"It comes from my old home," said he, "do you not feel it? it brings to my mind so many recollections."

He sat a long while, thinking, no doubt, of the wide, gloomy forests on the Malabar coast, where the had passed his childhood, and of the mysterious caves of the pagoda at Trivanderam, where the Brahmins had instructed him in the art of evocation.

Suddenly he arose and walked toward the bronze vase which he had used the day before for the purpose of exhibiting his power. He imposed his hands upon the surface of the water which filled it to the very edge, but he did not touch it, however, and stood motionless in that position. As yet I had no idea of the phenomena that the intended to perform.

I do not know that he experienced any unusual difficulty on that day, but an hour had elapsed before either the water or the vase exhibited any evidence whatever of action on his part.

I had begun to despair of obtaining any result on that occasion, when the water began to be gently agitated. It looked as though its surface were ruffled by a slight breeze. Placing my hands upon the edge of the vase I experienced a slight feeling of coolness, which apparently arose from the same cause. A rose-leaf, thrown into the water, soon was blown or drifted against the other edge.

Meanwhile the Fakir stood motionless. His mouth was closed, and, strange to say, though it effectually disposed of any idea of trickery on his part, the waves were formed on the opposite side from that of the performer and gently broke against the edge of the vase on his side.

Gradually the motion of the waves became more violent. They made their appearance in every direction, as though the water were in a state of intense ebullition under the influence of a great heat. It soon rose higher than the Fakir's hands, and several waves rose to a height of one or two feet from the surface.

[p. 236]

I asked Covindasamy to take his hands away. Upon their removal the motion of the water gradually abated, without ceasing altogether, as in the case of boiling water from which the fire has been removed. On the other hand, whenever he placed his hands in their former position, the motion of the water was as great as ever.

The last portion of the seance was still more extraordinary.

The Hindu asked me to lend him a small stick. I handed him a wooden lead-pencil that had never been sharpened. He placed it in the water, and in a few minutes, by the imposition of his hands, the made it move in every direction, like a magnet in contact with an iron bar.

Placing his forefinger gently upon the middle of the pencil, so as not to affect its position upon the water, in a few minutes I saw the small piece of wood slowly descend beneath the surface, until it had reached the bottom of the vase.

Laying aside the question of skill or deception on the performer's part, without doing which it is impossible for me to make any positive statement either one way or the other, although under the circumstances it would have been extremely difficult for any attempt at imposture to have escaped my attention, it occurred to me that the Fakir, upon charging the small piece of wood with fluid, might perhaps have increased its weight, so as to make it heavier than water.

Though deeply sceptical with regard to spirits, I often wondered, whenever I saw an experiment of this kind, whether or not some natural force had not been brought into play, with which we were totally unacquainted.

I merely state the facts without further comment.

     
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 237]

  

CHAPTER VII.

  

PHENOMENA OF ELEVATION AND KNOCKING.

The Fakir's third visit was short, as he was to pass the night in prayer upon the banks of the sacred river, upon the occasion of a religions festival, and he had been invited to a funeral sraddha, which was to take place on the following day.

He came merely to inform me that he would be obliged to attend them, and was preparing to return to the small hut that the Peishwa had given him the use of, when, at my request, he consented to perform a phenomenon of elevation, which I had already seen other performers successfully accomplish, without, however, taking any particular notice of how they did it.

Taking an ironwood cane which I had brought from Ceylon, he leaned heavily upon it, resting his right hand upon the handle, with his eyes fixed upon the ground. He then proceeded to utter the appropriate incantations, which he had forgotten to favor me with the day previous.

From the elaborate preparation he made in my presence, I formed the opinion that this was to be only another instance of what I had always regarded as an acrobatic trick.

My judgment refuses, in fact, to attach any other name to such phenomena as this:

Leaning upon the cane with one hand, the Fakir rose gradually about two feet from the ground. His legs were crossed beneath him, and he made no change in his position, which was very like that of those bronze statues of

[p. 238]

Buddha that all tourists bring from the far East, without a suspicion that most of them come originally from English foundries.

For more than twenty minutes I tried to see how Covindasamy could thus fly in the face and eyes of all the known laws of gravity; it was entirely beyond my comprehension; the stick gave him no visible support, and there was no apparent contact between that and his body, except through his right hand.

When I dismissed him he informed me, upon leaving, that when the sacred elephants should strike the hour of midnight upon the copper gong in the pagoda of Siva, he would evoke the familiar spirits that protect the Franguys (or French), who would then manifest their presence in some manner in my bedroom.

The Hindus have a perfect understanding among themselves. In order to prevent any too obvious fraud, I sent my two servants to pass the night upon the dingui with the cercar and boatmen. The idea of the supernatural was naturally repugnant to my mind. My leanings were all the other way, but if the fact should occur as he predicted, I did not want to be too easily duped. For that reason I prepared to throw every obstacle in the Fakir's way.

The Peishwa's house was singularly constructed; all the windows overlooked the Ganges, and it contained seven large apartments, one above the other. All the rooms in each apartment opened upon covered galleries or terraces projecting over the quay. The mode of communication from one story to another was very curious. There was a single flight of steps which led from the bottom apartment to that immediately above. Upon crossing this second apartment, in the last room was a second flight of stairs which had no communication with the former, and which led to the story above, and so on up to the seventh story, which was reached by means of a movable stairway which could be raised by chains like a drawbridge.

[p. 239]

It was this seventh story, which was furnished in a style partly Oriental and partly European, which commanded a most splendid view and where the air was the coolest, that the Peishwa had set apart for his foreign guests.

As soon as it was dark, I examined all the different rooms in the apartment, in the most careful manner, and made sure that nobody was concealed in them. I then raised the drawbridge, and thus cut off all communication from the outside.

At the hour named I thought I heard two blows distinctly struck against the wall of my room. I walked toward the spot from which the sound seemed to come, when my steps were suddenly arrested by a sharp blow, which appeared to proceed from the glass shade that protected the hanging lamp against gnats and night butterflies. A few more sounds were heard at unequal intervals in the cedar rafters of the ceiling, and that was all. I walked toward the end of the terrace. It was one of those silvery nights, unknown in our more foggy lands. The vast flood of the sacred river rolled silently along at the foot of the sleeping city, upon one of whose steps the outlines of a human form were dimly profiled. It was the Fakir of Trivanderam, praying for the repose of his dead.

     
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 240]

  

CHAPTER VIII.

  

THE BAMBOO STOOL--AERIAL. FLOWERS--THE MYSTERIOUS PUNKAH.

I spent a part of the night, in reflection upon this subject, but I was not able to solve the riddle. Since I had lived in India I had often seen similar phenomena performed in my presence by others and I was able to bring a multitude of other facts quite as wonderful to the support of what was said and done by the Fakir of Trivanderam, but they did not prove, in my opinion, the truth of the theory with regard to the evocation of the ancestral shades. What I beg to direct the reader's attention to, more particularly because it is strictly true, is the fact that the means employed to produce these phenomena are not known to any person in India except the performers themselves.

I was impatiently expecting the Fakir's arrival, for I had long intended to accompany my investigations into the ancient doctrine regarding the Pitris with an inquiry into the material phenomena inseparably connected, in the Hindu mind, with their religious convictions. The willingness, added to the skill, of Covindasamy gave me an opportunity that might not soon occur again of reviewing these singular facts, which seem to have occupied the minds of the sacerdotal classes in ancient times in all their leisure moments, and which had been repeated in my presence more than a hundred times before. I spent a portion of the day in visiting the temples and mosques of Benares, and I did not not return to the palace until sunset.

[p. 241]

It was night, and I was waiting for the Fakir upon the terrace when he walked quietly in. People of that class have the privilege of entering the presence of the highest personages in Hindustan at any time, without previous announcement, and although they seldom make use of the privilege in the case of Europeans, I had, in the beginning of our acquaintance, allowed  to do as he pleased. This, added to my knowledge of his native tongue, had made him very friendly.

"Well," said I, "as soon as I perceived his entrance, "the sounds were heard as you predicted; the Fakir is very skilful."

"The Fakir is nothing," he answered, with the utmost coolness. "He utters the proper mentrams and the spirits hear them. It was the ancestral shades of the Franguy who paid him a visit."

"Have you power over the spirits of foreigners?"

"No one has power over the spirits."

"I did not express myself properly. How does it happen that the souls of the Franguys should grant the requests of a Hindu? They do not belong to your caste."

"There are no castes in the superior world."

"Then it was my ancestors who appeared last night?"

"You have said it."

Such was his invariable answer.

Whenever I questioned him upon this subject I carefully watched the expression of his face, to see if I could detect in his looks a smile or any other sign of incredulity, but he seemed to be sincere, and his face was calm and impenetrable.

Without being asked to do so, he then went on with his performances.

Taking a small bamboo stool that stood near, he sat down upon it in the Mussulman style with his legs crossed beneath him, and his arms folded across his chest. According to my instructions to my cansama, the terrace

[p. 242]

had been lighted a giorno, and I had made such preparations that nothing that occurred could possibly escape my attention.

As in my accounts of previous performances, I omit all the elaborate preparations by which they were accompanied, and the impression made upon my own mind, and confine myself strictly to what is essential.

At the end of a few minutes, during which he appeared to concentrate his attention upon the bamboo stool upon which he was sitting, it began to move noiselessly along the floor, by short jerks which made it advance about three or four inches every time. I watched the Hindu attentively, but he was as still and motionless as a statue.

The terrace was about seven yards long and as many wide. It took about ten minutes to traverse the whole distance, and when the stool had arrived at the end it began to move backward until it returned to its starting-place. The performance was repeated three times, and always successfully, unless the conditions were changed. I ought to say, however, that the Fakir's legs, which were crossed beneath him, were distant from the ground the whole height of the stool.

During the whole day the heat had been overpowering. The night breeze which springs up so regularly in those latitudes to cool the heated lungs, and which blows from the Himalaya Mountains, had not yet risen. The metor was moving, as fast as he could, by the aid of a rope of cocoa fibre above our heads, an enormous punkah, hanging from iron rods in the middle of the terrace, which also supported horizontally the vetivert curtains and surrounding matting.

The punkah is a sort of movable fan of rectangular form, which is fastened at both ends to the ceiling of the room. Set in motion by a servant specially engaged for that purpose, it imparts a factitious, though very agreeable, coolness to the atmosphere. The Fakir made use of this instrument for the performance of the second phenomenon.

[p. 243]

Taking the punkah rope from the metor's hands, he pressed it against his forehead with both hands, and sat down in a squatting position beneath the punkah, which soon began to move slowly over our heads, though Covindasamy had not made the slightest motion. It gradually increased its speed until it moved at a very rapid rate, as though it were driven by some invisible hand.

When the Fakir let go of the rope it continued to move, though at a gradually diminishing rate, and finally stopped altogether.

These two phenomena were repeated several times, and it was now quite late at night, but the Fakir was in a good humor, and before leaving he determined to give me another proof of his power.

Three vases of flowers, so heavy that none but a strong man could have lifted them (and then he could not have done so without an effort), stood at one end of the terrace. Selecting one, he imposed his hands upon it so as to touch the edge of the vase with the tips of his fingers. Without any apparent effort on his part it began to move to and fro upon its base as regularly as the pendulum of a clock. It soon seemed to me that the vase had left the floor, without changing its movement in the least degree, and it appeared to me to be floating in the air, going from right to left at the will of the Fakir.

I do not, it will be observed, speak of this phenomenon in positive terms, for I have always regarded it as caused by an illusion of the senses. To be candid, I must acknowledge that I have always been somewhat sceptical with regard to the phenomena performed by the Fakirs, but that especially, though I had often seen it performed under circumstances that seemed to render deception impossible, always appeared to me so strange that I was unable to resist the belief that some imposition, however elaborate or skilful, was being practised upon me.

     
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 244]

  

CHAPTER IX.

  

THE STATIONARY TABLE--A SHOWER OF KNOCKS--THE LITTLE MILL--FLYING FEATHERS--THE HARMONIFLUTE.

Covindasamy had only three days more to stay at Benares. I determined to devote our last meeting to experiments in magnetism and somnambulism. When I informed him of my intention he seemed to be surprised by these novel expressions, though I translated them as well as I could into the Tamoul language.

When I had made him understand the meaning attached to those words in Europe, he smiled and answered, in his usual way, that such phenomena were also produced by the Pitris, in addition to those I had already witnessed. It was not possible to hold any discussion with him upon that point. Without regard to his religious opinions, or to the causes to which he attributed his power, I merely asked him if he was willing to take part in experiments of that character.

"The Franguy," he answered, "has spoken to the Fakir in his native language. The Fakir can refuse him nothing."

Seeing that his reply was so satisfactory in this respect, I was encouraged to make another request.

"Will you allow me to-day," said I, "to indicate the phenomena that I wish you to perform, instead of leaving them to you?"

Although it seems highly improbable, in view of the peculiar circumstances of their occurrence, that the Fakir should have wade any preparations in advance for the

[p. 245]

performances which I have already described, or should have had any previous understanding with the servants, I was anxious, however, to ascertain whether Covindasamy would be able to produce any manifestations that he had no previous notice of.

"I will do as you please," said the Hindu, simply. This plan however, met the fate of many others. I spent so much time, and took so deep an interest in the Fakir's manifestations of spiritual force, that I had no opportunity to investigate the subject of his magnetic power.

I had often seen the performing Fakirs attach different objects to the ground, either, according to the explanation given me by an English major who had devoted much time and thought to questions of this class, by charging them with fluid in order to augment their specific gravity or in some other manner unknown to me. I determined to repeat the experiment. Taking a small stand of teak wood which I could lift without any effort with my thumb and forefinger, I placed it in the middle of the terrace, and asked the Fakir if he could not fix it there so that it could not be moved.

The Fakir, without the slightest hesitation, walked toward the small piece of furniture, and imposing both hands upon the top stood motionless in that position for nearly a quarter of an hour, at the end of which time he said to me, smiling:

The spirits have come and nobody can remove the table without their permission.

Feeling somewhat incredulous, I approached the table and took hold of it, as though I were going to lift it. It would not stir from the ground any more than if it had been sealed. I struggled harder, with the result that the fragile leaf there fastened came off in my hands.

I then took hold of the legs, which were united by a cross brace and which remained standing, but the result was the same. A thought then crossed my mind.

[p. 246]

Suppose, thought I, that these phenomena are produced by the Fakir's charging objects with some kind of fluid, and that a natural force is thus developed the laws of which we are as yet ignorant of, the supply of fluid with which they are charged must gradually lose its efficacy unless renewed by the operator, and in that case I shall soon be able to remove what is left of the table without any difficulty.

I asked the Fakir to go to the other end of the terrace, which he did with the utmost good humor imaginable. At the end of a few minutes I was able to handle the stand without any trouble whatever. It was evident, therefore, that there was a force of some kind or other; there was no other alternative unless I was willing to admit that I had been egregiously imposed upon, which would have been impossible, under the circumstances.

I should have had to devote some months to this experiment alone, if I had desired to test it scientifically. I had not sufficient time at my disposal to do so, and I merely describe it now, like all the rest, without expressing an opinion either one way or the other, as to means employed or the cause thereof.

"The Pitris have departed," said the Hindu, in explanation, "because their means of terrestrial communication was broken. Listen! they are coming back again."

As he uttered these words, he imposed his hands above one of those immense copper platters inlaid with silver such as are used by wealthy natives for dice playing, and almost immediately there ensued such a rapid and violent succession of blows or knocks that it might have been taken for a hail-shower upon a metal roof, and I thought I saw (the reader will observe that I do not express myself positively in this respect) a succession of phosphorescent lights (plain enough to be visible in broad daylight) pass to and fro across the platter in every direction.

[p. 247]

This phenomenon ceased or was repeated at the Fakir's pleasure.

I have already remarked that the apartments I occupied at the Peishwa's were furnished partly in the European and partly in the Oriental style. There was a multitude of fancy articles upon the etageres, such as windmills setting blacksmiths in motion, tin soldiers, and wooden houses from Nuremberg with those everlasting little green fir trees, from which many children obtain their earliest ideas of nature. The furniture was all cluttered up with objects of this nature; the most childish articles were mingled pell-mell with the most artistic, according to the fancies of the native servants. We need not laugh, however; a native of those countries could not look at three-quarters of the Chinese, Hindu, or Oceanic objects with which we proudly and ostentatiously decorate our dwellings, and keep a sober face. I bethought myself of a small mill which might be moved by a breath, which set several personages in motion. I pointed it out to Covindasamy and asked him if he could make it go without touching it.

In consequence of the imposition of his hands alone he set the mill in motion with great rapidity, at a rate which increased or diminished according to the distance at which the Fakir stood.

This was a very simple fact, but yet it made a great impression upon my mind, by reason of the improbability of any previous notice or preparation.

The following is another of the same character, but much more surprising.

Among the objects that composed the Peishwa's museum was a harmoniflute. By the aid of a small cord tied around the wooden square forming a portion of the bellows (a part of the instrument which, as everybody knows, is on the side opposite to that of the keys) I hung it from one of the iron bars of the terrace, in such a way that it swung in the air at about two feet from the ground,

[p. 248]

and I asked the Fakir if he could make it play without touching it.

Complying unhesitatingly with my request, he seized the cord by which the harmoniflute was suspended, between the thumb and forefinger of each hand and stood perfectly motionless and still. The harmoniflute soon began to be gently stirred, the bellows underwent an alternate movement of contraction and inflation, as though proceeding from some invisible hand, and the instrument emitted sounds which were perfectly plain and distinct, though of unusual length and not very harmonious it is true.

"Cannot you get a tune?" said I to Covindasamy.

"I will evoke the spirit of one of the old pagoda musicians," he answered with the greatest gravity.

I waited patiently.

The instrument had been silent a long while, not having made a sound since my request. It now began to move anew and first played a series of notes or chords like a prelude; it then bravely attacked one of the most popular airs on the Malabar coast.

Taitou moucouty conda
 Aroune cany pomele, etc.

("Bring jewels for the young maiden of Aroune, etc.)

As long as the piece lasted the Fakir stood perfectly still. He merely had hold, as I have already described, of the cord by which he was in communication with the harmoniflute.

Wishing to apply every test in my power, I kneeled down in order to observe the various movements of the instrument, and I saw, so that I am positively sure of what I say, unless I was misled by an illusion of the senses, the upward and downward motion of the keys, according to the requirements of the tune.

As before, I merely state the fact, and leave the reader to draw his own conclusions.

[p. 249]

Suppose that there was no illusion of the senses and no imposture used in the production of these manifestations--shall we, in that case, investigate their laws?

No! say the French scientists, who occupy an official station, a priori such folly is not worthy of an investigation.

Yes! answer the scientists of England, who are not less dignified, we have ascertained material facts, which are free from the suspicion of illusion or imposture. We are bound in honor to ascertain their laws and proclaim the truth.

Such is the state of the question.

On the one hand, negation under any circumstances; on the other, further investigation.

Our French savants--to call them by the name which they use among themselves--have never lost sight, as we see, of the traditions which have led to the rejection of all the great inventions by which the present century has been distinguished.

I have not taken a very active part in the discussion and that for an obvious reason. Anybody might say to me, if I attempted to formulate a law governing the facts which have come under my own observation:

Have you experimented scientifically regarding all the extraordinary facts described as having been performed by the Fakirs?

As I have had manufactured under my own supervision neither the weights nor scales nor vases nor tables nor any of the instruments used by the Fakirs, to this question I am bound to answer--scientifically no!

But, on the other hand, when I see the Fakirs often using articles belonging to myself and most frequently things which, in all probability, they had never seen or touched before, I say with Messrs Crookes, Huggins, Cox, and others--here are the facts for your investigation, science should know the grounds upon which they rest before rejecting or accepting them.

[p. 250]

At sunset Covindasamy was to perform his devotions upon the banks of the sacred river. It was near that hour now, and upon taking leave of me with the usual salaams he informed me that he could not come the next day.

As I expressed my regret, he answered me:

"To-morrow will be the twenty-first day since my arrival at Benares, and the mortuary ceremonies will then be concluded." The Fakir was to remain at prayer from one sunrise to another--a period of twenty-four hours. When his task was accomplished, and previous to his departure for Trivanderam, he promised to give me an entire day and night, for, said he, "you have been very kind, and with you I could speak the language that my old ama (mother) used to speak when she rocked me to sleep in a banana leaf. My mouth has long been closed." He often recurred to this subject, and always seemed much moved when he spoke of it.

I have never known a Hindu to speak of his mother without emotion.

As he was about stepping across the threshold of the terrace door he noticed a vase containing various feathers, taken from the most wonderful birds in India. He took up a handful, which he threw above his head high in the air. The feathers of course descended again soon, but the Fakir made passes beneath them as they fell, and whenever one came near him, it turned around quickly and ascended again with a spiral movement, until stopped by the vetivert carpet, which answered the purpose of a movable roof. They all went in the same direction, but after a moment, in obedience to the laws of gravity, they dropped again, but before they had travelled half the distance to the ground they resumed their ascending movement and were stopped as before by the matting, where they remained.

A final tremor was followed by a slight manifestation of downward tendency, but the feathers soon remained stationary.

[p. 251]

[paragraph continues] If any one had seen them standing out in sharp relief against the golden background of the straw matting, in brilliant and decided colors of every possible shade, he would have said that they were placed there by the pencil of some accomplished artist.

As soon as the Fakir had disappeared they fell flat to the ground. I left them a long while as they lay strewn upon the floor, as a proof, of which I felt the need, that I had not been misled by some mental hallucination.

Night had no sooner come with its refreshing coolness, than I embarked upon the dingui which lay at the quay, and ordered the cercar to let the boat drift down the river with the current. Influenced, in spite of myself, by the incomprehensible phenomena which I had just witnessed, I felt as though I wanted to change my surroundings, instead of groping my way dreamily among the metaphysical speculations of the past. I also felt the need of the pleasanter sensations always accompanying a night upon the Ganges, soothed by the song of the Hindu boatmen and the distant cry of savage beasts.

     
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 252]

  

CHAPTER X.

  

SAND DRAWING--THE METOR AND THE BUCKET OF WATER--LOSS OF VOICE--MIND READING--READING IN A CLOSED BOOK--AERIAL MELODY--THE FLYING PALM--LEAF--ELEVATION OF THE FAKIR.

Covindasamy had promised me that before he left to return to Trivanderam the would employ all the power at his command, or, to use an expression for which he alone is responsible, he would appeal to all the Pitris who assisted him, and would show me something wonderful that I would never forget.

On the day in question we were to have two sittings, one in the broad light of day, like those which I have previously described, and one at night, but I was to be free to illuminate the place in which the experiments were to be held as much as I pleased.

The gath of Siva was hardly gilded by the first rays of the rising sun when the Hindu, whose mission was now at an end, sent in his name by my cansama. He was afraid that he would find me asleep.

"Saranai-aya" (greeting, sahib), said he, upon entering. To-morrow is the day of the Fakir's return to the land of his ancestors.

"My best wishes will accompany you," answered I. "I hope that you will find that your abode has been respected by the evil spirits during your absence."

As usual, the Fakir made no attempt to continue the conversation. He immediately sat down upon the ground, after the ordinary salutation, and lost no time in beginning his performances.

[p. 253]

He had brought with him a small bag of the finest sand, which he proceeded to empty upon the floor and level with his hand, in such a way as to form a surface of about half a square yard.

When he had done this, he asked me to sit at a table opposite him, with a sheet of paper and a pencil.

Having asked for a small piece of wood, I threw him the handle of a penholder, which he gently placed upon the bed of sand.

"Listen!" said he. "I am about to evoke the Pitris. When you see the article which you have just given me stand upright, one end only being in contact with the ground, you are at liberty to trace upon the paper any figures you please, and you will see an exact copy of them in the sand."

He then extended both hands before him horizontally, and proceeded to repeat the sacred formulas of evocation.

In .a few minutes the wooden rod gradually rose as he had said, and at the same moment I proceeded to move my pencil over the sheet of paper before me, tracing the strangest figures in the world entirely at random. The piece of wood at once imitated every motion, and I saw the whimsical figures that I had been tracing appear successively in the sand.

When I stopped, the improvised pencil stopped--when I went on, it followed me.

The Fakir had not changed his position, and there was no apparent contact between him and the piece of wood.

Wishing to know whether he could see, from his position, the movements of the pencil, as I drew it over the sheet of paper, which however would not have explained how he could transfer the figures without being in contact with the sand upon which they appeared, I left the table, and placing myself in an identically similar position to that of Covindasamy, I was able to satisfy myself that

[p. 254]

it was totally impossible for him to ascertain what I was doing.

I then compared the figures with each other, and I found that they were exactly alike.

Having levelled the sand again, the Fakir said to me:

"Think of a word in the language of the gods"--the Sanscrit.

"Why that language particularly?" I answered.

"Because the Pitris use that immortal medium of speech more easily than any other. The impure are not allowed to use it."

I was not in the habit of disputing his religious convictions, and therefore said nothing.

The Hindu then extended his hands as before. The magic pencil began to move, and, gradually rising, wrote unhesitatingly the following word:

Pouroucha!

(The celestial generator).

That was actually the word that I had thought of.

"Think of a whole phrase," continued the Fakir.

I have done so," I answered.

The pencil then wrote upon the sand the following words:

Adicete Veikountam Haris!

(Vischnou sleeps upon Mount Eikonta).

"Can the spirit by whom you are inspired give me the 243d sloca of the fourth book of Manu?" inquired I of Covindasamy.

I had hardly expressed the wish, when the pencil proceeded to gratify it, and wrote the following words one after the other, letter by letter, before my eyes:

Darmapradanam pouroucham tapasa' hatakilvisam
 paralokam nayaty acou basouantam Kacaririnam.

[p. 255]

The following is a translation of this remarkable stanza, which was correctly given as indicated:

"The man, the end of all whose actions is virtue, and all whose sins are wiped out by acts of piety and sacrifices, reaches the celestial mansions, radiant with light and clothed with a spiritual form."

 

Finally, as a last experiment, placing my hands upon a closed book containing extracts from hymns in the Rig-Veda, I asked for the first word of the fifth line of the twenty-first page. I received the following answer:

Devadatta.

(Given by a god.)

Upon comparison I found it to be correct.

"Will you now put a mental question?" said the Fakir. I acquiesced by a simple movement of the head, and the following word was written upon the sand:

Vasundara.

(The Earth.)

I had asked, "Who is our common mother?"

I have no explanation or statement to make with regard to these facts.

Whether it is purely a matter of skill or whether the performers are really inspired--that is a question which I do not undertake to decide. I only describe what I have seen and assert that the circumstances under which the facts occurred are accurately related. Materially speaking, I do not think it possible that any fraud could have been committed.

[p. 256]

The first part of this sitting was somewhat long. Y asked the Fakir to discontinue his performances for a few minutes, during which I walked to the end of the terrace, whither he followed me.

It might have been ten o'clock in the forenoon.

The waters of the Ganges shone like a mirror in the bright light of a hot day. Upon our left lay a large garden, in the midst of which there stood a well, from which a metor was unconcernedly drawing water, which he poured into a bamboo pipe, which in its turn supplied a bathing-room.

Covindasamy imposed his hands in the direction of the well, and the result was that, though the poor metor pulled upon the rope with all his might, it would no longer slip through the pulley.

When a Hindu meets with any impediment in his work, he at once attributes any obstacle that he cannot overcome to evil spirits, and immediately proceeds to chant all the magical incantations with which he is acquainted, for the knowledge of which he has often paid a high price.

The poor metor, of course, could not let slip so favorable an opportunity to use the knowledge he had obtained; but he had hardly chanted a few words in that sharp nasal tone which is so lacerating to the European ear, but which is inflicted upon it everywhere in the East, and particularly in the far East, in the name of music, when his voice died away in his throat and he found it impossible, though he made the strangest contortions, to articulate a single word.

After looking at this curious sight for a few moments, the Fakir dropped his hands and the metor recovered the use of his speech, while the rope performed its office as before.

Upon returning to the scene of our late experiments, I found the heat to be overpowering and so remarked to

[p. 257]

the Fakir, who did not seem to hear me, absorbed as he was, apparently, in his own reflections. I had forgotten the remark that I had incidentally let drop, when one of those palm-leaf fans that Hindu servants use to cool the air in rooms where there is no punkah, flew up from the table, where it had been lying, and gently fanned my face.

I observed that, although it moved very slowly, the air was unusually cool and refreshing. At the same time, the atmosphere seemed to be filled with the melodious sounds of a human voice, which had nothing Hindu about it, which I thought I heard, like those faint songs that huntsmen on the mountains often hear rising from the valleys at twilight.

The palm leaf finally returned to the table and the sounds ceased. I wondered whether there had not been some illusion of my senses. As the Fakir was about to leave me, to go to his breakfast and obtain a few hours rest, of which he stood in urgent need, having had no food nor sleep for the last twenty-four hours, he stopped in the embrasure of the door leading from the terrace to the outside stairs, and, crossing his arms upon his chest, lifted himself up gradually, without any apparent support or assistance, to the height of about ten to twelve inches.

I was able to determine the distance exactly by means of a point of comparison which I had fixed upon during the continuance of the phenomenon. Behind the Fakir's back there was a silken hanging, which was used as a portiere, striped in gold and white bands of equal width. I Noticed that the Fakir's feet were on a level with the sixth band. At the commencement of his ascension I had seized my chronometer; the entire time from the moment when the Fakir commenced to rise until he touched the ground again, was more than eight minutes. He remained perfectly still, at the highest point of elevation for nearly five minutes.

As Covindasamy was waking his parting salaam, I asked

[p. 258]

if he could repeat the last phenomenon whenever he pleased.

"The Fakir," answered he, emphatically, "can lift himself up as high as the clouds."

"What is the source of his power?" I do not know why I asked him the question, as he had already told me, more than twenty times, that he did not regard himself as anything more than an instrument in the hands of the Pitris.

He answered me with the following lines:

Swadyaye nityayoukta' syat
 Ambarad avatarati deva'.

"He should be in constant communication with heaven, and a superior spirit should descend therefrom."

     
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 259]

  

CHAPTER XI.

  

SPONTANEOUS VEGETATION.

Huc, the missionary, in his account of his travels in Thibet, gives a description of a phenomenon similar to that which I am about to relate, and which I can only look upon as a cunning trick.

I should not have mentioned it, perhaps, in the present work, but it forms an essential part, so to speak, of the stock in trade of those believers in the Pitris, who deal more particularly in external manifestations, and, as a faithful historian, I am loath to omit any of their curious practices.

Among the extraordinary claims advanced by the Fakirs, is one that they can directly influence the growth of plants, and that they can so hasten it as to accomplish in a few hours what usually takes several months or even years.

I had already seen this phenomenon performed by itinerant magicians a number of times, but, as I had always regarded it merely as a successful fraud, I had omitted to record the circumstances under which it occurred.

Absurd as it seemed, as Covindasamy, who was really a man of remarkable power, proposed to repeat the various phenomena which I had already seen performed by others at different times, I determined to watch him so that he could do nothing which should escape my notice.

He had promised to give inc two hours more of his time--from three to five--previous to the night sitting. I determined to employ them as proposed,

[p. 260]

The Fakir suspected nothing, and I thought he would be highly surprised when, upon his arrival, I told him what I intended to.

"I am entirely at your service," said he, in his usual simple way.

I was somewhat disconcerted by his assurance, but I continued:

"Will you allow me to choose the earth, the vessel, and the seed, which you are to make grow before my eyes?"

"The vessel and the seed, yes; but the earth must be taken from a nest of carias."

These little white ants, who build, for shelter, small hills, often reaching a height of nine or a dozen yards, are very common in India, and there was no difficulty, whatever, in procuring a little of the earth which they prepare very skilfully for their purpose.

I told my cansama to have a flower-pot of the usual size filled with the earth required, and to bring me, at the same time, some seeds of different sorts.

The Fakir asked him to break the earth between a couple of stones, as it was only to be obtained in pieces, almost as hard as old building material.

It was well he did so, as that was an operation that we never could have performed in our rooms, without a great deal of trouble.

In less than a quarter of art hour my servant had returned with the articles required. I took them from his hands and dismissed him, not wishing to leave him in communication with Covindasamy.

To the latter I handed the flower-pot filled with a whitish earth, which must have been entirely saturated with that milky fluid, which the caria secrete and deposit upon every particle of earth, however small, which they use for building purposes.

When the Fakir deemed that it was in proper condition, he asked me to give him the seed that I had selected, as

[p. 261]

well as about a foot and a half of some white cloth. I chose at random a papaw seed from among those which my cansama had brought, and before handing it to him, I asked him if he would allow me to mark it. Being answered in the affirmative, I made a slight cut in its outer skin. It was very much like the kernel of a gourd, except in color, which was a deep brown. I gave it to him, with a few yards of mosquito cloth.

"I shall soon sleep the sleep of the spirits," said Covindasamy; "you must promise me that you will neither touch me personally nor the flower-pot."

I made the promise required.

He then planted the seed in the earth, which was now in a state of liquid mud, thrusting his seven-knotted stick--which, being a sign of his initiation, he never laid aside--into one corner of the vessel, and using it as a prop to hold up the piece of muslin which I had just given him. After hiding from sight in this manner the object upon which he was to operate, he sat down upon the floor, stretched both hands horizontally above him, and gradually fell into a deep cataleptic sleep.

I had promised that I would not touch him, and at first I could not tell whether his sleep was real or simulated; but when I saw, at the end of half an hour, that he had not stirred, I was forced to believe the evidence of my own senses. No man, however strong he might be, was able, except in that condition, to hold both his arms stretched horizontally before him for the space of even ten minutes.

An hour passed by, and no motion of the muscles indicated that he was alive. With his body almost entirely naked, his skin polished and glistening in the heat, and open and staring eyes, the Fakir looked like a bronze statue in a position of mystical evocation.

At first, I took my place opposite him, so that I could see everything that was going on, but he looked at me in

[p. 262]

a manner that soon became unendurable. His eyes seemed to be half dead, but they were filled at the same time with magnetic influences. At one time, everything seemed to be in a whirl, and the Fakir himself appeared to take part in the dance that was going on around me. In order to break loose from the effects of this hallucination of the senses, caused, no doubt, by looking at one object too attentively, I left the seat that I had been occupying, without, however, losing sight of Covindasamy, who was as motionless as a corpse. I took a seat at the end of the terrace, alternately directing my attention to the course of the Ganges and to the Fakir, that I might not be exposed to too direct and steady an influence from him.

I had been waiting for a couple of hours, and the sun was fast sinking below the horizon, when a low sigh startled me. The Fakir had recovered possession of his senses.

He made signs to me to approach. Removing the muslin that hid the flower-pot, he then pointed out to me a young stalk of papaw, fresh and green, and nearly eight inches high.

Anticipating my thoughts, he thrust his fingers into the ground, which, meanwhile, had parted with nearly all of its moisture, and carefully taking up the young plant, he showed me, upon one of the two cuticles still adhering to the roots, the cut that I had made two hours previously.

Was it the same seed and the same cut? I have only one answer to make. I noticed no substitution. The Fakir had not left the terrace; I had not lost sight of him. When he came, he did not know what I was going to ask. It was impossible for him to conceal a plant in his clothes, as he was almost entirely naked, and, at any rate, he could not have told, in advance, that I would select a papaw seed, among thirty different kinds that my cansama had brought.

As may be imagined, I can state nothing more positively

[p. 263]

regarding a fact of this nature. There are cases where reason refuses its assent, even in view of phenomena that can only be accounted for upon the supposition of delusion, though there is no evidence to that effect.

After enjoying my surprise for a few moments, the Fakir said to me, with an ill-concealed movement of pride:

"If I had continued my evocations longer, the papaw tree would have borne flowers in eight days, and fruit in fifteen.

Bearing in mind the accounts of Hue, the missionary, as well as various other phenomena of the same character which I had myself witnessed in the Carnatic, I said in reply that there were other performers who accomplished the same results in two hours.

"You are mistaken," said the Hindu; "in the manifestations you speak of, there is an apport, as it is called, of fruit trees by the spirits. What I have just shown you is really spontaneous vegetation; but the pure fluid, under the direction of the Pitris, never was able to produce the three phases of germination, flowering, and fruitage in a single day."

It was near the hour of ablutions; in other words, it was near sunset. The Fakir hastened to leave, engaging to meet me, for the last time, at ten o'clock that evening, when the remainder of the night was to be devoted to phenomena of apparition.

There is one fact, however, which I ought not to omit, and which may be of service in arriving at a satisfactory explanation, and that is a fact with which those who live in India are perfectly familiar.

There are a multitude of kitchen plants (I have seen the experiment tried myself a score of times) which, when put at dawn into moist soil, and exposed to the favorable influence of a sun which does wonders, appear above ground between noon and one o'clock, and at six o'clock, or the close of day, are already nearly half an inch high.

[p. 264]

On the other hand, I am bound also to say, in justice to the Fakir, at least fifteen days are necessary to the germination of a papaw seed.

We have dwelt long enough, however, on a fact which many will reject as a delusion, and which cannot be explained by any process of pure reasoning, excluding the hypothesis of fraud.

     
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 265]

  

APPARITIONS.

__________________

  

CHAPTER I.

  

MYSTERIOUS HANDS--THE PRODUCTION OF FLOWERS, CROWNS, ETC.--LETTERS OF FIRE--THE SPECTRE OF A PRIEST OF BRAHMA--THE PHANTOM MUSICIAN.

Looking over my notes of travel, which were jotted down the next day, I see that they were written under the influence of the great excitement caused by the strange scenes that I had witnessed the day previous. I have simply undertaken to narrate facts as they occurred. If I should transcribe them as written, in the present work, I should be untrue to the character I have assumed.

If the reader is at all curious as to these singular manners and practices, he will find them described elsewhere [*1] in all their details. As in the case of previous phenomena, my office is simply to report the facts that occurred during that surprising evening.

At the appointed hour Covindasamy quietly entered my room.

"Is not the Fakir fatigued by three weeks of watching and prayer?" said I, greeting him in the most friendly manner.

"The Fakir's body is never fatigued. It is a slave, whose only duty is obedience," answered the Hindu, sententiously.

Before entering my apartments, He had divested himself

[p. 266]

of the small piece of cloth, called the langouty, about four inches wide, which usually composed his only garment, and had deposited it upon one of the steps. He was entirely naked when he came in, and his seven. knotted stick was fastened to a lock of his long hair.

"Nothing impure" said he, "should come in contact with the body of the evocator, if he wishes to reserve his power of communication with the spirits unimpaired.

Whenever I met a Fakir of this character J wondered whether those whom the Greeks saw upon the banks of the Indus and whom they called gymnosofistai, or naked monks, did not belong to the same class.

My bedroom was on a level with the terrace. I set apart both rooms for our experiments, and carefully shut and fastened all the outside doors by means of which they were accessible.

The terrace was securely closed by its movable ceiling and curtains of vetivert matting. There was no opening from the outside, and nobody could gain admission except through my bedroom.

In the centre of each room there was a cocoa oil-lamp, protected by a glass shade of the clearest crystal, which hung from a bronze chain and diffused a soft light, sufficiently intense, however, to enable any one to read the smallest type in the remotest corner of the room.

All Hindu houses contain small copper furnaces which are kept constantly supplied with burning coals, on which are burned from time to time a few pinches of a perfumed powder, consisting of sandal wood, iris root, incense and myrrh.

The Fakir placed one of these in the centre of the terrace, and deposited by its side a copper platter filled with the fragrant powder; having done so, he took his seat upon the floor in his usual posture, with his arms folded across his chest, and commenced a long incantation in an unknown tongue.

[p. 267]

When he was through with the recitation of his .entrains, he remained in the same position without making a movement, his left hand resting upon his heart, and his right hand leaning upon his seven-knotted stick.

I thought that he was going to drop into a cataleptic sleep as he had done the day before, but such was not the case. From time to time, he pressed his hand against his forehead, and seemed to make passes as though to relieve his brain.

Involuntarily, I experienced a sudden shock. A slightly phosphorescent cloud seemed to have formed in the middle of my chamber, from which semblances of hands appeared to go and come with great rapidity. In a few minutes, several hands seemed to have lost their vaporous appearance and to resemble human hands; so much so, indeed, that they might have been readily mistaken for the latter. Singular to relate, while some became, as it were, more material, others became more luminous. Some became opaque, and cast a shadow in the light, while others became so transparent that an object behind them could be distinctly seen.

I counted as many as sixteen.

Asking the Fakir if I could touch them, I had hardly expressed a wish to that effect, when one of them, breaking away from the rest, flew toward me and pressed my outstretched hand. It was small, supple and moist, like the hand of a young woman.

"The spirit is present, though one of its hands is alone visible," said Covindasamy. "You can speak to it, if you wish."

I smilingly asked whether the spirit to whom that charming hand belonged would give me something in the nature of a keepsake.

Thereupon, in answer to my request, I felt the hand fade away in my own. I looked; it was flying toward a bouquet of flowers, from which it plucked a rosebud, which it 'threw at my feet and vanished.

[p. 268]

For nearly two hours a scene ensued which was calculated to set my head in a whirl. At one time, a hand brushed against my face or fanned it with a fan. At another, it would scatter a shower of flowers all over the room, or would trace in the air, in characters of fire, words which vanished as soon as the last letter was written.

Some of these words were so striking that I wrote them down hastily with a pencil.

Divyavapour gatwa.

Meaning in Sanscrit--"I have clothed myself with a fluidic (fluidique) body."

Immediately afterward, the hand wrote:

Atmanam creyasa yoxyatas
 Dehasya 'sya vimocanant.

"You will attain happiness when you lay aside this perishable body."

Meanwhile, flashes of genuine lightning seemed to dart across both rooms.

Gradually, however, all the hands disappeared. The cloud from which they came seemed to vanish by degrees as the hands became more material.

In the place where the last hand had disappeared, we found a garland of those yellow flowers with penetrating fragrance which the Hindus use in all their ceremonies.

I offer no explanation--I merely relate what occurred--leaving the reader at perfect liberty to draw any conclusion that he may see fit.

I can state positively, however, that the doors of both rooms were closed, that I had the keys in my pocket, and that the Fakir had not changed his position.

To these phenomena succeeded two others, that were, perhaps, more surprising still.

[p. 269]

Shortly after the hands had disappeared, and while the Fakir was still going on with his evocations, a cloud similar to the first, but more opaque and of a brighter color, hovered near the little furnace, which, at the Hindu's request, I had kept constantly fed with burning coals. By degrees it seemed to assume a human form, and I distinguished the spectre--for I cannot call it otherwise--of an old Brahminical priest kneeling by the side of the little furnace.

On his forehead he wore the signs of his consecration to Vischnou, while his body was girdled with the triple cord, which signified that he had been initiated into the priestly caste. He clasped his hands above his head as in the performance of sacrifices, and his lips moved as if they were reciting prayers. At a certain moment, he took a pinch of the perfumed powder and threw it upon the furnace; there must have been an unusual quantity, for the fire emitted a thick smoke which filled both rooms.

When the smoke dispersed, I noticed the spectre less than a couple of yards distant; it held out to me its fleshless hands. I took them in my own, as I returned his greeting, and was surprised to find them, though hard and bony, warm and lifelike.

"Are you really," said I, in a distinct voice, "a former inhabitant of the earth?"

I had hardly finished the question, when the word

Am

(meaning Yes),

appeared and disappeared in letters of fire upon the bosom of the old Brahmin. The effect was similar to that which would have been produced if the word had been written in the dark with a bit of phosphorus.

"Will you not leave me something as a token of your presence?"

The spirit broke the triple cord, consisting of three

[p. 270]

strands of cotton, which was tied about his loins, gave it to me and then faded away before my eyes.

I supposed that the seance was over, and I was going to raise the movable curtains that shaded the terrace, to admit a little fresh air inside, where the heat was really suffocating, when I noticed that the Fakir seemed to have no such idea. All at once, I heard a strange tune performed upon an instrument, which seemed to be the harmoniflute that we had used a couple of days before. That, however, appeared impossible, inasmuch as the Peishwa had sent for it the day before, and it was consequently no longer in my rooms.

It sounded at a distance, at first, but soon it came so near that it appeared to come from the next room, and I seemed before long to hear it in my bedroom. I noticed the phantom of a musician from the pagodas, gliding along the wall. He had a harmoniflute in his hands, from which he drew plaintive and monotonous notes exactly like the religious music of the Hindus.

When he had made the circuit of my room and of the terrace, he disappeared, and I found the instrument that he had used at the very place where he had vanished.

It was actually the rajah's harmoniflute. I examined all the doors, but I found them all securely locked and I had the keys in my pocket.

Covindasamy then arose. All his limbs were covered with perspiration, and he seemed to be thoroughly exhausted, though, in a few hours, he was to set out on his return journey.

"Thanks, Malabar," said I, calling him by a name that he liked, because it reminded him of his native land. May he who possesses the three mysterious powers [*1] protect you as you journey toward the fair land of the South, and may you find that joy and happiness have ruled in your cottage during your absence."

[p. 271]

It is usual in India for people who are about to part to address each other in effusive and flowery terms, and I should have hurt the poor Fakir's feelings if I had spoken otherwise or had used plainer language, which he would have taken as a sign of indifference. He answered me in the same manner, but in even more exaggerated style, and, after accepting the presents that I offered him, without even looking at them or even deigning to thank me, he sorrowfully made his parting salaam and noiselessly disappeared behind the curtains that hung before the outside door to my rooms.

As soon as he had gone, I called my cansama, and ordered him to remove all the tattis and matting from the terrace, so as to admit the cool morning air.

In the pale light of approaching day, I noticed a black speck upon the silvery waves of the Ganges, as they rolled below, which seemed to move toward the opposite shore. I turned my night glass in that direction. It was the Fakir, who, as he had said, had awakened the ferryman and was crossing the Ganges on his homeward way to Trivanderain. A faint red streak in the distant sky indicated that the horizon would soon be illuminated by the beams of the rising sun.

He would soon see the ocean with its blue waves, his beloved cocoa-nut trees, and the cottage that he was constantly talking about.

I threw myself upon a hammock for a few hours' rest. When I awoke and remembered the strange scenes that had passed before my eyes, it seemed as though I had been the plaything of a dream. Yet there was the harmoniflute, and I could not find out who, if anybody, had brought it. The floor of the terrace was still strewn with flowers, the crown of flowers was upon a divan, and the words that I had written had not vanished from the memorandum book in which I had jotted them down.

Footnotes

^265:1 Travels among the performing Fakirs, 1 vol. in press, Dentu, Paris.

^270:1 The Brahminic trinity.

     
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 272]

  

CHAPTER II.

  

THE PHANTOM OF KARLI.

About four years after this, I was travelling in the province of Aurungabad, on a visit to the subterranean temple of Karli, having come through Madras, Bellary, and Bedjapour.

These celebrated crypts, which are excavated from the living rock, are all situated within the area bounded by the Mahratta Hills, where are also found all the other monuments of this character that India possesses, as, for instance, Ellora, Elephanta, Rosah, etc.

According to E. Roberts, these hills, which all terminate in wide plateaux, were protected, at one time, by fortresses, which made this place a formidable line of defence against the Arabs and Mussulmans, which proved effectual for more than five centuries.

The ruins of citadels are still standing upon the steep road leading to Karli.

The entrance to the caves is situated about three hundred feet above the bottom of the hill, and the only access is by a rough and narrow path, which is more like the bed of a torrent than a practicable road.

The path leads to a terrace or platform, partly artificial, and cut in the rock, or built of fragments of rock taken from the inside.

It is about a hundred feet wide, and forms a square worthy of the magnificence of the interior of the temple.

At the left of the portico stands a massive column, supporting, upon its capital, three lions so disfigured by the hand of time that they can with difficulty be recognized

[p. 273]

at all. This column is covered with inscriptions that are now illegible.

Penetrating into the interior, I stood at the threshold of a spacious vestibule, the entire length of which, measuring about a hundred and sixty feet, is covered with arabesques and sculptured figures of animals and men. On either side of the entrance stood three elephants of colossal size, with their drivers upon their necks and their houdahs upon their backs, in which, with great boldness, the unknown artist had fashioned a multitude of persons. The arched vault is sustained by two rows of pillars, each of which is also surmounted by an elephant, bearing upon his back a man and woman, in the form of cariatides, who seem to bend beneath the enormous weight they bear.

The interior is imposing but dismal, and it is impossible to find one's way in the prevailing darkness.

This grand underground crypt is a celebrated place of resort for pilgrims, and crowds of Fakirs are often met with, who have come from all parts of India, to perform their devotions in the Cave of Evocations.

Others live permanently in the neighborhood of the temple, where they spend the whole of their time in corporeal mortifications and mental contemplation,. sitting, day and night, in front of two blazing fires, which are constantly fed by the attendants, who wear a band upon their month to prevent inhaling the slightest impurity, and eat nothing but a few grains of cooked rice, which they moisten with water filtered through a piece of linen cloth. They gradually arrive at a state of emaciation bordering closely upon death. Their moral strength is soon impaired, and when this protracted suicide has brought them to death's door, they have long been in such a state of intellectual and physical decrepitude that they hardly seem to be alive.

All Fakirs who strive to attain the highest transformations

[p. 274]

in the superior spheres have to undergo these terrible mortifications.

One was pointed out to me who had arrived some months ago from Cape Comorin, and who, sitting between two fires, in order, no doubt, to hasten the decomposition of his physical organs, had already arrived at a state of almost complete insensibility. Imagine my astonishment when, from a deep scar running across the whole upper part of his skull, I thought I, recognized the Fakir of Trivanderam.

Approaching and addressing him in that beautiful Southern language in which he so much liked to converse, I asked him if he remembered the Franguy of Benares.

His almost lifeless eyes seemed to blaze up for a moment, and I heard him murmur the two Sanscrit words, which I had seen in phosphorescent letters on the evening of our last sitting:

Divyavapour gatwa,

meaning, "I have clothed myself with a fluidic (fluidique) body."

That was the only sign of recognition that I was able to obtain. He was known to the Hindus in the neighborhood as Karli Sava, or the Karli Phantom.

So, decrepitude and imbecility appear to be the final end of all Hindu transformed Fakirs.

    
Occult Science in India, by Louis Jacoilliot, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 275]

  

CONCLUSION.

IN conclusion, we can only repeat the words of our preface:

"It is not our office to decide, either for or against, the belief in spirits, whether mediating or inspiring."

Our aim is merely to give an account of the philosophical and spiritualistic tenets of the Brahmins, as well as of the external phenomena and manifestations which are, according to them, the means whereby the Pitris, or ancestral shades, demonstrate their existence and communicate with men.

All ancient religions, and even Christianity itself, acknowledge the existence of extraordinary beings, who have a special part to perform in the continuous movement of creation. All teach that man, upon laying aside his present earthly envelope, enters the superior world in the state of a spirit.

The constant perfectibility of the soul, and the spiritual life--that is their common philosophical idea.

As for the phenomena and manifestations, which are claimed to be supernatural, we also find them to be an outgrowth of this belief, both in the temples of India, Chaldea, and Egypt, and in the catacombs to which the early Christians fled for shelter.

We refrain from making any positive statement as to the possibility or not of the extraordinary phenomena performed by the Fakirs, as we have described them, which some attribute to the adroitest imposture and others to occult intervention, but leave the reader to judge for himself.

[p. 276]

 

 

 

 

PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY
 RICHARD CLAY & SONS, LIMITED,
 BRUNSWICK ST., STANFORD ST., S.E. 1,
 AND BUNGAY, SUFFOLK.

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: otmf.txt =====



On the Migration of Fables, by Max Muller, [1881], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 139]

  

ON THE MIGRATION OF FABLES.

  

A LECTURE DELIVERED AT THE ROYAL INSTITUTION, ON FRIDAY, JUNE 3, 1870.

  

From Chips from a German Workshop, by F. Max Muller, Vol. IV, pp. 139-198. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons [1881].

Scanned, proofed and formatted by John Bruno Hare at sacred-texts.com, December 2009. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

"COUNT not your chickens before they be hatched," is a well-known proverb in English, and most people, if asked what was its origin, would probably appeal to La Fontaine's delightful fable, La Laitiere et le Pot au Lait. [*1] We all know Perrette, lightly stepping along from her village to the town, carrying the milk-pail on her head, and in her day-dreams selling her milk for a good sum, then buying a hundred eggs, then selling the chickens, then buying a pig, fattening it, selling it again, and buying a cow with a calf. The calf frolics about, and kicks up his legs--so does Perrette, and, alas! the pail falls down, the milk is spilt, her riches gone, and she only hopes when she comes home that she may escape a flogging from her husband.

Did La Fontaine invent this fable? or did he merely follow the example of Sokrates, who, as we know from the Phaedon, [*2] occupied himself in prison, during the last days of his life, with turning into verse some of the fables, or, as he calls them, the myths of Aesop.

[p. 140]

La Fontaine published the first six books of his fables in 1668, [*1] and it is well known that the subjects of most of these early fables were taken from Aesop, Phaedrus, Horace, and other classical fabulists, if we may adopt this word "fabuliste," which La Fontaine was the first to introduce into French.

In 1678 a second edition of these six books was published, enriched by five books of new fables, and in 1694 a new edition appeared, containing one additional book, thus completing the collection of his charming poems.

The fable of Perrette stands in the seventh book, and was published, therefore, for the first time in the edition of 1678. In the preface to that edition La Fontaine says: "It is not necessary that I should say whence I have taken the subjects of these new fables. I shall only say, from a sense of gratitude, the largest portion of them to Pilpay the Indian sage."

If, then, La Fontaine tells us himself that he borrowed the subjects of most of his new fables from Pilpay, the Indian sage, we have clearly a right to look to India in order to see whether, in the ancient literature of that country, any traces can be discovered of Perrette with the milk-pail.

Sanskrit literature is very rich in fables and stories; no other literature can vie with it in that respect; nay, it is extremely likely that fables, in particular animal fables, had their principal source in India. In the sacred literature of the Buddhists, fables held a most prominent place. The Buddhist preachers, addressing themselves chiefly to the people, to the untaught,

[p. 141]

the uncared for, the outcast, spoke to them, as we still speak to children, in fables, in proverbs and parables. Many of these fables and parables must have existed before the rise of the Buddhist religion; others, no doubt, were added on the spur of the moment, just as Sokrates would invent a myth or fable whenever that form of argument seemed to him most likely to impress and convince his hearers. But Buddhism gave a new and permanent sanction to this whole branch of moral mythology, and in the sacred canon, as it was settled in the third century before Christ, many a fable received, and holds to the present day, its recognized place. After the fall of Buddhism in India, and even during its decline, the Brahmans claimed the inheritance of their enemies, and used their popular fables for educational purposes. The best known of these collections of fables in Sanskrit is the Pankatantra, literally the Pentateuch, or Pentamerone. From it and from other sources another collection was made, well known to all Sanskrit scholars by the name of Hitopadesa, i.e., Salutary Advice. Both these books have been published in England and Germany, and there are translations of them in English, German, French, and other languages. [*1]

The first question which we have to answer refers to the date of these collections, and dates in the history

[p. 142]

of Sanskrit literature are always difficult points.

Fortunately, as we shall see, we can in this case fix the date of the Pankatantra at least, by means of a translation into ancient Persian, which was made about 550 years after Christ, though even then we can only prove that a collection somewhat like the Pankatantra must have existed at that time; but we cannot refer the book, in exactly that form in which we now possess it, to that distant period.

If we look for La Fontaine's fable in the Sanskrit stories of the Pankatantra, we do not find, indeed, the milkmaid counting her chickens before they are hatched, but we meet with the following story:--

"There lived in a certain place a Brahman, whose name was Svabhavakripana, which means 'a born miser.' He had collected a quantity of rice by begging (this reminds us somewhat of the Buddhist mendicants), and after having dined off it, he filled a pot with what was left over. He hung the pot on a peg on the wall, placed his couch beneath, and looking intently at it all the night, he thought, 'Ah, that pot is indeed brimful of rice. Now, if there should be a famine, I should certainly make a hundred rupees by it. With this I shall buy a couple of goats. They will have young ones every six months, and thus I shall have a whole herd of goats. Then, with the goats, I shall buy cows. As soon as they have calved, I shall sell the calves. Then, with the cows, I shall buy buffaloes; with the buffaloes, mares. When the mares have foaled, I shall have plenty of horses; and when I sell them, plenty of gold. With that gold I shall get a house with four wings. And then a Brahman will come to my house, and will give me his beautiful daughter, with a large dowry. She will have a son, and I shall call him Somasarman. When he is old enough to be danced on his father's knee, I shall sit with a book at the back of the stable, and while I am reading the boy will see me, jump from his mother's lap, and run towards me to be danced on my knee. He will come too near the horse's hoof, and, full of anger, I shall call to my wife, "Take the baby; take him!" But she, distracted by some domestic work does not hear me. Then I get up, and give her

[p. 143]

such a kick with my foot.' While he thought this, he gave a kick with his foot, and broke the pot. All the rice fell over him, and made him quite white. Therefore, I say, 'He who makes foolish plans for the future will be white all over, like the father of Somasarman.'" [*1]

I shall at once proceed to read you the same story, though slightly modified, from the Hitopadesa. [*2] The Hitopadesa professes to be taken from the Pankatantra and some other books; and in this case it would seem as if some other authority had been followed. You will see, at all events, how much freedom there was in telling the old story of the man who built castles in the air.

"In the town of Devikotta there lived a Brahman of the name of Devasarman. At the feast of the great equinox he received a plate full of rice. He took it, went into a potter's shop, which was full of crockery, and, overcome by the heat, he lay down in a corner and began to doze. In order to protect his plate of rice, he kept a stick in his hand, and began to think, 'Now, if I sell this plate of rice, I shall receive ten cowries (kapardaka). I shall then, on the spot, buy pots and plates, and after having increased my capital again and again, I shall buy and sell betel nuts and dresses till I become enormously rich. Then I shall marry four wives, and the youngest and prettiest of the four I shall make a great pet of. Then the other wives will be so angry, and begin to quarrel. But I shall be in a great rage, and take a stick, and give them a good flogging.' . . . . While he said this, he flung his stick away; the plate of rice was smashed to pieces, and many of the pots in the shop were broken. The potter, hearing the noise, ran into the shop, and when he saw his pots broken, he gave the Brahman a good scolding, and drove him out of his shop. Therefore I say, 'He who rejoices over plans for the future will come to grief, like the Brahman who broke the pots.'"

In spite of the change of a Brahman into a milkmaid, no one, I suppose, will doubt that we have here

[p. 144]

in the stories of the Pankatantra and Hitopadesa the first germs of La Fontaine's fable. [*1] But how did that fable travel all the way from India to France? How did it doff its Sanskrit garment and don the light dress of modern French? How was the stupid Brahman born again as the brisk milkmaid, "cotillon simple et souliers plats?"

It seems a startling case of longevity that while languages have changed, while works of art have perished, while empires have risen and vanished again, this simple children's story should have lived on, and maintained its place of honor and its Undisputed sway in every school-room of the East and every nursery of the West. And yet it is a case of longevity so well attested that even the most skeptical would hardly venture to question it. We have the passport of these stories viseed at every place through which they have passed, and, as far as I can judge, parfaitement en regle. The story of the migration of these Indian fables from East to West is indeed wonderful; more wonderful and more instructive than many of these fables themselves. Will it be believed that we, in this Christian country and in the nineteenth century, teach our children the first, the most important lessons of worldly wisdom, nay, of a more than worldly wisdom, from books borrowed from Buddhists and Brahmans, from heretics and idolaters, and that wise words, spoken a thousand, nay, two thousand years ago, in a lonely village of India, like precious seed scattered broadcast all over the world, still bear fruit a hundred and a thousand-fold in that soil which is the most precious before God and man, the soul of a child? No lawgiver, no philosopher,

[p. 145]

has made his influence felt so widely, so deeply, and so permanently as the author of these children's fables. But who was he? We do not know. His name, like the name of many a benefactor of the human race, is forgotten. We only know he was an Indian ...--and that he lived at least two thousand years ago.

No doubt, when we first hear of the Indian origin of these fables, and of their migration from India to Europe, we wonder whether it can be so; but the fact is, that the story of this Indo-European migration is not, like the migration of the Indo-European languages, myths, and legends, a matter of theory, but of history, and that it was never quite forgotten either in the East or in the West. Each translator, as he handed on his treasure, seems to have been anxious to show how he came by it.

Several writers who have treated of the origin and spreading of Indo-European stories and fables, have mixed up two or three questions which ought to be treated each on its own merits.

The first question is whether the Aryans, when they broke up their pro-ethnic community, carried away with them, not only their common grammar and dictionary, but likewise some myths and legends which we find that Indians, Persians, Greeks, Romans, Celts, Germans, Slaves, when they emerge into the light of history, share in common? That certain deities occur in India, Greece, and Germany, having the same names and the same character, is a fact that can no longer be denied. That certain heroes, too, known to Indians, Greeks, and Romans, point to one and the same origin, both by their name and by their

[p. 146]

history, is a fact by this time admitted by all whose admission is of real value. As heroes are in most cases gods in disguise, there is nothing very startling in the fact that nations, who had worshipped the same gods, should also have preserved some common legends of demi-gods or heroes, nay, even in a later phase of thought, of fairies and ghosts. The case, however, becomes much more problematical when we ask, whether stories also, fables told with a decided moral purpose, formed part of that earliest Aryan inheritance? This is still doubted by many who have no doubts whatever as to common Aryan myths and legends, and even those who, like myself, have tried to establish by tentative arguments the existence of common Aryan fables, dating from before the Aryan separation, have done so only by showing a possible connection between ancient popular saws and mythological ideas, capable of a moral application. To any one, for instance, who knows how in the poetical mythology of the Aryan tribes, the golden splendor of the rising sun leads to conceptions of the wealth of the Dawn in gold and jewels and her readiness to shower them upon her worshippers, the modern German proverb, Morgenstunde hat Gold im Munde, seems to have a kind of mythological ring, and the stories of benign fairies, changing everything into gold, sound likewise like an echo from the long-forgotten forest of our common Aryan home. If we know how the trick of dragging stolen cattle backwards into their place of hiding, so that their footprints might not lead to the discovery of the thief, appears again and again in the mythology of different Aryan nations, then the pointing of the same trick as a kind of proverb, intended to convey a moral lesson,

[p. 147]

and illustrated by fables of the same or a very similar character in India and Greece, makes one feel inclined to suspect that here too the roots of these fables may reach to a pro-ethnic period. Vestigia nulla retrorsum is clearly an ancient proverb, dating from a nomadic period, and when we see how Plato ("Alcibiades," i. 123) was perfectly familiar with the Aesopian myth or fable,--kata ton Aisupoy muthon, he says--of the fox declining to enter the lion's cave, because all footsteps went into it and none came out, and how the Sanskrit Pankatantra (III. 14) tells of a jackal hesitating to enter his own cave, because he sees the footsteps of a lion going in, but not coming out, we feel strongly inclined to admit a common origin for both fables. Here, however, the idea that the Greeks, like La Fontaine, had borrowed their fable from the Pankatantra would be simply absurd, and it would be much more rational, if the process must be one of borrowing, to admit, as Benfey ("Pantschatantra," i. 381) does, that the Hindus, after Alexander's discovery of India, borrowed this story from the Greeks. But if we consider that each of the two fables has its own peculiar tendency, the one deriving its lesson from the absence of backward footprints of the victims, the other from the absence of backward footprints of the lion himself, the admission of a common Aryan proverb such as "vestigia nulla retrorsum," would far better explain the facts such as we find them. I am not ignorant of the difficulties of this explanation, and I would myself point to the fact that among the Hottentots, too, Dr. Bleek has found a fable of the jackal declining to visit the sick lion, "because the traces of the animals

[p. 148]

who went to see him did not turn back." [*1] Without, however, pronouncing any decided opinion on this vexed question, what I wish to place clearly before you is this, that the spreading of Aryan myths, legends, and fables, dating from a pro-ethnic period, has nothing whatever to do with the spreading of fables taking place in strictly historical times from India to Arabia, to Greece and the rest of Europe, not by means of oral tradition, but through more or less faithful translations of literary works. Those who like may doubt whether Zeus was Dyaus, whether Daphne was Ahana, whether La Belle au Bois was the mother of two children, called L'Aurore and Le Jour, [*2] but the fact that a collection of fables was, in the sixth century of our era, brought from India to Persia, and by means of various translations naturalized among Persians, Arabs, Greeks, Jews, and all the rest, admits of no doubt or cavil. Several thousand years have passed between those two migrations, and to mix them up together, to suppose that Comparative Mythology has anything to do with the migration of such fables as that of Perrette, would be an anachronism of a portentous character.

There is a third question, viz., whether besides the two channels just mentioned, there were others through which Eastern fables could have reached Europe, or Aesopian and other European fables have been transferred to the East. There are such channels, no doubt. Persian and Arab stories, of Indian origin, were through the crusaders brought back to Constantinople, Italy, and France; Buddhist fables

[p. 149]

were through Mongolian [*1] conquerors (13th century) carried to Russia and the eastern parts of Europe. Greek stories may have reached Persia and India at the time of Alexander's conquests and during the reigns of the Diadochi, and even Christian legends may have found their way to the East through missionaries, travellers, or slaves.

Lastly, there comes the question, how far our common human nature is sufficient to account for coincidences in beliefs, customs, proverbs, and fables, which, at first sight, seem to require an historical explanation. I shall mention but one instance. Professor Wilson ("Essays on Sanskrit Literature," i. p. 201) pointed out that the story of the Trojan horse occurs in a Hindu tale, only that instead of the horse we have an elephant. But he rightly remarked that the coincidence was accidental. In the one case, after a siege of nine years, the principal heroes of the Greek army are concealed in a wooden horse, dragged into Troy by a stratagem, and the story ends by their falling upon the Trojans and conquering the city of Priam. In the other story a king bent on securing a son-in-law, had an elephant constructed by able artists, and filled with armed men. The elephant was placed in a forest, and when the young prince came to hunt, the armed men sprang out, overpowered the prince and brought him to the king, whose daughter he was

[p. 150]

to marry. However striking the similarity may seem to one unaccustomed to deal with ancient legends, I doubt whether any comparative mythologist has postulated a common Aryan origin for these two stories. They feel that, as far as the mere construction of a wooden animal is concerned, all that was necessary to explain the origin of the idea in one place was present also in the other, and that while the Trojan horse forms an essential part of a mythological cycle, there is nothing truly mythological or legendary in the Indian story. The idea of a hunter disguising himself in the skin of an animal, or even of one animal assuming the disguise of another, [*1] are familiar in every part of the world, and if that is so, then the step from hiding under the skin of a large animal to that of hiding in a wooden animal is not very great.

Every one of these questions, as I said before, must be treated on its own merits, and while the traces of the first migration of Aryan fables can be rediscovered

[p. 151]

only by the most minute and complex inductive processes, the documents of the latter are to be found in the library of every intelligent collector of books. Thus, to return to Perrette and the fables of Pilpay, Huet, the learned bishop of Avranches, the friend of La Fontaine, had only to examine the prefaces of the principal translations of the Indian fables in order to track their wanderings, as he did in his famous "Traite de l'Origine des Romans," published at Paris in 1670, two years after the appearance of the first collection of La Fontaine's fables. Since his time the evidence has become more plentiful, and the whole subject has been more fully and more profoundly treated by Sylvestre de Sacy, [*1] Loiseleur Deslongchamps, [*2] and Professor Benfey. [*3] But though we have a more accurate knowledge of the stations by which the Eastern fables reached their last home in the West, Bishop Huet knew as well as we do that they came originally from India through Persia by way of Bagdad and Constantinople.

In order to gain a commanding view of the countries traversed by these fables, let us take our position at Bagdad in the middle of the eighth century, and watch from that central point the movements of our literary caravan in its progress from the far East to the far West. In the middle of the eighth century, during the reign of the great Khalif Almansur, Abdallah ibn Almokaffa wrote his famous collection of fables, the "Kalila and Dimnah," which we still possess.

[p. 152]

[paragraph continues] The Arabic text of these fables has been published by Sylvestre de Sacy, and there is an English translation of it by Mr. Knatchbull, formerly Professor of Arabic at Oxford. Abdallah ibn Almokaffa was a Persian by birth, who after the fall of the Omeyyades became a convert to Mohammedanism, and rose to high office at the court of the Khalifs. Being in possession of important secrets of state, he became dangerous in the eyes of the Khalif Almansur, and was foully murdered. [*1] In the preface, Abdallah ibn Almokaffa tells us that he translated these fables from Pehlevi, the ancient language of Persia; and that they had been translated into Pehlevi (about two hundred years before his time) by Barzuyeh, the physician of Khosru Nushir van, the King of Persia, the contemporary of the Emperor Justinian. The King of Persia had heard that there existed in India a book full of wisdom, and he had commanded his Vezier, Buzurjmihr, to find a man acquainted with the languages both of Persia and India. The man chosen was Barzuyeh. He travelled to India, got possession of the book, translated it into Persian, and brought it back to the court of Khosru. Declining all rewards beyond a dress of honor, he only stipulated that an account of his own life and opinions should be added to the book. This account, probably written by himself, is extremely curious. It is a kind of Religio Medici of the sixth century, and shows us a soul dissatisfied with traditions and formularies, striving after truth, and finding rest only where many other seekers after truth have found rest before and after him, in a life devoted to alleviating the sufferings of mankind.

There is another account of the journey of this

[p. 153]

[paragraph continues] Persian physician to India. It has the sanction of Firdusi, in the great Persian epic, the Shah Nameh, and it is considered by some [*1] as more original than the one just quoted. According to it, the Persian physician read in a book that there existed in India trees or herbs supplying a medicine with which the dead could be restored to life. At the command of the king he went to India in search of those trees and herbs; but, after spending a year in vain researches, he consulted some wise people on the subject. They told him that the medicine of which he had read as having the power of restoring men to life had to be understood in a higher and more spiritual sense, and that what was really meant by it were ancient books of wisdom preserved in India, which imparted life to those who were dead in their folly and sins. [*2] Thereupon the physician translated these books, and one of them was the collection of fables, the "Kalila and Dimnah."

It is possible that both these stories were later inventions; the preface also by Ali, the son of Alshah Faresi, in which the names of Bidpai and King Dabshelim are mentioned for the first time, is of later date. But the fact remains that Abdallah ibn Almokaffa, the author of the oldest Arabic collection of our fables, translated them from Pehlevi, the language of Persia at the time of Khosru Nushirvan, and that the Pehlevi text which he translated was believed to be a translation of a book brought from India in the middle of the sixth century. That Indian book could not have been the Pankatantra, as we now possess it, but must have been a much larger collection of fables,

[p. 154]

for the Arabic translation, the "Kalilah and Dimnah," contains eighteen chapters instead of the five of the Pankatantra, and it is only in the fifth, the seventh, the eighth, the ninth, and the tenth chapters that we find the same stories which form the five books of the Pankatantra in the textus ornatior. Even in these chapters the Arabic translator omits stories which we find in the Sanskrit text, and adds others which are not to be found there.

In this Arabic translation the story of the Brahman and the pot of rice runs as follows:--

"A religious man was in the habit of receiving every day from the house of a merchant a certain quantity of butter (oil) and honey, of which, having eaten as much as he wanted, he put the rest into a jar, which he hung on a nail in a corner of the room, hoping that the jar would in time be filled. Now, as he was leaning back one day on his couch, with a stick in his hand, and the jar suspended over his head, he thought of the high price of butter and honey, and said to himself, 'I will sell what is in the jar, and buy with the money which I obtain for it ten goats, which, producing each of them a young one every five months, in addition to the produce of the kids as soon as they begin to bear, it will not be long before there is a large flock.' He continued to make his calculations, and found that he should at this rate, in the course of two years, have more than four hundred goats. 'At the expiration of this term I will buy,' said he, 'a hundred black cattle, in the proportion of a bull or a cow for every four goats. I will then purchase land, and hire workmen to plough it with the beasts, and put it into tillage, so that before five years are over I shall, no doubt, have realized a great fortune by the sale of the milk which the cows will give, and of the produce of my land. My next business will be to build a magnificent house, and engage a number of servants, both male and female; and, when my establishment is completed, I will marry the handsomest woman I can find, who, in clue time becoming a mother, will present me with an heir to my possessions, who, as he advances in age, shall receive the best masters that can be procured; and, if the progress which he makes

[p. 155]

in learning is equal to my reasonable expectations, I shall be amply repaid for the pains and expense which I have bestowed upon him; but if, on the other hand, he disappoints my hopes, the rod which I have here shall be the instrument with which I will make him feel the displeasure of a justly-offended parent. [*1] At these words he suddenly raised the band which held the stick towards the jar, and broke it, and the contents ran down upon his head and face." [*1] ...

You will have observed the coincidences between the Arabic and the Sanskrit versions, but also a considerable divergence, particularly in the winding up of the story. The Brahman and the holy man both build their castles in the air; but, while the former kicks his wife, the latter only chastises his son. How this change came to pass we cannot tell. One might suppose that, at the time when the book was translated from Sanskrit into Pehlevi, or from Pehlevi into Arabic, the Sanskrit story was exactly like the Arabic story, and that it was changed afterwards. But another explanation is equally admissible, viz., that the Pehlevi or the Arabic translator wished to avoid the offensive behavior of the husband kicking his wife, and therefore substituted the son as a more deserving object of castigation.

We have thus traced our story from Sanskrit to Pehlevi, and from Pehlevi to Arabic; we have followed it in its migrations from the hermitages of Indian sages to the court of the kings of Persia, and from thence to the residence of the powerful Khalifs at Bagdad. Let us recollect that the Khalif Almansur, for whom the Arabic translation was made, was the contemporary of Abderrhaman, who ruled in Spain, and that both were but little anterior to Harun

[p. 156]

al Rashid and Charlemagne. At that time, therefore, the way was perfectly open for these Eastern fables, after they had once reached Bagdad, to penetrate into the seats of Western learning, and to spread to every part of the new empire of Charlemagne. They may have done so, for all we know; but nearly three hundred years pass before these fables meet us again in the literature of Europe. The Carlovingian empire had fallen to pieces, Spain had been rescued from the Mohammedans, William the Conqueror had landed in England, and the Crusades had begun to turn the thoughts of Europe towards the East, when, about the year 1080, we hear of a Jew of the name of Symeon, the son of Seth, who translated these fables from Arabic into Greek. He states in his preface that the book came originally from India, that it was brought to the King Chosroes of Persia, and then translated into Arabic. His own translation into Greek must have been made from an Arabic MS. of the "Kalila and Dimna," in some places more perfect, in others less perfect, than the one published by De Sacy. The Greek text has been published, though very imperfectly, under the title of "Stephanites and Ichnelates." [*1] Here our fable is told as follows (p. 337):--

"It is said that a beggar kept some honey and butter in a jar close to where he slept. One night he thus thought within himself: 'I shall sell this honey and butter for however small a sum; with it I shall buy ten goats, and these in five months will produce as many again. In five years they will become four hundred. With them I shall buy one hundred cows, and with them I shall cultivate some land. And what with their calves

[p. 157]

and the harvests, I shall become rich in five years, and build a house with four wings, [*1] ornamented with gold, and buy all kinds of servants, and marry a wife. She will give me a child, and I shall call him Beauty It will be a boy, and I shall educate him properly; and if I see him lazy, I shall give him such a flogging with this stick...' With these words he took a stick that was near him, struck the jar, and broke it, so that the honey and milk ran down on his beard."

This Greek translation might, no doubt, have reached La Fontaine; but as the French poet was not a great scholar, least of all a reader of Greek MSS., and as the fables of Symeon Seth were not published till 1697, we must look for other channels through which the old fable was carried along from East to West.

There is, first of all, an Italian translation of the "Stephanites and Ichnelates," which was published at Ferrara in 1583. [*2] The title is, "Del Governo de' Regni. Sotto morali essempi di animali ragionanti tra loro. Tratti prima di lingua Indiana in Agarena da Lelo Demno Saraceno. Et poi dall' Agarena nella Greca da Simeone Setto, philosopho Antiocheno. Et hora tradotti di Greco in Italiano." This translation was probably the work of Giulio Nuti.

There is, besides, a Latin translation, or rather a free rendering of the Greek translation by the learned Jesuit, Petrus Possinus, which was published at Rome in 1666. [*3] This may have been, and, according to some authorities, has really been one of the sources from which La Fontaine drew his inspirations. But though La Fontaine may have consulted this work

[p. 158]

for other fables, I do not think that he took from it the fable of Perrette and the milk-pail.

The fact is, these fables had found several other channels through which, as early as the thirteenth century, they reached the literary market of Europe, and became familiar as household words, at least among the higher and educated classes. We shall follow the course of some of these channels. First, then, a learned Jew, whose name seems to have been Joel, translated our fables from Arabic into Hebrew (1250?). His work has been preserved in one MS. at Paris, but has not yet been published, except the tenth book, which was communicated by Dr. Neubauer to Benfey's journal, "Orient and Occident" (vol. i. p. 658). This Hebrew translation was translated by another converted Jew, Johannes of Capua, into Latin. His translation was finished between 1263-1278, and, under the title of "Directorium Humanae Vitae," it became very soon a popular work with the select reading public of the thirteenth century. [*1] In the "Directorium," and in Joel's translation, the name of Sendebar is substituted for that of Bidpay. The "Directorium" was translated into German at the command of Eberhard, the great Duke of Wurtemberg, [*2] and both the Latin text and the German translation occur, in repeated editions, among the rare books printed between 1480 and the end of the fifteenth century. [*3] A Spanish translation, founded both on the German and the Latin texts, appeared at Burgos in 1493; [*4] and from these different sources flowed in the sixteenth century the Italian

[p. 159]

renderings of Firenzuola (1548) [*1] and Doni (1552). [*2] As these Italian translations were repeated in French [*3] and English, before the end of the sixteenth century, they might no doubt have supplied La Fontaine with subjects for his fables.

But, as far as we know, it was a third channel that really brought the Indian fables to the immediate notice of the French poet. A Persian poet, of the name of Nasr Allah, translated the work of Abdallah ibn Almokaffa into Persian about 1150. This Persian translation was enlarged in the fifteenth century by another Persian poet, Husain ben Ali called el Vaez, under the title of "Anvari Suhaili." [*4] This name will be familiar to many members of the Indian Civil Service, as being one of the old Haileybury class-books which had to be construed by all who wished to gain high honors in Persia. This work, or

The second book is a translation of the second part of Doni's Filosofia Morale.

[p. 160]

at least the first books of it, were translated into French by David Sahid of Ispahan, and published at Paris in 1644, under the title of "Livre des Lumieres, ou, la Conduite des Rois, compose par le Sage Pilpay, Indien." This translation, we know, fell into the hands of La Fontaine, and a number of his most charming fables were certainly borrowed from it.

But Perrette with the milk-pail has not yet arrived at the end of her journey, for if we look at the "Livre des Lumieres," as published at Paris, we find neither the milkmaid nor her prototype, the Brahman who kicks his wife, or the religious man who flogs his boy. That story occurs in the later chapters, which were left out in the French translation; and La Fontaine, therefore, must have met with his model elsewhere.

Remember that in all our wanderings we have not yet found the milkmaid, but only the Brahman or the religious man. What we want to know is who first brought about this metamorphosis.

No doubt La Fontaine was quite the man to seize on any jewel which was contained in the Oriental fables, to remove the cumbersome and foreign-looking setting, and then to place the principal figure in that pretty frame in which most of us have first become acquainted with it. But in this case the charmer's wand did not belong to La Fontaine, but to some forgotten worthy, whose very name it will be difficult to fix upon with certainty.

We have, as yet, traced three streams only, all starting from the Arabic translation of Abdallah ibn Almokaffa, one in the eleventh, another in the twelfth, a third in the thirteenth century, all reaching Europe,

[p. 161]

some touching the very steps of the throne of Louis XIV., yet none of them carrying the leaf which contained the story of "Perrette," or of the "Brahman," to the threshold of La Fontaine's home. We must, therefore, try again.

After the conquest of Spain by the Mohammedans, Arabic literature had found a new home in Western Europe, and among the numerous works translated from Arabic into Latin or Spanish, we find towards the end of the thirteenth century (1289) a Spanish translation of our fables, called "Calila e Dymna." [*1] In this the name of the philosopher is changed from Bidpai to Bundobel. This, or another translation from Arabic, was turned into Latin verse by Raimond de Beziers in 1313 (not published).

Lastly, we find in the same century another translation from Arabic straight into Latin verse, by Baldo, which became known under the name of "Aesopus alter." [*2]

From these frequent translations, and translations of translations, in the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth centuries, we see quite clearly that these Indian fables were extremely popular, and were, in fact, more widely read in Europe than the Bible, or any other book. They were not only read in translations, 'but having been introduced into sermons, [*3] homilies, and works on morality, they were improved upon, acclimatized, localized, moralized, till at last it is almost impossible to recognize their Oriental features under their homely disguises.

I shall give you one instance only.

Rabelais, in his "Gargantua," gives a long description how a man might conquer the whole world. At

[p. 162]

the end of this dialogue, which was meant as a satire on Charles V., we read:--

"There was there present at that time an old gentleman well experienced in the wars, a stern soldier, and who had been in many great hazards, named Echephron, who, hearing this discourse, said: 'J'ay grand peur que toute ceste entreprise sera semblable a la farce du pot au laict duquel un cordavanier se faisoit riche par resverie, puis le pot casse, n'eut de quoy disner.'"

This is clearly our story, only the Brahman has, as yet, been changed into a shoemaker only, and the pot of rice or the jar of butter and honey into a pitcher of milk. Now it is perfectly true that if a writer of the fifteenth century changed the Brahman into a shoemaker, La Fontaine might, with the same right, have replaced the Brahman by his milkmaid. Knowing that the story was current, was, in fact, common property in the fifteenth century, nay, even at a much earlier date, we might really be satisfied after having brought the germs of "Perrette" within easy reach of La Fontaine. But, fortunately, we can make at least one step further, a step of about two centuries. This step backwards brings us to the thirteenth century, and there we find our old Indian friend again, and this time really changed into a milkmaid. The book I refer to is written in Latin, and is called, "Dialogus Creaturarum optime moralizatus;" in English, the "Dialogue of Creatures moralized." It was a book intended to teach the principles of Christian morality by examples taken from ancient fables. It was evidently a most successful book, and was translated into several modern languages. There is an old translation of it in English, first printed by Rastell, [*1] and

[p. 163]

afterwards repeated in 1816. I shall read you from it the fable in which, as far as I can find, the milkmaid appears for the first time on the stage, surrounded already by much of that scenery which, four hundred years later, received its last touches at the hand of La Fontaine.

"DIALOGO C. (p. ccxxiii.) For as it is but madnesse to trust to moche in surete, so it is but foly to hope to moche of vanyteys, for vayne be all erthly thinges longynge to men, as sayth Davyd, Psal. xciiii: Wher of it is tolde in fablys that a lady uppon a tyme delyvered to her mayden a galon of mylke to sell at a cite, and by the way, as she sate and restid her by a dyche side, she began to thinke that with the money of the mylke she wold bye an henne, the which shulde bringe forth chekyns, and when they were growyn to hennys she wolde sell them and by piggis, and eschaunge them in to shepe, and the shepe in to oxen, and so whan she was come to richesse she sholde be maried right worshipfully unto some worthy man, and thus she reioycid. And whan she was thus mervelously comfortid and ravisshed inwardly in her secrete solace, thinkynge with howe greate ioye she shuld be ledde towarde the chirche with her husbond on horsebacke, she sayde to her self: 'Goo we, goo we.' Sodaynlye she smote the ground with her fote, myndynge to spurre the horse, but her fote slypped, and she fell in the dyche, and there lay all her mylke, and so she was farre from her purpose, and never had that she hopid to have." [*1]

[p. 164]

Here we have arrived at the end of our journey. It has been a long journey across fifteen or twenty centuries, and I am afraid our following Perrette from country to country, and from language to language, may have tired some of my hearers. I shall, therefore, not attempt to fill the gap that divides the fable of the thirteenth century from La Fontaine. Suffice it to say, that the milkmaid, having once taken the place of the Brahman, maintained it against all corners. We find her as Dona Truhana, in the famous "Conde Lucanor," the work of the Infante Don Juan Manuel, [*1] who died in 1347, the grandson of St. Ferdinand, the nephew of Alfonso the Wise, though himself not a king, yet more powerful than a king; renowned both by his sword and by his pen, and possibly not ignorant of Arabic, the language of his enemies. We find her again in the "Contes et Nouvelles" of Bonaventure des Periers, published in the sixteenth century, a book which we know that La Fontaine was well acquainted with. We find her after La Fontaine in all the languages of Europe. [*2]

You see now before your eyes the bridge on which our fables came to us from East to West. The same bridge which brought us Perrette brought us hundreds of fables, all originally sprung up in India, many of them carefully collected by Buddhist priests, and preserved in their sacred canon, afterwards handed on to the Brahminic writers of a later age, carried by Barzuyeh from India to the court of

[p. 165]

Click to enlarge
OLD COLLECTION OF INDIAN FABLES.

[p. 166]

[paragraph continues] Persia, then to the courts of the Khalifs at Bagdad and Cordova, and of the emperors at Constantinople. Some of them, no doubt, perished on their journey, others were mixed up together, others were changed till we should hardly know them again. Still, if you once know the eventful journey of Perrette, you know the journey of all the other fables that belong to this Indian cycle. Few of them have gone through so many changes, few of them have found so many friends, whether in the courts of kings or in the huts of beggars. Few of them have been to places where Perrette has not also been. This is why I selected her and her passage through the world as the best illustration of a subject which otherwise would require a whole course of lectures to do it justice.

But though our fable represents one large class or cluster of fables, it does not represent all. There were several collections, besides the Pankatantra, which found their way from India to Europe. The most important among them is the "Book of the Seven Wise Masters, or the Book of Sindbad," the history of which has lately been written, with great learning and ingenuity, by Signor Comparetti. [*1]

These large collections of fables and stories mark what may be called the high roads on which the literary products of the East were carried to the West. But there are, beside these high roads, some smaller, less trodden paths on which single fables, sometimes mere proverbs, similes, or metaphors, have come to us from India, from Persepolis, from Damascus and Bagdad. I have already alluded to the powerful influence which Arabic literature exercised on Western Europe through Spain. Again, a most

[p. 167]

active interchange of Eastern and Western ideas took place at a later time during the progress of the Crusades. Even the inroads of Mongolian -tribes into Russia and the East of Europe kept up a literary bartering between Oriental and Occidental nations.

But few would have suspected a Father of the Church as an importer of Eastern fables. Yet so it is.

At the court of the same Khalif Almansur, where Abdallah ibn Almokaffa translated the fables of Calla and Dimna from Persian into Arabic, there lived a Christian of the name of Sergius, who for many years held the high office of treasurer to the Khalif. He had a son to whom he gave the best education that could then be given, his chief tutor being one Cosmas, an Italian monk, who had been taken prisoner by the Saracens, and sold as a slave at Bagdad. After the death of Sergius, his son succeeded him for some time as chief councillor (prutosumboylos) to the Khalif Almansur. Such, however, had been the influence of the Italian monk on his pupil's mind, that he suddenly resolved to retire from the world, and to devote himself to study, meditation, and pious works. From the monastery of St. Saba, near Jerusalem, this former minister of the Khalif issued the most learned works on theology, particularly his "Exposition of the Orthodox Faith." He soon became the highest authority on matters of dogma in the Eastern Church, and he still holds his place among the saints both of the Eastern and Western Churches. His name was Joannes, and from being born at Damascus, the former capital of the Khalifs, he is best known in history as Joannes Damascenus, or St. John of Damascus. He must

[p. 168]

have known Arabic, and probably Persian; but his mastery of Greek earned him, later in life, the name of Chrysorrhoas, or Gold-flowing. He became famous as the defender of the sacred images, and as the determined opponent of the Emperor Leo the Isaurian, about 726. It is difficult in his life to distinguish between legend and history, but that he had held high office at the court of the Khalif Almansur, that he boldly opposed the iconoclastic policy of the Emperor Leo, and that he wrote the most learned theological works of his time, cannot be easily questioned.

Among the works ascribed to him is a story called "Barlaam and Joasaph." [*1] There has been a fierce controversy as to whether he was the author of it or not. Though for our own immediate purposes it would be of little consequence whether the book was written by Joannes Damascenus or by some less distinguished ecclesiastic, I must confess that the arguments hitherto adduced against his authorship seem to me very weak.

The Jesuits did not like the book, because it was

[p. 169]

a religious novel. They pointed to a passage in which the Holy Ghost is represented as proceeding from the Father "and the Son," as incompatible with the creed of an Eastern ecclesiastic. That very passage, however, has now been proved to be spurious; and it should be borne in mind, besides, that the controversy on the procession of the Holy Ghost from the Father and the Son, or from the Father through the Son, dates a century later than Joannes. The fact, again, that the author does not mention Mohammedanism, [*1] proves nothing against the authorship of Joannes, because, as he places Barlaam and Joasaph in the early centuries of Christianity, he would have ruined his story by any allusion to Mohammed's religion, then only a hundred years old. Besides, he had written a separate work, in which the relative merits of Christianity and Mohammedanism are discussed. The prominence given to the question of the worship of images shows that the story could not have been written much before the time of Joannes Damascenus, and there is nothing in the style of our author that could be pointed out as incompatible with the style of the great theologian. On the contrary, the author of "Barlaam and Joasaph" quotes the same authors whom Joannes Damascenus quotes most frequently--eg., Basilius and Gregorius Nazianzenus. And no one but Joannes could have taken long passages from his own works without saying where he borrowed them. [*2]

[p. 170]

The story of "Barlaam and Joasaph"--or, as he is more commonly called, Josaphat--may be told in a few words: "A king in India, an enemy and persecutor of the Christians, has an only son. The astrologers have predicted that he would embrace the new doctrine. His father, therefore, tries by all means in his power to keep him ignorant of the miseries of the world, and to create in him a taste for pleasure and enjoyment. A Christian hermit, however, gains access to the prince, and instructs him in the doctrines of the Christian religion. The young prince is not only baptized, but resolves to give  all his earthly riches; and after having converted his own father and many of his subjects, he follows his teacher into the desert."

The real object of the book is to give a simple exposition of the principal doctrines of the Christian religion. It also contains a first attempt at comparative theology, for in the course of the story there is a disputation on the merits of the principal religions of the world--the Chaldaean, the Egyptian, the Greek, the Jewish, and the Christian. But one of the chief attractions of this manual of Christian theology consisted in a number of fables and parables with which it is enlivened. Most of them have been traced to an Indian source. I shall mention one only which has found its way into almost every literature of the world: [*1]--

"A man was pursued by a unicorn, and while he tried to flee from it, he fell into a pit. In falling he stretched out both his

[p. 171]

arms, and laid hold of a small tree that was growing on one side of the pit. Having gained a firm footing, and holding to the tree, he fancied he was safe, when he saw two mice, a black and a white one, busy gnawing the root of the tree to which he was clinging. Looking down into the pit, he perceived a horrid dragon with his mouth wide open, ready to devour him, and when examining the place on which his feet rested, the heads of four serpents glared at him. Then he looked up, and observed drops of honey falling down from the tree to which he clung. Suddenly the unicorn, the dragon, the mice, and the serpents were all , and his mind was intent only on catching the drops of sweet honey trickling down from the tree."

An explanation is hardly required. The unicorn is Death, always chasing man; the pit is the world; the small tree is man's life, constantly gnawed by the black and the white mouse--i.e., by night and day; the four serpents are the four elements which compose the human body; the dragon below is meant for the jaws of hell. Surrounded by all these horrors, man is yet able to forget them all, and to think only of the pleasures of life, which, like a few drops of honey, fall into his mouth from the tree of life. [*1]

But what is still more curious is, that the author of "Barlaam and Josaphat" has evidently taken his very hero, the Indian Prince Josaphat, from an Indian source. In the "Lalita Vistara"--the life, though no doubt the legendary life, of Buddha--the father of Buddha is a king. When his son is born, the Brahman Asita predicts that he will rise to great glory, and become either a powerful king, or, renouncing the throne and embracing the life of a hermit

[p. 172]

become a Buddha. [*1] The great object of his father is to prevent this. He therefore keeps the young prince, when he grows up, in his garden and palaces, surrounded by all pleasures which might turn his mind from contemplation to enjoyment. More especially he is to know nothing of illness, old age, and death, which might open his eyes to the misery and unreality of life. After a time, however, the prince receives permission to drive out; and then follow the four drives, [*2] so famous in Buddhist history. The places where these drives took place were commemorated by towers still standing in the time of Fa Hian's visit to India, early in the fifth century after Christ, and even in the time of Hiouen Thsang, in the seventh century. I shall read you a short account of the three drives: [*3]--

"One day when the prince with a large retinue was driving through the eastern gate of the city, on the way to one of his parks, he met on the road an old man, broken and decrepit. One could see the veins and muscles over the whole of his body, his teeth chattered, he was covered with wrinkles, bald, and hardly able to utter hollow and unmelodious sounds. He was bent on his stick, and all his limbs and joints trembled. 'Who is that man?' said the prince to his coachman. 'He is small and weak, his flesh and his blood are dried up, his muscles stick to his skin, his head is white, his teeth chatter, his body is wasted away; leaning on his stick, he is hardly able to walk, stumbling at every step. Is there something peculiar in his family, or is this the common lot of all created beings?'

"'Sir,' replied the coachman, 'that man is sinking under old age, his senses have become obtuse, suffering has destroyed his strength, and he is despised by his relations. He is without support and useless, and people have abandoned him, like a dead tree in a forest. But this is not peculiar to his family.

[p. 173]

[paragraph continues] In every creature youth is defeated by old age. Your father, your mother, all your relations, all your friends, will come to the same state; this is the appointed end of all creatures.'

"'Alas!' replied the prince, "are creatures so ignorant, so weak and foolish as to be proud of the youth by which they are intoxicated, not seeing the old age which awaits them? As for me, I go away. Coachman, turn my chariot quickly. What have I, the future prey of old age--what have I to do with pleasure?" And the young prince returned to the city without going to the park.

"Another time the prince was driving through the southern gate to his pleasure-garden, when he perceived on the road a man suffering from illness, parched with fever, his body wasted, covered with mud, without a friend, without a home, hardly able to breathe, and frightened at the sight of himself, and the approach of death. Having questioned his coachman, and received from him the answer which he expected, the young prince said, 'Alas! health is but the sport of a dream, and the fear of suffering must take this frightful form. Where is the wise man who, after having seen what he is, could any longer think of joy and pleasure?' The prince turned his chariot, and returned to the city.

"A third time he was driving to his pleasure-garden through the western gate, when he saw a dead body on the road, lying on a bier and covered with a cloth. The friends stood about crying, sobbing, tearing their hair, covering their heads with dust, striking their breasts, and uttering wild cries. The prince, again, calling his coachman to witness this painful scene, exclaimed, 'Oh, woe to youth, which must be destroyed by old age! Woe to health, which must be destroyed by so many diseases! Woe to this life, where a man remains so short a time! If there were no old age, no disease, no death; if these could he made captive forever!' Then, betraying for the first time his intentions, the young prince said, 'Let us turn back, I must think how to accomplish deliverance.'

"A last meeting put an end to hesitation. He was driving through the northern gate on the way to his pleasure-gardens, when he saw a mendicant, who appeared outwardly calm, subdued, looking downwards, wearing with an air of dignity his religious vestment, and carrying an alms-bowl.

"'Who is that man?' asked the prince.

[p. 174]

"'Sir,' replied the coachman, 'this man is one of those who are called Bhikshus, or mendicants. He has renounced all pleasures, all desires, and leads a life of austerity. He tries to conquer himself. He has become a devotee. Without passion, without envy, he walks about asking for alms.'

"'This is good and well said,' replied the prince. 'The life of a devotee has always been praised by the wise. It will be my refuge, and the refuge of other creatures; it will lead us to a real life, to happiness and immortality.'

"With these words the young prince turned his chariot, and returned to the city."

If we now compare the story of Joannes of Damascus, we find that the early life of Josaphat is exactly the same as that of Buddha. His father is a king, and after the birth of his son, an astrologer predicts that he will rise to glory; not, however, in his own kingdom, but in a higher and better one; in fact, that he will embrace the new and persecuted religion of the Christians. Everything is done to prevent this. He is kept in a beautiful palace, surrounded by all that is enjoyable; and great care is taken to, keep him in ignorance of sickness, old age, and death. After a time, however, his father gives him leave to drive out. On one of his drives he sees two men, one maimed, the other blind. He asks what they are, and is told that they are suffering from disease. He then inquires whether all men are liable to disease, and whether it is known beforehand who will suffer from disease and who will be free; and when he hears the truth, he becomes sad, and returns home. Another time, when he drives out, he meets an old man with wrinkled face and shaking legs, bent down, with white hair, his teeth gone, and his voice faltering. He asks again what all this means, and is told that this is what happens

[p. 175]

to all men; and that no one can escape old age, and that in the end all men must die. Thereupon he returns home to meditate on death, till at last a hermit appears, [*1] and opens before his eyes a higher view of life, as contained in the Gospel of Christ.

No one, I believe, can read these two stories without feeling convinced that one was borrowed from the other; and as Fa Hian, three hundred years before John of Damascus, saw the towers which commemorated the three drives of Buddha still standing among the ruins of the royal city of Kapilavastu, it follows that the Greek father borrowed his subject from the Buddhist scriptures. Were it necessary, it would be easy to point out still more minute coincidences between the life of Josaphat and of Buddha, the founder of the Buddhist religion. Both in the end convert their royal fathers, both fight manfully against the assaults of the flesh and the devil, both are regarded as saints before they die. Possibly even a proper name may have been transferred from the sacred canon of the Buddhists to the pages of the Greek writer. The driver who conducts Buddha then he flees by night from his palace where he leaves his wife, his only son, and all his treasures, in order to devote himself to a contemplative life, is called Chandaka, in Burmese, Sanna. [*2] The friend and companion of Barlaam is called Zardan. [*3] Reinaud

[p. 176]

in his "Memoire sur l'Inde," p. 91 (1849), was the first, it seems, to point out that Youdasf, mentioned by Massoudi as the founder of the Sabaean religion, and Youasaf, mentioned as the founder of Buddhism by the author of the "Kitab-al-Fihrist," are both meant for Bodhisattva, a corruption quite intelligible with the system of transcribing that name with Persian letters. Professor Benfey has identified Theudas, the sorcerer in "Barlaam and Joasaph," with the Devadatta of the Buddhist scriptures. [*1]

How palpable these coincidences are between the two stories is best shown by the fact that they were pointed out, independently of each other, by scholars in France, Germany, and England. I place France first, because in point of time M. Laboulaye was the first who called attention to it in one of his charming articles in the "Debats." [*2] A more detailed comparison

[p. 177]

was given by Dr. Liebrecht. [*1] And, lastly, Mr. Beal, in his translation of the "Travels of Fa Hian," [*2] called attention to the same fact--viz., that the story of Josaphat was borrowed from the "Life of Buddha." I could mention the names of two or three scholars besides who happened to read the two books, and who could not help seeing, what was as clear as daylight, that Joannes Damascenus took the principal character of his religious novel from the "Lalita Vistara," one of the sacred books of the Buddhists; but the merit of having been the first belongs to M. Laboulaye.

This fact is, no doubt, extremely curious in the history of literature; but there is another fact connected with it which is more than curious, and I wonder that it has never been pointed out before. It is well known that the story of "Barlaam and Josaphat" became a most popular book during the Middle Ages. In the East it was translated into Syriac(?), Arabic, Ethiopic, Armenian, and Hebrew; in the West it exists in Latin, French, Italian, German, English, Spanish, Bohemian, and Polish. As early as 1204, a King of Norway translated it into Icelandic, and at a later time it was translated by a Jesuit missionary into Tagala, the classical language of the Philippine Islands. But this is not all, Barlaam and Josaphat have actually risen to the rank of saints, both in the Eastern and in the Western . In the Eastern church the 26th of August is the saints' day of Barlaam and Josaphat; in the

[p. 178]

[paragraph continues] Roman Martyrologium, the 27th of November is assigned to them.

There have been from time to time misgivings about the historical character of these two saints. Leo Allatius, in his "Prolegomena," ventured to ask the question, whether the story of :"Barlaam and Josaphat" was more real than the "Cyropaedia" of Xenophon, or the "Utopia" of Thomas More; but, en bon Catholique, he replied, that as Barlaam and Josaphat were mentioned, not only in the Menaea of the Greek, but also in the Martyrologium of the Roman Church, he could not bring himself to believe that their history was imaginary. Billius thought that to doubt the concluding words of the author, who says that he received the story of "Barlaam and Josaphat" from men incapable of falsehood, would be to trust more in one's own suspicions than in Christian charity, which believeth all things. Bellarminus thought he could prove the truth of the story by the fact that, at the end of it, the author himself invokes the two saints Barlaam and Josaphat! Leo Allatius admitted, indeed, that some of the speeches and conversations occurring in the story might be the work of Joannes Damascenus, because Josaphat, having but recently been converted, could not have quoted so many passages from the Bible. But he implies that even this could be explained, because the Holy Ghost might have taught St. Josaphat what to say. At all events, Leo has no mercy for those "quibus omnia sub sanctorum nomine prodita male olent, quemadmodum de sanctis Georgio, Christophoro, Hippolyto, Catarina, aliisque nusquam eos in rerum natura extitisse impudentissime nugantur." The Bishop of Avranches had likewise his doubts;

[p. 179]

but he calmed them by saying: "Non pas que je veuille soustenir que tout en soit suppose: il y auroit de la temerite a desavouer qu'il y ait jamais eu de Barlaam ni de Josaphat. Le temoignage du Martyrologe, qui les met au nombre des Saints, et leur intercession que Saint Jean Damascene reclame a la fin de cette histoire ne permettent pas d'en douter." [*1]

With us the question as to the historical or purely imaginary character of Josaphat has assumed a new and totally different aspect. We willingly accept the statement of Joannes Damascenus that the story of "Barlaam and Josaphat" was told him by men who came from India. We know that in India a story was current of a prince who lived in the sixth century B.C., a prince of whom it was predicted that he would resign the throne, and devote his life to meditation, in order to rise to the rank of a Buddha. The story tells us that his father did everything to prevent this; that he kept him in a palace secluded from the world, surrounded by all that makes life enjoyable; and that he tried to keep him in ignorance of sickness, old age, and death. We know from the same story that at last the young prince obtained permission to drive into the country, and that, by meeting an old man, a sick man, and a corpse, his eyes were opened to the unreality of life, and the vanity of this life's pleasures; that he escaped from his palace, and, after defeating the assaults of all adversaries, became the founder of a new religion. This is the story, it may be the legendary story, but at all events the recognized story of Gautama Sakyamuni, best known to us under the name of Buddha.

If, then, Joannes Damascenus tells the same story,

[p. 180]

only putting the name of Joasaph or Josaphat, i.e., Bodhisattva, in the place of Buddha; if all that is human and personal in the life of St. Josaphat is taken from the "Lalita Vistara"--what follows? It follows that, in the same sense in which La Fontaine's Perrette is the Brahman of the Pankatantra, St. Josaphat is the Buddha of the Buddhist canon. It follows that Buddha has become a saint in the Roman Church; it follows that, though under a different name, the sage of Kapilavastu, the founder of a religion which, whatever we may think of its dogma, is, in the purity of its morals, nearer to Christianity than any other religion, and which counts even now, after an existence of 2,400 years, 455,000,000 of believers, has received the highest honors that the Christian Church can bestow. And whatever we may think of the sanctity of saints, let those who doubt the right of Buddha to a place among them read the story of his life as it is told in the Buddhist canon. If he lived the life which is there described, few saints have a better claim to the title than Buddha; and no one either in the Greek or in the Roman Church need be ashamed of having paid to Buddha's memory the honor that was intended for St. Josaphat, the prince, the hermit, and the saint.

History, here as elsewhere, is stranger than fiction; and a kind fairy, whom men call Chance, has here, as elsewhere, remedied the ingratitude and injustice of the world.

Footnotes

^139:1 La Fontaine, Fables, livre vii., fable 10.

^139:2 Phaedon, 61, 5: Meta de ton theon, ennoesas, oti ton poieten deoi, eiper melloi poietes einai, poiein mythoys, all' oy logoys, kai aytos oyk E mythologikos, dia tauta de oys proxeiroys eixon kai epistamen muthoys tous Aisupoy, toutun epoiesa ois prutois enetyxoy.

^140:1 Robert, Fables Inedites, des XIIe, XIIIe, et XIVe Siecles; Paris, 1825; vol. i. p. ccxxvii.

^141:1 Pantschatantrum sine Quinquepartitum, edidit I. G. L. Kosegarten. Bonnae, 1848.

Pantschatantra, Funf Bucher indischer Fablen, aus dem Sanskrit ubersetzt. Von Th. Benfey. Leipzig, 1859.

Hitopadesa, with interlinear translation, grammatical analysis, and English translation, in Max Muller's Handbooks for the study of Sanskrit. London, 1864.

Hitopadesa, eine alte indische Fabelsammlung aus dem Sanskrit zum ersten Mal in das Deutsche ubersetzt. Von Max Muller. Leipzig, 1844.

^143:1 Pankatantra, v. 10.

^143:2 Hitopadesa, ed. Max Muller, p. 120; German translation, p. 159.

^144:1 Note A, page 188.

^148:1 Hottentot Fables and Tales, by Dr. W. H. I. Bleek, London, 1894, p. 19.

^148:2 Academy, vol. v. p. 548.

^149:1 Die Marchen des Siddhi-kur, or Tales of an Enchanted Corpse, translated front Kalmuk into German by B. Julg, 1866. (This is based on the Vetalapankavimsati.) Die Geschichte des Ardschi-Bordschi Chan, translated from Mongolian by Dr. B. Julg, 1868. (This is based on the Simhasanadvatrimsati.) A Mongolian translation of the Kalila and Dimnah, is ascribed to Melik Said Iftikhar eddin Mohammed ben Abou Nasr, who died AD. 1280. See Barbier de Meynard, "Description de la Ville de Kazvin," Journal Asiatique, 1857, p. 284; Lancereau, Pantchatantra, p. xxv.

^150:1 Plato's expression, "As I have put on the lion's skin" (Kratylos, 411), seems to show that he knew the fable of an animal or a man having assumed the lion's skin without the lion's courage. The proverb onos para Kymaioys seems to be applied to men boasting before people who have no means of judging. It presupposes the story of a donkey appearing in a lion's skin.

A similar idea is expressed in a fable of the Pankatantra (IV. 8) where a dyer, not being rich enough to feed his donkey, puts a tiger's skin on him. In this disguise the donkey is allowed to roam through all the cornfields without being molested, till one day he see a female donkey, and begins to bray. Thereupon the owners of the field kill him.

In the Hitopadesa (III. 3) the same fable occurs, only that there it is the keeper of the field who on purpose disguises himself as a she-donkey, and when he hears the tiger bray, kills him.

In the Chinese Avadanas, translated by Stanislas Julien (vol. ii. p. 59), the donkey takes a lion's skin and frightens everybody, till he begins to bray, and is recognized as a donkey.

In this case it is again quite clear that the Greeks did not borrow their fable and proverb from the Pankatantra; but it is not so easy to determine positively whether the fable was carried from the Greeks to the East, or whether it arose independently in two places.

^151:1 Calilah et Dimna, ou, Fables de Bidpai, en Arabe, precedees d'un Memoire sur l'origine de ce livre. Par Sylvestre de Sacy. Paris, 1816.

^151:2 Loiseleur Deslongchamps, Essai sur les Fables Indiennes, et sur leur Introduction en Europe. Paris, 1838.

^151:3 Pantschatantra, Funf Bucher indischer Fabeln, Marchen und Erzahlungen, mit Einleitung. Von. Th. Benfey. Leipzig, 1859.

^152:1 See Weil, Geschichte der Chalifen, vol. ii. p. 84.

^153:1 Benfey, p. 60.

^153:2 Cf. Barlaam et Joasaph, ed. Boissonade, p. 37.

^155:1 Kalila and Dimna; or, the Fables of Bidpai, translated from the Arabic. By the Rev. Wyndham Knatchbull, A. M. Oxford, 1819.

^156:1 Specimen Sapientiae Indorum Veterum, id est Liber Ethico-Politicus pervetustus, dictus Arabice Kalilah ve Dinanah, Graece Stephanites et Ichnelates, nunc primum Graece ex MS. Cod. Halsteiniano prodit cum versione Latina, opera S. G. Starkii. Berolini, 1697.

^157:1 This expression, a four-winged house, occurs also in the Pankatantra. As it does not occur in the Arabic text, published by De Sacy, it is clear that Symeon must have followed another Arabic text in which this adjective, belonging to the Sanskrit, and no doubt to the Pehlevi text, also, had been preserved.

^157:2 Note B, p. 190.

^157:3 Note C, p. 191.

^158:1 Note D, p. 192.

^158:2 Note E, p. 193.

^158:3 Benfey, Orient and Occident, vol. i. p. 138.

^158:4 Ibid. vol. i. p. 501. Its title is: "Exemplario contra los enganos y peligros del mundo," ibid. pp. 167, 168.

^159:1 Discorsi degli animali, di Messer Agnolo Firenzuola, in prose di M. A. F. (Fiorenza, 1548.)

^159:2 La Moral Filosophia del Doni, tratta da gli antichi scrittori. Vinegia, 1552.

Trattati Diversi di Sendebar Indian, filosopho morale. Vinegia, 1552. P. 65. Trattato Quarto.

A woman tells her husband to wait till her son is born, and says:--

"Stava uno Romito domestico ne i monti di Brianza a far penitenza e teneva alcune cassette d' api per suo spasso, e di quelle a suoi tempi ne cavava il Mele, e di quello ne vendeva alcuna parte tal volta per i suoi besogni. Avenue che un' anno ne fu una gran carestia, e egli attendeva a conservarlo, e ogni giorno lo guardava mille volte, e gli pareva cent' anni ogni hora, che e gli indugiava a empierlo di Mele," etc.

^159:3 Le Plaisant et Facetieux Discours des Animaux, novellement traduict de Tuscan en Francois. Lyon, 1556, par Gabriel Cottier.

Deux Livres de Filosofie Fabuleuse, le Premier Pris des Discours de M. Ange Firenzuola, le Second Extraict des Traictez de Sandebar Indien, par Pierre de La Rivey. Lyon, 1579.

^159:4 The Anvar-i Suhaili, or the Lights of Canopus, being the Persian version of the Fables of Pilpay, or the Book, Kalilah and Damnah, rendered into Persian by Husain Va'iz U'l-Kashifi, literally translated by E. B. Eastwick. Hertford, 1854.

^161:1 Note F, p. 194.

^161:2 Note G, p. 194.

^161:3 Note H, p. 196.

^162:1 Dialogues of Creatures moralysed, sm. 4to, circ. 1517. It is generally attributed to the press of John Rastell, but the opinion of Mr. Haslewood, [p. 163] in his preface to the reprint of 1816, that the book was printed on the continent, is perhaps the correct one. (Quaritch's Catalogue, July, 1870.)

^163:1 The Latin text is more simple: "Unde cum quedam domina dedisset ancille sue lac ut venderet et lac portaret ad urbem juxta fossatum cogitare cepit quod de pcio lactis emerit gallinam qua faceret pullos quos auctos in gallinas venderet et porcellos emeret eosque mutaret in oves et ipsas in boves. Sic que ditata contraheret cum aliquo nobili et sic gloriabatur. Et cum sic gloriaretur et cogitaret cum quanta gloria duceretur ad illum virum super equum dicendo gio gio cepit pede percutere terram quasi pungeret equum calcaribus. Sed tunc lubricatus est pes ejus et cecidit in fossatum effundendo lac. Sic enim non habuit quod se adepturam sperabat." Dialogus Creaturarum optime moralizatus (ascribed to Nicolaus Pergaminus, supposed to have lived in the thirteenth century). He quotes Elynandus, in Gestis Romanorum. First edition, "per Gerardum leeu in oppido Goudensi inceptum; munere Dei finitus est, Anno Domini, 1480."

^164:1 Note I, p. 197.

^164:2 My learned German translator, Dr. Felix Liebrecht, says in a note: "Other books in which our story appears before La Fontaine are Esopus, by Burkhard Waldis, ed. H. Kurz, Leipzig, 1862, ii. 177; note to Des Bettlers Kaufmannschaft; and Oesterley, in Kirchoff's Wendunmuth, v. 44, note to i. 171, Vergebene Anschleg reich zuwerden (Bibl. des liter. Vereins zu Stuttg. No. 99).

^166:1 Ricerche intorno al Libro di Sindibad. Milano, 1869.

^168:1 The Greek text was first published in 1832 by Boissonade, in his Anecdota Graeca, vol. iv. The title, as given in some MSS. is: Istoria psyxufeles ek teis endoteras tun Aithiopun xuras, teis Indun legomenes, pros ten agian polin metenextheisa dia Iuannoy tou monaxou [other MSS. read, syggrafeisa para tou agioy partos emun Iuannoy tou Damaskenou], andros timioy kai enaretoy moneis tou agioy Saba. en ei o bios Barlaam kai Iuasaf tun aoidimun kai makariun. Joannes Monachus occurs as the name of the author in other works of Joannes Damascenus. See Leo Allatius, Prolegomena, p L., in Damasceni Opera Omnia. Ed. Lequien, 1748. Venice.

At the end the author says: Eus ude to peras tou parontos logoy, on kata dunamin emen gegrafeka, kathus akekoa para tun apseydus paradedukun moi timiun andrun. Genoito de emas, tous anaginuskontas te kai akouontas ten psyxufelei diegesin tauten, teis meridos axiutheinai tun eyarestesantun tui kyriui eyxais kai presbeiais Barlaam kai Iuasaf tun makariun, peri un e diegesis. See also Wiener, Jahrbucher, vol. lxiii. pp. 44-83; vol. lxxii. pp. 274-288; vol. lxxiii. pp. 176-202.

^169:1 Littre, Journal des Savants, 1865, p. 337.

^169:2 The Martyrologium Romanum, whatever its authority may be, states distinctly that the acts of Barlaam and Josaphat were written by Sanctus Joannes Damascenus. "Aped Indos Persis finitimos sanctorum Barlaam et Josaphat, quorum actus mirandos sanctus Joannes Damascenus conscripsit." See Leonis Allatii Prolegomena, in Joannis Damasceni Opera, [p. 170] ed. Lequien, vol. L p. xxvi. He adds: "Et Gennadius Patriarcha per Conch. Florent. cap. 5: oyx Etton de kai o Iuannes o megas tou Damaskou ofth almos en tui biui Barlaam kai Iusafat tun Indun martyrei legun."

^170:1 The story of the caskets, well known from the Merchant of Venice, occurs in Barlaam and Josaphat, though it is used there for a different purpose.

^171:1 Cf. Benfey, Pantschatantra, vol. i. p. 80; vol. ii. p. 528; Les Avadanas, Contes et Apologues indiens, par Stanislas Julien, i. pp. 132, 191 Gesta Romanorum, cap. 168; Homayun Nameh, cap. iv.; Grimm, Deutsche Mythologie, pp. 758, 759; Liebrecht, Jahrbucher fur Rom. and Engl. Literatur, 1860.

^172:1 Lalita Vistara, ed. Calcutt., p. 120.

^172:2 Ibid., p. 225.

^172:3 See M. M.'s Chips from a German Workshop, Amer. ed., vol. i. p. 207.

^175:1 Minayeff, Melanges Asiatiques, vi. 5, p. 584, remarks: "According to a legend in the Mahavastu of Yasas or Yasoda (in a less complete form to be found in Schiefner, Eine tibetische Lebensbeschreibung Sakyamunis, p. 247; Hardy, Manual of Buddhism, p. 187; Bigandet, The Life or Legend of Gaudama, p. 113), a merchant appears in Yosoda's house, the night before he has the dream which induces him to leave his paternal house, and proclaims to him the true doctrine.

^175:2 Journal of the American Oriental Society, vol. iii. p. 21.

^175:3 In some places one might almost believe that Joannes Damascenus did not only hear the story of Buddha, as he says, from the mouth of people [p. 176] who had brought it to him from India, but that he had before him the very text of the Lalita Vistara. Thus in the account of the three or four drives we find indeed that the Buddhist canon represents Buddha as seeing on three successive drives, first an old, then a sick, and at last a dying man, while Joannes makes Joasaph meet two men on his first drive, one maimed, the other blind, and an old man, who is nearly dying, on his second drive. So far there is a difference which might best be explained by admitting the account given by Joannes Damascenus himself, viz: that the story was brought from India, and that it was simply told him by worthy and truthful men. But, if it was so, we have here another instance of the tenacity with which oral tradition is able to preserve the most minute points of the story. The old man is described by a long string of adjectives both in Greek and in Sanskrit, and many of them are strangely alike. The Greek gerun, old, corresponds to the Sanskrit girna; pepalaiumenos, aged, is Sanskrit vriddha; erriknumenos to prosupon, shriveled in his face, is balinikitakaya, the body covered with wrinkles; pareimenos tas knemas weak in his knees, is pravedhayamanah sarvangapratyangaih, trembling in all his limbs; sygkekyfus, bent, is kubga: pepoliumenos, gray, is palitakesa; esteremenos tous odontas, toothless, is khandadanta; egkekomena lalun, stammering, is khurakhuravasaktakantha.

^176:1 Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlandischen Gesellschaft, vol. xxiv p. 480.

^176:2 Debats, 1859, 21 and 26 Juillet.

^177:1 Die Quellen des Barlaam and Josaphat, in Jahrbuch fur roman. and engl. Litteratur, vol. ii. p. 314, 1860.

^177:2 Travels of Fah-hian and Sung-gun, Buddhist Pilgrims from China to India. (400 AD. and 518 AD.) Translated from the Chinese by Samuel Beal. London, Trubner & Co. 1869.

^179:1 Littre, Journal Les Savants, 1865, p. 337.

On the Migration of Fables, by Max Muller, [1881], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 181]

  

APPENDIX.

I AM enabled to add here a short account of an important discovery made by Professor Benfey with regard to the Syriac translation of our Collection of Fables. Doubts had been expressed by Sylvestre de Sacy and others, as to the existence of this translation, which was mentioned for the first time in Ebedjesu's catalogue of Syriac writers published by Abraham Ecchellensis, and again later by Assemani ("Biblioth. Orient.," tom. iii. part 1, p. 219). M. Renan, on the contrary, had shown that the title of this translation, as transmitted to us, "Kalilag and Damnag," was a guarantee of its historical authenticity. As a final k in Pehlevi becomes h in modern Persian, a title such as "Kalilag and Damnag," answering to "Kalilak and Damnak" in Pehlevi, in Sanskrit "Karataka and Damanaka," could only have been borrowed from the Persian before the Mohammedan era. Now that the interesting researches of Professor Benfey on this subject have been rewarded by the happy discovery of a Syriac translation, there remains but one point to be cleared up, viz., whether this is really the translation made by Bud Periodeutes, and whether this same translation was made, as Ebedjesu affirms, from the Indian text, or, as M. Renan supposes, from a Pehlevi version. I insert the account which Professor Benfey himself gave of his discovery in the Supplement to the "Allgemeine Zeitung" of July 12, 1871, and I may add that both text and translation are nearly ready for publication (1875).

The oldest MS. of the Pantschatantra.

GOTTINGEN, July 6, 1871.

The account I am about to give will recall the novel of our celebrated compatriot Freytag ("Die verlorene Handschrift,"

[p. 182]

or "The Lost MS."), but with this essential difference, that we are not here treating of a creation of the imagination, but of a real fact; not of the MS. of a work of which many other copies exist, but of an unique specimen; in short, of the MS. of a work which, on the faith of one single mention, was believed to have been composed thirteen centuries ago. This mention, however, appeared to many critical scholars so untrustworthy, that they looked upon it as the mere result of confusion. Another most important difference is, that this search, which has lasted three years, has been followed by the happiest results: it has brought to light a MS. which, even in this century, rich in important discoveries, deserves to be ranked as of the highest value. We have acquired in this MS. the oldest specimen preserved to our days of a work, which, as translated into various languages, has been more widely disseminated and has had a greater influence on the development of civilization than any other work, excepting the Bible.

But to the point.

Through the researches, which I have published in my edition of the Pantschatantra, [*1] it is known that about the sixth century of our era, a work existed in India, which treated of deep political questions under the form of fables, in which the actors were animals. It contained various chapters; but these subdivisions were not, as had been hitherto believed, eleven to thirteen in number, but, as the MS. just found shows most clearly, there were at least twelve, perhaps thirteen or fourteen. This work was afterwards so entirely altered in India, that five of these divisions were separated from the other six or nine, and much enlarged, whilst the remaining ones were entirely set aside. This apparently curtailed, but really enlarged edition

[p. 183]

of the old work, is the Sanskrit book so well known as the Pantschatantra, "The Five Books." It soon took the place, on its native soil, of the old work, causing the irreparable loss of the latter in India.

But before this change of the old work had been effected in its own land, it had, in the first half of the sixth century, been carried to Persia, and translated into Pehlevi under King Chosru Nuschirvan (531-579). According to the researches which I have described in my book already quoted, the results of which are fully confirmed by the newly discovered MS., it cannot be doubted that, if this translation had been preserved, we should have in it a faithful reproduction of the original Indian work, from which, by various modifications, the Pantschatantra is derived. But unfortunately this Pehlevi translation, like its Indian original, is irretrievably lost.

But it is known to have been translated into Arabic in the eighth century by a native of Persia, by name Abdallah ibn Almokaffa (d. 760), who had embraced Islamism, and it acquired, partly in this language, partly in translations and retranslations from it (apart from the recensions in India, which penetrated to East, North, and South Asia,) that extensive circulation which has caused it to exercise the greatest influence on civilization in Western Asia, and throughout Europe.

Besides this translation into Pehlevi, there was, according to one account, another, also of the sixth century, in Syriac. This account we owe to a Nestorian writer, who lived in the thirteenth century. He mentions in his catalogue of authors [*1] a certain Bud Periodeutes, who probably about 570 had to inspect the Nestorian communities in Persia and India, and who says that, in addition to other books which he names, "he translated the book 'Qalilag and Damnag' from the Indian."

Until three years ago, not the faintest trace of this old

[p. 184]

[paragraph continues] Syrian translation was to be found, and the celebrated Orientalist, Silvestre de Sacy, in the historical memoir which he prefixed to his edition of the Arabic translation, "Calila and Dimna" (Paris, 1816), thought himself justified in seeing in this mention a mere confusion between Barzuyeh, the Pehlevi translator, and a Nestorian Monk.

The first trace of this Syriac version was found in May, 1868. Ou the sixth of that month, Professor Bickell of Munster, the diligent promoter of Syrian philology, wrote to tell me that he had heard from a Syrian Archdeacon from Urumia, Jochannan bar Babisch, who had visited Munster in the spring to collect alms, and had returned there again in May, that, some time previously, several Chaldaean priests who had been visiting the Christians of St. Thomas in India, had brought back with them some copies of this Syriac translation, and had given them to the Catholic Patriarch in Elkosh (near Mossul). He had received one of these.

Though the news appeared so unbelievable and the character of the Syrian priest little calculated to inspire confidence in his statements, it still seemed to me of sufficient importance for rue to ask my friends to make further inquiries in India, where other copies ought still to be in existence. Even were the result but a decided negative, it would be a gain to science. These inquiries had no effect in proving the truth of the archdeacon's assertions; but, at the same time, they did not disprove them. It would of course have been more natural to make inquiries among the Syrians. But from want of friends and from other causes, which I shall mention further on, I could hardly hope for any certain results, and least of all, that if the MS. really existed, I could obtain it, or a copy of it.

The track thus appeared to be lost, and not possible to be followed up, when, after the lapse of nearly two years, Professor Bickell, in a letter of February 22, 1870, drew my attention to the fact that the Chaldaean Patriarch, Jussuf Audo, who, according to Jochannan bar Babisch, was in

[p. 185]

possession of that translation, was now in Rome, as member of the Council summoned by the Pope.

Through Dr. Scholl of Weimar, then in Rome, and one Italian savant, Signor Ignazio Guidi, I was put into communication with the Patriarch, and with another Chaldaean priest, Bishop Qajjat, and received communications, the latest of June 11, 1870, which indeed proved the information of Jochannan bar Babisch to be entirely untrustworthy; but at the same time pointed to the probable existence of a MS. of the Syriac translation at Mardin.

I did not wait for the last letters, which might have saved the discoverer much trouble, but might also have frustrated the whole inquiry; but, as soon as I had learnt the place where the MS. might be, I wrote, May 6, 1870, exactly two years after the first trace of the MS. had been brought to light, to my former pupil and friend, Dr. Albert Socin of Basle, who was then in Asia on a scientific expedition, begging him to make the most careful inquiries in Mardin about this MS., and especially to satisfy himself whether it had been derived from the Arabian translation, or was independent of and older than the latter. We will let Dr. Socin, the discoverer of the MS., tell us himself of his efforts and their results.

"I received your letter of May 6, 1870, a few days ago, by Bagdad and Mossul, at Yacho on the Chaboras. You say that you had heard that the book was in the library at Mardin. I must own that I doubted seriously the truth of the information, for Oriental Christians always say that they possess every possible book, whilst in reality they have but few. I found this on my journey through the 'Christian Mountain,' the Tur el' 'Abedin, where I visited many places and monasteries but little known. I only saw Bibles in Estrangelo character, which were of value, nowhere profane books; but the people are so fanatical, and watch their books so closely, that it is very difficult to get sight of any thing; and one has to keep them in good humor. Unless after a long sojourn, and with the aid of bribery, there can

[p. 186]

never be any thought of buying anything from a monastic library. Arrived in Mardin, I set myself to discover the book. I naturally passed by all Moslem libraries, as Syriac books only exist among the Christians. I settled at first that the library in question could only be the Jacobite Cloister, 'Der ez Zaferan,' the most important centre of the Christians of Mardin. I therefore sent to the Patriarch of Diarbekir for most particular introductions. and started for 'Der ez Zaferan,' which lies in the mountains, 5 1/2 hours from Mardin. The recommendations opened the library to me. I looked through four hundred volumes, without finding anything; there was not much of any value. On my return to Mardin, I questioned people right and left; no one knew anything about it. At length I summoned up courage one day, and went to the Chaldaean monastery. The different sects in Mardin are most bitter against each other, and as I unfortunately lodged in the house of an American missionary, it was very difficult for me to gain access to these Catholics, who were unknown to me. Luckily my servant was a Catholic, and could state that I had no proselytizing schemes. After a time I asked about their books; Missals and Gospels were placed before me; I asked if they had any books of Fables. 'Yes, there was one there.' After a long search in the dust, it was found and brought to me. I opened it, and saw at the first glance, in red letters, 'Qalilag and Damnag,' with the old termination g, which proved to me that the work was not translated from the Arabic 'Calila ve Dimnah.' You may be certain that I did not show what I felt. I soon laid the book quietly down. I had indeed before asked the monk specially for 'Kalila and Dimna,' and with some persistency, before I inquired generally for books of fables; but he had not the faintest suspicion that the book before him was the one so eagerly sought after. After about a week or ten days, in order to arouse no suspicion, I sent a trustworthy man to borrow the book; but he was asked at once if it were for the 'Frengi den Prot' (Protestant), and my

[p. 187]

confidant was so good as to deny it, 'No, it was for himself.' I then examined the book more carefully. Having it safely in my possession, I was not alarmed at the idea of a little hubbub. I therefore made inquiries, but in all secret, whether they would sell it. 'No, never,' was the answer I expected and received, and the idea that I had borrowed it for myself was revived. I therefore began to have a copy made. But I was obliged to leave Mardin and even the neighboring Diarbekir, before I received the copy. In Mardin itself the return of the book was loudly demanded, as soon as they knew I was having it copied. I was indeed delighted when, through the kindness of friends, post tot discrimina rerum I received the book at Aleppo."

So far writes my friend, the fortunate discoverer, who, as early as the 19th of August, 1870, announced in a letter the happy recovery of the book. On April 20, 1871, he kindly sent it to me from Basle.

This is not the place to descant on the high importance of this discovery. It is only necessary to add that there is not the least doubt that it has put us in possession of the old Syriac translation, of which Ebedjesur speaks. There is only one question still to be settled, whether it is derived direct from the Indian, or through the Pehlevi translation? In either case it is the oldest preserved rendering of the original, now lost in India, and therefore of priceless value.

The fuller treatment of this and other questions, which spring from this discovery, will find a place in the edition of the text, with translation and commentary, which Professor Bickell is preparing in concert with Dr. Hoffman and myself.

THEODOR BENFEY.

Footnotes

^182:1 Pantschatantra; Funf Bucher indischer Fabeln. Marchen und Erzahlungen. Aus dem Sanskrit ubersetzt mit Einleitung and Anmerkungen, 2 Theile, Leipzig, 1859; and particularly in the first part, the introduction, called "Ueber das Indische Grundwerk, and dessen Ausflusse, so wie uber die Quellen and die Verbreitung des Inhalts derselben."

^183:1 Cf. Assemani, Biblioth. Orient. iii. 1, 220, and Renan, in the Journal Asiatique, Cinq. Serie, t. vii. 1856, p. 251.

On the Migration of Fables, by Max Muller, [1881], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 188]

  

NOTES.

  

NOTE A.

IN modern times, too, each poet or fabulist tells the story as seems best to him. I give three recensions of the story of Perrette, copied from English schoolbooks.

  

THE MILKMAID.

A milkmaid who poised a full pail on her head,
 Thus mused on her prospects in life, it is said:--
 Let me see, I should think that this milk will procure
 One hundred good eggs or fourscore, to be sure.
      Well then, stop a bit, it must not be forgotten,
 Some of these may be broken, and some may be rotten;
 But if twenty for accident should be detached,
 It will leave me just sixty sounds eggs to be hatched.
      Well, sixty sound eggs--no, sound chickens I mean:
 Of these some may die--we'll suppose seventeen;
 Seventeen, not so many!--say ten at the most,
 Which will leave fifty chickens to boil or to roast.
      But then there's their barley, how much will they need?
 Why, they take but one grain at a time when they feed,
 So that's a mere trifle;--now then, let me see,
 At a fair market-price how much money there'll be.
 Six shillings a pair, five, four, three-and-six,
 To prevent all mistakes that low price I will fix;
 Now what will that make? Fifty chickens I said;
 Fifty times three-and-six?--I'll ask brother Ned.
      Oh! but stop, three-and-sixpence a pair I must sell them!
 Well, a pair is a couple; now then let us tell them.
 A couple in fifty will go (my poor brain),
 Why just a score times, and five pairs will remain. [p. 189]
      Twenty-five pairs of fowls, now how tiresome it is
 That I can't reckon up such money as this.
 Well there 's no use in trying, so let 's give a guess--
 I'll say twenty pounds, and it can be no less.
      Twenty pounds I am certain will buy me a cow,
 Thirty geese and two turkeys, eight pigs and a sow;
 Now if these turn out well, at the end of the year
 I shall fill both my pockets with guineas, 'tis clear.
      Forgetting her burden when this she had said,
 The maid superciliously tossed up her head,
 When, alas for leer prospects! her milkpail descended,
 And so all her schemes for the future were ended.
      This moral, I think, may be safely attached
 "Reckon not on your chickens before they are hatched!
                                       JEFFREYS TAYLOR."

  

FABLE.

A country maid was walking with a pail of milk upon her head, when she fell into the following train of thoughts: "The money for which I shall sell this milk will enable me to increase my stock of eggs to three hundred. These eggs will bring at least two hundred and fifty chickens. The chickens will be fit to carry to market about Christmas, when poultry always bear a good price; so that by May-day I shall have money enough to buy me a new gown. Green?--let me consider--yes, green becomes my complexion best, and green it shall be. In this dress I will go to the fair, where all the young fellows will strive to have me for a partner; but I shall perhaps refuse every one of them, and with an air of distain toss from them." Charmed with this thought, she could not forbear acting with her head what thus passed in her mind, when down came the pail of milk, and with it all her fancied happiness.--From Guy's "British Spelling Book."

  

ALNASKER.

Alnasker was a very idle fellow, that would never set his hand to work during his father's life. When his father died he left him to the value of a hundred pounds in Persian money. In order to make the best of it he laid it out in glasses and bottles, and the finest china. These he piled up in a large open basket at his feet, and leaned his back upon the wall of his shop in the

[p. 190]

hope that many people would come in to buy. As he sat in this posture, with his eyes upon the basket, he fell into an amusing train of thought, and talked thus to himself: "This basket," says he, "cost me a hundred pounds, which is all I had in the world. I shall quickly make two hundred of it by selling in retail. These two hundred shall in course of trade rise to ten thousand, when I will lay aside my trade of a glass-man, and turn a dealer in pearls and diamonds, and all sorts of rich stones. When I have got as much wealth as I can desire, I will purchase the finest house I can find, with lands, slaves, and horses. Then I shall set myself on the footing of a prince, and will ask the grand Vizier's daughter to be my wife. As soon as I have married her, I will buy her ten black servants, the youngest and best that can be got for money. When I have brought this princess to my house, I shall take care to breed her in due respect for me. To this end I shall confine her to her own rooms, make her a short visit, and talk but little to her. Her mother will then come and bring her daughter to me, as I am seated on a sofa. The daughter, with tears in her eyes, will fling herself at my feet, and beg me to take her into my favor. Then will I, to impress her with a proper respect for my person, draw up my leg, and spurn her from me with my foot in such a manner that she shall fall down several paces from the sofa." Alnasker was entirely absorbed with his ideas, and could not forbear acting with his foot what he had in his thoughts; so that, striking his basket of brittle ware, which was the foundation of all his grand hopes, he kicked his glasses to a great distance into the street, and broke then into a thousand pieces.--"Spectator." (From the "Sixth Book," published by the Scottish School Book Association, W. Collins & Co., Edinburgh).

  

NOTE B.

PERTSCH, in Benfey's "Orient and Occident," vol. ii. p. 261. Here the story is told as follows: "Perche si conta che un certo pouer huomo hauea uicino a doue dormiua, un mulino & del buturo, & una notte tra se pensando disse, io uendero questo mulino, & questo butturo tanto per il meno, che io comprero diece capre. Le quali mi figliaranno in cinque mesi altre tante, & in cinque anni multiplicheranno fino a quattro cento; Le quali barattero in cento buoi, & con essi seminaro una capagna, & insieme da figliuoli

[p. 191]

loro, & dal frutto della terra in altri cinque anni, saro oltre modo ricco, & faro un palagio quadro, adorato, & comprero schiaui una infinita, & prendero moglie, la quale mi fara un figliuolo, & lo nominero Pancalo, & lo faro ammaestrare come bisogna. Et se vedro che non si curi con questa bacchetta cosi il percotero. Con che prendendo la bacchetta che gli era uicina, & battendo di essa il vaso doue era il buturo, e lo ruppe, & fuse il buturo. Dopo gli partori la moglie un figliuolo, e la moglie un di gli disse, habbi un poco cura di questo fanciullo o marito, fino che io uo e torno da un seruigio. La quale essendo andata fu anco il marito chiamato dal Signore della terra, & tra tanto auuenne che una serpe sali sopra il fanciullo. Et vna donzella uicina, corsa la l'uccise. Tornato il marito uide insanguito l' vscio, & pensando che costei l' hauesse ucciso, auanti che il uedesse, le diede sui capo, di un bastone, e l' uccise. Entrato poi, & sano trouando il figliuolo, & la serpe morta, si fu grandemente pentito, & piase amaramente. Cosi adunque i frettolosi in molte cose errano." (Page 516.)

  

NOTE C.

THIS and some other extracts, from books not to be found at Oxford, were kindly copied for me by my late friend, E. Deutsch, of the British Museum.

"Georgii Pachymeris Michael Palaeologus, sive Historia serum a M. P. gestarum," ed. Petr. Possinus. Rome, 1666.

Appendix ad observationes Pachymerianas, Specimen Sapientiae Indorum veterum liber olim ex lingua Indica in Persicam a Perzoe Medico: ex Persica in Arabicam ab Anonymo: ex Arabica in Graecam a Symeone Seth, a Petro Possino Societ. Iesu, novissime e Graeca in Latinam translatas.

"Huic talia serio nuganti haud paulo cordatior mulier. Mihi videris, Sponse, inquit, nostri cujusdam famuli egentissimi hominis similis ista inani provisione nimis remotarum et incerto eventu pendentium rerum. Is diurnis mercedibus mellis ac butyri non magna copia collecta duobus ista vasis e terra coctili condiderat. Mox secum ita ratiocinans nocte quadam dicebat: Mel ego istud ac butyrum quindecim minimum vendam denariis. Ex his decem Capras emam. Hae mihi quinto mense totidem alias parient. Quinque annis gregem Caprarum facile quadringentarum confecero. Has commutare tunc placet cum bobus centum, quibus

[p. 192]

exarabo vim terrae magnum et numerum tritici maximum congeram. Ex fructibus hisce quinquennio multiplicatis, pecuniae scilicet tantus existet modus, ut facile in locupletissimis numerer. Accedit dos uxoris quam istis opibus ditissiman nansciscar. Nascetur mihi filius quem jam nunc decerno nominare Pancalum. Hunc educabo liberalissime, ut nobilium nulli concedat. Qui si ubi adoleverit, ut juventus solet, contumacem se mihi praebeat, haud feret impune. Baculo enim hoc ilium hoc modo feriam. Arreptum inter haec dicendum lecto vicinum baculum per tenebras jactavit, casuque incurrens in dolia mellis et butyri juxta posita, confregit utrumque, ita ut in ejus etiam os barbamque stillae liquoris prosilirent; caetera effusa et mixta pulveri prorsus corrumperentur; ac fundamentum spei tantae, inopem et multum gementem momento destitueret." (Page 602.)

  

NOTE D.

"DIRECTORIUM Humanae Vitae alias Parabolae Antiquorum Sapientum," fol. s.1. e. a. k. 4 (circ. 1480?): "Dicitque olim quidam fuit heremita apud quendam regem. Cui rex providerat quolibet die pro sua vita. Scilicet provisionem de sua coquina et vasculum de melle. Ille vero comedebat decocta, et reservabat mel in quodam vase suspenso super suum caput donec esset plenum. Erat autem mel percarum in illis diebus. Quadam vero die: dun jaceret in suo lecto elevato capite, respexit vas mellis quod super caput ei pendebat. Et recordatus quoniam mel de die in diem vendebatur pluris solito seu carius, et dixit in corde suo. Quum fuerit hoc vas plenum: vendam ipsum uno talento auri: de quo mihi emam decem oves, et successu temporis he oves facient filios et filas, et erunt viginti. Postes vero ipsis multiplicatis cum filiis et filiabus in quatuor annis erunt quatuor centum. Tunc de quibuslibet quatuor ovibus emam vaccam et bovem et terram. Et vaccae multiplicabuntur in filiis, quorum masculos accipiam mihi in culturam terre, praeter id quod percipiam de eis de lacte et lana, donec non consummatis aliis quinque annis multiplicabuntur in tantum quod habebo mihi magnas substantias et divitias, et ero a cunctis reputatus dives et honestus. Et edificabo mihi tunc grandia et excellentia edificia pre omnibus meis vicinis et consauguinibus, itaque omnes de meis divitiis loquantur, nonne erit mihi illud jocundum, eum omnes homilies mihi reverentiam in omnibus locis exhibeant.

[p. 193]

[paragraph continues] Accipiam postea uxorem de nobilibus terre. Cumque eam cognovero, concipiet et pariet mihi filium nobilem et delectabilem cum bona fortuna et dei beneplacito qui crescet in scientia virtute, et relinquam mihi per ipsum bonam memoriam post mei obitum et castigabo ipsum dietim: si mee recalcitraverit doctrine; ac mihi in omnibus erit obediens, et si non: percutiam eum isto baclo et erecto baculo ad percutiendum percussit vas mellis et fregit ipsum et defluxit mel super caput ejus."

  

NOTE E.

"DAS Buch der Weisheit der alter Weisen," Ulm, 1415. Here the story is given as follows:--

"Man sagt es wohnet eins mals ein bruder der dritten regel der got fast dienet, bei eins kunigs hof, den versach der kunig alle tag zu auff enthalt seines lebens ein kuchen speiss und ein fleschlein mit honig. diser ass alle tag die speiss von der kuchen und den honig behielt er in ein irden fleschlein das hieng ob seiner petstat so lang biss es voll ward. Nun kam bald eine grosse teur in den honig und eins morgens frue lag er in seinem pett und sach das honig in dem fleschlein ob seinem haubt hangen do fiel ym in sein gedanck die teure des honigs und fieng an mit ihm selbs ze reden. wann diss fleschlein gantz vol honigs wirt so ver kauff ich das umb funff guldin, darum kauff ich mir zehen gutter schaff und die machen alle des jahrs lember. und dann werden eins jahrs zweintzig und die und das von yn kummen mag in zehen jaren werden tausent. dann kauff ich umb fier schaff ein ku und kauff dobei ochsen und ertrieh die meren sich mit iren fruchten und do nimb ich dann die frucht zu arbeit der acker. von den andern kuen und schaffen nimb ich milich und woll ee das andre funff jar furkommen so wird es sich allso meren das ich ein grosse hab und reichtumb uberkumen wird dann will ich mir selbs knecht und kellerin kauffen und hohe und hubsche baw ton. und darnach so nimm ich mir ein hubsch weib von einem edeln geschlecht die beschlaff ich mit kurtzweiliger lieb. so enpfecht sie und gebirt mir ein schon gluckseligten sun und gottforchtigen. und der wirt wachsen in lere und kunsten und in weissheit. durch den lass ich mir einen guten leumde nach meinein tod. aber wird er nit folgig sein und meiner straff nit achten so wolt ich yn mit meinem stecken uber sein rucken on erbermde gar hart schlahen. und nam sein stecken da mit man pflag das

[p. 194]

pet ze machen ym selbs ze zeigen wie fretelich er sein sun schlagen wolt. und schlug das irden fass das ob seinem haubt hieng zu stricken dass ym das honig under sein antlit und in das pet troff und ward ym von allen sein gedencken nit dann das er sein antlit und pet weschen must."

  

NOTE F.

THIS translation has lately been published by Don Pascual de Gayangos in the "Biblioteca de Autores Espanoles," Madrid, 1860, vol. li. Here the story runs as follows (p.57):--

'Del religioso que vertio la miel et la manteca sobre su cabeza.

"Dijo la mujer: 'Dicen que un religioso habia cada dia limosna de casa de un mercader rico, pan e manteca e miel e otras cosas, et comia el pan e lo al condesaba, et ponia la miel e la manteca en un jarra, fasta quel a fincho, et tenia la jarra colgada a la cabecera de su cama. Et vino tiempo que encarecio la miel e la manteca, et el religioso fablo un dia consigo mismo, estando asentado en su cama, et dijo asi: Vendere cuanto esta en esta jarra por tantos maravedis, e compare con ellos diez cabras, et emprenarse-han, e pariran a cabo de cinco meses; et fizo cuenta de esta guisa, et fallo que en cinco anos montarian bien cuatrocientas cabras. Desi dijo: Venderlas-he todas, et con el precio dellas comprare cien vacas, por cada cuatro cabezas una vaca, e habere simiente e sembrare con los bueyes, et aprovecharme-he de los becerros et de las fembras e de la leche e manteca, e de las mieses habre grant haber, et labrare muy nobles casas, e comprare siervos e siervas, et esto fecho casarme-he con una mujer muy rica, e fermosa, e de grant logar, e emprefrarla-he de fijo varon, e nacere complido de sus miembros, et criarlo-he como a fijo de rey, e castigarlo-he con esta vara, si non quisiere ser bueno e obediente.' E el deciendo esto, alzo la vara que tenia en la mano, et ferio en la olla que estaba colgada encima del, e quebrola, e cayole la miel e la manteca sobre su cabeza," etc.

  

NOTE G.

SEE "Poesies inedites du Moyen Age," par M. Edelstand Du Meril. Paris, 1854. XVI. De Viro et Vase Olei (p. 239):--

[p. 195]

"Uxor ab antiquo fuit infecunda marito.
  Mesticiam (l. moestitiam) cujus cupiens lenire vix (1. vir) hujus,
  His blandimentis solatur tristi[ti]a mentis:
  Cur sic tristaris? Dolor est tuus omnis inanis:
  Pulchrae prolis eris satis amodo munere felix.
  Pro nihilo ducens conjunx haec verbula prudens,
  His verbis plane quod ait vir monstrat inane:
  Rebus inops quidam . . . (bone vir, tihi dicam)
  Vas oleo plenum, longum quod retro per aevum
  Legerat orando, loca per diversa vagando,
  Fune ligans ar(c)to, tecto[que] suspendit ab alto.
  Sic praestolatur tempus quo pluris ernatur[atur]
  Qua locupletari se sperat et arte beari.
  Talia dum captat, haec stultus inania jactat:
  Ecce potens factus, fuero cum talia nactus,
  Vinciar uxori quantum queo nobiliori:
  Tune sobolem gignam, se meque per omnia dignam,
  Cujus opus morum genus omne praeibit avorum.
  Cui nisi tot vitae fuerint insignia rite,
  Fustis hic absque mora feriet caput ejus et [h]ora.
  Quod dum narraret, dextramque minando levaret,
  Ut percussisset puerum quasi praesto fuisset
  Vas in praedictum manus ejus dirigit ictum
  Servatumque sibi vas il[l]ico fregit olivi."

I owe the following extract to the kindness of M. Paul Meyer: --

Apologi Phaedrii ex ludicris I. Regnerii Belnensis doct. Medici, Divione, apud Petrum Palliot, 1643 in 12, 126 pages et de plus un index.

Le recueil se divise en deux partis, pars I., pars II. (La fable en question est it la page 32, pars I. fab. xxv.)

XXV.

Pagana et eius mercis emptor.

Pagana mulier, lac in olla fictili,
 Ova in canistro, rustici mercem penus,
 Ad civitatem proximam ibat venditum.
 In eius aditu factus huit quidam obvius [p. 196]
 Quanti rogavit ista quae fers vis emi?
 Et illa tanti. Tantin'? hoc fuerit nimis.
 Numerare num me vis quod est aequum? vide
 Hac merce quod sit nunc opus mihi plus dabo
 Quam praestet illam cede, et hos nummos cape,
 Ea quam superbe foede rusticitas agit,
 Hominem reliquit additis conviciis,
 Quasi aestimasset vilius mercem optimam.
 Aversa primos inde vix tulerat grades,
 Cum lubricato corruit strato viae:
 Lac olla fundit quassa, gallinaceae
 Testae vitellos congerunt coeno suos
 Caput cruorem mittit impingens petrae
 Luxata nec fert coxa surgentem solo:
 Ridetur ejus non malum, sed mens procax,
 Qua merx et ipsa mercis et pretium petit;
 Segue illa deflens tot pati infortunia
 Nulli imputare quam sibi hanc sortem potest
 Dolor sed omnis saeviter recruduit
 Curationis danda cum merces fuit.

In re minori cum quis et fragili tumet
 Hunc sortis ingens sternit indignatio.

  

NOTE H.

HULSBACH, "Sylva Sermonum," Basileae, 1568, p. 28: "In sylva quadam morabatur heremicola jam satis provectae aetatis, qui quaque die accedebat civitatem, afferens inde mensuram mellis, qua donabatur. Hoc recondebat in vase terreo, quod pependerat supra lectum suum. Uno dierum jacens in lecto, et habens bacalum in manu sua, haec apud se dicebat: Quotidie mihi datur vasculum mellis, quod dum indies recondo, fiet tandem summa aliqua. Jam valet mensura staterem unum. Corraso autem ita floreno uno aut altero, emam mihi oves, quae foenerabunt mihi plures: quibus divenditis coemam mihi elegantem uxorculam, cum qua transigam vitam meam laetanter: ex ea suscitabo mihi puellam, quam instituam honeste. Si vero mihi noluerit obedire, hoc baculo eam ita comminuam: atque levato baculo confregit suum vasculum, et effusum est mel, quare

[p. 197]

cassatum est suum propositum, et manendum adhuc in suo statu."

  

NOTE I.

"EL CONDE LUCANOR, compuesto por el excelentissimo Principe don Iuan Manuel, hijo del Infante don Manuel, y nieto del Santo Rey don Fernando," Madrid, 1642; cap. 29, p. 96. He tells the story as follows: "There was a woman called Dona Truhana (Gertrude), rather poor than rich. One day she went to the market carrying a pot of honey on her head. On her way she began to think that she would sell the pot of honey, and buy a quantity of eggs, that from those eggs she would have chickens, that she would sell them and buy sheep; that the sheep would give her lambs, and thus calculating all her gains, she began to think herself much richer than her neighbors. With the riches which she imagined she possessed, she thought how she would marry her sons and daughters, and how she would walk in the street surrounded by her sons and daughters-in-law; and how people would consider her happy for having amassed so large a fortune, though she had been so poor. While she was thinking over all this, she began to laugh for joy, and struck her head and forehead with her hand. The pot of honey fell down, was broken, and she shed hot tears because she had lost all that she would have possessed if the pot of honey had not been broken."

  

NOTE K.

BONAVENTURE des Periers, "Les Contes ou les Nouvelles." Amsterdam, 1735. Nouvelle XIV. (vol. i. p. 141). (First edition, Lyon, 1558): "Et ne les (les Alquemistes) scauroiton mieux comparer qu'a une bonne femme qui portoit une potee de laict au marche, faisant son compte ainsi: qu'elle la vendroit deux liards: de ces deux liards elle en achepteroit une douzaine d'oeufs, lesquelz elle mettroit couver, et en auroit une douzaine de poussins: ces poussins deviendroient grands, et les feroit chaponner: ces chapons vaudroient cinq solz la piece, ce seroit un escu et plus, dont elle achepteroit deux cochons, masle et femelle: qui deviendroient grands et en feroient une douzaine d'autres, qu'elle vendroit vingt solz la piece; apres les avoir

[p. 198]

nourris quelque temps, ce seroient douze francs, dont elle achepteroit une iument, qui porteroit un beau poulain, lequel croistroit et deviendroit tant gentil: il sauteroit et feroit Hin. Et en disant Hin, la bonne femme, de l'aise qu'elle avoit en son compte, se print a faire la ruade que feroit son poulain: et en ce faisant sa potee de laict va tomber, et se respandit toute. Et voila ses oeufs, ses poussins, ses chappons, ses cochons, sa jument, et son poulain, tous par terre."

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: pc.txt =====


    Proofs of a Conspiracy, by John Robison, [1798], at sacred-texts.com

  

PROOFS

  

OF A

  

CONSPIRACY

  

AGAINST ALL THE

  

RELIGIONS AND GOVERNMENTS

  

OF

  

EUROPE,

  

CARRIED ON

  

IN THE SECRET MEETINGS

  

OF

  

FREE MASONS, ILLUMINATI,

  

AND

  

READING SOCIETIES,

  

COLLECTED FROM GOOD AUTHORITIES,

  

BY JOHN ROBISON, A. M.

  

PROFESSOR OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY, AND SECRETARY TO THE ROYAL SOCIETY OF EDINBURGH.

Nam tua res agitur paries cum proximo ardet.

  

THE FOURTH EDITION.

  

TO WHICH IS ADDED, A POSTSCRIPT.

  

NEW-YORK:

  

Printed and Sold by George Forman, No. 64, Water-Street,
 between Coenties and the Old-Slip.

  

[1798]

Click to enlarge
Title Page

Scanned at sacred-texts.com, November 2006. Proofed and formatted by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the United States because it was published prior to January 1st, 1923. These files may be used for any non-commercial purpose, provided this notice of attribution is left intact in all copies.

     Proofs of a Conspiracy, by John Robison, [1798], at sacred-texts.com

Click to enlarge
Dedication and Epigram

I have preserved the original typography in the dedication and epigram, but the typography has been modernized in the rest of the text.--JBH

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE

WILLIAM WYNDHAM

SECRETARY AT WAR. &c. as &e. SIR,

It was with great fatisfaction that I learned from a Friend that you coincided with me in the opinion, that the information contained in this performance would make a ufeful impreffion on the minds of my Countrymen.

I have prefumed to infcribe it with your Name, that I may publicly esprefs the pleafure which I felt, when I found that neither a feparation for thirty years, nor the preffure of the moft important bufinefs, had effaced your kind remembrance of a College Acquaintance, or abated that obliging and polite attention with which you favored au in thofe early days of life.

The friendfhip of the accomplifhed and the worthy is the higheft honor; and to him who is cut off, by want of health, from almoft every other enjoyment, it is an ineftimable bleffing. Accept, therefore, I pray, of my grateful acknowledgements, and of my earneft wifhes for your Health, Profperity, and increafing Honor.

With fentiments of the greateft Efteem and Refpect,
          I am,
                  SIR,
                     Your moft obedient,
                        and moft humble Servant,
                             JOHN ROBISON.

EDINBURGH
 September 5, 1797.

  QUOD fi quis vera vitam ratione gubernet,
 Divitiae grandes homini funt, vivere parce
 Aequo anima: neque enim eft unquam penuria parvi,
 At claros fe homines voluerunt atque potentes,
 Ut fundamento: ftabili fortuna maneres,
 Et placidam poffent opulenti degere vitam:
 Nequicquam.--quoniam ad fummum fuccedere honorem
 Certantes, iter infeftum fecere viai,
 Et tamen a fummo quafi fulmen dejicit ictos
 Invidia interdum contemptim in Tartara tetra.

Ergo, Regibus occifis, fubverfa jacebat
 Priftina majeftas foliorum, et fceptra fuperba;
 Et capitis fummi praeclarum infigne, cruentum,
 Sub pedibus volgi magnum lugebat honorem:
 Nam cupide conculcatur nimis ante metutum.
 Res itaqe ad fummam faecem, turbafque redibat,
 Imperium fibi cum ac fummatum quifque petebat.

                      LUCRETIUS, V. 1153.

Note: The following Latin and English texts of the above passage were not in the original book, they are supplied for reference.--JBH

...quod siquis vera vitam ratione gubernet,
 divitiae grandes homini sunt vivere parce
 aequo animo; neque enim est umquam penuria parvi.
 at claros homines voluerunt se atque potentes,
 ut fundamento stabili fortuna maneret
 et placidam possent opulenti degere vitam,
 ne quiquam, quoniam ad summum succedere honorem
 certantes iter infestum fecere viai,
 et tamen e summo, quasi fulmen, deicit ictos
 invidia inter dum contemptim in Tartara taetra;...

Ergo regibus occisis subversa iacebat
 pristina maiestas soliorum et sceptra superba,
 et capitis summi praeclarum insigne cruentum
 sub pedibus vulgi magnum lugebat honorem;
 nam cupide conculcatur nimis ante metutum.
 res itaque ad summam faecem turbasque redibat,
 imperium sibi cum ac summatum quisque petebat.

But men wished glory for themselves and power
 Even that their fortunes on foundations firm
 Might rest forever, and that they themselves,
 The opulent, might pass a quiet life-
 In vain, in vain; since, in the strife to climb
 On to the heights of honour, men do make
 Their pathway terrible; and even when once
 They reach them, envy like the thunderbolt
 At times will smite, O hurling headlong down
 To murkiest Tartarus, in scorn;

And therefore kings were slain,
 And pristine majesty of golden thrones
 And haughty sceptres lay o'erturned in dust;
 And crowns, so splendid on the sovereign heads,
 Soon bloody under the proletarian feet,
 Groaned for their glories gone-for erst o'er-much
 Dreaded, thereafter with more greedy zest
 Trampled beneath the rabble heel. Thus things
 Down to the vilest lees of brawling mobs
 Succumbed, whilst each man sought unto himself
 Dominion and supremacy.

(Lucretius, De Rerum Naturum, Book 5, William Ellery Leonard translation)

     Proofs of a Conspiracy, by John Robison, [1798], at sacred-texts.com

  

Contents

          Introduction

       <page 1>

     
      Chapter I. Schisms   in Free Masonry.

       <page 11>

     
      Chapter II. The   Illuminati.

       <page 57>

     
      Chapter III.   The German Union.

       <page 157>

     
      Chapter IV. The   French Revolution.

       <page 207>

     
      Postscript

       <page 286>

     
   
     Proofs of a Conspiracy, by John Robison, [1798], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

Introduction.

BEING AT a friend's house in the country during some part of the summer 1795, I there saw a volume of a German periodical work, called Religions Begebenheiten, i.e. Religious Occurrences; in which there was an account of the various schisms in the Fraternity of Free Masons, with frequent allusions to the origin and history of that celebrated association. This account interested me a good deal, because, in my early life, I had taken some part in the occupations (shall I call them) of Free Masonry; and having chiefly frequented the Lodges on the Continent, I had learned many doctrines, and seen many ceremonials, which have no place in the simple system of Free Masonry which obtains in this country. I had also remarked, that the whole was much more the object of reflection and thought than I could remember it to have been among my acquaintances at home. There, I had seen a Mason Lodge considered merely as a pretext for passing an hour or two in a fort of decent conviviality, not altogether void of some rational occupation. I had sometimes heard of differences of doctrines or of ceremonies, but in terms which marked them as mere frivolities. But, on the Continent, I found them matters of serious concern and debate. Such too is the contagion of example, that I could not hinder myself from thinking one opinion better founded, or one Ritual more apposite and significant, than another; and I even felt something like an anxiety for its being adopted, and a zeal for making it a general practice. I had been initiated in a very splendid Lodge at Liege, of which the Prince Bishop, his Trefonciers, and the chief Noblesse of the State, were members. I visited the French Lodges at Valenciennes, at Brussels, at Aix-la-Chapelle, at Berlin, and Koningsberg;

[p. 2]

and I picked up some printed discourses delivered by the Brother-orators of the Lodges. At St. Petersburgh I connected myself with the English Lodge, and occasionally visited the German and Russian Lodges held there. I found myself received with particular respect as a Scotch Mason, and as an Eleve of the Lodge de la Parfaite Intelligence at Liege. I was importuned by persons of the first rank to pursue my masonic career through many degrees unknown in this country. But all the splendour and elegance that I saw could not conceal a frivolity in every part. It appeared a baseless fabric, and I could not think of engaging in an occupation which would consume much time, cost me a good deal of money, and might perhaps excite in me some of that fanaticism, or, at least, enthusiasm that I saw in others, and perceived to be void of any rational support. I therefore remained in the English Lodge, contented with the rank of Scotch Master, which was in a manner forced on me in a private Lodge of French Masons, but is not given in the English Lodge. My masonic rank admitted me to a very elegant entertainment in the female Loge de la Fidelite, where every ceremonial was composed in the highest degree of elegance, and every thing conducted with the most delicate respect for our fair sisters, and the old song of brotherly love was chanted in the most refined strain of sentiment. I do not suppose that the Parisian Free Masonry of forty-five degrees could give me more entertainment. I had profited so much by it, that I had the honor of being appointed the Brother-orator. In this office I gave such satisfaction, that a worthy Brother sent me at midnight a box, which he committed to my care, as a person far advanced in masonic science, zealously attached to the order, and therefore a fit depositary of important writings. I learned next day that this gentleman had found it convenient to leave the empire in a hurry, but taking with him the funds of an establishment of which her Imperial Majesty had made him the manager. I was desired to keep these writings till he should see me again. I obeyed. About ten years afterward I saw the gentleman on the street in Edinburgh, conversing with a foreigner. As I passed by him, I saluted him softly in the Russian language, but without stopping, or even looking him in the face. He coloured, but made no return. I endeavoured in vain to meet with him, intending to make a proper return for

[p. 3]

much civility and kindness which I had received from him in his own country.

 

I now considered the box as accessible to myself, and opened it. I found it to contain all the degrees of the Parfait Macon Ecossois, with the Rituals, Catechisms, and Instructions, and also four other degrees of Free Masonry, as cultivated in the Parisian Lodges. I have kept them with all care, and mean to give them to some respectable Lodge. But as I am bound by no engagement of any kind, I hold myself as at liberty to make such use of them as may be serviceable to the public, without enabling any uninitiated person to enter the Lodges of these degrees.

This acquisition might have roused my former relish for Masonry, had it been merely dormant; but, after so long separation from the Loge de la Fidelite, the masonic spirit had evaporated. Some curiosity, however, remained, and some wish to trace this plastic mystery to the pit from which the clay had been dug, which has been moulded into so many different shapes, "some to honor, and some to dishonor." But my opportunities were now gone. I had given away (when in Russia) my volumes of discourses, and some far-fetched and gratuitous histories, and nothing remained but the pitiful work of Anderson, and the Maconnerie Adonhiramique devoilee, which are in every one's hands.

 

My curiosity was strongly roused by the accounts given in the Religions Begebenheiten. There I saw quotations without number; systems and schisms of which I had never heard; but what particularly struck me, was a zeal and fanaticism about what I thought trifles, which astonished me. Men of rank and fortune, and engaged in serious and honorable public employments, not only frequenting the Lodges of the cities where they resided, but journeying from one end of Germany or France to the other, to visit new Lodges, or to learn new secrets or new doctrines. I saw conventions held at Wismar, at Wisbad, at Kohlo, at Brunswick, and at Willemsbad, consisting of some hundreds of persons of respectable stations. I saw adventurers coming to a city, professing some new secret, and in a few days forming new Lodges, and instructing in a troublesome and expensive manner hundreds of brethren.

[p. 4]

German Masonry appeared a very serious concern, and to be implicated with other subjects with which I had never suspected it to have any connection. I saw it much connected with many occurrences and schisms in the Christian church; I saw that the Jesuits had several times interfered in it; and that most of the exceptionable innovations and dissentions had arisen about the time that the order of Loyola was suppressed; so that it should seem, that these intriguing brethren had attempted to maintain their influence by the help of Free Masonry. I saw it much disturbed by the mystical whims of J. Behmen and Swedenborg--by the fanatical and knavish doctrines of the modern Rosycrucians--by Magicians--Magnetisers--Exorcists, &c. And I observed that these different sects reprobated each other, as not only maintaining erroneous opinions, but even inculcating opinions which were contrary to the established religions of Germany, and contrary to the principles of the civil establishments. At the same time they charged each other with mistakes and corruptions, both in doctrine and in practice; and particularly with falsification of the first principles of Free Masonry, and with ignorance of its origin and its history; and they supported these charges by authorities from many different books which were unknown to me.

 

My curiosity was now greatly excited. I got from a much-respected friend many of the preceding volumes of the Religions Begebenheiten, in hopes of much information from the patient industry of German erudition. This opened a new and very interesting scene; I was frequently sent back to England, from whence all agreed that Free Masonry had been imported into Germany. I was frequently led into France and into Italy. There, and more remarkably in France, I found that the Lodges had become the haunts of many projectors and fanatics, both in science, in religion, and in politics, who had availed themselves of the secrecy and the freedom of speech maintained in these meetings, to broach their particular whims, or suspicious doctrines, which, if published to the world in the usual manner, would have exposed the authors to ridicule, or to censure. These projectors had contrived to tag their peculiar nostrums to the mummery of Masonry, and were even allowed to twist the masonic emblems and ceremonies to

[p. 5]

their purpose; so that in their hands Free Masonry became a thing totally unlike, and almost in direct opposition to the system (if it may get such a name) imported from England; and some Lodges had become schools of irreligion and licentiousness.

 

No nation in modern times has so particularly turned its attention to the cultivation of every thing that is refined or ornamental as France, and it has long been the resort of all who hunt after entertainment in its most refined form; the French have come to consider themselves as the instructors of the world in every thing that ornaments life, and feeling themselves received as such, they have formed their manners accordingly--full of the most condescending complaisance to all who acknowledge their superiority. Delighted, in a high degree, with this office, they have become zealous missionaries of refinement in every department of human pursuit, and have reduced their apostolic employment to a system, which they prosecute with ardour and delight. This is not groundless declamation, but sober historical truth. It was the professed aim (and it was a magnificent and wise aim) of the great Colbert, to make the court of Louis XIV, the fountain of human refinement, and Paris the Athens of Europe. We need only look at the plunder of Italy by the French army, to be convinced that their low-born generals and statesmen have in this respect the same notions with the Colberts and the Richlieus.

 

I know no subject in which this aim at universal influence on the opinions of men, by holding themselves forth as the models of excellence and elegance, is more clearly seen than in the care that they have been pleased to take of Free Masonry. It seems indeed peculiarly suited to the talents and taste of that vain and ardent people. Baseless and frivolous, it admits of every form that Gallic refinement can invent, to recommend it to the young, the gay, the luxurious; that class of society which alone deserves their care, because, in one way or another, it leads all other classes of society.

 

It has accordingly happened, that the homely Free Masonry imported from England has been totally changed in every country of Europe, either by the imposing ascendancy

[p. 6]

of French brethren, who are to be found every where, ready to instruct the world; or by the importation of the doctrines, and ceremonies, and ornaments of the Parisian Lodges. Even England, the birth-place of Masonry, has experienced the French innovations; and all the repeated injunctions, admonitions, and reproofs of the old Lodges, cannot prevent those in different parts of the kingdom from admitting the French novelties, full of tinsel and glitter, and high-sounding titles.

Were this all, the harm would not be great. But long before good opportunities had occurred for spreading the refinements on the simple Free Masonry of England, the Lodges in France had become places of very serious discussion, where opinions in morals, in religion, and in politics, had been promulgated and maintained with a freedom and a keenness, of which we in this favored land have no adequate notion, because we are unacquainted with the restraints, which, in other countries, are laid on ordinary conversation. In consequence of this, the French innovations in Free Masonry were quickly followed in all parts of Europe, by the admission of similar discussions, although in direct opposition to a standing rule, and a declaration made to every newly received Brother, "that nothing touching the religion or government shall ever be spoken of in the Lodge." But the Lodges in other countries followed the example of France, and have frequently become the rendezvous of innovators in religion and politics, and other disturbers of the public peace. In short, I have found that the covert of a Mason Lodge had been employed in every country for venting and propagating sentiments in religion and politics, that could not have circulated in public without exposing the author to great danger. I found, that this impunity had gradually encouraged men of licentious principles to become more bold, and to teach doctrines subversive of all our notions of morality--of all our confidence in the moral government of the universe--of all our hopes of improvement in a future state of existence--and of all satisfaction and contentment with our present life, so long as we live in a state of civil subordination. I have been able to trace these attempts, made, through a course of fifty years, under the specious pretext of enlightening the world by the torch of philosophy, and of dispelling the clouds of

[p. 7]

civil and religious superstition which keep the nations of Europe in darkness and slavery. I have observed these doctrines gradually diffusing and mixing with all the different systems of Free Masonry; till, at last, AN ASSOCIATION HAS BEEN FORMED for the express purpose of  OUT ALL THE RELIGIOUS ESTABLISHMENTS, AND OVERTURNING ALL THE EXISTING GOVERNMENTS OF EUROPE. I have seen this Association exerting itself zealously and systematically, till it has become almost irresistible: And I have seen that the most active leaders in the French Revolution were members of this Association, and conducted their first movements according to its principles, and by means of its instructions and assistance, formerly requested and obtained: And, lastly, I have seen that this Association still exists, still works in secret, and that not only several appearances among ourselves show that its emissaries are endeavoring to propagate their detestable doctrines among us, but that the Association has Lodges in Britain corresponding with the mother Lodge at Munich ever since 1784.

 

If all this were a matter of mere curiosity, and susceptible of no good use, it would have been better to have kept it to myself, than to disturb my neighbours with the knowledge of a state of things which they cannot amend. But if it shall appear that the minds of my countrymen are misled in the very same manner as were those of our continental neighbours--if I can show that the reasonings which make a very strong impression on some persons in this country are the same which actually produced the dangerous association in Germany; and that they had this unhappy influence solely because they were thought to be sincere, and the expressions of the sentiments of the speakers--if I can show that this was all a cheat, and that the Leaders of this Association disbelieved every word that they uttered, and every doctrine that they taught; and that their real intention was to abolish all religion, overturn every government, and make the world a general plunder and a wreck--if I can show, that the principles which the Founder and Leaders of this Association held forth as the perfection of human virtue, and the most powerful and efficacious for forming the minds of men, and making them good and happy, had no influence on the Founder and Leaders themselves, and that they were, almost without exception, the most insignificant,

[p. 8]

worthless, and profligate of men; I cannot but think, that such information will make my countrymen hesitate a little, and receive with caution, and even distrust, addresses and instructions which flatter our self-conceit, and which, by buoying us up with the gay prospect of what is perhaps attainable by a change, may make us discontented with our present condition, and forget that there never was a government on earth where the people of a great and luxurious nation enjoyed so much freedom and security in the possession of every thing that is dear and valuable.

 

When we see that these boasted principles had not that effect on the leaders which they assert to be their native, certain, and inevitable consequences, we will distrust the fine descriptions of the happiness that should result from such a change. And when we see that the methods which were practised by this Association for the express purpose of breaking all the bands of society, were employed solely in order that the leaders might rule the world with uncontroulable power, while all the rest, even of the associated, will be degraded in their own estimation, corrupted in their principles, and employed as mere tools of the ambition of their unknown superiors; surely a free-born Briton will not hesitate to reject at once, and without any farther examination, a plan so big with mischief, so disgraceful to its underling adherents, and so uncertain in its issue.

 

These hopes have induced me to lay before the public a short abstract of the information which I think I have received. It will be short, but I hope sufficient for establishing the fact, that this detestable Association exists, and its emissaries are busy among ourselves.

 

I was not contented with the quotations which I found in the Religions Begebenheiten, but procured from abroad some of the chief writings from which they are taken. This both gave me confidence in the quotations from books which I could not procure, and furnished me with more materials. Much, however, remains untold, richly deserving the attention of all those who feel themselves disposed to listen to the tales of a possible happiness that may be enjoyed in a society where all the magistrates are wise and just, and all the people are honest and kind.

[p. 9]

I hope that I am honest and candid. I have been at all pains to give the true sense of the authors. My knowledge of the German language is but scanty, but I have had the assistance of friends whenever I was in doubt. In compressing into one paragraph what I have collected from many, I have, as much as I was able, stuck to the words of the author, and have been anxious to give his precise meaning. I doubt not but that I have sometimes failed, and will receive correction with deference. I entreat the reader not to expect a piece of good literary composition. I am very sensible that it is far from it--it is written during bad health, when I am not at ease--and I wished to conceal my name--but my motive is, without the smallest mixture of another, to do some good in the only way I am able, and I think that what I say will come with better grace, and be received with more confidence, than any anonymous publication. Of these I am now most heartily sick. I throw myself on my country with a free heart, and I bow with deference to its decision.

 

The Association of which I have been speaking, is the Order of ILLUMINATI, founded in 1775, by Dr. Adam Weishaupt, professor of Canon law in the university of Ingolstadt, and abolished in 1786 by the Elector of Bavaria, but revived immediately after, under another name, and in a different form, all over Germany. It was again detected, and seemingly broken up; but it had by this time taken so deep root that it still subsists without being detected, and has spread into all the countries of Europe. It took its first rise among the Free Masons, but is totally different from Free Masonry. It was not, however, the mere protection gained by the secrecy of the Lodges that gave occasion to it, but it arose naturally from the corruptions that had gradually crept into that fraternity, the violence of the party-spirit which pervaded it, and from the total uncertainty and darkness that hangs over the whole of that mysterious Association. It is necessary, therefore, to give some account of the innovations that have been introduced into Free Masonry from the time that it made its appearance on the continent of Europe as a mystical Society, possessing secrets different from those of the mechanical employment whose name it assumed, and thus affording entertainment and occupation to persons of all ranks and professions. It is by no means

[p. 10]

intended to give a history of Free Masonry. This would lead to a very long discussion. The patient industry of German erudition has been very seriously employed on this subject, and many performances have been published, of which some account is given in the different volumes of the Religions Begebenheiten, particularly in those for 1779, 1785, and 1786. It is evident, from the nature of the thing, that they cannot be very instructive to the public; because the obligation of secrecy respecting the important matters which are the very subjects of debate, prevents the author from giving that full information that is required from an historian, and the writers have not, in general, been persons qualified for the talk. Scanty erudition, credulity, and enthusiasm, appear in almost all their writings; and they have neither attempted to remove the heap of rubbish with which Anderson has disgraced his Constitutions of Free Masonry (the basis of masonic history) nor to avail themselves of informations which history really affords to a sober enquirer. Their Royal art must never forsooth appear in a state of infancy or childhood, like all other human acquirements; and therefore, when they cannot give proofs of its existence in a state of manhood, possessed of all its mysterious treasures, they suppose what they do not see, and say that they are concealed by the oath of secrecy. Of such instructions I can make no use, even if I were disposed to write a history of the Fraternity. I shall content myself with an account of such particulars as are admitted by all the masonic parties, and which illustrate or confirm my general proposition, making such use of the accounts of the higher degrees in my possession as I can, without admitting the profane into their Lodges. Being under no tie of secrecy with regard to these, I am with-held by discretion alone from putting the public in possession of all their mysteries.

     Proofs of a Conspiracy, by John Robison, [1798], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 11]

  

CHAP. I.

  

Schisms in Free Masonry.

THERE IS undoubtedly a dignity in the art of building, or in architecture, which no other art possesses, and this, whether we consider it in its rudest state, occupied in raising a hut, or as practised in a cultivated nation, in the erection of a magnificent and ornamented temple. As the arts in general improve in any nation, this must always maintain its pre-eminence; for it employs them all, and no man can be eminent as an architect who does not possess a considerable knowledge of almost every science and art already cultivated in his nation. His great works are undertakings of the most serious concern, connect him with the public, or with the rulers of the state, and attach to him the practitioners of other arts, who are wholly occupied in executing his orders: His works are the objects of public attention, and are not the transient spectacles of the day, but hand down to posterity his invention, his knowledge, and his taste. No wonder then that he thinks highly of his profession, and that the public should acquiesce in his pretensions, even when in some degree extravagant.

 

It is not at all surprising, therefore, that the incorporated architects in all cultivated nations should arrogate to themselves a pre-eminence over the similar associations of other tradesmen. We find traces of this in the remotest antiquity. The Dionysiacs of Asia Minor were undoubtedly an association of architects and engineers, who had the exclusive privilege of building temples, stadia, and theatres, under the mysterious tutelage of Bacchus, and distinguished from the uninitiated or profane inhabitants by the science which they possessed, and by many private signs and tokens, by which they recognized each other. This association came into Ionia from Syria, into which country it had come from Persia, along with that style of architecture that we call

[p. 12]

[paragraph continues] Grecian. We are also certain that there was a similar trading association, during the dark ages, in Christian Europe, which monopolized the building of great churches and castles, working under the patronage and protection of the Sovereigns and Princes of Europe, and possessing many privileges. Circumstances, which it would be tedious to enumerate and discuss, continued this association later in Britain than on the Continent.

 

But it is quite uncertain when and why persons who were not builders by profession first sought admission into this Fraternity. The first distinct and unequivocal instance that we have of this is the admission of Mr. Ashmole, the famous antiquary, in 1648, into a Lodge at Warrington, along with his father-in-law Colonel Mainwaring. It is not improbable that the covert of secrecy in those assemblies had made them courted by the Royalists, as occasions of meeting. Nay, the Ritual of the Master's degree seems to have been formed, or perhaps twisted from its original institution, so as to give an opportunity of founding the political principles of the candidate, and of the whole Brethren present. For it bears so easy an adaptation to the death of the King, to the overturning of the venerable constitution of the English government of three orders by a mean democracy, and its re-establishment by the efforts of the loyalists, that this would start into every person's mind during the ceremonial, and could hardly fail to show, by the countenances and behaviour of the Brethren, how they were affected. I recommend this hint to the consideration of the Brethren. I have met with many particular facts, which convince me that this use had been made of the meetings of Masons, and that at this time the Jesuits interfered considerably, insinuating themselves into the Lodges, and contributing to encrease that religious mysticism that is to be observed in all the ceremonies of the order. This society is well known to have put on every shape, and to have made use of every mean that could promote the power and influence of the order. And we know that at this time they were by no means without hopes of re-establishing the dominion of the Church of Rome in England. Their services were not scrupled at by the distressed Royalists, even such as were Protestants, while they were highly prized by the Sovereign. We also know that Charles II. was made a Mason, and

[p. 13]

frequented the Lodges. It is not unlikely, that besides the amusement of a vacant hour, which was always agreeable to him, he had pleasure in the meeting with his loyal friends, and in the occupations of the Lodge, which recalled to his mind their attachment and services. His brother and successor James II, was of a more serious and manly cast of mind, and had little pleasure in the frivolous ceremonies of Masonry. He did not frequent the Lodges. But, by this time, they were the resort of many persons who were not of the profession, or members of the trading corporation. This circumstance, in all probability, produced the denominations of FREE and ACCEPTED Masons. A person who has the privilege of working at any incorporated trade, is said to be a freeman of that trade. Others were accepted as Brethren, and admitted to a kind of honorary freedom, as is the case in many other trades and incorporations, without having (as far as we can learn for certain) a legal title to earn a livelihood by the exercise of it.

 

The Lodges being in this manner frequented by persons of various professions, and in various ranks of civil society, it cannot be supposed that the employment in those meetings related entirely to the ostensible profession of Masonry. We have no authentic information by which the public can form any opinion about it. It was not till some years after this period that the Lodges made open profession of the cultivation of general benevolence, and that the grand aim of the Fraternity was to enforce the exercise of all the social virtues. It is not unlikely that this was an after thought. The political purposes of the association being once obtained, the conversation and occupations of the members must take some particular turn, in order to be generally acceptable. The establishment of a fund for the relief of unfortunate Brethren did not take place till the very end of last century; and we may presume that it was brought about by the warm recommendations of some benevolent members, who would naturally enforce it by addresses to their assembled Brethren. This is the probable origin of those philanthropic discourses which were delivered in the Lodges by one of the Brethren as an official task. Brotherly love was the general topic, and this, with great propriety, when we consider the object aimed at in those addresses. Nor was this object altogether a novelty. For while the manners of society were

[p. 14]

yet but rude, Brother Masons, who were frequently led by their employment far from home and from their friends, stood in need of such helps, and might be greatly benefited by such an institution, which gave them introduction and citizenship wherever they went, and a right to share in the charitable contributions of Brethren who were strangers to them. Other incorporated trades had similar provisions for their poor. But their poor were townsmen and neighbours, well known to them. There was more persuasion necessary in this Fraternity, where the objects of our immediate beneficence were not of our acquaintance. But when the Lodges consisted of many who were not Masons, and who had no particular claim to good offices from a stranger, and their number might be great, it is evident that stronger persuasions were now necessary, and that every topic of philanthropy must now be employed. When the funds became considerable, the effects naturally took the public eye, and recommended the Society to notice and respect. And now the Brethren were induced to dwell on the same topic, to join in the commendations bestowed on the Society, and to say that universal beneficence was the great aim of the Order. And this is all that could be said in public, without infringing the obligation to secrecy. The inquisitive are always prying and teazing, and this is the only point on which a Brother is at liberty to speak. He will therefore do it with affectionate zeal, till perhaps he has heated his own fancy a little, and overlooks the inconsistency of this universal beneficence and philanthropy with the exclusive and monopolizing spirit of an Association, which not only confines its benevolence to its own Members (like any other charitable association) but hoards up in its bosom inestimable secrets, whose natural tendency, they say, is to form the heart to this generous and kind conduct, and inspire us with love to all mankind. The profane world cannot see the beneficence of concealing from public view a principle or a motive which so powerfully induces a Mason to be good and kind. The Brother says that publicity would rob it of its force, and we must take him at his word: and our curiosity is so much the more excited to learn what are the secrets which have so singular a quality.

 

Thus did the Fraternity conduct themselves, and thus

[p. 15]

were they considered by the public, when it was carried over from England to the continent; and here, it is to be particularly remarked, that all our Brethren abroad profess to have received the Mystery of Free Masonry from Britain. This is surely a puzzle in the history; and we must leave it to others to reconcile this with the repeated assertions in Anderson's book of Constitutions, "That the Fraternity existed all over the world," and the numberless examples which he adduces of its exertions in other countries; nay, with his repeated assertions, "that it frequently was near perishing in Britain, and that our Princes were obliged to send to France and other countries, for leading men, to restore it to its former energy among us." We shall find by and by that this is not a point of mere historical curiosity, but that much hinges on it.

 

In the mean time, let us just remember, that the plain tale of Brotherly love had been polished up to protestations of universal benevolence, and had taken place of loyalty and attachment to the unfortunate Family of Stuart, which was now totally forgotten in the English Lodges. The Revolution had taken place, and King James, with many of his most zealous adherents, had taken refuge in France.

 

But they took Free Masonry with them to the continent, where it was immediately received by the French, and was cultivated with great zeal in a manner suited to the taste and habits of that highly polished people. The Lodges in France naturally became the rendezvous of the adherents to their banished King, and the means of carrying on a correspondence with their friends in England. At this time also the Jesuits took a more active hand in Free Masonry than ever. They insinuated themselves into the English Lodges, where they were caressed by the Catholics, who panted after the re-establishment of their faith, and tolerated by the Protestant royalists, who thought no concession too great a compensation for their services. At this time changes were made in some of the masonic symbols, particularly in the tracing of the Lodge, which bear evident marks of Jesuitical interference.

 

It was in the Lodges held at St. Germain's that the degree of Chevalier Macon Ecoffois was added to the three SYMBOLICAL

[p. 16]

degrees of English Masonry. The constitution, as imported, appeared too coarse for the refined taste of our neighbours, and they must make Masonry more like the occupation of a gentleman. Therefore, the English degrees of Apprentice, Fellowcraft, and Master, were called symbolical, and the whole Fraternity was considered either as typical of something more elegant, or as a preparation for it. The degrees afterwards superadded to this leave us in doubt which of these views the French entertained of our Masonry. But at all events, this rank of Scotch Knight was called the first degree of the Macon Parfait. There is a device belonging to this Lodge which deserves notice. A lion, wounded by an arrow, and escaped from the stake to which he had been bound, with the broken rope still about his neck, is represented lying at the mouth of a cave, and occupied with mathematical instruments which are lying near him. A broken crown lies at the foot of the stake. There can be little doubt but that this emblem alludes to the dethronement, the captivity, the escape, and the asylum of James II. and his hopes of re-establishment by the help of the loyal Brethren. This emblem is worn as the gorget of the Scotch Knight. It is not very certain, however when this degree was added, whether immediately after King James's Abdication, or about the time of the attempt to set his son on the British Throne. But it is certain, that in 1716, this and still higher degrees of Masonry were much in vogue in the Court of France. The refining genius of the French, and their love of show, made the humble denominations of the English Brethren disgusting; and their passion for military rank, the only character that connected them with the Court of an absolute monarch, made them adapt Free Masonry to the same scale of public estimation, and invent ranks of Macons Chevaliers ornamented with titles, and ribbands, and stars. These were highly relished by that vain people; and the price of reception, which was very high, became a rich fund, that was generously applied to relieve the wants of the banished British and Irish adherents of the unfortunate Family who had taken refuge among them. Three new degrees of Novice, Eleve, and Chevalier, were soon added, and the Parfait Macon had now seven receptions to go through, for each of which a handsome contribution was made. Afterwards, when the first beneficent purpose of this contribution ceased to exist,

[p. 17]

the finery that now glittered in all the Lodges made a still more craving demand for reception-money, and ingenuity was set to work to invent new baits for the Parfait Macon. More degrees of chivalry were added, interspersed with degrees of Philosophe, Pellerin, Clairvoyant, &c. &c. till some Parisian Lodges had forty-five ranks of Masonry, having fifteen orders of chivalry. For a Knighthood, with a Ribband and a Star, was a bonne bouche, given at every third step. For a long while these degrees of chivalry proceeded on some faint analogies with several orders of chivalry which had been erected in Europe. All of these had some reference to some mystical doctrines of the Christian Church, and were, in fact, contrivances of the Church of Rome for securing and extending her influence on the laymen of rank and fortune, whom she retained in her service by these play-things. The Knights Templars of Jerusalem, and the Knights of the Desert, whose office it was to protect pilgrims, and to defend the holy city, afforded very apt models for Masonic mimicry, because the Temple of Solomon, and the Holy Sepulchre, always shared the same fate. Many contended doctrines of the theologians had also their Chevaliers to defend them.

 

In all this progressive mummery we see much of the hand of the Jesuits, and it would seem that it was encouraged by the church. But a thing happened which might easily have been foreseen. The Lodges had become familiar with this kind of invention; the professed object of many real Orders of Knighthood was often very whimsical, or very refined and far-fetched, and it required all the finesse of the clergy to give it some slight connection with religion or morality. The Masons, protected by their secrecy, ventured to go farther. The declamations in the Lodges by the Brother orator, must naturally resemble the compositions of the ancient sophists, and consist of wire-drawn dissertations on the social duties, where every thing is amplified and strained to hyperbole, in their far-fetched and fanciful explanations of the symbols of Masonry. Thus accustomed to allegory, to fiction, to finesse, and to a sort of innocent hypocrisy, by which they cajoled themselves into a notion that this child's-play had at bottom a serious and important meaning, the zealous champions of Free Masonry found no inclination to check this inventive spirit or circumscribe

[p. 18]

its flights. Under the protection of Masonic secrecy, they planned schemes of a different kind, and instead of more Orders of Chivalry directed against the enemies of their faith, they formed associations in opposition to the ridiculous and oppressive ceremonies and superstitions of the church. There can be no doubt, that in those hidden assemblies, a free communication of sentiment was highly relished and much indulged. It was soon suspected that such use was made of the covert of a Mason Lodge; and the church dreaded the consequences, and endeavored to suppress the Lodges. But in vain. And when it was found, that even auricular confession, and the spiritual threatenings of the church, could not make the Brethren break their oath of secrecy; a full confidence in their security made these free-thinking Brethren bring forward, with all the eagerness of a missionary, such sentiments as they were afraid to hazard in ordinary society. This was long suspected; but the rigours of the church only served to knit the Brethren more firmly together, and provoked them to a more eager exercise of their bold criticisms. The Lodges became schools of scepticism and infidelity, and the spirit of conversion or proselytism grew every day stronger. Cardinal Dubois had before this time laboured with all his might to corrupt the minds of the courtiers, by patronising, directly and indirectly, all sceptics who were otherwise men of talents. He gave the young courtiers to understand that if he should obtain the reins of government, they should be entirely freed from the bigotry of Louis XIV, and the oppression of the church, and should have the free indulgence of their inclinations. His own plans were disappointed by his death; but the Regent Orleans was equally indulgent, and in a few years there was hardly a man in France who pretended to knowledge and reflection, who did not laugh at all religion. Amidst the almost infinite number of publications from the French presses, there is hardly a dozen to be found whose author attempts to vindicate religion from the charges of universal superstition and falsehood. And it must be acknowledged that little else was to be seen in the established religion of the kingdom. The people found nothing in Christianity but a never-ceasing round of insignificant and troublesome ceremonies, which consumed their time, and furnished a fund for supporting a set of lordly and oppressive dignitaries, who declared in the plainest manner

[p. 19]

their own disbelief of their religion, by their total disregard of common decency, by their continual residence at court, and by absolute neglect, and even the most haughty and oppressive treatment, of the only part of their order that took any concern about the religious sentiments of the nation, namely, the Cures or parish-priests. The monks appeared only as lazy drones; but the parish-priests instructed the people, visited the sick, reconciled the offender and the offended, and were the great mediators between the landlords and their vassals, an office which endeared them more to the people than all the other circumstances of their profession. And it is remarkable, that in all the licentious writings and bitter satyrical tales of the philosophic freethinkers, such as Voltaire, who never fails to have a taunting hit at the clergy, the Cure is generally an amiable personage, a charitable man, a friend to the poor and unfortunate, a peace-maker, and a man of piety and worth. Yet these men were kept in a state of the most slavish and cruel subjection by the higher orders of the clergy, and all hopes of advancement cut off. Rarely, hardly ever, does it happen, that a Cure becomes a Bishop. The Abbes step into every line of preferment. When such procedure is observed by a whole nation, what opinion can be formed but that the whole is a vile cheat? This however was the case in France, and therefore infidelity was almost universal. Nor was this overstrained freedom or licentiousness confined to religious opinions. It was perhaps more naturally directed to the restraints arising from civil subordination. The familiar name of Brother could not but tickle the fancy of those of inferior rank, when they found themselves set cheek by jowl with persons whom they cannot approach out of doors but with cautious respect; and while these men of rank have their pride lulled a little, and perhaps their hearts a little softened by the slang and sentimental declamation on the topic of Brotherly love and Utopian felicity, the others begin to fancy the happy days arrived, and the light of philanthropy beaming from the east and illuminating the Lodge. The Garret Pamphleteer enjoys his fancied authority as Senior Warden, and conducts with affectionate solemnity the young nobleman, who pants for the honor of Mastership, and he praises the trusty Brother who has guarded him in his perilous journies round the room. What topic of declamation can be more agreeable than the equality of

[p. 20]

the worthy Brethren? and how naturally will the Brother Orator, in support of this favorite topic, slide into all the common-place pictures of human society, freed from all the anxieties attending civil distinction, and passing their days in happy simplicity and equality. From this state of the fancy, it is hardly a step to descant on the propriety, the expediency, and at last, the justice of this arrangement of civil society; and in doing this, one cannot avoid taking notice of the great obstructions to human felicity which we see in every quarter, proceeding from the abuses of those distinctions of rank and fortune which have arisen in the world: and as the mischiefs and horrors of superstition are topics of continual declamation to those who wish to throw off the restraints of religion; so the oppression of the rulers of this world, and the sufferings of talents and worth in inferior stations, will be no less greedily listened to by all whose notions of morality are not very pure, and who would be glad to have the enjoyments of the wealthy without the trouble of labouring for them. Free Masonry may be affirmed to have a natural tendency to foster such levelling wishes; and we cannot doubt but that great liberties are taken with those subjects in the Lodges, especially in countries where the distinctions of rank and fortune are strongly expressed and noticed.

 

But it is not a matter of mere probability that the Mason Lodges were the seminaries of these libertine instructions. We have distinct proof of it, even in some of the French degrees. In the degree called the Chevalier de Soleil, the whole instruction is aimed against the established religion of the kingdom. The professed object is the emancipation from error, and the discovery of truth. The inscription in the east is Sagesse, that in the north is Liberal, that in the south is Fermete, and in the west it is Caution; terms which are very significant. The Tres Venerable is Adam; the Senior Warden is Truth, and all the Brethren are Children of Truth. The process of reception is very well contrived: the whole ritual is decent and circumspect, and nothing occurs which can alarm the most timid. Brother Truth is asked, What is the hour? He informs Father Adam, that among men it is the hour of darkness, but that it is mid-day in the Lodge. The candidate is asked, Why he has knocked at the door, and what is become of the eight companions (he is

[p. 21]

one of the Elus)? He says, that the world is in darkness, and his companions and he have lost each other; that Hesperus, the star of Europe, is obscured by clouds of incense, offered up by superstition to despots, who have made themselves gods, and have retired into the inmost recesses of their palaces, that they may not be recognised to be men, while their priests are deceiving the people, and causing them to worship these divinities. This and many similar sentiments are evident allusions to the pernicious doctrine of the book called Origine du Despotisme Oriental, where the religion of all countries is considered as a mere engine of state; where it is declared that reason is the only light which nature has given to man; and that our anxiety about futurity has made us imagine endless torments in a future world; and that princes, taking advantage of our weakness, have taken the management of our hopes and fears, and directed them so as to suit their own purposes; emancipation from the fear of death is declared the greatest of all deliverances; questions are put to the candidate, tending to discover whether and how far he may be trusted, and what sacrifices he is willing to make in search after truth.

 

This shape given to the plastic mysteries of Masonry was much relished, and in a very short time this new path was completely explored, and a new series of degrees was added to the list, viz. the Novice, and the Elu de la Verite, and the Sublime Philosophe. In the progress through these degrees, the Brethren must forget that they have formerly been Chevaliers de l'Orient, Chevaliers de l'Aigle, when the symbols were all explained as typical of the life and immortality brought to light by the gospel. Indeed they are taught to class this among the other clouds which have been dispelled by the sun of reason. Even in the Chevalerie de l'Aigle there is a two-fold explanation given of the symbols, by which a lively imagination may conceive the whole history and peculiar doctrines of the New Testament, as being typical of the final triumph of reason and philosophy over error. And perhaps this degree is the very first step in the plan of ILLUMINATION.

 

We are not to suppose that this was carried to extremity at once. But it is certain, that before 1743 it had become universal, and that the Lodges of Free Masons had become

[p. 22]

the places for making proselytes to every strange and obnoxious doctrine. Theurgy, Cosmogony, Cabala, and many whimsical and mythical doctrines which have been grafted on the distinguishing tenets and the pure morality of the Jews and Christians, were subjects of frequent discussion in the Lodges. The celebrated Chevalier Ramsay was a zealous apostle in this mission. Affectionately attached to the family of Stuart, and to his native country, he had co-operated heartily with those who endeavoured to employ Masonry in the service of the Pretender, and, availing himself of the pre-eminence given (at first perhaps as a courtly compliment) to Scotch Masonry, he laboured to shew that it existed, and indeed arose, during the Crusades, and that there really was either an order of chivalry whose business it was to rebuild the Christian churches destroyed by the Saracens; or that a fraternity of Scotch Masons were thus employed in the east, under the protection of the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem. He found some facts which were thought sufficient grounds for such an opinion, such as the building of the college of these Knights in London, called the Temple, which was actually done by the public Fraternity of Masons who had been in the holy wars. It is chiefly to him that we are indebted for that rage for Masonic chivalry which distinguishes the French Free Masonry. Ramsay's singular religious opinions are well known, and his no less singular enthusiasm. His eminent learning, his elegant talents, his amiable character, and particularly his estimation at court, gave great influence to every thing he said on a subject which was merely a matter of fashion and amusement. Whoever has attended much to human affairs, knows the eagerness with which men propagate all singular opinions, and the delight which attends their favorable reception. None are more zealous than the apostles of infidelity and atheism. It is in human nature to catch with greediness any opportunity of doing what lies under general restraint. And if our apprehensions are not completely quieted, in a case where our wishes lead us strongly to some favorite but hazardous object, we are conscious of a kind of self-bullying. This naturally gets into our discourse, and in our eagerness to get the encouragement of joint adventurers, we enforce our tenets with an energy, and even a violence, that is very inconsistent with the subject in hand. If I am an Atheist, and my neighbour a

[p. 23]

[paragraph continues] Theist, there is surely nothing that should make me violent in my endeavors to rid him of his error. Yet how violent were the people of this party in France.

 

These facts and observations fully account for the zeal with which all this patch-work addition to the simple Free Masonry of England was prosecuted in France. It surprises us, Britons, who are accustomed to consider the whole as a matter of amusement for young men, who are glad of any pretext for indulging in conviviality. We generally consider a man advanced in life with less respect, if he shows any serious attachment to such things. But in France, the civil and religious restraints on conversation made these secret assemblies very precious; and they were much frequented by men of letters, who there found an opportunity of expressing in safety their dissatisfaction with those restraints, and with that inferiority of rank and condition to which they were subjected, and which appeared to themselves so inadequate to their own talents and merits. The Avocats de Parlement, the unbeneficed Abbes, the young men of no fortune, and the soi-disant philosophers, formed a numerous band, frequented the Lodges, and there discussed every topic of religion and politics. Specimens of this occupation appeared from time to time in Collections of Discourses delivered by the Frere Orateur. I once had in my possession two volumes of these discourses, which I now regret that I left in a Lodge on the continent, when my relish for Free Masonry had forsaken me. One of these is a discourse by Brother Robinet, delivered in the Loge des Chevaliers Bienfaisants de la Sainte Cite at Lyons, at a visitation by the Grand Master the Duc de Chartres, afterwards Orleans and Egalite. In this discourse we have the germ and substance of his noted work, the Systeme de la Nature, ou l'Homme moral et physique. In another discourse, delivered by Brother Condorcet in the Loge des Philalethes at Strasbourg, we have the outlines of his posthumous work, Le Progres de l'Esprit humain; and in another, delivered by Mirabeau in the Loge des Chevaliers Bienfaisants at Paris, we have a great deal of the levelling principles, and cosmopolitism, [**] which he thundered from

[p. 24]

the tribunes of the National Assembly. But the most remarkable performances of this kind are, the Archives Mystico-Hermetiques, and the Des Erreurs, et de la Verite. The first is considered as an account historical and dogmatical, of the procedure and system of the Loge des Chevaliers Bienfaisants at Lyons. This was the most zealous and systematical of all the cosmopolitical Lodges in France. It worked long under the patronage of its Grand Master the Duc de Chartres, afterwards Orleans, and at last Ph. Egalite. It sent out many affiliated Lodges, which were erected in various parts of the French dominions. The daughter Lodges at Paris, Strasbourg, Lille, Thoulouse, took the additional title of Philalethes. There arose some schisms, as may be expected, in an Association where every man is encouraged to broach and to propagate any the most singular opinion. These schisms were continued with some heat, but were in a great measure repaired in Lodges which took the name of Amis reunis de la Verite. One of this denomination at Paris became very eminent. The mother Lodge at Lyons extended its correspondence into Germany, and other foreign countries, and sent constitutions or systems, by which the Lodges conducted their operations.

 

I have not been able to trace the steps by which this Lodge acquired such an ascendency; but I see, that in 1769 and 1770, all the refined or philosophical Lodges in Alsace and Lorraine united, and in a convention at Lyons, formally put themselves under the patronage of this Lodge, cultivated a continual correspondence, and considered themselves as professing one Masonic Faith, sufficiently distinguishable from that of other Lodges. What this was we do not very distinctly know. We can only infer it from some historical circumstances. One of its favorite daughters, the Lodge Theodor von der guten Rath, at Munich, became so remarkable for discourses dangerous to church and state, that the Elector of Bavaria, after repeated admonitions during a course of five or six years, was obliged to suppress it in 1786. Another of its suffragan Lodges at Regensburgh became exceedingly obnoxious to the state, and occasioned several commotions and insurrections. Another, at Paris, gradually refined into the Jacobin club--And in the year 1791, the Lodges in Alsace and Lorraine, with

[p. 25]

those of Spire and Worms, invited Custine into Germany, and delivered Mentz into his hands.

 

When we reflect on these historical facts, we get some key to the better understanding of the two performances which I mentioned as descriptive of the opinions and occupations of this sect of Free Masons. The Archives Mystico-Hermetiques exhibit a very strange mixture of Mysticism, Theosophy, Cabalistic whim, real Science, Fanaticism, and Freethinking, both in religion and politics. They must not be considered as an account of any settled system, but rather as annals of the proceedings of the Lodge, and abstracts of the strange doctrines which made their successive appearance in the Lodge. But if an intelligent and cautious reader examine them attentively, he will see, that the book is the work of one hand, and that all the wonders and oddities are caricatured, so as to engross the general attention, while they also are twisted a little, so that in one way or another they accord with a general spirit of licentiousness in morals, religion, and politics. Although every thing is expressed decently, and with some caution and moderation, atheism, materialism, and discontent with civil subordination, pervade the whole. It is a work of great art. By keeping the ridicule and the danger of superstition and ignorance continually in view, the mind is captivated by the relief which free enquiry and communication of sentiment seems to secure, and we are put off our guard against the risk of delusion, to which we are exposed when our judgment is warped by our passions.

 

The other book, "Des Erreurs et de la Verite," came from the same school, and is a sort of holy scripture, or at least a Talmud among the Free Masons of France. It is intended only for the initiated, and is indeed a mystery to any other reader. But as it was intended for spreading the favorite opinions of some enthusiastic Brethren, every thing is said that does not directly betray the secrets of the Order. It contains a system of Theosophy that has often appeared in the writings of philosophers, both in ancient and modern times. "All the intelligence and moral sentiment that appears in the universe, either directly, as in the minds of men, or indirectly, as an inference from the marks of design that we see around us, some of which show

[p. 26]

us that men have acted, and many more that some other intelligence has acted, are considered as parts or portions of a general mass of intelligence which exists in the universe, in the same manner as matter exists in it. This intelligence has an inscrutable connection with the material part of the universe, perhaps resembling the connexion, equally unsearchable, that subsists between the mind and body of man; and it may be considered as the Soul of the World. It is this substance, the natural object of wonder and respect, that men have called God, and have made the object of religious worship. In doing so they have fallen into gross mistakes, and have created for themselves numberless unfounded hopes and fears, which have been the source of superstition and fanaticism, the most destructive plagues that have ever afflicted the human race. The Soul of Man is separated from the general mass of intelligence by some of the operations of nature, which we shall never understand, just as water is raised from the ground by evaporation, or taken up by the root of a plant. And as the water, after an unsearchable train of changes, in which it sometimes makes part of a flower, sometimes part of an animal, &c. is at last reunited, in its original form, to the great mass of waters, ready to run over the same circle again; so the Soul of Man, after performing its office, and exhibiting all that train of intellectual phenomena that we call human life, is at last swallowed up in the great ocean of intelligence." The author then breaks out

"Felix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas,
 Atque metus omnes et inexorabile fatum
 Subjecit pedibus, strepitumque Acherontis avari."

For he has now got to his asylum. This deity of his may be the object of wonder, like every thing great and incomprehensible, but not of worship, as the moral Governor of the universe. The hopes are at an end, which rest on our notions of the immortality and individuality of the human soul, and on the encouragement which religion holds forth to believe, that improvement of the mind in the course of this life, by the exercise of wisdom and of virtuous dispositions, is but the beginning of an endless progress in all that can give delight to the rational and well-disposed mind. No relation now subsists between man and Deity that can warm the heart. But, as this is contrary to some natural

[p. 27]

propensity in the human mind, which in all ages and nations has panted after some connection with Deity, the author strives to avail himself of some cold principles of symmetry in the works of nature, some ill-supported notions of propriety, and other such considerations, to make this anima mundi an object of love and respect. This is done in greater detail in another work, Tableau des rapports entre l'Homme, Dieu, et l'Univers, which is undoubtedly by the same hand. But the intelligent reader will readily see, that such incongruous things cannot be reconciled, and that we can expect nothing here but sophistry. The author proceeds, in the next place, to consider man as related to man, and to trace out the path to happiness in this life. Here we have the same overstrained morality as in the other work, the same universal benevolence, the same lamentations over the miserable state of mankind, resulting from the oppression of the powerful, the great ones of the earth, who have combined against the happiness of mankind, and have succeeded, by debasing their minds, so that they have become willing slaves. This could not have been brought about without the assistance of superstition. But the princes of this world enlisted into their service the priests, who exerted themselves in darkening the understandings of men, and filled their minds with religious terrors. The altar became the chief pillar of the throne, and men were held in complete subjection. Nothing can recover them from this abject state but knowledge. While this dispels their fears, it will also show them their rights, and the way to attain them.

 

It deserves particularly to be remarked, that this system of opinions (if such an inconsistent mass of assertions can be called a system) bears a great resemblance to a performance of Toland's, published in 1720, called Pantheisticon, seu Celebratio Sodalitii Socratici. It is an account of the principles of a Fraternity which he calls Socratica, and the Brothers Pantheistae. They are supposed to hold a Lodge, and the author gives a ritual of the procedure in this Lodge; the ceremonies of opening and shutting of the Lodge, the admission of Members into its different degrees, &c. Reason is the Sun that illuminates the whole, and Liberty and Equality are the objects of their occupations.

[p. 28]

We shall see afterwards that this book was fondly pushed into Germany, translated, commented, and misrepresented, so as to take off the attention from the real spirit of the book, which is intentionally wrapped up in cabala and enigma. Mirabeau was at much pains to procure it notice; and it must therefore be considered as a treasure of the cosmo-political opinions of the Association of Chevaliers Bienfaisants, Philalethes, and Amis Reunis, who were called the improved Lodges, working under the D. de Chartres--of these there were 266 in 1784. This will be found a very important remark. Let it also be recollected afterwards, that this Lodge of Lyons sent a deputy to a grand Convention in Germany in 1772, viz. Mr. Willermooz, and that the business was thought of such importance, that he remained there two years.

 

The book Des Erreurs et de la Verite, must therefore be considered as a classical book of these opinions. We know that it originated in the Loge des Chev. Bienfaisants at Lyons. We know that this Lodge stood as it were at the head of French Free Masonry, and that the fictitious Order of Masonic Knights Templars was formed in this Lodge, and was considered as the model of all the rest of this mimic chivalry. They proceeded so far in this mummery, as even to have the clerical tonsure. The Duke of Orleans, his son, the Elector of Bavaria, and some other German Princes, did not scruple at this mummery in their own persons. In all the Lodges of reception, the Brother Orator never failed to declaim on the topics of superstition, blind to the exhibition he was then making, or indifferent as to the vile hypocrisy of it. We have, in the lists of Orators and Office-bearers, many names of persons, who have had an opportunity at last of proclaiming their sentiments in public. The Abbe Sieyes was of the Lodge of Philalethes at Paris, and also at Lyons. Lequinio, author of the most profligate book that ever disgraced a press, the Prejuges vaincus par la Raison, was warden in the Lodge Compacte Sociale. Despremenil, Bailly, Fauchet, Maury, Mounier, were of the same system, though in different Lodges. They were called Martinists, from a St. Martin, who formed a schism in the system of the Chevaliers Bienfaisants, of which we have not any very precise account. Mercier, gives some account of it in his Tableau de Paris, and in his Annee 1888.

[p. 29]

[paragraph continues] The breach alarmed the Brethren, and occasioned great heats. But it was healed, and the Fraternity took the name of Misa du Renis, which is an anagram of des Amis Reunis. The Bishop of Autun, the man so bepraised as the benevolent Citizen of the World, the friend of mankind and of good order, was Senior Warden of another Lodge at Paris, established in 1786 (I think chiefly by Orleans and himself) which afterwards became the Jacobin Club. In short, we may assert with confidence, that the Mason Lodges in France were the hot-beds, where the seeds were soon, and tenderly reared, of all the pernicious doctrines which soon after choaked every moral or religious cultivation, and have made the Society worse than a waste, have made it a noisome marsh of human corruption, filled with every rank and poisonous weed.

 

These Lodges were frequented by persons of all ranks, and of every profession. The idle and the frivolous found amusement, and glittering things to tickle their satiated fancies. There they became the dupes of the declamations of the crafty and licentious Abbes, and writers of every denomination. Mutual encouragement in the indulgence of hazardous thoughts and opinions which flatter our wishes or propensities is a lure which few minds can resist. I believe that most men have felt this in some period of their lives. I can find no other way of accounting for the company that I have sometimes seen in a Mason Lodge. The Lodge de la Parfaite Intelligence at Liege, contained, in December 1770, the Prince Bishop, and the greatest part of his Chapter, and all the Office-bearers were dignitaries of the church; yet a discourse given by the Brother Orator was as poignant a satire on superstition and credulity, as if it had been written by Voltaire. It was under the auspices of this Lodge that this collection of discourses, which I mentioned above, was published, and there is no fault found with Brother Robinet; nor Brother Condorcet. Indeed the Trefonciers of Liege were proverbial even in Brabant, for their Epicurism in the most extensive sense of the word.

 

Thus was corruption spread over the kingdom under the mask of moral instruction. For these discourses were full of the most refined and strained morality, and florid paintings of Utopian felicity, in a state where all are Brothers

[p. 30]

and citizens of the world. But alas! these wire-drawn principles seem to have had little influence on the hearts, even of those who could best display their beauties. Read the tragedies of Voltaire, and some of his grave performances in prose--What man is there who seems better to know his Master's will? No man expresses with more propriety, with more exactness, the feelings of a good mind. No man seems more sensible of the immutable obligation of justice and of truth. Yet this man, in his transactions with his book-sellers, with the very men to whom he was immediately indebted for his affluence and his fame, was repeatedly, nay, incessantly, guilty of the meanest, the vilest tricks. When he sold a work for an enormous price to one bookseller (even to Cramer, whom he really respected) he took care that a surreptitious edition should appear in Holland, almost at the same moment. Proof-sheets have been traced from Ferney to Amsterdam. When a friend of Cramer's expostulated with Voltaire on the injustice of this conduct, he said, grinning, Oh le bon Cramer--eh bien--il n'a que d'etre du parti--he may take a share--he will not give me a livre the less for the first piece I offer him. Where shall we see more tenderness, more honor, more love of every thing that is good and fair, than in Diderot's Pere de Famille.--Yet this man did not scruple to sell to the Empress of Russia an immense library, which he did not possess, for an enormous price, having got her promise that it should remain in his possession in Paris during his life. When her ambassador wanted to see it, after a year or two's payments, and the visitation could be no longer staved off, Diderot was obliged to set off in a hurry, and run through all the book-sellers shops in Germany, to help him to fill his empty shelves. He had the good fortune to save appearances--but the trick took air, because he had been niggardly in his attention to the ambassador's secretary. This, however, did not hinder him from honoring his Imperial pupil with a visit. He expected adoration, as the light of the world, and was indeed received by the Russian courtiers with all the childish fondness that they feel for every Parisian mode. But they did not understand him, and as he did not like to lose money at play they did not long court his company. He found his pupil too clearsighted. Ces philosophes, said she, sont beaux, vus de loin; mais de plus pres, le diamant pardit crystal. He had contrived a poor

[p. 31]

story, by which he hoped to get his daughter married in parade, and portioned by her Majesty--but it was seen through, and he was disappointed.

 

When we see the inefficacy of this refined humanity on these two apostles of philosophical virtue, we see ground for doubting of the propriety and expediency of trusting entirely to it for the peace and happiness of a state, and we should be on our guard when we listen to the florid speeches of the Brother Orator, and his congratulations on the emancipation from superstition and oppression, which will in a short time be effectuated by the Chevaliers Bienfaisants, the Philalethes, or any other sect of cosmo-political Brethren.

 

I do not mean by all this to maintain, that the Mason Lodges were the sole corrupters of the public mind in France.--No.--In all nations that have made much progress in cultivation, there is a great tendency to corruption, and it requires all the vigilance and exertions of magistrates, and of moral instructors, to prevent the spreading of licentious principles and maxims of conduct. They arise naturally of themselves, as weeds in a rich soil; and, like weeds, they are pernicious, only because they are, where they should not be, in a cultivated field. Virtue is the cultivation of the human soul, and not the mere possession of good dispositions; all men have these, and occasionly exhibit them. But virtue supposes exertion; and, as the husbandman must be incited to his laborious task by some cogent motive, so must man be prompted to that exertion which is necessary on the part of every individual for the very existence of a great society: For man is indolent, and he is luxurious; he wishes for enjoyment, and this with little trouble. The less fortunate envy the enjoyments of others, and repine at their own inability to obtain the like. They see the idle in affluence. Few, even of good men, have the candour, nay, I may call it the wisdom, to think on the activity and the labour which had procured these comforts to the rich, or to their ancestors; and to believe that they are idle only because they are wealthy, but would be active if they were needy. Such spontaneous reflections cannot be expected in persons who are engaged in unceasing labour, to procure a very moderate share (in their estimation at least)

[p. 32]

of the comforts of life. Yet such reflections would, in the main, be just, and surely they would greatly tend to quiet the minds of the unsuccessful.

 

This excellent purpose may be greatly forwarded by a national establishment for moral instruction and admonition; and if the public instructors should add all the motives to virtuous moderation which are suggested by the considerations of genuine religion, every advice would have a tenfold influence. Religious and moral instructions are therefore, in their own nature, unequivocal supports to that moderate exertion of the authority arising from civil subordination, which the most refined philanthropist or cosmopolite acknowledges to be necessary for the very existence of a great and cultivated society. I have never seen a scheme of Utopian happiness that did not contain some system of education, and I cannot conceive any system of education of which moral instruction is not a principal part. Such establishments are dictates of nature, and obtrude themselves on the mind of every person who begins to form plans of civil union. And in all existing societies they have indeed been formed, and are considered as the greatest corrector and soother of those discontents that are unavoidable in the minds of the unsuccessful and the unfortunate. The magistrate, therefore, whose professional habits lead him frequently to exert himself for the maintenance of public peace, cannot but see the advantages of such stated remembrancers of our duty. He will therefore support and cherish this public establishment, which so evidently assists him in his beneficent and important labours.

 

But all the evils of society do not spring from the discontents and the vices of the poor. The rich come in for a large and a conspicuous share. They frequently abuse their advantages. Pride and haughty behaviour on their part rankle in the breasts, and affect the tempers of their inferiors, already fretted by the hardships of their own condition. The rich also are luxurious; and are often needy. Grasping at every mean of gratification, they are inattentive to the rights of inferiors whom they despise, and, despising, oppress. Perhaps their own superiority has been acquired by injustice. Perhaps most sovereignties have been acquired by oppression. Princes and Rulers are but men; as such, they abuse many of their greatest blessings. Observing that

[p. 33]

religious hopes make the good resigned under the hardships of the present scene, and that its terrors frequently restrain the bad; they avail themselves of these observations, and support religion as an engine of state, and a mean of their own security. But they are not contented with its real advantages; and they are much more afraid of the resentment and the crimes of the offended profligate, than of the murmurs of the suffering worthy. Therefore they encourage superstition, and call to their aid the vices of the priesthood. The priests are men of like passions as other men, and it is no ground of peculiar blame that they also frequently yield to the temptations of their situation. They are encouraged to the indulgence of the love of influence natural to all men, and they heap terror upon terror, to subdue the minds of men, and darken their understandings. Thus, the most honorable of all employments, the moral instruction of the state, is degraded to a vile trade, and is practised with all the deceit and rapacity of any other trade; and religion, from being the honor and the safeguard of a nation, becomes its greatest disgrace and curse.

 

When a nation has fallen into this lamentable state, it is extremely difficult to reform. Although nothing would so immediately and so completely remove all ground of complaint, as the re-establishing private virtue, this is of all others the least likely to be adopted., The really worthy, who see the mischief where it really is, but who view this life as the school of improvement, and know that man is to be made perfect through suffering, are the last persons to complain. The worthless are the most discontented, the most noisy in their complaints, and the least scrupulous about the means of redress. Not to improve the nation, but to advance themselves, they turn the attention to the abuses of power and influence. And they begin their attack where they think the place most defenceless, and where perhaps they expect assistance from a discontented garrison. They attack superstition, and are not at all solicitous that true religion shall not suffer along with it. It is not, perhaps, with any direct intention to ruin the state, but merely to obtain indulgence for themselves, and the cooperation of the wealthy. They expect to be listened to by many who wish for the same indulgence; and thus it is that religious

[p. 34]

free-thinking is generally the first step of anarchy and revolution. For in a corrupted state, persons of all ranks have the same licentious wishes, and if superstitious, fear be really an ingredient of the human mind, it requires some struggle to shake it off. Nothing is so effectual as mutual encouragement, and therefore all join against priestcraft; even the rulers forget their interest, which should lead them to support it. In such a state, the pure morality of true religion vanishes from the sight. There is commonly no remains of it in the religion of the nation, and therefore all goes together.

 

Perhaps there never was a nation where all those cooperating causes had acquired greater strength than in France. Oppressions of all kinds were at a height. The luxuries of life were enjoyed exclusively by the upper classes, and this in the highest degree of refinement; so that the desires of the rest were whetted to the utmost. Religion appeared in its worst form, and seemed calculated solely for procuring establishments for the younger sons of the insolent and useless noblesse. The morals of the higher orders of the clergy and of the laity were equally corrupted. Thousands of literary men were excluded by their station from all hopes of advancement to the more respectable offices in the church. These vented their discontents as far as there was safety, and were encouraged by many of the upper classes, who joined them in their satires on the priesthood. The clergy opposed them, it is true, but feebly, because they could not support their opposition by examples of their own virtuous behaviour, but were always obliged to have recourse to the power of the church, the very object of hatred and disgust. The whole nation became infidel, and when in a few instances a worthy  uttered the small still voice of true religion, it was not heard amidst the general noise of satire and reproach. The misconduct of administration, and the abuse of the public treasures, were every day growing more impudent and glaring, and exposed the government to continual criticism. But it was still too powerful to suffer this to proceed to extremities; while therefore infidelity and loose sentiments of morality passed unpunished, it was still very hazardous to publish any thing against the state. It was in this respect chiefly, that the Mason Lodges contributed to the dissemination of

[p. 35]

dangerous opinions, and they were employed for this purpose all over the kingdom. This is not an assertion hazarded merely on account of its probability. Abundant proof will appear by and by, that the most turbulent characters in the nation frequented the Lodges. We cannot doubt, but that under this covert they indulged their factious dispositions; nay, we shall find the greatest part of the Lodges of France, converted, in the course of a very few weeks, into corresponding political societies.

 

But it is now time to turn our eyes to the progress of Free Masonry in Germany and the north of Europe; there it took a more serious turn. Free Masonry was imported into Germany somewhat later than into France. The first German Lodge that we have any account of, is that at Cologne, erected in 1716, but very soon suppressed. Before the year 1725 there were many, both in Protestant and Catholic Germany. Those of Wetzlar, Frankfort on the Mayne, Brunswick, and Hamburg, are the oldest, and their priority is doubtful. All of them received their institution from England, and had patents from a mother Lodge in London. All seem to have got the mystery through the same channel, the banished friends of the Stuart family. Many of these were Catholics, and entered into the service of Austria and the Catholic princes.

 

The true hospitality, that is no where more conspicuous than in the character of the Germans, made this institution a most agreeable and useful passport to these gentlemen; and as many of them were in military stations, and in garrison, they found it a very easy matter to set up Lodges in all parts of Germany. These afforded a very agreeable pastime to the officers, who had little to occupy them, and were already accustomed to a subordination which did not affect their vanity on account of family distinctions. As the Ensign and the General were equally gentlemen, the allegory or play of universal Brotherhood was neither novel nor disgusting. Free Masonry was then of the simplest form, consisting of the three degrees of Apprentice, Fellow-craft, and Master. It is remarkable, that the Germans had been long accustomed to the word, the sign, and the gripe of the Masons, and some other handicraft trades. In many parts of Germany there was a distinction of operative

[p. 36]

[paragraph continues] Masons into Wort-Maurers and Schrift-Maurers. The Wort-Maurers had no other proof to give of their having been regularly brought up to the trade of builders, but the word and signs; the Schrift-Maurers had written indentures to shew. There are extant and in force, borough-laws, enjoining the Masters of Masons to give employment to journeymen who had the proper words and sign. In particular it appears, that some cities had more extensive privileges in this respect than others. The word given at Wetzlar, the feat of the great council of revision for the empire, entitled the possessor to work over the whole empire. We may infer from the processes and decisions in some of those municipal courts, that a master gave a word and token for each year's progress of his apprentice. He gave the word of the incorporated Imperial city or borough on which he depended, and also a word peculiar to himself, by which all his own pupils could recognise each other. This mode of recognisance was probably the only document of education in old times, while writing was confined to a very small part of the community. When we reflect on the nature of the German empire, a confederation of small independent states, we see that this profession cannot keep pace with the other mechanic arts, unless its practitioners are invested with greater privileges than others. Their great works exceed the strength of the immediate neighbourhood, and the workmen must be brought together from a distance. Their association must therefore be more cared for by the public.

When English Free Masonry was carried into Germany, it was hospitably received. It required little effort to give it respectability, and to make it the occupation of a gentleman, and its secrets and mysteries were not such novelties as in France. It spread rapidly, and the simple topic of Brotherly love was sufficient for recommending it to the honest and hospitable Germans. But it soon took a very different turn. The German character is the very opposite of frivolity. It tends to seriousness, and requires serious occupation. The Germans are eminent for their turn for investigation; and perhaps they indulge this to excess. We call them plodding and dull, because we have little relish for enquiry for its own sake. But this is surely the occupation of a rational nature, and deserves any name but stupidity. At the same time it must be acknowledged, that

[p. 37]

the spirit of enquiry requires regulation as much as any propensity of the human mind. But it appears that the Germans are not nice in their choice of their objects; it appears that singularity, and wonder, and difficulty of research, are to them irresistible recommendations and incitements. They have always exhibited a strong hankering after every thing that is wonderful, or solemn, or terrible; and in spite of the great progress which men have made in the course of these two last centuries, in the knowledge of nature, a progress too in which we should be very unjust if we did not acknowledge that the Germans have been generally in the foremost ranks, the gross absurdities of magic, exorcism, witchcraft, fortune-telling, transmutation of metals, and universal medicine, have always had their zealous partizans, who have listened with greedy ears to the nonsense and jargon of fanatics and cheats; and though they every day saw examples of many who had been ruined or rendered ridiculous by their credulity, every new pretender to secrets found numbers ready to listen to him, and to run over the same course.

 

Free Masonry, professing mysteries, instantly roused all these people, and the Lodges appeared to the adventurers who wanted to profit by the enthusiasm or the avarice of their dupes, the fittest places in the world for the scene of their operations. The Rosycrucians were the first who availed themselves of the opportunity. This was not the Society which had appeared formerly under that name, and was now extinct; but a set of Alchymists, pretenders to the transmutation of metals and the universal medicine, who, the better to inveigle their votaries, had mixed with their own tricks a good deal of the absurd superstitions of that sect, in order to give a greater air of mystery to the whole, to protract the time of instruction, and to afford more room for evasions, by making so many difficult conditions necessary for perfecting the grand work, that the unfortunate gull, who had thrown away his time and his money, might believe that the failure was owing to his own incapacity or unfitness for being the possessor of the grand secret. These cheats found it convenient to make Masonry one of their conditions, and by a small degree of art, persuaded their pupils that they were the only true Masons. These Rosycrucian Lodges were soon established,

[p. 38]

and became numerous, because their mysteries were addressed, both to the curiosity, the sensuality, and the avarice of men. They became a very formidable band, adopting the constitution of the Jesuits, dividing the Fraternity into circles, each under the management of its own superior, known to the president, but unknown to the individuals of the Lodges. These superiors were connected with each other in a way known only to themselves, and the whole was under one General. At least this is the account which they wish to be believed. If it be just, nothing but the absurdity of the ostensible motives of their occupations could have prevented this combination from carrying on schemes big with hazard to the peace of the world. But the Rosycrucian Lodges have always been considered by other Free Masons as bad Societies, and as gross schismatics. This did not hinder, however, their alchemical and medical secrets from being frequently introduced into the Lodges of simple Free Masonry; and in like manner, exorcism, or ghost-raising, magic, and other gross superstitions, were often held out in their meetings as attainable mysteries, which would be immense acquisitions to the Fraternity, without any necessity of admitting along with them the religious deliriums of the Rosycrucians.

 

In 1743, a Baron Hunde, a gentleman of honorable character and independent fortune, was in Paris, and got acquainted with the Earl of Kilmarnock and some other gentlemen who were about the Pretender, and learned from them that they had some wonderful secrets in their Lodges. He was admitted, through the medium of that nobleman, and of a Lord Clifford, and his Masonic patent was signed George (said to be the signature of Kilmarnock). Hunde had attached himself to the fortunes of the Pretender, in hopes (as he says himself) of rising in the world under his protection. The mighty secret was this. "When the Order of Knights Templars was abolished by Philip the Fair, and cruelly persecuted, some worthy persons escaped, and took refuge in the Highlands of Scotland, where they concealed themselves in caves. These persons possessed the true secrets of Masonry, which had always been in that Order, having been acquired by the Knights, during their services in the east, from the pilgrims whom they occasionally protected or delivered. The Chevaliers de la Rose-Croix continued

[p. 39]

to have the same duties as formerly, though robbed of their emoluments. In fine, every true Mason is a Knight Templar." It is very true that a clever fancy can accommodate the ritual of reception of the Chevalier de l'Epee, &c. to something like the institution of the Knights Templars, and perhaps this explanation of young Zerobabel's pilgrimage, and of the rebuilding of the Temple by Ezra, is the most significant explanation that has been given of the meagre symbols of Free Masonry.

 

When Baron Hunde returned to Germany, he exhibited to some friends his extensive powers for propagating this system of Masonry, and made a few Knights. But he was not very active. Probably the failure of the Pretender's attempt to recover the throne of his ancestors had put an end to Hunde's hopes of making a figure. In the mean time Free Masonry was cultivated with zeal in Germany, and many adventurers found their advantage in supporting particular schisms.

 

But in 1756, or 1757, a complete revolution took place. The French officers who were prisoners at large in Berlin, undertook, with the assurance peculiar to their nation, to instruct the simple Germans in every thing that embellishes society. They said, that the homespun Free Masonry, which had been imported from England, was fit only for the unpolished minds of the British; but that in France it had grown into an elegant system, fit for the profession of Gentlemen. Nay, they said, that the English were ignorant of true Masonry, and possessed nothing but the introduction to it; and even this was not understood by them. When the ribbands and stars, with which the French had ornamented the Order, were shown to the Germans, they could not resist the enchantment. A Mr. Rosa, a French commissary, brought from Paris a complete waggonload of Masonic ornaments, which were all distributed before it had reached Berlin, and he was obliged to order another, to furnish the Lodges of that city. It became for a while a most profitable business to many French officers and commissaries dispersed over Germany, having nothing else to do. Every body gaped for instruction, and these kind teachers were always ready to bestow it. In half a year Free Masonry underwent a complete revolution all over Germany, and

[p. 40]

[paragraph continues] Chevaliers multiplied without number. The Rosaic system was a gospel to the Mason and the poor British system was despised. But the new Lodges of Berlin, as they had been the teachers of the whole empire, wanted also to be the governors, and insisted on complete subjection from all the others. This startled the Free Masons at a distance, and awakened them from their golden dreams. Now began a struggle for dominion and for independency. This made the old Lodges think a little about the whole affair. The result of this was a counter revolution. Though no man could pretend that he understood the true meaning of Free Masonry, its origin, its history, or its real aim, all saw that the interpretations of their hieroglyphics, and the rituals of the new degrees imported from France, were quite gratuitous. It appeared, therefore, that the safest thing for them was an appeal to the birth-place of Masonry. They sent to London for instructions. There they learned, that nothing was acknowledged for genuine unsophisticated Masonry but the three degrees; and that the mother Lodge of London alone could, by her instructions, prevent the most dangerous schisms and innovations. Many Lodges, therefore, applied for patents and instructions. Patents were easily made out, and most willingly sent to the zealous Brethren; and these were thankfully received and paid for. But instruction was not so easy a matter. At that time we had nothing but the book of constitutions, drawn up about 1720, by Anderson and Desaguilliers, two persons of little education, and of low manners, who had aimed at little more than making a pretext, not altogether contemptible, for a convivial meeting. This, however, was received with respect. We are apt to smile at grave men's being satisfied with such coarse and scanty fare. But it was of use, merely because it gave an ostensible reason for resisting the despotism of the Lodges of Berlin. Several respectable Lodges, particularly that of Frankfort on the Mayne, that of Brunswick, that of Wetzlar, and the Royal York of Berlin, resolutely adhered to the English system, and denied themselves all the enjoyment of the French degrees, rather than acknowledge the supremacy of the Rosaic Lodges of Berlin.

 

About the year 1764 a new revolution took place. An adventurer, who called himself Johnson, and passed himself for an Englishman, but who was really a German or Bohemian

[p. 41]

named Leucht, said that he was ambassador from the Chapter of Knights Templars at Old Aberdeen in Scotland, sent to teach the Germans what was true Masonry. He pretended to transmute metals, and some of the Brethren declared that they had seen him do it repeatedly. This reached Baron Hunde and brought back all his former enthusiasm. There is something very dark in this part of the history; for in a little Johnson told his partisans that the only point he had to inform them of was, that Baron Hunde was the Grand Master of the 7th province of Masonry, which included the whole of Germany, and the royal dominions of Prussia. He showed them a map of the Masonic Empire arranged into provinces, each of which had distinguishing emblems. These are all taken from an old forgotten and insignificant book, Typotii Symbola Divina et Humana, published in 1601. There is not the least trace in this book either of Masonry or Templars, and the emblems are taken out without the smallest ground of selection. Some inconsistency with the former magnificent promises of Johnson startled them at first, but they acquiesced and submitted to Baron Hunde as Grand Master of Germany. Soon after Johnson turned out to be a cheat, escaped, was taken, and put in prison, where he died. Yet this seems not to have ruined the credit of Baron Hunde. He erected Lodges, gave a few simple instructions, all in the system of English Masonry, and promised, that when they had approved themselves as good Masons, he would then impart the mighty secret. After two or three years of noviciate, a convention was held at Altenberg; and he told them that his whole secret was, that every true Mason was a Knight Templar. They were astonished, and disappointed; for they expected in general that he would teach them the philosopher's stone, or ghost-raising, or magic. After much discontent, falling out, and dispute, many Lodges united in this system, made somewhat moderate and palatable, under the name of the STRICT DISCIPLINARIANS, Strickten Observanz. It was acceptable to many, because they insisted that they were really Knights, properly consecrated, though without temporalities; and they seriously set themselves about forming a fund which should secure the order in a landed property and revenue, which would give them a respectable civil existence. Hunde declared that his whole estate should devolve on the Order. But the vexations which he afterwards

[p. 42]

met with, and his falling in love with a lady who prevailed on him to become Roman Catholic, made him alter this intention. The Order went on, however, and acquired considerable credit by the serious regularity of their proceedings; and, although in the mean time a new apostle of Mysteries, a Dr. Zinzendorff, one of the Strict Observanz, introduced a new system, which he said was from Sweden, distinguished by some of the mystical doctrines of the Swedenborgh sect, and though this system obtained the Royal patronage, and a National Lodge was established at Berlin by patent, still the Terpelorden, or Orden des Stricten Observanz, continued to be very respectable. The German gentry were better pleased with a Grand Master of their own choosing, than with any imposed on them by authority.

 

During this state of things, one Stark, a Protestant divine, well known in Germany by his writings, made another trial of public faith. One Gugomos (a private gentleman, but who would pass for son to a King of Cyprus) and one Schropfer, keeper of a coffee-house at Nuremberg, drew crowds of Free Masons around them, to learn ghost-raising, exorcism, and alchymy. Numbers came from a great distance to Weisbad to see and learn these mysteries, and Free Masonry was on the point of another revolution. Dr. Stark was an adept in all these things, and contended with Cagliostro in Courland for the palm of superiority. He saw that this deception could not long stand its ground. He therefore came forward, at a convention at Braunschweig in 1772, and said to the Strict Disciplinarians or Templars, That he was of their Order, but of the spiritual department, and was deputed by the Chapter of K--m--d--t in Scotland, where he was Chancellor of the Congregation, and had the name of Archidemides, Eques ab Aquila fulva: That this Chapter had the superintendance of the Order: That they alone could consecrate the Knights, or the unknown superiors; and that he was deputed to instruct them in the real principles of the Order, and impart its inestimable secrets, which could not be known to Baron Hunde, as he would readily acknowledge when he should converse with him. Johnson, he said, had been a cheat, and probably a murderer. He had got some knowledge from papers which he must have stolen from a missionary, who had disappeared,

[p. 43]

and was probably killed. Gugomos and Schropfer must have had some similar information; and Schropfer had even deceived him for a time. He was ready to execute his commission, upon their coming under the necessary obligations of secrecy and of submission. Hunde (whose name in the Order was the Eques ab Ense) acquiesced at once, and proposed a convention, with full powers to decide and accept. But a Schubart, a gentleman of character, who was treasurer to the Templar Masons, and had an employment which gave him considerable influence in the Order, strongly dissuaded them from such a measure. The most unqualified submission to unknown superiors, and to conditions equally unknown, was required previous to the smallest communication, or any knowledge of the powers which Archidemides had to treat with them. Many meetings were held, and many attempts were made to learn something of this spiritual court, and of what they might expect from them. Dr. Stark, Baron Weggensak, Baron Von Raven, and some others of his coadjutors in the Lodges at Koningsberg in Prussia, and at Wismar, were received into the Order. But in vain--nothing was obtained from these ghostly Knights but some insignificant ceremonials of receptions and consecrations. Of this kind of novelties they were already heartily sick; and though they all panted after the expected wonders, they were so much frightened by the unconditional submission, that they could come to no agreement, and the secrets of the Scotch Congregation of K--m--d--t still remain with Dr. Stark. They did, however, a sensible thing; they sent a deputation to Old Aberdeen, to enquire after the caves where their venerable mysteries were known, and their treasures were hid. They had, as they thought, merited some more confidence; for they had remitted annual contributions to these unknown superiors, to the amount of some thousands of rix-dollars. But alas, their ambassadors found the Free Masons of Old Aberdeen ignorant of all this, and as eager to learn from the ambassadors what was the true origin and meaning of Free Masonry, of which they knew nothing but the simple tale of Old Hiram. This broke Stark's credit; but he still insisted on the reality of his commission, and said that the Brethren at Aberdeen were indeed ignorant, but that he had never said otherwise; their expectations from that quarter had rested on the scraps purloined by Johnson. He reminded

[p. 44]

them of a thing well known to themselves; that one of them had been sent for by a dying nobleman to receive papers on this subject, and that his visit having been delayed a few hours by an unavoidable accident, he found all burnt but a fragment of a capitulary and a thing in cypher, part of which he (Dr. Stark) had explained to them. They had employed another gentleman, a H. Wachter, to make similar enquiries in Italy, where Schropfer and others (even Hunde) had told them great secrets were to be obtained from the Pretender's secretary Approsi, and others. Wachter told them, that all this was a fiction, but that he had seen at Florence some Brethren from the Holy Land, who really possessed wonderful secrets, which he was willing to impart, on proper conditions. These, however, they could not accede to; but they were cruelly tortured by seeing Wachter, who had left Germany in sober circumstances, now a man of great wealth and expence. He would not acknowledge that he had got the secret of gold-making from the Asiatic Brethren; but said that no man had any right to ask him how he had come by his fortune. It was enough that he behaved honorably, and owed no man any thing. He broke off all connections with them, and left them in great distress about their Order, and panting after his secrets. Risum teneatis amici.

 

Stark, in revenge for the opposition he had met with from Schubart, left no stone unturned to hurt him with his Brethren, and succeeded, so that he left them in disgust. Hunde died about this time. A book appeared, called, The Stumbling Block and Rock of Offence, which betrayed (by their own confession) the whole secrets of the Order of Templars, and soon made an end of it, as far as it went beyond the simple English Masonry.

 

Thus was the faith of Free Masons quite unhinged in Germany. But the rage for mysteries and wonder was not in the least abated; and the habits of these secret assemblies were becoming every day more craving. Dissension and schism was multiplying in every quarter; and the Institution, instead of being an incitement to mutual complaisance and Brotherly love, had become a source of contention, and of bitter enmity. Not satisfied with defending the propriety of its own Institutions, each System of Free

[p. 45]

[paragraph continues] Masonry was busy in enticing away the partisans of other Systems, shut their Lodges against each other, and proceeded even to vilify and persecute the adherents of every System but their own.

 

These animosities arose chiefly from the quarrel about precedency, and the arrogance (as it was thought) of the patent Lodge of Berlin, in pretending to have any authority in the other parts of the Empire. But these pretensions were not the result of mere vanity. The French importers of the new degrees, always true to the glory of their nation, hoped by this means to secure the dependence even of this frivolous Society; perhaps they might foresee political uses and benefits which might arise from it. One thing is worth notice: The French Lodges had all emanated from the great Confederation under the Duke de Chartres, and, even if we had no other proof, we might presume that they would cultivate the same principles that characterised that Sect. But we are certain that infidelity and laxity of moral principles were prevalent in the Rosaic Lodges, and that the observation of this corruption had offended many of the sober, oldfashioned Lodges, and was one great cause of any check that was given to the brilliant Masonry of France. It is the observation of this circumstance, in which they all resembled, and which soon ceased to be a distinction, because it pervaded the other Lodges, that induced me to expatiate more on this history of Free Masonry in Germany, than may appear to my readers to be adequate to the importance of Free Masonry in the general subject-matter of these pages. But I hope that it will appear in the course of my narration that I have not given it greater value than it deserves.

 

About this very time there was a great revolution of the public mind in Germany, and scepticism, infidelity and irreligion, not only were prevalent in the minds and manners of the wealthy and luxurious, and of the profligate of lower ranks, but began to appear in the productions of the press. Some circumstances, peculiar to Germany, occasioned these declensions from the former acquiescence in the faith of their forefathers to become more uniform and remarkable than they would otherwise have been. The Confessions of Germany are the Roman Catholic, the Lutheran

[p. 46]

[paragraph continues] (which they call Protestant) and the Calvinist (which they call Reformed). These are professed in many small contiguous principalities, and there is hardly one of them in which all the three have not free exercise. The desire of making proselytes is natural to all serious professors of a rational faith, and was frequently exercised. The Roman Catholics are supposed by us to be particularly zealous; and the Protestants (Lutherans and Calvinists) were careful to oppose them by every kind of argument, among which those of ridicule and reproach were not spared. The Catholics accused them of infidelity respecting the fundamental doctrines of Christianity which they professed to believe, and even with respect to the doctrines of natural religion. This accusation was long very slightly supported; but, of late, by better proofs. The spirit of free inquiry was the great boast of the Protestants, and their only support against the Catholics, securing them both in their religious and civil rights. It was therefore supported by their governments. It is not to be wondered at that it should be indulged to excess, or improperly, even by serious men, liable to error, in their disputes with the Catholics. In the progress of this contest, even their own Confession did not escape criticism, and it was asserted that the Reformation which those Confessions express was not complete. Further Reformations were proposed. The Scriptures, the foundation of our faith, were examined by clergymen of very different capacities, dispositions, and views, till by explaining, correcting, allegorising, and otherwise twisting the Bible, men's minds had hardly any thing left to rest on as a doctrine of revealed religion. This encouraged others to go farther, and to say that revelation was a solecism, as plainly appeared by the irreconcileable differences among these Enlighteners (so they were called) of the public, and that man had nothing to trust to but the dictates of natural reason. Another set of writers, proceeding from this as a point already settled, proscribed all religion whatever, and openly taught the doctrines of materialism and atheism. Most of those innovations were the work of Protestant divines, from the causes that I have mentioned. Teller, Semler, Eberhardt, Leffing, Bahrdt, Riem, and Shultz, had the chief hand in all these innovations. But no man contributed more than Nicholai, an eminent and learned bookseller in Berlin. He has been for many years the publisher

[p. 47]

of a periodical work, called the General German Library (Algemein deutsche Bibliothek) consisting of original dissertations, and reviews of the writings of others. The great merit of this work, on account of many learned dissertations which appear in it, has procured it great influence on that class of readers whose leisure or capacity did not allow them a more profound kind of reading. This is the bulk of readers in every country. Nicholai gives a decided preference to the writings of the Enlighteners, and in his reviews treats them with particular notice, makes the public fully acquainted with their works, and makes the most favorable comments; whereas the performances of their opponents, or more properly speaking, the defenders of the National Creeds, are neglected, omitted, or barely mentioned, or they are criticised with every severity of ridicule and reproach. He fell upon a very sure method of rendering the orthodox writers disagreeable to the public, by representing them as the abetters of superstition; and as secret Jesuits. He asserts, that the abolition of the Order of Loyola is only apparent. The Brethren still retain their connection, and most part of their property, under the secret patronage of Catholic Princes. They are, therefore, in every corner, in every habit and character, working with unwearied zeal for the restoration of their empire. He raised a general alarm, and made a journey through Germany, hunting for Jesuits, and for this purpose, became Free Mason and Rosycrucian, being introduced by his friends Gedicke and Biester, clergymen, publishers of the Berlin Monatschrift, and most zealous promoters of the new doctrines. This favor he has repaid at his return, by betraying the mysteries of the Lodges, and numberless falsehoods. His journey was published in several volumes, and is full of frightful Jesuitisms. This man, as I have said, found the greatest success in his method of slandering the defenders of Bible-Christianity, by representing them as concealed Jesuits. But, not contented with open discussion, he long ago published a sort of romance, called Sebaldus Nothanker, in which these divines are introduced under feigned names, and made as ridiculous and detestable as possible. All this was a good trading job, for sceptical and free-thinking writings have every where a good market; and Nicholai was not only reviewer, but publisher, having presses in different cities of the Empire. The immense literary manufacture of Germany, far

[p. 48]

exceeding that of any nation of Europe, is carried on in a very particular way. The books go in sheets to the great fairs of Leipsic and Frankfort, twice a year. The booksellers meet there, and see at one glance the state of literature; and having speculated and made their bargains, the books are instantly dispersed through every part of the Empire, and appear at once in all quarters. Although every Principality has an officer for licensing, it is impossible to prevent the currency of a performance, although it may be prohibited; for it is to be had by the carrier at three or four miles distance in another state. By this mode of traffic, a plot may be formed, and actually has been formed, for giving any particular turn to the literature of the country. There is an excellent work printed at Bern by the author Heinzmann, a bookseller, called, Appeal to my Country, concerning a Combination of Writers, and Booksellers, to rule the Literature of Germany, and form the public mind into a contempt for the religion and civil establishments of the Empire. It contains a historical account of the publications in every branch of literature for about thirty years. The author shows, in the most convincing manner, that the prodigious change from the former satisfaction of the Germans on those subjects to their present discontent and attacks from every quarter, is neither a fair picture of the prevailing sentiments, nor has been the simple operation of things, but the result of a combination of trading Infidels.

 

I have here somewhat anticipated (for I hope to point out the sources of this combination,) because it helps to explain or illustrate the progress of infidelity and irreligion that I was speaking of. It was much accelerated by another circumstance. One Basedow, a man of talents and learning, set up, in the Principality of Anhalt-Dessau, a PHILANTHROPINE, or academy of general education, on a plan extremely different from those of the Universities and Academies. By this appellation, the founder hoped to make parents expect that much attention would be paid to the morals of the pupils; and indeed the programs or advertisements by which Basedow announced his institution to the public, described it as the professed seminary of practical Ethics. Languages, sciences, and the ornamental exercises, were here considered as mere accessories, and the great aim was to form the young mind to the love of mankind and of

[p. 49]

virtue, by a plan of moral education which was very specious and unexceptionable. But there was a circumstance which greatly obstructed the wide prospects of the founder. How were the religious opinions of the youth to be cared for? Catholics, Lutherans, and Calvinists, were almost equally numerous in the adjoining Principalities; and the exclusion of any two of these communions would prodigiously limit the proposed usefulness of the institution. Basedow was a man of talents, a good scholar, and a persuasive writer. He framed a set of rules, by which the education should be conducted, and which, he thought, should make every parent easy; and the plan is very judicious and manly. But none came but Lutherans. His zeal and interest in the thing made him endeavour to interest others; and he found this no hard matter. The people of condition, and all sensible men, saw that it would be a very great advantage to the place, could they induce men to send their children from all the neighbouring states. What we wish, we readily believe to be the truth; and Basedow's plan and reasonings appeared complete, and had the support of all classes of men. The moderate Calvinists, after some time, were not averse from them, and the literary manufacture of Germany was soon very busy in making pamphlets, defending, improving, attacking and reprobating the plans. Innumerable were the projects for moderating the differences between the three Christian communions of Germany, and making it possible for the members of them all, not only to live amicably among each other, and to worship God in the same church, but even to communicate together. This attempt naturally gave rise to much speculation and refinement; and the proposals for amendment of the formulas and the instructions from the pulpit were prosecuted with so much keenness, that the ground-work, Christianity, was refined and refined, till it vanished altogether, leaving Deism, or Natural, or, as it was called, Philosophical Religion, in its place. I am not much mistaken as to historical fact, when I say, that the astonishing change in religious doctrine which has taken place in Protestant Germany within these last thirty years was chiefly occasioned by this scheme of Basedow's. The pre-disposing causes existed, indeed, and were general and powerful, and the disorder had already broken out. But this specious and enticing object

[p. 50]

first gave a title to Protestant clergymen to put to their hand without risk of being censured.

 

Basedow corrected, and corrected again, but not one Catholic came to the Philanthropine. He seems to have thought that the best plan would be, to banish all positive religion whatever, and that he would then be sure of Catholic scholars. Cardinal Dubois was so far right with respect to the first Catholic pupil of the church. He had recommended a man of his own stamp to Louis XIV. to fill some important office. The monarch was astonished, and told the Cardinal, that "that would never do, for the man was a Jansenist; Eh! que non, Sire," said the Cardinal, "il n'est qu' Athee;" all was safe, and the man got the priory. But though all was in vain, Basedow's Philanthropine at Dessau got a high character. He published many volumes on education that have much merit.

 

It were well had this been all. But most unfortunately, though most naturally, writers of loose moral principles and of wicked hearts were encouraged by the impunity which the sceptical writers experienced, and ventured to publish things of the vilest tendency, inflaming the passions and justifying licentious manners. These maxims are congenial with irreligion and Atheism, and the books found a quick market. It was chiefly in the Prussian States that this went on. The late King was, to say the best of him, a naturalist, and, holding this life for his all, gave full liberty to his subjects to write what they pleased, provided they did not touch on state matters. He declared, however, to a minister of his court, long before his death, that "he was extremely sorry that his indifference had produced such effects; that he was sensible it had greatly contributed to hurt the peace and mutual good treatment of his subjects;" and he said, "that he would willingly give up the glory of his best fought battle, to have the satisfaction of leaving his people in the same state of peace and satisfaction with their religious establishments, that he found them in at his accession to the throne." His successor Frederick William found that things had gone much too far, and determined to support the church establishment in the most peremptory manner; but at the same time to allow perfect freedom of thinking and conversing to the professors of every christian

[p. 51]

faith, provided it was enjoyed without disturbing the general peace, or any encroachment on the rights of those already supported by law. He published an edict to this effect, which is really a model worthy of imitation in every country. This was the epoch of a strange revolution. It was attacked from all hands, and criticisms, satires, slanders, threatenings, poured in from every quarter. The independency of the neighbouring states, and the monarch's not being a great favorite among several of his neighbours, permitted the publication of these pieces in the adjoining principalities, and it was impossible to prevent their circulation even in the Prussian States. His edict was called an unjustifiable tyranny over the consciences of men; the dogmas supported by it, were called absurd superstitions; the King's private character, and his opinions in religious matters, were treated with little reverence, nay, were ridiculed and scandalously abused. This field of discussion being thus thrown open, the writers did not confine themselves to religious matters. After flatly denying that the prince of any country had the smallest right to prescribe, or even direct the faith of his subjects, they extended their discussions to the rights of princes in general; and now they fairly opened their trenches, and made an attack in form on the constitutions of the German confederacy, and after the usual approaches, they set up the standard of universal citizenship on the very ridge of the glacis, and summoned the fort to surrender. The most daring of these attacks was a collection of anonymous letters on the constitution of the Prussian States. It was printed (or said to be so) at Utrecht; but by comparing the faults of some types with some books printed in Berlin, it was supposed by all to be the production of one of Nicholai's presses. It was thought to be the composition of Mirabeau. It is certain that he wrote a French translation, with a preface and notes, more impudent than the work itself. The monarch was declared to be a tyrant; the people are addressed as a parcel of tame wretches crouching under oppression. The people of Silesia are represented as still in a worse condition, and are repeatedly called to rouse themselves, and to rise up and assert their rights. The King is told, that there is a combination of philosophers (conjuration) who are leagued together in defence of truth and reason, and which no power can withstand; that they are to be found in every country,

[p. 52]

and are connected by mutual and solemn engagement, and will put in practice every mean of attack. Enlightening, instruction, was the general cry among the writers. The triumph of reason over error, the overthrow of superstition and slavish fear, freedom from religious and political prejudices, and the establishment of liberty and equality, the natural and unalienable rights of man, were the topics of general declamation; and it was openly maintained, that secret societies, where the communication of sentiment should be free from every restraint, was the most effectual mean for instructing and enlightening the world.

 

And thus it appears, that Germany has experienced the same gradual progress, from Religion to Atheism, from decency to dissoluteness, and from loyalty to rebellion, which has had its course in France. And I must now add, that this progress has been effected in the same manner, and by the same means; and that one of the chief means of seduction has been the Lodges of the Free Masons. The French, along with their numerous chevaleries, and stars, and ribbands, had brought in the custom of haranguing in the Lodges, and as human nature has a considerable uniformity every where, the same topics became favorite subjects of declamation that had tickled the ear in France; there were the same corruptions of sentiments and manners among the luxurious or profligate, and the same incitements to the utterance of these sentiments, wherever it could be done with safety; and I may say, that the zealots in all these tracts of free-thinking were more serious, more grave, and fanatical. These are not assertions apriori. I can produce proofs. There was a Baron Knigge residing at that time in the neighbourhood of Frankfort, of whom I shall afterwards have occasion frequently to speak. This man was an enthusiast in Masonry from his youth, and had run through every possible degree of it. He was dissatisfied with them all, and particularly with the frivolity of the French chivalry; but he still believed that Masonry contained invaluable secrets. He imagined that he saw a glimpse of them in the cosmo-political and sceptical discourses in their Lodges; he sat down to meditate on these, and soon collected his thoughts, and found that those French orators were right without knocking it; and that Masonry was pure natural religion and universal citizenship, and that this was

[p. 53]

also true Christianity. In this faith he immediately began his career of Brotherly love, and published three volumes of sermons; the first and third published at Frankfort, and the second at Heidelberg, but without his name. He published also a popular system of religion. In all these publications, of which there are extracts in the Religions Begebenheiten, Christianity is considered as a mere allegory, or a Masonic type of natural religion; the moral duties are spun into the common-place declamations of universal benevolence; and the attention is continually directed to the absurdities and horrors of superstition, the sufferings of the poor, the tyranny and oppression of the great, the tricks of the priests, and the indolent simplicity and patience of the laity and of the common people. The happiness of the patriarchal life, and sweets of universal equality and freedom, are the burden of every paragraph; and the general tenor of the whole is to make men discontented with their condition of civil subordination, and the restraints of revealed religion.

 

All the proceedings of Knigge in the Masonic schisms show that he was a zealous apostle of cosmo-politism, and that he was continually dealing with people in the Lodges who were associated with him in propagating these notions among the Brethren; so that we are certain that such conversations were common in the German Lodges.

 

When the reader considers all these circumstances, he will abate of that surprise which naturally affects a Briton, when he reads accounts of conventions for discussing and fixing the dogmatic tenets of Free Masonry. The perfect freedom, civil and religious, which we enjoy in this happy country, being familiar to every man, we indulge it with calmness and moderation, and secret assemblies hardly differ from the common meetings of friends and neighbours. We do not forget the expediency of civil subordination, and of those distinctions which arise from secure possession of our rights, and the gradual accumulation of the comforts of life in the families of the sober and industrious. These have, by prudence and a respectable oeconomy, preserved the acquisitions of their ancestors. Every man feels in his own breast the strong call of nature to procure for himself and his children, by every honest and commendable exertion, the means of public consideration and respect. No

[p. 54]

man is so totally without spirit, as not to think the better of his condition when he is come of creditable parents, and has creditable connections; and without thinking that he is in any respect generous, he presumes that others have the same sentiments, and therefore allows the moderate expression of them, without thinking it insolence or haughtiness. All these things are familiar, are not thought of, and we enjoy them as we enjoy ordinary health, without perceiving it. But in the same manner as a young man who has been long confined by sickness, exults in returning health, and is apt to riot in the enjoyment of what he so distinctly feels; so those who are under continual check in open society, feel this emancipation in these hidden assemblies, and indulge with eagerness in the expression of sentiments which in public they must smother within their own breast. Such meetings, therefore, have a zest that is very alluring, and they are frequented with avidity. There is no country in Europe where this kind of enjoyment is so poignant as in Germany. Very insignificant principalities have the same rank in the General Federation with very extensive dominions. The internal constitution of each petty state being modelled in nearly the same manner, the official honors of their little courts become ludicrous and even farcical. The Geheim Hofrath, the Hofmareschal, and all the Kammerhers of a Prince, whose dominions do not equal the estates of many English Squires, cause the whole to appear like the play of children, and must give frequent occasion for discontent and ridicule, Mason Lodges even keep this alive. The fraternal equality professed in them is very flattering to those who have not succeeded in the scramble for civil distinctions. Such persons become the most zealous Masons, and generally obtain the active offices in the Lodges, and have an opportunity of treating with authority persons whom in public society they must look up to with some respect.

 

These considerations account, in some measure, for the importance which Free Masonry has acquired in Germany. For a long while the hopes of learning some wonderful secret made a German Baron think nothing of long and expensive journies in quest of some new degree. Of late, the cosmo-political doctrines encouraged and propagated in the Lodges, and some hopes of producing a Revolution

[p. 55]

in society, by which men of talents should obtain the management of public affairs, seem to be the cause of all the zeal with which the order is still cherished and promoted. In a periodical work, published at Neuwied, called Algemein Zeitung der Freymaurerey, we have the list of the Lodges in 1782, with the names of the Office-bearers. Four-fifths of these are clergymen, professors, persons having offices in the common-law courts, men of letters by trade, such as reviewers and journalists, and other pamphleteers; a class of men, who generally think that they have not attained that rank in society to which their talents entitle them, and imagine that they could discharge the important offices of the state with reputation to themselves and advantage to the public.

 

The miserable uncertainty and instability of the Masonic faith, which I described above, was not altogether the effect of mere chance, but had been greatly accelerated by the machinations of Baron Knigge, and some other Cosmo-political Brethren whom he had called to his assistance. Knigge had now formed a scheme for uniting the whole Fraternity, for the purpose of promoting his Utopian plan of universal benevolence in a state of liberty and equality. He hoped to do this more readily by completing their embarrassment, and shewing each system how imfirm its foundation was, and how little chance it had of obtaining a general adherence. The Stricten Observanz had now completely lost its credit, by which it had hoped to get the better of all the rest. Knigge therefore proposed a plan to the Lodges of Frankfort and Wetzlar, by which all the systems might, in some measure, be united, or at least be brought to a state of mutual forbearance and intercourse. He proposed that the English system should be taken for the ground-work, and to receive all and only those who had taken the three symbolical degrees, as they were now generally called. After thus guarding this general point of faith, he proposed to allow the validity of every degree or rank which should be received in any Lodge, or be made the character of any particular system. These Lodges, having secured the adherence of several others, brought about a general convention at Willemsbad in Hainault, where every different system should communicate its peculiar tenets. It was then hoped, that after an examination of them

[p. 56]

all, a constitution might be formed, which comprehended every thing that was most worthy of selection, and therefore be far better than the accommodating system already described. By this he hoped to get his favorite scheme introduced into the whole Order, and Free Masons made zealous Citizens of the World. I believe he was sincere in these intentions, and had no intention to disturb the public peace. The convention was accordingly held, and lasted a long while, the deputies consulting about the frivolities of Masonry, with all the seriousness of state-ambassadors. But there was a great shyness in their communications; and Knigge was making but small progress in his plan, when he met with another Mason, the Marquis of Constanza, who in an instant converted him, and changed all his measures, by showing him that he (Knigge) was only doing by halves what was already accomplished by another Society, which had carried it to its full extent. They immediately set about undoing what he had been occupied with, and heightened as much as they could the dissentions, already sufficiently great, and, in the mean time, got the Lodges of Frankfort and Wetzlar, and several others, to unite, and pick out the best of the things they had obtained by the communications from the other systems, and they formed a plan of what they called, the Eclectic or Syncritic Masonry of the United Lodges of Germany. They composed a constitution, ritual, and catechism, which has merit, and is indeed the completest body of Free Masonry that we have.

 

Such was the state of this celebrated and mysterious Fraternity in Germany in 1776. The spirit of innovation had seized all the Brethren. No man could give a tolerable account of the origin, history, or object of the Order, and it appeared to all as a lost or forgotten mystery. The symbols seemed to be equally susceptible of every interpretation, and none of these seemed entitled to any decided preference.

Footnotes

^23:* Citizenship of the World, from the Greek words Cosmos, world, and Polis, a city.

     Proofs of a Conspiracy, by John Robison, [1798], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 57]

  

CHAP. II.

  

The Illuminati.

I AM now arrived at what I should call the great epoch of Cosmo-politism, the scheme communicated to Baron Knigge by the Marchese di Constanza. This obliges me to mention a remarkable Lodge of the Eclectic Masonry, erected at Munich in Bavaria, in 1775, under the worshipful Master, Professor Baader. It was called The Lodge Theodore of Good Counsel. It had its constitutional patent from the Royal York at Berlin, but had formed a particular system of its own, by instructions from the Loge des Chevaliers Bienfaisants at Lyons, with which it kept up a correspondence. This respect to the Lodge at Lyons had arisen from the preponderance acquired in general by the French party in the convention at Willemstad. The deputies of the Rosaic Lodges, as well as the remains of the Templars, and Stricten Observanz, all looking up to this as the mother Lodge of what they called the Grand Orient de la France, consisting (in 1782) of 266 improved Lodges, united under the D. de Chartres. Accordingly the Lodge at Lyons sent Mr. Willermooz as deputy to this convention at Willemsbad. Refining gradually on the simple British Masonry, the Lodge had formed a system of practical morality, which it asserted to be the aim of genuine Masonry, saying, that a true Mason, and a man of upright heart and active virtue, are synonymous characters, and that the great aim of Free Masonry is to promote the happiness of mankind by every mean in our power. In pursuance of these principles, the Lodge Theodore professedly occupied itself with oeconomical, statistical, and political matters, and not only published from time to time discourses on such subjects by the Brother Orator, but the Members considered themselves as in duty bound to propagate and inculcate the same doctrines out of doors.

[p. 58]

Of the zealous members of the Lodge Theodore the most conspicuous was Dr. Adam Weishaupt, Professor of Canon Law in the university of Ingolstadt. This person had been educated among the Jesuits; but the abolition of their order made him change his views, and from being their pupil, he became their most bitter enemy. He had acquired a high reputation in his profession, and was attended not only by those intended for the practice in the law-courts, but also by the young gentlemen at large, in their course of general education; and he brought numbers from the neighbouring states to this university, and gave a ton to the studies of the place. He embraced with great keenness this opportunity of spreading the favorite doctrines of the Lodge, and his auditory became the seminary of Cosmopolitism. The engaging pictures of the possible felicity of a society where every office is held by a man of talents and virtue, and where every talent is set in a place fitted for its exertion, forcibly catches the generous and unsuspecting minds of youth, and in a Roman Catholic state, far advanced in the habits of gross superstition (a character given to Bavaria by its neighbours) and abounding in monks and idle dignitaries, the opportunities must be frequent for observing the inconsiderate dominion of the clergy, and the abject and indolent submission of the laity. Accordingly Professor Weishaupt says, in his Apology for Illuminatism, that Deism, Infidelity, and Atheism are more prevalent in Bavaria than in any country he was acquainted with. Discourses, therefore, in which the absurdity and horrors of superstition and spiritual tyranny were strongly painted, could not fail of making a deep impression. And during this state of the minds of the auditory the transition to general infidelity and irreligion is so easy, and so inviting to sanguine youth, prompted perhaps by a latent wish that the restraints which religion imposes on the expectants of a future state might be found, on enquiry, to be nothing but groundless terrors; that I imagine it requires the most anxious care of the public teacher to keep the minds of his audience impressed with the reality and importance of the great truths of religion, while he frees them from the shackles of blind and absurd superstition. I fear that this celebrated instructor had none of this anxiety, but was satisfied with his great success in the last part of this task, the emancipation of his young hearers from the terrors of

[p. 59]

superstition. I suppose also that this was the more agreeable to him, as it procured him the triumph over the Jesuits, with whom he had long struggled for the direction of the university.

 

This was in 1777. Weishaupt had long been scheming the establishment of an Association or Order, which, in time, should govern the world. In his first fervour and high expectations, he hinted to several Ex-Jesuits the probability of their recovering, under a new name, the influence which they formerly possessed, and of being again of great service to society, by directing the education of youth of distinction, now emancipated from all civil and religious prejudices. He prevailed on some to join him, but they all retracted but two. After this disappointment Weishaupt became the implacable enemy of the Jesuits; and his sanguine temper made him frequently lay himself open to their piercing eye, and drew on him their keenest resentment, and at last made him the victim of their enmity.

 

The Lodge Theodore was the place where the above-mentioned doctrines were most zealously propagated. But Weishaupt's emissaries had already procured the adherence of many other Lodges; and the Eclectic Masonry had been brought into vogue chiefly by their exertions at the Willemsbad convention. The Lodge Theodore was perhaps less guarded in its proceedings, for it became remarkable for the very bold sentiments in politics and religion which were frequently uttered in their harangues; and its members were noted for their zeal in making proselytes. Many bitter pasquinades, satires, and other offensive pamphlets were in secret circulation, and even larger works of very dangerous tendency, and several of them were traced to that Lodge. The Elector often expressed his disapprobation of such proceedings, and sent them kind messages, desiring them to be careful not to disturb the peace of the country, and particularly to recollect the solemn declaration made to every entrant into the Fraternity of Free Masons, "That no subject of religion or politics shall ever be touched on in the Lodge;" a declaration which alone could have procured his permission of any secret assembly whatever, and on the sincerity and honor of which he had reckoned when he gave his sanction to their establishment. But repeated accounts

[p. 60]

of the same kind increased the alarm, and the Elector ordered a judicial enquiry into the proceedings of the Lodge Theodore.

 

It was then discovered that this and several associated Lodges were the nursery or preparation-school for another Order of Masons, who called themselves the ILLUMINATED, and that the express aim of this Order was to abolish Christianity, and overturn all civil government. But the result of the enquiry was very imperfect and unsatisfactory. No Illuminati were to be found. They were unknown in the Lodge. Some of the members occasionally heard of certain candidates for illumination called MINERVALS, who were sometimes seen among them. But whether these had been admitted, or who received them, was known only to themselves. Some of these were examined in private by the Elector himself. They said that they were bound by honor to secrecy: But they assured the Elector, on their honor, that the aim of the Order was in the highest degree praiseworthy, and useful both to church and state: But this could not allay the anxiety of the profane public; and it was repeatedly stated to the Elector, that members of the Lodge Theodore had unguardedly spoken of this Order as one that in time must rule the world. He therefore issued an order forbidding, during his pleasure, all secret assemblies, and shutting up the Mason Lodges. It was not meant to be rigorously enforced, but was intended as a trial of the deference of these Associations for civil authority. The Lodge Theodore distinguished itself by pointed opposition, continuing its meetings; and the members, out of doors, openly reprobated the prohibition as an absurd and unjustifiable tyranny.

 

In the beginning of 1783, four professors of the Marianen Academy, founded by the widow of the late Elector, viz. Utschneider, Cossandey, Renner, and Grunberger, with two others, were summoned before the Court of Enquiry, and questioned, on their allegiance, respecting the Order of the Illuminati. They acknowledged that they belonged to it, and when more closely examined, they related several circumstances of its constitution and principles. Their declarations were immediately published, and were very unfavorable. The Order was said to abjure Christianity, and

[p. 61]

to refuse admission into the higher degrees to all who adhered to any of the three confessions. Sensual pleasures were restored to the rank they held in the Epicurean philosophy. Self-murder was justified on Stoical principles. In the Lodges death was declared an eternal sleep; patriotism and loyalty were called narrow-minded prejudices, and incompatible with universal benevolence; continual declamations were made on liberty and equality as the unalienable rights of man. The baneful influence of accumulated property was declared an insurmountable obstacle to the happiness of any nation whose chief laws were framed for its protection and increase. Nothing was so frequently discoursed of as the propriety of employing, for a good purpose, the means which the wicked employed for evil purposes; and it was taught, that the preponderancy of good in the ultimate result consecrated every mean employed; and that wisdom and virtue consisted in properly determining this balance. This appeared big with danger; because it appeared that nothing would be scrupled at, if we could make it appear that the Order could derive advantage from it, because the great object of the Order was held as superior to every consideration. They concluded by saying that the method of education made them all spies on each other and on all around them. But all this was denied by the Illuminati. Some of them were said to be absolutely false; and the rest were said to be mistakes. The apostate professors had acknowledged their ignorance of many things. Two of them were only Minervals, another was an Illuminatus of the lowest class, and the fourth was but one step farther advanced. Pamphlets appeared on both sides, with very little effect. The Elector called before him one of the superiors, a young nobleman, who denied these injurious charges, and said that they were ready to lay before his Highness their whole archives and all constitutional papers.

Notwithstanding all this, the government had received such an impression of the dangerous tendency of the Order, that the Elector issued another edict, forbidding all hidden assemblies; and a third, expressly abolishing the Order of Illuminati. It was followed by a search after their papers. The Lodge Theodore was immediately searched, but none

[p. 62]

were to be found. They said now that they had burnt them all, as of no use, since that Order was at an end.

 

It was now discovered, that Weishaupt was the head and founder of the Order. He was deprived of his Professor's chair, and banished from the Bavarian States; but with a pension of 800 florins, which he refused. He went to Regensburg, on the confines of Switzerland. Two Italians, the Marquis Constanza and Marquis Savioli, were also banished, with equal pensions (about L. 40) which they accepted. One Zwack, a counsellor, holding some law-office, was also banished. Others were imprisoned for some time. Weishaupt went afterwards into the service of the D. of Saxe Gotha, a person of a romantic turn of mind, and whom we shall again meet with. Zwack went into the service of the Pr. de Salms, who soon after had so great a hand in the disturbances in Holland.

 

By destroying the papers, all opportunity was lost for authenticating the innocence and usefulness of the Order. After much altercation and paper war, Weishaupt, now safe in Regensburg, published an account of the Order, namely, the account which was given to every Novice in a discourse read at his reception. To this were added, the statutes and the rules proceeding, as far as the degree of Illuminatus Minor, inclusive. This account he affirmed to be conform to the real practice of the Order. But this publication did by no means satisfy the public mind. It differed exceedingly from the accounts given by the four professors. It made no mention of the higher degrees, which had been most blamed by them. Besides, it was alleged, that it was all a fiction, written in order to lull the suspicions which had been raised (and this was found to be the case, except in respect of the very lowest degree.) The real constitution was brought to light by degrees, and shall be laid before the reader, in the order in which it was gradually discovered, that we may the better judge of things not fully known by the conduct of the leaders during the detection. The first account given by Weishaupt is correct, as far as I shall make use of it, and shows clearly the methods that were taken to recommend the Order to strangers.

 

The Order of ILLUMINATI appears as an accessory to

[p. 63]

[paragraph continues] Free Masonry. It is in the Lodges of Free Masons that the Minervals are found, and there they are prepared for Illumination. They must have previously obtained the three English degrees. The founder says more. He says that his doctrines are the only true Free Masonry. He was the chief promoter of the Eclectic System. This he urged as the best method for getting information of all the explanations which have been given of the Masonic Mysteries. He was also a Strict Observanz, and an adept Rosycrucian. The result of all his knowledge is worthy of particular remark, and shall therefore be given at large.

 

"I declare," says he, "and I challenge all mankind to contradict my declaration, that no man can give any account of the Order of Free Masonry, of its origin, of its history, of its object, nor any explanation of its mysteries and symbols, which does not leave the mind in total uncertainty on all these points. Every man is entitled, therefore, to give any explanation of the symbols, and any system of the doctrines, that he can render palatable. Hence have sprung up that variety of systems which for twenty years have divided the Order. The simple tale of the English, and the fifty degrees of the French, and the Knights of Baron Hunde, are equally authentic, and have equally had the support of intelligent and zealous Brethren. These systems are in fact but one. They have all sprung from the Blue Lodge of Three degrees; take these for their standard, and found on these all the improvements by which each system is afterwards suited to the particular object which it keeps in view. There is no man, nor system, in the world, which can show by undoubted succession that it should stand at the head of the Order. Our ignorance in this particular frets me. Do but consider our short history of 120 years.--Who will show me the Mother Lodge? Those of London we have discovered to be self-erected in 1716. Ask for their archives. They tell you they were burnt. They have nothing but the wretched sophistications of the Englishman Anderson, and the Frenchman Desaguilliers. Where is the Lodge of York, which pretends to the priority, with their King Bouden, and the archives that he brought from the East? These too are all burnt. What is the Chapter of Old Aberdeen, and its Holy Clericate? Did we not find it unknown, and the Mason Lodges there the most ignorant of all the

[p. 64]

ignorant, gaping for instruction from our deputies? Did we not find the same thing at London? And have not their missionaries been among us, prying into our mysteries, and eager to learn from us what is true Free Masonry? It is in vain, therefore, to appeal to judges; they are no where to be found; all claim for themselves the sceptre of the Order; all indeed are on an equal footing. They obtained followers, not from their authenticity, but from their conduciveness to the end which they proposed, and from the importance of that end. It is by this scale that we must measure the mad and wicked explanations of the Rosycrucians, the Exorcists, and Cabalists. These are rejected by all good Masons, because incompatible with social happiness. Only such systems as promote this are retained. But alas, they are all sadly deficient, because they leave us under the dominion of political and religious prejudice; and they are as inefficient as the sleepy dose of an ordinary sermon.

 

"But I have contrived an explanation which has every advantage; is inviting to Christians of every communion; gradually frees them from all religious prejudices; cultivates the social virtues; and animates them by a great, a feasible, and speedy prospect of universal happiness, in a state of liberty and moral equality, freed from the obstacles which subordination, rank, and riches, continually throw in our way. My explanation is accurate, and complete, my means are effectual, and irresistible. Our secret Association works in a way that nothing can withstand, and man shall soon be free and happy.

 

"This is the great object held out by this Association: and the means of attaining it is Illumination, enlightening the understanding by the sun of reason, which will dispel the clouds of superstition and of prejudice. The proficients in this Order are therefore justly named the Illuminated. And of all Illumination which human reason can give, none is comparable to the discovery of what we are, our nature, our obligations, what happiness we are capable of, and what are the means of attaining it. In comparison with this, the most brilliant sciences are but amusements for the idle and luxurious. To fit man by Illumination for active virtue, to engage him to it by the strongest motives, to render the

[p. 65]

attainment of it easy and certain, by finding employment for every talent, and by placing every talent in its proper sphere of action, so that all, without feeling any extraordinary effort, and in conjunction with and completion of ordinary business, shall urge forward, with united powers, the general task. This indeed will be an employment suited to noble natures, grand in its views, and delightful in its exercise.

 

"And what is this general object? THE HAPPINESS OF THE HUMAN RACE. Is it not distressing to a generous mind, after contemplating what human nature is capable of, to see how little we enjoy? When we look at this goodly world, and see that every man may be happy, but that the happiness of one depends on the conduct of another; when we see the wicked so powerful, and the good so weak; and that it is in vain to strive, singly and alone, against the general current of vice and oppression; the wish naturally arises in the mind, that it were possible to form a durable combination of the most worthy persons, who should work together in removing the obstacles to human happiness, become terrible to the wicked, and give their aid to all the good without distinction, and should by the most powerful means, first fetter, and by fettering, lessen vice; means which at the same time should promote virtue, by rendering the inclination to rectitude, hitherto too feeble, more powerful and engaging. Would not such an association be a blessing to the world?

 

"But where are the proper persons, the good, the generous, and the accomplished, to be found? and how, and by what strong motives, are they to be induced to engage in a task so vast, so incessant, so difficult, and so laborious? This Association must be gradual. There are some such persons to be found in every society. Such noble minds will be engaged by the heart-warming object. The first task of the Association must therefore be to form the young members. As these multiply and advance, they become the apostles of beneficence, and the work is now on foot, and advances with a speed encreasing every day. The slightest observation shows that nothing will so much contribute to increase the zeal of the members as secret union. We see with what keenness and zeal the frivolous business of Free

[p. 66]

[paragraph continues] Masonry is conducted, by persons knit together by the secrecy of their union. It is needless to enquire into the causes of this zeal which secrecy produces. It is an universal fact, confirmed by the history of every age. Let this circumstance of our constitution therefore be directed to this noble purpose, and then all the objections urged against it by jealous tyranny and affrighted superstition will vanish. The Order will thus work silently, and securely; and though the generous benefactors of the human race are thus deprived of the applause of the world, they have the noble pleasure of seeing their work prosper in their hands."

 

Such is the aim, and such are the hopes of the Order of the Illuminated. Let us now see how these were to be accomplished. We cannot judge precisely of this, because the account given of the constitution of the Order by its founder includes only the lowest degree, and even this is suspected to be fictitious. The accounts given by the four Professors, even of this part of the Order, make a very different impression on the mind, although they differ only in a few particulars.

 

The only ostensible members of the Order were the Minervals. They were to be found only in the Lodges of Free Masons. A candidate for admission must make his wish known to some Minerval; he reports it to a Superior, who, by a channel to be explained presently, intimates it to the Council. No notice is farther taken of it for some time. The candidate is carefully observed in silence, and if thought unfit for the Order, no notice is taken of his solicitation. But if otherwise, the candidate receives privately an invitation to a conference. Here he meets with a person unknown to him, and, previous to all further conference, he is required to peruse and to sign the following oath.

 

"I N. N. hereby bind myself, by mine honor and good name, forswearing all mental reservation, never to reveal, by hint, word, writing, or in any manner whatever, even to my most trusted friend, any thing that shall now be said or done to me respecting my wished-for-reception, and this whether my reception shall follow or not; I being previously assured that it shall contain nothing contrary to religion, the state, nor good manners. I promise, that I shall make

[p. 67]

no intelligible extract from any papers which shall be shewn me now or during my noviciate. All this I swear, as I am, and as I hope to continue, a Man of Honor."

 

The urbanity of this protestation must agreeably impress the mind of a person who recollects the dreadful imprecations which he made at his reception into the different ranks of Free Masonry. The candidate is then introduced to an Illuminates Dirigens, whom perhaps he knows, and is told that this person is to be his future instructor. There is now presented to the candidate, what they call a table, in which he writes his name, place of birth, . age, rank, place of residence, profession, and favorite studies. He is then made to read several articles of this table. It contains, 1st. a very concise account of the Order, its connection with Free Masonry, and its great object, the promoting the happiness of mankind by means of instruction and confirmation in virtuous principles. 2d. Several questions relative to the Order. Among these are, "What advantages he hopes to derive from being a member? What he most particularly wishes to learn? What delicate questions relative to the life, the prospects, the duties of man, as an individual, and as a citizen, he wishes to have particularly discussed to him? In what respects he thinks he can be of use to the Order? Who are his ancestors, relations, friends, correspondents, or enemies? Whom he thinks proper persons to be received into the Order, or whom he thinks unfit for it, and the reasons for both opinions. To each of these questions he must give some answer in writing.

 

The Novice and his Mentor are known only to each other; perhaps nothing more follows upon this; if otherwise, the Mentor appoints another conference, and begins his instructions, by giving him in detail certain portions of the constitution, and of the fundamental rules of the Order. Of these the Novice must give a weekly account in writing. He must also read, in the Mentor's house, a book containing more of the instructions of the Order; but he must make no extracts. Yet from this reading he must derive all his knowledge; and he must give an account in writing of his progress. All writings received from his Superiors must be returned with a stated punctuality. These writings consist chiefly of important and delicate questions,

[p. 68]

suited, either to the particular inclination, or to the peculiar taste which the candidate had discovered in his subscriptions of the articles of the table, and in his former rescripts, or to the direction which the Mentor wishes to give to his thoughts.

 

Enlightening the understanding, and the rooting out of prejudices, are pointed out to him as the principal tasks of his noviciate. The knowledge of himself is considered as preparatory to all other knowledge. To disclose to him, by means of the calm and unbiassed observation of his instructor, what is his own character, his most vulnerable side, either in respect of temper, passions, or prepossessions, is therefore the most essential service that can be done him. For this purpose there is required of him some account of his own conduct on occasions where he doubted of its propriety; some account of his friendships, of his differences of opinion, and of his conduct on such occasions. From such relations the Superior learns his manner of thinking and judging, and those propensities which require his chief attention.

 

Having made the candidate acquainted with himself, he is apprised that the Order is not a speculative, but an active association, engaged in doing good to others. The knowledge of human character is therefore of all others the most important. This is acquired only by observation, assisted by the instructions of his teacher. Characters in history are proposed to him for observation, and his opinion is required. After this he is directed to look around him, and to notice the conduct of other men; and part of his weekly rescripts must consist of accounts of all interesting occurrences in his , whether of a public or private nature. Cossandey, one of the four Professors, gives a particular account of the instructions relating to this kind of science. "The Novice must be attentive to trifles: For, in frivolous occurrences a man is indolent, and makes no effort to act a part, so that his real character is then acting alone. Nothing will have such influence with the Superiors in promoting the advancement of a candidate as very copious narrations of this kind, because the candidate, if promoted, is to be employed in an active station, and it is from this kind of information only that the Superiors can judge of

[p. 69]

his fitness. These characteristic anecdotes are not for the instruction of the Superiors, who are men of long experience, and familiar with such occupation. But they inform the Order concerning the talents and proficiency of the young member. Scientific instruction, being connected by system, is soon communicated, and may in general be very completely obtained from the books which are recommended to the Novice, and acquired in the public seminaries of instruction. But knowledge of character is more multifarious and more delicate. For this there is no college, and it must therefore require longer time for its attainment. Besides, this assiduous and long continued study of men, enables the possessor of such knowledge to act with men, and by his knowledge of their character, to influence their conduct. For such reasons this study is continued, and these rescripts are required, during the whole progress through the Order, and attention to them is recommended as the only mean of advancement. Remarks on Physiognomy in these narrations are accounted of considerable value." So far Mr. Cossandey.

 

During all this trial, which may last one, two, or three years, the Novice knows no person of the Order but his own instructor, with whom he has frequent meetings, along with other Minervals. In these conversations he learns the importance of the Order, and the opportunities he will afterwards have of acquiring much hidden science. The employment of his unknown Superiors naturally causes him to entertain very high notions of their abilities and worth. He is counselled to aim at a resemblance to them by getting rid by degrees of all those prejudices or prepossessions which checked his own former progress; and he is assisted in this endeavour by an invitation to a correspondence with them. He may address his Provincial Superior, by directing his letter Soli, or the General by Primo, or the Superiors in general by Quibus licet. In these letters he may mention whatever he thinks conducive to the advancement of the Order; he may inform the Superiors how his instructor behaves to him; if assiduous or remiss, indulgent or severe. The Superiors are enjoined by the strongest motives to convey these letters wherever addressed. None but the General and Council know the result of all this; and all

[p. 70]

are enjoined to keep themselves and their proceedings unknown to all the world.

 

If three years of this Noviciate have elapsed without further notice, the Minerval must look for no further advancement; he is found unfit, and remains a Free Mason of the highest class. This is called a Sta bene.

 

But should his Superiors judge more favorably of him, he is drawn out of the general mass of Free Masons, and becomes Illuminatus Minor. When called to a conference for this purpose, he is told in the most serious manner, that "it is vain for him to hope to acquire wisdom by mere systematic instruction; for such instruction the Superiors have no leisure. Their duty is not to form speculators, but active men, whom they must immediately employ in the service of the Order. He must therefore grow wise and able entirely by the unfolding and exertion of his own talents. His Superiors have already discovered what these are, and know what service he may be capable of rendering the Order, provided he now heartily acquiesces in being thus honorably employed. They will assist him in bringing his talents into action, and will place him in the situations most favorable for their exertion, so that he may be assured of success. Hitherto he has been a mere scholar, but his first a step farther carries him into action; he must therefore now consider himself as an instrument in the hands of his Superiors, to be used for the noblest purposes." The aim of the Order is now more fully told him. It is, in one sentence, "to make of the human race, without any distinction of nation, condition, or profession, one good and happy family." To this aim, demonstrably attainable, every smaller consideration must give way. This may sometimes require sacrifices which no man standing alone has fortitude to make; but which become light, and a source of the purest enjoyment, when supported and encouraged by the countenance and co-operation of the united wise and good, such as are the Superiors of the Order. If the candidate, warmed by the alluring picture of the possible happiness of a virtuous Society, says that he is sensible of the propriety of this procedure, and still wishes to be of the Order, he is required to sign the following obligation.

[p. 71]

"I, N. N. protest before you, the worthy Plenipotentiary of the venerable Order into which I wish to be admitted, that I acknowledge my natural weakness and inability, and that I, with all my possessions, rank, honors, and titles which I hold in political society, am, at bottom, only a man; I can enjoy these things only through my fellow-men, and through them also I may lose them. The approbation and consideration of my fellow-men are indispensibly necessary, and I must try to maintain them by all my talents. These I will never use to the prejudice of universal good, but will oppose, with all my might, the enemies of the human race, and of political society. I will embrace every opportunity of saving mankind, by improving my understanding and my affections, and by imparting all important knowledge, as the good and statutes of this Order require of me. I bind myself to perpetual silence and unshaken loyalty and submission to the Order, in the persons of my Superiors; here making a faithful and complete surrender of my private judgment, my own will, and every narrow-minded employment of my power and influence. I pledge myself to account the go d of the Order as my own, and am ready to serve it with my fortune, my honor, and my blood. Should I, through omission, neglect, passion, or wickedness, behave contrary to this good of the Order, I subject myself to what reproof or punishment my Superiors shall enjoin. The friends and enemies of the Order shall be my friends and enemies; and with respect to both I will conduct myself as directed by the Order, and am ready, in every lawful way, to devote myself to its increase and promotion, and therein to employ all my ability. All this I promise, and protest, without secret reservation, according to the intention of the Society which require from me this engagement. This I do as I am, and as I hope to continue, a Man of Honor."

 

A drawn sword is then pointed at his breast, and he is asked, Will you be obedient to the commands of your Superiors? He is threatened with unavoidable vengeance, from which no potentate can defend him, if he should ever betray the Order. He is then asked, 1. What aim does he wish the Order to have? 2. What means he would choose to advance this aim? 3. Whom he wishes to keep out of the Order? 4. What subjects he wishes not to be discussed in it?

[p. 72]

Our candidate is now ILLUMINATUS MINOR. It is needless to narrate the mummery of reception, and it is enough to say, that it nearly resembles that of the Masonic Chevalier du Soleil, known to every one much conversant in Masonry. Weishaupt's preparatory discourse of reception is a piece of good composition, whether considered as argumentative (from topics, indeed, that are very gratuitous and fanciful) or as a specimen of that declamation which was so much practised by Libanius and the other Sophists, and it gives a distinct and captivating account of the professed aim of the Order.

The Illuminatus Minor learns a good deal more of the Order, but by very sparing morsels, under the same instructor. The task has now become more delicate and difficult. The chief part of it is the rooting out of prejudices in politics and religion; and Weishaupt has shown much address in the method which he has employed. Not the most hurtful, but the most easily refuted, were the first subjects of discussion, so that the pupil gets into the habits of victory; and his reverence for the systems of either kind is diminished when they are found to have harboured such untenable opinions. The proceedings in the Eclectic Lodges of Masonry, and the harangues of the Brother Orators, teemed with the boldest sentiments both in politics and religion. Enlightening, and the triumph of reason, had been the ton of the country for some time past, and every institution, civil and religious, had been the subject of the most free criticism. Above all, the Cosmo-politism, which had been imported from France, where it had been the favorite topic of the enthusiastical oeconomists, was now become a general theme of discussion in all societies of cultivated men. It was a subject of easy and agreeable declamation; and the Literati found in it a subject admirably fitted for showing their talents, and ingratiating themselves with the young men of fortune, whose minds, unsuspicious as yet and generous, were fired with the fair prospects set before them of universal and attainable happiness. And the pupils of the Illuminati were still more warmed by the thought that they were to be the happy instruments of accomplishing all this. And though the doctrines of universal liberty and equality, as imprescriptible rights of man, might sometimes startle those who possessed the advantage of fortune, there were

[p. 73]

thousands of younger sons, and of men of talents without fortune, to whom these were agreeable sounds. And we must particularly observe, that those who were now the pupils were a set of picked subjects, whose characters and peculiar biases were well known by their conduct during their noviciate as Minervals. They were therefore such as, in all probability, would not boggle at very free sentiments. We might rather expect a partiality to doctrines which removed some restraints which formerly checked them in the indulgence of youthful passions. Their instructors, who have thus relieved their minds from several anxious thoughts, must appear men of superior minds. This was a notion most carefully inculcated; and they could see nothing to contradict it: for except their own Mentor, they knew none; they heard of Superiors of different ranks, but never saw them; and the same mode of instruction that was practised during their noviciate was still retained. More particulars of the Order were slowly unfolded to them, and they were taught that their Superiors were men of distinguished talents, and were Superiors for this reason alone. They were taught, that the great opportunities which the Superiors had for observation, and their habits of continually occupying their thoughts with the great objects of this Order, had enlarged their views, even far beyond the narrow limits of nations and kingdoms, which they hoped would one day coalesce into one great Society, where consideration would attach to talents and worth alone, and that pre-eminence in these would be invariably attended with all the enjoyments of influence and power. And they were told that they would gradually become acquainted with these great and venerable Characters, as they advanced in the Order. In earnest of this, they were made acquainted with one or two Superiors, and with several Illuminati of their own rank. Also, to whet their zeal, they are now made instructors of one or two Minervals, and report their progress to their Superiors. They are given to understand that nothing can so much recommend them as the success with which they perform this task. It is declared to be the best evidence of their usefulness in the great designs of the Order.

 

The baleful effects of general superstition, and even of any peculiar religious prepossession, are now strongly inculcated,

[p. 74]

and the discernment of the pupils in these matters is learned by questions which are given them from time to time to discuss. These are managed with delicacy and circumspection, that the timid may not be alarmed. In like manner, the political doctrines of the Order are inculcated with the utmost caution. After the mind of the pupil has been warmed by the pictures of universal happiness, and convinced that it is a possible thing to unite all the inhabitants of the earth in one great society, and after it has been made out, in some measure to the satisfaction of the pupil, that a great addition of happiness is gained by the abolition of national distinctions and animosities, it may frequently be no hard task to make him think that patriotism is a narrow-minded monopolising sentiment, and even incompatible with the more enlarged views of the Order, namely, the uniting the whole human race into one great and happy society. Princes are a chief feature of national distinction. Princes, therefore, may now be safely represented as unnecessary. If so, loyalty to Princes loses much of its sacred character; and the so frequent enforcing of it in our common political discussions may now be easily made to appear a selfish maxim of rulers, by which they may more easily enslave the people; and thus, it may at last appear, that religion, the love of our particular country, and loyalty to our Prince, should be resisted, if, by these partial or narrow views, we prevent the accomplishment of that Cosmo-political happiness which is continually held forth as the great object of the Order. It is in this point of view that the terms of devotion to the Order which are inserted in the oath of admission are now explained. The authority of the ruling powers is therefore represented as of inferior moral weight to that of the Order. "These powers are despots, when they do not conduct themselves by its principles; and it is therefore our duty to surround them with its members, so that the profane may have no access to them. Thus we are able most powerfully to promote its interests. If any person is more disposed to listen to Princes than to the Order, he is not fit for it, and must rise no higher. We must do our utmost to procure the advancement of Illuminati into all important civil offices."

 

Accordingly the Order laboured in this with great zeal and success. A correspondence was discovered, in which

[p. 75]

it is plain, that by their influence, one of the greatest ecclesiastical dignities was filled up in opposition to the right and authority of the Archbishop of Spire, who is there represented as a tyrannical and bigotted priest. They contrived to place their Members as tutors to the youth of distinction. One of them, Baron Leuchtsenring, took the charge of a young prince without any salary. They insinuated themselves into all public offices, and particularly into courts of justice. In like manner, the chairs in the University of Ingolstadt were (with only two exceptions) occupied by Illuminati. "Rulers who are members must be promoted through the ranks of the Order only in proportion as they acknowledge the goodness of its great object, and manner of procedure. Its object may be said to be the checking the tyranny of princes, nobles, and priests, and establishing an universal equality of condition and of religion." The pupil is now informed "that such a religion is contained in the Order, is the perfection of Christianity, and will be imparted to him in due time."

 

These and other principles and maxims of the Order are partly communicated by the verbal instruction of the Mentor, partly by writings, which must be punctually returned, and partly read by the pupil at the Mentor's house (but without taking extracts) in such portions as he shall direct. The rescripts by the pupil must contain discussions on these subjects, and of anecdotes and descriptions of living characters; and these must be zealously continued, as the chief mean of advancement. All this while the pupil knows only his Mentor, the Minervals, and a few others of his own rank. All mention of degrees, or other business of the Order, must be carefully avoided, even in the meetings with other Members: "For the Order wishes to be secret, and to work in silence; for thus it is better secured from the oppression of the ruling powers, and because this secrecy gives a greater zest to the whole."

 

This short account of the Noviciate, and of the lowest class of Illuminati, is all we can get from the authority of Mr. Weishaupt. The higher degrees were not published by him. Many circumstances appear suspicious, and are certainly susceptible of different turns, and may easily be

[p. 76]

pushed to very dangerous extremes. The accounts given by the four professors confirm these suspicions. They declare upon oath, that they make all these accusations in consequence of what they heard in the Meetings, and of what they knew of the Higher Orders.

 

But since the time of the suppression by the Elector, discoveries have been made which throw great light on the subject. A collection of original papers and correspondence was found by searching the house of one Zwack (a Member) in 1786. The following year a much larger collection was found at the house of Baron Bassus; and since that time Baron Knigge, the most active Member next to Weishaupt, published an account of some of the higher degrees, which had been formed by himself. A long while after this were published, Neueste Arbeitung des Spartacus and Philo in der Illuminaten Orden, and Hohere Granden des Ilium. Ordens. These two works give an account of the whole secret constitution of the Order, its various degrees, the manner of conferring them, the instructions to the intrants, and an explanation of the connection of the Order with Free Masonry, and a critical history. We shall give some extracts from such of these as have been published.

 

Weishaupt was the founder in 1776. In 1778 the number of Members was considerably increased, and the Order was fully established. The Members took antique names. Thus Weishaupt took the name of Spartacus, the man who headed the insurrection of slaves, which in Pompey's time kept Rome in terror and uproar for three years. Zwack was called Cato. Knigge was Philo. Bassus was Hannibal. Hertel was Marius. Marquis Constanza was Diomedes. Nicholai, an eminent and learned bookseller in Berlin, and author of several works of reputation, took the name of Lucian, the great scoffer at all religion. Another was Mahomet, &c. It is remarkable, that except Cato and Socrates, we have not a name of any ancient who was eminent as a teacher and practiser of virtue. On the contrary, they seem to have affected the characters of the free-thinkers and turbulent spirits of antiquity. In the same manner they gave ancient names to the cities and countries of Europe. Munich was Athens, Vienna was Rome, &c.

[p. 77]

  

Spartacus to Cato, Feb. 6, 1778.

"Mon but est de faire valoir la raison. As a subordinate object I shall endeavour to gain security to ourselves, a backing in case of misfortunes, and assistance from without. I shall therefore press the cultivation of science, especially such sciences as may have an influence on our reception in the world, and may serve to remove obstacles out of the way. We have to struggle with pedantry, with intolerance, with divines and statesmen, and above all, princes and priests are in our way. Men are unfit as they are, and must be formed; each class must be the school of trial for the next. This will be tedious, because it is hazardous. In the last classes I propose academies under the direction of the Order. This will secure us the adherence of the Literati. Science shall here be the lure. Only those who are assuredly proper subjects shall be picked out from among the inferior classes for the higher mysteries, which contain the first principles and means of promoting a happy life. No religionist must, on any account, be admitted into these: For here we work at the discovery and extirpation of superstition and prejudices. The instructions shall be so conducted that each shall disclose what he thinks he conceals within his own breast, what are his ruling propensities and passions, and how far he has advanced in the command of himself. This will answer all the purposes of auricular confession. And in particular, every person shall be made a spy on another and on all around him. Nothing can escape our sight; by these means we shall readily discover who are contented, and receive with relish the peculiar state-doctrines and religious opinions that are laid before them; and, at last, the trust-worthy alone will be admitted to a participation of the whole maxims and political constitution of the Order. In a council composed of such members we shall labour at the contrivance of means to drive by degrees the enemies of reason and of humanity out of the world, and to establish a peculiar morality and religion fitted for the great Society of mankind.

 

"But this is a ticklish project, and requires the utmost circumspection. The squeamish will start at the sight of religious or political novelties; and they must be prepared

[p. 78]

for them. We must be particularly careful about the books which we recommend; I shall confine them at first to moralists and reasoning historians. This will prepare for a patient reception, in the higher classes, of works of a bolder flight, such as Robinet's Systeme de la Nature--Politique Naturelle--Philosophie de la Nature--Systeme Social--The writings of Mirabaud, &c. Helvetius is fit only for the strongest stomachs. If any one has a copy already, neither praise nor find fault with him. Say nothing on such subjects to intrants, for we don't know how they will be received--folks are not yet prepared. Marius, an excellent man, must be dealt with. His stomach, which cannot yet digest such strong food, must acquire a better tone. The allegory on which I am to found the mysteries of the Higher Orders is the fire-worship of the Magi. We must have some worship, and none is so apposite. LET THERE BE LIGHT, AND THERE SHALL BE LIGHT. This is my motto, and is my fundamental principle. The degrees will be Feurer Orden, Parsen Orden; [**] all very practicable. In the course through these there will be no STA BENE (this is the answer given to one who solicits preferment, and is refused.) For I engage that none shall enter this class who has not laid aside his prejudices. No man is fit for our Order who is not a Brutus or a Catiline, and is not ready to go every length.--Tell me how you like this?"

  

Spartacus to Cato, March 1778.

"To collect unpublished works, and information from the archives of States, will be a most useful service. We shall be able to show in a very ridiculous light the claims of our despots. Marius (keeper of the archives of the Electorate) has ferreted out a noble document, which we have got. He makes it, forsooth, a case of conscience--how silly that--since only that is sin, which is ultimately productive of mischief. In this case, where the advantage far exceeds the hurt, it is meritorious virtue. It will do more good in our hands than by remaining for 1000 years on the dusty shelf."

[p. 79]

There was found in the hand-writing of Zwack a project for a Sisterhood, in subserviency to the designs of the Illuminati. In it are the following passages:

 

"It will be of great service, and procure us both much information and money, and will suit charmingly the taste of many of our truest members, who are lovers of the sex. It should consist of two classes, the virtuous, and the freer hearted (i.e. those who fly out of the common tract of prudish manners); they must not know of each other, and must be under the direction of men, but without knowing it. Proper books must be put into their hands, and such (but secretly) as are flattering to their passions."

 

There are, in the same hand-writing, Description of a strong box, which, if forced open, shall blow up and destroy its contents--Several receipts for procuring abortion--A composition which blinds or kills when spurted in the face--A sheet, containing a receipt for sympathetic ink--Tea for procuring abortion--Herbae quae habent qualitatem deleteriam--A method for filling a bed-chamber with pestilential vapours--How to take off impressions of seals, so as to use them afterwards as seals--A collection of some hundreds of such impressions, with a list of their owners, princes, nobles, clergymen, merchants, &c.--A receipt ad excitandum furorem uterinum--A manuscript entitled, "Better than Horus." It was afterwards printed and distributed at Leipzig fair, and is an attack and bitter satire on all religion. This is in the hand-writing of Ajax. As also a dissertation on suicide. N. B. His sister-in-law threw herself from the top of a tower. There was also a set of portraits, or characters of eighty-five ladies in Munich; with recommendations of some of them for members of a Lodge of Sister Illuminatae; also injunctions to all the Superiors to learn to write with both hands; and that they should use more than one cypher.

 

Immediately after the publication of these writings, many defences appeared. It was said that the dreadful medical apparatus were with propriety in the hands of Counsellor Zwack, who was a judge of a criminal court, and whose duty it was therefore to know such things. The same excuse was offered for the collection of seals; but how came these

[p. 80]

things to be put up with papers of the Illuminati, and to be in the hand writing of one of that Order? Weishaupt says, "These things were not carried into effect--only spoken of, and are justifiable when taken in proper connection." This however he has not pointed out; but he appeals to the account of the Order, which he had published at Regensburg, and in which neither these things are to be found, nor any possibility of a connection by which they may be justified. "All men, says he, are subject to errors, and the best man is he who best conceals them. I have never been guilty of any such vices or follies: for proof, I appeal to the whole tenor of my life, which my reputation, and my struggles with hostile cabals, had brought completely into public view long before the institution of this Order, without abating any thing of that flattering regard which was paid to me by the first persons of my country and its neighbourhood; a regard well evinced by their confidence in me as the best instructor of their children." In some of his private letters, we learn the means which he employed to acquire this influence among the youth, and they are such as could not fail. But we must not anticipate. "It is well known that I have made the chair which I occupied in the university of Ingolstadt, the resort of the first class of the German youth; whereas formerly it had only brought round it the low-born practitioners in the courts of law. I have gone through the whole circle of human enquiry. I have exorcised spirits--raised ghosts--discovered treasures--interrogated the Cabala--hatte Loto gespielt--I have never transmuted metals."--(A very pretty and respectable circle indeed, and what vulgar spirits would scarcely have included within the pale of their curiosity.) "The tenor of my life has been the opposite of every thing that is vile; and no man can lay any such thing to my charge. I have reason to rejoice that these writings have appeared; they are a vindication of the Order and of my conduct. I can, and must declare to God, and I do it now in the most solemn manner, that in my whole life I never saw or heard of the so much condemned secret writings; and in particular, respecting these abominable means; such as poisoning, abortion, &c. was it ever known to me in any case, that any of my friends or acquaintances ever even thought of them, advised them, or made any use of them. I was indeed always a schemer and projector, but never could engage much in detail. My general

[p. 81]

plan is good, though in the detail there may be faults. I had myself to form. In another situation, and in an active station in life, I should have been keenly occupied, and the founding an Order would never have come into my head. But I would have executed much greater things, had not government always opposed my exertions, and placed others in the situations which suited my talents. It was the full conviction of this, and of what could be done, if every man were placed in the office for which he was fitted by nature and a proper education, which first suggested to me the plan of illumination." Surely Mr. Weishaupt had a very serious charge, the education of youth; and his encouragement in that charge was the most flattering that an Illuminatus could wish for, because he had brought round him the youth whose influence in society was the greatest and who would most of all contribute to the diffusing good principles, and exciting to good conduct through the whole state. "I did not," says he, "bring deism into Bavaria more than into Rome. I found it here, in great vigour, more abounding than in any of the neighbouring Protestant states. I am proud to be known to the world as the founder of the Order of Illuminati; and I repeat my wish to have for my epitaph,

"Hic situs est Phaethon, currus auriga paterni,
 "Quem si non tenuit, magnis tamen excidit ausis."

The second discovery of secret correspondence at Sandersdorff, the feat of Baron Batz (Hannibal) contains still more interesting facts.

  

Spartacus to Cato.

"What shall I do? I am deprived of all help. Socrates, who would insist on being a man of consequence among us, and is really a man of talents, and of a right way of thinking, is eternally besotted. Augustus is in the worst estimation imaginable. Alcibiades sits the day long with the vintner's pretty wife, and there he sighs and pines. A few days ago, at Corinth, Tiberius attempted to ravish the wife of Democides, and her husband came in upon them. Good heavens! what Areopagitae I have got. When the worthy man Marcus Aurelius comes to Athens (Munich) what

[p. 82]

will he think? What a meeting with dissolute immoral wretches, whore-masters, liars, bankrupts, braggarts, and vain fools! When he sees all this, what will he think? He will be ashamed to enter into an Association," (observe, Reader, that Spartacus writes this in August 1783, in the very time that he was trying to murder Cato's sister) "where the chiefs raise the highest expectations, and exhibit such a wretched example; and all this from self-will, from sensuality. Am I not in the right--that this man--that any such worthy man--whose name alone would give us the selection of all Germany--will declare that the whole province of Grecia (Bavaria) innocent and guilty, must be excluded. I tell you, we may study; and write, and toil till death. We may sacrifice to the Order, our health, our fortune, and our reputation (alas the loss!) and these Lords, following their own pleasures, will whore, cheat, steal, and drive on like shameless rascals; and yet must be Areopagitae, and interfere in every thing. Indeed, my dearest friend, we have only enslaved ourselves."

 

In another part of this fine correspondence, Diomedes has had the good fortune to intercept a Q. L. (Quibus licet) in which it is said, and supported by proofs, that Cato had received 250 florins as a bribe for his sentence in his capacity as a judge in a criminal court; (the end had surely sanctified the means.) In another, a Minerval complains of his Mentor for having by lies occasioned the dismission of a physician from a family, by which he obtained the custom of the house and free access, which favor he repaid by debauching the wife; and he prays to be informed whether he may not get another Mentor, saying, that although that man had always given him the most excellent instructions, and he doubted not would continue them, yet he felt a disgust at the hypocrisy, which would certainly diminish the impression of the most salutary truths. (Is it not distressing to think, that this promising youth will by and by laugh at his former simplicity, and follow the steps and not the instructions of his physician.) In another place, Spartacus writes to Marius (in confidence) that another worthy Brother, an Areopagitae, had stolen a gold and a silver watch, and a ring, from Brutus (Savioli) and begs Marius, in another letter, to try, while it was yet possible, to get the things restored, because the culprit was a most excellent 

[p. 83]

man (Vortrefflich) and of vast use to the Order, having the direction of an eminent seminary of young gentlemen; and because Savioli was much in good company, and did not much care for the Order, except in so far as it gave him an opportunity of knowing and leading some of them, and of steering his way at court.

 

I cannot help inserting here, though not the most proper place, a part of a provincial report from Knigge, the man of the whole Areopagitae who shows any thing like urbanity or gentleness of mind.

 

"Of my whole colony (Westphalia) the most brilliant is Claudiopolis (Neuwied.) There they work, and direct, and do wonders."

 

If there ever was a spot upon earth where men may be happy in a state of cultivated society, it was the little principality of Neuwied. I saw it in 1770. The town was neat, and the palace handsome and in good taste; all was clean. But the country was beyond conception delightful; not a cottage that was out of repair, not a hedge out of order; it had been the hobby (pardon the word) of the Prince, who made it his daily employment to go through his principality regularly, and assist every householder, of whatever condition, with his advice, and with his purse; and, when a freeholder could not of himself put things into a thriving condition, the Prince sent his workmen and did it for him. He endowed schools for the common people, and two academies for the gentry and the people of business. He gave little portions to the daughters, and prizes to the well-behaving sons of the labouring people. His own household was a pattern of elegance and economy; his sons were sent to Paris to learn elegance, and to England to learn science and agriculture. In short, the whole was like a romance (and was indeed romantic.) I heard it spoken of with a smile at the table of the Bishop of Treves, at Ehrenbretstein, and was induced to see it next day as a curiosity: And yet even here, the fanaticism of Knigge would distribute his poison, and tell the blinded people, that they were in a state of sin and misery, that their Prince was a despot, and that they would never be happy till he was made to fly, and till they were all made equal.

[p. 84]

They got their wish; the swarm of French locusts sat down on Neuwied's beautiful fields in 1793, and entrenched themselves; and in three months, Prince and farmers houses, and cottages, and schools, and academies--all vanished; and all the subjects were made equal, and free (as they were expressly told by the French General) to weep.

Discite justitiam moniti, et non temnere divos!

To proceed:

  

Spartacus to Cato.

"By this plan we shall direct all mankind. In this manner, and by the simplest means, we shall set all in motion and in flames. The occupations must be so allotted and contrived, that we may, in secret, influence all political transactions." N. B. This alludes to a part that is withheld from the public, because it contained the allotment of the most rebellious and profligate occupations to several persons whose common names could not be traced. "I have considered," says Spartacus, "every thing, and so prepared it, that if the Order should this day go to ruin, I shall in a year re-establish it more brilliant than ever." Accordingly it got up again in about this space of time, under the name of the GERMAN UNION, appearing in the form of READING SOCIETIES. One of these was set up in Zwack's house; and this raising a suspicion, a visitation was made at Landshut, and the first set of the private papers were found. The scheme was, however, zealously prosecuted in other parts of Germany, as we shall see by and by. "Nor," continues Spartacus, "will it signify though all should be betrayed and printed. I am so certain of success, in spite of all obstacles (for the springs are in every heart) that I am indifferent, though it should involve my life and my liberty. What! Have thousands thrown away their lives about homoios and homoiousios, and shall not this cause warm even the heart of a coward? But I have the art to draw advantage even from misfortune; and when you would think me sunk to the bottom, I shall rise with new vigour. Who would have thought, that a professor at Ingolstadt was to become the teacher of the professors of Gottingen, and of the greatest men in Germany?"

[p. 85]

  

Spartacus to Cato.

"Send me back my degree of Illuminatus Minor; it is the wonder of all men here (I may perhaps find time to give a translation of the discourse of reception, which contains all that can be said of this Association to the public;) as also the two last sheets of my degree, which is in the keeping of Marius, and Celsus, under 100 locks which contains my history of the lives of the Patriarchs." N. B. Nothing very particular has been discovered of these lives of the Patriarchs. He says, that there were above sixty sheets of it. To judge by the care taken of it, it must be a favorite work, very hazardous, and very catching.

 

In another letter to Cato, we have some hints of the higher degrees, and concerning a peculiar morality, and a popular religion, which the Order was one day to give the world. He says, "There must (a la Jesuite) not a single purpose ever come in sight that is ambiguous, and that may betray our aims against religion and the state. One must speak sometimes one way and sometimes another, but so as never to contradict ourselves, and so that, with respect to our true way of thinking, we may be impenetrable. When our strongest things chance to give offence, they must be explained as attempts to draw answers which discover to us the sentiments of the person we converse with." N. B. This did not always succeed with him.

 

Spartacus says, speaking of the priests degree, "One would almost imagine, that this degree, as I have managed it, is genuine Christianity, and that its end was to free the Jews from slavery. I say, that Free Masonry is concealed Christianity. My explanation of the hieroglyphics, at least, proceeds on this supposition; and as I explain things, no man need be ashamed of being a Christian. Indeed I afterwards throw away this name, and substitute Reason. But I assure you this is no small affair; a new religion, and a new state-government, which so happily explain one and all of these symbols, and combines them in one degree, You may think that this is my chief work; but I have three other degrees, all different, for my class of higher mysteries, in comparison with which this is but

[p. 86]

child's play; but these I keep for myself as General, to be bestowed by me only on the Benemeritissimi," (surely such as Cato, his dearest friend, and the possessor of such pretty secrets, as abortives, poisons, pestilential vapours, &c.) "The promoted may be Areopagites or not. Were you here I should give you this degree without hesitation. But it is too important to be intrusted to paper, or to be bestowed otherwise than from my own hand. It is the key to history, to religion, and to every state-government in the world." [**]

 

Spartacus proceeds, "There shall be but three copies for all Germany. You can't imagine what respect and curiosity my priest-degree has raised; and, which is wonderful, a famous Protestant divine, who is now of the Order, is persuaded that the religion contained in it is the true sense of Christianity. O MAN, MAN! TO WHAT MAY'ST THOU NOT BE PERSUADED. Who would imagine that I was to be the founder of a new religion."

 

In this scheme of Masonic Christianity, Spartacus and Philo laboured seriously together. Spartacus sent him the materials, and Philo worked them up. It will therefore illustrate this capital point of the constitution of the Order, if we take Philo's account of it.

  

Philo to Cato.

"We must consider the ruling propensities of every age of the world. At present the cheats and tricks of the priests have roused all men against them, and against Christianity. But, at the same time superstition and fanaticism rule with unlimited dominion, and the understanding of man really seems to be going backwards. Our task, therefore, is doubled. We must give such an account of things, that fanatics shall not be alarmed, and that shall, notwithstanding, excite a spirit of free enquiry. We must not throw away the good with the bad, the child with the dirty water; but we must

[p. 87]

make the secret doctrines of Christianity be received as the secrets of genuine Free Masonry. But farther, we have to deal with the despotism of Princes. This increases every day. But then, the spirit of freedom breathes and sighs in every corner; and, by the assistance of hidden schools of wisdom, Liberty and Equality, the natural and imprescriptible rights of man, warm and glow in every breast. We must therefore unite these extremes. We proceed in this manner.

 

"Jesus Christ established no new Religion; he would only set Religion and Reason in their ancient rights. For this purpose he would unite men in a common bond. He would fit them for this by spreading a just morality, by enlightening the understanding, and by assisting the mind to shake off all prejudices. He would teach all men, in the first place, to govern themselves. Rulers would then be needless, and equality and liberty would take place without any revolution, by the natural and gentle operation of reason and expediency. This great Teacher allows himself to explain every part of the Bible in conformity to these purposes; and he forbids all wrangling among his scholars, because every man may there find a reasonable application to his peculiar doctrines. Let this be true or false, it does not signify. This was a simple Religion, and it was so far inspired; but the minds of his hearers were not fitted for receiving these doctrines. I told you, says he, but you could not bear it. Many therefore were called, but few were chosen. To these elect were entrusted the most important secrets; and even among them there were degrees of information. There was a seventy, and a twelve. All this was in the natural order of things, and according to the habits of the Jews, and indeed of all antiquity. The Jewish Theosophy was a mystery; like the Eleusinian, or the Pythagorean, unfit for the vulgar, And thus the doctrines of Christianity were committed to the Adepti, in a Disciplina Arcani. By these they were maintained, like the Vestal Fire. They were kept up, only in hidden societies, who handed them down to posterity; and they are now possessed by the genuine Free Masons."

 

N. B. This explains the origin of many anonymous pamphlets which appeared about this time in Germany, showing that Free Masonry was Christianity. They have doubtless

[p. 88]

been the works of Spartacus and his partizans among the Eclectic Masons. Nicholai, the great apostle of infidelity, had given very favorable reviews of these performances, and having always shown himself an advocate of such writers as depreciated Christianity, it was natural for him to take this opportunity of bringing it still lower in the opinion of the people. Spartacus therefore conceived a high opinion of the importance of gaining Nicholai to the Order. He had before this gained Leuchtsenring, a hot-headed fanatic, who had spied Jesuits in every corner, and set Nicholai on his journey through Germany, to hunt them out. This man finding them equally hated by the Illuminati, was easily gained, and was most zealous in their cause. He engaged Nicholai, and Spartacus exults exceedingly in the acquisition, saying, "that he was an unwearied champion, et quidem contentissimus." Of this man Philo says, "that he had spread this Christianity into every corner of Germany. I have put meaning," says Philo, "to all these dark symbols, and have prepared both degrees, introducing beautiful ceremonies, which I have selected from among those of the ancient communions, combined with those of the Rosaic Masonry; and now," says he, "it will appear that we are the only true Christians. We shall now be in a condition to say a few words to Priests and Princes. I have so contrived things, that I would admit even Popes and Kings, after the trials which I have prefixed; and they would be glad to be of the Order."

 

But how is all this to be reconciled with the plan of Illumination, which is to banish Christianity altogether. Philo himself in many places says, "that it is only a cloak, to prevent squeamish people from starting back." This is done pretty much in the same way that was practised in the French Masonry. In one of their degrees, the Master's degree is made typical of the death of Jesus Christ, the preacher of Brotherly love. But in the next step, the Chevalier du Soleil, it is Reason that has been destroyed and entombed, and the Master in this degree, the Sublime Philosophe, occasions the discovery of the place where the body is hid. Reason tries again, and superstition and tyranny disappear, and all becomes clear; man becomes free and happy.

Let us hear Spartacus again.

[p. 89]

  

Spartacus, in another place.

"We must, 1st. gradually explain away all our preparatory pious frauds. And when persons of discernment find fault, we must desire them to consider the end of all our labour. This sanctifies our means, which at any rate are harmless, and have been useful, even in this case, because they procured us a patient hearing, when otherwise men would have turned away from us like petted children. This will convince them of our sentiments in all the intervening points; and our ambiguous expressions will then be interpreted into an endeavour to draw answers of any kind, which may show us the minds of our pupils. 2d. We must unfold, from history and other writings, the origin and fabrication of all religious lies whatever; and then, 3d. We give a critical history of the Order. But I cannot but laugh, when I think of the ready reception which all this has met with from the grave and learned divines of Germany and of England; and I wonder how their William failed when he attempted to establish a Deistical Worship in London (what can this mean? [**]) for, I am certain, that it must have been most acceptable to that learned and free people. But they had not the enlightening of our days." I may here remark, that Weishaupt is presuming too much on the ignorance of his friend, for there was a great deal of this enlightening in England at the time he speaks of, and if I am not mistaken, even this celebrated Professor of Irreligion has borrowed most of his scheme from this kingdom. This to be sure is nothing in our praise. But the PANTHEISTICON of Toland resembles Weishaupt's Illumination in every thing but its rebellion and its villany. Toland's Socratic Lodge is an elegant pattern for Weishaupt, and his Triumph of Reason, his Philosophic Happiness, his God, or Anima Mundi, are all so like the harsh system of Spartacus, that I am convinced that he has copied them, stamping them with the roughness of his own character. But to go on; Spartacus says of the English: "Their poet Pope made his Essay on Man a system of pure naturalism, without knowing it, as Brother Chrysippus did with my Priest's Degree, and was equally astonished when this was

[p. 90]

pointed out to him. Chrysippus is religious, but not superstitious. Brother Lucian (Nicholai, of whom I have already said so much) says, that the grave Zolikofer now allows that it would be a very proper thing to establish a Deistical Worship at Berlin. I am not afraid but things will go on very well. But Philo, who was entrusted with framing the Priest's Degree, has destroyed it without any necessity; it would, forsooth, startle those who have a hankering for Religion. But I always told you that Philo is fanatical and prudish. I gave him fine materials, and he has stuffed it full of ceremonies and child's play, and as Minos says, c'est jouer la religion. But all this may be corrected in the revision by the Areopagitae."

 

N. B. I have already mentioned Baron Knigge's conversion to Illuminatism by the M. de Constanza, whose name in the Order was Diomedes. Knigge (henceforth Philo) was, next to Spartacus, the most serviceable man in the Order, and procured the greatest number of members. It was chiefly by his exertions among the Masons in the Protestant countries, that the Eclectic System was introduced, and afterwards brought under the direction of the Illuminati. This conquest was owing entirely to his very extensive connections among the Masons. He travelled like a philosopher from city to city, from Lodge to Lodge, and even from house to house, before his Illumination, trying to unite the Masons, and he now went over the same ground to extend the Eclectic System, and to get the Lodges put under the direction of the Illuminati, by their choice of the Master and Wardens. By this the Order had an opportunity of noticing the conduct of individuals; and when they had found out their manner of thinking, and that they were fit for their purpose, they never quitted them till they had gained them over to their party. We have seen, that he was by no means void of religious impressions, and we often find him offended with the atheism of Spartacus. Knigge was at the same time a man of the world, and had kept good company. Weishaupt had passed his life in the habits of a college. Therefore he knew Knigge's value, and communicated to him all his projects, to be dressed up by him for the taste of society. Philo was of a much more affectionate disposition, with something of a devotional

[p. 91]

turn, and was shocked at the hard indifference of Spartacus. After labouring four years with great zeal, he was provoked with the disingenuous tricks of Spartacus, and he broke off all connection with the Society in 1784, and some time after published a declaration of all that he had done in it. This is a most excellent account of the plan and principles of the Order (at least as he conceived it, for Spartacus had much deeper views) and shows that the aim of it was to abolish Christianity, and all the state-governments in Europe, and to establish a great republic. But it is full of romantic notions and enthusiastic declamation, on the hackneyed topics of universal citizenship, and liberty and equality. Spartacus gave him line, and allowed him to work on, knowing that he could discard him when he chose. I shall after this give some extracts from Philo's letters, from which the reader will see the vile behaviour of Spartacus, and the nature of his ultimate views. In the mean time we may proceed with the account of the principles of the system.

  

Spartacus to Cato.

"Nothing would be more profitable to us than a right history of mankind. Despotism has robbed them of their liberty. How can the weak obtain protection? Only by union; but this is rare. Nothing can bring this about but hidden societies. Hidden schools of wisdom are the means which will one day free men from their bonds. These have in all ages been the archives of nature, and of the rights of men; and by them shall human nature be raised from her fallen state. Princes and nations shall vanish from the earth. The human race will then become one family, and the world will be the dwelling of rational men.

 

"Morality alone can do this. The head of every family will be what Abraham was, the patriarch, the priest, and the unlettered lord of his family, and Reason will be the code of laws to all mankind. THIS," says Spartacus, "is our GREAT SECRET. True, there may be some disturbance; but by and by the unequal will become equal; and after the storm all will be calm. Can the unhappy consequences remain when the grounds of dissension are removed? Rouse yourselves therefore, O men! assert your rights; and then

[p. 92]

will Reason rule with unperceived sway; and ALL SHALL BE HAPPY. [**]

 

"Morality will perform all this; and morality is the fruit of Illumination; duties and rights are reciprocal. Where Octavius has no right, Cato owes him no duty. Illumination shews us our rights, and Morality follows; that Morality which teaches us to be of age, to be out of wardenship, to be full grown, and to walk without the leading-strings of priests and princes.

 

"Jesus of Nazareth, the Grand Master of our Order, appeared at a time when the world was in the utmost disorder, and among a people who for ages had groaned under the yoke of bondage. He taught them the lessons of reason. To be more effective, he took in the aid of Religion--of opinions which were current--and, in a very clever manner, he combined his secret doctrines with the popular religion, and with the customs which lay to his hand. In these he wrapped up his lessons--he taught by parables. Never did any prophet lead men so easily and so securely along the road of liberty. He concealed the precious meaning and consequences of his doctrines; but fully disclosed them to a chosen few. He speaks of a kingdom of the upright and faithful; his Father's kingdom, whose children we also are. Let us only take Liberty and Equality as the great aim of his doctrines, and Morality as the way to attain it, and every thing in the New Testament will be comprehensible; and Jesus will appear as the Redeemer of slaves. Man is fallen from the condition of Liberty and Equality, the STATE OF PURE NATURE. He is under subordination and civil bondage, arising from the vices of man. This is the FALL, and ORIGINAL SIN. The KINGDOM OF GRACE is that restoration which may be brought about by Illumination and a just Morality. This is the NEW BIRTH. When man lives under government, he is fallen, his worth is gone, and his nature tarnished. By subduing our passions, or limiting their cravings, we may recover a great deal of our original worth, and live in a state of grace. This is the redemption of men

[p. 93]

[paragraph continues] --this is accomplished by Morality; and when this is spread over the world, we have THE KINGDOM OF THE JUST.

 

"But alas! the task of self-formation was too hard for the subjects of the Roman empire, corrupted by every species of profligacy. A chosen few received the doctrines in secret, and they have been handed down to us (but frequently almost buried under rubbish of man's invention) by the Free Masons. These three conditions of human society are expressed by the rough, the split and the polished stone. The rough stone, and the one that is split, express our condition under civil government; rough by every fretting inequality of condition; and split, since we are no longer one family; and are farther divided by differences of government, rank, property, and religion; but when reunited in one family, we are represented by the polished stone. G. is Grace; the Flaming Star is the Torch of Reason. Those who possess this knowledge are indeed ILLUMINATI. Hiram is our fictitious Grand Master, slain for the REDEMPTION OF SLAVES; the Nine Masters are the Founders of the Order. Free Masonry is a Royal Art, inasmuch as it teaches us to walk without trammels, and to govern ourselves."

 

Reader, are you not curious to learn something of this all-powerful morality, so operative on the heart of the truly illuminated--of this disciplina arcani, entrusted only to the chosen few, and handed down to Professor Weishaupt, to Spartacus, and his associates, who have cleared it of the rubbish heaped on it by the dim-sighted Masons, and now beaming in its native lustre on the minds of the Areopagitae? The teachers of ordinary Christianity have been labouring for almost 2000 years, with the New Testament in their hands; many of them with great address, and many, I believe, with honest zeal. But alas! they cannot produce such wonderful and certain effects (for observe, that Weishaupt repeatedly assures us that his means are certain) probably for want of this disciplina arcani, of whose efficacy so much is said. Most fortunately, Spartacus has given us a brilliant specimen of the ethics which illuminated himself on a trying occasion, where an ordinary Christian would have been much perplexed, or would have taken a road widely different from that of this illustrious apostle of light. And seeing

[p. 94]

that several of the Areopagitae co-operated in the transaction, and that it was carefully concealed from the profane and dim-sighted world, we can have no doubt but that it was conducted according to the disciplina arcani of Illumination. I shall give it in his own words.

  

Spartacus to Marius, September 1783.

"I am now in the most embarrassing situation; it robs me of all rest, and makes me unfit for every thing. I am in danger of losing at once my honor and my reputation, by which I have long had such influence. What think you--my sister-in-law is with child. I have sent her to , and am endeavouring to procure a marriage-licence from Rome. How much depends on this uncertainty--and there is not a moment to lose. Should I fail, what is to be done? What a return do I make by this to a person to whom I am so much obliged! (we shall see the probable meaning of this exclamation by and by.) We have tried every method in our power to destroy the child; and I hope she is determined on every thing--even d------. (Can this mean death?) But alas! Euriphon is, I fear, too timid (alas! poor woman, thou art now under the disciplina arcani) and I see no other expedient. Could I be but assured of the silence of Celsus (a physician at Ingoldstadt) he can relieve me, and he promised me as much three years ago. Do speak to him, if you think he will be staunch. I would not let Cato (his dearest friend, and his chief or only confidant in the scheme of Illumination) know it yet, because the affair in other respects requires his whole friendship. (Cato had all the pretty receipts.) Could you but help me out of this distress, you would give me life, honor, and peace, and strength to work again in the great cause. If you cannot, be assured I will venture on the most desperate stroke (poor sister!) for it is fixed.--I will not lose my honor. I cannot conceive what devil has made me to go astray--me who have always been so careful on such occasions. As yet all is quiet, and none know of it but you and Euriphon. Were it but time to undertake any thing--but alas! it is the fourth month. These damned priests too--for the action is so criminally accounted by them, and scandalises the blood. This makes the utmost efforts and the most desperate measures absolutely necessary."

[p. 95]

It will throw some light on this transaction if we read a letter from Spartacus to Cato about this time.

 

"One thing more, my dearest friend--Would it be agreeable to you to have me for a brother-in-law. If this should be agreeable, and if it can be brought about without prejudice to my honor, as I hope it may, I am not without hopes that the connection may take place. But in the mean time keep it a secret, and only give me permission to enter into correspondence on the subject with the good lady, to whom I beg you will offer my respectful compliments, and I will explain myself more fully to you by word of mouth, and tell you my whole situation. But I repeat it--the thing must be gone about with address and caution. I would not for all the world deceive a person who certainly has not deserved so of me."

 

What interpretation can be put on this? Cato seems to be brother to the poor woman--he was unwittingly to furnish the drugs, and he was to be dealt with about consenting to a marriage, which could not be altogether agreeable to him, since it required a dispensation, she being already the sister-in-law of Weishaupt, either the sister of his former wife, or the widow of a deceased brother. Or perhaps Spartacus really wishes to marry Cato's sister, a different person from the poor woman in the straw; and he conceals this adventure from his trusty friend Cato, till he sees what becomes of it. The child may perhaps be got rid of, and then Spartacus is a free man. There is a letter to Cato, thanking him for his friendship in the affair of the child--but it gives no light. I meet with another account, that the sister of Zwack threw herself from the top of a tower, and beat out her brains. But it is not said that it was an only sister; if it was, the probability is, that Spartacus had paid his addresses to her, and succeeded, and that the subsequent affair of his marriage with his sister-in-law or something worse, broke her heart. This seems the best account of the matter. For Hertel (Marius) writes to Zwack in November 1782: "Spartacus is this day gone home, but has left his sister-in-law pregnant behind (this is from Bassus Hoss.) About the new year he hopes to be made merry by a------; who will be before all kings and princes--a young Spartacus.

[p. 96]

[paragraph continues] The Pope also will respect him, and legitimate him before the time."

 

Now, vulgar Christian, compare this with the former declaration of Weishaupt, in page 80, where he appeals to the tenor of his former life, which had been so severely scrutinised, without diminishing his high reputation and great influence, and his ignorance and abhorrence of all those things found in Cato's repositories. You see this was a surprise--he had formerly proceeded cautiously.--"He is the best man," says Spartacus, "who best conceals his faults."--He was disappointed by Celsus, who had promised him his assistance on such occasions three years ago, during which time he had been busy in "forming himself." How far he has advanced, the reader may judge.

 

One is curious to know what became of the poor woman: she was afterwards taken to the house of Baron Bassus; but here the foolish woman, for want of that courage which Illumination, and the bright prospect of eternal sleep should have produced, took fright at the disciplina arcani, left the house, and in the hidden society of a midwife and nurse brought forth a young Spartacus, who now lives to thank his father for his endeavours to murder him. A "damned priest," the good Bishop of Freysingen, knowing the cogent reasons, procured the dispensation, and Spartacus was obliged, like another dim-sighted mortal, to marry her. The scandal was hushed, and would not have been discovered had it not been for these private writings.

 

But Spartacus says (page 84) "that when you think him sunk to the bottom, he will spring up with double vigour." In a subsequent work called Short Amendment of my Plan, he says, "If men were not habituated to wicked manners, his letters would be their own justification." He does not say that he is without fault; "but they are faults of the understanding--not of the heart. He had, first of all, to form himself; and this is a work of time." In the affair of his sister-in-law he admits the facts, and the attempts to destroy the child; "but this is far from proving any depravity of heart. In his condition, his honor at stake, what else was left him to do? His greatest enemies, the Jesuits, have taught that in such a case it is lawful to make away with

[p. 97]

the child," and he quotes authorities from their books. "In the introductory fault he has the example of the best of men. The second was its natural consequence, it was altogether involuntary, and, in the eye of a philosophical judge (I presume of the Gallic School) who does not square himself by the harsh letters of a blood-thirsty lawgiver, he has but a very trifling account to settle. He had become a public teacher, and was greatly followed; this example might have ruined many young men. The eyes of the Order also were fixed on him. The edifice rested on his credit; had he fallen, he could no longer have been in a condition to treat the matters of virtue so as to make a lasting impression. It was chiefly his anxiety to support the credit of the Order which determined him to take this step. It makes for him, but by no means against him; and the persons who are most in fault are the slavish inquisitors, who have published the transaction, in order to make his character more remarkable, and to hurt the Order through his person; and they have not scrupled, for this hellish purpose, to stir up a child against its father ! ! !"

 

I make no reflections on this very remarkable, and highly useful story, but content myself with saying, that this justification by Weishaupt (which I have been careful to give in his own words) is the greatest instance of effrontery and insult on the sentiments of mankind that I have ever met with. We are all supposed as completely corrupted as if we had lived under the full blaze of Illumination.

 

In other places of this curious correspondence we learn that Minos, and others of the Areopagitae, wanted to introduce Atheism at once, and not go hedging in the manner they did; affirming it was easier to show at once that Atheism was friendly to society, than to explain all their Masonic Christianity, which they were afterwards to show to be a bundle of lies. Indeed this purpose, of not only abolishing Christianity, but all positive religion whatever, was Weishaupt's favorite scheme from the beginning. Before he canvassed for his Order, in 1774, he published a fictitious antique, which he called Sidonii Apollinaris Fragmenta, to prepare (as he expressly says in another place)  minds for the doctrines of Reason, which contains all the detestable doctrines of Robinet's Systeme de la Nature. The

[p. 98]

publication of the second part was stopped. Weishaupt says, in his APOLOGY FOR THE ILLUMINATI, that before 1780 he had retracted his opinions about Materialism, and about the inexpediency of Princes. But this is false: Philo says expressly, that every thing remained on its original footing in the whole practice and dogmas of the Order when he quitted it in July 1784. All this was concealed, and a even the abominable Masonry, in the account of the Order which Weishaupt published at Regensburg; and it required the constant efforts of Philo to prevent bare or flat Atheism from being uniformly taught in their degrees. He had told the council that Zeno would not be under a roof with a man who denied the immortality of the soul. He complains of Minos's cramming irreligion down their throats in every meeting, and says, that he frightened many from entering the Order. "Truth," says Philo, "is a clever, but a modest girl, who must be led by the hand like a gentlewoman, but not kicked about like a whore." Spartacus complains much of the squeamishness of Philo; yet Philo is not a great deal behind him in irreligion. When describing to Cato the Christianity of the Priest-degree, as he had manufactured it, he says, "It is all one whether it be true or false, we must have it, that we may tickle those who have a hankering for religion." All the odds seems to be, that he was of a gentler disposition, and had more deference even for the absurd prejudices of others. In one of his angry letters to Cato he says; "The vanity and self conceit of Spartacus would have got the better of all prudence, had I not checked him, and prevailed on the Areopagitae but to defer the developement of the bold principles till we had firmly secured the man. I even wished to entice the candidate the more by giving him back all his former bonds of secrecy, and leaving him at liberty to walk out without fear; and I am certain that they were, by this time, so engaged that we should not have lost one man. But Spartacus had composed an exhibition of his last principles, for a discourse of reception, in which he painted his three favorite mysterious degrees, which were to be conferred by him alone, in colours which had fascinated his own fancy. But they were the colours of hell, and would have scared the most intrepid; and because I represented the danger of this, and by force obtained the omission of this picture, he became my implacable enemy. I

[p. 99]

abhor treachery and profligacy, and leave him to blow himself and his Order in the air."

 

Accordingly this happened. It was this which terrified one of the four professors, and made him impart his doubts to the rest. Yet Spartacus seems to have profited by the apprehensions of Philo; for in the last reception, he, for the first time, exacts a bond from the intrant, engaging himself for ever to the Order, and swearing that he will never draw back. Thus admitted, he becomes a sure card. The course of his life is in the hands of the Order, and his thoughts on a thousand dangerous points; his reports concerning his neighbours and friends; in short, his honor and his neck. The Deist, thus led on, has not far to go before he becomes a Naturalist or Atheist; and then the eternal sleep of death crowns all his humble hopes.

 

Before giving an account of the higher degrees, I shall just extract from one letter more on a singular subject.

  

Minos to Sebastian, 1782.

"The proposal of Hercules to establish a Minerval school for girls is excellent, but requires much circumspection. Philo and I have long conversed on this subject. We cannot improve the world without improving women, who have such a mighty influence on the men. But how shall we get hold of them? How will their relations, particularly their mothers, immersed in prejudices, consent that others shall influence their education? We must begin with grown girls. Hercules proposes the wife of Ptolemy Magus. I have no objection; and I have four step-daughters, fine girls. The oldest in particular is excellent. She is twenty-four, has read much, is above all prejudices, and in religion she thinks as I do. They have much acquaintance among the young ladies their relations (N. B. we don't know the rank of Minos, but as he does not use the word Damen, but Frauenzimmer, it is probable that it is not high.) It may immediately be a very pretty Society, under the management of Ptolemy's wife, but really under his management. You must contrive pretty degrees, and dresses, and ornaments, and elegant and decent rituals. No man must be admitted. This will make them become more keen, and they will go much farther than

[p. 100]

if we were present, or than if they thought that we knew of their proceedings. Leave them to the scope of their own fancies, and they will soon invent mysteries which will put us to the blush, and create an enthusiasm which we can never equal. They will be our great apostles. Reflect on the respect, nay the awe and terror inspired by the female mystics of antiquity. (Think of the Danaids--think of the Theban Bacchantes.) Ptolemy's wife must direct them, and she will be instructed by Ptolemy, and my step-daughters will consult with me. We must always be at hand to prevent the introduction of any improper question. We must prepare themes for their discussion--thus we shall confess them, and inspire them with our sentiments. No man however must come near them. This will fire their roving fancies, and we may expect rare mysteries. But I am doubtful whether this Association will be durable. Women are fickle and impatient. Nothing will please them but hurrying from degree to degree, through a heap of insignificant ceremonies, which will soon lose their novelty and influence. To rest seriously in one rank, and to be still and silent when they have found out that the whole is a cheat (hear the words of an experienced Mason) is a task of which they are incapable. They have not our motives to persevere for years, allowing themselves to be led about, and even then to hold their tongues when they find that they have been deceived. Nay there is a risk that they may take it into their heads to give things an opposite turn, and then, by voluptuous allurements, heightened by affected modesty and decency, which give them an irresistible empire over the best men, they may turn our Order upside down, and in their turn will lead the new one."

 

Such is the information which may be got from the private correspondence. It is needless to make more extracts of every kind of vice and trick. I have taken such as show a little of the plan of the Order, as far as the degree of Illuminatus Minor, and the vile purposes which are concealed under all their specious declamation. A very minute account is given of the plan, the ritual, ceremonies, &c. and even the instructions and discourses, in a book called the Achte Illuminat, published at Edessa (Frankfurt) in 1787. Philo says, "that this is quite accurate, but that he does not know the author." I proceed to give an account

[p. 101]

of their higher degrees, as they are to be seen in the book called Neueste Arbeitung des Spartacus and Philo. And the authenticity of the accounts is attested by Grollman, a private gentleman of independent fortune, who read them, signed and sealed by Spartacus and the Areopagitae.

The series of ranks and progress of the pupil were arranged as follows:

The Reader must be almost sick of so much villany, and would be disgusted with the minute detail, in which the cant of the Order is ringing continually in his ears. I shall therefore only give such a short extract as may fix our notions of the object of the Order, and the morality of the means employed for attaining it. We need not go back to the lower degrees, and shall begin with the ILLUMINATUS DIRIGENS, or SCOTCH KNIGHT.

 

After a short introduction, teaching us how the holy secret Chapter of Scotch Knights is assembled, we have, I. Fuller accounts and instructions relating to the whole. II. Instructions for the lower classes of Masonry. III. Instructions relating to Mason Lodges in general. IV. Account of a reception into this degree, with the bond which each subscribes before he can be admitted. V. Concerning the solemn Chapter for reception. VI. Opening of the Chapter. VII. Ritual of Reception, and the Oath. VIII. Shutting of

[p. 102]

the Chapter. IX. Agape, or Love Feast. X. Ceremonies of the consecration of the Chapter. Appendix A, Explanation of the Symbols of Free Masonry. B, Catechism for the Scotch Knight. C, Secret Cypher.

 

In No. I. it is said that the "chief study of the Scotch Knight is to work on all men in such a way as is most insinuating. II. He must endeavour to acquire the possession of considerable property. III. In all Mason Lodges we must try secretly to get the upper hand. The Masons do not know what Free Masonry is, their high objects, nor their highest Superiors, and should be directed by those who will lead them along the right road. In preparing a candidate for the degree of Scotch Knighthood, we must bring him into dilemmas by catching questions.--We must endeavour to get the disposal of the money of the Lodges of the Free Masons, or at least take care that it be applied to purposes favorable to our Order--but this must be done in a way that shall not be remarked. Above all, we must push forward with all our skill, the plan of Eclectic Masonry, and for this purpose follow up the circular letter already sent to all the Lodges with every thing that can increase their present embarrassment." In the bond of No. IV. the candidate binds himself to "consider and treat the Illuminati as the Superiors of Free Masonry, and endeavour in all the Mason Lodges which he frequents, to have the Masonry of the Illuminated, and particularly the Scotch Noviciate, introduced into the Lodge." (This is not very different from the Masonry of the Chevalier de l'Aigle of the Rosaic Masonry, making the Master's degree a sort of commemoration of the passion, but without giving that character to Christianity which is peculiar to Illuminatism.) Jesus Christ is represented as the enemy of superstitious observances, and the assertor of the Empire of Reason and of Brotherly love, and his death and memory as dear to mankind. This evidently paves the way for Weishaupt's Christianity. The Scotch Knight also engages "to consider the Superiors of the Order as the unknown Superiors of Free Masonry, and to contribute all he can to their gradual union." In the Oath, No. VII. the candidate says, "I will never more be a flatterer of the great, I will never be a lowly servant of princes; but I will strive with spirit, and with address, for virtue, wisdom, and liberty. I will powerfully oppose superstition,

[p. 103]

slander, and despotism; so, that like a true son of the Order, I may serve the world. I will never sacrifice the general good, and the happiness of the world, to my private interest. I will boldly defend my Brother against slander, will follow out the traces of the pure and true Religion pointed out to me in my instructions, and in the doctrines of Masonry; and will faithfully report to my Superiors the progress I make therein."

 

When he gets the stroke which dubs him a Knight, the Preses says to him, "Now prove thyself, by thy ability, equal to Kings, and never from this time forward bow thy knee to one who is, like thyself, but a man."

 

No. IX is an account of the Love-Feast.

 

1st, There is a Table Lodge, opened as usual, but in virtue of the ancient Master-word. Then it is said, "Let moderation, fortitude, morality, and genuine love of the Brethren, with the overflowing of innocent and careless mirth reign here." (This is almost verbatim from Toland.)

2d, In the middle of a bye-table is a chalice, a pot of wine, an empty plate, and a plate of unleavened bread--All is covered with a green cloth.

 

3d, When the Table Lodge is ended, and the Prefect sees no obstacle, he strikes on this bye-table the stroke of Scotch Master, and his signal is repeated by the Senior Warden. All are still and silent. The Prefect lifts off the cloth.

 

4th, The Prefect asks, whether the Knights are in the disposition to partake of the Love-Feast in earnest, peace, and contentment. If none hesitates, or offers to retire, he takes the plate with the bread and says,

 

"J. of N. our Grand-Master, in the night in which he was betrayed by his friends, persecuted for his love for truth, imprisoned, and condemned to die, assembled his trusty Brethren, to celebrate his last Love-Feast--which is signified to us in many ways. He took bread (taking it) and broke it (breaking it) and blessed it, and gave it to his disciples, &c.--This shall be the mark of our Holy Union, &c. Let each of you examine his heart, whether

[p. 104]

love reigns in it, and whether he, in full imitation of our Grand-Master, is ready to lay down his life for his Brethren.

 

"Thanks be to our Grand-Master, who has appointed this feast as a memorial of his kindness, for the uniting of the hearts of those who love him.--Go in peace, and blessed be this new Association which we have formed.--Blessed be ye who remain loyal and strive for the good cause."

 

5th, The Prefect immediately closes the Chapter with the usual ceremonies of the Loge de Table.

 

6th, It is to be observed, that no priest of the Order must be present at this Love-Feast, and that even the Brother Servitor quits the Lodge.

 

I must observe here, that Philo, the manufacturer of this ritual, has done it very injudiciously; it has no resemblance whatever to the Love-Feast of the primitive Christians, and is merely a copy of a similar thing in one of the steps of French Masonry. Philo's reading in church-history was probably very scanty, or he trusted that the candidates would not be very nice in their examination of it, and he imagined that it would do well enough, and "tickle such as had a religious hankering." Spartacus disliked it exceedingly--it did not accord with his serious conceptions, and he justly calls it Jouer la Religion.

 

The discourse of reception is to be found also in the secret correspondence (Nachtrag II. Abtheilung, p. 44). But it is needless to insert it here. I have given the substance of this and of all the Cosmo-political declamations already in the panegyric introduction to the account of the process of education. And in Spartacus's letter, and in Philo's I have given an abstract of the introduction to the explanation given in this degree of the symbols of Free Masonry. With respect to the explanation itself, it is as slovenly and wretched as can be imagined, and shows that Spartacus trusted to much more operative principles in the human heart for the reception of his nonsense than the dictates of unbiased reason. None but promising subjects were admitted thus far--such as would not boggle; and

[p. 105]

their principles were already sufficiently apparent to assure him that they would be contented with any thing that made game of religion, and would be diverted by the seriousness which a chance devotee might exhibit during these silly caricatures of Christianity and Free Masonry. But there is considerable address in the way that Spartacus prepares his pupils for having all this mummery shown in its true colours, and overturned.

 

"Examine, read, think on these symbols. There are many things which one cannot find out without a guide nor even learn without instructions. They require study and zeal. Should you in any future period think that you have conceived a clearer notion of them, that you have found a paved road, declare your discoveries to your Superiors; it is thus that you improve your mind; they expect this of you; they know the true path--but will not point it out--enough if they assist you in every approach to it, and warn you when you recede from it. They have even put things in your way to try your powers of leading yourself through the difficult track of discovery. In this process the weak head finds only child's play--the initiated finds objects of thought which language cannot express, and the thinking mind finds food for his faculties." By such forewarnings as these Weishaupt leaves room for any deviation, for any sentiment or opinion of the individual that he may afterwards choose to encourage, and "to whisper in their ear (as he expresses it) many things which he did not find it prudent to insert in a printed compend."

 

But all the principles and aim of Spartacus and of his Order are most distinctly seen in the third or Mystery Class. I proceed therefore to give some account of it. By the Table it appears to have two degrees, the Lesser and the Greater Mysteries, each of which have two departments, one relating chiefly to Religion and the other to Politics.

 

The Priest's degree contains, 1. An Introduction. 2. Further Accounts of the Reception into this degree. 3. What is called Instruction in the Third Chamber, which the candidate must read over. 4. The Ritual of Reception. 5. Instruction for the First Degree of the Priest's Class, called

[p. 106]

[paragraph continues] Instructio in Scientificis. 6. Account of the Consecration of a Dean, the Superior of this Lower Order of Priests.

 

The Regent degree contains, 1. Directions to the Provincial concerning the dispensation of this degree. 2. Ritual of Reception. 3. System of Direction for the whole Order. 4. Instruction for the whole Regent degree. 5. Instruction for the Prefects or Local Superiors. 6. Instruction for the Provincials.

 

The most remarkable thing in the Priest's degree is the Instruction in the Third Chamber. It is to be found in the private correspondence. (Nachtrage Original Schriften 1787, 2nd Abtheilung, page 44.) There it has the title Discourse to the Illuminati Dirigentes, or Scotch Knights. In the critical history, which is annexed to the Neueste Arbeitung, there is an account given of the reason for this denomination; and notice is taken of some differences between the instructions here contained and that discourse.

 

This instruction begins with sore complaints of the low condition of the human race; and the causes are deduced from religion and state-government. "Men originally led a patriarchal life, in which every father of a family was the sole lord of his house and his property, while he himself possessed general freedom and . But they suffered themselves to be oppressed--gave themselves up to civil societies, and formed states. Even by this they fell; and this is the fall of man, by which they were thrust into unspeakable misery. To get out of this state, to be freed and born again, there is no other mean than the use of pure Reason, by which a general morality may be established, which will put man in a condition to govern himself, regain his original worth, and dispense with all political supports, and particularly with rulers. This can be done in no other way but by secret associations, which will by degrees, and in silence, possess themselves of the government of the States, and make use of those means for this purpose which the wicked use for attaining their base ends. Princes and Priests are in particular, and kat' exochen, the wicked, whose hands must tie up by means of these associations, if we cannot root them out altogether.

[p. 107]

"Kings are parents. The paternal power ceases with the incapacity of the child; and the father injures his child, if he pretends to retain his right beyond this period. When a nation comes of age, their state of wardship is at an end."

 

Here follows a long declamation against patriotism, as a narrow-minded principle when compared with true Cosmo-politism. Nobles are represented as "a race of men that serve not the nation but the Prince, whom a hint from the Sovereign stirs up against the nation, who are retained servants and ministers of despotism, and the mean for oppressing national liberty. Kings are accused of a tacit convention, under the flattering appellation of the balance of power, to keep nations in subjection.

 

"The mean to regain Reason her rights--to raise liberty from its ashes--to restore to man his original rights--to produce the previous revolution in the mind of man--to obtain an eternal victory over oppressors--and to work the redemption of mankind, is secret schools of wisdom. When the worthy have strengthened their association by numbers, they are secure, and then they begin to become powerful, and terrible to the wicked, of whom many will, for safety, amend themselves--many will come over to our party, and we shall bind the hands of the rest, and finally conquer them. Whoever spreads general illumination augments mutual security; illumination and security make princes ; illumination performs this by creating an effective Morality, and Morality makes a nation of full age fit to govern itself; and since it is not impossible to produce a just Morality, it is possible to regain freedom for the world."

 

"We must therefore strengthen our band, and establish a legion, which shall restore the rights of man, original liberty and independence.

 

"Jesus Christ"--but I am sick of all this. The following questions are put to the candidate:

 

1. "Are our civil conditions in the world the destinations that seem to be the end of our nature, or the purposes for which man was placed on this earth, or are they not? Do

[p. 108]

states, civil obligations, popular religion, fulfill the intentions of men who established them? Do secret associations promote instruction and true human happiness, or are they the children of necessity, of the multifarious wants, of unnatural conditions, or the inventions of vain and cunning men?"

 

2. "What civil association, what science do you think to the purpose, and what are not?"

 

3. "Has there ever been any other in the world, is there no other more simple condition, and what do you think of it?"

 

4. "Does it appear possible, after having gone through all the nonentities of our civil constitutions, to recover for once our first simplicity, and get back to this honorable uniformity?"

 

5. "How can one begin this noble attempt; by means of open support, by forcible revolution, or by what other way?"

 

6. "Does Christianity give us any hint to this purpose? does it not recognize such a blessed condition as once the lot of man, and as still recoverable?"

 

7. "But is this holy religion the religion that is now professed by any sect on earth, or is it a better?"

 

8. "Can we learn this religion--can the world, as it is, bear the light? Do you think that it would be of service, before numerous obstacles are removed, if we taught men this purified religion, sublime philosophy, and the art of governing themselves? Or would not this hurt, by rousing the interested passions of men habituated to prejudices, who would oppose this as wicked?"

 

9. "May it not be more advisable to do away these corruptions bit by bit, in silence, and for this purpose to propagate these salutary and heart-consoling doctrines in secret?"

[p. 109]

10. "Do we not perceive traces of such a secret doctrine in the ancient schools of philosophy, in the doctrines and instructions of the Bible, which Christ, the Redeemer and Liberator of the human race, gave to his trusty disciples? Do you not observe an education, proceeding by steps of this kind, handed down to us from his time till the present?"

 

In the ceremonial of Reception, crowns and sceptres are represented as tokens of human degradation. "The plan of operation, by which our higher degrees act, must work powerfully on the world, and must give another turn to all our present constitutions."

 

Many other questions are put to the pupil during his preparation, and his answers are given in writing. Some of these rescripts are to be found in the secret correspondence. Thus, "How far is the position true, that all those means may be used for a good purpose which the wicked have employed for a bad?" And along with this question there is an injunction to take counsel from the opinions and conduct of the learned and worthy out of the society. In one of the answers, the example of a great philosopher and Cosmo-polite is adduced, who betrayed a private correspondence entrusted to him, for the service of freedom; the case was Dr. Franklin's. In another, the power of the Order was extended to the putting the individual to death; and the reason given, was, that "this power was allowed to all Sovereignties, for the good of the State, and therefore belonged to the Order, which was to govern the world."--"N. B. We must acquire the direction of education--of church-management--of the professorial chair, and of the pulpit. We must bring our opinions into fashion by every art--spread them among the people by the help of young writers. We must preach the warmest concern for humanity, and make people indifferent to all other relations. We must take care that our writers be well puffed, and that the Reviewers do not depreciate them; therefore we must endeavour by every mean to gain over the Reviewers and Journalists; and we must also try to gain the booksellers, who in time will see that it is their interest to side with us."

 

I conclude this account of the degree of Presbyter with remarking, that there were two copies of it employed occasionally.

[p. 110]

In one of them all the most offensive things in respect of church and state were left out.

 

In the Regent degree, the proceedings and instructions are conducted in the same manner. Here, it is said, "We must as much as possible select for this degree persons who are free, independent of all princes; particularly such as have frequently declared themselves discontented with the usual institutions, and their wishes to see a better government established."

 

Catching questions are put to the candidate for this degree; such as,

 

1. "Would the Society be objectionable which should (till the greater revolution of nature should be ripe) put monarchs and rulers out of the condition to do harm; which in silence prevents the abuse of power, by surrounding the great with its members, and thus not only prevents their doing mischief, but even makes them do good?"

 

2. "Is not the objection unjust, That such a Society may abuse its power. Do not our rulers frequently abuse their power, though we are silent? This power is not so secure as in the hands of our Members, whom we train up with so much care, and place about princes after mature deliberation and choice. If any government can be harmless which is erected by man, surely it must be ours, which is founded on morality, fore-sight, talents, liberty, and virtue," &c.

 

The candidate is presented for reception in the character of a slave; and it is demanded of him what has brought him into this most miserable of all conditions. He answers--Society--the State--Submissiveness--False Religion. A skeleton is pointed out to him, at the feet of which are laid a Crown and a Sword. He is asked, whether that is the skeleton of a King, a Nobleman, or a Beggar? As he cannot decide, the President of the meeting says to him, "the character of being a Man is the only one that is of importance."

 

In a long declamation on the hackneyed topics, we have

[p. 111]

here and there some thoughts which have not yet come before us.

 

"We must allow the underlings to imagine (but without telling them the truth) that we direct all the Free Mason Lodges, and even all other Orders, and that the greatest monarchs are under our guidance, which indeed is here and there the case.

 

"There is no way of influencing men so powerfully as by means of the women. These should therefore be our chief study; we should insinuate ourselves into their good opinion, give them hints of emancipation from the tyranny of public opinion, and of standing up for themselves; it will be an immense relief to their enslaved minds to be freed from any one bond of restraint, and it will fire them the more, and cause them to work for us with zeal, without knowing that they do so; for they will only be indulging their own desire of personal admiration.

 

"We must win the common people in every corner. This will be obtained chiefly by means of the schools, and by open, hearty behaviour, show, condescension, popularity, and toleration of their prejudices, which we shall at leisure root out and dispel.

 

"If a writer publishes any thing that attracts notice, and is in itself just, but does not accord with our plan, we must endeavour to win him over, or decry him.

 

"A chief object of our care must be to keep down that slavish veneration for princes which so much disgraces all nations. Even in the soi-disant free England, the silly Monarch says, We are graciously pleased, and the more simple people say, Amen. These men, commonly very weak heads, are only the farther corrupted by this servile flattery. But let us at once give an example of our spirit by our behaviour with Princes; we must avoid all familiarity--never entrust ourselves to them--behave with precision, but with civility, as to other men--speak of them on an equal footing--this will in time teach them that they are by nature men, if they have sense and spirit, and that only by convention they are Lords. We must assiduously collect anecdotes, and

[p. 112]

the honorable and mean actions, both of the least and the greatest, and when their names occur in any records which are read in our meetings, let them ever be accompanied by these marks of their real worth.

 

"The great strength of our Order lies in its concealment; let it never appear in any place in its own name, but always covered by another name, and another occupation. None is fitter than the three lower degrees of Free Masonry; the public is accustomed to it, expects little from it, and therefore takes little notice of it. Next to this, the form of a learned or literary society is best suited to our purpose, and had Free Masonry not existed, this cover would have been employed; and it may be much more than a cover, it may be a powerful engine in our hands. By establishing reading societies, and subscription libraries, and taking these under our direction, and supplying them through our labours, we may turn the public mind which way we will.

 

In like manner we must try to obtain an influence in the military academies (this may be of mighty consequence) the printing-houses, booksellers shops, chapters, and in short in all offices which have any effect, either in forming, or in managing, or even in directing the mind of man: painting and engraving are highly worth our care." [**]

 

"Could our Prefect (observe it is to the Illuminati Regentes he is speaking, whose officers are Prefecti) fill the judicatories of a state with our worthy members, he does all that man can do for the Order. It is better than to gain the Prince himself. Princes should never get beyond the Scotch knighthood. They either never prosecute any thing, or they twist every thing to their own advantage.

 

"A Literary Society is the most proper form for the introduction of our Order into any state where we are yet strangers." (Mark this!)

[p. 113]

"The power of the Order must surely be turned to the advantage of its Members. All must be assisted. They must be preferred to all persons otherwise of equal merit. Money, services, honor, goods, and blood, must be expended for the fully proved Brethren, and the unfortunate must be relieved by the funds of the Society."

 

As evidence that this was not only their instructions, but also their assiduous practice, take the following report from the overseer of Greece (Bavaria.)

  

In Cato's hand-writing.

"The number (about 600) of Members relates to Bavaria alone.

 

"In Munich there is a well-constituted meeting of Illuminati Mejores, a meeting of excellent Illuminati Minores, a respectable Grand Lodge, and two Minerval Assemblies. There is a Minerval Assembly at Freyssing, at Landsberg, at Burghausen, at Strasburg, at Ingolstadt, and at last at Regensburg. [**]

 

"At Munich we have bought a house, and by clever measures have brought things so far, that the citizens take no notice of it, and even speak of us with esteem. We can openly go to the house every day, and carry on the business of the Lodge. This is a great deal for this city. In the house is a good museum of natural history, and apparatus for experiments; also a library which daily increases. The garden is well occupied by botanic specimens, and the whole has the appearance of a society of zealous naturalists.

 

"We get all the literary journals. We take care, by well-timed pieces, to make the citizens and the Princes a little more noticed for certain little slips. We oppose the monks with all our might, and with great success.

 

"The Lodge is constituted entirely according to our system, and has broken off entirely from Berlin, and we have

[p. 114]

nearly finished our transactions with the Lodges of Poland, and shall have them under our direction.

 

"By the activity of our Brethren, the Jesuits have been kept out of all the professorial chairs at Ingolstadt, and our friends prevail."

 

"The Widow Duchess has set up her academy entirely according to our plan, and we have all the Professors in the Order. Five of them are excellent, and the pupils will be prepared for us.

 

"We have got Pylades put at the head of the Fisc, and he has the church-money at his disposal. By properly using this money, we have been enabled to put our Brother ------'s household in good order; which he had destroyed by going to the Jews. We have supported more Brethren under similar misfortunes.

 

"Our Ghostly Brethren have been very fortunate this last year, for we have procured for them several good benefices, parishes, tutorships, &c.

 

"Through our means Arminius and Cortez have gotten Professorships, and many of our younger Brethren have obtained Bursaries by our help.

 

"We have been very successful against the Jesuits, and brought things to such a bearing, that their revenues, such as the Mission, the Golden Alms, the Exercises, and the Conversion Box, are now under the management of our friends. So are also their concerns in the university and the German school foundations. The application of all will be determined presently, and we have six members and four friends in the Court. This has cost our senate some nights want of sleep.

 

"Two of our best youths have got journies from the Court, and they will go to Vienna, where they will do us great service.

 

"All the German Schools, and the Benevolent Society, are at last under our direction.

[p. 115]

"We have got several zealous members in the courts of justice, and we are able to afford them pay, and other good additions.

 

"Lately, we have got possession of the Bartholomew Institution for young clergymen, having secured all its supporters. Through this we shall be able to supply Bavaria with fit priests.

 

"By a letter from Philo we learn, that one of the highest dignities in the church was obtained for a zealous Illuminatus, in opposition even to the authority and right of the Bishop of Spire, who is represented as a bigotted and tyrannical priest."

 

Such were the lesser mysteries of the Illuminati. But there remain the higher mysteries. The system of these has not been printed, and the degrees were conferred only by Spartacus himself, from papers which he never entrusted to any person. They were only read to the candidate, but no copy was taken. The publisher of the Neueste Arbeitung says that he has read them (so says Grollman.) He says, "that in the first degree of MAGUS or PHILOSOPHUS, the doctrines are the same with those of Spinoza, where all is material, God and the world are the same thing, and all religion whatever is without foundation, and the contrivance of ambitious men." The second degree, or REX, teaches, "that every peasant, citizen, and householder is a sovereign, as in the Patriarchal state, and that nations must be brought back to that state, by whatever means are conducible--peaceably, if it can be done; but, if not, then by force--for all subordination must vanish from the face of the earth."

 

The author says further, that the German Union was, to his certain knowledge, the work of the Illuminati.

 

The private correspondence that has been published is by no means the whole of what was discovered at Landshut and Bassus Hoff, and government got a great deal of useful information, which was concealed, both out of regard to the families of the persons concerned, and also that the

[p. 116]

rest might not know the utmost extent of the discovery, and be less on their guard. A third collection was found under the foundation of the house in which the Lodge Theodor von guten Rath had been held. But none of this has appeared. Enough surely has been discovered to give the public a very just idea of the designs of the Society and its connections.

 

Lodges were discovered, and are mentioned in the private papers already published, in the following places.

        Munich

       Hesse (many)

     
      Ingolstadt

       Buchenwerter

     
      Frankfort

       Monpeliard

     
      Echstadt

       Stutgard (3)

     
      Hanover

       Carlsruhe

     
      Brunswick

       Anspach

     
      Calbe

       Neuwied (2)

     
      Magdenburgh

       Mentz (2)

     
      Cassel

       Poland (many)

     
      Osnabruck

       Turin

     
      Weimar

       England (8)

     
      Upper Saxony   (several)

       Scotland (2)

     
      Austria (14)

       Warsaw (2)

     
      Westphalia   (several)

       Deuxponts

     
      Heidelberg

       Cousel

     
      Mannheim

       Treves (2)

     
      Strasburgh (5)

       Aix-la-Chappelle   (2)

     
      Spire

       Bartschied

     
      Worms

       Hahrenberg

     
      Dusseldorf

       Switzerland   (many)

     
      Cologne

       Rome

     
      Bonn (4)

       Naples

     
      Livonia (many)

       Ancona

     
      Courland (many)

       Florence

     
      Frankendahl

       France

     
      Alsace (many)

       Halland (many)

     
      Vienna (4)

       Dresden (4)

     
 America (several). N. B. This was before 1786.

[p. 117]

I have picked up the names of the following members.

        Spartacus

       Weishaupt,   Professor.

     
      Philo,

       Knigge,   Freyherr, i.e. Gentleman.

     
      Amelius,

       Bode, F. H.

     
      Bayard,

       Busche, F. H.

     
      Diomedes,

       Constanza,   Marq.

     
      Cato,

       Zwack, Lawyer.

     
       

       Torring, Count.

     
       

       Kreitmaier,   Prince.

     
       

       Utschneider,   Professor.

     
       

       Cossandey, Professor.

     
       

       Renner,   Professor.

     
       

       Grunberger,   Professor.

     
       

       Balderbusch, F.   H.

     
       

       Lippert,   Counsellor.

     
       

       Kundl, ditto.

     
       

       Bart, ditto.

     
       

       Leiberhauer,   Priest.

     
       

       Kundler,   Professor.

     
       

       Lowling,   Professor.

     
       

       Vachency, Councellor.

     
       

       Morausky,   Count.

     
       

       Hoffstetter,   Surveyor of Roads.

     
       

       Strobl,   Bookseller.

     
      Pythagoras,

       Westenrieder,   Professor.

     
       

       Babo,   Professor.

     
       

       Baader,   Professor.

     
       

       Burzes, Priest.

     
       

       Pfruntz,   Priest.

     
      Hannibal,

       Bassus, Baron.

     
      Brutus,

       Savioli, Count.

     
      Lucian,

       Nicholai,   Bookseller.

     
       

       Bahrdt,   Clergyman.

     
      Zoroaster,   Confucius,

       Baierhamer.

     
      Hermes   Trismegistus,

       Socher, School   Inspector.

     
       

       Dillis,   Abbe.

     
      Sulla,

       Meggenhoff,   Paymaster.

     
       

       Danzer, Canon.

     
       

       Braun, ditto.

     
       

       Fischer,   Magistrate.

     
      [p. 118]

        

     
       

       Frauenberger,   Baron.

     
       

       Kaltner,   Lieutenant.

     
      Pythagoras,

       Drexl,   Librarian.

     
      Marius,

       Hertel, Canon.

     
       

       Dachsel.

     
       

       Dilling,   Counsellor.

     
       

       Seefeld, Count.

     
       

       Gunsheim,   ditto.

     
       

       Morgellan,   ditto.

     
      Saladin,

       Ecker, ditto.

     
       

       Ow, Major.

     
       

       Werner,   Counsellor.

     
      Cornelius   Scipio,

       Berger, ditto.

     
       

       Wortz,   Apothecary.

     
       

       Mauvillon,   Colonel.

     
       

       Mirabeau,   Count.

     
       

       Orleans, Duke.

     
       

       Hochinaer.

     
      Tycho Brahe,

       Gaspar,   Merchant.

     
      Thales,

       Kapfinger.

     
      Attila,

       Sauer.

     
      Ludovicus   Bavarus,

       Losi.

     
      Shaftesbury,

       Steger.

     
      Coriolanus,

       Tropponero,   Zuschwartz.

     
      Timon,

       Michel.

     
      Tamerlane,

       Lange.

     
      Livius,

       Badorffer.

     
      Cicero,

       Pfelt.

     
      Ajax,

       Massenhausen,   Count.

     
  

I have not been able to find who personated Minos, Euriphon, Celsius, Mahomet, Hercules, Socrates, Philippo Strozzi, Euclides, and some others who have been uncommonly active in carrying forward the great cause.

 

The chief publications for giving us regular accounts of the whole (besides the original writings) are,

1. Grosse Absicht des Illuminaten Ordens.

2. -------- Nachtrages (3.) an denselben.

3. Weishaupt's improved System.

4. System des Ilium. Ordens aus dem Original-Schriften gezogen.

[p. 119]

I may now be permitted to make a few reflections on the accounts already given of this Order, which has so distinctly concentrated the casual and scattered efforts of its prompters, the Chevaliers Bienfaisants, the Philalethes, and Amis Reunis of France, and carried on the system of enlightening and reforming the world.

 

The great aim professed by the Order is to make men happy; and the means professed to be employed, as the only and surely effective, is making them good; and this is to be brought about by enlightening the mind, and freeing it from the dominion of superstition and prejudices. This purpose is effected by its producing a just and steady morality. This done, and becoming universal, there can be little doubt but that the peace of society will be the consequence--that government, subordination, and all the disagreeable coercions of civil governments will be unnecessary--and that society may go on peaceably in a state of perfect liberty and equality.

 

But surely it requires no angel from heaven to tell us that if every man is virtuous, there will be no vice; and that there will be peace on earth, and good will between man and man, whatever be the differences of rank and fortune; so that Liberty and Equality seem not to be the necessary consequences of this just Morality, nor necessary requisites for this national happiness. We may question, therefore, whether the Illumination which makes this a necessary condition is a clear and a pure light. It may be a false glare, showing the object only on one side, tinged with partial colours thrown on it by neighbouring objects. We see so much wisdom in the general plans of nature, that we are apt to think that there is the same in what relates to the human mind, and that the God of nature accomplishes his plans in this as well as in other instances. We are even disposed to think that human nature would suffer by it. The rational nature of man is not contented with meat and drink, and raiment, and shelter, but is also pleased with exerting many powers and faculties, and with gratifying many tastes, which could hardly have any existence in a society where all are equal. We say that there can be no doubt that the pleasure arising from the contemplation of the works of art--the pleasure of intellectual

[p. 120]

cultivation, the pleasure of mere ornament, are rational, distinguish man from a brute, and are so general, that there is hardly a mind so rude as not to feel them. Of all these, and of all the difficult sciences, all most rational, and in themselves most innocent, and most delightful to a cultivated mind, we should be deprived in a society where all are equal. No individual could give employment to the talents necessary for creating and improving these ornamental comforts of life. We are absolutely certain that, even in the most favorable situations on the face of the earth, the most untainted virtue in every breast could not raise man to that degree of cultivation that is possessed by citizens very low in any of the states of Europe; and in the situation of most countries we are acquainted with, the state of man would be much lower: for, at our very setting out, we must grant that the liberty and equality here spoken of must be complete; for there must not be such a thing as a farmer and his cottager. This would be as unjust, as much the cause of discontent, as the gentleman and the farmer.

 

This scheme therefore seems contrary to the designs of our Creator, who has every where placed us in these situations of inequality that are here so much scouted, and has given us strong propensities by which we relish these enjoyments. We also find that they may be enjoyed in peace and innocence. And lastly, We imagine that the villain, who, in the station of a professor, would plunder a Prince, would also plunder the farmer if he were his cottager. The illumination therefore that appears to have the best chance of making mankind happy, is that which will teach us the Morality which will respect the comforts of cultivated Society, and teach us to protect the possessors in the innocent enjoyment of them; that will enable us to perceive and admire the taste and elegance of Architecture and Gardening, without any wish to sweep the gardens and their owner from off the earth, merely because he is their owner.

 

We are therefore suspicious of this Illumination, and apt to ascribe this violent antipathy to Princes and subordination to the very cause that makes true Illumination, and just Morality proceeding from it, so necessary to public happiness, namely, the vice and injustice of those who cannot

[p. 121]

innocently have the command of those offensive elegancies of human life. Luxurious tastes, keen desires, and unbridled passions, would prompt to all this, and this Illumination is, as we see, equivalent to them in effect. The aim of the Order is not to enlighten the mind of man, and show him his moral obligations, and by the practice of his duties to make society peaceable, possession secure, and coercion unnecessary, so that all may be at rest and happy, even though all were equal; but to get rid of the coercion which must be employed in place of Morality, that the innocent rich may be robbed with impunity by the idle and profligate poor. But to do this, an unjust casuistry must be employed in place of a just Morality; and this must be defended or suggested, by misrepresenting the true state of man, and of his relation to the universe, and by removing the restrictions of religion, and giving a superlative value to all those constituents of human enjoyment, which true Illumination shows us to be but very small concerns of a rational and virtuous mind. The more closely we examine the principles and practice of the Illuminati, the more clearly do we perceive that this is the case. Their first and immediate aim is to get the possession of riches, power, and influence, without industry; and, to accomplish this, they want to abolish Christianity; and then dissolute manners and universal profligacy will procure them the adherence of all the wicked, and enable them to overturn all the civil governments of Europe; after which they will think of farther conquests, and extend their operations to the other quarters of the globe, till they have reduced mankind to the state of one undistinguishable chaotic mass.

 

But this is too chimerical to be thought their real aim. Their Founder, I dare say, never entertained such hopes, nor troubled himself with the fate of distant lands. But it comes in his way when he puts on the mask of humanity and benevolence: it must embrace all mankind, only because it must be stronger than patriotism and loyalty, which stand in his way. Observe that Weishaupt took a name expressive of his principles. Spartacus was a gladiator, who headed an insurrection of Roman slaves, and for three years kept the city in terror. Weishaupt says in one of his letters, "I never was fond of empty titles; but surely that man has a childish soul who would not as readily chuse the name

[p. 122]

of Spartacus as that of Octavius Augustus." The names which he gives to several of his gang express their differences of sentiments. Philo, Lucian, and others, are very significantly given to Knigge, Nicholai, &c. He was vain of the name Spartacus, because he considered himself as employed somewhat in the same way, leading slaves to freedom. Princes and Priests are mentioned by him on all occasions in terms of abhorrence.

 

Spartacus employs powerful means. In the style of the Jesuits (as he says) he considers every mean as consecrated by the end for which it is employed, and he says with great truth,

"Flectere si nequeo superos, Acheronta movebo."

To save his reputation, he scruples not to murder his innocent child, and the woman whom he had held in his arms with emotions of fondness and affection. But lest this should appear too selfish a motive, he says, "had I fallen, my precious Order would have fallen with me; the Order which is to bless mankind. I should not again have been able to speak of virtue so as to make any lasting impression. My example might have ruined many young men." This he thinks will excuse, nay sanctify any thing. "My letters are my greatest vindication." He employs the Christian Religion, which he thinks a falsehood, and which he is afterwards to explode, as the mean for inviting Christians of every denomination, and gradually cajoling them, by clearing up their Christian doubts in succession, till he lands them in Deism; or, if he finds them unfit, and too religious, he gives them a Sta bene, and then laughs at the fears, or perhaps madness, in which he leaves them. Having got them this length, they are declared to be fit, and he receives them into the higher mysteries. But lest they should still shrink back, dazzled by the Pandemonian glare of Illumination which will now burst upon them, he exacts from them, for the first time, a bond of perseverance. But, as Philo says, there is little chance of tergiversation. The life and honor of most of the candidates are by this time in his hand. They have been long occupied in the vile and corrupting office of spies on all around them, and they are found fit for their present honors, because they have

[p. 123]

discharged this office to his satisfaction, by the reports which they have given in, containing stories of their neighbours, nay even of their own gang. They may be ruined in the world by disclosing these, either privately or publicly. A man who had once brought himself into this perilous situation durst not go back. He might have been left indeed in any degree of Illumination; and, if Religion has not been quite eradicated from his mind, he must be in that condition of painful anxiety and doubt that makes him desperate, fit for the full operation of fanaticism, and he may be engaged in the cause of God, "to commit all kind of wickedness with greediness." In this state of mind, a man shuts his eyes, and rushes on. Had Spartacus supposed that he was dealing with good men, his conduct would have been the reverse of all this. There is no occasion for this bond from a person convinced of the excellency of the Order. But he knew them to be unprincipled, and that the higher mysteries were so daring, that even some of such men would start at them. But they must not blab.

 

Having thus got rid of Religion, Spartacus could with more safety bring into view the great aim of all his efforts--to rule the world by means of his Order. As the immediate mean for attaining this, he holds out the prospect of freedom from civil subordination. Perfect Liberty and Equality are interwoven with every thing; and the flattering thought is continually kept up, that "by the wise contrivance of this Order, the most complete knowledge is obtained of the real worth of every person; the Order will, for its own sake, and therefore certainly, place every man in that situation in which he can be most effective. The pupils are convinced that the Order will rule the world. Every member therefore becomes a ruler." We all think ourselves qualified to rule. The difficult task is to obey with propriety; but we are honestly generous in our prospects of future command. It is therefore an alluring thought, both to good and bad men. By this lure the Order will spread. If they are active in insinuating their members into offices, and in keeping out others (which the private correspondence shows to have been the case) they may have had frequent experience of their success in gaining an influence on the world. This must whet their zeal. If Weishaupt was a sincere Cosmo-polite,

[p. 124]

he had the pleasure of seeing "his work prospering in his hands."

 

It surely needs little argument now to prove, that the Order of Illuminati had for its immediate object the abolishing of Christianity (at least this was the intention of the Founder) with the sole view of overturning the civil government, by introducing universal dissoluteness and profligacy of manners, and then getting the assistance of the corrupted subjects to overset the throne. The whole conduct in the preparation and instruction of the Presbyter and Regens is directed to this point. Philo says, "I have been at unwearied pains to remove the fears of some who imagine that our Superiors want to abolish Christianity; but by and by their prejudices will wear off, and they will be more at their ease. Were I to let them know that our General holds all Religion to be a lie, and uses even Deism, only to lead men by the nose.--Were I to connect myself again with the Free Masons, and tell them our designs to ruin their Fraternity by this circular letter (a letter to the Lodge in Courland)--Were I but to give the least hint to any of the Princes of Greece (Bavaria)--No, my anger shall not carry me so far.--An Order forsooth, which in this manner abuses human nature--which will subject men to a bondage more intolerable than Jesuitism.--I could put it on a respectable footing, and the world would he ours. Should I mention our fundamental principles (even after all the pains I have been at to mitigate them) so unquestionably dangerous to the world, who would remain? What signifies the innocent ceremonies of the Priest's degree, as I have composed it, in comparison with your maxim, that we may use for a good end those means which the wicked employ for a base purpose?"

 

Brutus writes, "Numenius now acquiesces in the mortality of the soul; but, I fear we shall lose Ludovicus Bavarus. He told Spartacus, that he was mistaken when he thought that he had swallowed his stupid Masonry. No, he saw the trick, and did not admire the end that required it. I don't know what to do; a Sta bene would make him mad, and he will blow us all up.

 

"The Order must possess the power of life and death

[p. 125]

in consequence of our Oath; and with propriety, for the same reason, and by the same right, that any government in the world possesses it: For the Order comes in their place, making them unnecessary. When things cannot be otherwise, and ruin would ensue if the Association did not employ this mean, the Order must, as well as public rulers, employ it for the good of mankind; therefore for its own preservation. (N. B. Observe here the casuistry.) Nor will the political constitutions suffer by this, for there are always thousands equally ready and able to supply the place."

 

We need not wonder that Diomedes told the Professors, "that death, inevitable death, from which no potentate could protect them, awaited every traitor of the Order;" nor that the French Convention proposed to take off the German Princes and Generals by sword or poison, &c.

 

Spartacus might tickle the fancy of his Order with the notion of ruling the world; but I imagine that his darling aim was ruling the Order. The happiness of mankind was, like Weishaupt's Christianity, a mere tool, a tool which the Regentes made a joke of. But Spartacus would rule the Regentes; this he could not so easily accomplish. His despotism was insupportable to most of them, and finally brought all to light. When he could not persuade them by his own firmness, and indeed by his superior wisdom and disinterestedness in other respects, and his unwearied activity, he employed jesuitical tricks, causing them to fall out with each other, setting them as spies on each other, and separating any two that he saw attached to each other, by making the one a Master of the other; and, in short, he left nothing undone that could secure his uncontrouled command. This caused Philo to quit the Order, and made Bassus, Von Torring, Kreitmaier, and several other gentlemen, cease attending the meetings; and it was their mutual dissentions which made them speak too freely in public, and call on themselves so much notice. At the time of the discovery, the party of Weishaupt consisted chiefly of very mean people, devoted to him, and willing to execute his orders, that by being his servants, they might have the pleasure of commanding others.

 

The objects, the undoubted objects of this Association,

[p. 126]

are surely dangerous and detestable; viz. to overturn the present constitutions of the European States, in order to introduce a chimera which the history of mankind shows to be contrary to the nature of man.

Naturam expellas furca, tamen usque recurret.

[paragraph continues] Suppose it possible, and done in peace, it could not stand, unless every principle of activity in the human mind be enthralled, all incitement to exertion and industry removed, and man brought into a condition incapable of improvement; and this at the expence of every thing that is valued by the best of men--by misery and devastation--by loosening all the bands of society. To talk of morality and virtue in conjunction with such schemes, is an insult to common sense; dissoluteness of manners alone can bring men to think of it.

 

Is it not astonishing therefore, to hear people in this country express any regard for this institution? Is it not grieving to the heart to think that there are Lodges of Illuminated among us? I think that nothing bids fairer for weaning our inconsiderate countrymen from having any connection with them, than the faithful account here given. I hope that there are few, very few of our countrymen, and none whom we call friend, who can think that an Order which practised such things can be any thing else than a ruinous Association, a gang of profligates. All their professions of the love of mankind are vain; nay, their Illumination must be a bewildering blaze, and totally ineffectual for its purpose, for it has had no such influence on the leaders of the band; yet it seems quite adequate to the effects it has produced; for such are the characters of those who forget God.

 

If we in the next place attend to their mode of education, and examine it by those rulers of common sense that we apply in other cases of conduct, we shall find it equally unpromising. The system of Illuminatism is one of the explanations of Free Masonry; and it has gained many partisans. These explanations rest their credit and their preference on their own merits. There is something in themselves, or in one of them as distinguished from another, which procures it the preference for its own sake. Therefore,

[p. 127]

to give this Order any dependence on Free Masonry, is to degrade the Order. To introduce a Masonic Ritual into a manly institution is to degrade it to a frivolous amusement for great children. Men really exerting themselves to reform the world, and qualified for the task, must have been disgusted with such occupations. They betray a frivolous conception of the talk in which they are really engaged. To imagine that men engaged in the struggle and rival-ship of life, under the influence of selfish, or mean, or impetuous passions, are to he wheedled into candid sentiments, or a generous conduct, as a froward child may sometimes be made gentle and tractable by a rattle or a humming-top, betrays a great ignorance of human nature, and an arrogant self-conceit in those who can imagine that all but themselves are babies. The further we proceed, the more do we see of this want of wisdom. The whole procedure of their instruction supposes such a complete surrender of freedom of thought, of common sense, and of common caution, that it seems impossible that it should not have alarmed every sensible mind. This indeed happened before the Order was seven years old. It was wise indeed to keep their Areopagitae out of sight; but who can be so silly as to believe that their unknown superiors were all and always faultless men. But had they been the men they were represented to be--if I have any knowledge of my own heart, or any capacity of drawing just inferences from the conduct of others, I am persuaded that the knowing his superiors would have animated the pupil to exertion, that he might exhibit a pleasing spectacle to such intelligent and worthy judges. Did not the Stoics profess themselves to be encouraged in the scheme of life, by the thought that the immortal Gods were looking on and passing their judgments on their manner of acting the part assigned them? But what abject spirit will be contented with working, zealously working, for years, after a plan of which he is never to learn the full meaning. In short, the only knowledge that he can perceive is knowledge in its worst form, Cunning. This must appear in the contrivances by which he will soon find that he is kept in complete subjection. If he is a true and zealous Brother, he has put himself in the power of his Superiors by his rescripts, which they required of him on pretence of their learning his own character, and of his learning how to know the characters of other men. In these rescripts

[p. 128]

they have got his thoughts on many delicate points, and on the conduct of others. His Directors may ruin him by betraying him: and this without being seen in it. I should think that wise men would know that none but weak or bad men would subject themselves to such a task. They exclude the good, the manly, the only fit persons for assisting them in their endeavours to inform and to rule the world. Indeed I may say that this exclusion is almost made already by connecting the Order with Free Masonry. Lodges are not the resorts of such men. They may sometimes be found there for an hour's relaxation. But these places are the haunts of the young, the thoughtless, the idle, the weak, the vain, or of designing Literati; and accordingly this is the condition of three-fourths of the Illuminati whose names are known to the public. I own that the reasons given to the pupil for prescribing these tasks are clever, and well adapted to produce their effect. During the flurry of reception, and the glow of expectation, the danger may not be suspected; but I hardly imagine that it will remain unperceived when the pupil sits down to write his first lesson. Mason Lodges, however, were the most likely places for finding and enlisting members. Young men, warmed by declamations teeming with the flimsy moral cant of Cosmo-politism, are in the proper frame of mind for this Illumination. It now appears also, that the dissentions in Free Masonry must have had great influence in promoting this scheme of Weishaupt's, which was, in many particulars, so unpromising, because it presupposes such a degradation of the mind. But when the schismatics in Masonry disputed with warmth, trifles came to acquire unspeakable importance. The hankering after wonder was not in the least abated by all the tricks which had been detected, and the impossibility of the wished-for discovery had never been demonstrated to persons prepossessed in its favor. They still chose to believe that the symbols contained some important secret; and happy will be the man who finds it out. The more frivolous the symbols, the more does the heart cling to the mystery; and, to a mind in this anxious state, Weishaupt's proffer was enticing. He laid before them a scheme which was somewhat feasible, was magnificent, surpassing our conceptions, but at the same time such as permitted us to expatiate on the subject, and even to amplify it at pleasure in our imaginations without absurdity.

[p. 129]

[paragraph continues] It does not appear to me wonderful, therefore, that so many were fascinated till they became at last regardless of the absurdity and inconsistency of the means by which this splendid object was to be attained. Hear what Spartacus himself says of hidden mysteries. "Of all the means I know to lead men, the most effectual is a concealed mystery. The hankering of the mind is irresistible; and if once a man has taken it into his head that there is a mystery in a thing, it is impossible to get it out, either by argument or experience. And then, we can so change notions by merely changing a word. What more contemptible than fanaticism; but call it enthusiasm; then add the little word noble, and you may lead him over the world. Nor are we, in these bright days, a bit better than our fathers, who found the pardon of their sins mysteriously contained in a much greater sin, viz. leaving their family, and going barefooted to Rome."

 

Such being the employment, and such the disciples, should we expect the fruits to be very precious? No. The doctrines which were gradually unfolded were such as suited those who continued in the Cursus Academicus. Those who did not, because they did not like them, got a Sta bene; they were not fit for advancements. The numbers however were great; Spartacus boasted of 600 in Bavaria alone in 1783. We don't know many of them; few of those we know were in the upper ranks of life; and I can see that it required much wheedling, and many letters of long worded German compliments from the proud Spartacus, to win even a young Baron or a Graf just come of age Men in an easy situation in life could not brook the employment of a spy, which is base, cowardly, and corrupting, and has in all ages and countries degraded the person who engages in it. Can the person be called wise who thus enslaves himself? Such persons give up the right of private judgment, and rely on their unknown Superiors with the blindest and most abject confidence. For their sakes, and to rivet still faster their own fetters, they engage in the most corrupting of all employments--and for what?--To learn something more of an order, of which every degree explodes the doctrine of a former one. Would it have hurt the young Illuminatus to have it explained to him all at once? Would not this fire his mind--when he sees with

[p. 130]

the same glance the great object, and the fitness of the means for attaining it? Would not the exalted characters of the Superior, so much excelling himself in talents, and virtue, and happiness (otherwise the Order is good for nothing) warm his heart, and fill him with emulation, since he sees in them, that what is so strongly preached to him is an attainable thing? No, no--it is all a trick; he must be kept like a child, amused with rattles, and stars, and ribands--and all the satisfaction he obtains is, like the Masons, the fun of seeing others running the same gauntlet.

 

Weishaupt acknowledges that the great influence of the Order may be abused. Surely, in no way so easily or so fatally as by corrupting or seductive lessons in the beginning. The mistake or error of the pupil is undiscoverable by himself (according to the genuine principles of Illumination) for the pupil must believe his Mentor to be infallible--with him alone he is connected--his lessons only must he learn. Who can tell him that he has gone wrong--or who can set him right? yet he certainly may be misled.

 

Here, therefore, there is confusion and deficiency. There must be some standard to which appeal can be made; but this is inaccessible to all within the pale of the Order; it is therefore without this pale, and independent of the Order--and it is attainable only by abandoning the Order. The QUIBUS LICET, the PRIMO, the SOLI, can procure no light to the person who does not know that he has been led out of the right road to virtue and happiness. The Superiors indeed draw much useful information from these reports, though they affect to stand in no need of it, and they make a cruel return.

 

All this is so much out of the natural road of instruction, that, on this account alone, we may presume that it is wrong. We are generally safe when we follow nature's plans. A child learns in his father's house, by seeing, and by imitating, and in common domestic education, he gets much useful knowledge, and the chief habits which are afterwards to regulate his conduct. Example does almost every thing; and, with respect to what may be called living, as distinguishable from profession, speculation and argumentative instruction are seldom employed, or of any use. The indispensableness of mutual forbearance and obedience, for domestic

[p. 131]

peace and happiness, forms most of these habits; and the child, under good parents, is kept in a situation that makes virtue easier than vice, and he becomes wise and good without any express study about the matter.

 

But this Illumination plan is darkness over all--it is too artificial--and the topics, from which counsel is to be drawn, cannot be taken from the peculiar views of the Order--for these are yet a secret for the pupil--and must ever be a secret for him while under tuition. They must therefore be drawn from common sources, and the Order is of no use; all that can naturally be effectuated by this Association is the forming, and assiduously fostering a narrow, Jewish, corporation spirit, totally opposite to the benevolent pretensions of the Order. The pupil can see nothing but this, that there is a set of men, whom he does not know, who may acquire incontroulable power, and may perhaps make use of him, but for what purpose, and in what way, he does not know; how can he know that his endeavours are to make man happier, any other way than as he might have known it without having put this collar round his own neck?

 

These reflections address themselves to all men who profess to conduct themselves by the principles and dictates of common sense and prudence, and who have the ordinary share of candour and good will to others. It requires no singular sensibility of heart, nor great generosity, to make such people think the doctrines and views of the Illuminati false, absurd, foolish, and ruinous. But I hope that I address them to thousands of my countrymen and friends, who have much higher notions of human nature, and who cherish with care the affections and the hopes that are suited to a rational, a benevolent, and a high-minded being, capable of endless improvement.

 

To those who enjoy the cheering confidence in the superintendance and providence of God, who consider themselves as creatures whom he has made, and whom he cares for, as the subjects of his moral government, this Order must appear with every character of falsehood and absurdity on its countenance. What CAN BE MORE IMPROBABLE than this, that He, whom we look up to as the contriver,

[p. 132]

the maker, and director, of this goodly frame of things, should have so far mistaken his own plans, that this world of rational creatures should have subsisted for thousands of years, before a way could be found out, by which his intention of making men good and happy could be accomplished; and that this method did not occur to the great Artist himself, nor even to the wisest, and happiest, and best men upon earth; but to a few persons at Munich in Bavaria, who had been trying to raise ghosts, to change lead into gold, to tell fortunes, or discover treasures, but had failed in all their attempts; men who had been engaged for years in every whim which characterises a weak, a greedy, or a gloomy mind. Finding all these beyond their reach, they combined their powers, and, at once, found out this infinitely more important SECRET--for secret it must still be, otherwise not only the Deity, but even those philosophers, will still be disappointed.

 

Yet this is the doctrine that must be swallowed by the Minervals and the Illuminati Minores, to whom it is not yet safe to disclose the grand secret, that there is no such superintendance of Deity. At last, however, when the pupil has conceived such exalted notions of the knowledge of his teachers, and such low notions of the blundering projector of this world, it may be no difficult matter to persuade him that all his former notions were only old wives tales. By this time he must have heard much about superstition, and how  minds have been dazzled by this splendid picture of a Providence and a moral government of the universe. It now appears incompatible with the great object of the Order, the principles of universal liberty and equality--it is therefore rejected without farther examination, for this reason alone. This was precisely the argument used in France for rejecting revealed religion. It was incompatible with their Rights of Man.

 

It is richly worth observing how this principle can warp the judgment, and give quite another appearance to the same object. The reader will not be displeased with a most remarkable instance of it, which I beg leave to give at length.

 

Our immortal Newton, whom the philosophers of Europe

[p. 133]

look up to as the honor of our species, whom even Mr. Bailly, the President of the National Assembly of France, and Mayor of Paris, cannot find words sufficiently energetic to praise; this patient, sagacious, and successful observer of nature, after having exhibited to the wondering world the characteristic property of that principle of material nature by which all the bodies of the solar system are made to form a connected and permanent universe; and after having shown that this law of action alone was adapted to this end, and that if gravity had deviated but one thousandth part from the inverse duplicate ratio of the distances, the system must, in the course of a very few revolutions, have gone into confusion and ruin--he sits down, and views the goodly scene--and then closes his Principles of Natural Philosophy with this reflection (his Scholium generale.)

 

"This most elegant frame of things could not have arisen, unless by the contrivance and the direction of a wise and powerful Being; and if the fixed stars are the centres of systems, these systems must be similar; and all these, constructed according to the same plan, are subject to the government of one Being. All these he governs, not as the soul of the world, but as the Lord of all; therefore, on account of his government, he is called the Lord God--Pantokrator; for God is a relative term, and refers to subjects. Deity is God's government, not of his own body, as those think who consider him as the soul of the world, but of his servants. The supreme God is a Being eternal, infinite, absolutely perfect. But a being, however perfect, without government, is not God; for we say, my God, your God, the God of Israel. We cannot say my eternal, my infinite. We may have some notions indeed of his attributes, but can have none of his nature. With respect to bodies, we see only shapes and colour--hear only sounds--touch only surfaces. These are attributes of bodies; but of their essence we know nothing. As a blind man can form no notion of colours, we can form none of the manner in which God perceives, and understands, and influences every thing.

 

"Therefore we know God only by his attributes. What are these? The wise and excellent contrivance, structure, and final aim of all things. In these his perfections we

[p. 134]

admire him, and we wonder. In his direction or government, we venerate and worship him--we worship him as his servants; and God, without dominion, without providence, and final aims, is Fate--not the object either of reverence, of hope, of love, or of fear."

 

But mark the emotions which affected the mind of another excellent observer of Nature, the admirer of Newton, and the person who has put the finishing stroke to the Newtonian philosophy, by showing that the acceleration of the moon's mean motion, is the genuine result of a gravitation decreasing in the precise duplicate ratio of the distance inversely; I mean Mr. Delaplace, one of the most brilliant ornaments of the French academy of sciences. He has lately published the Systeme du Monde a most beautiful compend of astronomy and of the Newtonian philosophy. Having finished his work with the same observation, "That a gravitation inversely proportional to the squares of the distances was the only principle which could unite material Nature into a permanent system;" he also sits down--surveys the scene--points out the parts which he had brought within our ken--and then makes this reflection: "Beheld in its totality, astronomy is the noblest monument of the human mind, its chief title to intelligence. But, seduced by the illusions of sense, and by self conceit, we have long considered ourselves as the centre of these motions; and our pride has been punished by the groundless fears which we have created to ourselves. We imagine, forsooth, that all this is for us, and that the stars influence our destinies! But the labours of ages have convinced us of our error, and we find ourselves on an insignificant planet, almost imperceptible in the immensity of space. But the sublime discoveries we have made richly repay this humble situation. Let us cherish these with care, as the delight of thinking beings--they have destroyed our mistakes as to our relation to the rest of the universe; errors which were the more fatal, because the social Order depends on justice and truth alone. Far be from us the dangerous maxim, that it is sometimes useful to depart from these, and to deceive men, in order to insure their happiness; but cruel experience has shewn us that these laws are never totally extinct."

[p. 135]

There can be no doubt as to the meaning of these last words--they cannot relate to astrology--this was entirely out of date. The "attempts to deceive men, in order to insure their happiness," can only be those by which we are made to think too highly of ourselves. "Inhabitants of this pepper-corn, we think ourselves the peculiar favorites of Heaven, nay, the chief objects of care to a Being, the Maker of all; and then we imagine that, after this life, we are to be happy or miserable, according as we accede or not to this subjugation to opinions which enslave us. But truth and justice have broken these bonds."--But where is the force of the argument which entitles this perfecter of the Newtonian philosophy to exult so much? It all rests on this, That this earth is but as a grain of mustard-seed. Man would be more worth attention had he inhabited Jupiter or the Sun. Thus may a Frenchman look down on the noble creatures who inhabit Orolong or Pelew. But whence arises the absurdity of the intellectual inhabitants of this pepper-corn being a proper object of attention? it is because our shallow comprehensions cannot, at the same glance, see an extensive scene, and perceive its most minute detail.

 

David, a King, and a soldier had some notions of this kind. The heavens, it is true, pointed out to him a Maker and Ruler, which is more than they seem to have done to the Gallic philosopher; but David was afraid that he would be forgotten in the crowd, and cries out, "Lord! what is man, that thou art mindful of him?" But David gets rid of his fears, not by becoming a philosopher, and discovering all this to be absurd--he would still be forgotten--he at once thinks of what he is--a noble creature--high in the scale of nature. "But," says he, "I had forgotten myself. Thou hast made man but a little lower than the angels--thou hast crowned him with glory and honor--thou hast put all things under his feet." Here are exalted sentiments, fit for the creature whose ken pierces through the immensity of the visible universe, and who sees his relation to the universe, being nearly allied to its Sovereign, and capable of rising continually in his rank, by cultivating those talents which distinguish and adorn it.

 

Thousands, I trust, there are, who think that this life is but a preparation for another, in which the mind of

[p. 136]

man will have the whole wonders of creation and of providence laid open to its enraptured view, where it will see and comprehend with one glance what Newton, the most patient and successful of all the observers of nature, took years of meditation to find out--where it will attain that pitch of wisdom, goodness, and enjoyment, of which our consciences tell us we are capable, tho' it far surpasses that of the wisest, the best, and the happiest of men. Such persons will consider this Order as degrading and detestable, and as in direct opposition to their most confident expectations: For it pretends to what is impossible, to perfect peace and happiness in this life. They believe, and they feel, that man must be made perfect through sufferings, which shall call into action powers of mind that otherwise would never have unfolded themselves--powers which are frequently sources of the purest and most soothing pleasures, and naturally make us rest our eyes and hopes on that state where every tear shall be wiped away, and where the kind affections shall become the never-failing sources of pure and unfading delight. Such persons see the palpable absurdity of a preparation which is equally necessary for all, and yet must be confined to the minds of a few, who have the low and indelicate appetite for frivolous play-things, and for gross sensual pleasures. Such minds will turn away from this boasted treat with loathing and abhorrence.

 

I am well aware that some of my readers may smile at this, and think it an enthusiastical working up of the imagination, similar to what I reprobate in the case of Utopian happiness in a state of universal Liberty and Equality. It is like, they will say, to the declamation in a sermon by persons of the trade, who are trained up to finesse, by which they allure and tickle weak minds.

 

I acknowledge, that in the present case, I do not address myself to the cold hearts, who contentedly

"Sink and slumber in their cells of clay;"

[paragraph continues] --Peace to all such; but to the felices animae, quibus haec cognoscere cura;"--to those who have enjoyed the pleasures of science, who have been successful--who have made discoveries--who have really illuminated the world--

[p. 137]

to the Bacons, the Newtons, the Lockes.--Allow me to mention one, Daniel Bernoulli, the most elegant mathematician, the only philosopher, and the most worthy man, of that celebrated family. He said to a gentleman (Dr. Staehling) who repeated it to me, that "when reading some of those wonderful guesses of Sir Isaac Newton, the subsequent demonstration of which has been the chief source of fame to his most celebrated commentators--his mind has sometimes been so overpowered by thrilling emotions, that he has wished that moment to be his last; and that it was this which gave him the clearest conception of the happiness of heaven." If such delightful emotions could be excited by the perception of mere truth, what must they be when each of these truths is an instance of wisdom, and when we recollect, that what we call wisdom in the works of nature, is always the nice adaptation of means for producing beneficent ends; and that each of these affecting qualities is susceptible of degrees which are boundless, and exceed our highest conceptions. What can this complex emotion or feeling be but rapture? But Bernoulli is a Doctor of Theology--and therefore a suspicious person, perhaps one of the combination hired by despots to enslave us. I will take another man, a gentleman of rank and family, a soldier, who often signalised himself as a naval commander--who at one time forced his way through a powerful fleet of the Venetians with a small squadron, and brought relief to a distressed garrison. I would desire the reader to peruse the conclusion of Sir Kenhelm Digby's Treatises on Body and Mind; and after having reflected on the state of science at the time this author wrote, let him coolly weigh the incitements to manly conduct which this soldier finds in the differences observed between body and mind; and then let him say, on his conscience, whether they are more feeble than those which he can draw from the eternal sleep of death. If he thinks that they are--he is in the proper frame for initiation into Spartacus's higher mysteries. He may be either MAGUS or REX.

 

Were this a proper place for considering the question as a question of science or truth, I would say, that every man who has been a successful student of nature, and who will rest his conclusions on the same maxims of probable reasoning that have procured him success in his past researches,

[p. 138]

will consider it as next to certain that there is another state of existence for rational man. For he must own, that if this be not the case, there is a most singular exception to a proposition which the whole course of his experience has made him consider as a truth founded on universal induction, viz. that nature accomplishes all her plans, and that every class of beings attains all the improvement of which it is capable. Let him but turn his thoughts inward, he will feel that his intellect is capable of improvement, in comparison with which Newton is but a child. I could pursue this argument very far, and (I think) warm the heart of every man whom I should wish to call my friend.

 

What opinion will be formed of this Association by the modest, the lowly-minded, the candid, who acknowledge that they too often feel the superior force of present and sensible pleasures, by which their minds are drawn off from the contemplation of what their consciences tell them to be right--to be their dutiful and filial sentiments and emotions respecting their great and good Parent--to be their dutiful and neighbourly affections, and their proper conduct to all around them--and which diminish their veneration for that purity of thought and moderation of appetite which becomes their noble natures. What must they think of this Order? Conscious of frequent faults, which would offend themselves if committed by their dearest children, they look up to their Maker with anxiety--are sorry for having so far forgotten their duty, and fearful that they may again forget it. Their painful experience tells them that their reason is often too weak, their information too scanty, or its light is obstructed by passion and prejudices, which distort and discolour every thing; or it is unheeded during their attention to present objects. Happy should they be, if it should please their kind Parent to remind them of their duty from time to time, or to influence their mind in any way that would compensate for their own ignorance, their own weakness, or even their indolence and neglect. They dare not expect such a favor, which their modesty tells them they do not deserve, and which they fear may be unfit to be granted; but when such a comfort is held out to them, with eager hearts they receive it--they bless the kindness that granted it, and the hand that brings it.--Such amiable characters have appeared in all ages, and in

[p. 139]

all situations of mankind. They have not in all instances been wise--often have they been precipitate, and have too readily catched at any thing which pretended to give them the so much wished-for assistances; and, unfortunately, there have been enthusiasts, or villains, who have taken advantage of this universal wish of anxious man; and the world has been darkened by cheats, who have misrepresented God to mankind, have filled us with vain terrors, and have then quieted our fears by fines, and sacrifices, and mortifications, and services, which they said made more than amends for all our faults. Thus was our duty to our neighbour, to our own dignity, and to our Maker and Parent, kept out of sight, and religion no longer came in aid to our sense of right and wrong; but, on the contrary, by these superstitions it opened the doors of heaven to the worthless and the wicked.--But I wish not to speak of these men, but of the good, the candid, the MODEST, the HUMBLE who know their failings, who love their duties, but wish to know, to perceive, and to love them still more. These are they who think and believe that "the Gospel has brought life and immortality to light," that is, within their reach. They think it worthy of the Father of mankind, and they receive it with thankful hearts, admiring above all things the simplicity of its morality, comprehended in one sentence, "Do to another what you can reasonably wish that another should do to you," and THAT PURITY OF THOUGHT AND MANNERS WHICH DISTINGUISHES IT FROM ALL THE SYSTEMS OF MORAL INSTRUCTION THAT HAVE EVER BEEN OFFERED TO MEN. Here they find a ground of resignation under the troubles of life, and a support in the hour of death, quite suited to the diffidence of their character. Such men are ready to grant that the Stoics were persons of noble and exalted minds, and that they had worthy conceptions of the rank of man in the scale of God's works; but they confess that they themselves do not feel all that support from Stoical principles which man too frequently needs; and they say that they are not singular in their opinions, but that the bulk of mankind are prevented, by their want of heroic fortitude, by their situation, or their want of the opportunities of cultivating their native strength of mind, from ever attaining this hearty submission to the will of Deity.--They maintain, that the Stoics were but a few, a very few, from among many millions--and therefore

[p. 140]

their being satisfied was but a trifle amidst the general discontent, and fretting, and despair.--Such men will most certainly start back from this Illumination with horror and fright--from a Society which gives the lie to their fondest hopes, makes a sport of their grounds of hope, and of their deliverer; and which, after laughing at their credulity, bids them shake off all religion whatever, and denies the existence of that Supreme Mind, the pattern of all excellence, who till now had filled their thoughts with admiration and love--from an Order which pretends to free them from spiritual bondage, and then lays on their necks a load ten times more oppressive and intolerable, from which they have no power of ever escaping. Men of sense and virtue will spurn at such a proposal; and even the profligate, who trade with Deity, must be sensible that they will be better off with their priests, whom they know, and among whom they may make a selection of such as will with patience and gentleness clear up their doubts, calm their fears, and encourage their hopes.

 

And all good men, all lovers of peace and of justice, will abhor and reject the thought of overturning the present constitution of things, faulty as it may he, merely in the endeavour to establish another, which the vices of mankind may subvert again in a twelvemonth. They must see, that in order to gain their point, the proposers have found it necessary to destroy the grounds of morality, by permitting the most wicked means for accomplishing any end that our fancy, warped by passion or interest, may represent to us as of great importance. They see, that instead of morality, vice must prevail, and that therefore there is no security for the continuance of this Utopian felicity; and, in the mean time, desolation and misery must lay the world waste during the struggle, and half of those for whom we are striving will be swept from the face of the earth. We have but to look to France, where in eight years there have been more executions and spoilations and distresses of every kind by the pouvoir revolutionnaire, than can be found in the long records of that despotic monarchy.

 

There is nothing in the whole constitution of the Illuminati that strikes me with more horror than the proposals of Hercules and Minos to enlist the women in this shocking

[p. 141]

warfare with all that "is good, and pure, and lovely, and of good report." They could not have fallen on any expedient that will be more effectual and fatal. If any of my countrywomen shall honor these pages with a reading, I would call on them, in the most earnest manner, to consider this as an affair of the utmost importance to themselves. I would conjure them by the regard they have for their own dignity, and for their rank in society, to join against these enemies of human nature, and profligate degraders of the sex; and I would assure them that the present state of things almost puts it in their power to be the saviours of the world. But if they are remiss, and yield to the seduction, they will fall from that high state to which they have arisen in Christian Europe, and again sink into that insignificancy or slavery in which the sex is found in all ages and countries out of the hearing of Christianity.

 

I hope that my countrywomen will consider this solemn address to them as a proof of the high esteem in which I hold them. They will not be offended then if, in this season of alarm and anxiety, when I wish to impress their minds with a serious truth, I shall wave ceremony which is always designing, and speak of them in honest but decent plainness.

 

Man is immersed in luxury. Our accommodations are now so numerous that every thing is pleasure. Even in very sober situations in this highly cultivated Society, there is hardly a thing that remains in the form of a necessary of life, or even of a mere conveniency--every thing is ornamented--it must not appear of use--it must appear as giving some sensible pleasure. I do not say this by way of blaming--it is nature--man is a refining creature, and our most boasted acquirements are but refinements on our necessary wants. Our hut becomes a palace, our blanket a fine dress, and our arts become sciences. This discontent with the natural condition of things, and this disposition to refinement, is a characteristic of our species, and is the great employment of our lives. The direction which this propensity chances to take in any age or nation, marks its character in the most conspicuous and interesting manner. All have it in some degree, and it is very conceivable that, in some, it may constitute the chief object of attention. If

[p. 142]

this be the case in any nations, it is surely most likely to be so in those where the accommodations of life are the most numerous--therefore in a rich and luxurious nation. I may surely, without exaggeration or reproach, give that appellation to our own nation at this moment. If you do not go to the very lowest class of people, who must labour all day, is it not the chief object of all to procure perceptible pleasure in one way or another? The sober and busy struggle in the thoughts and hopes of getting the means of enjoying the comforts of life without farther labour--and many have no other object than pleasure.

 

Then let us reflect that it is woman that is to grace the whole--It is in nature, it is the very constitution of man, that woman, and every thing connected with woman, must appear as the ornament of life. That this mixes with every other social sentiment, appears from the conduct of our species in all ages and in every situation. This I presume would be the case, even though there were no qualities or talents in the sex to justify it. This sentiment respecting the sex is necessary, in order to rear so helpless, so nice, and so improveable a creature as man; without it, the long abiding task could not be performed:--and I think that I may venture to say that it is performed in the different states of society nearly in proportion as this preparatory and indispensable sentiment is in force.

 

On the other hand, I think it no less evident that it is the desire of the women to be agreeable to the men, and that they will model themselves according to what they think will please. Without this adjustment of sentiments by nature, nothing would go on. We never observe any such want of symmetry in the works of God. If, therefore, those who take the lead, and give the fashion in society, were wise and virtuous, I have no doubt but that the women would set the brightest pattern of every thing that is excellent. But if the men are nice and fastidious sensualists, the women will be refined and elegant voluptuaries.

 

There is no deficiency in the female mind, either in talents or in dispositions; nor can we say with certainty that there is any subject of intellectual or moral discussion in which women have not excelled. If the delicacy of their

[p. 143]

constitution, and other physical causes, allow the female sex a smaller share of some mental powers, they possess others in a superior degree, which are no less respectable in their own nature, and of as great importance to society. Instead of descanting at large on their powers of mind, and supporting my assertions by the instances of a Hypatia, a Schurman, a Zenobia, an Elisabeth, &c. I may repeat the account given of the sex by a person of uncommon experience, who saw them without disguise, or any motive that could lead them to play a feigned part.--Mr. Ledyard, who traversed the greatest part of the world, for the mere indulgence of his taste for observation of human nature; generally in want, and often in extreme misery.

 

"I have (says he) always remarked that women, in all countries, are civil, obliging, tender, and humane; that they are ever inclined to be gay and cheerful, timorous and modest; and that they do not hesitate, like man, to perform a kind or generous action.--Not haughty, not arrogant, not supercilious, they are full of courtesy, and fond of society--more liable in general to err than man, but in general, also, more virtuous, and performing more good actions than he. To a woman, whether civilized or savage, I never addressed myself in the language of decency and friendship, without receiving a decent and friendly answer--with man it has often been otherwise.

 

"In wandering over the barren plains of inhospitable Denmark, through honest Sweden, and frozen Lapland, rude and churlish Finland, unprincipled Russia, and the wide spread regions of the wandering Tartar--if hungry, dry, cold, wet, or sick, the women have ever been friendly to me, and uniformly so; and to add to this virtue (so worthy of the appellation of benevolence) these actions have been performed in so free and so kind a manner, that if I was thirsty, I drank the sweetest draught, and if hungry, I ate the coarse meal with a double relish."

 

And these are they whom Weishaupt would corrupt! One of these, whom he had embraced with fondness, would he have murdered, to save his honor, and qualify himself to preach virtue! But let us not be too severe on Weishaupt--let us wash ourselves clear of all stain before we think

[p. 144]

of reprobating him. Are we not guilty in some degree, when we do not cultivate in the women those powers of mind, and those dispositions of heart, which would equally dignify them in every station as in those humble ranks in which Mr. Ledyard most frequently saw them? I cannot think that we do this. They are not only to grace the whole of cultivated society, but it is in their faithful and affectionate personal attachment that we are to find the sweetest pleasures that life can give. Yet in all the situations where the manner in which they are treated is not dictated by the stern laws of necessity, are they not trained up for mere amusement--are not serious occupations considered as a task which hurts their loveliness? What is this but selfishness, or as if they had no virtues worth cultivating? Their business is supposed to be the ornamenting themselves, as if nature did not dictate this to them already, with at least as much force as is necessary. Every thing is prescribed to them because it makes them more lovely--even their moral lessons are enforced by this argument, and Miss Woolstoncroft is perfectly right when she says that the fine lessons given to young women by Fordyce or Rousseau are nothing but selfish and refined voluptuousness. This advocate of her sex puts her sisters in the proper point of view, when she tells them that they are, like man, the subjects of God's moral government--like man, preparing themselves for boundless improvement in a better state of existence. Had she adhered to this view of the matter, and kept it constantly in sight, her book (which doubtless contains many excellent things, highly deserving of their serious consideration) would have been a most valuable work. She justly observes, that the virtues of the sex are great and respectable, but that in our mad chace of pleasure, only pleasure, they are little thought of or attended to. Man trusts to his own uncontroulable power, or to the general goodness of the sex, that their virtues will appear when we have occasion for them;--"but we will send for these some other time;"--Many noble displays do they make of the most difficult attainments. Such is the patient bearing up under misfortunes, which has no brilliancy to support it in the effort. This is more difficult than braving danger in an active and conspicuous situation. How often is a woman left with a family and the shattered remains of a fortune, lost perhaps by dissipation or by indolence

[p. 145]

and how seldom, how very seldom, do we see woman shrink from the task, or discharge it with negligence? Is it not therefore folly next to madness, not to be careful of this our greatest blessing--of things which so nearly concern our peace--nor guard ourselves, and these our best companions and friends, from the effects of this fatal Illumination? It has indeed brought to light what dreadful lengths men will go, when under the fanatical and dazzling glare of happiness in a state of liberty and equality, and spurred on by insatiable luxury, and not held in check by moral feelings and the restraints of religion--and mark, reader, that the women have here also taken the complexion of the men, and have even gone beyond them. If we have seen a son present himself to the National Assembly of France, professing his satisfaction with the execution of his father three days before, and declaring himself a true citizen, who prefers the nation to all other considerations; we have also seen, on the same day, wives denouncing their husbands, and (O shocking to human nature!) mothers denouncing their sons, as bad citizens and traitors. Mark too what return the women have met with for all their horrid services, where, to express their sentiments of civism and abhorrence of royalty, they threw away the character of their sex, and bit the amputated limbs of their murdered countrymen. [**] Surely these patriotic women merited that the rights of their sex should be considered in full council, and they were well entitled to a seat; but there is not a single act of their government in which the sex is considered as having any rights whatever, or that they are things to be cared for.

 

Are not the accursed fruits of Illumination to be seen in the present humiliating condition of woman in France? pampered in every thing that can reduce them to the mere instrument of animal pleasure. In their present state of national moderation (as they call it) and security, see Madame Talien come into the public theatre, accompanied by other beautiful women (I was about to have misnamed

[p. 146]

them Ladies) laying aside all modesty, and presenting themselves to the public view, with bared limbs, a la Sauvage, as the alluring objects of desire. I make no doubt but that this is a serious matter, encouraged, nay, prompted by government. To keep the minds of the Parisians in the present fever of dissolute gaiety, they are at more expence from the national treasury for the support of the sixty theatres, than all the pensions and honorary offices in Britain, three times told, amount to. Was not their abominable farce in the church of Notre Dame a bait of the same kind, in the true spirit of Weishaupt's Eroterion? I was pleased to see among the priests of that solemnity Mr. Brigonzi, an old acquaintance, formerly Machiniste (and excellent in his profession) to the opera at the palace in St. Petersburg. He was a most zealous Mason, and Chevalier de l'Orient; and I know that he went to Paris in the same capacity of Machiniste de l'Opera; so that I am next to certain that this is the very man. But what will be the end of all this? The fondlings of the wealthy will be pampered in all the indulgences which fastidious voluptuousness finds necessary for varying or enhancing its pleasures; but they will either be slighted as toys, or they will be immured; and the companions of the poor will be drudges and slaves.

 

I am fully persuaded that it was the enthusiastic admiration of Grecian democracy that recommended to the French nation the dress a la Grecque, which exhibits, not the elegant, ornamented beauty, but the beautiful female, fully as well as Madame Talien's dress a la Sauvage. It was no doubt with the same adherence to serious principle, that Mademoiselle Therouanne was most beautifully dressed a l'Amazonne on the 5th of October 1789, when she turned the heads of so many young officers of the regiments at Versailles. The Cytherea, the hominum divumque voluptas, at the cathedral of Notre Dame, was also dressed a la Grecque; and in this, and in much of the solemnities of that day, I recognized the taste and invention of my old acquaintance Brigonzi. I recollected the dresses of our premiere & seconde Surveillantes in the Loge de la Fidelite. There is a most evident and characteristic change in the whole system of female dress in France. The Filles de l'Opera always gave the ton, and were surely withheld

[p. 147]

by no rigid principle. They sometimes produced very extravagant and fantastic forms, but these were almost always in the style of the highest ornament, and they trusted, for the rest of the impression which they wished to make, to the fascinating expression of elegant movements. This indeed was wonderful, and hardly conceivable by any who have not seen a grand ballet performed by good actors. I have shed tears of the most sincere and tender sorrow during the exhibition of Antigone, set to music by Traetta, and performed by Madame Meilcour and Sre Torelli, and Zantini. I can easily conceive the impression to be still stronger, though perhaps of another kind, when the former superb dresses are changed for the expressive simplicity of the Grecian. I cannot help thinking that the female ornaments in the rest of Europe, and even among ourselves, have less elegance since we lost the imprimatur of the French court. But see how all this will terminate, when we shall have brought the sex so low, and will not even wait for a Mahometan paradise. What can we expect but such a dissoluteness of manners, that the endearing ties of relation and family, and mutual confidence within doors, will be slighted, and will cease; and every man must stand up for himself, single and alone, in perfect equality, and full liberty to do whatever his own arm (but that alone) is able to accomplish. This is not the suggestion of prudish fear, I think it is the natural course of things, and that France is at this moment giving to the world the fullest proof of Weishaupt's sagacity, and the judgment with which he has formed his plans. Can it tend to the improvement of our morals or manners to have our ladies frequent the gymnastic theatres, and see them decide, like the Roman matrons, on the merits of a naked gladiator or wrestler? Have we not enough of this already with our vaulters and posture-masters, and should we admire any lady who had a rage for such spectacles? Will it improve our taste to have our rooms ornamented with such paintings and sculptures as filled the cenaculum, and the study of the refined and elegant moralist Horace, who had the art--ridendo dicere verum? Shall we be improved when such indulgences are thought compatible with such lessons as he generally gives for the conduct of life? The pure Morality of Illuminatism is now employed in stripping Italy of all those precious remains of ancient art and voluptuousness; and Paris will ere long be the

[p. 148]

deposit and the resort of artists from all nations, there to study the works of ancient masters, and to return from thence pandars of public corruption. The plan is masterly, and the low-born Statesmen and Generals of France may in this respect be set on a level with a Colbert or a Conde. But the consequences of this Gallic dominion over the minds of fallen man will be as dreadful as their dominion over their lives and fortunes.

 

Recollect in what manner Spartacus proposed to corrupt his sisters (for we need not speak of the manner in which he expected that this would promote his plan--this is abundantly plain.) It was by destroying their moral sentiments, and their sentiments of religion.--Recollect what is the recommendation that the Atheist Minos gives of his step-daughters, when he speaks of them as proper persons for the Lodge of Sisters. "They have got over all prejudices, and, in matters of religion, they think as I do." These profligates judged rightly that this affair required much caution, and that the utmost attention to decency, and even delicacy, must be observed in their rituals and ceremonies, otherwise they would be disgusted. This was judging fairly of the feelings of a female mind. But they judged falsely, and only according to their own coarse experience, when they attributed their disgust and their fears to coyness. Coyness is indeed the instinctive attribute of the female. In woman it is very great, and it is perhaps the genuine source of the disgust of which the Illuminati were suspicious. But they have been dim-sighted indeed, or very unfortunate in their acquaintance, if they never observed any other source of repugnance in the mind of woman to what is immoral or immodest--if they did not see dislike--moral disapprobation. Do they mean to insinuate, that in that regard which modest women express in all their words and actions, for what every one understands by the terms decency, modesty, filthiness, obscenity, they only show female coyness? Then are they very blind instructors. But they are not so blind. The account given of the initiation of a young Sister at Frankfort, under the feigned name Psycharion, shows the most scrupulous attention to the moral feelings of the sex; and the confusion and disturbance which it occasioned among the ladies, after all their care, shows, that when they thought all right and delicate, they had been but coarse

[p. 149]

judges. Minos damns the ladies there, because they are too free, too rich, too republican, and too wise, for being led about by the nose (this is his own expression). But Philo certainly thought more correctly of the sex in general, when he says, Truth is a modest girl: She may be handed about like a lady, by good sense and good manners, but must not be bullied and driven about like a strumpet. I would give the discourses or addresses which were made on that occasion to the different classes of the assembly, girls, young ladies, wives, young men, and strangers, which are really well composed and pretty, were they not such as would offend my fair countrywomen.

 

The religious sentiments by which mortals are to be assisted, even in the discharge of their moral duties, and still more, the sentiments which are purely religious, and have no reference to any thing here, are precisely those which are most easily excited in the mind of woman. Affection, admiration, filial reverence, are, if I mistake not exceedingly, those in which the women far surpass the men; and it is on this account that we generally find them so much disposed to devotion, which is nothing but a sort of fond indulgence of these affections without limit to the imagination. The enraptured devotee pours out her soul in expressions of these feelings, just as a fond mother mixes the caresses given to her child with the most extravagant expressions of love. The devotee even endeavours to excite higher degrees of these affections, by expatiating on such circumstances in the divine conduct with respect to man as naturally awaken them; and he does this without any fear of exceeding; because Infinite Wisdom and Goodness will always justify the sentiment, and free the expression of it from all charge of hyperbole or extravagance.

 

I am convinced, therefore, that the female mind is well adapted to cultivation by means of religion, and that their native softness and kindness of heart will always be sufficient for procuring it a favorable reception, from them. It is therefore with double regret that I see any of them join in the arrogant pretensions of our Illuminated philosophers, who see no need of such assistances for the knowledge and discharge of their duties. There is nothing so unlike that general modesty of thought, and that diffidence, which we

[p. 150]

are disposed to think the character of the female mind. I am inclined to think, that such deviations from the general conduct of the sex are marks of a harsher character, of a heart that has less sensibility, and is on the whole less amiable than that of others; yet it must be owned that there are some such among us. Much, if not the whole of this perversion, has, I am persuaded, been owing to the contagion of bad example in the men. They are made familiar with such expressions--their first horror is gone, and (would to heaven that I were mistaken!) some of them have already wounded their consciences to such a degree, that they have some reason to wish that religion may be without foundation.

 

But I would call upon all; and these women in particular, to consider this matter in another light--as it may affect themselves in this life; as it may affect their rank and treatment in ordinary society. I would say to them, that if the world shall once adopt the belief that this life is our all, then, the true maxim of rational conduct will be, to "eat and to drink, since to-morrow we are to die;" and that when they have nothing to trust to but the fondness of the men, they will soon find themselves reduced to slavery. The crown which they now wear will fall from their heads, and they will no longer be the arbiters of what is lovely in human life. The empire of beauty is but short; and even in republican France, it will not be many years that Madame Talien can fascinate the Parisian Theatre by the exhibition of her charms. Man is fastidious and changeable, and he is stronger than they, and can always take his own will with respect to woman. At present he is with-held by respect for her moral worth--and many are with-held by religion--and many more are with-held by public laws, which laws were framed at a time when religious truths influenced the minds and the conduct of men. When the sentiments of men change, they will not be so foolish as to keep in force laws which cramp their strongest desires. Then will the rich have their Harems, and the poor their drudges.

 

Nay, it is not merely the circumstance of woman's being considered as the moral companion of man that gives the sex its empire among us. There is something of this to be observed in all nations. Of all the distinctions which set our

[p. 151]

species above the other sentient inhabitants of this globe, making us as unlike to the best of them as they are to a piece of inanimate matter, there is none more remarkable than the differences observable in the appearances of those desires by which the race is continued. As I observed already, such a distinction is indispensably necessary. There must be a moral connection, in order that the human species may be a race of rational creatures, improveable, not only by the encreasing experience of the individual, but also by the heritable experience of the successive generations. It may be observed between the solitary pairs in Labrador, where human nature starves, like the stunted oak in the crevice of a baron rock; and it is seen in the cultivated societies of Europe, where our nature in a series of ages becomes a majestic tree. But, alas! with what differences of boughs and foliage! Whatever may be the native powers of mind in the poor but gentle Esquimaux, she can do nothing for the species but nurse a young one, who cannot run his race of life without incessant and hard labour to keep soul and body together--here therefore her station in society can hardly have a name, because there can hardly be said that there is an association, except what is necessary for repelling the hostile attacks of Indians, who seem to hunt them without provocation as the dog does the hare. In other parts of the world, we see that the consideration in which the sex is held, nearly follows the proportions of that aggregate of many different particulars, which we consider as constituting the cultivation of a society. We may perhaps err, and we probably do err, in our estimation of these degrees, because we are not perfectly acquainted with what is the real excellence of man. But as far as we can judge of it, I believe that my assertion is acknowledged. On this authority, I might presume to say, that it is in Christian Europe that man has attained his highest degree of cultivation--and it is undoubtedly here that the women have attained the highest rank. I may even add, that it is in that part of Europe where the essential and distinguishing doctrines of Christian morality are most generally acknowledged and attended to by the laws of the country, that woman acts the highest part in general society. But here we must be very careful how we form our notion, either of the society, or of the female rank--it is surely not from the two or three dozens who fill the highest ranks in the

[p. 152]

state. Their number is too small, and their situation is too particular, to afford the proper average. Besides, the situation of the individuals of this class in all countries is very much the same--and in all it is very artificial--accordingly their character is fantastical. Nor are we to take it from that class that is the most numerous of all, the lowest class of society, for these are the labouring poor, whose conduct and occupations are so much dictated to them by the hard circumstances of their situation, that scarcely any thing is left to their choice. The situation of women of this class must be nearly the same in all nations. But this class is still susceptible of some variety--and we see it--and I think that even here there is a perceptible superiority of the female rank in those countries where the purest Christianity prevails. We must however take our measures or proportions from a numerous class, but also a class in somewhat of easy circumstances, where moral sentiments call some attention, and persons have some choice in their conduct. And here, although I cannot pretend to have had many opportunities of observation, yet I have had some. I can venture to say that it is not in Russia, nor in Spain, that woman is, on the whole, the most important as a member of the community. I would say, that in Britain her important rights are more generally respected than any where else. No where is a man's character so much hurt by infidelity--no where is it so difficult to rub off the stigma of bastardy, or to procure a decent reception or society for an improper connection; and I believe it will readily be granted, that their share in successions, their authority in all matters of domestic trust, and even their opinions in what concerns life and manners, are fully more respected here than in any country.

 

I have been of the opinion (and every observation that I have been able to make since I first formed it confirms me in it) that woman is indebted to Christianity alone for the high rank she holds in society. Look into the writings of antiquity--into the works of the Greek and Latin poets--into the numberless panegyrics of the sex, to be found both in prose and verse--I can find little, very little indeed, where woman is treated with respect--there is no want .of love, that is, of fondness, of beauty, of charms, of graces. But of woman as the equal of man, as a moral companion,

[p. 153]

travelling with him the road to felicity--as his adviser--his solace in misfortune--as a pattern from which he may sometimes copy with advantage;--of all this there is hardly a trace. Woman is always mentioned as an object of passion. Chastity, modesty, sober-mindedness, are all considered in relation to this single point; or sometimes as of importance in respect of oeconomy or domestic quiet. Recollect the famous speech of Metellus Numidicus to the Roman people, when, as Censor, he was recommending marriage.

 

"Si fine uxore possemus Quirites esse, omnes ea molestia careremus. Sed quoniam ita natura tradidit, ut nec cum illis commode, nec fine illis ullo modo vivi posset, saluti perpetuae potius quam brevi voluptati consulendum."
                           Aul. Gell. Noct. Att. I. 6.

 

What does Ovid, the great panegyrist of the sex, say for his beloved daughter, whom he had praised for her attractions in various places of his Tristia and other compositions? He is writing her Epitaph--and the only thing he can say of her as a rational creature is, that she is--Domifida--not a Gadabout.--Search Apuleius, where you will find many female characters in abstracto--You will find that his little Photis was nearest to his heart, after all his philosophy. Nay, in his pretty story of Cupid and Psyche, which the very wise will tell you is a fine lesson of moral philosophy, and a representation of the operations of the intellectual and moral faculties of the human soul, a story which gave him the finest opportunity, nay, almost made it necessary for him, to insert whatever can ornament the female character; what is his Psyche but a beautiful, fond, and silly girl; and what are the whole fruits of any acquaintance with the sex?--Pleasure. But why take more pains in the search?--Look at their immortal goddesses--is there one among them whom a wise man would for a wife or a friend?--I grant that a Lucretia is praised--a Portia, an Arria, a Zenobia--but these are individual characters--not representatives of the sex. The only Grecian ladies who made a figure by intellectual talents, were your Aspasias, Sapphos, Phrynes, and other nymphs of this cast, who had emerged from the general insignificance of the sex, by throwing away what we are accustomed to call its greatest ornament.

[p. 154]

I think that the first piece in which woman is pictured as a respectable character, is the oldest novel that I am acquainted with, written by a Christian Bishop, Heliodorus--I mean the Adventures of Theagenes and Chariclea. I think that the Heroine is a greater character than you will meet with in all the annals of antiquity. And it is worth while to observe what was the effect of this painting. The poor Bishop had been deposed, and even excommunicated, for doctrinal errors, and for drawing such a picture of a heathen. The magistrates of Antioch, the most voluptuous and corrupted city of the East, wrote to the Emperor, telling him that this book had reformed the ladies of their city, where Julian the Emperor and his Sophists had formerly preached in vain, and they therefore prayed that the good Bishop might not be deprived of his mitre.--It is true, we read of Hypatia, daughter of Theon, the mathematician at Alexandria, who was a prodigy of excellence, and taught philosophy, i.e. the art of leading a good and happy life, with great applause in the famous Alexandrian school.--But she also was in the times of Christianity, and was the intimate friend of Syncellus and other Christian Bishops.

 

It is undoubtedly Christianity that has set woman on her throne, making her in every respect the equal of man, bound to the same duties, and candidate for the same happiness. Mark how woman is described by a Christian poet,

------"Yet when I approach
 Her loveliness, so absolute she seems,
 And in herself complete, so well to know
 Her own, that what she wills to do or say
 Seems wisest, virtuousest, discreetest, best.

Neither her outside, form'd so fair,------
 So much delights me, as those graceful acts,
 Those thousand decencies that daily flow
 From all her words and actions, mix'd with love
 And sweet compliance, which declare unfeign'd
 Union of mind, or in us both one soul.

------And, to consummate all,
 Greatness of mind, and nobleness, their feat
 Build in her loveliest, and create an awe
 About her, as a guard angelic plac'd."
                                        MILTON.

This is really moral painting, without any abatement of female charms.

[p. 155]

This is the natural consequence of that purity of heart, which is so much insisted on in the Christian morality. In the instructions of the heathen philosophers, it is either not mentioned at all, or at most, it is recommended coldly, as a thing proper, and worthy of a mind attentive to great things.--But, in Christianity, it is insisted on as an indispensable duty, and enforced by many arguments peculiar to itself.

 

It is worthy of observation, that the most prominent superstitions which have dishonored the Christian churches, have been the excessive refinements which the enthusiastic admiration of heroic purity has allowed the holy trade to introduce into the manufacture of our spiritual fetters. Without this enthusiasm, cold expediency would not have been able to make the Monastic vow so general, nor have given us such numbers of convents. These were generally founded by such enthusiasts--the rulers indeed of the church encouraged this to the utmost, as the best levy for the spiritual power--but they could not enjoin such foundations. From the same source we may derive the chief influence of auricular confession. When these were firmly established, and were venerated, almost all the other corruptions of Christianity followed of course. I may almost add, that though it is here that Christianity has suffered the most violent attacks, it is here that the place is most tenable.--Nothing tends so much to knit all the ties of society as the endearing connections of family, and whatever tends to lessen our veneration for the marriage contract, weakens them in the most effectual manner. Purity of manners is its most effectual support, and pure thoughts are the only sources from which pure manners can flow. I readily grant that this. veneration for personal purity was carried to an extravagant height, and that several very ridiculous fancies and customs arose from this. Romantic love, and chivalry, are strong instances of the strange vagaries of our imagination, when carried along by this enthusiastic admiration of female purity; and so unnatural and forced, that they could only be temporary fashions. But I believe that, with all their ridicule, it would be a happy nation where this was the general creed and practice. Nor can I help thinking a nation on its decline, when the domestic connections cease to be venerated, and the illegitimate offspring of a nabob

[p. 156]

or a nobleman are received with ease into good company.

 

Nothing is more clear than that the design of the Illuminati was to abolish Christianity--and we now see how effectual this would be for the corruption of the fair sex, a purpose which they eagerly wished to gain, that they might corrupt the men. But if the women would retain the rank they now hold, they will be careful to preserve in full force on their minds this religion so congenial to their dispositions, which nature has made affectionate and kind.

 

And with respect to the men, is it not egregious folly to encourage any thing that can tend to blast our sweetest enjoyments? Shall we not do this most effectually if we attempt to corrupt what nature will always make us consider as the highest elegance of life? The divinity of the Stoics was, "Mens sana in corpore sano"--but it is equally true,

"Gratior est pulchro veniens e corpore virtus."

[paragraph continues] If therefore, instead of professedly tainting what is of itself beautiful, we could really work it up to

"That fair form, which, wove in fancy's loom,
 "Floats in light visions round the poet's head,"

and make woman a pattern of perfection, we should undoubtedly add more to the heartfelt happiness of life than by all the discoveries of the Illuminati. See what was the effect of Theagenes and Chariclea.

 

And we should remember that with the fate of woman that of man is indissolubly knit. The voice of nature spoke through our immortal bard, when he made Adam say,

--------------------------------- "From thy state
 Mine never shall be parted, bliss or woe."

[paragraph continues] Should we suffer the contagion to touch our fair partner, all is gone, and too late shall we say,

"O fairest of creation! last and best
 Of all God's works, creature in whom excell'd
 Whatever can to fight or thought be form'd,
 Holy, divine, good, amiable, or sweet!
 How art thou lost--and now to death devote?--
 And me with thee hast ruin'd: for with thee
 Certain my resolution is to die."

 

Footnotes

^78:* This is evidently the Mystere du Mithrus mentioned by Barruel, in his History of Jacobinism, and had been carried into France by Bede and Busche.

^86:* I observe, in other parts of his correspondence where he speaks of this, several singular phrases, which are to be found in two books; Antiquite devoilee par ses Usages, and Origine du Despotisme Oriental. These contain indeed much of the maxims inculcated in the reception discourse of the degree Illuminatus Minor. Indeed I have found, that Weishaupt is much less an inventor than he is generally thought.

^89:* It means an attempt made by David Williams, [Am: Ed]

^92:* Happy France! Cradle of illumination, where the morning of Reason has dawned, dispelling the clouds of Monarchy and Christianity, where the babe has sucked the blood of the unenlightened, and Murder! Fire! Help! has been the lullaby to sing it to sleep.

^112:* (They were strongly suspected of having published some scandalous caricatures, and some very immoral prints.) They scrupled at no mean, however base, for corrupting the nation. Mirabeau had done the same thing at Berlin. By political caricatures and filthy prints, they corrupt even such as cannot read.

^113:* In this small turbulent city there were eleven secret societies of Masons, Rosycrucians, Clairvoyants," &c.

^145:* I say this on the authority of a young gentleman, an emigrant, who saw it, and who said, that they were women, not of the dregs of the Palais Royal, not of infamous character, but well dressed.--I am sorry to add, that the relation, accompanied with looks of horror and disgust, only provoked a contemptuous smile from an illuminated British Fair one.

     Proofs of a Conspiracy, by John Robison, [1798], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 157]

  

CHAP. III.

  

The German Union.

WHEN SUCH a fermentation has been excited in the public mind, it cannot be supposed that the formal suppression of the Order of the Illuminati in Bavaria, and in the Duchy of Wirtemberg, by the reigning Princes, would bring all to rest again. By no means. The minds of men were predisposed for a change by the restless spirit of speculation in every kind of enquiry, and the leaven had been carefully and skilfully disseminated in every quarter of the empire, and even m foreign countries. Weishaupt said, on good grounds, that "if the Order should be discovered and suppressed, he would restore it with tenfold energy in a twelvemonth." Even in those states where it was formally abolished, nothing could hinder the enlisting new members, and carrying on all the purposes of the Order. The Areopagitae might indeed be changed, and the feat of the direction transferred to some other place; but the Minerval and his Mentor could meet as formerly, and a ride of a few miles into another State, would bring him to a Lodge, where the young would be amused, and the more advanced would be engaged in serious mischief. Weishaupt never liked  play. He indulged Philo in it, because he saw him taken with such rattles; but his own projects were dark and solemn, and it was a relief to him now to be freed from that mummery. He soon found the bent of the person's mind on whom he had set his talons, and he says, that "no man ever escaped him whom he thought it worth while to secure." He had already filled the lists with enough of the young and gay, and when the present condition of the Order required sly and experienced heads, he no longer courted them by play-things. He communicated the ranks and the instructions by a letter, without any ceremony. The correspondence with Philo at the time of the breach with him shows the superiority of Spartacus. Philo is in a rage,

[p. 158]

provoked to find a pitiful professor discontented with the immense services which he had received from a gentleman of his rank, and treating him with authority, and with disingenuity.--He tells Spartacus what still greater services he can do the Order, and that he can also ruin it with a breath.--But in the midst of this rage, he proposes a thousand modes of reconcilement. The smallest concession would make him hug Spartacus in his arms. But Spartacus is deaf to all his threats, and firm as a rock. Though he is conscious of his own vile conduct, he abates not in the smallest point his absolute authority--requires the most implicit submission, which he says "is due, not to him, but to the Order, and without which the Order must immediately go to ruin."--He does not even deign to challenge Philo to do his worst, but allows him to go out of the Order without one angry word. This shows his confidence in the energy of that spirit of restless discontent, and that hankering after reform which he had so successfully spread abroad.

 

This had indeed arisen to an unparalleled height, unexpected even by the seditious themselves. This appeared in a remarkable manner by the reception given to the infamous letters on the constitution of the Prussian States.

 

The general opinion was, that Mirabeau was the author of the letters themselves, and it was perfectly understood by every person, that the translation into French was a joint contrivance of Mirabeau and Nicholai. I was assured of this by the British Minister at that Court. There are some blunders in respect of names, which an inhabitant of the country could hardly be guilty of, but are very consistent with the self-conceit and precipitancy of this Frenchman.--There are several instances of the same kind in two pieces, which are known for certain to be his, viz. the Chronique scandaleuse and the Histoire secrette de la Ceur ae Berlin. These letters were in every hand, and were mentioned in every conversation, even in the Prussian dominions--and in other places of the Empire they were quoted, and praised, and commented on, although some of their contents were nothing short of rebellion.

 

Mirabeau had a large portion of that self-conceit which distinguishes his countrymen. He thought himself qualified

[p. 159]

not only for any high office in administration, but even for managing the whole affairs of the new King. He therefore endeavoured to obtain some post of honor. But he was disappointed, and, in revenge, did every thing in his power to make those in administration the objects of public ridicule and reproach. His licentious and profligate manners were such as excluded him from the society of the people of the first classes, whom it behoved to pay some attention to personal dignity. His opinions were in the highest degree corrupted, and he openly professed Atheism. This made him peculiarly obnoxious to the King, who was determined to correct the disturbances and disquiets which had arisen in the Prussian states from the indifference of his predecessor in these matters. Mirabeau therefore attached himself to a junto of writers and scribblers, who had united in order to disseminate licentious principles, both in respect of religion and of government. His wit and fancy were great, and he had not perhaps his equal for eloquent and biting satire. He was therefore caressed by these writers as a most valuable acquisition to their Society. He took all this deference as his just due; and was so confident in his powers, and so foolish as to advise, and even to admonish, the King. Highly obnoxious by such conduct, he was excluded from any chance of preferment, and was exceedingly out of humour. In this state of mind he was in a fit frame for Illumination. Spartacus had been eyeing him for some time, and at last communicated this honor to him through the intermedium of Mauvillon, another Frenchman, Lieutenant-Colonel in the service of the Duke of Brunswick. This person had been most active during the formal existence of the Order, and had contributed much to its reception in the Protestant states--he remained long concealed. Indeed his Illumination was not known till the invasion of Holland by the French rebels. Mauvillon then stepped forth, avowed his principles, and recommended the example of the French to the Germans. This encouragement brought even Philo again on the stage, notwithstanding his resentment against Spartacus, and his solemn declaration of having abjured all such societies--These, and a thousand such facts, show that the seeds of licentious Cosmo-politism had taken deep root, and that cutting down the crop had by no means destroyed the baneful plant--But this is not all--a new method of cultivation had been invented, and immediately

[p. 160]

adopted, and it was now growing over all Europe in another form.

 

I have already taken notice of the general perversion of the public mind which co-operated with the schisms of Free Masonry in procuring a listening ear to Spartacus and his associates. It will not be doubted but that the machinations of the Illuminati encreased this, even among those who did not enter into the Order. It was easier to diminish the respect for civil establishments in Germany than in almost any other country. The frivolity of the ranks and court offices in the different confederated petty states, made it impossible to combine dignity with the habits of a scanty income.--It was still easier to expose to ridicule and reproach those numberless abuses which the folly and the vices of men had introduced into religion. The influence on the public mind which naturally attaches to the venerable office of a moral instructor, was prodigiously diminished by the continual disputes of the Catholics and Protestants, which were carried on with great heat in every little principality. The freedom of enquiry, which was supported by the state in Protestant Germany, was terribly abused (for what will the folly of man not abuse) and degenerated into a wanton licentiousness of thought, and a rage for speculation and scepticism on every subject whatever. The struggle, which was originally between the Catholics and the Protestants, had changed, during the gradual progress of luxury and immorality, into a contest between reason and superstition. And in this contest the denomination of superstition had been gradually extended to every doctrine which professed to be of divine revelation, and reason was declared to be, for certain, the only way in which the Deity can inform the human mind.

 

Some respectable Catholics had published works filled with liberal sentiments. These were represented as villanous machinations to inveigle Protestants. On the other hand, some Protestant divines had proposed to imitate this liberality by making concessions which might enable a good Catholic to live more at ease among the Protestants, and might even accelerate an union of faiths. This was hooted beyond measure, as Jesuitical, and big with danger. While

[p. 161]

the sceptical junto, headed by the editors of the Deutsche Bibliothek and the Berlin Monatschrift, were recommending every performance that was hostile to the established faith of the country, Leuchtsenring was equally busy, finding Jesuits in every corner, and went about with all the inquietude of a madman, picking up anecdotes. Zimmerman, the respectable physician of Frederick King of Prussia, gives a diverting account of a visit which he had by Leuchtsenring at Hanover, all trembling with fears of Jesuits, and wishing to persuade him that his life was in danger from them. Nicholai was now on the hunt, and during this crusade Philo laid hands on him, being introduced to his acquaintance by Leuchtsenring, who was, by this time, cured of his zeal for Protestantism, and had become a disciple of Illuminatism. Philo had gained his good opinion by the violent attack which he had published on the Jesuits and Rosycrucians by the orders of Spartacus.--He had not far to go in gaining over Nicholai, who was at this time making a tour through the Lodges. The sparks of Illumination which he perceived in many of them pleased him exceedingly, and he very cheerfully received the precious secret from Philo.

 

This acquisition to the Order was made in January 1782. Spartacus was delighted with it, considered Nicholai as a most excellent champion, and gave him the name of Lucian, the great scoffer at all religion, as aptly expressing his character.

 

Nicholai, on his return to Berlin, published many volumes of his discoveries. One would imagine that not a Jesuit had escaped him. He mentions many strange schismatics, both in religion and in Masonry--but he never once mentions an Illuminatus.--When they were first checked, and before the discovery of the secret correspondence, he defended them, and strongly reprobated the proceedings of the Elector of Bavaria, calling it vile persecution--Nay, after the discovery of the letters found in Zwack's house, he persisted in his defence, vindicated the possession of the abominable receipts, and highly extolled the character of Weishaupt.--But when the discovery of papers in the house of Batz informed the public that he himself had long been an Illuminatus, he was sadly put to

[p. 162]

it to reconcile his defence with any  to religion. [**]--Weishaupt saved him from disgrace, as he thought, by his publication of the system of Illuminatism--Nicholai then boldly said that he knew no more of the Order than was contained in that book, that is, only the two first degrees.

 

But before this, Nicholai had made to himself a most formidable enemy. The history of this contest is curious in itself, and gives us a very instructive picture of the machinations of that conjuration des philosophes, or gang of scribblers who were leagued against the peace of the world. The reader will therefore find it to our purpose. On the authority of a lady in Courland, a Countess von der Recke, Nicholai had accused Dr. Stark of Darmstadt (who made such a figure in Free Masonry) of Jesuitism, and of having even submitted to the tonsure. Stark was a most restless spirit--had gone through every mystery in Germany, Illuminatism excepted, and had ferreted out many of Nicholai's hidden transactions. He was also an unwearied book-maker, and dealt out these discoveries by degrees, keeping the eye of the public continually upon Nicholai. He had suspected his Illumination for some time past, and when the secret came out, by Spartacus's letter, where he boasts of his acquisition, calling Nicholai a most sturdy combatant, and saying that he was contentissimus, Stark left no stone unturned, till he discovered that Nicholai had been initiated in all the horrid and most profligate mysteries of Illuminatism, and that Spartacus had at the very first entrusted him with his most darling secrets, and advised with him on many occasions. [*+]

[p. 163]

This complete blasting of his moral character could not be patiently borne, and Nicholai was in his turn the bitter enemy of Stark, and, in the paroxysms of his anger, published every idle tale, although he was often obliged to contradict them in the next Review. In the course of this attack and defence, Dr. Stark discovered the revival of the Illuminati, or at least a society which carried on the same great work in a somewhat different way.

 

Dr. Stark had written a defence against one of Nicholai's accusations, and wished to have it printed at Leipzig. He therefore sent the manuscript to a friend, who resided there. This friend immediately proposed it to a most improper person, Mr. Pott, who had written an anonymous commentary on the King of Prussia's edict for the uniformity of religious worship in his dominions. This is one of the most shameless attacks on the established faith of the nation, and the authority and conduct of the Prince, that can be imagined. Stark's friend was ignorant of this, and spoke to Pott, as the partner of the great publisher Walther. They, without hesitation, undertook the publishing; but when six weeks had passed over, Stark's friend found that it was not begun. Some exceptionable passages, which treated with disrespect the religion of Reason, were given as the cause of delay; and he was told that the author had been written to about them, but had not yet returned an answer. This was afterwards found to be false. Then a passage in the preface was objected to, as treating roughly a lady in Courland, which Walther could

[p. 164]

not print, because he had connections with that court. The author must be entreated to change his expressions. After another delay, paper was wanting. The MS. was withdrawn. Walther now said that he would print it immediately, and again got it into his hands, promising to send the sheets as they came from the press. These not appearing for a long time, the agent made enquiry, and found that it was sent to Michaelis at Halle, to be printed there. The agent immediately went thither, and found that it was printing with great alterations, another title, and a guide or key, in which the work was perverted and turned into ridicule by a Dr. Bahrdt, who resided in that neighbourhood. An action of recovery and damages was immediately commenced at Leipzig, and after much contest, an interdict was put on Michaelis's edition, and a proper edition was ordered immediately from Walther, with security that it should appear before Bahrdt's key. Yet when it was produced at the next fair, the booksellers had been already supplied with the spurious edition; and as this was accompanied by the key, it was much more saleable ware, and completely supplanted the other.

 

This is surely a strong instance of the machinations by which the Illuminati have attempted to destroy the Liberty of the Press, and the power they have to discourage or suppress any thing that is not agreeable to the taste of the literary junto. It was in the course of this transaction that Dr. Stark's agent found people talking in the coffee-houses of Leipzig and Halle of the advantages of public libraries, and of libraries by subscription, in every town, where persons could, at a small expence, see what was passing in the learned world. As he could not but acquiesce in these points, they who held this language began to talk of a general Association, which should act in concert over all Germany, and make a full communication of its numerous literary productions, by forming societies for reading and instruction, which should be regularly supplied with every publication. Flying sheets and pamphlets were afterwards put into his hands, stating the great use of such an Association, and the effect which it would speedily produce by enlightening the nation. By and by he learned that such an Association did really exist, and that it was called the GERMAN

[p. 165]

[paragraph continues] UNION, for ROOTING OUT SUPERSTITION AND PREJUDICES, AND ADVANCING TRUE CHRISTIANITY. On enquiry, however, he found that this was to be a Secret Society, because it had to combat prejudices which were supported by the great of this world, and because its aim was to promote that general information which priests and despots dreaded above all things. This Association was accessible only through the reading societies, and oaths of secrecy and fidelity were required. In short, it appeared to be the old song of the Illuminati.

 

This discovery was immediately announced to the public, in an anonymous publication in defence of Dr. Stark. It is supposed to be his own performance. It discloses a scene of complicated villany and folly, in which the Lady in Courland makes a very strange figure. She appears to be a wild fanatic, deeply engaged in magic and ghost-raising, and leagued with Nicholai, Gedicke, and Biester, against Dr. Stark. He is very completely cleared of the facts alledged against him; and his three male opponents appear void of all principle and enemies of all religion. Stark however would, in Britain, be a very singular character, considered as a clergyman. The frivolous secrets of Masonry have either engrossed his whole mind, or he has laboured in them as a lucrative trade, by which he took advantage of the folly of others. The contest between Stark and the Triumvirate at Berlin engaged the public attention much more than we should imagine that a thing of so private a nature would do. But the characters were very notorious; and it turned the attention of the public to those clandestine attacks which were made in every quarter on the civil and religious establishments. It was obvious to every person, that these reading societies had all on a sudden become very numerous; and the characters of those who patronised them only increased the suspicions which were now raised.

 

The first work that speaks expressly of the German Union, is a very sensible performance "On the Right of Princes to direct the Religion of their subjects." The next is a curious work, a sort of narrative Dialogue on the Characters of Nicholai, Gedicke, and Biester. It is chiefly occupied with the contest with Dr. Stark, but in the 5th part, it treats particularly of the German Union.

[p. 166]

About the same time appeared some farther account, in a book called Archives of Fanaticism and Illuminatism. But all these accounts are very slight and unsatisfactory. The fullest account is to be had in a work published at Leipzig by Goschen the bookseller. It is entitled "More Notes than Text, or the German Union of XXII, a new Secret Society for the Good of Mankind," Leipzig, 1789. The publisher says, that it was sent him by an unknown hand, and that he published it with all speed, on account of the many mischiefs which this Society (of which he had before heard several reports) might do to the world, and to the trade, if allowed to go on working in secret. From this work, therefore, we may form a notion of this redoubtable Society, and judge how far it is practicable to prevent such secret machinations against the peace and happiness of mankind.

 

There is another work, "Further Information concerning the German Union (Nahere Beleuchtung der Deutsche Union) also showing how, for a moderate price, one may become a Scotch Free Mason." Frankfort and Leipzig, 1789. The author says that he had all the papers in his hands; whereas the author of More Notes than Text acknowledges the want of some. But very little additional light is thrown on the subject by this work, and the first is still the most instructive, and will chiefly be followed in the account which is now to be laid before the reader.

 

The book More Notes than Text contains plans and letters, which the Twenty-two United Brethren have allowed to be given out, and of which the greatest part were printed, but were entrusted only to assured members.

 

No. I. is the first plan, printed on a single quarto page, and is addressed, To all the Friends of Reason, of Truth, and of Virtue. It is pretty well written, and states among other things, that "because a great number of persons are labouring, with united effort, to bring Reason under the yoke, and to prevent all instruction, it is therefore necessary that there be a combination which shall work in opposition to them, so that mankind may not sink anew into irrecoverable barbarism, when Reason and Virtue shall have been completely subdued, overpowered by the restraints

[p. 167]

which are put on our opinions."------"For this noble purpose a company of twenty-two persons, public instructors, and men in private stations, have united themselves, according to a plan which they have had under consideration for more than a year and a half, and which, in their opinion, contains a method that is fair, and irresistable by any human power, for promoting the enlightening and forming of mankind, and that will gradually remove all the obstacles which superstition supported by force has hitherto put in the way."

 

This address is intended for an enlisting advertisement, and, after a few insignificant remarks on the Association, a rix-dahler is required along with the subscription of acquiescence in the plan, as a compensation for the expences attending this mode of intimation and consent.

 

Whoever pays the rix-dahler, and declares his wish to join the Association, receives in a few days No. II. which is a form of the Oath of secrecy, also printed on a single 4to page. Having subscribed this, and given a full designation of himself, he returns it agreeably to a certain address; and soon after, he gets No. III printed on a 4to sheet. This number contains what is called the Second Plan, to which all the subsequent plans and circular letters refer. A copy therefore of this will give us a pretty full and just notion of the Order, and its mode of operation. It is entitled,

The Plan of the Twenty-Two,

And begins with this declaration. "We have united, in order to accomplish the aim of the exalted Founder of Christianity, viz. the enlightening of mankind, and the dethronement of superstition and fanaticism, by means of a secret fraternization of all who love the work of God.

 

"Our first exertion, which has already been very extensive, consists in this, that, by means of confidential persons we allow ourselves to be announced every where as a Society united for the above-mentioned purpose; and we invite and admit into brotherhood with ourselves every person who has a sense of the importance of this matter, and wishes to apply to us and see our plans.

[p. 168]

"We labour first of all to draw into our Association all good and learned writers. This we imagine will he the easier obtained, as they must derive an evident advantage from it. Next to such men, we seek to gain the masters and secretaries of the Post-offices, in order to facilitate our correspondence.

 

"Besides these, we receive persons of every condition and station, excepting princes and their ministers. Their favorites, however, may be admitted, and may be useful by their influence in behalf of Truth and Virtue.

 

"When any person writes to us, we send him an oath, by which he must abjure all treachery or discovery of the Association, till circumstances shall make it proper for us to come forward and show ourselves to the world. When he subscribes the oath, he receives the plan, and if he finds this to be what satisfies his mind as a thing good and honorable, he becomes our friend only in so far as he endeavours to gain over his friends and acquaintances. Thus we learn who are really our zealous friends, and our numbers increase in a double proportion.

 

"This procedure is to continue till Providence shall so far bless our endeavours, that we acquire an active Brother and coadjutor in every place of note, where there is any literary profession; and for this purpose we have a secretary and proper office in the centre of the Association, where every thing is expedited, and all reports received. When this happy epoch arrives, we begin our second operation," That is to say,

 

"We intimate to all the Brotherhood in every quarter, on a certain day, that THE GERMAN UNION has now acquired a consistence, and we now divide the fraternised part of the nation into ten or twelve Provinces or Dioceses, each directed by its Diocesan at his office: and these are so arranged in due subordination, that all business comes into the UNION-HOUSE as into the centre of the whole.

 

"Agreeably to this manner of proceeding there are two classes of the Brotherhood, the Ordinary, and the Managing Brethren. The latter alone know the aim of the Association,

[p. 169]

and all the means for attaining it; and they alone constitute the UNION, the name, and the connection of which is not intended to be at all conspicuous in the world.

 

"To this end the business takes a new external form. The Brethren, to wit, speak not of the Union in the places where they reside, nor of a Society, nor of enlightening the people; but they assemble, and act together in every quarter, merely as a LITERARY SOCIETY, bring into it all the lovers of reading and of useful knowledge; and such in fact are the Ordinary Brethren, who only know that an Association exists in their place of residence, for the encouragement of literary men, but by no means that it has any connection with any other similar Society, and that they all constitute one whole. But these Societies will naturally point out to the intelligent Brethren such persons as are proper to be selected for carrying forward the great work. For persons of a serious turn of mind are not mere loungers in such company, but show in their conversation the interest they take in real instruction. And the cast of their reading, which must not be checked in the beginning in the smallest degree, although it may be gradually directed to proper subjects of information, will point out in the most unequivocal manner their peculiar ways of thinking on the important subjects connected with our great object. Here, therefore, the active Brethren will observe in secret, and will select those whom they think valuable acquisitions to the sacred Union. They will invite such persons to unite with themselves in their endeavours to enlighten the rest of mankind, by calling their attention to profitable subjects of reading, and to proper books: Reading Societies, therefore, are to be formed in every quarter, and to be furnished with proper books. In this provision attention must be paid to two things. The taste of the public must be complied with, that the Society may have any effect at all in bringing men together who are born for somewhat more than just to look about them. But the general taste may, and must also be carefully and skilfully directed to subjects that will enlarge the comprehension, will fortify the heart, and, by habituating the mind to novelty, and to successful discovery, both in physics and in morals, will hinder the timid from being startled at doctrines and maxims which are singular, or perhaps opposite

[p. 170]

to those which are current in ordinary society. Commonly a man speaks as if he thought he was uttering his own sentiments, while he is only echoing the general sound. Our minds are dressed in a prevailing fashion as much as our bodies, and with stuff as little congenial to sentiment, as a piece of woollen cloth is to the human skin. So careless and indolent are men, even in what they call serious conversation. Till reflection becomes a habit, what is really a thought startles, however simple, and, if really uncommon, it astonishes and confounds. Nothing, therefore, can so powerfully tend to the improvement of the human character, as well managed Reading Societies.

 

"When these have been established in different places, we must endeavour to accomplish the following intermediate plans: 1. To introduce a general literary Gazette or Review, which, by uniting all the learned Brethren, and combining with judgment and address all their talents, and steadily proceeding according to a distinct and precise plan, may in time supplant every other Gazette, a thing which its intrinsic merit and comprehensive plan will easily accomplish. 2. To select a secretary for our Society, who shall have it in charge to commission the books which they shall select in conformity to the great aim of the Association, and who shall undertake to commission all other books for the curious in his neighbourhood. If there be a bookseller in the place, who can be gained over and sworn into the Society, it will be proper to choose him for this office, since, as will be made more plain afterwards, the trade will gradually come into the plan, and fall into the hands of the Union.

 

"And now, every eye can perceive the progressive moral influence which the Union will acquire on the nation. Let us only conceive what superstition will lose, and what instruction must gain by this; when, 1. In every Reading Society the books are selected by our Fraternity. 2. When we have confidential persons in every quarter, who will make it their serious concern to spread such performances as promote the enlightening of mankind, and to introduce them even into every cottage. 3. When we have the loud voice of the public on our side, and since we are able, either to scout into the shade all the fanatical writings which appear

[p. 171]

in the reviews that are commonly read, or to warn the public against them; and, on the other hand, to bring into notice and recommend those performances alone which give light to the human mind. 4. When we by degrees bring the whole trade of bookselling into our hands (as the good writers will bring all their performances into the market through our means) we shall bring it about, that at last the writers who labour in the cause of superstition and, restraint, will have neither a publisher nor readers. 5. When, lastly, by the spreading of our Fraternity, all good hearts and sensible men will adhere to us, and by our means will be put in a condition that enables them to work in silence upon all courts, families, and individuals in every quarter, and acquire an influence in the appointment of court-officers, stewards, secretaries, parish-priests, public teachers, and private tutors.

 

"Remark, That we shall speedily get the trade into our hands (which was formerly the aim of the association called the Gelehrtenbuchhandlung) is conceivable by this, that every writer who unites with us immediately acquires a triple number of readers, and finds friends in every place who promote the sale of his performance; so that his gain is increased manifold, and consequently all will quit the booksellers, and accede to us by degrees. Had the above-named association been constructed in this manner, it would, long ere now, have been the only shop in Germany."

 

The book called Fuller Information, &c. gives a more particular account of the advantages held forth to the literary manufacturers of Germany by this Union for God's work. The class of literary Brothers, or writers by trade, was divided into Mesopolites, Aldermen, Men, and Cadets.

 

The MESOPOLITES, or Metropolitans, are to be attached to the archive-office, and to be taken care of in the Union-House, when in straits through age or misfortune. They will be occupied in the department of the sciences or arts, which this Association professes principally to cherish. They are also Brethren of the third degree of Scotch Free Masonry, a qualification to be explained afterwards. The Union-House is a building which the ostensible Founder of the Union professed to have acquired, or speedily to acquire

[p. 172]

at ------, through the favor and protection of a German Prince, who is not named.

 

ALDERMEN are persons who hold public offices, and are engaged to exercise their genius and talents in the sciences. These also are Brothers of the third rank of Scotch Free Masonry, and out of their number are the Diocesans and the Directors of the Reading Societies selected.

 

The members who are designed simply MEN, are Brothers of the second rank of Masonry, and have also a definite scientific occupation assigned them.

 

The CADETS are writers who have not yet merited any particular honors, but have exhibited sufficient dispositions and talents for different kinds of literary manufacture.

 

Every member is bound to bring the productions of his genius to market through the Union. An Alderman receives for an original work 80 per cent. of the returns, and 70 for a translation. The member of the next class receives 60, and the Cadet 50. As to the expence of printing, the Alderman pays nothing, even though the work should lie on hand unsold; but the Man and the Cadet must pay one half. Three months after publication at the fairs an account is brought in, and after this, yearly, when and in what manner the author shall desire.

 

In every diocese will be established at least one Reading Society, of which near 800 are proposed. To each of these will a copy of an Alderman's work be sent. The same favor will be shown to a dissertation by a Man, or by a Cadet, provided that the manuscript is documented by an Alderman, or formally approved by him upon serious perusal. This imprimatur, which must be considered as a powerful recommendation of the work, is to be published in the General Review or Gazette. This is to be a vehicle of political as well as of literary news; and it is hoped that, by its intrinsic worth, and the recommendation of the members, it will soon supplant all others. (With respect to affairs of the Union, a sort of cypher was to be employed in it. Each Diocesan was there designed by a letter, of a size that marked his rank, and each member by a number. It

[p. 173]

was to appear weekly, at the very small price of five-and-twenty shillings.)--But let us return to the plan.

 

When every thing has been established in the manner set forth above, the Union will assume the following republican form (the reader always recollecting that this is not to appear to the world, and to be known only to the managing Brethren.)

 

Here, however, there is a great blank. The above-named sketch of this Constitution did not come to the hands of the person who furnished the bookseller with the rest of the information. But we have other documents which give sufficient information for our purpose. In the mean time, let us just take the papers as they stand.

 

No. IV. Contains a list of the German Union, which the sender received in manuscript. Here we find many names which we should not have expected, and miss many that were much more likely to have been partners in this patriotic scheme. There are several hundred names, but very few designations; so that it is difficult to point out the individuals to the public. Some however are designed, and the writer observes that names are found, which, when applied to some individuals whom he knows, accord surprisingly with the anecdotes that are to be seen in the private correspondence of the Illuminati, and in the romance called Materials for the History of Socratism (Illuminatism. [**]) It is but a disagreeable remark, that the list of the Union contains the names of many public teachers, both from the pulpit, and from the academic chair in all its degrees; and among these are several whose cyphers show that they have been active hands. Some of these have in their writings given evident proofs of their misconception of the simple

[p. 174]

truths, whether dogmatical or historical, of revealed religion, or of their inclination to twist and manufacture them so as to chime in with the religion and morality of the Sages of France. But it is more distressing to meet with unequivocal names of some who profess in their writings to consider these subjects as an honest man should consider them, that is, according to the plain and common sense of the words; whereas we have demonstrative proofs that the German Union had the diametrically opposite purpose in view. The only female in the list is the Grafin von der Recke, the lady who gave Dr. Stark of Darmstadt so much trouble about his Tonsure. This Lady, as we have already seen, could not occupy herself with the frivolities of dress, flirtation, or domestic cares. "Femina fronte patet, vir pectore." She was not pleased however at finding her name in such a  list, and gave oath, along with Biester at the centre, that she was not of the Association. I see that the public was not satisfied with this denial. The Lady has published some more scandal against Stark since that time, and takes no notice of it; and there have appeared many accounts of very serious literary connections between these two persons and the man who was afterwards discovered to be the chief agent of the Union.

 

No. V. is an important document. It is a letter addressed to the sworn members of the Union, reminding the beloved fellow-workers that "the bygone management of the business has been expensive, and that the XXII. do not mean to make any particular charge for their own compensation. But that it was necessary that all and each of the members should know precisely the object of the association, and the way which mature consideration had pointed out as the most effectual method of attaining this object. Then, and not till then, could the worthy members act by one plan, and consequently with united force. To accomplish this purpose, one of their number had composed a Treatise on Instruction, and the means of promoting it." [**] This work has been revised by the whole number, and may be considered as the result of their deepest reflection. They

[p. 175]

say, that it would be a signal misfortune should this Association, this undertaking, so important for the happiness of mankind, be cramped in the very beginning of its brilliant progress. They therefore propose to print this work, this Holy Scripture of their faith and practice, by subscription. (They here give a short account of the work.) And they request the members to encourage the work by subscribing and by exerting more than their usual activity in procuring subscriptions, and in recommending the performance in the newspapers. Four persons are named as Diocesans, who are to receive the money, which they beg may be speedily advanced in order to purchase paper, that the work may be ready for the first fair (Easter 1788.)

 

No. VI. is a printed paper (as is No. V.) without date, farther recommending the Essay on Instruction. No. VII. is in manuscript, without date. It is addressed to "a worthy man," intimating that the like are sent to others, to whom will also speedily be forwarded an improved plan, with a request to cancel or destroy the former contained in No. III. It is added, that the Union now contains, among many others, more than two hundred of the most respectable persons in Germany, of every rank and condition, and that in the course of the year (1788) a general list will be sent, with a request that the receiver will point out such as he does not think worthy of perfect confidence. It concludes with another recommendation of the book on Instruction, on the returns from which first work of the German Union the support of the secretary's office is to depend.

Accordingly No. VIII. contains this plan, but it is not entitled The Improved Plan. Such a denomination would have called in doubt the infallibility of the XXII. It is therefore called the Progressive (Vorlaufig) plan, a title which leaves room for every subsequent change. It differs from the former only in some unimportant circumstances. Some expressions, which had given offence or raised suspicions, are softened or cancelled. Two copies of this, which we may call A and B, are given, differing also in some circumstances.

 

"The great aim of the German Union, is the good of mankind, which is to be attained only by means of mental Illumination (Auffklarung) and the dethroning of fanaticism

[p. 176]

and moral despotism." Neither paper has the expression which immediately followed in the former plan, "that this had been the aim of the exalted Founder of Christianity." The paper A refers, on the present subject, to a dissertation printed in 1787 without a name, On the Freedom of the Press, and its Limitation. This is one of the most licentious pieces that has been published on the subject, not only enforcing the most unqualified liberty of publishing every thing a man pleases, but exemplifying it in the most scandalous manner; libelling characters of every sort, and persons of every condition, and this frequently in the most abusive language, and expressions so coarse, as shewed the author to be either habituated to the coarsest company, or determined to try boldly once for all, what the public eye can bear. The piece goes on: "The Union considers it as a chief part of its secret plan of operation, to include the trade of bookselling in their circle. By getting hold of this, they have it in their power to encrease the number of writings which promote instruction, and to lessen that of those which mar it, since the authors of the latter will by degrees lose both their publishers and their readers. That the present booksellers may do them no harm, they will by degrees draw in the greater part of them to unite with them."--The literary newspaper is here strongly insisted on, and, in addition to what was said in the former plan, it is said, "that they will include political news, as of mighty influence on the public mind, and as a subject that merits the closest attention of the moral instructor." For what Illumination is that mind susceptible of, that is so blinded by the prejudice created and nursed by the habits of civil subordination, that it worships stupidity or wickedness under a coronet, and neglects talents and virtue under the bearskin cap of the boor. We must therefore represent political transactions, and public occurrences, not as they affect that artificial and fanatical creature of imagination that we see every where around us, wheeled about in a chariot, but as it affects a MAN, rational, active, freeborn man. By thus stripping the transaction of all foreign circumstances, we see it as it affects, or ought to affect ourselves. Be assured that this new form of political intelligence will be highly interesting, and that the Gazette of the Union will soon supersede all others, and, of itself, will defray all our necessary expences."

[p. 177]

This is followed by some allusions to a secret correspondence that is quick, unsusceptible of all discovery or treachery, and attended with no expence, by which the business of the secret plan (different from either of those communicated to the sworn Brethren at large) is carried on, and which puts the members in a condition to learn every thing that goes on in the world, for or against their 'ccause, and also teaches them to know mankind, to gain an influence over all, and enables them effectually to promote their best subjects into all offices, &c. and finally, from which every member, whether statesmen, merchant, or writer, can draw his own advantages. Some passages, here and in another place, make me imagine that the Union hoped to get the command of the post-offices, by having their Brethren in the direction.

 

It is then said, that "it is supposed that the levy will be sufficiently numerous in the spring of the ensuing year. When this takes place, a general synod will be held, in which the plan of secret operations will be finally adjusted, and accommodated to local circumstances, so as to be digested into a law that will need no farther alteration. A proper person will set off from this synod, with full powers, to visit every quarter where there are sworn Brethren, and he will there establish a Lodge after the ancient simple ritual, and will communicate verbally the plan of secret operation, and certain instructions. These Lodges will then establish a managing fund or box. Each Lodge will also establish a Reading Society, under the management of a bookseller residing in the place, or of some person acquainted with the mechanical conduct of things of this nature. There must also be a collector and agent (Expediteur) so that in a moment the Union will have its offices or comptoirs in every quarter, through which it carries on the trade of bookselling, and guides the ebb and flow of its correspondence. And thus the whole machine will be set in motion, and its activity is all directed from the centre."

 

I remark, that here we have not that exclusion of Princes and ministers that was in the former plan; they are not even mentioned. The exclusion in express terms could not but surprise people, and appear somewhat suspicious.

[p. 178]

No. IX. is a printed circular letter to the sworn Brethren; and is subscribed "by their truly associated Brother Barthels, Oberamtsman (first bailiff) for the King of Prussia, at Halle on the Saal."

 

In this letter the Brethren are informed that "the XXII. were wont to meet sometimes at Halle, and sometimes at Berlin. But unavoidable circumstances oblige them not only to remain concealed for some time, but even to give up their relation to the Union, and withdraw themselves from any share in its proceedings. These circumstances are but temporary, and will be completely explained in due time. They trust, however, that this necessary step on their part will not abate the zeal and activity of men of noble minds, engaged in the cause by the conviction of their own hearts. They have therefore communicated to their worthy Brother BARTHELS all necessary informations, and have unanimously conferred on him the direction of the secretary's office, and have provided him with every document and mean of carrying on the correspondence. He has devoted himself to the honorable office, giving up all other employments. They observe that by this change in the manner of proceeding, the Association is freed from an objection made with justice to all other secret societies, namely, that the members subject themselves to blind and unqualified submission to unknown superiors."--"The Society is now in the hands of its own avowed members. Every thing will soon be arranged according to a constitution purely republican; a Diocesan will be chosen, and will direct in every province, and report to the centre every second month, and instructions and other informations will issue in like manner from the centre.

 

"If this plan shall be approved of by the Associated, H. Barthels will transmit to all the Dioceses general lists of the Union, and the PLAN OF SECRET OPERATION, the result of deep meditation of the XXII. and admirably calculated for carrying on with irresistible effect their noble and patriotic plan. To stop all cabal, and put an end to all slander and suspicion, H. Barthels thinks it proper that the Union shall step forward, and declare itself to the world, and openly name some of its most respectable members. The public must however be informed only with respect to the exterior of the Society, for which purpose he had written a sheet

[p. 179]

to be annexed as an appendix to the work, ON INSTRUCTION, declaring that to be the work of the Society, and a sufficient indication of its most honorable aim. He desires such members as choose to share the honor with him, to send him their names and proper designations, that they may appear in that appendix. And, lastly, he requests them to instruct him, and co-operate with him, according to the concerted rules of the Union, in promoting the cause of God and the happiness of mankind."

 

The Appendix now alluded to makes No. X. of the packet sent to the Bookseller Goschen of Leipzig, and is dated December 1788. It is also found in the book On Instruction, &c. printed at Leipzig in 1789, by Walther. Here, however, the Appendix is dated January 1789. This edition agrees in the main with that in the book from which I have made such copious extracts, but differs in some particulars that are not unworthy of remark.

 

In the packet it is written, "The undersigned, as Member and Agent of the German Union, in order to rectify several mistakes and injurious slanders and accusations, thinks it necessary that the public itself should judge of their object and conduct."--Towards the end it is said, "and all who have any doubts may apply to those named below, and are invited to write to them." No names however are subjoined.--In the appendix to the book it is only said, "the agent of the German Union, &c. and "persons who wish to be better informed may write to the agent, under the address, To the German Union--under cover to the shop of Walther, bookseller in Leipzig."--Here too there are no names, and it does not appear that any person has chosen to come from behind the curtain. [**]

 

There has already been so much said about Enlightening, that the reader must be almost tired of it. He is assured in this performance that the Illumination proposed by the

[p. 180]

[paragraph continues] Union is not that of the Wolfenbuttle Fragments, nor that of HORUS, nor that of Bahrdt. The Fragments and Horus are books which aim directly, and without any concealment, to destroy the authority of our Scriptures, either as historical narrations or as revelations of the intentions of providence and of the future prospects of man. The Theological writings of Bahrdt are gross perversions, both of the sense of the text, and of the moral instructions contained in it, and are perhaps the most exceptionable performances on the subject. They are stigmatised as absurd, and coarse, and indecent, even by the writers on the same side; yet the work recommended so often, as containing the elements of that Illumination which the world has to expect from the Union, not only coincides in its general principles with these performances, but is almost an abstract of some of them, particularly of his Popular Religion, his Paraphrase on the Sermon on the Mount, and his MORALITY OF RELIGION. We have also seen that the book on the Liberty of the Press is quoted and recommended as an elementary book. Nay, both the work on Instruction and that on the Liberty of the Press are now known to be Bahrdt's.

 

But these principles, exceptionable as they may be, are probably not the worst of the institution. We see that the outside alone of the Union is to be shewn to the public. Barthels felicitates the public that there is no subordination and blind obedience to unknown superiors; yet, in the ; same paragraph, he tells us that there is a secret plan of operations, that is known only to the Centre and the Confidential Brethren. The author of Fuller Information says that he has this plan, and would print it, were he not restrained by a promise. [**] He gives us enough however to show us that the higher mysteries of the Union are precisely the same with those of the Illuminati. Christianity is expressly said to have been a Mystical Association, and its founder the Grand Master of a Lodge. The Apostles, Peter, James, John, and Andrew, were the ELECT, and Brethren of the Third Degree, and initiated into all the mysteries. The remaining Apostles were only of the Second Degree; and the Seventy-Two were of the First Degree. Into this degree ordinary Christians may be admitted, and prepared

[p. 181]

for further advancement. The great mystery is, that J------ C------ was a NATURALIST, and taught the doctrine of a Supreme Mind, the Spectator, but not the Governor of the World, pretty nearly in the sense of the Stoics. The Initiated Brethren were to be instructed by reading proper books. Those particularly recommended are Basedow's Practical Knowledge, Eberhard's Apology for Socrates, Bahrdt's Apology for Reason, Steinbardt's System of Moral Education, Meiner's Ancient Mysteries, Bahrdt's Letters on the Bible, and Bahrdt's Completion of the Plan and Aim of J------ C------. These books are of the most Antichristian character, and some of them aim at shaking off all moral obligation whatever.

 

Along with these religious doctrines, are inculcated the most dangerous maxims of civil conduct. The despotism that is aimed at over the minds of men, and the machinations and intrigues for obtaining possession of places of trust and influence, are equally alarming, but being perfectly similar to those of the Illuminati, it is needless to mention them.

 

The chief intelligence that we get from this author is that the CENTRE of the Union is at a house in the neighbourhood of Halle. It is a sort of tavern, in a vineyard immediately without the city. This was bought by DOCTOR KARL FRIEDERICH BAHRDT, and fitted up for the amusement of the University Students. He calls it BAHRDT'S RUHE (Bahrdt's Repose.) The author thinks that this must have been the work of the Association, because Bahrdt had not a farthing, and was totally unable for such an undertaking. He may however have been the contriver of the institution. He has never affirmed or denied this in explicit terms, nor has he ever said who are the XXII coadjutors. Wucherer, an eminent bookseller at Vienna, seems to have been one of the most active hands, and in one year admitted near 200 members, among whom is his own shoemaker. He has published some of the most profligate pamphlets which have yet appeared in Germany.

 

The publication of the list of members alarmed the nation; persons were astonished to find themselves in every quarter in the midst of villains who were plotting against the peace

[p. 182]

and happiness of the country, and destroying every sentiment of religion, morality, or loyalty. Many persons published in the newspapers and literary journals affirmations and proofs of the false insertion of their names. Some acknowledged that curiosity had made them enter the Association, and even continue their correspondence with the Centre, in order to learn something of what the Fraternity had in view, but declared that they had never taken any part in its proceedings. But, at the same time, it is certain that many Reading Societies had been set up, during these transactions, in every quarter of Germany, and that the ostensible managers were in general of very suspicious characters, both as to morals and loyalty. The Union had actually set up a press of their own at Calbe, in the neighbourhood of Halberstadt. Every day there appeared stronger proofs of a combination of the Journalists, Reviewers, and even of the publishers and booksellers, to suppress the writings which appeared in defense of the civil and ecclesiastical constitutions of the States of Germany. The extensive literary manufacture of Germany is carried on in such a manner that it is impossible for any thing less than the joint operation of the whole federated powers to prevent this. The spirit of free thinking and innovating in religious matters had been remarkable prevalent in the dominions of the King of Prussia, having been much encouraged by the indifference of the late King. One of the vilest things published on this occasion was an abominable farce, called the Religion Edict. This was traced to Bahrdt's Ruhe, and the Doctor was arrested, and all his papers seized and ransacked. The civil Magistrate was glad of an opportunity of expiscating the German Union, which common fame had also traced hither. The correspondence was accordingly examined, and many discoveries were made, which there was no occasion to communicate to the public, and the prosecution of the business of the Union was by this means stopped. But the persons in high office at Berlin agree in saying that the Association of writers and other turbulent persons in Germany has been but very faintly hit by this blow, and is almost as active as ever.

 

The German Union appears a mean and precipitate Association. The Centre, the Archives, and the Secretary are contemptible. All the Archives that were found were the

[p. 183]

plans and lists of the members and a parcel of letters of correspondence. The correspondence and other business was managed by an old man in some very inferior office or judicatory, who lived at bed and board in Bahrdt's house for about six shillings a week, having a chest of papers and a writing desk in the corner of the common room of the house.

 

Bahrdt gives a long narration of his concern in the affair, but we can put little confidence in what he says; yet as we have no better authority, I shall give a very short abstract of it as follows.

 

He said, that he learned Cosmo-political Free Masonry in England, when he was there getting pupils for his academy--but neglected it on his return to Germany. Some time after his settlement he was roused by a visit from a stranger who passed for an Englishman; but whom he afterwards found to be a Dutch officer--(he gives a description which bears considerable resemblance to the Prince or General Salms who gave so much disturbance to the States-General)--He was still more excited by an anonymous letter giving him an account of a Society which was employed in the instruction of mankind, and a plan of their mode of operations, nearly the same with that of No. III.--He then set up a Lodge of Free Masonry on Cosmo-political principles, as a preparation for engaging in this great plan--he was stopped by the National Lodge, because he had no patent from it.--This obliged him to work in secret.--He met with a gentleman in a coffee-house, who entreated him to go on, and promised him great assistance--this he got from time to time, as he stood most in need of it, and he now found that he was working in concert with many powerful though unknown friends, each in his own circle. The plan of operation of the XXII was gradually unfolded to him, and he got solemn promises of being made acquainted with his colleagues--But he now found, that after he had so essentially served their noble cause, he was dropped by them in the hour of danger, and thus was made the sacrifice for the public good. The last packet which he received was a request from a Friend to the Union to print two performances sent him, with a promise of 100 dahlers for his trouble. These were the abominable farce called the Religion 

[p. 184]

[paragraph continues] Edict, and some Dissertations on that Royal Proclamation.

 

He then gives an account of his system of Free Masonry, not very different from Weishaupt's Masonic Christianity--and concludes with the following abstract of the advantages of the Union--Advancement of Science--A general interest and concern for Arts and Learning--Excitement of Talents--Check of Scribbling--Good Education--Liberty--Equality--Hospitality--Delivery of many from Misfortunes--Union of the Learned--and at last--perhaps--Amen.

 

What the meaning of this enigmatical conclusion is we can only guess--and our conjectures cannot be very favorable.

 

The narration, of which this is a very short index, is abundantly entertaining; but the opinion of the most intelligent is, that it is in a great measure fictitious, and that the contrivance of the Union is mostly his own. Although it could not be legally proved that he was the author of the farce, every person in court was convinced that he was, and indeed it is perfectly in Bahrdt's very singular manner.--This invalidates the whole of his story--and he afterwards acknowledges the farce (at least by implication) in several writings, and boasts of it.

 

For these reasons I have omitted the narration in detail. Some information, however, which I have received since, seems to confirm his account, while it diminishes its importance. I now find that the book called Fuller Information is the performance of a clergyman called Schutz, of the lowest class, and by no means of an eminent character--Another performance in the form of a dialogue between X, Y, and Z, giving nearly the same account, is by Pott, the dear friend of Bahrdt and of his Union, and author of the Commentary on the Edict. Schutz got his materials from one Roper, an expelled student of debauched morals, who subsisted by copying and vending filthy manuscripts. Bahrdt says, that he found him naked and starving, and, out of pity, took him into his house, and employed him as an amanuensis. Roper stole the papers at various times, taking them with him to Leipzig, whither he went on pretence

[p. 185]

of sickness. At last Schutz and he went to Berlin together, and gave the information on which Bahrdt was put in prison. In short they all appear to have been equally profligates and traitors to each other, and exhibit a dreadful, but I hope a useful picture of the influence of this Illumination which so wonderfully fascinates Germany.

 

This is all the direct information that I can pick up of the founder and the proceedings of the German Union. The project is coarse, and palpably mean, aiming at the dahlers of entry-money and of annual contribution, and at the publication and profitable sale of Dr. Bahrdt's books. This circumstance gives it strong features of its parentage.--Philo speaks of Bahrdt in his Final Declaration in terms of contempt and abhorrence. There is nothing ingenious, nothing new, nothing enticing, in the plans; and the immediate purpose of indulging the licentious taste of the public comes so frequently before the eye, that it bears all the marks of that grossness of mind, precipitancy, and impatient oversight that are to be found in all the voluminous writings of Dr. Bahrdt.--Many in Germany, however, ascribe the Union to Weishaupt, and say that it is the Illuminati working in another form. There is no denying that the principles, and even the manner of proceeding, are the same in every essential circumstance. Many paragraphs of the declamations circulated through Germany with the plans, are transcribed verbatim from Weishaupt's Corrected System of Illuminatism. Much of the work On Instruction, and the Means for promoting it, is very nearly a copy of the same work, blended with slovenly extracts from some of his own writings--There is the same series of delusions from the beginning, as in Illuminatism--Free Masonry and Christianity are compounded--first with marks of respect--then Christianity is twisted to a purpose foreign from it, but the same with that aimed at by Weishaupt--then it is thrown away altogether, and Natural Religion and Atheism substituted for it--For no person will have a moment's hesitation in saying, that this is the creed of the author of the books On Instruction and On the Liberty of the Press. Nor can he doubt that the political principles are equally anarchical with those of the Illuminati.--The endeavours also to get possession of public offices, of places of education--of the public mind, by the Reading Societies, and by

[p. 186]

publications--are so many transcripts from the Illuminati.--Add to this, that Dr. Bahrdt was an Illuminatus--and wrote the Better than Horus, at the command of Weishaupt.--Nay, it is well known that Weishaupt was twice or thrice at Bahrdt's Ruhe during those transactions, and that he zealously promoted the formation of Reading Societies in several places.--But I am rather of the opinion that Weishaupt made those visits in order to keep Dr. Bahrdt within some bounds of decency, and to hinder him from hurting the cause by his precipitancy, when spurred on by the want of money. Weishaupt could not work in such an unskilful manner. But he would be very glad of such help as this coarse tool could give him--and Bahrdt gave great help; for, when he was imprisoned and his papers seized, his Archives, as he called them, shewed that there were many Reading Societies which his project had drawn together. The Prussian States had above thirty, and the number of readers was astonishingly great--and it was found, that the pernicious books had really found their way into every hut. Bahrdt, by descending a story lower than Weishaupt, has greatly increased the number of his pupils.

 

But, although I cannot consider the German Union as a formal revival of the Order under another name, I must hold those United, and the members of those Reading Societies, as Illuminati and Minervals. I must even consider the Union as a part of Spartacus's work. The plans of Weishaupt were partly carried into effect in their different branches--they were pointed out, and the way to carry them on are distinctly described in the private correspondence of the Order--It required little genius to attempt them in imitation. Bahrdt made the attempt, and in part succeeded. Weishaupt's hopes were well founded--The leaven was not only distributed, but the management of the fermentation was now understood, and it went on apace.

 

It is to be remarked, that nothing was found among Bahrdt's papers to support the story he writes in his diary--no such correspondences--but enough for detecting many of these societies. Many others however were found unconnected with Bahrdt's Ruhe, not of better character, either as to Morality or Loyalty, and some of them considerable and expensive; and many proofs were found of

[p. 187]

a combination to force the public to a certain way of thinking, by the management of the Reviews and Journals. The extensive dealings of Nicholai of Berlin gave him great weight in the book-making trade, which in Germany surpasses all our conceptions. The catalogues of new writings in sheets, which are printed twice a-year for each of the fairs of Leipzig and Frankfort, would astonish a British reader by the number. The booksellers meet there, and in one glance see the whole republic of literature, and, like Roman senators, decide the sentiments of distant provinces. By thus seeing the whole together, their speculations are national, and they really have it in their power to give what turn they please to the literature and to the sentiments of Germany. Still however they must be induced by motives. The motive of a merchant is gain, and every object appears in his eye something by which money may be made. Therefore in a luxurious and voluptuous nation, licentious and free-thinking books will abound. The writers suggest, and the booksellers think how the thing will tickle. Yet it must not be inferred from the prevalence of such books, that such is the common sense of mankind, and that the writings are not the corrupters, but the corrupted, or that they are what they ought to be, because they please the public. We need only push the matter to an extremity, and its cause appears plain. Filthy prints will always create a greater crowd before the shop window than the finest performances of Woollet. Licentious books will be read with a fluttering eagerness, as long as they are not universally permitted; and pitiable will be the state of the nation when their number makes them familiar and no longer entertaining.

 

But although it must be confessed that great encouragement was given to the sceptical, infidel, and licentious writings in Germany, we see that it was still necessary to practice seduction. The religionist was made to expect some engaging exhibition of his faith. The Citizen must be told that his civil connections are respected, and will be improved; and all are told that good manners or virtue is to be supported. Man is supposed to be, in very essential circumstances, what he wishes to be, and feels he ought to be; and he is corrupted by means of falsehood and trick. The principles by which he is wheedled into wickedness in the first instance, are therefore such as are really addressed to

[p. 188]

the general sentiments of mankind: these therefore should be considered as more expressive of the public mind than those which he afterwards adopts, after this artificial education. Therefore Virtue, Patriotism, Loyalty, Veneration for true and undefiled Religion, are really acknowledged by those corrupters to be the prevailing sentiments; and they are good if this prevalence is to be the test of worth. The mind that is otherwise affected by them, and hypocritically uses them in order to get hold of the uninitiated, that he may in time be made to cherish the contrary sentiments, cannot be a good mind, notwithstanding any pretentious it may make to the love of mankind.

 

No man, not Weishaupt himself, has made stronger professions of benevolence, of regard for the happiness of mankind, and of every thing that is amiable, than Dr. Bahrdt. It may not be useless to enquire what effect such principles have had on his own mind, and those of his chief coadjutors. Deceit of every kind is dishonorable; and the deceit that is professedly employed in the proceedings of the Union is no exception. No pious fraud whatever must be used, and pure religion must be presented to the view without all disguise.

"The more fair Virtue's seen, the more she charms.
 "Safe, plain, and easy, are her artless ways.
 "With face erect, her eyes look strait before;
 "For dauntless is her march, her step secure.

"Not so pale Fraud--now here she turns, now there,
 "Still seeking darker shades, secure in none,
 "Looks often back, and wheeling round and round,
 "Sinks headlong in the danger she would shun."

The mean motive of the Protestant Sceptic is as inconsistent with our notions of honesty as with our notions of honor; and our suspicions are justly raised of the character of Dr. Bahrdt and his associates, even although we do not suppose that their aim is the total abolishing of religion. With propriety therefore may we make some enquiry about their lives and conduct. Fortunately this is easy in the present instance. A man that has turned every eye upon himself can hardly escape observation. But it is not so easy to get fair information. The peculiar situation of Dr. Bahrdt, and the cause between him and the public, are of all others the

[p. 189]

most productive of mistake, misrepresentation, obloquy, and injustice. But even here we are fortunate. Many remarkable parts of his life are established by the most respectable testimony, or by judicial evidences; and, to make all sure, he has written his own life. I shall insert nothing here that is not made out by the two last modes of proof, resting nothing on the first, however respectable the evidence may be. But I must observe, that his life was also written by his dear friend Pott, the partner of Walther the bookseller. The story of this publication is curious, and it is instructive.

 

Bahrdt was in prison, and in great poverty. He intended to write his own life, to be printed by Walther, under a fictitious name, and in this work he intended to indulge his spleen and his dislike of all those who had offended him, and in particular all priests, and rulers, and judges, who had given him so much trouble. He knew that the strange, and many of them scandalous anecdotes, with which he had so liberally interlarded many of his former publications, would set curiosity on tiptoe, and would procure a rapid sale as soon as the public should guess that it was his own performance, by the singular but significant name which the pretended author would assume. He had almost agreed with Walther for a thousand dahlers (about L. 200) when he was imprisoned for being the author of the farce so often named, and of the Commentary on the Religion Edict, written by Pott, and for the proceedings of the German Union. He was refused the use of pen and ink. He then applied to Pott, and found means to correspond with him, and to give him part of his life already written, and materials for the rest, consisting of stories, and anecdotes, and correspondence. Pott sent him several sheets, with which he was so pleased, that they concluded a bargain. Bahrdt says, that Pott was to have 400 copies, and that the rest was to go to the maintenance of Bahrdt and his family, consisting of his wife, daughter, a Christina and her children who lived with them, &c. Pott gives a different account, and the truth was different from both, but of little consequence to us. Bahrdt's papers had been seized, and searched for evidence of his transactions, but the strictest attention was paid to the precise points of the charge, and no paper was abstracted which did not relate to these.

[p. 190]

[paragraph continues] All others were kept in a sealed room. Pott procured the removal of the seals, and got possession of them. Bahrdt says, that his wife and daughter came to him in prison, almost starving, and told him that now that the room was opened, Pott had made an offer to write for their support, if he had the use of these papers--that this was the conclusion of the bargain, and that Pott took away all the papers. N. B. Pott was the associate of Walther, who had great confidence in him (Anecdotenbuch  meinen lieben Amtsbruder, p. 400.) and had conducted the business of Stark's book, as has been already mentioned. No man was better known to Bahrdt, for they had long acted together as chief hands in the Union. He would therefore write the life of its founder con amore, and it might be expected to be a rare and tickling performance. And indeed it was. The first part of it only was published at this time; and the narration reaches from the birth of the hero till his leaving Leipzig in 1768. The attention is kept fully awake, but the emotions which successfully occupy the mind of the reader, are nothing but strong degrees of aversion, disgust, and horror. The figure set up to view is a monster, clever indeed, and capable of great things; but lost to truth, to virtue, and even to the affectation of common decency--In short, a shameless profligate.--Poor Bahrdt was astonished--flared--but, having his wits about him, saw that this life would sell, and would also sell another.--Without loss of time, he said that he would hold Pott to his bargain--but he reckoned without his host. "No, no," said Pott, "You are not the man I took you for--your correspondence was put into my hands--I saw that you had deceived me, and it was my duty, as a man who loves truth above all things, to hinder you from deceiving the world. I have not written the book you desired me. I did not work for you, but for myself--therefore you get not a groschen." "Why, Sir," said Bahrdt "we both know that this wont do. You and I have already tried it. You received Stark's manuscript, to be printed by Walther--Walther and you sent it hither to Michaelis, that I might see it during the printing. I wrote an illustration and a key, which made the fellow very ridiculous, and they were printed together, with one title page. You know that we were cast in court. Walther was obliged to print the work as Stark first ordered, and we lost all our labour. So shall you now, for I will commence an action this

[p. 191]

instant, and let me see with what face you will defend yourself, within a few weeks of your last appearance in court." Pott said, "You may try this. My work is already sold, and dispersed over all Germany--and I have no objection to begin yours to-morrow--believe me, it will sell." Bahrdt pondered--and resolved to write one himself.

 

This is another specimen of the Union.

 

DR. CARL FRIEDERICH BAHRDT was born in 1741. His father was then a parish-minister, and afterwards Professor of Theology at Leipzig, where he died in 1775. The youth, when at College, enlisted in the Prussian service as a hussar, but was bought off by his father. He was M. A. in 1761. He became catechist in his father's church, was a popular preacher, and published sermons in 1765, and some controversial writings, which did him honor--But he then began to indulge in conviviality, and in anonymous , uncommonly bitter and offensive. No person was safe--Professors--Magistrates--Clergymen--had his chief notice--also, students--and even comrades and friends. (Bahrdt says, that these things might cut to the quick, but they were all just.) Unluckily his temperament was what the atomical philosophers (who can explain every thing by aethers and vibrations) call sanguine. He therefore (his own word) was a passionate admirer of the ladies. Coming home from supper he frequently met a young Miss in the way to his lodgings, neatly dressed in a rose-coloured silk jacket and train, and a sable bonnet, costly, and like a lady. One evening (after some old Rhenish, as he says) he saw the lady home. Some time after, the mistress of the house, Madam Godschusky, came into his room, and said that the poor maiden was pregnant. He could not help that--but it was very unfortunate, and would ruin him if known.--He therefore gave the old lady a bond for 200 dahlers, to be paid by instalments of twenty-five.------"The girl was sensible, and good, and as he had already paid for it, and her conversation was agreeable, he did not discontinue his acquaintance." A comrade one day told him, that one Bel, a magistrate, whom he had lampooned, knew the affair, and would bring it into court, unless he immediately retrieved the bond. This bond was the only evidence, but it was enough. Neither Bahrdt nor his friend could raise the

[p. 192]

money. But they fell on another contrivance. They got Madam Godschusky to meet them at another house, in order to receive the money. Bahrdt was in a closet, and his comrade wore a sword. The woman could not be prevailed on to produce the bond till Bahrdt should arrive, and the money be put into her hands, with a present to herself. The comrade tried to flutter her, and, drawing his sword, shewed her how men fenced--made passes at the wall--and then at her--but she was too firm--he then threw away his sword, and began to try to force the paper from her. She defended herself a good while, but at length he got the paper out of her pocket, tore it in pieces, opened the closet-door, and said, "There you b------- there is the honorable fellow whom you and your wh------- have bullied--but it is with me you have to do now, and you know that I can bring you to the gallows." There was a great squabble to be sure, says Bahrdt, but it ended, and I thought all was now over.--But Mr. Bel had got word of it, and brought it into court the very day that Bahrdt was to have made some very reverend appearance at church. In short, after many attempts of his poor father to save him, he was obliged to send in his gown and band, and to quit the place. It was some comfort, however, that Madam Godschusky and the young Miss did not fare much better. They were both imprisoned. Madam G. died some time after of some shocking disease. The court-records give a very different account of the whole, and particularly of the scuffle; but Bahrdt's story is enough.

 

Bahrdt says, that his father was severe--but acknowledges that his own temperament was hasty (why does not his father's temperament excuse something? Vibratiunculae will explain every thing or nothing.) "Therefore (again) I sometimes forgot myself.--One day I laid a loaded pistol on the table, and told him that he should meet with that if he went on so. But I was only seventeen."

 

Dr. Bahrdt was, of course, obliged to leave the place. His friends, and Semler in particular, an eminent theological writer, who had formed a very favorable opinion of his uncommon talents, were assiduous in their endeavours to get an establishment for him. But his high opinion of himself, his temper, impetuous, precipitant, and overbearing,

[p. 193]

and a bitter satirical habit which he had freely indulged in his outset of life, made their endeavours very ineffectual.

 

At last he got a professorship at Erlangen, then at Erfurth, and in 1771, at Giessen. But in all these places, he was no sooner settled than he got into disputes with his colleagues and with the established church, being a strenuous partizan of the innovations which were attempted to be made in the doctrines of Christianity. In his anonymous publications, he did not trust to rational discussion alone, but had recourse to ridicule and personal anecdotes, and indulged in the most cutting sarcasms and gross scurrility.--Being fond of convivial company, his income was insufficient for the craving demand, and as soon as he found that anecdote and slander always procured readers, he never ceased writing. He had wonderful readiness and activity, and spared neither friends nor foes in his anonymous performances. But this could not last, and his avowed theological writings were such as could not be suffered in a Professor of Divinity. The very students at Giessen were shocked with some of his liberties. After much wrangling in the church-judicatories he was just going to be dismissed, when he got an invitation to Marschlins in Switzerland to superintend an academy. He went thither about the year 1776, and formed the seminary after the model of Basedow's Philanthropine, or academy, at Dessau, of which I have already given some account. It had acquired some celebrity, and the plan was peculiarly suited to Bahrdt's taste, because it left him at liberty to introduce any system of religious or irreligious opinions that he pleased. He resolved to avail himself of this liberty, and though a clergyman and Doctor of Theology, he would outstrip even Basedow, who had no ecclesiastical orders to restrain him. But he wanted the moderation, the prudence, and the principle of Basedow. He had, by this time, formed his opinion of mankind, by meditating on the feelings of his own mind. His theory of human nature was simple--"The leading propensities, says he, of the human mind are three--Instinctive liberty (Freyheitstriebe)--instinctive activity (Triebe fur Thatigkeit)--and instinctive love (Liebes triebe.") I do not wish to misunderstand him, but I can give no other translation.--"If a man is obstructed in the exercise of any of these propensities, he suffers an injury--The business

[p. 194]

of a good education therefore is to teach us how they are to be enjoyed in the highest degree."

 

We need not be surprised although the Doctor should find it difficult to manage the Cyclopedia in his Philanthropine in such a manner as to give satisfaction to the neighbourhood, which was habituated to very different sentiments.--Accordingly he found his situation as uncomfortable as at Giessen. He says, in one of his latest performances, "that the Grisons were a strong instance of the immense importance of education. They knew nothing but their handicrafts, and their minds were as coarse as their persons." He quarrelled with them all, and was obliged to abscond after lying some time in arrest.

 

He came to Durkheim or Turkheim, where his father was or had been minister. His literary talents were well known.--After some little time he got an association formed for erecting and supporting a Philanthropine or house of education. A large fund was collected, and he was enabled to travel into Holland and England, to engage pupils, and was furnished with proper recommendations.--On his return the plan was carried into execution. The castle or residence of Count Leining Hartzburgh at Heidesheim, having gardens, park, and every handsome accommodation, had been fitted up for it, and it was consecrated by a solemn religious festival in 1778.

 

But his old misfortunes pursued him. He had indeed no colleagues to quarrel with, but his avowed publications became every day more obnoxious--and when any of his anonymous pieces had a great run, he could not stifle his vanity and conceal the author's name.--Of these pieces, some were even shocking to decency.--It was indifferent to him whether it was friend or foe that he abused; and some of them were so horribly injurious to the characters of the most respectable men in the state, that he was continually under the correction of the courts of justice. There was hardly a man of letters that had ever been in his company who did not suffer by it. For his constant practice was to father every new step that he took towards Atheism on some other person; and, whenever the reader sees, in the beginning of a book, any person celebrated by the author

[p. 195]

for sound sense, profound judgment, accurate reasoning, or praised for acts of friendship and kindness to himself, he may be assured that, before the close of the book, this man will convince Dr. Bahrdt in some private conversation, that some doctrine, cherished and venerated by all Christians, is a practice of knavish superstition. So lost was Dr. Bahrdt to all sense of shame. He said that he held his own opinions independent of all mankind, and was indifferent about their praise or their reproach.

Bahrdt's licentious, very licentious life, was the cause of most of these enormities. No income could suffice, and he wrote for bread. The abominable way in which the literary manufacture of Germany was conducted, made it impossible to hinder the rapid dispersion of his writings over all Germany; and the undelicate and coarse maw of the public was as ravenous as the sensuality of Dr. Bahrdt, who really battened in the Epicurean sty. The consequence of all this was that he was obliged to fly from Heidesheim, leaving his sureties in the Philanthropine to pay about 14,000 dahlers, besides debts without number to his friends. He was imprisoned at Dienheim, but was released I know not how, and settled at Halle. There he sunk to be a keeper of a tavern and billiard-table, and his house became the resort and the bane of the students in the University.--He was obliged therefore to leave the city. He had somehow got funds which enabled him to buy a little vineyard, prettily situated in the neighbourhood. This he fitted up with every accommodation that could invite the students, and called it Bahrdt's Ruhe. We have already seen the occupations of Dr. B. in this Buen Retiro--Can we call it otium cum dignitate? Alas no! He had not lived two years here, bustling and toiling for the German Union, sometimes without a bit of bread--when he was sent to prison at Halle, and then to Magdeburgh, where he was more than a year in jail. He was set at liberty, and returned to Bahrdt's Ruhe, not, alas, to live at ease, but to lie down on a sick bed, where, after more than a year's suffering encreasing pain, he died on the 23d of April 1793, the most wretched and loathsome victim of unbridled sensuality.

 

The account of his case is written by a friend, a Dr. Jung, who professes to defend his memory and his principles. The medical description melted my heart, and I am

[p. 196]

certain would make his bitterest enemy weep. Jung repeatedly says that the case was not venereal--calls it the vineyard disease--the quicksilver disease (he was dying of an unconquerable salivation) and yet, through the whole of his narration, relates symptoms and sufferings, which, as a medical man, he could not possibly mean to be taken in any other sense than as effects of pox. He meant to please the enemies of poor Bahrdt, knowing that such a man could have no friends, and being himself ignorant of what friendship or goodness is. The fate of this poor creature affected me more than any thing I have read of a great while. All his open enemies put together have not said so much ill of him as his trusted friend Pott, and another confident, whose name I cannot recollect, who published in his lifetime an anonymous book called Bahrdt with the iron brow--and this fellow Jung, under the absurd mask of friendship, exhibited the loathsome carcase for a florin, like a malefactor's at Surgeons Hall. Such were the fruits of the German Union, of that Illumination that was to refine the heart of man, and bring to maturity the seeds of native virtue, which are choaked in the hearts of other men by superstition and despotism. We see nothing but mutual treachery and base desertion.

 

I do not concern myself with the gradual perversion of Dr. Bahrdt's moral and religious opinions. But he affected to be the enlightener and reformer of mankind; and affirmed, that all the mischiefs in life originated from despotism supported by superstition. "In vain," says he, "do we complain of the inefficacy of religion. All positive religion is founded on injustice. No Prince has a right to prescribe or sanction any such system. Nor would he do it, were not the priests the firmest pillars of his tyranny, and superstition the strongest fetters for his subjects. He dares not show religion as she is, pure and undefiled--She would charm the eyes and the hearts of mankind, would immediately produce true morality, would open the eyes of freeborn man, would teach him what are his rights, and who are his oppressors, and Princes would vanish from the face of the earth."

 

Therefore, without troubling ourselves with the truth or falsehood of his religion of Nature, and assuming it as

[p. 197]

an indisputable point, that Dr. Bahrdt has seen it in this natural and so effective purity, it is surely a very pertinent question, "Whether has the sight produced on his mind an effect so far superior to the acknowledged faintness of the impression of Christianity on the bulk of mankind, that it will be prudent to adopt the plan of the German Union, and at once put an end to the divisions which so unfortunately alienate the minds of professing Christians from each other? The account here given of Dr. Bahrdt's life seems to decide the question.

 

But it will be said that I have only related so many instances of the quarrels of Priests and their slavish adherents with Dr. Bahrdt. Let us view him in his ordinary conduct, not as the Champion and Martyr of Illumination, but as an ordinary citizen, a husband, a father, a friend, a teacher of youth, a clergyman.

 

When Dr. Bahrdt was a parish-minister, and president of some inferior ecclesiastical district, he was empowered to take off the censures of the church from a young woman who had born a bastard child. By violence he again reduced her to the same condition, and escaped censure, by the poor girl's dying of a fever before her pregnancy was far advanced, or even legally documented. Also, on the night of the solemn farce of consecrating his Philanthropine, be debauched the maid-servant, who bore twins, and gave him up for the father. The thing, I presume, was not judiciously proved, otherwise he would have surely been disgraced; but it was afterwards made evident, by the letters which were found by Pott, when he undertook to write his life. A series of these letters had passed between him and one Graf a steward, who was employed by him to give the woman the small pittance by which she and the infants were maintained. Remonstrances were made when the money was not advanced; and there are particularly letters about the end of 1779, which show that Bahrdt had ceased giving any thing. On the ___ of February 1780, the infants (three years old) were taken away in the night, and were found exposed, the one at Ufstein, and the other at Worms, many miles distant from each other, and almost frozen to death. The first was found, by its moans, by a shoemaker

[p. 198]

in a field by the road-side, about six in the morning; the other was found by two girls between the hedges in a lane, set between two great stones, past all crying. The poor mother travelled up and down the country in quest of her infants, and hearing these accounts, found them both, and took one of them home; but not being able to maintain both, when Bahrdt's commissioner refused contributing any more, it remained with the good woman who had taken it in.

 

Bahrdt was married in 1772 while at Giessen; but after wasting the greatest part of his wife's little fortune left her by a former husband, he was provoked, by losing 1000 florins (about L. 110) in the hands of her brother, who would not pay it up. After this he used her very ill, and speaks very contemptuously of her in his own account of his life, calling her a dowdy, jealous, and every thing contemptible. In two infamous novels, he exhibits characters, in which she is represented in a most cruel manner; yet this woman (perhaps during the honey-moon) was enticed by him one day into the bath, in the pond of the garden of the Philanthropine at Heidesheim, and there, in the sight of all the pupils, did he (also undressed) toy with his naked wife in the water. When at Halle, he used the poor woman extremely ill, keeping a mistress in the house, and giving her the whole command of the family, while the wife and daughter were confined to a separate part of it. When in prison at Magdeburgh, the strumpet lived with him, and bore him two children. He brought them all to his house when he was set at liberty. Such barbarous usage made the poor woman at last leave him and live with her brother. The daughter died about a year before him, of an overdose of Laudanum given by her father, to procure sleep when ill of a fever. He ended his own wretched life in the same manner, unable, poor man, to bear his distress, without the smallest compunction or sorrow for his conduct: and the last thing he did was to send for a bookseller (Vipink of Halle, who had published some of his vile pieces) and recommend his strumpet and her children to his protection, without one thought of his injured wife.

 

I shall end my account of this profligate monster with a specimen of his way of using his friends.

[p. 199]

"Of all the acquisitions which I made in England, Mr. ------- (the name appears at full length) was the most important. This person was accomplished in the highest degree. With sound judgment, great genius, and correct taste, he was perfectly a man of the world. He was my friend, and the only person who warmly interested himself for my institution. To his warm and repeated recommendations I owe all the pupils I got in England, and many most respectable connections; for he was universally esteemed as a man of learning and of the most unblemished worth. He was my friend, my conductor, and I may say my preserver; for when I had not bread for two days, he took me to his house, and supplied all my wants. This gentleman was a clergyman, and had a small but genteel and selected congregation, a flock which required strong food. My friend preached to them pure natural religion, and was beloved by them. His sermons were excellent, and delivered with native energy and grace, because they came from the heart. I had once the honor of preaching for him. But what a difference--I found myself afraid--I feared to speak too boldly, because I did not know where I was, and thought myself speaking to my crouching countrymen. But the liberty of England opens every heart, and makes it accessible to morality. I can give a very remarkable instance.

 

"The women of the town in London do not, to be sure, meet with my unqualified approbation in all respects. But it is impossible not to be struck with the propriety and decency of their manners, so unlike the clownish impudence of our German wh-------. I could not distinguish them from modest women, otherwise than by their greater attention and eagerness to shew me civility. My friend used to laugh at my mistakes, and I could not believe him when he told me that the lady who had kindly shewed the way to me, a foreigner, was a votary of Venus. He maintained that English liberty naturally produced morality and kindness. I still doubted, and he said that he would convince me by my own experience. These girls are to be seen in crouds every evening in every quarter of the town. Although some of them may not have even a shift, they come out in the evening dressed like princesses, in hired clothes, which are entrusted to them without any fear of their making off with them. Their fine shape, their beautiful skin, and dark brown hair,

[p. 200]

their swelling bosom so prettily set off by their black silk dress, and above all, the gentle sweetness of their manners, makes an impression in the highest degree favorable to them. They civilly offer their arm, and say, "My dear, will you give me a glass of wine." If you give them no encouragement, they pass on, and give no farther trouble. I went with my friend to Covent Garden, and after admiring the innumerable beauties we saw in the piazzas, we gave our arm to three very agreeable girls, and immediately turned in to a temple of the Cytherean Goddess, which is to be found at every second door of the city, and were shown into a parlour elegantly carpeted and furnished, and lighted with wax, with every other accommodation at hand. My friend called for a pint of wine, and this was all the expence, for which we received so much civility. The conversation and other behaviour of the ladies was agreeable in the highest degree, and not a word passed that would have distinguished them from nuns, or that was not in the highest degree mannerly and elegant. We parted in the street--and such is the liberty of England, that my friend ran not the smallest risk of suffering either in his honor or usefulness.--Such is the effect of freedom."

 

We may be sure, the poor man was astonished when he saw his name before the public as one of the enlighteners of Christian Europe. He is really a man of worth, and of the most irreproachable character, and knew that whatever might be the protection of British liberty, such conduct would ruin him with his own hearers, and in the minds of all his respectable countrymen. He therefore sent a vindication of his character from his slanderous abuse to the publishers of the principal newspapers and literary journals in Germany. The vindication is complete, and B. is convicted of having related what he could not possibly have seen. It is worthy of remark, that the vindication did not appear in the Berlin Monatschrift, nor in any of the Journals which make favorable mention of the performances of the Enlighteners.

 

"Think not, indignant reader," says Arbuthnot, "that this man's life is useless to mortals." It shows in a strong light the falsity of all his declamations in favor of his so much praised natural religion and universal kindness and humanity.

[p. 201]

[paragraph continues] No man of the party writes with more persuasive energy, and, though his petulance and precipitant self-conceit lead him frequently astray, no man has occasionally put all the arguments of these philosophers in a clearer light; yet we see that all is false and hollow. He is a vile hypocrite, and the real aim of all his writings is to make money, by fostering the sensual propensities of human nature, although he sees and feels that the completion of the plan of the German Union would be an event more destructive and lamentable than any that can be pointed out in the annals of superstition. I will not say that all partisans of Illumination are hogs of the sty of Epicurus like this wretch. But the reader must acknowledge that, in the institution of Weishaupt, there is the same train of sensual indulgence laid along the whole, and that purity of heart and life is no part of the morality that is held forth as the perfection of human nature. The final abolition of Christianity is undoubtedly one of its objects--whether as an end of their efforts, or as a mean for the attainment of some end still more important. Purity of heart is perhaps the most distinctive feature of Christian morality. Of this Dr. Bahrdt seems to have had no conception; and his institution, as well as his writings, show him to have been a very coarse sensualist. But his taste, though coarse, accorded with what Weishaupt considered as a ruling propensity, by which he had the best chance of securing the fidelity of his subjects. Craving desires, beyond the bounds of our means, were the natural consequences of indulgence--and since the purity of Christian morality stood in his way, his first care was to clear the road by rooting it out altogether--What can follow but general dissoluteness of manners?

 

Nothing can more distinctly prove the crooked politics of the Reformers than this. It may be considered as the mainspring of their whole machine. Their pupils were to be led by means of their meaner desires, and the aim of their conductors was not to inform them, but merely to lead them; not to reform, but to rule the world.--They would reign, though in hell, rather than serve in heaven.--Dr. Bahrdt was a true Apostle of Illuminatism; and though his torch was made of the grossest materials, and "served only to discover sights of woe," the horrid glare darted

[p. 202]

into every corner, rousing hundreds of filthy vermin, and directing their flight to the rotten carrion where they could best deposit their poison and their eggs; in the breasts, to wit, of the sensual and profligate, there to fester and burst forth in a new and filthy progeny: and it is astonishing what numbers were thus roused into action. The scheme of Reading Societies had taken prodigiously, and became a very profitable part of the literary trade of Germany. The booksellers and writers soon perceived its importance, and acted in concert.

 

I might fill a volume with extracts from the criticisms which were published on the Religion Edict so often mentioned already. The Leipzig catalogue for one year contained 173. Although it concerned the Prussian States alone, these appeared in every corner of Germany; nay, also in Holland, in Flanders, in Hungary, in Switzerland, in Courland, and in Livonia. This shows it to have been the operation of an Associated Band, as was intimated to the King with so much petulance by Mirabeau. There was (past all doubt) such a combination among the innumerable scribblers who supplied the fairs of Leipzig and Frankfort. Mirabeau calls it a Conjuration des Philosophes, an expression very clear to himself, for the miriads of garreteers who have long fed the craving mouth of Paris ("always thirsting after some new thing") called themselves philosophers, and, like the gangs of St. Gile's, conversed with each other in a cant of their own, full of moral, of energie, of bienveillance, &c. &c. &c. unintelligible or misunderstood by other men, and used for the purpose of deceit. While Mirabeau lived too, they formed a Conjuration. The 14th of July 1790 the most solemn invocation of the Divine presence ever made on the face of this earth, put an end to the propriety of this appellation; for it became necessary (in the progress of political Illumination) to declare that oaths were nonsense, because the invoked was a creature of the imagination, and the grand federation, like Weishaupt and Bahrdt's Masonic Christianity, is declared, to those initiated into the higher mysteries, to be a lie. But if we have no longer a Conjuration des Philosophes, we have a gang of scribblers that has got possession of the public mind by their management of the literary journals of Germany, and have made licentious sentiments in politics, in morals,

[p. 203]

and in religion, as familiar as were formerly the articles of ordinary news. All the sceptical writings of England put together will not make half the number that have appeared in Protestant Germany during the last twelve or fifteen years. And, in the Criticisms on the Edict, it is hard to say whether infidelity or disloyalty fills the most pages.

 

To such a degree had the Illuminati carried this favorite and important point that they obtained the direction even of those whose office it was to prevent it. There is at Vienna, as at Berlin, an office for examining and licensing writings before they can have their course in the market. This office publishes annually an index of forbidden books. In this index are included the account of the last Operations of Spartacus and Philo in the Order of Illuminati, and a dissertation on The Final Overthrow of Free Masonry, a most excellent performance, showing the gradual corruption and final perversion of that society to a seminary of sedition. Also the Vienna Magazine of Literature and Arts, which contains many accounts of the interferences of the Illuminati in the disturbances of Europe. The Censor who occasioned this prohibition was an Illuminatus, named Retzer. He makes a most pitiful and Jesuitical defence, showing himself completely versant in all the chicane of the Illuminati, and devoted to their Infidel principles. (See Rel. Begebenh. 1795. p. 493.)

 

There are two performances which give us much information respecting the state of moral and political opinions in Germany about this time. One of them is called, Proofs of a hidden Combination to destroy the Freedom of Thought and Writing in Germany. These proofs are general, taken from many concurring circumstances in the condition of German literature. They are convincing to a thinking mind, but are too abstracted to be very impressive on ordinary readers. The other is the Appeal to my Country (which I mentioned in the former part of this work.) This is much more striking, and, in each branch of literature, gives a progressive account of the changes of sentiment, all supported by the evidence of the books themselves. The author puts it past contradiction, that in every species of literary composition into which it was possible, without palpable absurdity, to introduce licentious or seditious principles, it

[p. 204]

was done. Many romances, novels, journies through Germany and other countries, [**] are written on purpose to attach praise or reproach to certain sentiments, characters, and pieces of conduct. The Prince, the nobleman, is made despotic, oppressive, unfeeling, or ridiculous--the poor, and the men of talents, are unfortunate and neglected--and here and there a fictitious Graf or Baron is made a divinity, by philanthropy expressed in romantic charity and kindness, or ostentatious indifference for the little honors which are so precious in the eyes of a German.--In short, the system of Weishaupt and Knigge is carried into vigorous effect over all. In both these performances, and indeed in a vast number of other pieces, I see that the influence of Nicholai is much commented on, and considered as having had the chief hand in all those innovations.

 

Thus I think it clearly appears, that the suppression of the Illuminati in Bavaria and of the Union of Brandenburgh, were insufficient for removing the evils which they had introduced. The Elector of Bavaria was obliged to issue another proclamation in November 1790, warning his subjects of their repeated machinations, and particularly enjoining the Magistrates to observe carefully the assemblies in the Reading Societies, which were multiplying in his States. A similar proclamation was made and repeated by the Regency of Hanover, and it was on this occasion that Mauvillon impudently avowed the most anarchical opinions.--But Weishaupt and his agents were still busy and successful. The habit of plotting had formed itself into a regular system. Societies now acted every where in secret, in correspondence with similar societies in distant places. And thus a mode of co-operation was furnished to the discontented, the restless, and the unprincipled in all places, without even the trouble of formal initiations, and without any external appearances by which the existence and occupations of the members could be distinguished. The Hydra's teeth were already sown, and each grew up, independent of the rest, and soon sent out its own offsets.--In all places where such secret practices were going on, there did not

[p. 205]

fail to appear some individuals of more than common zeal and activity, who took the lead, each in his own circle. This gives a consistency and unity to the operations of the rest, and they, encouraged by this co-operation, could now attempt things which they would not have otherwise ventured on. It is not till this state of things obtains, that this influence becomes sensible to the public. Philo, in his public declaration, unwarily lets this appear. Speaking of the numerous little societies in which their principles were cultivated, he says, "we thus begin to be formidable." It may now alarm--but it is now too late. The same germ is now sprouting in another place.

 

I must not forget to take notice that about this time (1787 or 1788) there appeared an invitation from a Baron or Prince S------, Governor of the Dutch fortress H------ before the troubles in Holland to form a society for the Protection of Princes.--The plan is expressed in very enigmatical terms, but such as plainly show it to be merely an odd title, to catch the public eye; for the Association is of the same seditious kind with all those already spoken of, viz. professing to enlighten the minds of men, and making them imagine that all their hardships proceed from superstition, which subjects them to useless and crafty priests; and from their own indolence and want of patriotism, which make them submit to the mal-administration of ministers. The Sovereign is supposed to be innocent, but to be a cypher, and every magistrate, who is not chosen by the people actually under him, is held to be a despot, and is to be bound hand and foot.--Many circumstances concur to prove that the projector of this insidious plan is the Prince Salms, who so assiduously fomented all the disturbances in the Dutch and Austrian Netherlands. He had, before this time, taken into his service Zwack, the Cato of the Illuminati. The project had gone some length when it was discovered and suppressed by the States.

 

Zimmerman, who had been president of the Illuminati in Manheim, was also a most active person in propagating their doctrines in other countries. He was employed as a missionary, and erected some Lodges even in Rome--also at Neufchatel--and in Hungary. He was frequently seen in the latter place by a gentleman of my acquaintance, and

[p. 206]

preached up all the ostensible doctrines of Illuminatism in the most public manner, and made many proselytes. But when it was discovered that their real and fundamental doctrines were different from those which he professed in order to draw in proselytes, Zimmerman left the country in haste.--Some time after this he was arrested in Prussia for seditious harangues--but he escaped, and has not been heard of since.--When he was in Hungary he boasted of having erected above an hundred Lodges in different parts of Europe, some of which were in England.

 

That the Illuminati and other hidden Cosmo-political societies had some influence in bringing about the French Revolution, or at least in accelerating it, can hardly be doubted.--In reading the secret correspondence, I was always surprised at not finding any reports from France, and something like a hesitation about establishing a mission there; nor am I yet able thoroughly to account for it. But there is abundant evidence that they interfered, both in preparing for it in the same manner as in Germany, and in accelerating its progress. Some letters in the Brunswick Journal from one Campe, who was an inspector of the seminaries of education, a man of talents, and an Illuminatus, put it beyond doubt. He was residing in Paris during its first movements, and gives a minute account of them, lamenting their excesses, on account of their imprudence, and the risk of shocking the nation, and thus destroying the project, but justifying the motives, on the true principles of Cosmo-politism. The Vienna Zeitschrift, and the Magazine of Literature and Fine Arts for 1790, and other pamphlets of that date, say the same thing in a clearer manner. I shall lay together some passages from such as I have met with, which I think will shew beyond all possibility of doubt, that the Illuminati took an active part in the whole transaction, and may be said to have been its chief contrivers. I shall premise a few observations, which will give a clearer view of the matter.

Footnotes

^162:* He impudently pretended that the papers containing the system and doctrines of Illumination, came to him at Berlin, from an unknown hand. But no one believed him--it was inconsistent with what is said of him in the secret correspondence. He had said the same thing concerning the French translation of the Letters on the Constitution of the Prussian States. Fifty copies were found in his warehouse. He said that they had been sent from Strasburg, and that he had never sold one of them.--Supposing both these assertions to be true, it appears that Nicholai was considered as a very proper hand for dispersing such poison.

^162:+ Of this we have complete proof in the private correspondence. Philo, speaking in one of his letters of the gradual change which was to be produced in the minds of their pupils from Christianity to Deism, says, "Nicholai informs me, that even the pious Zollikofer has now been convinced that it would be proper to set up a deistical church in Berlin." It is in vain that Nicholai says that his knowledge [p. 163] of the Order was only of what Weishaupt had published; for Philo says that that corrected system had not been introduced into it when he quitted it in 1784. But Nicholai deserves no credit--he is one of the most scandalous examples of the operation of the principles of Weishaupt. He procured admission into the Lodges of Free Masons and Rosycrucians, merely to act the dishonorable part of a spy, and he betrayed their secrets as far as he could. In the appendix to the 7th volume of his journey, he declaims against the Templar Masons, Rosycrucians, and Jesuits, for their blind submission to unknown superiors, their superstitions, their priesthoods, and their base principles--and yet had been five years in a society in which all these were carried to the greatest height. He remains true to the Illuminati alone, because they had the same object in view with himself and his atheistical associates. His defence of Protestantism is all a cheat; and perhaps he may be considered as an enemy equally formidable with Weishaupt himself. This is the reason why he occupies so many of these pages.

^173:* This, by the by, is a very curious and entertaining work, and, had the whole affair been better known in this country, would have been a much better antidote against the baneful effects of that Association than any thing that I can give to the public, being written with much acuteness and knowledge of the human mind, and agreeably diversified with anecdote and ironical exhibition of the affected wisdom and philanthropy of the knavish Founder and his coadjutors. If the present imperfect and desultory account shall be found to interest the public, I doubt not but that a translation of this novel, and some other fanciful performances on the subjects will be read with entertainment and profit.

^174:*  AUFFKLARUNG and deren Beforderungs-Mittel. The only proper translation of this word would be, clearing up, or enlightening. Instruction seems the single word that comes nearest to the precise meaning of Auffklarung, but is not synonymous.

^179:* Walther is an eminent bookseller, and carries on the business of publishing to a great extent, both at Leipzig and other places. He was the publisher of the most virulent attacks on the King of Prussia's Edict on Religion, and was brought into much trouble about the Commentary by Pott which is mentioned above. He also publishes many of the sceptical and licentious writings which have so much disturbed the peace of Germany.

^180:* This I find to be false, and the book a common job.

^204:* A plan adopted within these few years in our own country, which, if prosecuted with the same industry with which it has been begun, will soon render our circulating Libraries so many Nurseries of Sedition and Impiety. (See Travels Into Germany by Este.)

     Proofs of a Conspiracy, by John Robison, [1798], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 207]

  

CHAP. IV.

  

The French Revolution.

DURING these dissensions and discontents, and this general fermentation of the public mind in Germany, political occurrences in France gave exercise and full scope for the operation of that spirit of revolt which had long growled in secret in the different comers of that great empire. The Cosmo-political and sceptical opinions and sentiments so much cultivated in all the Lodges of the Philalethes had by this time been openly professed by many of the sages of France, and artfully interwoven with their statistical oeconomics. The many contests between the King and the Parliament of Paris about the registration of his edicts, had given occasion to much discussion, and had made the public familiarly acquainted with topics altogether unsuitable to the absolute monarchy of France.

 

This acquaintance with the natural expectations of the subject, and the expediency of a candid attention on the part of Government to these expectations, and a view of Legislation and Government founded on a very liberal interpretation of all these things, was prodigiously promoted by the rash interference of France in the dispute between Great Britain and her colonies. In this attempt to ruin Britain, even the court of France was obliged to preach the doctrines of Liberty, and to take its chance that Frenchmen would consent to be the only slaves. But their officers and soldiers who returned from America, imported the American principles, and in every company found hearers who listened with delight and regret to their fascinating tale of American independence. During the war, the Minister, who had too confidently pledged himself for the destruction of Britain, was obliged to allow the Parisians to amuse themselves with theatrical entertainments, where English law was represented as oppression, and every fretful extravagance

[p. 208]

of the Americans was applauded as a noble struggle for native freedom.--All wished for a taste of that liberty and equality which they were allowed to applaud on the stage; but as soon as they came from the theatre into the street, they found themselves under all their former restraints. The sweet charm had found its way into their hearts, and all the luxuries of France became as dull as common life does to a fond girl when she lays down her novel.

 

In this irritable state of mind a spark was sufficient for kindling a flame. To import this dangerous delicacy of American growth, France had expended many millions, and was drowned in debts. The mad prodigality of the Royal Family and the Court had drained the treasury, and forestalled every livre of the revenue. The edicts for new taxes and forced loans were most unwelcome and oppressive.

 

The Avocats au parlement had nothing to do with state-affairs, being very little more than barristers in the highest court of justice; and the highest claim of the Presidents of this court was to be a sort of humble counsellors to the King in common matters. It was a very strange inconsistency in that ingenious nation to permit such people to touch on those state-subjects; for, in fact, the King of France was an absolute Monarch, and the subjects were slaves. This is the result of all their painful research, notwithstanding that glimmerings of natural justice and of freedom are to be met with in their records. There could not be found in their history so much as a tolerable account of the manner of calling the nation together, to learn from the people how their chains would best please their fancy. But all this was against nature, and it was necessary that it should come to an end, the first time that the Monarch confessed that he could not do every thing unless they put the tools into his hands. As things were approaching gradually but rapidly to this condition, the impertinent interference (for so a Frenchman, subject of the Grand Monarch, must think it) of the advocates of the Parliament of Paris was popular in the highest degree; and it must be confessed, that in general it was patriotic, however inconsistent with the constitution.

[p. 209]

[paragraph continues] They felt themselves pleading the cause of humanity and natural justice. This would embolden honest and worthy men to speak truth, however unwelcome to the court. In general, it must also be granted that they spoke with caution and with respect to the sovereign powers: and they had frequently the pleasure of being the means of mitigating the burdens of the people. The Parliament of Paris, by this conduct, came to be looked up to as a sort of mediator between the King and his subjects; and as the avocats saw this, they naturally rose in their own estimation far above the rank in which the constitution of their government had placed them. For it must always be kept in mind, that the robe was never considered as the dress of a Nobleman, although the cassock was. An advocate was merely not a roturier; and though we can hardly conceive a profession more truly honorable than the dispensing of distributive justice, nor any skill more congenial to a rational mind than that of the practical morality which we, in theory, consider as the light by which they are always conducted; and although even the artificial constitution of France had long been obliged to bow to the dictates of nature and humanity, and to confer nobility, and even title, on such of the professors of the municipal law as had, by their skill and their honorable character, risen to the first offices of their profession, yet the Noblesse de la Robe never could incorporate with the Noblesse du Sang, nor even with the Noblesse de l'Epee. The descendants of a Marquis de la Robe never could rise to certain dignities in the church and at court. The avocats de parlement felt this, and smarted under the exclusion from court-honors; and though they eagerly courted such nobility as they could attain, they seldom omitted any opportunity that occurred during their junior practice of exposing the arrogance of the Noblesse, and the dominion of the court. This increased their popularity, and in the present situation of things, being certain of support, they went beyond their former cautious bounds, and introduced in their pleadings, and particularly in their joint remonstrances against the registration of edicts, all the wiredrawn morality, and cosmo-political jurisprudence, which they had so often rehearsed in the Lodges, and which had of late been openly preached by the economists and philosophers.

[p. 210]

A signal was given to the nation for engaging "en masse" in political discussion. The Notables were called upon to come and advise the King; and the points were laid before them, in which his Majesty (infallible till now) acknowledged his ignorance or his doubts. But who were the Notables? Were they more knowing than the King, or less in need of instruction? The nation thought otherwise; nay, the court thought otherwise; for, in some of the royal proclamations on this occasion, men of letters were invited to assist with their counsels, and to give what information their reading and experience should suggest as to the best method of convoking the States General, and of conducting their deliberations. When a Minister thus solicits advice from all the world how to govern, he most assuredly declares his own incapacity, and tells the people that now they must govern themselves. This however was done, and the Minister, Neckar, the Philosopher and Philanthropist of Geneva, set the example, by sending in his opinion, to be laid on the council-table with the rest. On this signal, counsel poured in from every garret, and the press groaned with advice in every shape. Ponderous volumes were written for the Bishop or the Duke; a handsome 8vo for the Notable Officer of eighteen; pamphlets and single sheets for the loungers in the Palais Royal. The fermentation was astonishing, but it was no more than should have been expected from the most cultivated, the most ingenious, and the least bashful nation on earth. All wrote, and all read. Not contented with bringing forth all the fruits which the Illumination of these bright days of reason had raised in such abundance in the conservatories of the Philalethes, and which had been gathered from the writings of Voltaire, Diderot, Rousseau, Raynal, &c. the patriotic counsellors of the Notables had ransacked all the writings of former ages. They discovered THAT FRANCE HAD ALWAYS BEEN FREE! One would have thought that they had travelled with Sir John Mandeville in that country where even the speeches of former times had been frozen, and were now thawing apace under the beams of the sun of Reason. For many of these essays were as incongruous and mal-a-propos as the broken sentences recorded by Mr. Addison in the Spectator. A gentleman who was in Paris at this time, a person of great judgment, and well informed in every thing respecting the constitution and present condition of his

[p. 211]

country, assured me that this invitation, followed by the memorial of Mr. Neckar, operated like an electrical shock. In the course of four or five days, the appearance of Paris was completely changed. Every where one saw crowds staring at papers pasted on the walls--breaking into little parties--walking up and down the streets in eager conversation--adjourning to coffee-houses--and the conversation in all companies turned to politics alone; and in all these conversations, a new vocabulary, where every second word was Morality, Philanthropy, Toleration, Freedom, and Equalisation of property. Even at this  period persons were listened to without censure, or even surprise, who said that it was nonsense to think of reforming their government, and that it must be completely changed. In short, in the course of a month, a spirit of licentiousness and a rage for innovation had completely pervaded the minds of the Parisians. The most conspicuous proof of this was the unexpected fate of the Parliament. It met earlier than usual, and to give greater eclat to its patriotic efforts, and completely to secure the gratitude of the people, it issued an arret on the present state of the nation, containing a number of resolutions on the different leading points of national liberty. A few months ago these would have been joyfully received as the Magna Charta of Freedom, and really contained all that a wise people should desire; but because the Parliament had some time before given it as their opinion as the constitutional counsel of the Crown, that the States should be convoked on the principles of their last meeting in 1614, which preserved the distinctions of rank, all their past services were forgotten--all their hard struggle with the former administration, and their unconquerable courage and perseverance, which ended only with their downfall, all were forgotten; and those distinguished members whose zeal and sufferings ranked them with the most renowned heroes and martyrs of patriotism, were now regarded as the contemptible tools of Aristocracy. The Parliament now set, in a fiery troubled sky--to rise no more.

 

Of all the barristers in the Parliament of Paris, the most conspicuous for the display of the enchanting doctrines of Liberty and Equality was Mr. Duval, son of an Avocat in the same court, and ennobled about this time under the name of Despresmenil. He was member of a Lodge of the Amis 

[p. 212]

[paragraph continues] Reunis at Paris, called the Contract Social, and of the Lodge of Chevaliers Bienfaisants at Lyons. His reputation as a barrister had been prodigiously encreased about this time by his management of a cause, where the descendant of the unfortunate General Lally, after having obtained the restoration of the family honors, was striving to get back some of the estates. Mr. Lally Tollendahl had even trained himself to the profession, and pleaded his own cause with astonishing abilities. But Despresmenil had near connections with the family which was in possession of the estates, and opposed him with equal powers, and more address. He was on the side which was most agreeable to his favorite topics of declamation, and his pleadings attracted much notice both in Paris and in some of the provincial Parliaments. I mention these things with some interest, because this was the beginning of that marked rivalship between Lally Tollendahl and Despresmenil, which made such a figure in the journals of the National Assembly. It ended fatally for both. Lally Tollendahl was obliged to quit the Assembly, when he saw it determined on the destruction of the monarchy and of all civil order, and at last to emigrate from his country with the loss of all his property, and to subsist on the kindness of England. Despresmenil attained his meredian of popularity by his discovery of the secret plan of the Court to establish the Cour pleniere, and ever after this took the lead in all the strong measures of the Parliament of Paris, which was now overstepping all bounds of moderation or propriety, in hopes of preserving its influence after it had rendered itself impotent by an unguarded stroke. Despresmenil was the first martyr of that Liberty and Equality which it was now boldly preaching, having voluntarily surrendered himself a prisoner to the officer sent to demand him from the Parliament. He was also a martyr to any thing that remained of the very shadow of liberty after the Revolution, being guillotined by Robespierre.

 

I have already mentioned the intrigues of Count Mirabeau at the Court of Berlin, and his seditious preface and notes on the anonymous letters on the Rights of the Prussian States. He also, while at Berlin, published an Essai sur la Secte des Illumines, one of the strangest and most impudent performances that ever appeared. He there describes

[p. 213]

a sect existing in Germany, called the Illuminated, and says, that they are the most absurd and gross fanatics imaginable, waging war with every appearance of Reason, and maintaining the most ridiculous superstitions. He gives some account of these, and of their rituals, ceremonies, &c. as if he had seen them all. His sect is a confused mixture of Christian superstitions, Rosycrucian nonsense, and every thing that can raise contempt and hatred. But no such Society ever existed, and Mirabeau confided in his own powers of deception, in order to screen from observation those who were known to be Illuminati, and to hinder the rulers from attending to their real machinations, by means of this Ignis fatuus of his own brain. He knew perfectly that the Illuminati were of a stamp diametrically opposite; for he was illuminated by Mauvillon long before.--He gained his point in some measure, for Nicholai and others of the junto immediately adopted the whim, and called them Obscuranten, and joined with Mirabeau in placing on the list of Obscuranten several persons whom they wished to make ridiculous.

 

Mirabeau was not more discontented with the Court of Berlin for the small regard it had testified for his eminent talents, than he was with his own Court, or rather with the minister Calonne, who had sent him thither. Calonne had been greatly dissatisfied with his conduct at Berlin, where his self-conceit, and his private projects, had made him act in a way almost contrary to the purposes of his mission. Mirabeau was therefore in a rage at the minister, and published a pamphlet, in which his celebrated memorial on the state of the nation, and the means of relieving it, was treated with the utmost severity of reproach; and in this contest his mind was wrought up to that violent pitch of opposition which he ever after maintained. To be noticed, and to lead, were his sole objects--and he found that taking the side of the discontented was the best field for his eloquence and restless ambition.--Yet there was no man that was more devoted to the principles of a court than Count Mirabeau, provided he had a share in the administration; and he would have obtained it, if any thing moderate would have satisfied him--but he thought nothing worthy of him but a place of active trust, and a high department. For such offices all knew him to be totally unfit. He wanted knowledge

[p. 214]

of great things, and was learned only in the bustling detail of intrigue, and at any time would sacrifice every thing to have an opportunity of exercising his brilliant eloquence, and indulging his passion for satire and reproach.--The greatest obstacle to his advancement was the abject worthlessness of his character. What we usually call profligacy, viz. debauchery, gaming, impiety, and every kind of sensuality were not enough--he was destitute of decency in his vices--tricks which would disgrace a thief-catcher, were never boggled at in order to supply his expences--For instance--His father and mother had a process of separation--Mirabeau had just been liberated from prison for a gross misdemeanour, and was in want of money--He went to his father, sided with him in invectives against his mother, and, for 100 guineas, wrote his father's memorial for the court.--He then went to his mother, and by a similar conduct got the same sum from her--and both memorials were presented. Drinking was the only vice in which he did not indulge--his exhausted constitution did not permit it. His brother the Viscount, on the contrary, was apt to exceed in jollity. One day the Count said to him, "How can you, Brother, so expose yourself?" "What! says the Viscount, how insatiable you are--Nature has given you every vice, and having left me only this one, you grudge it me." When the elections were making for the States-General, he offered himself a candidate in his own order at Aix--But he was so abhorred by the Noblesse, that they not only rejected him, but even drove him from their meetings. This affront settled his measures, and he determined on their ruin. He went to the Commons, disclaimed his being a gentleman, set up a little shop in the market-place of Aix, and sold trifles--and now, fully resolved what line he should pursue, he courted the Commons, by joining in all their excesses against the Noblesse, and was at last returned a member of the Assembly.

 

From this account of Mirabeau we can easily foretell the use he would make of the Illumination which he had received in Germany. Its grand truths and just morality seem to have had the same effects on his mind as on that of Weishaupt or Bahrdt.

 

In the year 1786, Mirabeau, in conjunction with the

[p. 215]

[paragraph continues] Duke de Lauzun and the Abbe Perigord, afterwards Bishop of Autun (the man so puffed in the National Assemblies as the brightest pattern of humanity) reformed a Lodge of Philalethes in Paris, which met in the Jacobin College or Convent. It was one of the Amis Reunis, which had now rid itself of all the insignificant mysticism of the sect. This was now become troublesome, and took up the time which would be much better employed by the Chevaliers du Soleil, and other still more refined champions of reason and universal citizenship. Mirabeau had imparted to it some of that Illumination which had beamed upon him when he was in Berlin. In 1788 he and the Abbe were Wardens of the Lodge. They found that they had not acquired all the dexterity of management that he understood was practised by his Brethren in Germany, for keeping up their connection, and conducting their correspondence. A letter was therefore sent from this Lodge, signed by these two gentlemen, to the Brethren in Germany, requesting their assistance and instruction. In the course of this year, and during the sitting of the Nobles, A  WAS SENT from the German Illuminati to catch this glorious opportunity of carrying their plan into full execution with the greatest eclat.

 

Nothing can more convincingly demonstrate the early intentions of a party, and this a great party, in France to overturn the constitution completely, and plant a democracy or oligarchy on its ruins. The Illuminati had no other object. They accounted all Princes usurpers and tyrants, and all privileged orders as their abettors. They intended to establish a government of Morality, as they called it (Sittenregiment) where talents and character (to be estimated by their own scale, and by themselves) should alone lead to preferment. They meant to abolish the laws which protected property accumulated by long continued and successful industry, and to prevent for the future any such accumulation. They intended to establish universal Liberty and Equality, the imprescriptible Rights of Man (at least they pretended all this to those who were neither Magi nor Regentes.) And, as necessary preparations for all this, they intended to root out all religion and ordinary morality, and even to break the bonds of domestic life, by destroying the veneration for marriage-vows, and by taking the education of children out of the hands of the parents. This was 

[p. 216]

all that the Illuminati could teach, and THIS WAS PRECISELY WHAT FRANCE HAS DONE.

 

I cannot proceed in the narration without defiling the page with the detested name of Orleans, stained with every thing that can degrade or disgrace human nature. He only wanted Illumination, to shew him in a system all the opinions, dispositions, and principles which filled his own wicked heart. This contemptible being was illuminated by Mirabeau, and has shown himself the most zealous disciple of the Order. In his oath of allegiance he declares, "That the interests and the object of the Order shall be rated by him above all other relations, and that he will serve it with his honor, his fortune, and his blood."--He has kept his word, and has sacrificed them all--And he has been treated in the true spirit of the Order--used as a mere tool, cheated and ruined.--For I must now add, that the French borrowed from the Illuminati a maxim, unheard of in any other association of banditti, viz. that of cheating each other. As the managers had the sole possession of the higher mysteries, and led the rest by principles which they held to be false, and which they employed only for the purpose of securing the co-operation of the inferior Brethren, so Mirabeau, Sieyes, Pethion, and others, led the Duke of Orleans at first by his wicked ambition, and the expectation of obtaining that crown which they intended to break in pieces, that they might get the use of his immense fortune, and of his influence on the thousands of his depending sycophants, who ate his bread and pandered to his gross appetites. Although we very soon find him acting as an Illuminatus, we cannot suppose him so lost to common sense as to contribute his fortune, and risk his life, merely in order that the one should be afterwards taken from him by law, and the other put on a level with that of his groom or his pimp. He surely hoped to obtain the crown of his indolent relation. And indeed Mirabeau said to Bergasse, that "when the project was mentioned to the Duke of Orleans, he received it with all possible favor," (avec toute la grace imaginable.) During the contests between the Court and the Parliament of Paris, he courted popularity with an indecency and folly that nothing can explain but a mad and fiery ambition which blinded his eyes to all consequences. This is put out of doubt by his behaviour at Versailles on the dreadful 5th

[p. 217]

and 6th of October 1789. The depositions at the Chatelet prove in the most incontestable manner, that during the horrors of these two days he was repeatedly seen, and that whenever he was recognised by the croud, he was huzzaed with Vive Orleans, Vive notre Roi Orleans, &c.--He then withdrew, and was seen in other places. While all about the unfortunate Royal Family were in the utmost concern for their fate, he was in gay humour, chatting on indifferent subjects. His last appearance in the evening of the 5th was, about nine o'clock, conversing in a corner with men disguised in mean dress, and some in women's clothes; among whom were Mirabeau, Barnave, Duport, and other deputies of the Republican party--and these men were seen immediately after, concealed among the lines of the Regiment de Flandre, the corruption of which they had that day completed. He was seen again next morning conversing with the same persons in women's dress. And when the insulted Sovereign was dragged in triumph to Paris, Orleans was again seen, skulking in a balcony behind his children, to view the procession of devils and furies; anxiously hoping all the while that some disturbance would arise in which the King might perish.--I should have added that he was seen in the morning at the top of the stairs, pointing the way with his hand to the mob, where they should go, while he went by another road to the King. In short, he went about trembling like a coward, waiting for the explosion which might render it safe for him to shew himself. Mirabeau said to him, "The fellow carries a loaded pistol in his bosom, but will never dare to pull the trigger." He was saved, notwithstanding his own folly, by being joined in the accusation with Mirabeau, who could not rescue himself without striving also for Orleans, whom he despised, while he made use of his fortune.--In short, Orleans was but half illuminated at this time, and hoped to be King or Regent.

 

Yet he was deeply versed in the preparatory lessons of Illuminatism, and well convinced of its fundamental truths. He was well assured of the great influence of the women in society, and he employed this influence like a true disciple of Weishaupt. Above three hundred nymphs from the Purlieus of the Palais Royal were provided with ecus and Louis d'ors, by his grand procureur the Abbe Sieyes, and were sent to meet and to illuminate the two battalions of the

[p. 218]

[paragraph continues] Regiment de Flandre, who were coming to Versailles for the protection of the Royal Family. The privates of one of these regiments came and informed their officers of this attempt made on their loyalty.-45,000 livres were given them at St. Denys, to make them disband themselves--and the poor lads were at first dazzled by the name of a sum that was not familiar to them--but when some thinking head among them told them that it only amounted to two Louis d'ors a-piece, they disclosed the bribery. They were then offered 90,000, but never saw it. (Depositions at the Chatelet, No. 317.) Mademoiselle Therouane, the favorita of the day at the Palais Royal, was the most active person of the armed mob from Paris, dressed en Amazonne, with all the elegance of the opera, and turned many young heads that day which were afterwards taken off by the guillotine. The Duke of Orleans acknowledged, before his death, that he had expended above L. 50,000 Sterling in corrupting the Gardes Francoises. The armed mob which came from Paris to Versailles on the 5th of October, importuning the King for bread, had their pockets filled with crown-pieces; and Orleans was seen on that day by two gentlemen, with a bag of money so heavy that it was fastened to his clothes with a strap, to hinder it from being oppressive, and to keep it in such a position that it should be accessible in an instant. (See the Depositions at the Chatelet, No. 177.)

 

But such was the contempt into which his gross profligacy, his cowardice, and his niggardly disposition, had brought him with all parties, that, if he had not been quite blinded by his wicked ambition, and by his implacable resentment of some bitter taunts he had gotten from the King and Queen, he must have seen very early that he was to be sacrificed as soon as he had served the  of the faction. At present, his assistance was of the utmost consequence. His immense fortune, much above three millions Sterling, was almost exhausted during the three first years of the Revolution. But (what was of more consequence) he had almost unbounded authority among the Free Masons.

 

In this country we have no conception of the authority of a National Grand Master. When Prince Ferdinand of Brunswick, by great exertions among the jarring sects in

[p. 219]

[paragraph continues] Germany, had got himself elected Grand Master of the Strict Observanz, it gave serious alarm to the Emperor, and to all the Princes of Germany, and contributed greatly to their connivance at the attempts of the Illuminati to discredit that party. In the great cities of Germany, the inhabitants paid more respect to the Grand Master of the Masons than to their respective Princes. The authority of the D. of Orleans in France was still greater, in consequence of his employing his fortune to support it. About eight years before the Revolution he had (not without much intrigue and many bribes and promises) been elected Grand Master of France, having under his directions all the Improved Lodges. The whole Association was called the Grand Orient de la France, and in 1785 contained 266 of these Lodges (see Freymaurerische Zeitung, Neuwied, 1787.) Thus he had the management of all those Secret Societies; and the licentious and irreligious sentiments which were currently preached there, were sure of his hearty concurrence. The same intrigue which procured him the supreme chair, must have filled the Lodges with his dependents and emissaries, and these men could not better earn their pay, than by doing their utmost to propagate infidelity, immorality, and impurity of manners.

 

But something more was wanted: Disrespect for the higher Orders of the State, and disloyalty to the Sovereign.--It is not so easy to conceive how these sentiments, and particularly the latter, could meet with toleration, and even encouragement, in a nation noted for its professions of veneration for its Monarch, and for the pride of its Noblesse. Yet I am certain, that such doctrines were habitually preached in the Lodges of Philalethes, and Amis Reunis de la Verite. That they should be very current in Lodges of lowborn Literati, and other Brethren in inferior stations, is natural, and I have already said enough on this head. But the French Lodges contained many gentlemen in easy, in affluent circumstances. I do not expect such confidence in my assertions, that even in these the same opinions were very prevalent. I was therefore much pleased with a piece of information which I got while these sheets were printing off, which corroborates my assertions.

 

This is a performance called La voile retiree, ou le Secret 

[p. 220]

de la Revolution explique par la Franc Maconnerie. It was written by a Mr. Lefranc, President of the Seminary of the Eudists at Caen in Normandy, and a second edition was published at Paris in 1792. The author was butchered in the massacre of September. He says, that on the death of a friend, who had been a very zealous Mason, and many years Master of a respectable Lodge, he found among his papers a collection of Masonic writings, containing the rituals, catechisms, and symbols of every kind, belonging to a long train of degrees of Free Masonry, together with many discourses delivered in different Lodges, and minutes of their proceedings. The perusal filled him with astonishment and anxiety. For he found that doctrines were taught, and maxims of conduct were inculcated, which were subversive of religion and of all good order in the state; and which not only countenanced disloyalty and sedition, but even invited to it. He thought them so dangerous to the state, that he sent an account of them to the Archbishop of Paris long before the Revolution, and always hoped that that Reverend Prelate would represent the matter to his Majesty's Ministers, and that they would put an end to the meetings of this dangerous Society, or would at least restrain them from such excesses. But he was disappointed, and therefore thought it his duty to lay them before the public. [**]

 

Mr. Lefranc says expressly, that this shocking perversion of Free Masonry to seditious purposes was, in a great measure, but a late thing, and was chiefly brought about by the agents of the Grand Master, the Duke of Orleans. He was, however, of opinion that the whole Masonic Fraternity was hostile to Christianity and to good morals, and that it was the contrivance of the great schismatic Faustus

[p. 221]

[paragraph continues] Socinus, who being terrified by the fate of Servetus, at Geneva, fell on this method of promulgating his doctrines among the great in secret. This opinion is but ill supported, and is incompatible with many circumstances in Free Masonry--But it is out of our way at present. Mr. Lefranc then takes particular notice of the many degrees of Chivalry cultivated in the Lodges, and shows how, by artful changes in the successive explanations of the same symbols, the doctrines of Christianity, and of all revealed religion, are completely exploded, and the Philosophe Inconnu becomes at last a professed Atheist.--He then takes notice of the political doctrines which are in like manner gradually unfolded, by which "patriotism and loyalty to the Prince are declared to be narrow principles, inconsistent with universal benevolence, and with the native and imprescriptible rights of man; civil subordination is actual oppression, and Princes are ex officio usurpers and tyrants." These principles he fairly deduces from the Catechisms of the Chevalier du Soleil, and of the Philosophe Inconnu. He then proceeds to notice more particularly the intrigues of the Duke of Orleans. From these it appears evident that his ambitious views and hopes had been of long standing, and that it was entirely by his support and encouragement that seditious doctrines were permitted in the Lodges. Many noblemen and gentlemen were disgusted and left these Lodges, and advantage was taken of their absence to improve the Lodges still more, that is, to make them still more anarchical and seditious. Numbers of paltry scribblers who haunted the Palais Royal, were admitted into the Lodges, and there vented their poisonous doctrines. The Duke turned his chief attention to the French guards, introducing many of the privates and inferior officers into the obscure and even the more respectable Lodges, so that the officers were frequently disgusted in the Lodges by the insolent behaviour of their own soldiers, under the mask of Masonic Brotherhood and Equality--and this behaviour became not unfrequent even out of doors. He asserts with great confidence that the troops were much corrupted by these intrigues--and that when they sometimes declared, on service, that they would not fire on their Brethren, the phrase had a particular reference to their Masonic Fraternity, because they recognized many of their Brother Masons in every crowd.--

[p. 222]

[paragraph continues] And the corruption was by no means confined to Paris and its neighbourhood, but extended to every place in the kingdom where there was a Municipality and a Mason Lodge.

 

Mr. Lefranc then turns our attention to many peculiarities in the Revolution, which have a resemblance to the practices in Free Masonry. Not only was the arch rebel the Duke of Orleans the Grand Master, but the chief actors in the Revolution, Mirabeau, Condorcet, Rochefoucault, and others, were distinguished office-bearers in the great Lodges. He says that the distribution of France into departments, districts, circles, cantons, &c. is perfectly similar, with the same denominations, to a distribution which he had remarked in the correspondence of the Grand Orient. [**]--The President's hat in the National Assembly is copied from that of a Tres Venerable Grand Maitre.--The scarf of a Municipal Officer is the same with that of a Brother Apprentice.--When the Assembly celebrated the Revolution in the Cathedral, they accepted of the highest honors of Masonry by passing under the Arch of Steel, formed by the drawn swords of two ranks of Brethren.--Also it is worthy of remark, that the National Assembly protected the meetings of Free Masons, while it peremptorily prohibited every other private meeting. The obligation of laying aside all stars, ribbands, crosses, and other honorable distinctions under the pretext of Fraternal Equality, was not merely a prelude, but was intended as a preparation for the destruction of all civil distinctions, which took place almost at the beginning of the Revolution--and the first proposal of a surrender, says Mr. Lefranc, was made by a zealous Mason.--He farther observes, that the horrible and sanguinary oaths, the daggers, death-heads, cross-bones, the imaginary combats with the murderers of Hiram, and many other gloomy ceremonies, have a natural tendency to harden the heart, to remove its natural disgust at deeds of horror, and have paved the way for those shocking barbarities which have made the name of Frenchman abhorred over all Europe. These deeds were indeed perpetrated by a mob of fanatics; but the principles were promulgated and fostered by persons who style themselves philosophers.

[p. 223]

I see more evidence of these important facts in another book just published by an emigrant gentleman (Mr. Latocnaye.) He confirms my repeated assertions, that all the irreligious and seditious doctrines were the subjects of perpetual harangues in the Mason Lodges, and that all the principles of the Revolution, by which the public mind was as it were set on fire, were nothing but enthusiastic amplifications of the common-place cant of Free Masonry, and arose naturally out of it. He even thinks "that this must of necessity be the case in every country where the minds of the lower classes of the State are in any way considerably fretted or irritated; it is almost impossible to avoid being drawn into this vortex, whenever a discontented mind enters into a Mason Lodge. The stale story of brotherly love, which at another time would only lull the hearer asleep, now makes him prick up his ears, and listen with avidity to the silly tale, and he cannot hinder fretting thoughts from continually rankling in his mind."

 

Mr. Latocnaye says expressly, "That notwithstanding the general contempt of the public for the Duke of Orleans, his authority as Grand Master of the Masons gave him the greatest opportunity that a seditious mind could desire for helping forward the Revolution. He had ready to his hand a connected system of hidden Societies, protected by the State, habituated to secrecy and artifice, and already tinged with the very enthusiasm he wished to inspire. In these he formed political committees, into which only his agents were admitted. He filled the Lodges with the French guards, whom he corrupted with money and hopes of preferment: and by means of the Abbe Sieyes, and other emissaries, they were harangued with all the sophistical declamation, or cant of Masonry."

 

Mr. Latocnaye says, that all this was peculiar to the Lodges of the Grand Orient; but that there were many (not very many, if we judge by the Neuwied almanac, which reckons only 289 in all France in 1784, of which 266 were of the Grand Orient) Lodges who continued on the old plan of amusing themselves with a little solemn trifling. He coincides with Mr. Lefranc in the opinion that the awful and gloomy rituals of Masonry, and particularly the severe trials of confidence and submission, must have a great tendency

[p. 224]

to harden the heart, and fit a man for atrocious actions. No one can doubt of this who reads the following instance:

 

"A candidate for reception into one of the highest Orders, after having heard many threatenings denounced against all who should betray the Secrets of the Order, was conducted to a place where he saw the dead bodies of several who were said to have suffered for their treachery. He then saw his own brother tied hand and foot, begging his mercy and intercession. He was informed that this person was about to suffer the punishment due to this offence, and that it was reserved for him (the candidate) to be the instrument of this just vengeance, and that this gave him an opportunity of manifesting that he was completely devoted to the Order. It being observed that his countenance gave signs of inward horror (the person in bonds imploring his mercy all the while) he was told, that in order to spare his feelings, a bandage should be put over his eyes. A dagger was then put into his right hand, and being hood-winked, his left hand was laid on the palpitating heart of the criminal, and he was then ordered to strike. He instantly obeyed; and when the bandage was taken from his eyes, he saw that it was a lamb that he had stabbed. Surely such trials and such wanton cruelty are only fit for training conspirators."

 

Mr. Latocnaye adds, that "when he had been initiated, an old gentleman asked him what he thought of the whole?" He answered, "A great deal of noise, and much nonsense." "Nonsense, said the other, don't judge so rashly, young man; I have worked these twenty-five years, and the farther I advanced, it interested me the more; but I stopped short, and nothing shall prevail on me to advance a step farther." In another conversation the gentleman said, "I imagine that my stoppage was owing to my refusal about nine years ago, to listen to some persons who made to me, out of the Lodge, proposals which were seditious and horrible; for ever since that time I have remarked, that my higher Brethren treat me with a much greater reserve than they had done before; and that, under the pretext of further instruction, they have laboured to confute the notions which I had already acquired, by giving some of the most delicate subjects a different turn. I saw that they wanted to remove some suspicions

[p. 225]

which I was beginning to form concerning the ultimate scope of the whole."

 

I imagine that these observations will leave no doubt in the mind of the reader with respect to the influence of the secret Fraternity of Free Masonry in the French Revolution, and that he will allow it to be highly probable that the infamous Duke of Orleans had, from the beginning, entertained hopes of mounting the throne of France. It is not my province to prove or disprove this point, only I think it no less evident, from many circumstances in the transactions of those tumultuous days, that the active leaders had quite different views, and were impelled by fanatical notions of democratic felicity, or more probably, by their own ambition to be the movers of this vast machine, to overturn the ancient government, and erect a republic, of which they hoped to be the managers. [**] Mirabeau had learned when in Germany, that the principles of anarchy had been well digested into a system, and therefore wished for some instructions as to the subordinate detail of the business, and for this purpose requested a deputation from the Illuminati.

 

In such a cause as this, we may be certain that no ordinary person would be sent. One of the deputies was Amelius, the next person in the order to Spartacus and Philo. His worldly name was Johann. J. C. Bode, at Weimar, privy-counsellor to the Prince of Hesse-Darmstadt (See Fragmente der Biographie des verstorbenes-Freyherr Bode in Weimar, mit zuverlassigen Urkunden, 8vo. Riom. 1795. See also Endliche Shickfall der Freymaurerey, 1794; also

[p. 226]

[paragraph continues] Wiener Zeitschrift fur 1793.)--This person has played a principal part in the whole scheme of Illumination. He was a person of considerable and showy talents as a writer. He had great talents for conversation, and had kept good company. With respect to his mystical character, his experience was great. He was one of the Templar Masons, and among them was Eques a Lillis Convallium. He had speculated much about the origin and history of Masonry, and when at the Willemsbad convention, was converted to Illuminatism. He was the great instigator of Nicholai, Gedicke, and Biester, to the hunt after Jesuits, which so much occupied them, and suggested to Nicholai his journey through Germany. Leuchtsenring, whom I mentioned before, was only the letter-carrier between Bode and these three authors. He was just such a man as Weishaupt wished for; his head filled with Masonic fanaticism, attaching infinite importance to the frivolities of Masonry, and engaged in an enthusiastic and fruitless research after its origin and history. He had collected, however, such a number of archives (as they were called) of Free Masonry, that he sold his manuscript to the Duke of Saxe Gotha (into whose service Weishaupt engaged himself when he was driven from Bavaria) for 1500 dahlers. This little anecdote shows the high importance attributed to these matters by persons of whom we should expect better things. Bode was also a most determined and violent materialist. Besides all these qualities, so acceptable to the Illuminati, he was a discontented Templar Mason, having been repeatedly disappointed of the preferment which he thought himself entitled to. When he learned that the first operations of the Illuminati were to be the obtaining the sole direction of the Mason Lodges, and of the whole Fraternity, his hopes revived of rising to some of the Commanderies, which his enthusiasm, or rather fanaticism, had made him hope to see one day regained by the Order--but when he found that the next and favorite object was to root out the Strict Observanz altogether, he started back. But Philo saw that the understanding (shall we call it) that can be dazzled with one whim, may be dazzled with another, and he now attached him to Illuminatism, by a magnificent display of a world ruled by the Order, and conducted to happiness by means of Liberty and Equality. This did the business, as we see by the private correspondence, where Philo informs Spartacus of his first

[p. 227]

difficulties with Amelius. Amelius was gained over in August 1782, and we see by the same correspondence, that the greatest affairs were soon entrusted to him--he was generally employed to deal with the great. When a Graf or a Baron was to be wheedled into the Order, Amelius was the agent.--He was also the chief operator in all their contests with the Jesuits and the Rosycrucians. It was also Bode that procured the important accession of Nicholai to the Order. This he brought about through Leuchtsenring; and lastly, his numerous connections among the Free Masons, together with Knigge's influence among them, enabled the Illuminati to worm themselves into every Lodge, and at last gave them almost the entire command of the Fraternity.

 

Such was the first of the deputies to France. The other was a Mr. Bussche, called in the Order Bayard; therefore probably a man of respectable character; for most of Spartacus's names were significant, like his own. He was a military man, Lieutenant-Colonel in the service of Hesse-Darmstadt. This man also was a discontented Templar Mason, and his name in that Fraternity had been Eques a Fontibus Eremi. He was Illuminated by Knigge. He had also been unsuccessful both at court and in the field, in both of which situations he had been attempting to make a distinguished figure. He, as well as Bode, were immersed in debts. They were therefore just in the proper temper for Cosmo-political enterprise.

 

They went to Paris in the end of 1788, while the Notables were sitting, and all Paris was giving advice. The alarm that was raised about Animal Magnetism, which was indeed making much noise at that time, and particularly in Paris, was assigned by them as the great motive of the journey. Bode also said that he was anxious to learn what were the corrections made on the system of the Chevaliers Bienfaisants. They had taken that name at first, to screen themselves from the charges against them under the name of Templars. They had corrected something in their system when they took the name Philalethes. And now when the schisms of the Philalethes were healed, and the Brethren again united under the name of Amis Reunis, he suspected that Jesuits had interfered; and because he had

[p. 228]

heard that the principles of the Amis Reunis were very noble, he wished to be more certain that they were purged of every thing Jesuitical.

 

The deputies accordingly arrived at Paris, and immediately obtained admission into these two Fraternities. [**] They found both of them in the ripest state for Illumination, having shaken off all the cabalistical, chemical, and mystical whims that had formerly disturbed them, and would now take up too much of their time. They were now cultivating with great zeal the philosophico-political doctrines of universal citizenship. Their leaders, to the number of twenty, are mentioned by name in the Berlin Monatschrift for 1785, and among them are several of the first actors in the French Revolution. But this is nothing distinctive, because persons of all opinions were Masons.

 

The Amis Reunis were little behind the Illuminati in every thing that was irreligious and anarchichal, and had no inclination for any of the formalities of ritual, &c. They were already fit for the higher mysteries, and only wanted to learn the methods of business which had succeeded so well in spreading their doctrines and maxims over Germany. Besides, their doctrines had not been digested into a system, nor had the artful methods of leading on the pupils from bad to worse been practised. For hitherto, each individual had vented in the Lodges his own opinions, to unburden his own mind, and the Brethren listened for instruction and mutual encouragement. Therefore, when Spartacus's plan was communicated to them, they saw at

[p. 229]

once its importance, in all its branches, such as the use of the Mason Lodges, to fish for Minervals--the rituals and ranks to entice the young, and to lead them by degrees to opinions and measures, which, at first sight, would have shocked them. The firm hold which is gotten of the pupils, and indeed of all the inferior classes, by their reports in the course of their pretended training in the knowledge of themselves and of other men--and, above all, the provincial arrangement of the Order, and the clever subordination and entire dependence on a select band or Pandaemonium at Paris, which should inspire and direct the whole.--I think (although I have not express assertions of the fact) from the subsequent conduct of the French revolters, that even at this early period, there were many in those societies who were ready to go every length proposed to them by the Illuminati, such as the abolition of royalty and of all privileged orders, as tyrants by nature, the annihilation and robbery of the priesthood, the rooting out of Christianity, and the introduction of Atheism, or a philosophical chimera which they were to call Religion. Mirabeau had often spoken of the last branch of the Illuminated principles, and the conversations held at Versailles during the awful pauses of the 5th of October (which are to be seen in the evidence before the Chatelet in the Orleans process) can hardly be supposed to be the fancies of an accidental mob.

 

Mirabeau was, as I have said, at the head of this democratic party, and had repeatedly said, that the only use of a King was to serve as a pageant, in order to give weight to public measures in the opinion of the populace.--And Mr. Latocnaye says, that this party was very numerous, and that immediately after the imprudent or madlike invitation of every scribbler in a garret to give his advice, the party did not scruple to speak their sentiments in public, and that they were encouraged in their encomiums on the advantages of a virtuous republican government by Mr. Necker, who had a most extravagant and childish predilection for the constitution of Geneva, the place of his nativity, and was also much tinged with the Cosmo-political philosophy of the times. The King's brothers, and the Princes of the blood, presented a memorial to his Majesty, which concluded by saying, that "the effervescence of the

[p. 230]

public opinions had come to such a height that the most dangerous principles, imported from foreign parts, were avowed in print with perfect impunity--that his Majesty had unwarily encouraged every fanatic to dictate to him, and to spread his poisonous sentiments, in which the rights of the throne were not only disrespected, but were even disputed--that the rights of the higher classes in the state ran a great risk of being speedily suppressed, and that nothing would hinder the sacred right of property from being ere long invaded, and the unequal distribution of wealth from being thought a proper subject of reform."

 

When such was the state of things in Paris, it is plain that the business of the German deputies would be easily transacted. They were received with open arms by the Philalethes, the Amis de la Verite, the Social Contract, &c. and in the course of a very few weeks in the end of 1788, and the beginning of 1789 (that is, before the end of March) the whole of the Grand Orient, including the Philalethes, Amis Reunis, Martinistes, &c. had the secrets of Illumination communicated to them. The operation naturally began with the Great National Lodge of Paris, and those in immediate dependence on it. It would also seem, from many circumstances that occurred to my observation, that the Lodges in Alsace and Lorraine were illuminated at this time, and not long before, as I had imagined. Strasburg I know had been illuminated long ago, while Philo was in the Order. A circumstance strikes me here as of some moment. The sects of Philalethes and Amis Reunis were refinements engrafted on the system of the Chevaliers Bienfaisants at Lyons. Such refinements never fail to be considered as a sort of heresy, and the professors will be beheld with a jealous and unfriendly eye by some, who will pride themselves on adhering to the old faith. And the greater the success of the heresy, the greater will be the animosity between the parties.--May not this help to explain the mutual hatred of the Parisians and the Lyonnois, which produced the most dreadful atrocities ever perpetrated on the face of the earth, and made a shambles and a desert of the finest city of France?

 

The first proceeding by the advice of the deputies was the formation of a Political Committee in every Lodge.

[p. 231]

[paragraph continues] This committee corresponded with the distant Lodges, and in it were discussed and settled all the political principles which were to be inculcated on the members. The author of the Neueste  says expressly, that "he was thoroughly instructed in this, that it was given in charge to these committees to frame general rules, and to carry through the great plan (grand oeuvre) of a general overturning of religion and government." The principal leaders of the subsequent Revolution were members of these committees. Here were the plans laid, and they were transmitted through the kingdom by the Corresponding Committees.

 

Thus were the stupid Bavarians (as the French were once pleased to call them) their instructors in the art of overturning the world. The French were indeed the first who put it in practice. These committees arose from the Illuminati in Bavaria, who had by no means given over working; and these committees produced the Jacobin Club. It is not a frivolous remark, that the Masonic phrase of the persons who wish to address the Brethren, "S. je demande la parole, which the F. S. reports to the V. G. M. and which he announces to the Brethren thus, "Mes freres, frere tel demande la parole, la parole lui est accordee,") is exactly copied by the Jacobin Club. There is surely no natural connection between Free Masonry and Jacobinism--but we see the link--Illuminatism.--

 

The office-bearers of one of the Lodges of Philalethes in Paris were Martin, Willermooz (who had been deputy from the Chevaliers Bienfaisants to the Willemsbad Convention) Chappe, Minet, de la Henriere, and Savatier de l'Ange. [**] In another (the Contract Social) the political committee consisted of La Fayette, Condorcet, Pethion, d'Or-leans, Abbe Bertholis, d'Aiguillon, Bailly, Marq. de la 

[p. 232]

[paragraph continues] Salle, Despresmenil. This particular Lodge had been founded and conducted by one De Leutre, an adventurer and cheat of the first magnitude, who sometimes made a figure, and at other times was without a shilling. At this very time he was a spy attached to the office of the police of Paris. [**] The Duke of Orleans was Warden of the Lodge. The Abbe Sieyes was a Brother Orator, but not of this Lodge, nor (I think) of the former. It was probably of the one conducted by Mirabeau and the Abbe Perigord. But it appears from the piece from which I am at present borrowing, that Sieyes was present in the meetings of both Lodges, probably as visiting Brother, employed in bringing them to common measures. I must observe, that the subsequent conduct of some of these men does not just accord with my conjecture, that the principles of the Illuminati were adopted in their full extent. But we know that all the Bavarian Brethren were not equally illuminated, and it would be only copying their teachers if the cleverest of these their scholars should hold a sanctum sanctorum among themselves, without inviting all to the conference. Observe too that the chief lesson which they were now taking from the Germans was the method of doing business, of managing their correspondence, and of procuring and training pupils. A Frenchman does not think that he needs instruction in any thing like principle or science. He is ready on all occasions to be the instructor.

 

Thus were the Lodges of France converted in a very short time into a set of secret affiliated societies, corresponding with the mother Lodges of Paris, receiving from thence their principles and instructions, and ready to rise up at once when called upon, to carry on the great work of overturning the state.

[p. 233]

Hence it has arisen that the French aimed, in the very beginning, at overturning the whole world. In all the revolutions of other countries, the schemes and plots have extended no farther than the nation where they took their rise. But here we have seen that they take in the whole world. They have repeatedly declared this in their manifestos, and they have declared it by their conduct. This is the very aim of the Illuminati.--Hence too may be explained how the revolution took place almost in a moment in every part of France. The revolutionary societies were early formed, and were working in secret before the opening of the National Assembly, and the whole nation changed, and changed again, and again, as if by beat of drum. Those duly initiated in this mystery of iniquity were ready every where at a call. And we see Weishaupt's wish accomplished in an unexpected degree, and the debates in a club giving laws to solemn assemblies of the nation, and all France bending the neck to the city of Paris. The members of the club are Illuminati, and so are a great part of their correspondents.--Each operates in the state as a Minerval would do in the Order, and the whole goes on with systematic regularity. The famous Jacobin Club was just one of these Lodges, as has been already observed; and as, among individuals, one commonly takes the lead, and contrives for the rest, so it has happened on the present occasion, that this Lodge, supported by Orleans and Mirabeau, was the one that stepped forth and shewed itself to the world, and thus became the oracle of the party; and all the rest only echoed its discourses, and at last allowed it to give law to the whole, and even to rule the kingdom. It is to be remarked too that the founders of the club at Mentz were Illuminati (Relig. Begebenh. 1793. p. 448.) before the Revolution, and corresponded with another Lodge at Strasburg; and these two produced mighty effects during the year 1790. In a performance called Memoires Posthumes de Custine it is said that when that General was bending his course to Holland, the Illuminati at Strasburg, Worms, and Spire immediately formed clubs, and invited him into that quarter, and, by going to Mentz and encouraging their Brethren in that city, they raised a party against the garrison, and actually delivered up the place to the French army.

[p. 234]

A little book, just now printed with the title Paragraphen, says, that Zimmerman, of whom I have spoken more than once, went to France to preach liberty. He was employed as a missionary of Revolution in Alsace, where he had formerly been a most successful missionary of Illuminatism. Of his former proceedings the following is a curious anecdote. He connected himself with a highly accomplished and beautiful woman, whose conversation had such charms, that he says she gained him near a hundred converts in Spire alone. Some persons of high rank, and great exterior dignity of character, had felt more tender impressions--and when the lady informed them of certain consequences to their reputation, they were glad to compound matters with her friend Mr. Zimmerman, who either passed for her husband, or took the scandal on himself. He made above 1500 Louis d'ors in this way. When he returned, as a preacher of Revolution, he used to mount the pulpit with a sabre in his hand, and bawl out, "Behold, Frenchmen, this is your God. This alone can save you." The author adds, that when Custine broke into Germany, Zimmerman got admission to him, and engaged to deliver Manheim into his hands. To gain this purpose, he offered to set some corners of the city on fire, and assured him of support. Custine declined the offer. Zimmerman appeared against him before the Revolutionary Tribunal, and accused him of treachery to his cause.--Custine's answer is remarkable. "Hardly," said he, "had I set my foot in Germany, when this man, and all the fools of his country, besieged me, and would have delivered up to me their towns and villages--What occasion had I to do any thing to Manheim, when the Prince was neutral?" Zimmerman found his full account in Robespierre's bloody sway--but the spurt of his atrocities was also the whole of Zimmerman's career. He was arrested, but again liberated, and soon after again imprisoned, after which I can learn no more of him. The same thing is positively asserted in another performance, called Cri de la Raison, and in a third, called Les Masques arrachees. Observe too, that it is not the clubs merely that are accused of this treachery, but the Illuminati. De la Metherie also, in his preface to the Journal de Physique for 1790, says expressly that "the cause and arms of France were powerfully supported in Germany by a sect of philosophers called the Illuminated." In the preface to the Journal 

[p. 235]

for 1792, he says, that "Letters and deputations were received by the Assembly from several Corresponding Societies in England, felicitating them on the triumph of Reason and Humanity, and promising them their cordial assistance." He read some of these manifests, and says, that "one of them recommended strongly the political education of the children, who should be taken from the parents, and trained up for the state." Another lamented the baleful influence of property, saying that "the efforts of the Assembly would be fruitless, till the fence was removed with which the laws so anxiously secured inordinate wealth. They should rather be directed to the support of talents and virtue; because property would always support itself by the too great influence which it had in every corrupted state. The laws should prevent the too great accumulation of it in particular families."--In short, the counsel was almost verbatim what the Abbe Cossandey declared to have been the doctrine preached in the meetings of the Illuminati, which terrified him and his colleagues, and made them quit the Association. Anarcharsis Cloots, born in Prussian Westphalia, a keen Illuminatus, came to Paris for the express purpose of forwarding the great work, and by intriguing in the style of the Order, he got himself made one of the Representatives of the Nation. He seems to have been one of the completest fanatics in Cosmo-politism, and just such a tool as Weishaupt would choose to employ for a coarse and arduous job. He broke out at once into all the silly extravagance of the unthinking herd, and his whole language is just the jargon of Illumination. Citizen of the World--Liberty and Equality, the imprescriptible Rights of Man--Morality, dear Morality--Kings and Priests are useless things--they are Despots and Corrupters, &c.--He declared himself an atheist, and zealously laboured to have atheism established by law. He conducted that farcical procession in the true style of the most childish ritual of Philo, where counterfeited deputies from all quarters of the world, in the dresses of their countries, came to congratulate the nation for its victory over Kings and Priests. It is also worthy of remark, that by this time Leuchtsenring, whom we have seen so zealous an Illuminatus, after having been as zealous a Protestant, tutor of Princes, Hofrath and Hofmeister, was now a secretary or clerk in one of the Bureaus of the National Assembly of France.

[p. 236]

I may add as a finishing touch, that the National Assembly of France was the only body of men that I have ever heard of who openly and systematically proposed to employ assassination, and to institute a band of patriots, who should exercise this profession either by sword, pistol, or poison;--and though the proposal was not completed, it might be considered as the sentiments of the meeting; for it was only delayed till it should be considered how far it might not be imprudent, because they might expect reprisals. The Abbe Dubois engaged to poison the Comte d'Artois; but was himself robbed and poisoned by his accomplices.--There were strong reasons for thinking that the Emperor of Germany was poisoned--and that Mirabeau was thus tricked by his pupil Orleans, also Madame de Favras and her son.--This was copying the Illuminati very carefully.

 

After all these particulars, can any person have a doubt that the Order of Illuminati formally interfered in the French Revolution, and contributed greatly to its progress? There is no denying the insolence and oppression of the Crown and the Nobles, nor the misery and slavery of the people, nor that there were sufficient provocation and cause for a total change of measures and of principles. But the rapidity with which one opinion was declared in every corner, and that opinion as quickly changed, and the change announced every where, and the perfect conformity of the principles, and sameness of the language, even in arbitrary trifles, can hardly be explained in any other way. It may indeed be said, "que les beaux genies se rencontrent--that wits jump. The principles are the same, and the conduct of the French has been such as the Illuminati would have exhibited; but this is all--the Illuminati no longer existed." Enough has been said on this last point already.--The facts are as have been narrated. The Illuminati continued as an Order, and even held assemblies, though not so frequently nor so formally as before, and though their Areopagus was no longer at Munich. But let us hear what the French themselves thought of the matter.

 

In 1789, or the beginning of 1790, a manifest was sent from the GRAND NATIONAL LODGE of Free Masons (so it is entitled) at Paris, signed by the Duke of Orleans as 

[p. 237]

[paragraph continues] Grand Master, addressed and sent to the Lodges in all the respectable cities of Europe, exhorting them to unite for the support of the French Revolution, to gain it friends, defenders, and dependents; and according to their opportunities, and the practicability of the thing, to kindle and propagate the spirit of revolution through all lands. This is a most important article, and deserves a very serious attention. I got it first of all in a work called, Hochste wichtige Erinnerungen zur rechten Zeit uber einige der allerernsthaftesten Angelegenheiten dieses Zeitalters, von L. A. Hoffmann, Vienna, 1795.

 

The author of this work says, "That every thing he advances in these memorandums is consistent with his own personal knowledge, and that he is ready to give convincing proofs of them to any respectable person who will apply to him personally. He has already given such convincing documents to the Emperor, and to several Princes, that many of the machinations occasioned by this manifesto have been detected and stopped; and he would have no scruple at laying the whole before the public, did it not unavoidably involve several worthy persons who had suffered themselves to be misled, and heartily repented of their errors." He is naturally (being a Catholic) very severe on the Protestants (and indeed he has much reason) and by this has drawn on himself many bitter retorts. He has however defended himself against all that are of any consequence to his good name and veracity, in a manner that fully convinces any impartial reader, and turns to the confusion of the slanderers.

 

Hoffmann says, that "he saw some of those manifests; that they were not all of one tenor, some being addressed to friends, of whose support they were already assured." One very important article of their contents is Earnest exhortations to establish in every quarter secret schools of political education, and schools for the public education of the children of the people, under the direction of well-principled masters; and offers of pecuniary assistance for this purpose, and for the encouragement of writers in favor of the Revolution, and for indemnifying the patriotic booksellers who suffer by their endeavours to suppress publications which have an opposite tendency. We know very well that the immense

[p. 238]

revenue of the Duke of Orleans was scattered among all the rabble of the Palais Royal. Can we doubt of its being employed in this manner? Our doubts must vanish, when we see that not long after this it was publicly said in the National Assembly "that this method was the most effectual for accomplishing their purpose of setting Europe in a flame." "But much expence," says the speaker, "will attend it, and much has already been employed, which cannot be named, because it is given in secret." The Assembly had given the Illumination war-hoop--"Peace with cottages, but war with palaces."--A pouvoir revolutionnaire is mentioned, which supersedes all narrow thoughts, all ties of morality. Lequinio publishes the most detestable book that ever issued from a printing press, Les Prejuges vaincus, containing all the principles, and expressed in the very words of Illuminatism.

 

Hoffmann says, that the French Propaganda had many emissaries in Vienna, and many Friends whom he could point out. Mirabeau in particular had many connections in Vienna, and to the certain knowledge of Hoffmann, carried on a great correspondence in cyphers. The progress of Illumination had been very great in the Austrian States, and a statesman gave him accounts of their proceedings (qui font redresser les cheveux) which make one's hair stand on end. "I no longer wonder," says he, "that the Neueste Arbutung des Spartacus and Philo was forbidden. O ye almighty Illuminati, what can you not accomplish by your serpent-like insinuation and cunning!" Your leaders say, "This book is dangerous, because it will teach wicked men the most refined methods of rebellion, and it must never get into the hands of the common people. They have said so with the most impudent face to some Princes, who did not perceive the deeper-laid reason for suppressing the book. The leaders of the Illuminati are, not without reason, in anxiety, lest the inferior classes of their own Society should make just reprisals for having been so basely tricked, by keeping them back, and in profound ignorance of their real designs; and for working on them, by the very goodness of their hearts, to their final ruin; and lest the Free Masons, whom they have also abused, should think of revenging themselves, when the matchless villany of their deceivers has been so clearly exposed. It is in vain for

[p. 239]

them to talk of the danger of instructing the people in the methods of fomenting rebellion by this book. The aims are too apparent, and even in the neighbourhood of Regensburg, where the strength of the Illuminati lay, every person said aloud, that the Illuminatism discovered by this book was High Treason, and the most unheard-of attempt to annihilate every religion and every civil government." He goes on: "In 1790 I was as well acquainted with the spirit of the Illumination-system as at present, but only not so documented by their constitutional acts, as it is now by the Neuste Arbeitung des Spartacus and Philo. My masonic connections were formerly extensive, and my publication entitled Eighteen Paragraphs concerning Free Masonry, procured me more acquaintance with Free Masons of the greatest worth, and of Illuminati equally upright, persons of respectability and knowledge, who had discovered and repented the trick and inveigling conduct of the Order. All of us jointly swore opposition to the Illuminati, and my friends considered me as a proper instrument for this purpose. To whet my zeal, they put papers into my hands which made me shudder, and raised my dislike to the highest pitch. I received from them lists of the members, and among them saw names which I lamented exceedingly. Thus stood matters in 1790, when the French Revolution began to take a serious turn. The intelligent saw in the open system of the Jacobins the complete hidden system of the Illuminati. We knew that this system included the whole world in its aims, and France was only the place of its first explosion. The Propaganda works in every corner to this hour, and its emissaries run about in all the four quarters of the world, and are to be found in numbers in every city that is a seat of government."

 

"He farther relates how they in Vienna wanted to enlist him, and, as this failed, how they have abused him even in the foreign newspapers.

 

"I have personal knowledge (continues he) that in Germany a second Mirabeau, Mauvillon, had proposed in detail a plan of revolution, entirely and precisely suited to the present state of Germany. This he circulated among several Free Mason Lodges, among all the Illuminated Lodges which still remained in Germany, and through the

[p. 240]

hands of all the emissaries of the Propaganda, who had been already dispatched to the frontiers (vorposten) of every district of the empire, with means for stirring up the people." (N. B. in 1792 Mauvillon, finding abundant support and encouragement in the appearance of things round him, when the French arms had penetrated every where, and their invitations to revolt had met with so hearty a reception from the discontented in every state, came boldly forward, and, in the Brunswick Journal for March 1792, declared that "he heartily rejoiced in the French Revolution, wished it all success, and thought himself liable to no reproach when he declared his hopes that a similar revolution would speedily take place in Germany.")

 

In the Hamburgh Political Journal, August, September, and October 1790, there are many proofs of the machinations of emissaries from the Mason Lodges of Paris among the German Free Masons--See pages 836, 963, 1087, &c. It appears that a club has taken the name of Propaganda, and meets once a-week at least, in the form of a Mason Lodge. It consists of persons of all nations, and is under the direction of the Grand Master, the Duke of Orleans. De Leutre is one of the Wardens. They have divided Europe into colonies, to which they give revolutionary names, such as the Cap, the Pike, the Lantern, &c. They have ministers in these colonies. (One is pointed out in Saxony, by marks which I presume are well understood.) A secret press was found in Saxe Gotha, furnished with German types, which printed a seditious work called the Journal of Humanity. This journal was found in the mornings lying in the streets and highways. The house belonged to an Illuminatus of the name of Duport, a poor schoolmaster--he was associated with another in Strasburg, who was also an Illuminatus.--His name was Meyer, the writer of the Strasburg Newspaper. He had been some time a teacher in Salzmann's academy, who we see was also an Illuminatus, but displeased with their proceedings almost at the first. (Private Correspondence.)

 

"I have personal knowledge (continues Professor Hoffmann) that in 1791, during the temporary dearth at Vienna, several of these emissaries were busy in corrupting the minds of the poor, by telling them that in like manner the

[p. 241]

court had produced a famine in Paris in 1789. I detected some of them, and exposed them in my Patriotic Remarks on the present Dearth, and had the satisfaction of seeing my endeavours of considerable effect."

 

Surely these facts show that the Anarchists of France knew of the German Illuminati, and confided in their support. They also knew to what particular Lodges they could address themselves with safety and confidence.--But what need is there of more argument, when we know the zeal of the Illuminati, and the unhoped for opportunity that the Revolution had given them of acting with immediate effect in carrying on their great and darling work? Can we doubt that they would eagerly put their hand to the plough? And, to complete the proof, do we not know from the lists found in the secret correspondence of the Order, that they already had Lodges in France, and that in 1790 and 1791, many Illuminated Lodges in Germany, viz. at Mentz, Worms, Spire, Frankfort, actually interfered, and produced great effects. In Switzerland too they were no less active. They had Lodges at Geneva and at Bern. At Bern two Jacobins were sentenced to several years imprisonment, and among their papers were found their patents of Illumination. I also see the fate of Geneva ascribed to the operations of Illuminati residing there by several writers--particularly by Girtanner, and by the Gottingen editor of the Revolution Almanac.

 

I conclude this article with an extract or two from the proceedings of the National Assembly and Convention, which make it evident that their principles and their practice are precisely those of the Illuminati, on a great scale.

 

When the assumption of the Duchy of Savoy as an 84th Department was debated, Danton said to the Convention,

 

"In the moment that we send freedom to a nation on our frontier, we must say to them, You must have no more Kings--for if we are surrounded by tyrants, their coalition puts our own freedom in danger.--When the French nation sent us hither, it created a great committee for the general insurrection of the people."

[p. 242]

On the 19th of November 1792, it was decreed, "That the Convention, in the name of the French nation, tenders help and fraternity to all people who would recover their liberty."

 

On the 21st of November, the President of the Convention said to the pretended deputies of the Duchy of Savoy, "Representatives of an independent people, important to mankind was the day when the National Convention of France pronounced its sentence, Royal dignity is abolished.--From that day many nations will in future reckon the era of their political existence.--From the beginning of civil establishments Kings have been in opposition to their nations--but now they rise up to annihilate Kings.--Reason, when she darts her rays into every corner, lays open eternal truths--She alone enables us to pass sentence on despots, hitherto the scare-crow of other nations."

 

But the most distinct exhibition of principle is to be seen in a report from the diplomatic committee, who were commissioned to deliberate on the conduct which France was to hold with other nations. On this report was founded the decree of the 15th of December 1793. The Reporter addresses the Convention as follows.

 

"The Committees of Finance and War ask in the beginning, What is the object of the war which we have taken in hand? Without all doubt the object is THE ANNIHILATION OF ALL PRIVILEGES, WAR WITH THE PALACES, PEACE WITH THE COTTAGES. These are the principles on which your declaration of war is founded. All tyranny, all privilege must be treated as an enemy in the countries where we set our foot. This is the genuine result of our principles.--But it is not with Kings alone that we are to wage war--were these our sole enemies, we should only have to bring down ten or twelve heads. We have to fight with all their accomplices, with the privileged orders, who devour and have oppressed the people during many centuries.

 

We must therefore declare ourselves for a revolutionary power in all the countries into which we enter (loud applauses from the Assembly)--Nor need we put on the cloak of humanity--we disdain such little arts.--We must

[p. 243]

clothe ourselves with all the brilliancy of reason, and all the force of the nation. We need not mask our principles--the despots know them already. The first thing we must do is to ring the alarum bell, for insurrection and uproar.--We must, in a solemn manner, let the people see the banishment of their tyrants and privileged casts--otherwise, the people, accustomed to their fetters, will not be able to break their bonds.--It will effect nothing, merely to excite a rising of the people--this would only be giving them words instead of standing by them.

 

"And since, in this manner, we ourselves are the Revolutionary Administration, all that is against the rights of the people must be overthrown, at our entry--We must display our principles by actually destroying all tyranny; and our generals, after having chased away the tyrants and their satellites, must proclaim to the people that they have brought them happiness; and then, on the spot, they must suppress tithes, feudal rights, and every species of servitude."

 

"But we shall have done nothing if we stop here. Aristocracy still domineers--we must therefore suppress all authorities existing in the hands of the upper classes.--When the Revolutionary Authority appears, there must nothing of the old establishment remain.--A popular system must be introduced--every office must be occupied by new functionaries--and the Sansculottes must every where have a share in the Administration.

 

"Still nothing is done, till we declare aloud the precision of our principles to such as want only a half freedom.--We must say to them--if you think of compromising with the privileged casts, we cannot suffer such dealing with tyrants--They are our enemies, and we must treat them as enemies, because they are neither for Liberty nor Equality.--Show yourselves disposed to receive a free constitution--and the Convention will not only stand by you, but will give you permanent support; we will defend you against the vengeance of your tyrants, against their attacks, and against their return.--Therefore abolish from among you the Nobles--and every ecclesiastical and military incorporation. They are incompatible with Equality.--Henceforward

[p. 244]

you are citizens, all equal in rights--equally called upon to rule, to defend, and to serve your country.--The agents of the French Republic will instruct and assist you in forming a free constitution, and assure you of happiness and fraternity."

 

This Report was loudly applauded, and a decree formed in precise conformity to its principles.--Both were ordered to be translated into all languages, and copies to be furnished to their generals, with orders to have them carefully dispersed in the countries which they invaded.

 

And, in completion of these decrees, their armies found it easy to collect as many discontented or worthless persons in any country as sufficed for setting up a tree of liberty. This they held as a sufficient call for their interference.--Sometimes they performed this ceremony themselves--a representation was easily made up in the same way--and then, under the name of a free constitution, the nation was forced to acquiesce in a form dictated at the point of the bayonet, in which they had not the smallest liberty to choose--and they were plundered of all they had, by way of compensating to France for the trouble she had taken.--And this they call Liberty.--It needs no comment.--

 

Thus I have attempted to prove that the present awful situation of Europe, and the general fermentation of the public mind in all nations, have not been altogether the natural operations of discontent, oppression, and moral corruption, although these have been great, and have operated with fatal energy; but that this political fever has been carefully and systematically heightened by bodies of men, who professed to be the physicians of the State, and, while their open practice employed cooling medicines, and a treatment which all approved, administered in secret the most inflammatory poisons, which they made up so as to flatter the diseased fancy of the patient. Although this was not a plan begun, carried on, and completed by the same persons, it was undoubtedly an uniform and consistent scheme, proceeding on the same unvaried principle, and France undoubtedly now smarts under all the woes of German Illumination.

[p. 245]

I beg leave to suggest a few thoughts, which may enable us to draw some advantage from this shocking mass of information.

------------------------------

  

General Reflections.

I. I may observe, in the first place, and I beg it may be particularly attended to, that in all those villainous machinations against the peace of the world, the attack has been first made on the principles of Morality and Religion. The conspirators saw that till these are extirpated, they have no chance of success; and their manner of proceeding chews that they consider Religion and Morality as inseparably connected together. We learn much from this--Fas est et ab hoste doceri.--They endeavour to destroy our religious sentiments, by first corrupting our morals. They try to inflame our passions, that when the demands from this quarter become urgent, the restraints of Religion may immediately come in sight, and stand in the way. They are careful, on this occasion, to give such a view of those restraints, that the real origin of them does not appear.--We are made to believe that they have been altogether the contrivance of Priests and despots, in order to get the command of us. They take care to support these assertions by facts, which, to our great shame, and greater misfortune, are but too numerous.--Having now the passions on their side, they find no difficulty in persuading the voluptuary, or the discontented, that tyranny actually exerted, or resolved on in future, is the sole origin of religious restraint. He seeks no further argument, and gives himself no trouble to find any. Had he examined the matter with any care, he would find himself just brought back to those very feelings of moral excellence and moral depravity that he wishes to get rid of altogether; and these would tell him that pure Religion does not lay a single restraint on us that a noble nature would not have laid on itself--nor enjoins a single duty which an ingenuous and warm heart would not be ashamed to find itself deficient in. He would then see that all the sanctions of Religion are fitted to his high rank in the scale of existence. And the more he contemplates his future prospects, the more they brighten upon his

[p. 246]

view, the more attainable they appear, and the more he is able to know what they may probably be. Having attained this happy state of mind (an attainment in the power of any kind heart that is in earnest in the enquiry) he will think that no punishment is too great for the unthankful and groveling soul which can forego such hopes, and reject these noble proffers, for the comparatively frivolous and transitory gratifications of life. He is not frightened into worthy and virtuous conduct by fears of such merited punishment; but, if not enticed into it by his high expectations, he is, at least, retained in the paths of virtue by a kind of manly shame.

 

But all this is overlooked, or is kept out of sight, in the instructions of Illuminatism. In these the eye must be kept always directed to the Despot. This is the bugbear, and every thing is made to connect with present or future tyranny and oppression--Therefore Religion is held out as a combination of terrors--the invention of the state-tools, the priests. But it is not easy to stifle the suggestions of Nature--therefore no pains are spared to keep them down, by encreasing the uncertainty and doubts which arise in the course of all speculations on such subjects. Such difficulties occur in all scientific discussions.--Here they must be numerous and embarrassing--for in this enquiry we come near the first principles of things, and the first principles of human knowledge. The geometer does not wonder at mistakes even in his science, the most simple of all others. Nor does the mechanic or the chemist reject all his science, because he cannot attain clear conceptions of some Of the natural relations which operate in the phenomena under his consideration. Nor do any of these students of nature brand with the name of fool, or knave, or bigot, another person who has drawn a different conclusion from the phenomenon. In one point they all agree--they find themselves possessed of faculties which enable them to speculate, and to discover; and they find, that the operation of those faculties is quite unlike the things which they contemplate by their means--and they feel a satisfaction in the possession of them, and in this distinction. But this seems a misfortune to our Illuminators. I have long been struck with this. If by deep meditation I have solved a problem which has baffled the endeavours of others, I

[p. 247]

should hardly thank the person who convinced me that my success was entirely owing to the particular state of my health, by which my brain was kept free from many irritations to which other persons are exposed. Yet this is the conduct of the Illuminated--They are abundantly self-conceited; and yet they continually endeavour to destroy all grounds of self-estimation.---They rejoice in every discovery that is reported to them of some resemblance, unnoticed before, between mankind and the inferior creation, and would be happy to find that the resemblance is complete. It is very true, Mr. Pope's "Poor Indian, with untutor'd mind," had no objection to his dog's going to heaven with him;

"And thinks, admitted to that equal sky,
 "His faithful dog shall bear his company."

This is not an abject, but it is a modest sentiment. But our high-minded philosophers, who, with Beatrice in the play, "cannot brook obedience to a wayward piece of marl," if it be in the shape of a Prince, have far other notions of the matter. Indeed they are not yet agreed about it. Mr. de la Metherie hopes, that before the enlightened Republic of France has got into its teens, he shall be able to tell his fellow-citizens, in his Journal de Physique, that particular form of crystallization which men have been accustomed to call God.--Dr. Priestly again deduces all intelligence from elastic undulations, and will probably think, that his own great discoveries have been the quiverings of some fiery marsh miasma. While Pope's poor Indian hopes to take his dog to heaven with him, these Illuminators hope to die like dogs, and that both soul and body shall be as if they never had been.

 

Is not this a melancholy result of all our Illumination? It is of a piece with the termination of the ideal Philosophy, viz. professed and total ignorance. Should not this make us start back and hesitate, before we pout like wayward children at the rubs of civil subordination, and before we make a sacrifice to our ill humour of all that we value ourselves for? Does it not carry ridicule and absurdity in its forehead?--Such assertion of personal worth and dignity (always excepting Princes and priests) and such abject acknowledgements of worthlessness.--Does not this,

[p. 248]

of itself, show that there is some radical fault in the whole? It has all arisen from what they have called illumination, and this turns out to be worse than darkness--But we also know that it has all arisen from self-conceited discontent, and that it has been brought to its present state by the rage of speculation. We may venture to put the question to any man's conscience--whether discontent did not precede his doubts about his own nature, and whether he has not encouraged the train of argument that tended to degrade him. "Thy wish was father, Harry, to that thought."--Should not this make us distrust, at least, the operations of this faculty of our mind, and try to moderate and check this darling propensity? It seems a misfortune of the age--for we see that it is a natural source of disturbance and revolution. But here it will be immediately said, "What, must we give over thinking--be no longer rational creatures, and believe every lie that is told us?" By no means. Let us be really rational creatures--and, taught by experience, let us, in all our speculations on subjects which engage the passions, guard ourselves with the most anxious care against the risk of having our judgments warped by our desires. There is no propensity of our nature of which the proper and modest indulgence is not beneficial to man, and which is not hurtful, when this indulgence is carried too far. And if we candidly peruse the page of history, we shall be convinced that the abuse is great in proportion as the subject is important. What has been so ruinously perverted as the religious principle? What horrid superstition has it not produced? The Reader will not, I hope, take it amiss that I presume to direct his attention to some maxims which ought to conduct a prudent man in his indulgence of a speculative disposition, and apply them to the case in hand.

 

Whoever will for a while cast off his attention from the common affairs of life, the Curae hominum, et rerum pondus inane, and will but reflect a little on that wonderful principle within him, which carries him over the whole universe, and shows him its various relations--Whoever also remarks what a less than nothing he is, when compared with this unmeasurable scene--Whoever does this, cannot but feel an inexpressible pleasure in the contemplation.--He must rise in his own estimation, and be disposed to cherish

[p. 249]

with fondness this principle which so eminently raises him above all around him. Of all the sources of human vanity this is surely the most manly, the most excusable, and the most likely to be extravagantly indulged.--We may be certain that it will be so indulged, and that men will frequently speculate for the sake of speculation alone, and that they will have too much confidence in the results of this favorite occupation.--As there have been ages of indolent and abject credulity and superstition, it is next to certain that there are also times of wild and extravagant speculation--and when we see it becoming a sort of general passion, we may be certain that this is a case in point.

 

This can hardly be denied to be the character of the present day. It is not denied. On the contrary it is gloried in, as the prerogative of the 18th century. All the speculations of antiquity are considered as glimmerings (with the exceptions of a few brighter flashes) when compared with our present meridian splendor. We should therefore listen with caution to the inferences from this boasted Illumination. Also, when we reflect on what passes in our own minds, and on what we observe in the world, of the mighty influence of our desires and passions on our judgments, we should carefully notice whether any such warping of the belief is probable in the present case. That it is so is almost certain--for the general and immediate effect of this Illumination is to lessen or remove many restraints which the sanctions of religion lay on the indulgence of very strong passions, and to diminish our regard for a certain purity or correctness of manners, which religion recommends, as the only conduct suited to our noble natures, and as absolutely necessary for attaining that perfection and happiness of which we are capable.--For surely if we take away religion, it will be wisdom "to eat and to drink, since tomorrow we die." If moreover, we see this Illumination extolled above all science, as friendly to virtue as improving the heart, and as producing a just morality, which will lead to happiness, both for ourselves and others, but perceive at the same time that these assertions are made at the ex-pence of principles, which our natural feelings force us to venerate as supreme and paramount to all others, we may then be certain that our informer is trying to mislead and deceive us.--For all virtue and goodness, both of heart

[p. 250]

and conduct, is in perfect harmony, and there is no jarring or inconsistency. But we must pass this sentence on the doctrines of this Illumination. For it is a melancholy truth that they have been preached and recommended, for the most part, by clergymen, parish-ministers, who, in the presence of invoked Deity, and in the face of the world, have set their solemn seal to a system of doctrines directly opposite to those recommended in their writings; which doctrines they solemnly profess to believe, and solemnly swear to inculcate.--Surely the informations and instructions of such men should be rejected.--Where shall we find their real opinions? In their solemn oaths?--or in these infidel dissertations?--In either case, they are deceivers, whether mislead by vanity, or by the mean desire of church-emoluments; or they are prostitutes, courting the society of the wealthy and sensual. Honesty, like justice, admits of no degrees. A man is honest, or he is a knave--and who would trust a knave? But such men are unsuitable instructors for another reason--they are unwise; for, whatever they may think, they are not respected as men of worth, but are inwardly despised as parasites, by the rich, who admit them into their company, and treat them with civility, for their own reasons. We take instructions not merely from the knowing--the learned--but from the wise--not therefore from men who give such evidences of weakness.

 

Such would be the conduct of a prudent man, who listens to the instructions of another with the serious intention of profiting by them. In the present case, he sees plain proofs of degraded self estimation, of dishonesty, and of mean motives. But the prudent man will go further--he will remark that dissolute manners, and actions which are inevitably subversive of the peace and order, nay, of the very existence of society, are the natural and necessary consequences of irreligion. Should any doubt of this remain in his mind; should he sometimes think of an Epectetus, or one or two individuals of antiquity, who were eminently virtuous, without the influence of religious sanctions, he should recollect, that the Stoics were animated by the thought, that while the wise man was playing the game of life, the gods were looking on, and pleased with his skill. Let him read the beautiful account given by Dr. Smith, of the rise of the Stoic philosophy, and he will see that it was

[p. 251]

an artificial, but noble attempt of a few exalted minds, enthusiasts in virtue, aiming to steel their souls against the dreadful but unavoidable misfortunes to which they were continually exposed by the daily recurring revolutions in the turbulent democracies of ancient Greece. There a Philosopher was this day a Magistrate, and the next day a captive and a slave. He would see, that this fair picture of mental happiness and independence was fitted for the contemplation of only a few choice spirits, but had no influence on the bulk of mankind. He must admire the noble characters who were animated by this manly enthusiasm, and who have really exhibited some wonderful pictures of virtuous heroism; but he will regret, that the influence of these manly, these natural principles, was not more extensive. He will say to himself, "How will a whole nation act, when religious sanctions are removed, and men are actuated by reason alone?"--He is not without instruction on this important subject. France has given an awful lesson to surrounding nations, by shewing them what is the natural effect of shaking off the religious principle, and the veneration for that pure morality which characterises Christianity. By a decree of the Convention (June 6, 1794) it is declared, that there is nothing criminal in the promiscuous commerce of the sexes, and therefore nothing that derogates from the female character, when woman forgets that she is the depositary of all domestic satisfaction--that her honor is the sacred bond of social life--that on her modesty and delicacy depend all the respect and confidence that will make a man attach himself to her society, free her from labour, share with her the fruits of all his own exertions, and work with willingness and delight, that she may appear on all occasions his equal, and the ornament of all his acquisitions. In the very argument which this selected body of senators has given for the propriety of this decree, it has degraded woman below all estimation. "It is to prevent her from murdering the fruit of unlawful love, by removing her shame, and by relieving her from the fear of want." The senators say, "the Republic wants citizens, and therefore must not only remove this temptation of shame, but must take care of the mother while she nurses the child. It is the property of the nation, and must not be lost." The woman all the while is considered only as the she animal, the breeder of Sansculottes. This is the just morality of

[p. 252]

[paragraph continues] Illumination. It is really amusing (for things revolting to nature now amuse) to observe with what fidelity the principles of the Illuminati have expressed the sentiments which take possession of a people who have shaken off the sanctions of religion and morality. The following is part of the address to Psycharion and the company mentioned in page 148: "Once more, Psycharion, I indulge you with a look behind you to the flowry days of childhood. Now look forward, young woman! the holy circle of the marriageable (mannbaren) welcome you. Young men, honor the young woman, the future breeder (gebaererin)!" Then, to all.--"Rejoice in the dawn of Illumination and Freedom. Nature at last enjoys her sacred never-fading rights. Long was her voice kept down by civil subordination; but the days of your majority now draw nigh, and you will no longer, under the authority of guardians, account it a reproach to consider with enlightened eyes the secret workshops of Nature, and to enjoy your work and duty." Minos thought this very fine, but it raised a terrible disturbance, and broke up the assembly. Such are the effects of this boasted enlightening of the human mind with respect to religion and morality. Let us next consider what is the result of the mighty information which we have got in respect of our social or political connections.

 

II. We have learned the sum-total of this political Illumination, and see that, if true, it is melancholy, destructive of our present comforts, numerous as they are, and affords no prospect of redress from which we can profit, but, on the contrary, plunges mankind into contest, mutual injury, and universal misery, and all this for the chance only of prevailing in the contest, and giving our posterity a chance of going on in peace, if no change shall be produced, as in former times, by the efforts of ambitious men. But the Illumination appears to be partial, nay false. What is it? It holds out to the Prince nothing but the resignation of all his possessions, rights, and claims, sanctioned by the quiet possession of ages, and by all the feelings of the human heart which give any notion of right to his lowest subject. All these possessions and claims are discovered to have arisen from usurpations, and are therefore tyranny. It has been discovered, that all subordinate subjections were enforced, therefore their continuance is slavery. But both of

[p. 253]

these historical assertions are in a great degree false, and the inferences from them are unreasonable. The world has gone on as we see it go on at present. Most principalities or sovereignties have arisen as we see personal authorities and influence arise every day among ourselves. Business for the whole must be done. Most men are sufficiently occupied by their private affairs, and they are indolent even in these--they are contented when another does the thing for them. There is not a little village, nor a society of men, where this is not seen every day. Some men have an enjoyment in this kind of vicarious employment. All men like influence and power, and thus are compensated for their trouble. Thus many petty managers of public affairs arise in every country. The mutual animosities of individuals, and still more, the animosities of tribes, clans, and different associations, give rise to another kind of superiors--to leaders, who direct the struggles of the rest, whether for offence or defence. The descendants of Israel said, "they wanted a man to go out before the people, like other nations." As the small business of a few individuals requires a manager or a leader, so do some more general affairs of these petty superiors, and many of these also are indolent enough to wish this trouble taken off their hands; and thus another rank of superiors arises, and a third, and so on, till a great State may be formed; and in this gradation each class is a competent judge of the conduct of that class only which is immediately above it. All this may arise, and has often arisen, from voluntary concession alone. This concession may proceed from various causes--from confidence in superior talents--from confidence in great worth--most generally from the respect or deference which all men feel for great possessions. This is frequently founded in self-interest and expectations of advantage; but it is natural to man, and perhaps springs from our instinctive sympathy with the satisfactions of others--we are unwilling to disturb them, and even wish to promote them.

 

But this subordination may arise, and has often arisen, from other causes--from the love of power and influence, which makes some men eager to lead others, or even to manage their concerns. We see this every day, and it may be perfectly innocent. It often arises from the desire of gain of one kind or another. Even this may frequently be

[p. 254]

indulged with perfect innocence, and even with general advantage. Frequently, however, this subordination is produced by the love of power or of gain pushed to an immoderate degree of ambition, and rendered unjust. Now there arise oppression, tyranny, sufferings, and slavery. Now appears an opposition between the rights or claims of the ruler and of the people. Now the rulers come to consider themselves as a different class, and their transactions are now only with each other.--Prince becomes the rival or the enemy of Prince; and in their contests one prevails, and the dominion is enlarged. This rivalship may have begun in any rank of superiors, even between the first managers of the affairs of the smallest communities; and it must be remarked that they only are the immediate gainers or losers in the contest, while those below them live at ease, enjoying many advantages of the delegation of their own concerns.

 

No human society has ever proceeded purely in either of these two ways, but there has always been a mixture of both.--But this process is indispensably necessary for the formation of a great nation and for all the consequences that result only from such a coalition.--Therefore it is necessary for giving rise to all those comforts, and luxuries, and elegances, which are to be found only in great and cultivated states. It is necessary for producing such enjoyments as we see around us in Europe, which we prize so highly, and for which we are making all this stir and disturbance. I believe that no man who expects to be believed will flatly say that human nature and human enjoyments are not meliorated by this cultivation.--It seems to be the intention of nature, and, notwithstanding the follies and vices of many, we can have little hesitation in saying that there are in the most cultivated nations of Europe, and even in the highest ranks of these nations, men of great virtue and worth and of high accomplishment--Nor can we deny that such men are the finest specimens of human nature. Rousseau wrote a whimsical pamphlet in which he had the vanity to think that he had proved that all these fruits of cultivation were losses to humanity and to virtue--Yet Rousseau could not be contented with the society of the rude and unpolished, although he pretended that he was almost the sole worshipper of

[p. 255]

pure virtue.--He supported himself, not by assisting the simple peasant, but by writing music for the pampered rich.

This is the circumstance entirely overlooked, or artfully kept out of sight, in the boasted Illumination of these days. No attention is paid to the important changes which have happened in national greatness, in national connection, in national improvement--yet we never think of parting with any of the advantages, real or imaginary, which these changes have produced--nor do we reflect in order to keep a great nation together--to make it act with equality, or with preponderancy, among other nations, the individual exertions must be concentrated, must be directed--and that this requires a ruler vested with supreme power, and interested by some great and endearing motive, such as hereditary possession of this power and influence, to maintain and defend this coalition of men.--All this is overlooked, and we attend only to the subordination which is indispensably necessary. Its grievances are immediately felt, and they are heightened ten fold by a delicacy or sensibility which springs from the great improvements in the accommodations and enjoyments of life, which the gradual usurpation and subsequent subordination have produced and continue to support. But we are determined to have the elegance and grandeur of a palace without the prince.--We will not give up any of our luxuries and refinements, yet will not support those high ranks and those nice minds which produced them, and which must continue to keep them from degenerating into barbarous simplicity and coarse sensuality.--We would keep the philosophers, the poets, the artists, but not the Moecenases.--It is very true that in such a state there would be no Conjuration des Philosophes: for in such a state this vermin of philosophes and scribblers would not have existed.--In short, we would have what is impossible.

 

I have no hesitation in saying, that the British Constitution is the form of government for a great and refined nation, in which the ruling sentiments and propensities of human nature seem most happily blended and balanced. There is no occasion to vaunt it as the ancient rights of Britons, the wisdom of ages, &c. It has attained its present pitch of perfection by degrees, and this not by the efforts of wisdom, but by the struggles of vice and folly, working

[p. 256]

on a rich fund of good nature, and of manly spirit, that are conspicuous in the British character. I do not hesitate to say that this is the only form of government which will admit and give full exercise to all the respectable propensities of our nature, with the least chance of disturbance, and the greatest probability of man's arriving at the highest pitch of improvement in every thing that raises him above the beasts of the field. Yet there is no part of it that may not, that is not, abused, by pushing it to an improper length, and the same watchful care is necessary for preserving our inestimable blessings that was employed in acquiring them.--This is to be done, not flying at once to an abstract theory of the rights of man.--There is an evident folly in this procedure. What is this theory? It is the best general sketch that we can draw of social life, deduced from our knowledge of human nature.--And what is this knowledge? It is a well digested abstract, or rather a declaration of what we have observed of human actions. What is the use therefore of this intermediate picture, this theory of the rights of man?--It has a chance of being unlike the original--it must certainly have imperfections.--Therefore it can be of no use to us.--We should go at once to the original--we should consider how men have acted--what have been their mutual expectations--their fond propensities--what of these are inconsistent with each other--what are the degrees of indulgence which have been admitted in them all without disturbance. I will venture to say that whoever does this, will find himself imperceptibly set down in the British parliament of King, Lords, and Commons, all looking at each other with somewhat of a cautious or jealous eye, while the rest of the nation are sitting, "each under his own vine, and under his own fig-tree, and there is none to make him afraid."

 

A most valuable result of such contemplation will be a thorough conviction that the grievance which is most clamorously insisted on is the inevitable consequence of the liberty and security which we enjoy. I mean ministerial corruption, with all the dismal tale of placemen, and pensioners, and rotten boroughs, &c. &c. These are never seen in a despotic government--there they are not wanted--nor can they be very apparent in an uncultivated and poor state--but in a luxurious nation, where pleasures abound,

[p. 257]

where the returns of industry are secure; here an individual looks on every thing as his own acquisition--he does not feel his relation to the state--has no patriotism--thinks that he would be much happier if the state would let him alone.--He is fretted by the restraints which the public weal lays on him--therefore government and governors appear as checks and hindrances to his exertions--hence a general inclination to resist administration.--Yet public business must be done, that we may lie down and rise again in safety and peace.--Administration must be supported--there are always persons who wish to possess the power that is exercised by the present ministers, and would turn them out.--How is all this to be remedied?--I see no way but by applying to the selfish views of individuals--by rewarding the friends of administration--this may be done with perfect virtue--and from this the selfish will conceive hopes, and will support a virtuous ministry--but they are as ready to help a wicked one.--This becomes the greatest misfortune of a free nation.--Ministers are tempted to bribe--and, if a systematic opposition be considered as a necessary part of a practical constitution, it is almost indispensable--and it is no where so prevalent as in a pure democracy.--Laws may be contrived to make it very troublesome--but can never extirpate it, nor greatly diminish it--this can be done only by despotism, or by national virtue.--It is a shameful complaint--we should not reprobate a few ministers, but the thousands who take the bribes.--Nothing tends so much to diminish it in a corrupted nation as great limitations to the eligibility of representatives--and this is the beauty of our constitution.

We have not discovered, therefore, by this boasted Illumination, that Princes and superiors are useless, and must vanish from the earth; nor that the people have now attained full age, and are fit to govern themselves. We want only to revel for a little on the last fruits of national cultivation, which we would quickly consume, and never allow to be raised again.--No matter how this progress began, whether from concession or usurpation--We possess it, and if wise, we will preserve it, by preserving its indispensable supports. They have indeed been frequently employed very improperly, but their most pernicious abuse has been this breed of scribbling vermin, which have made the body-politic smart in every limb.

[p. 258]

Hear what opinion was entertained of the sages of France by their Prince, the Father of Louis XVI. the unfortunate martyr of Monarchy. "By the principles of our new Philosophers, the Throne no longer wears the splendour of divinity. They maintain that it arose from violence, and that by the same justice that force erected it, force may again shake it, and overturn it. The people can never give up their power. They only let it out for their own advantage, and always retain the right to rescind the contract, and resume it whenever their personal advantage, their only rule of conduct, requires it. Our philosophers teach in public what our passions suggest only in secret. They say to the Prince that all is permitted only when all is in his power, and that his duty is fulfilled when he has pleased his fancy. Then, surely, if the laws of self-interest, that is, the self-will of human passions, shall be so generally admitted, that we thereupon forget the eternal laws of God and of Nature, all conceptions of right and wrong, of virtue and vice, of good and evil, must be extirpated from the human heart. The throne must totter, the subjects must become unmanageable and mutinous, and their ruler hard-hearted and inhuman. The people will be incessantly either oppressed, or in an uproar."--"What service will it be if I order such a book to be burnt--the author can write another by to-morrow." This opinion of a Prince is unpolished indeed, and homely, but it is just.

 

Weishaupt grants that "there will be a terrible convulsion, and a storm--but this will be succeeded by a calm--the unequal will now be equal--and when the cause of dissension is thus removed, the world will be in peace." True, when the causes of dissension are removed. Thus, the destruction of our crop by vermin is at an end when a flood has swept every thing away--but as new plants will spring up in the waste, and, if not instantly devoured, will again cover the ground with verdure, so the industry of man, and his desire of comfort and consideration, will again accumulate in the hands of the diligent a greater proportion of the good things of life. In this infant state of the emerging remains of former cultivation, comforts, which the present inhabitants of Europe would look on with contempt, will be great, improper, and hazardous acquisitions. The

[p. 259]

principles which authorise the proposed dreadful equalisation will as justly entitle the idle or unsuccessful of future days to strip the possessor of his advantages, and things must ever remain on their savage level.

 

III. I think that the impression which the insincerity of conduct of those instructors will leave on the mind, must be highly useful. They are evidently teaching what they do not believe themselves--and here I do not confine my remark to their preparatory doctrines, which they afterwards explode. I make it chiefly with respect to their grand ostensible principle, which pervades the whole, a principle which they are obliged to adopt against their will. They know that the principles of virtue are rooted in the heart and that they can only be smothered--but did they pretend to eradicate them and proclaim hominem homini lupum, all would spurn at their instruction. We are wheedled, by tickling our fancy with the notion that sacred virtue is not only secure, but that it is only in such hearts that it exerts its native energy. Sensible that the levelling maxims now spoken of, are revolting to the mind, the Illuminators are under the necessity of keeping us from looking at the shocking picture, by displaying a beautiful scene of Utopian happiness--and they rock us asleep by the eternal lullaby of morality and universal philanthropy. Therefore the foregoing narration of the personal conduct of these instructors and reformers of the world, is highly useful. All this is to be brought about by the native loveliness of pure virtue, purged of the corruptions which superstitious fears have introduced, and also purged of the selfish thoughts which are avowed by the advocates of what their opponents call true religion. This is said to hold forth eternal rewards to the good, and to threaten the wicked with dreadful punishment. Experience has shown how inefficient such motives are. Can they be otherwise, say our Illuminators? Are they not addressed to a principle that is ungenerous and selfish? But our doctrines, say they, touch the hearts of the worthy. Virtue is beloved for her own sake, and all will yield to her gentle sway. But look, Reader, look at Spartacus the murderer--at Cato the keeper of poisons and the thief--Look at Tiberius, at Alcibiades, and the rest of the Bavarian Pandemonium.--Look at Poor Bahrdt.--Go to France-

[p. 260]

look at Lequinio--at Condorcet. [**]--Look at the Monster Orleans.--All were liars. Their divinity had no influence on their profligate minds. They only wanted to wheedle you, by touching the strings of humanity and goodness which are yet braced up in your heart, and which will still yield sweet harmony if you will accompany their notes with those of religion, and neither clog them with the groveling pleasures of sense, nor damp the whole with the thought of eternal silence.

 

A most worthy and accomplished gentleman, who took refuge in this country, leaving behind him his property, and friends to whom he was most tenderly attached, often said to me that nothing so much affected him as the revolution in the hearts of men.--Characters which were unspotted, hearts thoroughly known to himself, having been tried by many things which search the inmost folds of selfishness or malevolence--in short, persons whose judgments were excellent, and on whose worth he could have rested his honor and his life, so fascinated by the contagion, that they came at last to behold, and even to commit the most atrocious crimes with delight.--He used sometimes to utter a sigh which pierced my heart, and would say, that it was caused by some of those things that had come across his thoughts. He breathed his last among us, declaring that it was impossible to recover peace of mind, without a total oblivion of the wickedness and miseries he had beheld.--What a valuable advice, "Let him that thinketh he standeth, take heed lest he fall."--When the prophet told Hazael that he would betray his Prince, he exclaimed, "Is thy servant a dog, that he should do such a thing?" Yet next day he murdered him.

 

Never, since the beginning of the world, has true religion received so complete an acknowledgment of her excellence, as has been extorted from the fanatics who have attempted to destroy her. Religion stood in their way, and the wretch

[p. 261]

[paragraph continues] Marat, as well as the steady villain Weishaupt, saw that they could not proceed till they had eradicated all sentiments of the moral government of the universe. Human nature, improved as it has been by Religion, shrunk from the tasks that were imposed, and it must therefore be brutalized--The grand confederation was solemnly sworn to by millions in every corner of France-but, as Mirabeau said of the declaration of the Rights of Man, it must be made only the "Almanac of the bygone year"--Therefore Lequinio must write a book, declaring oaths to be nonsense, unworthy of sansculottes, and all religion to be a farce.--Not long after, they found that they had some use for a God--but he was gone--and they could not find another.--Their constitution was gone--and they have not yet found another.--What is now left them on which they can depend for awing a man into a respect for truth in his judicial declarations?--what but the honor of a Citizen of France, who laughs at all engagements, which he has broken again and again.--Religion has taken off with her every sense of human duty.--What can we expect but villany from an Archbishop of Paris and his chapter, who made a public profession that they had been playing the villains for many years, teaching what they thought to be a bundle of lies? What but the very thing which they have done, cutting each others throats. Have not the enlightened citizens of France applauded the execution of their fathers? Have not the furies of Paris denounced their own children?--But turn your eyes from the horrifying spectacle, and think on your own noble descent and alliance. You are not the accidental productions of a fatal chaos, but the work of a Great Artist, creatures that are cared for, born to noble prospects, and conducted to them by the plainest and most simple precepts, "to do justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly before God," not bewildered by the false and fluttering glare of French Philosophy, but conducted by this clear, single light, perceivable by all, "Do to others what you should reasonably expect them to do to you."

Think not the Muse whose sober voice you hear,
   Contracts with bigot frown her sullen brow.
 Casts round Religion's orb the mists of Fear,
   Or shades with horror what with smiles should glow. [p. 262]

No--she would warm you with seraphic fire,
   Heirs as ye are of Heaven's eternal day,
 Would bid you boldly to that Heaven aspire,
   Not sink and slumber in your cells of clay.

Is this the bigot's rant? Away ye vain,
   Your doubts, your fears, in gloomy dulness sleep;
 Go--soothe your souls in sickness, death, or pain,
   With the sad solace of eternal sleep.

Yet know, vain sceptics, know, th' Almighty Mind,
   Who breath'd on man a portion of his fire.
 Bade his free soul, by earth nor time confin'd,
   To Heaven, to immortality aspire.

Nor shall this pile of hope his bounty rear'd,
   By vain philosophy be e'er destroy'd;
 Eternity, by all or hop'd or fear'd,
   Shall be by all or suffer'd or enjoy'd.
                                                       MASON.

The unfortunate Prince who has taken refuge in this kingdom, and whose situation among us is an illustrious mark of the generosity of the nation, and of the sovereignty of its laws, said to one of the Gentlemen about him, that "if this country was to escape the general wreck of nations, it would owe its preservation to Religion."--When this was doubted, and it was observed, that there had not been wanting many Religionists in France: "True," said the Prince, "but they were not in earnest.--I see here a serious interest in the thing. The people know what they are doing when they go to church--they understand something of it, and take an interest in it." May his observation be just, and his expectations be fulfilled!

 

IV. I would again call upon my countrywomen with the most earnest concern, and beseech them to consider this subject as of more particular importance to themselves than even to the men.--While woman is considered as a respectable moral agent, training along with ourselves for endless improvement; then, and only then, will she be considered by lordly man as bis equal;--then, and only then, will she be allowed to have any rights, and those rights be respected. Strip women of this prerogative, and they become the drudges of man's indolence, or the pampered playthings of his idle hours, subject to his caprices, and slaves to his mean passions. Soon will their present empire of gallantry

[p. 263]

be over. It is a refinement of manners which sprang from Christianity; and when Christianity is forgotten, this artificial diadem will be taken from their heads, and, unless they adopt the ferocious sentiments of their Gallic neighbours, and join in the general uproar, they will sink into the insignificance of the women in the turbulent republics of Greece, where they are never seen in the busy haunts of men, if we except four or five, who, during the course of as many centuries, emerged from the general obscurity, and appear in the historic page, by their uncommon talents, and by the sacrifice of what my fair countrywomen still hold to be the ornament of their sex. I would remind them that they have it in their power to retain their present honorable station in society. They are our early instructors, and while mothers in the respectable stations of life continued to inculcate on the tender minds of their sons a veneration for the precepts of Religion, their plient children, receiving their instructions along with the affectionate caresses of their mothers, got impressions which long retained their force, and which protected them from the impulses of youthful passions, till ripening years fitted their minds for listening to serious instruction from their public teachers. Sobriety and decency of manners were then no slur on the character of a youth, and he was thought capable of struggling for independence, or pre-eminence, fit either for supporting or defending the state, although he was neither a toper nor a rake. I believe that no man who has seen thirty or forty years of life will deny that the manners of youth are sadly changed in this respect. And, without presuming to say that this has proceeded from the neglect, and almost total cessation of the moral education of the nursery, I think myself well warranted, from my own observation, to say that this education and the sober manners of young men have quitted us together.

 

Some will call this prudery, and croaking. But I am almost transcribing from Cicero, and from Quintilian.--Cornelia, Aurelia, Attia, and other ladies of the first rank, are praised by Cicero only for their eminence in this respect; but not because they were singular. Quintilian says that in the time immediately prior to his own, it had been the general practice of the ladies of rank to superintend the moral education both of sons and daughters. But of

[p. 264]

late, says he, they are so engaged in continual and corrupting amusements, such as the shows of gladiators, horse-racing, and deep play, that they have no time, and have yielded their places to Greek governesses and tutors, outcasts of a nation more subdued by their own vices than by the Roman arms. I dare say this was laughed at, as croaking about the corruption of the age. But what was the consequence of all this?--The Romans became the most abandoned voluptuaries, and, to preserve their mean pleasures, they crouched as willing slaves to a succession of the vilest tyrants that ever disgraced humanity.

 

What a noble fund of self-estimation would our fair partners acquire to themselves, if, by reforming the manners of the young generation, they should be the means of restoring peace to the world! They have it in their power, by the renewal of the good old custom of early instruction, and perhaps still more, by impressing on the minds of their daughters the same sentiments, and obliging them to respect sobriety and decency in the youth, and pointedly to withhold their smiles and civilities from all who transgress these in the smallest degree. This is a method of proceeding that will most certainly be victorious. Then indeed will the women be the saviours of their country. While therefore the German fair have been repeatedly branded with having welcomed the French invaders, [**] let our Ladies stand up for the honor of free-born Britons, by turning against the pretended enlighteners of the world, the arms which nature has put into their hands, and which those profligates have presumptuously expected to employ in extending their influence over mankind. The empire of beauty is but short, but the empire of virtue is durable; nor is there an instance to be met with of its decline. If it be yet possible to reform the world, it is possible for the fair. By the constitution of human nature, they must always appear as the ornament of human life, and be the objects of fondness and affection; so that if any thing can make head against

[p. 265]

the selfish and overbearing dispositions of man, it is his respectful regard for the sex. But mere fondness has but little of the rational creature in it, and we see it harbour every day in the breast that is filled with the meanest and most turbulent passions. No where is it so strong as in the harems of the east; and as long as the women ask nothing of the men but fondness and admiration, they will get nothing else--they will never be respected. But let them rouse themselves, assert their dignity, by shewing their own elevated sentiments of human nature, and by acting up to this claim, and they may then command the world.

 

V. Another good consequence that should result from the account that has been given of the proceedings of this conspiracy is, that since the fascinating picture of human life, by which men have been wheedled into immediate anarchy and rebellion, is insincere, and a mere artificial creature of the imagination, it can have no steadiness, but must be changed by every freak of fancy, or by every ingenious sophist, who can give an equal plausibility to whatever suits his present views. It is as much an airy phantom as any other whim of Free Masonry, and has no prototype, no original pattern in human nature, to which recourse may always be had, to correct mistakes, and keep things in a constant tenor. Has not France given the most unequivocal proofs of this? Was not the declaration of the Rights of Man, the production of their most brilliant Illuminators, a picture in abstracto, where man was placed at a distance from the eye, that no false light of local situation might pervert the judgment or engage the passions? Was it not declared to be the masterpiece of human wisdom? Did not the nation consider it at leisure? and having it continually before their eyes, did they not, step by step, give their assent to the different articles of their Constitution, derived from it, and fabricated by their most choice Illuminators? And did not this Constitution draw the applauses of the bright geniuses of other nations, who by this time were busy in persuading, each his countrymen, that they were ignoramuses in statistics, and patient slaves of oppression or of ancient prejudices? Did not panegyrics on it issue from every garret in London? Where is it now? where is its successor? Has any one plan of government subsisted, except while it was supported by the incontroulable

[p. 266]

and inexorable power of the guillotine? Is not the present administration of France as much as ever the object of discontent and of terror, and its coercions as like as ever to the summary justice of the Parisian mob? Is there any probability of its permanency in a state of peace, when the fears of a foreign enemy no longer give a consolidation to their measures, and oblige them either to agree among themselves, or immediately to perish?

 

VI. The above accounts evince in the most uncontrovertible manner the dangerous tendency of all mystical societies, and of all associations who hold secret meetings. We see that their uniform progress has been from frivolity and nonsense to wickedness and sedition. Weishaupt has been at great pains to show the good effects of secrecy in the Association, and the arguments are valid for his purpose.--But all his arguments are so many dissuasive ad-vices to every thinking and sober mind. The man who really wishes to discover an abstruse truth will place himself, if possible, in a calm situation, and will by no means expose himself to the impatient hankering for secrets and wonders--and he will always fear that a thing which resolutely conceals itself cannot bear the light. All who have seriously employed themselves in the discovery of truth have found the great advantages of open communication of sentiment. And it is against common sense to imagine that there is any thing of vast importance to mankind which is yet a secret, and which must be kept a secret in order to be useful. This is against the whole experience of mankind--And surely to hug in one's breast a secret of such mighty importance, is to give the lie to all our professions of brotherly love. What a solecism! a secret to enlighten and reform the whole world.--We render all our endeavours impotent when we grasp at a thing beyond our power. Let an association be formed with a serious plan for reforming its own members, and let them extend their numbers in proportion as they succeed--this might do some good.--But must the way of doing this be a secret?--It may be to many--who will not look for it where it is to be found--It is this,

"Do good--seek peace--and pursue it."

But it is almost affronting the reader to suppose arguments necessary on this point. If there be a necessity for secrecy,

[p. 267]

the purpose of the Association is either frivolous, or it is selfish.

 

Now, in either case, the danger of such secret assemblies is manifest.--Mere frivolity can never seriously occupy men come to age. And accordingly we see that in every quarter of Europe where Free Masonry has been established, the Lodges have become seedbeds of public mischief. I believe that no ordinary Brother will say, that the occupations in the Lodges are any thing better than frivolous, very frivolous indeed. The distribution of charity needs be no secret, and it is but a very small part of the employment of the meeting.--This being the case, it is in human nature that the greater we suppose the frivolity of such an association to be, the greater is the chance of its ceasing to give sufficient occupation to the mind, and the greater is the risk that the meetings may be employed to other purposes which require concealment. When this happens, self-interest alone must prompt and rule, and now there is no length that some men will not go, when they think themselves in no danger of detection and punishment. The whole proceedings of the secret societies of Free Masons on the Continent (and I am authorised to say, of some Lodges in Britain) have taken one turn, and this turn is perfectly natural. In all countries there are men of licentious morals. Such men wish to have a safe opportunity of indulging their wits in satire and sarcasm; and they are pleased with the support of others.--The desire of making proselytes is in every breast--and it is whetted by the restraints of society.--And all countries have discontented men, whose grumblings will raise discontent in others, who might not have attended to some of the trifling hardships and injuries they met with, had they not been reminded of them. To be discontented, and not to think of schemes of redress, is what we cannot think natural or manly;--and where can such sentiments and schemes find such safe utterance and such probable support as in a secret society? Free Masonry is innocent of all these things; but Free Masonry has been abused, and at last totally perverted--and so will and must any such secret association, as long as men are licentious in their opinions or wicked in their dispositions.

 

It were devoutly to be wished therefore that the whole

[p. 268]

[paragraph continues] Fraternity would imitate the truly benevolent conduct of those German Lodges who have formally broken up, and made a patriotic sacrifice of their amusement to the safety of the state. I cannot think the sacrifice great or costly. It can be no difficult matter to find as pleasant a way of passing a vacant hour--and the charitable deeds of the members need not diminish in the smallest degree. Every person's little circle of acquaintance will give him opportunities of gratifying his kind dispositions, without the chance of being mistaken in the worth of the person on whom he bestows his favors. There is no occasion to go to St. Petersburg for a poor Brother, nor to India for a convert to Christianity, as long as we see so many sufferers and infidels among ourselves.

 

But not only are secret societies dangerous, but all societies whose object is mysterious. The whole history of man is a proof of this position. In no age or country has there ever appeared a mysterious association which did not in time become a public nuisance. Ingenious or designing men of letters have attempted to show that some of the ancient mysteries were useful to mankind, containing rational doctrines of natural religion. This was the strong hold of Weishaupt, and he quotes the Eleusinian, the Pythagorean, and other mysteries. But surely their external signs and tokens were every thing that is shocking to decency and civil order. It is uncommon presumption for the learned of the 18th century to pretend to know more about them than their contemporaries, the philosophers, the lawgivers of antiquity. These give no such account of them. I would desire any person who admires the ingenious dissertations of Dr. Warburton to read a dull German book, called Caracteristik der Mysterien der Altern, published at Frankfort in 1787. The author contents himself with a patient collection of every scrap of every ancient author who has said any thing about them. If the reader can see any thing in them but the most absurd and immoral polytheism and fable, he must take words in a sense that is useless in reading any other piece of ancient composition. I have a notion that the Dionysiacs of Ionia had some scientific secrets, viz. all the knowledge of practical mechanics which was employed by their architects and engineers, and that they were really a Masonic Fraternity. But, like the Illuminati, they

[p. 269]

tagged to the secrets of Masonry the secret of drunkenness and debauchery; they had their Sister Lodges, and at last became rebels, subverters of the States where they were protected, till aiming at the dominion of all Ionia, they were attacked by the neighbouring States and dispersed. They were Illuminators too, and wanted to introduce the worship of Bacchus over the whole country, as appears in the account of them given by Strabo.--Perhaps the Pythagoreans had also some scientific secrets! but they too were Illuminators, and thought it their duty to overset the State, and were themselves overset.

 

Nothing is so dangerous as a mystic Association. The object remaining a secret in the hands of the managers, the rest simply put a ring in their own noses, by which they may be led about at pleasure; and still panting after the secret, they are the better pleased the less they see of their way. A mystical object enables the leader to shift his ground as he pleases, and to accommodate himself to every current fashion or prejudice. This again gives him almost unlimited power; for he can make use of these prejudices to lead men by troops. He finds them already associated by their prejudices, and waiting for a leader to concentrate their strength and set them in motion. And when once great bodies of men are set in motion, with a creature of their fancy for a guide, even the engineer himself cannot say, "Thus far shalt thou go, and no farther."

 

VII. We may also gather from what we have seen, that all declamations on universal philanthropy are dangerous. Their natural and immediate effect on the mind is to increase the discontents of the unfortunate, and of those in the laborious ranks of life. No one, even of the Illuminators, will deny that these ranks must be filled, if society exists in any degree of cultivation whatever, and that there will always be a greater number of men who have no farther prospect. Surely it is unkind to put such men continually in mind of a state in which they might be at their ease; and it is unkindness unmixed, because all the change that they will produce will be, that James will serve John, who formerly was the servant of James. Such declamations naturally tend to cause men to make light of the obligations and duties of common patriotism, because these are represented

[p. 270]

as subordinate and inferior to the greater and more noble affection of universal benevolence. I do not pretend to say that patriotism is founded in a rationally-perceived pre-eminence or excellence of the society with which we are connected. But if it be a fact that society will not advance unless its members take an interest in it, and that human nature improves only in society, surely this interest should be cherished in every breast. Perhaps national union arises from national animosity;--but they are plainly distinguishable, and union is not necessarily productive of injustice. The same arguments that have any force against patriotism are equally good against the preference which natural instinct gives parents for their children; and surely no one can doubt of the propriety of maintaining this in its full force, subject however to the precise laws of justice.

 

But I am in the wrong to adduce paternal or filial affection in defence of patriotism and loyalty, since even those natural instincts are reprobated by the Illuminati, as hostile to the all-comprehending philanthropy. Mr. de la Metherie says, that among the memorials sent from the clubs in England to the National Assembly, he read two (printed) in which the Assembly was requested to establish a community of wives, and to take children from their parents, and educate them for the nation. In full compliance with this dictate of universal philanthropy, Weishaupt would have murdered his own child and his concubine--and Orleans voted the death of his near relation.

 

Indeed, of all the consequences of Illumination, the most melancholy is this revolution which it seems to operate in the heart of man--this forcible sacrifice of every affection of the heart to an ideal divinity, a mere creature of the imagination.--It seems a prodigy, yet it is a matter of experience, that the farther we advance, or vainly suppose that we do advance, in the knowledge of our mental powers, the more are our moral feelings flattened and done away. I remember reading, long ago, a dissertation on the nursing of infants by a French academician, Le Cointre of Versailles. He indelicately supports his theories by the case of his own son, a weak puny infant, whom his mother was obliged to keep continually applied to her bosom, so that she rarely could get two hours of sleep during the time of

[p. 271]

suckling him. Mr. Le Cointre says, that she contracted for this infant "une partialite tout-a-fait deraisonable."--Plato, or Socrates, or Cicero, would probably have explained this by the habitual exercise of pity, a very endearing emotion.--But our Academician, better illuminated, solves it by stimuli on the papillae, and on the nerves of the skin, and by the meeting of the humifying aura, &c. and does not seem to think that young Le Cointre was much indebted to his mother. It would amuse me to learn that this was the wretch Le Cointre, Major of the National Guards of Versailles, who countenanced and encouraged the shocking treason and barbarity of those ruffians on the 5th and 6th of October 1789. Complete freezing of the heart would (I think) be the consequence of a theory which could perfectly explain the affections by vibrations or crystallizations.--Nay, any very perfect theory of moral sentiments must have something of this tendency.--Perhaps the ancient systems of moral philosophy, which were chiefly searches after the summum bonum, and systems of moral duties, tended more to form and strengthen the heart, and produce a worthy man, than the most perfect theory of modern times, which explains every phenomenon by means of a nice anatomy of our affections.

 

So far therefore as we are really more illuminated, it may chance to give us an easier victory over the natural or instinctive attachments of mankind, and make the sacrifice to universal philanthropy less costly to the heart. I do not however pretend to say that this is really the case: but I think myself fully warranted to say, that increase of virtuous affections in general has not been the fruit of modern Illumination. I will not again sicken the reader, by calling his attention to Weishaupt and his associates or successors. But let us candidly contemplate the world around us, and particularly the perpetual advocates of universal philanthropy. What have been the general effects of their continual declamations? Surely very melancholy; nor can it easily be otherwise.--An ideal standard is continually referred to. This is made gigantic, by being always seen indistinctly, as thro' a mist, or rather a fluttering air. In comparison with this, every feeling that we have been accustomed to respect vanishes as insignificant; and, adopting the Jesuitical maxim, that "the great end sanctifies every

[p. 272]

mean," this sum of Cosmo-political good is made to eclipse or cover all the present evils which must be endured for it. The fact now is, that we are become so familiarised with enormities, such as brutality to the weaker sex, cruelty to old age, wanton refinement on barbarity, that we now hear unmoved accounts of scenes, from which, a few years ago, we would have shrunk back with horror. With cold hearts, and a metaphysical scale, we measure the present miseries of our fellow-creatures, and compare them with the accumulated miseries of former times, occasioned through a course of ages, and ascribed to the ambition of Princes. In this artificial manner are the atrocities of France extenuated; and we struggle, and partly succeed, in reasoning ourselves out of all the feelings which link men together in society.--The ties of father, husband, brother, friend--all are abandoned for an emotion which we must even strive to excite--universal philanthropy. But this is sad perversion of nature. "He that loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how can he love God whom he hath not seen?"--Still less can he love this ideal being, of which he labours to conjure up some indistinct and fleeting notion. It is also highly absurd; for, in trying to collect the circumstances which constitute the enjoyments of this Citizen of the World, we find ourselves just brought back to the very moral feelings which we are wantonly throwing away. Weishaupt allures us by the happiness of the patriarchal life as the summum bonum of man. But if it is any thing more than eating and sleeping, and bullying with the neighbouring patriarchs, it must consist in the domestic and neighbourly affections, and every other agreeable moral feeling, all which are to be had in our present state in greater abundance.

 

But this is all a pretence; the wicked corrupters of mankind have no such views of human felicity, nor would they be contented with it;--they want to intrigue and to lead;--and their patriarchal life answers the same purpose of tickling the fancy as the Arcadia of the poets. Horace shows the frivolity of these declamations, without formally enouncing the moral, in his pretty Ode,

Beutus ille qui procul negotiis.

The usurer, after expatiating on this Arcadian felicity,

[p. 273]

hurries away to change, and puts his whole cash again out to usury.

 

Equally ineffective are the declamations of Cosmo-politism on a mind filled with selfish passions;--they just serve it for a subterfuge.--The ties of ordinary life are broken in the first place, and the Citizen of the World is a wolf of the desert.

 

The unhappy consequence is, that the natural progress of liberty is retarded. Had this ignis fatuus not appeared and misled us, the improvements which true Illumination has really produced, the increase in sciences and arts, and the improvement in our estimate of life and happiness, would have continued to work silently and gradually in all nations; and those which are less fortunate in point of government would also have improved, bit by bit, without losing any sensible portion of their present enjoyments in the possession of riches, or honors, or power. Those pretensions would gradually have come to balance each other, and true liberty, such as Britons enjoy, might have taken place over all.

 

Instead of this, the inhabitants of every State are put into a situation where every individual is alarmed and injured by the success of another, because all pre-eminence is criminal. Therefore there must be perpetual jealousy and struggle. Princes are now alarmed, since they see the aim of the lower classes, and they repent of their former liberal concessions. All parties maintain a sullen distance and reserve;--the people become unruly, and the Sovereign hard-hearted; so that liberty, such as can be enjoyed in peace, is banished from the country.

 

VIII. When we see how eagerly the Illuminati endeavoured to insinuate their Brethren into all offices which gave them influence on the public mind, and particularly into seminaries of education, we should be particularly careful to prevent them, and ought to examine with anxious attention the manner of thinking of all who offer themselves for teachers of youth. There is no part of the secret correspondence of Spartacus and his Associates, in which we see more varied and artful methods for securing pupils, than in his

[p. 274]

own conduct respecting the students in the University, and the injunctions he gives to others. There are two men, Socher and Drexl, who had the general inspection of the schools in the Electorate. They are treated by Spartacus as persons of the greatest consequence, and the instructions given them stick at no kind of corruption. Weishaupt is at pains, by circuitous and mean arts, to induce young gentlemen to come under his care, and, to one whom he describes in another letter as a little master who must have much indulgence, he causes it to be intimated, that in the quarters where he is to be lodged, he will get the key of the street-door, so that he can admit whom he will. In all this canvassing he never quits the great object, the forming the mind of the young man according to the principles of universal Liberty and Equality, and to gain this point, scruples not to flatter, and even to excite his dangerous passions. We may be certain, that the zeal of Cosmo-politism will operate in the same way in other men, and we ought therefore to be solicitous to have all that are the instructors of youth, persons of the most decent manners. No question but sobriety and hypocrisy may inhabit the same breast. But its immediate effect on the pupil is at least safe, and it is always easy for a sensible parent to represent the restrictions laid on the pupil by such a man as the effects of uncommon anxiety for his safety. Whereas there is no cure for the lax principles that may steal upon the tender mind that is not early put on its guard. Weishaupt undoubtedly thought that the principles of civil anarchy would be easiest inculcated on minds that had already shaken off the restraints of Religion, and entered into habits of sensual indulgence. We shall be safe if we trust his judgment in this matter.--We should be particularly observant of the character and principles of Men of Talents, who offer themselves for these offices, because their influence must be very great. Indeed this anxiety should extend to all offices which in any way give the holders any remarkable influence on the minds of considerable numbers. Such should always be filled by men of immaculate characters and approved principles; and, in times like the present, where the most essential questions are the subjects of frequent discussion, we should always consider with some distrust the men who are very cautious in declaring their opinions on these questions.

[p. 275]

It is a great misfortune undoubtedly to feel ourselves in a situation which makes us damp the enjoyments of life with so much suspicion. But the history of mankind shows us that many great revolutions have been produced by remote and apparently frivolous causes. When things come to a height it is frequently impossible to find a cure--at any rate medicina sero paratur, and it is much better to prevent the disease--principiis obsta--venienti occurrite marbo.

 

IX. Nor can it be said that these are vain fears. We know that the enemy is working among us, and that there are many appearances in these kingdoms which strongly resemble the contrivance of this dangerous Association. We know that before the Order of Illuminati was broken up by the Elector of Bavaria, there were several Lodges in Britain, and we may be certain that they are not all broken up. I know that they are not, and that within these two years some Lodges were ignorant, or affected to be so, of the corrupted principles and dangerous designs of the Illuminati. The constitution of the Order shows that this may be, for the Lodges themselves were illuminated by degrees. But I must remark that we can hardly suppose a Lodge to be established in any place, unless there be some very zealous Brother at hand to instruct and direct it. And I think that a person can hardly be advanced as far as the rank of Scotch Knight of the Order, and be a safe man either for our church or state. I am very well informed that there are several thousands of subscribing Brethren in London alone, and we can hardly doubt but that many of that number are well advanced. The vocabulary also of the Illuminati is current in certain societies among us. These societies have taken the very name and constitution of the French and German societies. Corresponding--Affiliated--Provincial--Rescript--Convention--Reading Societies--Citizen of the World--Liberty and Equality, the Imprescriptible Rights of Man, &c. &c. And must it not be acknowledged that our public arbiters of literary merit have greatly changed their manner of treatment of theological and political writings of late years? Till Paine's Age of Reason appeared, the most sceptical writings of England kept within the bounds of decency and of argument, and we have not, in the course of two centuries, one piece that should be compared with many of the blackguard productions of the German presses.

[p. 276]

[paragraph continues] Yet even those performances generally met with sharp reproof as well as judicious refutation. This is a tribute of commendation to which my country is most justly entitled. In a former part of my life I was pretty conversant in writings of this kind, and have seen almost every English performance of note. I cannot express the surprise and disgust which I felt at the number and the gross indecency of the German dissertations which have come in my way since I began this little history--and many of the titles which I observe in the Leipzig catalogues are such as I think no British writer would make use of. I am told that the licentiousness of the press has been equally remarkable in France, even before the Revolution.--May this sense of propriety and decency long continue to protect us, and support the national character for real good breeding, as our attainments in manly science have hitherto gained us the respect of the surrounding nations.

 

I cannot help thinking that British sentiment, or British delicacy, is changed; for Paine's book is treated by most of our Reviewers with an affected liberality and candour; and is laid before the public as quite new matter, and a fair field for discussion--and it strikes me as if our critics were more careful to let no fault of his opponents pass unnoticed than to expose the futility and rudeness of this indelicate writer. In the reviews of political writings we see few of those kind endeavours, which real love for our constitutional government would induce a writer to employ in order to lessen the fretful discontents of the people; and there is frequently betrayed a satisfaction at finding administration in straits, either through misconduct or misfortune. Real love for our country and its government would (I think) induce a person to mix with his criticisms some sentiments of sympathy with the embarassment of a minister loaded with the business of a great nation, in a situation never before experienced by any minister. The critic would recollect that the minister was a man, subject to error, but not necessarily nor altogether base. But it seems to be an assumed principle with some of our political writers and reviewers that government must always be in fault, and that every thing needs a reform. Such were the beginnings on the continent, and we cannot doubt but that attempts are made to influence the public mind in this

[p. 277]

country, in the very way that has been practised abroad:--Nay,

 

X. The detestable doctrines of Illuminatism have been openly preached among us. Has not Dr. Priestly said (I think in one of his letters on the Birmingham riots) "That if the condition of other nations be as much improved as that of France will be by the change in her system of government, the great crisis, dreadful as it may appear, will be a consummation devoutly to be wished for;--and though calamitous to many, perhaps to many innocent persons, will be eventually glorious and happy."--Is not this equivalent to Spartacus saying, "True--there will be a storm, a convulsion--but all will be calm again?"--Does Dr. Priestly think that the British will part more easily than their neighbours in France with their property and honors, secured by ages of peaceable possession, protected by law, and acquiesced in by all who wish and hope that their own descendants may reap the fruits of their honest industry?--Will they make a less manly struggle?--Are they less numerous?--Must his friends, his patrons, whom he has thanked, and praised, and flattered, yield up all peaceably, or fall in the general struggle? This writer has already given the most promising specimens of his own docility in the principles of Illuminatism, and has already passed through several degrees of initiation. He has refined and refined on Christianity, and boasts, like another Spartacus, that he has, at last, hit on the true secret.--Has he not been preparing the minds of his readers for Atheism by his theory of mind, and by his commentary on the unmeaning jargon of Dr. Hartley? I call it unmeaning jargon, that I may avoid giving it a more apposite and disgraceful name. For, if intelligence and design be nothing but a certain modification of the vibratiunculae or undulations of any kind, what is supreme intelligence, but a more extensive, and (perhaps they will call it) refined undulation, pervading or mixing with all others? Indeed it is in this very manner that the universal operation of intelligence is pretended to be explained. As any new or partial undulation may be superinduced on any other already existing, and this without the least disturbance or confusion, so may the inferior intelligences in the universe be only superinductions on the operations of this supreme intelligence which pervades them

[p. 278]

all.--And thus an undulation (of what? surely of something prior to and independent of this modification) is the cause of all the beings in the universe, and of all the harmony and beauty that we observe.--And this undulation is the object of love, and gratitude, and confidence (that is, of other kinds of undulations.) Fortunately all this has no meaning.--But surely, if anything can tend to diminish the force of our religious sentiments, and make all Dr. Priestly's discoveries in Christianity insignificant, this will do it.

 

Were it possible for the departed soul of Newton to feel pain, he would surely recollect with regret that unhappy hour, when, provoked by Dr. Hooke's charge of plagiarism, he first threw out his whim of a vibrating aether, to show what might be made of an hypothesis.--For Sir Isaac Newton must be allowed to have paved the way for much of the atomical philosophy of the moderns. Newton's aether is assumed as a fac totum by every precipitate sciolist, who in despite of logic, and in contradiction to all the principles of mechanics, gives us theories of muscular motion, of animal sensation, and even of intelligence and volition, by the undulations of aetherial fluids. Not one of a hundred of these theorists can go through the fundamental theorem of all this doctrine, the 47th prop. of the 2d book of the Principia, and not one in a thousand know that Newton's investigation is inconclusive.--Yet they talk of the effects and modifications of those undulations as familiarly and confidently as if they could demonstrate the propositions in Euclid's Elements.

 

Yet such is the reasoning that satisfies Dr. Priestly. But I do not suppose that he has yet attained his acme of Illumination. His genius has been cramped by British prejudices.--These need not sway his mind any longer. He is now in that "rara temporis (et loci) felicitate, ubi sentire quae velis, et quae sentias dicere licet,"--in the country which was honored by giving the world the first avowed edition of the Age of Reason, with the name of the shop and publisher. I make no doubt but that his mind will now take a higher flight--and we may expect to see him fire "that train by which he boasted that he would blow up the religious establishment of his stupid and enslaved native country.--Peace be with him.--But I grieve that he has left

[p. 279]

any of his friends and abettors among us.--A very eminent one said in a company a few days ago, that "he would willingly wade to the knees in blood to overturn the establishment of the Kirk of Scotland." I understand that he proposes to go to India, and there to preach Christianity to the natives. Let me beseech him to recollect that among us Christianity is still considered as the gospel of peace, and that it strongly dissuades us from bathing our feet in blood.

 

I understand that more apostles of this mission are avowed enemies of all religious establishments, and indeed of all establishments of any kind. But, as I do not see a greater chance of one pastor or one patriarch being in the right, either as to religious or political matters, than a number of pastors or patriarchs, who have consulted together, and compared and accommodated their opinions; and as I can find nothing but quarrels and ill-will among independents, I should be sorry to have any of our establishments destroyed, and am therefore apprehensive of some danger from the zealous spreading of such doctrines, especially as they make it equally necessary to admit the preaching up no religion, and no civil establishment whatever.

 

Seeing that there are such grounds of apprehension, I think that we have cause to be on our guard, and that every man who has enjoyed the sweets of British liberty should be very anxious indeed to preserve it. We should discourage all secret assemblies, which afford opportunities to the disaffected, and all conversations which foster any notions of political perfection, and create hankerings after unattainable happiness. These only increase the discontents of the unfortunate, the idle, and the worthless.--Above all, we should be careful to discourage and check immorality and licentiousness in every shape. For this will of itself subvert every government, and will subject us to the vile tyranny of the mob.

 

XI. If there has ever been a season in which it was proper to call upon the public instructors of the nation to exert themselves in the cause of Religion and of Virtue, it is surely the present. It appears from the tenor of the

[p. 280]

whole narration before the reader, that Religion and Virtue are considered as the great obstacles to the completion of this plan for overturning the governments of Europe--and I hope that I have made it evident that these conspirators have presupposed that there is deeply rooted in the heart of man a sincere veneration for unsophisticated Virtue, and an affectionate propensity to Religion; that is, to consider this beautiful world as the production of wisdom and power, residing in a Being different from the world itself, and the natural object of admiration and of love.--I do not speak of the truth of this principle at present, but only of its reality, as an impression on the heart of man. These principles must therefore be worked on--and they are acknowledged to be strong, because much art is employed to eradicate them, or to overwhelm them by other powerful agents.--We also see that Religion and Virtue are considered by those corrupters as closely united, and as mutually supporting each. other. This they admit as a fact, and labour to prove to be a mistake.--And lastly, they entertain no hopes of complete success till they have exploded both.

 

This being the case, I hope that I shall be clear of all charge of impropriety, when I address our national instructors, and earnestly desire them to consider this cause as peculiarly theirs. The world has been corrupted under pretence of moral instruction.--Backwardness therefore, on their part, may do inconceivable harm, because it will most certainly be interpreted as an acknowledgment of defeat, and they will be accused of indifference and insincerity.--I know that a modest man reluctantly comes forward with any thing that has the appearance of thinking himself wiser or better than his neighbours. But if all are so bashful, where will it end? Must we allow a parcel of worthless profligates, whom no man would trust with the management of the most trifling concern, to pass with the ignorant and indolent for teachers of true wisdom, and thus entice the whole world into a trap. They have succeeded, with our unfortunate neighbours on the continent, and, in Germany (to their shame be it spoken) they have been assisted even by some faithless clergymen.

 

But I will hope better of my countrymen, and I think that

[p. 281]

our clergy have encouragement even from the native character of Britons. National comparisons are indeed ungraceful, and are rarely candid--but I think they may be indulged in this instance. It is of his own countrymen that Voltaire speaks, when he says, "that they resemble a mixed breed of the monkey and the tiger," animals that mix fun with mischief, and that sport with the torments of their prey.--They have indeed given the most shocking proofs of the justness of his portrait. It is with a considerable degree of national pride, therefore, that I compare the behaviour of the French with that of the British in a very similar situation, during the civil wars and the usurpation of Cromwell. There have been more numerous, and infinitely more atrocious, crimes committed in France during any one half year since the beginning of the Revolution, than during the whole of that tumultuous period. And it should be remembered, that to all other grounds of discontent was added no small share of religious fanaticism, a passion (may I call it) which seldom fails to rouse every angry thought of the heart.------Much may be hoped for from an earnest and judicious address to that rich fund of manly kindness that is conspicuous in the British character--a fund to which I am persuaded to owe the excellence of our constitutional government--No where else in Europe are the claims of the different ranks in society so generally and so candidly admitted. All feel their force, and all allow them to others. Hence it happens that they are enjoyed in so much peace--hence it happens that the gentry live among the yeomen and farmers with so easy and familiar a superiority:

--------------------------Extrema per illos
 Justitia excedens terris vestigia fecit.

Our clergy are also well prepared for the task. For our ancestors differed exceedingly from the present Illuminators in their notions, and have enacted that the clergy shall be well instructed in natural philosophy, judging that a knowledge of the symmetry of nature, and the beautiful adjustment of all her operations, would produce a firm belief of a wisdom and power which is the source of all this fair order, the Author and Conductor of all, and therefore the natural object of admiration and of love. A good heart is open to this impression, and feels no reluctance, but on the contrary a pleasure, in thinking man the subject of his

[p. 282]

government, and the object of his care. This point being once gained, I should think that the salutary truths of Religion will be highly welcome. I should think that it will be easy to convince such minds, that in the midst of the immense variety of the works of God, there is one great plan to which every thing seems to refer, namely, the crouding this world, to the utmost degree of possibility, with life, with beings that enjoy the things around them, each in its own degree and manner. Among these, man makes a most conspicuous figure, and the maximum of his enjoyment seems a capital article in the ways of Providence.--It will, I think, require little trouble to shew that the natural dictates of Religion, or the immediate results of the belief of God's moral government of the universe, coincide, in every circumstance of sentiment, disposition, and conduct, with those that are most productive of enjoyment (on the whole) in social life. The same train of thought will shew, that the real improvements in the pleasures of society, are, in fact, improvements of man's rational nature, and so many steps toward that perfection which our own consciences tell us we are capable of, and which Religion encourages us to hope for in another state of being. And thus will "the ways of Wisdom appear to be ways of pleasantness, and all her paths to be peace."

 

Dwelling on such topics, there is no occasion for any political discussion. This would be equally improper and hurtful. Such discussions never fail to produce ill-humour.--But surely highest complacence must result from the thought that we are co-operating with the Author of all wisdom and goodness, and helping forward the favorite plans of his providence. Such a thought must elevate the mind which thus recognises a sort of alliance with the Author of nature.--Our brethren in society appear brethren indeed, heirs of the same hopes, and travelling to the same country. This will be a sort of moral patriotism, and should, I think, produce mutual forbearance, since we discover imperfections in all creatures, and are conscious of them in ourselves--notwithstanding which, we hope to be all equal at last in worth and in happiness.

 

I should gladly hope that I shall not be accused of presumption in this address. There is no profession that I more

[p. 283]

sincerely respect than that of the religious and moral instructor of my country. I am saying nothing here that I am not accustomed to urge at much greater length in the course of my professional duty. And I do not think that I am justly chargeable with vanity, when I suppose that many years of delightful study of the works of God have given me somewhat more acquaintance with them than is probably attained by those who never think of the matter, being continually engaged in the bustle of life. Should one of this description say that all is fate or chance, and that "the same thing happens to all," &c. as is but too common, I should think that a prudent man will give so much preference to my assertion, as at least to think seriously about the thing, before he allow himself any indulgence in things which I affirm to be highly dangerous to his future peace and happiness. For this reason I hope not to be accused of going out of my line, nor hear any one say, "Ne sutor ultra crepidam." The present is a season of anxiety, and it is the duty of every man to contribute his mite to the general good.

 

It is in some such hopes that I have written these pages; and if they have any such effect, I shall think myself fortunate in having by chance hit on something useful, when I was only trying to amuse myself during the tedious hours of bad health and confinement. No person is more sensible of the many imperfections of this performance than myself. But, as I have no motive for the publication but the hopes of doing some good, I trust that I shall obtain a favorable acceptance of my endeavours from an intelligent, a candid, and a good-natured public. I must entreat that it be remembered that these sheets are not the work of an author determined to write a book. They were for the most part notes, which I took from books I had borrowed, that I might occasionally have recourse to them when occupied with Free Masonry, the first object of my curiosity. My curiosity was diverted to many other things as I went along, and when the Illuminati came in my way, I regretted the time I had thrown away on Free Masonry.--But, observing their connection, I thought that I perceived the progress of one and the same design. This made me eager to find out any remains of Weishaupt's Association. I was not surprised when I saw marks of its interference

[p. 284]

in the French Revolution.--In hunting for clearer proofs I found out the German Union--and, in fine, the whole appeared to be one great and wicked project, fermenting and working over all Europe.--Some highly respected friends encouraged me in the hope of doing some service by laying my informations before the public, and said that no time should be lost.--I therefore set about collecting my scattered facts.--I undertook this task at a time when my official duty pressed hard on me, and bad health made me very unfit for study.--The effects of this must appear in many faults, which I see, without being able at present to amend them. I owe this apology to the public, and I trust that my good intentions will procure it acceptance. [**]

[p. 285]

Nothing would give me more sincere pleasure than to see the whole proved to be a mistake;--to be convinced that there is no such plot, and that we run no risk of the contagion; but that Britain will continue, by the abiding prevalence of honor, of virtue, and of true religion, to exhibit the fairest specimen of civil government that ever was seen on earth, and a national character and conduct not unworthy of the inestimable blessings that we enjoy. Our excellent Sovereign, at his accession to the throne, declared to his Parliament that HE GLORIED IN HAVING BEEN BORN A BRITON.--Would to God that all and each of his subjects had entertained the same lofty notions of this good fortune. Then would they have laboured, as he has done for near forty years, to support the honor of the British name by setting as bright an example of domestic and of public virtue.--Then would Britons have been indeed the boast of humanity--then we should have viewed these wicked plots of our neighbours with a smile of contempt, and of sincere pity--and there would have been no need of this imperfect but well-meant performance.

 

Footnotes

^220:* Had the good man been spared but a few months, his surprise at this neglect would have ceased. For, on the 19th of November 1793, the Archbishop of Paris came to the Bar of the Assembly, accompanied by his Vicar and eleven other Clergymen, who there renounced their Christianity and their clerical vows; acknowledging that they had played the villain for many years against their consciences, teaching what they knew to be a lie, and were now resolved to be honest men. The Vicar indeed had behaved like a true Illuminatus some time before, by running off with another man's wife and his strong box.--None of them, however, seem to have attained the higher mysteries, for they were all guillotined not long after.

^222:* I cannot help observing, that it is perfectly similar to the arrangement and denominations which appear in the secret correspondence of the Bavarian Illuminati.

^225:* The depositions at the Chatelet, which I have already quoted, give repeated and unequivocal proofs, that he, with a considerable number of the deputies of the National Assembly, had formed this plot before the 5th of October 1789. That trial was conducted in -4 strange manner, partly out of respect for the Royal Family, which still had some hearts affectionately attached to it, and to the monarchy, and partly by reason of the fears of the members of this court. There was now no safety for any person who differed from the opinion of the frantic populace of Paris. The chief points of accusation were written in a schedule which is not published, and the witnesses were ordered to depose on these in one general Yes  No; so that it is only the least important part of the evidence that has been printed. I am well informed that the whole of it is carefully preserved, and will one day appear.

^228:* To prevent interruptions, I may just mention here the authorities for this journey and co-operation of the two deputies.

1. Ein wichtiger Ausschluss uber ein noch wenig bekannte Veranlassung der Franzoschen Revolution, in the Vienna Zeitschrift for 1793, p. 145,

2. Endliche Shickfall des Freymaurer-Ordens, 1794, p. 19.

3. Neueste Arbeitung des Spartacus and Philo, Munich, 1793, p. 151-154.

4. Historische Nachrichten uber die Franc Revolution 1792, von Girkinner, var. loc.

5. Revolutions Almanach fur 1792--A. Gottingen, var. loc.

6. Beytrage zur Biographie des verstorbenes Frey-Herr v. Bode, 1794.

7. Magazin des Literatur et Kunst, for 1792, 3, 4, &c &c.

^231:* Minet was -(I think) at this time a player. He was son of a surgeon at Nantes--robbed his father and fled--enlisted in Holland--deserted and became smuggler--was taken and burnt in the hand--became player, and married an actress--then became priest--and was made Bishop of Nantes by Coustard in discharge of a debt of L. 500. Mr. Latocnaye often saw Coustard kneel to him for benediction. It cannot be supposed that he was much venerated in his pontificals in his native city.--It seems Minet, Minet, is the call of the children to a kitten--This was prohibited at Nantes, and many persons whipped for the freedom used with his name.

^232:* He now (or very lately) keeps the best company, and lives in elegence and affluence in London.

Augur, schaenobates medicus, magus, omnia novit
 Graculus esuriens; in caelum jusseris, ibit. [*+]
 Ingenium velox audacia perdita, sermo
 Promptus.------
                                                    Juvenal.

^232:+

All sciences a hungry Frenchman knows.
 And bid him go to hell--to hell he goes.
                                           Johnson's Translation.

^260:* De la Metherie says (Journ. de Phys. Nov. 1792) that Condorcet was brought up in the house of the old Duke of Rochefoucault, who treated him as his son--got Turgot to create a lucrative office for him, and raised him to all his eminence--yet he pursued him with malicious reports--and actually employed ruffians to assassinate him. Yet is Condorcet's writing a model of humanity and tenderness.

^264:* I have met with this charge in many places; and one book in particular, written by a Prussian General Officer, who was in the country over-run by the French troops, gives a detail of the conduct of the women that is very remarkable. He also says, that infidelity has become very prevalent among the ladies in the higher circles. Indeed this melancholy account is to be found in many passages of the private correspondence of the Illuminati.

^284:* While the sheet commencing p. 267 was printing off, I got a sight of a work published in Paris last year, entitled La Conjuration d' Orleans. It confirms all that I have said respecting the use made of the Free Mason Lodges.--It gives a particular account of the formation of the Jacobin Club, by the Club Breton. This last appears to have been the Association formed with the assistance of the German Deputies. The Jacobin Club had several committees, similar to those of the National Assembly. Among others, it had a Committee of Enquiry and Correspondence, whose business it was to gain partizans, to discover enemies, to decide on the merits of the Brethren, and to form similar Clubs in other places.

The author of the above-mentioned work writes as follows (vol. 3. p. 19.) We may judge of what the D. of Orleans could do in other places, by what he did during his stay in England. During his stay in London, he gained over to his interest Lord Stanhope and Dr. Price, two of the most respectable members of the Revolution Society. This Society had no other object (it said) but to support the Revolution, which had driven James II. from the throne of his ancestors.

Orleans made of this association a true Jacobin Club--It entered into correspondence with the Committee of Enquiry of our Commune, with the same Committee of our Jacobin Club, and at last with our National Assembly. It even sent to the Assembly an ostensible letter, in which we may see the following passages:

"The Society congratulates the National Assembly of France on the Revolution which has taken place in that country. It cannot but earnestly wish for the happy conclusion of so important a Revolution, and, at the same time, express the extreme satisfaction which it feels in reflecting on the glorious example which France has given to the world." (The Reader will remark, that in this example are contained all the horrors which had been exhibited in France before the month of March 1790; and that before this time, the conduct of the D. of Orleans on the 5th and 6th of October 1789, with all the shocking atrocities of those days, were fully known in England.)

[p. 285]

"The Society resolves unanimously to invite all the people of England to establish Societies through the kingdom, to support the principles of the Revolution (look back to p. 236, of this work) "to form correspondences between themselves, and by these means to establish a great concerted Union of all the true Friends of Liberty."

Accordingly (says the French author) this was executed, and Jacobin Clubs were established in several cities of England, Scotland, and Ireland.

    Proofs of a Conspiracy, by John Robison, [1798], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 286]

  

Postscript.

ALTHOUGH I saw no reason to doubt of the validity of the proofs which I have offered in the preceding pages, of a conspiracy against the dearest interests of every nation of Europe, nor of the importance of the information to my own countrymen, it gives me great satisfaction to learn that it has been received with favor and indulgence. This I may conclude from the impression's being exhausted in a few days, and because the publisher informs me that another edition is wanted immediately. I could have wished that this were deferred for some time, that I might have availed myself of the observations of others, and be enabled to correct the mistakes into which I have been led by my scanty knowledge of the German language, and the mistakes of the writers from whom I derived all my informations. I should, in that case, have attempted to make the work more worthy of the public eye, by correcting many imperfections, which the continual distraction of bad health, and my haste to bring it before the public, have occasioned. I should have made the disposition more natural and perspicuous, and have lopped off some redundances and repetitions. But the printer tells me, that this would greatly retard the publication, by changing the series of the pages. At any rate, I am not at present in a condition to engage in any work that requires dispatch. I must yield therefore to those reasons, and content myself with such corrections as can be made immediately.

I have found, after minute enquiry, that I was mistaken as to the expression of an eminent follower of Dr. Priestly, mentioned before. The person alluded to disclaims all sanguinary proceedings, and my information arose from a very erroneous account which was circulated of the conversation. But I still think the caution equally necessary, which I recommend to the hearers of the frequent and violent

[p. 287]

declamations made by those alluded to, against all religious establishments.

 

Except the anecdote of Diderot's library, I do not recollect another assertion in the book, for which I have not the authority of printed evidence. This story was told me by so many persons of credit, who were on the spot at the time, that I have no doubt of its truth.

 

I also find that I was mistaken in my conjecture that Mr. Le Franc communicated his suspicions of the horrid designs of the Free Masons to Archbishop Gobet. It must have been to Mr. Le Clerc de Juigne, a most worthy prelate, whom the hatred of the Jacobins obliged to fly into Switzerland. The Catholic clergy were butchered or banished, and the Jacobins substituted in their places such as would second their views. Gobet was worthy of their confidence, and the Archbishop of Thoulouse (Brienne) himself could not have served the cause of the philosophists more effectually, had they succeeded in their attempts to get him continued Archbishop of Paris.

 

As the poetical picture of unqualified Liberty and Equality, and the indolent pleasures of the patriarchal life, are the charm by which the Illuminators hope to fascinate all hearts, and as they reprobate every construction of society which tolerates any permanent subordination, and particularly such as found this subordination on distinctions of ranks, and scout all privileges allowed to particular orders of men, I hope that it will not be thought foreign to the general purpose of the foregoing Work, if, I with great deference, lay before the Reader some of my reasons for asserting, without hesitation, in a former part, that the British constitution is the only one that will give permanent happiness to a great and luxurious nation, and is peculiarly calculated to give full exercise to the best propensities of cultivated minds. I am the more desirous of doing this, because it seems to me that most of the political writers on the Continent, and many of my countrymen, have not attended to important circumstances which distinguish our constitution from the States General of France and other countries. The republicans in France have, since the Revolution, employed the pains in searching their records, which

[p. 288]

ought to have been taken before the convocation of the States, and which would probably have prevented that step altogether. They have shewn that the meetings of the States, if we except that in 1614 and 1483, were uniformly occasions of mutual contests between the different Orders, in which the interests of the nation and the authority of the Crown were equally forgotten, and the kingdom was plunged into all the horrors of a rancorous civil war. Of this they give us a remarkable instance during the captivity of King John in 1355 and 1356, the horrors of which were hardly exceeded by any thing that has happened in our days. They have shewn the same dismal consequences of the assembly of the different Orders in Brabant; and still more remarkably in Sweden and Denmark, where they have frequently produced a revolution and change of government, all of which have terminated in the absolute government, either of the Crown, or of one of the contending Orders. They laugh at the simplicity of the British for expecting that the permanent fruits of our constitution, which is founded on the same jarring principles, shall be any better; and assert, that the peaceable exercise of its several powers for somewhat more than a century (a thing never experienced by us in former times) has proceeded from circumstances merely accidental. With much address they have selected the former disturbances, and have connected them by a sort of principle, so as to support their system, "that a States General or Parliament, consisting of a representation of the different classes of citizens, can never deliberate for the general good, but must always occupy their time in contentions about their mutual invasions of privilege, and will saddle every aid to the executive power, with some unjust and ruinous aggrandisement of the victorious Order." They have the effrontery to give the MAGNA CHARTA as an instance of an usurpation of the great feudatories, and have represented it in such a light as to make it the game of their writers and of the tribunes.--All this they have done in order to reconcile the minds of the few thinking men of the nation to the abolition of the different Orders of the State, and to their National Convention in the form of a chaotic mass of Frenchmen, one and indivisible:

Non bene junctarum discordia femina rerum,
 Ubi frigida puegnabant calidis, humentia siccis,
 Mollia cum duris, sine pondere habentia pondus.

[p. 289]

Their reasonings would be just, and their proofs from history would be convincing, if their premises were true; if the British Parliament were really an assembly of three Orders, either personally, or by representation, deliberating apart, each having a veto on the decisions of the other two. And I apprehend that most of my countrymen, who have not had occasion to canvass the subject with much attention, suppose this to be really the British Constitution: for, in the ordinary table conversations on the subject, they seldom go farther, and talk with great complacence of the balance of hostile powers, of the King as the umpire of differences, and of the peace and prosperity that results from the whole.

 

But I cannot help thinking that this is a misconception, almost in every circumstance. I do not know any opposite interests in the State, except the general one of the governor and the governed, the king and the subject.--If there is an umpire in our constitution, it is the House of Lords--but this is not as a representation of the persons of birth, but as a court of hereditary magistrates: the Peers do not meet to defend their own privileges as citizens, but either as the counsellors of the King, or as judges in the last resort. The privileges for which we see them sometimes contend, are not the privileges of the high-born, of the great vassals of the Crown, but the privileges of the House of Lords, of the supreme Court of Judicature, or of the King's Council. In all the nations on the Continent, the different Orders, as they are called, of the State, are corporations, bodies politic, which have jurisdiction within themselves, and rights which they can maintain at their own hand, and privileges which mark them most distinctly, and produce such a complete separation between the different Orders, that they can no more mix than oil and water. Yet the great president Montesquieu says, that the Peerage of England is a body of Nobility; and he uses the term body in the strict sense now mentioned, as synonomous to corporation. He has repeatedly used this term to denote the second order of Frenchmen, persons of noble birth, or ennobled (that is, vested in the privileges and distinctions of the nobly born) united by law, and having authority to maintain their privileges. The history of France, nay of our own country, shows us that this body may enjoy all its distinctions

[p. 290]

of nobility, and that the Great Barons may enjoy the prerogatives of their baronies, although the authority of the Crown is almost annihilated.--We have no cogent reason, therefore, for thinking that they will be constantly careful to support the authority of the Crown; and much less to believe that they will, at the same time, watch over the liberties of the people. In the election of their representatives (for the whole body of the gentlemen must appear by representation) we must not expect that they will select such of their own number as will take care of those two essential objects of our constitution.--Equally jealous of the authority of the Crown and of the encroachments of all those who are not gentlemen, and even fearful of the assumptions of the great Barons, the powerful individuals of their own order, they will always choose such representatives as will defend their own rights in the first place. Such persons are by no means fit for maintaining the proper authority of the Crown, and keeping the representatives of the lower classes within proper bounds.

But this is not the nature of our House of Lords in the present day. It was so formerly in a great measure, and had the same effects as in other countries. But since the Revolution, the Peers of Great Britain have no important privileges which relate merely or chiefly to birth. These all refer to their functions as Magistrates of the supreme Court. The King can, at any time, place in this House any eminent person whom he thinks worthy of the office of hereditary magistrate. The Peers are noble--that is, remarkable, illustrious; but are not necessarily, nor in every instance, persons of high birth. This House therefore is not, in any sort, the representative of what is called in France the Noblesse--a particular cast of the nation;--nor is it a junction of the proprietors of the great fees of the Crown, as such;--for many, very many, of the greatest baronies are in the hands of those we call Commoners.--They sit as the King's Councellors, or as Judges.--Therefore the members of our Upper House are not swayed by the prejudices of any class of the citizens. They are hereditary magistrates, created by the Sovereign, for his council, to defend his prerogatives, to hold the balance between the throne and the people. The greatest part of the Nobility (in the continental sense of the word) are not called into this House, but they may be members of the Lower House, which we call the Commons;

[p. 291]

nay the sons and the brothers of the Peers are in the same situation. The Peers therefore cannot be hostile or indifferent to the liberty, the rights, or the happiness of the Commons, without being the enemies of their own families.

 

Nor is our House of Commons at all similar to the Third Estate of any of the neighbouring kingdoms. They are not the representatives of the ignobly born, or of any class of citizens. The members are the proper representatives of the whole nation, and consist of persons of every class, persons of the highest birth, persons of great fortune, persons of education, of knowledge, of talents.

 

Thus the causes of dissension which refer to the distinctive rights or prerogatives of the different classes of citizens are removed, because in each House there are many individuals selected from all the classes.

 

A Peer, having attained the highest honors of the state, must be an enemy to every revolution. Revolution must certainly degrade him, whether it places an absolute monarch, or a democratic junto, on the throne.

 

The Sovereign naturally looks for the support of the Upper House, and in every measure agreeable to the constitution, and to the public weal, exerts his influence on the House of Commons. Here the character of the monarch and his choice of ministers must appear, as in any other constitution; but with much less chance of danger to political liberty.--The great engine of monarchy in Europe, has been the jarring privileges of the different Orders; and the Sovereign, by siding with one of them, obtained accessions of prerogative and power.--It was thus that, under the House of Tudor, our constitution advanced with hasty strides to absolute monarchy; and would have attained it, had James the First been as able as he was willing to secure what he firmly believed to be the divine rights of his Crown.

 

I do not recollect hearing the lower ranks of the State venting much of their discontents against the Peers, and they seem to perceive pretty clearly the advantages arising from their prerogatives. They seem to look up to them as

[p. 292]

the first who will protect them against the agents of sovereignty. They know that a man may rise from the lowest station to the peerage, and that in that exaltation he remains connected with themselves by the dearest ties; and the House of Commons take no offence at the creation of new Peers, because their privileges as a Court, and their private rights, are not affected by it. Accordingly, the House has always opposed every project of limiting the King's prerogative in this respect.

 

How unlike is all this to the constitution consisting of the pure representatives of the Privileged Orders of the Continental States. The self-conceited constitutionalists of France saw something in the British Parliament which did not fall in with their own hasty notions, and prided themselves in not copying from us. This would have indicated great poverty of invention in a nation accustomed to consider itself as the teacher of mankind. The most sensible of them, however, wished to have a constitution which they called an improvement of ours: and this was the simple plan of a representation of the two or three Orders of the State. Their Upper House should contain the representatives of 100,000 noblesse. The Princes of the Blood and Great Barons should sit in it of their own right, and the rest by deputies. The Lower House, or Tiers Etat, should consist of deputies from those ignobly born; such as merchants, persons in the lower offices of the law, artisans, peasants, and a small number of freeholders. Surely it needs no deep reflection to teach us what sort of deliberations would occupy such a house. It would be a most useful occupation however, to peruse the history of France, and of other nations, and see what really did occupy the Tiers Etat thus constructed, and what were their proceedings, their decisions, and the steps which they took to make them effectual. I have no doubt but that this study would cure most of our advocates for general eligibility, and for general suffrage. I have lately read Velley and Villaret's History of France (by the bye, the Abbe Barruel has shewn that the Club d'Holbach managed the publication of this History after the first eight or ten volumes, and slipped into it many things suited to their impious project) and the accounts of the troublesome reigns of John, and Charles his successor, by authors who wrote long before the Revolution; and they

[p. 293]

filled me with horror. The only instance that I met with of any thing like moderation in the claims and disputes of the different Orders of their States General, and of patriotism, or regard for the general interests of the State, is in their meetings during the minority of Charles VIII.

 

With respect to the limitations of the eligibility into the House of Commons, I think that there can be no doubt that those should be excluded whose habits of needy and laborious life have precluded them from all opportunities of acquiring some general views of political relations. Such persons are totally unfit for deliberations, where general or comprehensive views only are to be the subjects of discussion; they can have no conceptions of the subject, and therefore no steady notions or opinions, but must change them after every speaker, and must become the dupes of every demagogue.

 

But there are other circumstances which make me think that, of all the classes of citizens, the land proprietors are the fittest for holding this important office. I do not infer this from their having a more real connection with the nation, and a stronger interest in its fate--I prefer them on account of their general habits of thought. Almost all their ordinary transactions are such as make them acquainted with the interests of others, cause them to consider those in general points of view; and, in short, most of their occupations are, in some degree, national. They are accustomed to settle differences between those of lower stations--they are frequently in the King's commission as Justices of the Peace. All these circumstances make them much apter scholars in that political knowledge, which is absolutely necessary for a member of the House of Commons. But, besides this, I have no hesitation in saying that their turn of mind, their principles of conduct, are more generally such as become a Senator, than those of any other class of men. This class includes almost all men of family. I cannot help thinking that even what is called family pride is a sentiment in their favor. I am convinced that all our propensities are useful in society, and that their bad effects arise wholly from want of moderation in the indulgence of them, or sometimes from the impropiety of the occasion on which they are exerted. What propensity is more general than the

[p. 294]

desire of acquiring permanent consideration for ourselves and our families? Where is the man to be found so mean-spirited as not to value himself for being born of creditable parents, and for creditable domestic connections? Is this wrong because it has been abused? So then is every preeminence of office; and the directors of republican France are as criminal as her former Nobles. This propensity of the human heart should no more be rejected than the desire of power. It should be regulated--but it should certainly be made use of as one of the means of carrying on the national business. I think that we know some of its good effects--It incites to a certain propriety of conduct that is generally agreeable--its honesty is embellished by a manner that makes it more pleasing. There is something that we call the behaviour of a Gentleman that is immediately and uniformly understood. The plainest peasant or labourer will say of a man whom he esteems in a certain way, "He is a Gentleman, every bit of him"--and he is perfectly understood by all who hear him to mean, not a rank in life, but a turn of mind, a tenor of conduct that is amiable and worthy, and the ground of confidence.--I remark, with some feeling of patriotic pride, that these are phrases almost peculiar to our language--in Russia the words would have no meaning. But there, the Sovereign is a despot, and all but the Gentry are slaves; and the Gentry are at no pains to recommend their class by such a distinction, nor to give currency to such a phrase.--I would infer from this peculiarity, that Britain is the happy land, where the wisest use has been made of this propensity of the human heart.

 

If therefore there be a foundation for this peculiarity, the Gentry are proper objects of our choice for filling the House of Commons.

 

If theoretical considerations are of any value in questions of political discussion, I would say, that we have good reasons for giving this class of citizens a great share in the public deliberations. Besides what I have already noticed of their habits of considering things in general points of view, and their feeling a closer connection with the nation than any other class, I would say that the power and influence which naturally attach to their being called to offices of public trust, will probably be better lodged in

[p. 295]

their hands. If they are generally selected for these offices, they come to consider them as parts of their civil condition, as situations natural to them. They will therefore exercise this power and influence with the moderation and calmness of habit--they are no novelties to them--they are not afraid of losing them;--therefore, when in office, they do not catch at the opportunities of exercising them. This is the ordinary conduct of men, and therefore is a ground of probable reasoning.--In short, I should expect from our Gentry somewhat of generosity and candour, which would temper the commercial principle, which seems to regulate the national transactions of modern Europe, and whose effects seem less friendly to the best interest of humanity, than even the Roman principle of glory.

 

The Reader will now believe that I would not recommend the filling the House of Commons with merchants, although they seem to be the natural Representatives of the monied interest of the nation. But I do not wish to consider that House as the Representative of any Orders whatever, or to disturb its deliberations with any debates on their jarring interests. The man of purely commercial notions disclaims all generosity--recommends honesty because it is the best policy--in short, "places the value of a thing in as much money as 'twill bring." 1 should watch the conduct of such men more narrowly than that of the Nobles. Indeed, the history of Parliament will show that the Gentry have not been the most venal part of the House. The Illumination which now dazzles the world aims directly at multiplying the number of venal members, by filling the senates of Europe with men who may be bought at a low price. Ministerial corruption is the fruit of Liberty, and freedom dawned in this nation in Queen Elizabeth's time, when her minister bribed Wentworth.--A wise and free Legislation will endeavour to make this as expensive and troublesome as possible, and therefore will neither admit universal suffrage nor a very extensive eligibility. These two circumstances, besides opening a wider door to corruption, tend to destroy the very intention of all civil constitutions. The great object in them is, to make a great number of people happy. Some men place their chief enjoyment in measuring their strength with others, and love to be continually employed in canvassing, intriguing, and carrying on

[p. 296]

some little pieces of a sort of public business; to such men universal suffrage and eligibility would be paradise--but it is to be hoped that the number of such is not very great: for this occupation must be accompanied by much disquiet among their neighbours, much dissension, and mutual offence and ill-will--and the peaceable, the indolent, the studious, and the half of the nation, the women, will be great sufferers by all this. In a nation possessing many of the comforts and pleasures of life, the happiest government is that which will leave the greatest number possible totally unoccupied with national affairs, and at full liberty to enjoy all their domestic and social pleasures, and to do this with security and permanency. Great limitations in the right of electing seems therefore a circumstance necessary for this purpose; and limitations are equally necessary on the eligibility. When the offices of power and emolument are open to all, the scramble becomes universal, and the nation is never at peace. The road to a seat in Parliament should be accessible to all; but it should be long, so that many things, which all may in time obtain, shall be requisite for qualifying the candidate. The road should also be such that all should be induced to walk in it, in the prosecution of their ordinary business; and their admission into public offices should depend on the progress which they have made in the advancement of their own fortunes. Such regulations would, I think, give the greatest chance of filling the offices with persons fittest for them, by their talents, their experience, and their habits of thinking. These habits, and the views of life which a man forms in consequence of his situation, are of the utmost importance.

 

After all these observations, I must still recur to a position which I have repeated more than once, namely, that our constitution, which nearly embraces all these circumstances, has attained its present excellence chiefly in consequence of the innate worth of the British character. About the time of the Conquest, our constitution hardly differed from that of France. But the clashing of interests between the different Orders of the subjects was not so rancorous and obstinate--these Orders melted more easily together--the purity of the principle of Representation in the States was less attended to; and while the French Peers gradually left off minding any business but their own, and left the

[p. 297]

[paragraph continues] High Court of Judicature to the lawyers, and the King to his Cabinet Council, the Peers of Great Britain, overlooking their own less important distinctions, attended more to the State, became a permanent Council to the Sovereign in the administration and legislation; and, with a patriotism and a patience that are unknown to the other Grandees of Europe, continued to hear and to judge in all questions of justice and property between the inferior citizens of the State. British Liberty is the highly-prized fruit of all this worthy conduct, and most people ascribe it to the superior spirit and independence of the national character. It strikes me, however, as more surely indicating superior virtue, and more judicious patriotism; and our happy constitution is not more justly entitled to the admiration and respect that is paid to it by all Europe, than to the affectionate and grateful attachment of every true-hearted Briton.

 

Since the publication of this volume I have seen a very remarkable work indeed, on the same subject, Memoires pour servir a l'Histoire du Jacobinisme, par M. l'Abbe Barruel. This author confirms all that I have said of the Enlighteners, whom he very aptly calls Philosophists; and of the abuses of Free Masonry in France. He shows, unquestionably, that a formal and systematic conspiracy against Religion was formed and zealously prosecuted by Voltaire, d'Alembert, and Diderot, assisted by Frederic II. King of Prussia; and I see that their principles and their manner of procedure have been the same with those of the German atheists and anarchists. Like them they hired an Army of Writers; they industriously pushed their writings into every house and every cottage. Those writings were equally calculated for inflaming the sensual appetites of men, and for perverting their judgments. They endeavoured to get the command of the Schools, particularly those for the lower classes; and they erected and managed a prodigious number of Circulating Libraries and Reading Societies. M. Barruel says, that this gang of public corruptors have held their meetings for many years in the Hotel de Holbach at Paris, and that Voltaire was their honorary President. The most eminent members were d'Alembert, Diderot, Condorcet, La Harpe, Turgot, Lamoignon. They took the name of OeCONOMISTS, and affected to be continually occupied with plans for improving Commerce,

[p. 298]

[paragraph continues] Manufactures, Agriculture, Finance, &c. and published from time to time respectable performances on those subjects.------But their darling project was to destroy Christianity and all Religion, and to bring about a total change of Government. They employed writers to compose corrupting and impious books--these were revised by the Society, and corrected till they suited their purpose. A number were printed in a handsome manner, to defray the expence; and then a much greater number were printed in the cheapest form possible, and given for nothing, or at very low prices, to hawkers and pedlars, with injunctions to distribute them secretly through the cities and villages. They even hired persons to read them to conventicles of those who had not learned to read. [**] (See vol. i. 343-355.)

 

I am particularly struck by a position of Abbe Barruel, "That Irreligion and unqualified Liberty and Equality are the genuine and original Secrets of Free Masonry, and the ultimatum of a regular progress through all its degrees." He supports this remarkable position with great ingenuity, and many very pertinent facts. I confess that now, when I have got this impression, I shall find it very difficult to efface it. But I must also say, that this thought never struck me, during all the time that I have been occupied with it; nor have I ever heard it expressed by any Brother, except such as had been illuminated; and such Brethren always considered this as an innovation or improvement on genuine British Free Masonry. I recollect, indeed, that Nicholai, in his account of the German Rosycrucians, says, that the object of Free Masonry in England, since the time of James

[p. 299]

[paragraph continues] II. is Toleration in Religious Opinions, as Royalism had been the object before that time.

 

The account which the Abbe gives of the Chevalerie du Soleil is very conformable to one of the three rituals in my possession. His account of the Chevalerie de Rose Croix, and some others, differs considerably from those in my box. I have reason to think that my materials are transcripts from the rituals, &c. which Rosa introduced into the German Lodges, because the writer of the greatest part of them is an inhabitant of that city.

 

I think that the Abbe Barruel's account of this matter suggests a pleasing reflection. All the Brethren on the Continent agree in saying, that Free Masonry was imported from Great Britain about the beginning of this century, and this in the form of a Mystical Society. It has been assiduously cultivated in Britain ever since that time, and I believe that the Fraternity is more numerous here, in proportion to the population of the country, than in any other kingdom; yet in Britain the Brethren have never suspected that its principles were seditious or atheistical. While the Free Masonry of the Continent was tricked up with all the frippery of stars and ribbands, or was perverted to the most profligate and impious purposes, and the Lodges became seminaries of Foppery, of Sedition, and Impiety, it has retained in Britain its original form, simple and unadorned, and the Lodges have remained the scenes of innocent merriment, or meetings of Charity and Beneficence. As the good sense and sound judgments of Britons have preserved them from the absurd follies of Transmutation, of Ghost-raising, and of Magic, so their honest hearts and their innate good dispositions have made them detest and reject the mad projects and impious doctrines of Cosmopolites, Epicurists, and Atheists.

O fortunato's nimium, fua si bona norint
 Anglicolas!

I have more confidence than ever in the sentiment which I expressed as an encouragement for our moral instructors; and with greater earnestness do I call on them to rescue

[p. 300]

from corruption and impending ruin a nation so highly deserving of their care.

 

Mr. Barruel, in the eighteenth chapter of his work, has suggested some reflections, which highly merit attention, and greatly tend to efface the impression which is naturally made on the minds of the unthinking and precipitant, when they observe such a list of authors, whom they have been accustomed to admire, all leagued against Religion. I think, however, that nothing can more effectually remove it, than what I have already shown of the vile and disgraceful tricks which these sophists have been guilty of to support their cause. The cause of this numerous association is distinctly seen in their very procedure. The very first step in their progress is depravation of manners. In this they have laboured with as much earnestness as either Spartacus, or Minos, or Bahrdt. It was a treat to me to learn that La Close's abominable book Les Liasons Dangereuses, was not merely pandering for his patron Orleans, but also working for his masters at the Hotel d'Holbach. Nothing gives such certain bread to those authors, in the beginning of their career, as immoral and impure writings;--and with such did even their chief set out, and fill his pockets; witness his Pucelle d'Orleans; and even after they became the sages of France, they continued, either from coarse taste or from serious principle, for the diabolical purpose of inflaming the passions of others, to interlard their gravest performances with impure thoughts and sentiments. Nay, the secret of the Hotel d'Holbach chews us that, for any thing we know to the contrary, the vilest productions of their press may have been the compositions of the octogenary Voltaire, of the sly d'Alembert, or of the author of the Pere de Famille. What a pity it is that the Decline of the Roman Empire was not all written in England, and that its learned and elegant author, by going into their society, has allowed himself to be drawn into this muddy and degrading vortex!

 

I should scarcely ask for more to disgust me with the philosophy of these sages, and to make me distrust all their pretensions to knowledge. The meanness of the conduct suited the original poverty of the whole of them; but

[p. 301]

its continuance strips them of all claims to the name of philosophers. Their pretended wisdom is only cunning--and we must acknowledge that their conduct was clever: for this mean of corruption, concealed or embellished by their talents for sentimental slang (I can give it no better name) made their conversation and their writings most acceptable to their noble patrons.--Now it is that Religion, of necessity, comes on the field; for Religion tells us, that these are mean pleasures for creatures born to our prospects; and Christianity tells us, that they are gross transgressions of the only just morality. The progress of the pupil will now be rapid; for he will listen with willing ears to lessons which flatter his passions. Yet Voltaire thinks it necessary to enliven the lessons by a little of the salaison, quelques bons mots a-propos aupres des femmes, which he recommends to d'Alembert, who, it seems, was deficient in this kind of small talk.

 

Surely all this is very unlike to wisdom; and when we see that it is part of a plan, and this an obvious one, it should greatly lessen our wonder at the number of these admired infidels. If we would now proceed to examine their pretentions to science, on which they found their claim to the name of philosophers, we must be careful to take the word in a sense that is unequivocal. Its true meaning is by no means what is commonly assigned to it, a lover of knowledge. It is a lover of wisdom; and philosophy professes to teach us what are the constituents of human felicity, and what are the means of attaining it; what are our duties, and the general rules for our conduct. The stoics were philosophers. The Christians are also philosophers. The Epicureans and the Sophists of France would also be called philosophers. I have put in my objection to this claim already, and need not repeat my reasons for saying that their doctrines are not dictates of wisdom. I shall only add, that their own conduct shows plainly that their principles had no effect on themselves, because we see, from the series of correspondence which Mr. Barruel has laid before us, that they do not scruple to practise villanous and hypocritical tricks, which never fail to disgrace a man, and are totally irreconcileable with our notions of human dignity. Voltaire patiently took a caining from an officer at Frankfort, for

[p. 302]

having wittily told lies of his scholar Frederic, and his wisdom told him that his honor was cleared by offering to meet the Major, each of them provided with an injection syringe. This was thought sublime wit at Ferney. I do not suppose that the slave Epictetus, or the soldier Digby, would have ended the affair in this manner. Many of the deeds of wisdom of the club d'Holbach were more degrading than even this; and I am confident that the whole of this phalanx of sages were conscious that they were treated by their patrons and pupils as Voltaire was treated by the Solomon of the North, and that their notions of the vraie sagesse were also the same with his. He gives this account of it in his letter to his niece: "Le Roi lui avoit repondu; 'j'aurai besoin de Voltaire un an tout au plus--On presse l'orange, et on jette l'ecorce.' Je me suis fait repeter ces douces paroles"--(How poor Voltaire would grin!)--"Je vois bien qu'on a presse l'orange--il faut penser a fauver l'ecorce."

 

But, as things stand at present, philosopher means a man of science, and in this sense of the word our sages claim great respect. No claim can be worse founded. It is amusing to observe the earnestness with which they recommend the study of natural history. One does not readily see the connection of this with their ostensible object, the happiness of man. A perusal of Voltaire's letters betrays the secret. Many years ago he heard that some observations on the formation of strata, and the fossils found in them, were incompatible with the age which the Mosaic history seems to assign to this globe. He mentions this with great exultation in some of his early letters; and, from that time forward, never ceases to enjoin his colleagues to press the study of natural history and cosmogony, and carefully to bring forward every fact which was hostile to the Mosaic accounts. It became a serious part of the exercises of their wealthy pupils, and their perplexing discoveries were most ostentatiously displayed. M. de Luc, a very eminent naturalist, has shewn, in a letter to the Chevalier Dr. Zimmermann (published, I think, about the year 1790) how very scanty the knowledge of these observers has been, and how precipitate have been their conclusions. For my own part, I think the affair is of little consequence. Moses writes the history, not of this globe, but of the race of Adam.

[p. 303]

The science of these philosophers is not remarkable in other branches, if we except M. d'Alembert's mathematics. [**] Yet the imposing confidence of Voltaire was such, that he passes for a person fully informed, and he pronounces on every subject with so much authority, with such a force of expression, and generally with so much wit or pleasantry, that his hearers and readers are fascinated, and soon convinced of what they wish to be true.

 

It is not by the wisdom nor by the profound knowledge which these writers display, that they have acquired celebrity, a fame which has been so pernicious. It is by fine writing, by works addressed to the imagination and to the affections, by excellent dramas, by affecting moral essays, full of expressions of the greatest respect for virtue, the most tender benevolence, and the highest sentiments of honor and dignity.--By these means they fascinate all readers; they gain the esteem of the worthy, who imagine them sincere, and their pernicious doctrines are thus spread abroad, and steal into the minds of the dissolute, the licentious, and the unwary.

 

But I am writing to Britons, who are considered by our neighbours on the Continent as a nation of philosophers--to the countrymen of Bacon, of Locke, of Newton--who are not to be wheedled like children, but must be reasoned with as men.--Voltaire, who decides without hesitation on the character of the most distant nations in the most remote antiquity, did not know us: he came among us, in the beginning of his career, with the highest expectations of our support, and hoped to make his fortune by his Pucelle d'Orleans. It was rejected with disdain--but we published his Henriade for him: and, notwithstanding his repeated

 

[p. 304]

disappointments of the same kind, he durst not offend his countrymen by slandering us, but joined in the profound respect paid by all to British science.--Our writers, whether on natural or moral science, are still regarded as standard classics, and are studied with care. Lord Verulam is acknowledged by every man of science to have given the first just description of true philosophy, pointed out its objects, and ascertained its mode of procedure--And Newton is equally allowed to have evinced the propriety of the Baconian precepts by his unequalled success, sua Mathesi facem preferente.--The most celebrated philosophers on the Continent are those who have completed by demonstration the wonderful guesses of his penetrating genius. Bailli, or Condorcet (I forget which) struck with the inconceivable reaches of Newton's thoughts, breaks out, in the words of Lucretius,

Te sequor, O magnae geniis decus, inque tuis nunc
 Fixa pedum pono pressis vestigia signis.
 Tu pater et rerum inventor, to patria nobis
 Suppeditas precepta, tuisque ex inclute chartis,
 Floriferis ut apes in saltibus omnia libant,
 Omnia nos itidem depascimur aurea dicta;
 Aurea, perpetua semper dignissima vita.

After such avowels of our capacity to instruct ourselves, shall we still fly to those disturbers of the world for our lessons? No--Let us rally round our own standards--let us take the path pointed out by Bacon--let us follow the steps of Newton--and, to conclude, let us seriously consider a most excellent advice by the highest authority:

"Beware of false prophets, who come to you in sheep's cloathing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves--BY THEIR FRUITS YE SHALL KNOW THEM--Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles?"

 

 

THE END.

 

 

 

Footnotes

^298:* The author makes an observation which is as just as it is agreeable. This atrocious gang solicited, with the most anxious assiduity, the participation and patronage of the great ones of the world, and boast of several very exalted names: Frederic II. of Prussia, whom they call the Solomon of the North, Catharine II. Gustavus King of Sweden, the King of Denmark, &c. &c. But in the whole series of their correspondence there is not the least trace of any encouragement or any hopes from our excellent Sovereign George III. Despising the incense of such wretches, and detesting their science, he has truly merited the title of Philosopher, by having done more for the real Illumination of the World, by the promotion of true Science, than Louis XIV. with his pensioned Academicians, or than all the present Sovereigns of Europe united; and has uniformly distinguished himself by his regard for true Religion, and every thing that is venerable sacred. This omission is above all praise!

^303:* Never was there any thing more contemptible than the physical and mechanical positions in Diderot's great work, the Systeme de la Nature (Barruel affirms, that he was the author, and got 100 pistoles for the copy, from the person who related the story to him) that long ago found that Diderot had assisted Robinet to make a book out of his Masonic Oration which I mentioned in page 23. Robinet trusted to Diderot's knowledge in natural philosophy. But the Junto were ashamed of the book De la Nature. Diderot seems to have, after this, read Dr. Hartley's book, and has greatly refined on the crude system of Robinet. But after all, the Systeme de la Nature is contemptible, if it be considered as pretending to what is received as science by a mechanical philosopher.

 

    


===== BOOK: pch.txt =====


     
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

PAGAN CHRISTS

  

STUDIES IN COMPARATIVE HIEROLOGY

  

BY

  

JOHN M. ROBERTSON

  

SECOND EDITION, REVISED AND EXPANDED

  

[ISSUED FOR THE RATIONALIST PRESS ASSOCIATION, LIMITED]

  

LONDON:

  

WATTS & CO.,

  

17 JOHNSON'S COURT, FLEET STREET, E.C.

  

[1911]

Scanned, proofed and formatted by John Bruno Hare at sacred-texts.com, Sept-Oct 2007. This book is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

Click to enlarge
Title Page

Click to enlarge
Spine

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

This page of advertisements originally appeared facing the title page. It is transcribed here for completeness.

          BY   THE SAME AUTHOR.

________________________

ESSAYS TOWARDS A CRITICAL METHOD.

NEW ESSAYS TOWARDS A CRITICAL METHOD.

WINNOWINGS FROM WORDSWORTH.

WALT WHITMAN: An Appreciation.

THE PERVERSION OF SCOTLAND.

MONTAIGNE AND SHAKESPEARE. (Second Edition, with additional Essays on   cognate subjects.)

BUCKLE AND HIS CRITICS: a Sociological Study.

THE SAXON AND THE CELT: a Sociological Study.

MODERN HUMANISTS: Essays on Carlyle, Mill, Emerson, Arnold, Ruskin and   Spencer. (Fourth Edition.)

THE FALLACY OF SAVING: a Study in Economics.

THE EIGHT HOURS QUESTION: a Study in Economics. (Second Edition.)

THE DYNAMICS OF RELIGION: an Essay in English Culture-History. (By   "M. W. Wiseman.")

A SHORT HISTORY OF FREETHOUGHT, Ancient and Modern. (Second Edition: 2   vols.)

PATRIOTISM AND EMPIRE. (Third Edition.)

STUDIES IN RELIGIOUS FALLACY.

AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH POLITICS.

WRECKING THE EMPIRE.

A SHORT HISTORY OF CHRISTIANITY.

CHRISTIANITY AND MYTHOLOGY. (Second Edition.)

CRITICISMS. 2 vols.

TENNYSON AND BROWNING AS TEACHERS.

ESSAYS IN ETHICS.

ESSAYS IN SOCIOLOGY. 2 vols.

LETTERS ON REASONING. (Second Edition.)

DID SHAKESPEARE WRITE "TITUS ANDRONICUS"?

PIONEER HUMANISTS: Essays on Machiavelli, Bacon, Hobbes, Spinoza,   Shaftesbury. Mandeville, Gibbon, and Mary Wollstonecraft.

TRADE AND TARIFFS.

COURSES OF STUDY.

CHAMBERLAIN: A STUDY.

PAPERS FOR THE PEOPLE.

CHARLES BRADLAUGH. By Mrs. Bradlaugh Bonner. Part II. by J. M. R.

 

     
   
      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. v]

  

CONTENTS

         

        

       PAGE

     
       

       PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION

       xi

     
       

       INTRODUCTION

       xxi

     
       

       
   PART I.

        

     
       

       THE RATIONALE OF RELIGION

        

     
       

       CHAP. I.--THE NATURALNESS OF ALL BELIEF.

        

     
       section 1.

       Origin of Gods from fear--from love--Beloved Gods the Christs of the world's   pantheon--Arbitrary Classifications

       <page 1>

     
       section 2.

       All beliefs results of reasoning--Taboo--Formulas of Mr. Lang and Dr. Jevons--Primary   and secondary taboo--Moral correlations--Theory of religion and magic

       <page 4>

     
       section 3.

       Dr. Jevons's theories of religious evolution--Contradictions--Thesis of   "superstition"

       <page 7>

     
       section 4.

       Scientific view of the "religious consciousness"--idea of   "the supernatural"--Fear versus   gratitude--Rise of magic--Meaning of "religion"

       <page 9>

     
       section 5.

       Dr. Frazer's definition--its inadequacy--Conflict of formulas--Antiquity of   magic--Analogies of religion, magic, and science--Magic homogeneous with religion--Inconsistencies   of magic--Magic in the Old Testament--Inconsistencies of later religion

       <page 11>

     
       section 6.

       The scientific induction--Magic and religion interfluent--The theory of   prayer--Dr. Jevons's reasoning here reduces the religious type to the Atheists   and Agnostics

       <page 20>

     
       section 7.

       Dr. Jevons's series of self-contradictions--His coincidence with Dr. Frazer   in excluding belief from the concept of religion

       <page 22>

     
       section 8.

       His contradictory doctrine of the conditions of survival in religion--Value   of his work--Causes of its fallacies

       <page 27>

     
       section 9.

       The continuity of religious phenomena--Homogeneity of all magic and religious   ritual--Elijah as magician--Comparative harmfulness of priesthoods and   sorcerers--The dilemma of Christian ethics--Philosophy in religion--Dr. Jevons's   psychology--"Impressions" versus   "projections"--Results of his classification--Religion   "rational" even if not "reasonable"

       <page 28>

     
       section 10.

       Dr. Frazer's sociological vindication of the sorcerer--Its a priori character--Its   antinomianism--Its confusion of the problem of the beginnings of culture with that   of the spread of civilisation--Checked by induction--Sketch of the actual   evolution--The need to guard against deduction from presuppositions

       <page 35>

     
       

       [p. vi]

        

     
       

        

       PAGE

     
       section 11.

       The beginning of the end of religion--Early interweaving of cosmology and   ethics--Fear and gratitude alike operative in time--Ancestor-worship--Dr.   Jevons's thesis of its lateness--His argument finally a petitio principii--Evidence against him from his own pages--"Ghosts"   versus "spirits"

       <page 39>

     
       section 12.

       Historic view of ancestor-worship--Conflict of formulas of Mr. Lang and Dr.   Frazer--The anthropological solution--Fluctuations in the status of   ancestor-Gods--Taboo of names not necessarily oblivion--Gods' names   tabooed--Gods relatively raised and ancestors depressed--Primary deification of   ancestors implied in the facts--Verbalist definitions of   "ancestor"--Ancestors one of   the types of friendly God--Gods originating from abstractions--Arguments of Von   Ihering and Fustel de Coulanges on ancestor-worship--Propitiation from fear   and from love--Horde-ancestor Gods and family Gods--Evolution of law-giving God

       <page 47>

     
       section 13.

       Interactions of norms of conduct--Religion and monarchy--Religious cast given   to law and ethics--The authoritarian element a mark of religion

       <page 55>

     
       section 14.

       Definition of religion

       <page 57>

     
       

       
   CHAP. II.--COMPARISON AND APPRAISEMENT OF RELIGIONS.

        

     
       section 1.

       Early Forces of Reform. Christian   partisanship--Difficulty of being impartial--The authoritarian ideal--Genius and   religious reform--Rarity of reform through priesthoods--Reality of priestcraft

       <page 59>

     
       section 2.

       Reform as a Religious Process. Fictitious   literature--Reform by strategy--Conditions of moral betterment for the   Hebrews--Conditions of religious survival

       <page 63>

     
       section 3.

       Polytheism and Monotheism.   Religious evolution conditioned politically and socially--Monotheism and   polytheism alike thus conditioned--No unique bias in the case of   Israel--Pressures towards monotheism and towards polytheism--The former usually   an external bias, without psychological sincerity--Hebrew and Roman theology   compared--Monotheism does grow out   of polytheism--Hebrew monotheism not a monarchic but a sacerdotal   creation--Monotheistic and polytheistic ethic compared--The conventional   view--Ethic associated with "Supreme" Gods--Rational tests--Ethic of   post-exilic Judaism--Economic forces in cult-making--Chastening effects of   national disaster

       <page 66>

     
       section 4.

       Hebrews and Babylonians.   Babylonian influences on Judaic thought--Higher developments of   polytheism--International ethic lower among monotheists than among polytheists

       <page 71>

     
       section 5.

       Forces of Religious Evolution.   The socio-political factors--Social decadence in Mesopotamia, with religious   activity--Fatality of imperialism

       <page 78>

     
       section 6.

       The Hebrew Evolution. Rise of the   cult of Yahweh--Literary beginnings--Practical polytheism--The attempted reforms   of Josiah--Probable negative results--Developments of Yahwism

        

     
       

       [p. vii]

        

     
       

        

       PAGE

     
       

       in the exile--Effects of Persian contact--The Return a process of hierocratic   selection--The process of literary fabrication Higher literary fruition

       <page 80>

     
       section 7.

       Post-Exilic Phases. Cramping   effects of racial sectarianism--Change nevertheless inevitable--Modifications   of belief--Hebrew thought monotheistic only on the surface--Polytheistic   superstition never eliminated--Early Christian and Moslem thought on the same   plane--Social failure in Jewry as elsewhere--Expansion of Jewry in Gentile   lands--Hellenistic reactions--The Maccabean renascence

       <page 85>

     
       section 8.

       Revival and Disintegration. The   renascence a second process of hierocratic selection--Parallel case of   Parsism--Special fecundity of Jews--Renewed process of doctrinal   modification--Development of a Secondary God--The Jesuist movement--Its   dependent relation to Judaism up till the destruction of the Temple--Fusion of   the secondary God-ideas in Jesus--The economic situation--Separate Christism a   result of the fall of the Temple--Later Judaism--Persistence of sacrifice up to   the political catastrophe--Conventional comparisons of Hebrew and Greek ethic   and character

       <page 89>

     
       section 9.

       Conclusion. All religions   processes of evolutionary change--General law of the substitution of Son-Gods   for the older--Analogous cases in Greece, Babylon, Egypt, Persia, and   Jewry--The psychological process--Modification of Indra--His supersession by   Krishna--Adaptations of Osiris--Advent of Serapis--Jesus--Apollo, Dionysos, and   Zeus--Recession of the Supreme God--Heresy and dissent phases of the total   evolutionary process--Conditions of sect-survival--Conditions of survival for   deities--The Holy Spirit--The Virgin Mother--Yahweh and Jesus--Mary and   Anna--Joseph and Mary--Christ-making thus a form of Secondary-God-making--All   Secondary Gods evolved from prior materials--The moral metamorphosis of   Bacchus--"Culture-religion" thus an evolution from   "nature-religion"

       <page 94>

     
       

       
   PART II.

        

     
       

       SECONDARY GOD-MAKING

        

     
       

       CHAP. I.--THE SACRIFICED SAVIOUR-GOD.

        

     
       section 1.

       Totemism and Sacraments

       <page 99>

     
       section 2.

       Theory and Ritual of Human Sacrifice

       <page 105>

     
       section 3.

       The Christian Crucifixion

       <page 118>

     
       section 4.

       Vogue of Human Sacrifice

       <page 122>

     
       section 5.

       The Divinity of the Victim

       <page 130>

     
       section 6.

       The Cannibal Sacrament

       <page 140>

     
       section 7.

       The Semitic Antecedents

       <page 144>

     
       section 8.

       The Judaic Evolution

       <page 148>

     
       section 9.

       Specific Survivals in Judaism

       <page 158>

     
       

       [p. viii]

        

     
       

        

       PAGE

     
       section 10.

       The pre-Christian Jesus-God

       <page 162>

     
       section 11.

       Private Jewish Eucharists

       <page 168>

     
       section 12.

       The Eucharist in Orthodox Judaism

       <page 175>

     
       section 13.

       Special Features of the Crucifixion Myth

       <page 180>

     
       section 14.

       Possible Historical Elements

       <page 188>

     
       section 15.

       The Gospel Mystery-Play

       <page 194>

     
       section 16.

       The Mystery-Play and the Cultus

       <page 204>

     
       section 17.

       Further Pagan Adaptations

       <page 206>

     
       section 18.

       Synopsis and Conclusion: Genealogy of Human Sacrifice and Sacrament

       <page 209>

     
       

       Diagram

       <page 211>

     
       

       CHAP. II.--THE TEACHING GOD.

        

     
       section 1.

       Primary and Secondary Ideas

       <page 214>

     
       section 2.

       The Logos

       <page 218>

     
       section 3.

       Derivations of the Christian Logos

       <page 223>

     
       section 4.

       The Search for a Historical Jesus

       <page 228>

     
       section 5.

       The Critical Problem

       <page 231>

     
       section 6. 

       Collapse of the Constructive Case

       <page 234>

     
       section 7.

       Parallel Problems

       <page 237>

     
       section 8.

       The Problem of Buddhist Origins

       <page 239>

     
       section 9.

       Buddhism and Buddhas

       <page 241>

     
       section 10.

       The Cruces

       <page 246>

     
       section 11.

       Sociological Clues

       <page 249>

     
       section 12.

       Buddhism and Asoka

       <page 253>

     
       section 13.

       The Buddha Myth

       <page 258>

     
       section 14.

       The Problem of Manichaeus

       <page 266>

     
       section 15.

       The Manichaean Solution

       <page 267>

     
       section 16.

       The Case of Apollonius of Tyana

       <page 274>

     
       

       
   PART III.

        

     
       

       MITHRAISM

        

     
       section 1.

       Introductory

       <page 281>

     
       section 2.

       Beginnings of Cult

       <page 283>

     
       section 3.

       Zoroastrianism

       <page 280>

     
       section 4.

       Evolution of Mithra

       <page 288>

     
       section 5.

       The Process of Syncretism

       <page 291>

     
       section 6.

       Symbols of Mithra

       <page 29>

     
       section 7.

       The Cultus

       <page 303>

     
       section 8.

       The Creed

       <page 310>

     
       section 9.

       Mithraism and Christianity

       <page 315>

     
       section 10.

       Further Christian Parallels

       <page 320>

     
       section 11.

       The Vogue of Mithraism

       <page 321>

     
       section 12.

       Absorption in Christianity

       <page 327>

     
       section 13.

       The Point of Junction

       <page 334>

     
       

       [p. ix]

        

     
       

       
   PART IV.

        

     
       

       THE RELIGIONS OF ANCIENT AMERICA

        

     
       

        

       PAGE

     
       section 1.

       American Racial Origins

       <page 339>

     
       section 2.

       Aztecs and Peruvians

       <page 346>

     
       section 3.

       Primitive Religion and Human Sacrifice

       <page 349>

     
       section 4.

       The Mexican Cultus

       <page 355>

     
       section 5.

       Mexican Sacrifices and Sacraments

       <page 360>

     
       section 6.

       Mexican Ethics

       <page 366>

     
       section 7.

       The Mexican White Christ

       <page 370>

     
       section 8.

       The Fatality of the Priesthood

       <page 373>

     
       section 9.

       The Religion of Peru

       <page 376>

     
       section 10.

       Conclusion

       <page 380>

     
       

       
   APPENDICES.

        

     
      A.

       The Eating of the Crucified Human Sacrifice

       <page 389>

     
      B.

       Dramatic and Ritual Survivals

       <page 391>

     
      C.

       Replies to Criticisms:--

        

     
       section 1.

       General Opposition--The Hibbert   Journal

       <page 396>

     
       section 2.

       The Rev. Alfred Ernest Crawley

       <page 402>

     
       section 3.

       The Rev. Dr. St. Clair Tisdall

       <page 403>

     
       section 4.

       The Rev. Father Martindale

       <page 413>

     
       section 5.

       Dr. J. Estlin Carpenter

       <page 427>

     
       section 6.

       Professor Carl Clemen

       <page 435>

     
       

       INDEX

       <page 439>

     
 
      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. x] [p. xi]

  

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION

SINCE the first issue of this work in 1903, but especially within the past few years, its main positions have been brought into extensive discussion by other writers, notably in Germany, where the Christusmythe of Professor Arthur Drews has been the theme of many platform debates. The hypothesis of the Pre-Christian Jesus-God, first indicated in Christianity and Mythology, and further propounded in the first edition of this book, has received highly important and independent development at the hands of Professor W. Benjamin Smith in his Der Vorchristliche Jesus (1906), and in the later exposition of Professor Drews. For one whose tasks include other busy fields, it is hardly possible to give this the constant attention it deserves; but the present edition has been as fully revised as might be; and some fresh elucidatory material has been embodied, without, however, any pretence of including the results of the other writers named.

Criticism of the book, so far as I have seen, has been to a surprising degree limited to subsidiary details. The first part, a discussion of the general principles and main results of hierology as regards the reigning religion, has been generally ignored, under circumstances which suggest rather avoidance than dissidence. But much more surprising is the general evasion of the two theses upon which criticism was specially challenged in the Introduction--the theses that the gospel story of the Last Supper, the Agony, the Betrayal, the Crucifixion, and the Resurrection is demonstrably not originally a narrative, but a mystery-drama, which has been transcribed with a minimum of modification; and that the mystery-drama was inferribly an evolution from a Palestinian rite of human sacrifice in which the annual victim was "Jesus the Son of the Father." Against this twofold position I have seen not a single detailed argument. Writers who confidently and angrily undertake to expose error in another section of the book pass this with at most a defiant shot. Like the legendary Scottish preacher, they recognise a "difficult passage, and, having looked it boldly in the face, pass on." Even Professor Schmiedel, to my surprise, abstains from

[p. xii]

argument on an issue of which his candour and acumen must reveal to him the gravity. It is but fair to say that even sympathetic readers do not often avow entire acquiescence. Professor Drews leaves this an open question. But I should have expected that such a proposition, put forward as capital, would have been dealt with by critics who showed themselves much concerned to discredit the book in general.

They seem to have been chiefly excited about Mithraism, either finding in the account of that ancient cultus a provocation which the other parts of the volume did not yield, or seeing there openings for hostile criticism which elsewhere were not patent. One Roman Catholic ecclesiastic has represented me as a "modern apostle" of the bull-slaying God. It would seem that a semblance, however illusory, of rivalry in cult propaganda is more evocative of critical conflict than any mere scientific disintegration of the current creed. Of the attacks upon the section "Mithraism," as well as of other criticisms of the book, I have given some account in Appendix C. It is to be regretted that it should still be necessary to make replies to criticisms in these matters consist largely of exposures of gross misrepresentation, blundering, bad faith, and bad feeling, as well as bad reasoning, on the part of theological critics. In the case of a hostile critique in the Hibbert Journal, which did not incur these characterisations, I made an amicable appeal for space in which to reply and set forth my own case; but my request was refused.

Broadly speaking, the critical situation is one of ferment rather than of decisive conflict. Those devoted Danaides, the professional theologians, continue their labours with the serious assiduity which has always marked them, exhibiting their learned results in dialectic vessels which lack the first elements of retention. The theologians are as much occupied with unrealities to-day, relatively to the advance of thought, and as sure of their own insight, as were their predecessors of three hundred years ago, expounding the functions of the devil. In Germany they are not yet done discussing the inner significance of the tale of Satan's carrying Jesus to the pinnacle of the temple or to a mountain top. Professor Zahn circumspectly puts it that Jesus felt himself so carried. Friedrich Spitta as circumspectly replies that that is not what the gospels say, but does not press that point to finality. Professor Harnack pronounces that the story in Matthew is the older. Spitta cogently proves that it is the later, and that Mark has minimised Luke. Wellhausen's theory of the priority of Mark he shows to be finally untenable; and his own conclusion he declares to give a decisive result as regards

[p. xiii]

the life of Jesus--namely, that Jesus believed firmly in his Messiah-ship from the moment of his baptism onwards, and that he held by it in terms of his own inner experience of divine and fiendish influences. [*1] And this is history, as written by scholarly theological experts. The fact that the whole Temptation story is rationally traceable to a Babylonian sculpture of the Goat-God beside the Sun-God, interpreted by Greeks and Romans successively as an education of Apollo or Jupiter by Pan on a mountain top, or a musical contest between them, has never entered the experts' consciousness. They are writing history in the air. Spitta confidently decides that neither the community nor the disciples nor Paul set up the Messianic conception of Jesus; and yet he has not a word to say on the problem of Paul's entire ignorance of the Temptation story. Seventy years before, our own experts had ascertained with equal industry and certainty that "most probably our Lord was placed [by Satan] not on the sheer descent [from the temple] into the valley (Jos. War, V, v, 2; Ant. XV, xi, 5), but on the side next the court where stood the multitude to whom He might thus announce himself from Dan. vii, 13 (1 Chron. xxi, 16), see Bp. Pearson, VII, f. and g. Solomon's porch was a cross building to the temple itself, and rose 120 cubits above it. From the term used by both Evangelists, it is certain that the Tempter stood on no part (tou naou) of the sanctuary." [*2] Thus does the "expert" elucidation of the impossible go on through the generations. The "experts" of to-day are for the most part as far behind the historic science of their time as were their predecessors; and their results are just as nugatory as the older. But they are just as certain as were their predecessors that they are at the true point of view, and have all the historical facts in hand.

Orthodox and heterodox alike, in the undertaking to set forth the manner of the rise of Christianity, either wholly disregard the principles of historical proof or apply these principles arbitrarily, at their own convenience. Pfleiderer, latterly more and more bitterly repugning the interpretations of other scholars, alternately represented the personality of Jesus as a profoundly obscure problem, and offered fallacious elucidations thereof, with perfect confidence in his own selection of certainties. [*3] Dr. Heinrici, offering a comprehensive view of Das Urchristentum (1902), ignores all historical difficulties on the score that he is discussing not the truth but the

[p. xiv]

influence of Christianity, and so sets forth a copious account of the psychology of the Gospel Jesus which for critical science has no validity whatever. Dr. Schweitzer, in his Von Reimarus zu Wrede (Eng. trans., The Quest of the Historical Jesus, 1910), after ably confuting all the current conceptions of the Founder, sets forth one which incurs fatal criticism as soon as it is propounded. [*1]

The old fashion of manipulating the evidences, on the other hand, is still practised from time to time even by distinguished experts like Professor Bousset, a scholar who has done original and important work in outlying provinces of research. But how little critical validity attaches to Bousset's vindication of the main Christian tradition has been crushingly set forth in the brochure of the late Pastor Kalthoff, Was wissen wir von Jesus? (Lehmann, Berlin: 1904), in reply to Bousset's discourse under the same title. Professing, for instance, to found on such historical data as the mention of an otherwise unknown "Chrestus" by Suetonius, Bousset deliberately denaturalises the passage to suit his purpose, and then makes it vouch for a "Christian" community at Rome when none such can be shown to have existed. Kalthoff rightly likens such a handling of documents to the methods of the professed rationalisers denounced by Lessing in his day. Many of the "liberal" school of to-day are in fact at the standpoint of the semi-rationalist beginnings of Biblical criticism among the eighteenth-century deists; on behalf of whom we can but say that they were at least sincere pioneers, and that Lessing, in substituting for their undeveloped critical method the idea of a divine "Education of Mankind" through all religious systems alike, retrograded to a standpoint where the rational interpretation of history ceases to be possible, and where the critic stultifies himself by censuring processes of thought which, on his own principles, should be envisaged as part of the divine scheme of "education." Yet that nugatory formula in turn is pressed into the service of a theology which is consistent only in refusing to submit to scientific and logical tests.

Then we have the significant portent of the pseudo-biological school of the Rev. Mr. Crawley, [*2] according to which nothing in religion is new and nothing true, but all is more or less productive of "vitality," and therefore precious, so that no critical analysis matters. Here the tribunals of historical and moral truth are brazenly closed; and the critical issue is referred to one commissioned for the instant by the defender of the faith, whose hand-to-mouth

[p. xv]

interpretations and generalisations of Christian history, worthy of a neophyte's essay, are complacently put forth as the vindication of beliefs and rites that are admittedly developments from mere savagery. And this repudiation of all intellectual morals, this negation of the very instinct of truth, is profusely flavoured with a profession of zeal for the morals of sex and the "instinct of life." Incidentally, too, an argument which puts all critical tests out of court is from time to time tinted with a suggestion of decent concern for historical research.

So, too, among the scholars who reconstruct Christian origins at will, some profess to apply a critical "method" or set of methods by which they can put down all challenges of the reality of their subject-matter. In Appendix C, I have shown what such "method" is worth in the hands of Professor Carl Clemen. Their general procedure is simply that of scholastics debating in vacuo, assuming what they please, and rejecting what they please. It is the method by which whole generations of their predecessors elucidated the details of the sacerdotal system of the Hebrews in the wilderness, until Colenso--set doubting about sacred tradition by an intelligent Zulu--established arithmetically the truth of Voltaire's verdict that the whole thing was impossible. Then the experts, under cover of orthodox outcry, changed the venue, avowing no shame for their long aberration. In due time the modern specialists, or their successors, will realise that their main positions as to Christian origins are equally fabulous; but they or their successors will continue to be conscious of their professional perspicacity, and solemnly or angrily contemptuous of all lay criticism of their "method." "Wir Gelehrten vom Fach," they still call themselves in Germany--"we scholars by profession"--thus disposing of all lay criticism.

It is not surprising that alongside of this vain demonstration of the historicity of myth there spreads, among determined believers in the historicity, an uneasy disposition to ground faith on the very "to believe," called by the name of "spiritual experience." With a confidence equal to that of the professional documentists, such believers maintain that their own spiritual autobiographies can establish the historical actuality of what rationalist critics describe as ancient myths. "The heart answers, I have felt." Some of these reasoners, proceeding on the lines of the pseudo-Paul (1 Cor. ii), dispose inexpensively of the historical critic by calling him "impercipient." They themselves are the percipients "vom Fach." Other apologists, with a little more modesty, reiterate their conviction that

[p. xvi]

the Christian origins must have been what they have been accustomed to think--that no religious movement can have risen without a revered Founder, and that the spread and duration of the Christian movement prove its Founder to have been a very great personality indeed. Abstractly put, such a theorem logically ends in the bald claim of the theorist to special "percipience," and a denial of percipience to all who refuse their assent.

It has latterly come to be associated, however, with an appeal to historical analogy in the case of the modern Persian movement of the Bab, the lessons of which in this connection have been pressed upon orthodox believers by the late Mr. Herbert Rix. Mr. Rix, whose personality gave weight and interest to all his views, seems to have set out as a Unitarian preacher with a fixed belief in the historicity of the Gospel Jesus, despite a recognition of the weakness of the historical basis. Noting "with what a childlike mind those ancient Christians came to all questions of external fact--how independent of external fact the truth they lived by really was," [*1] he yet assumed that any tale passed on by such believers must have had a basis in a great personality. "Those gospel stories," he wrote, "come down to us by tradition handed on by the lips of ignorant peasants, so that we can never be quite sure that we have the precise truth about any incident." [*2] Here both the positive and the negative assumptions are invalid. We do not know that all the gospel stories were passed on by peasants; and we never know whether there was any historical basis whatever for any one tale. But on such assumptions Mr. Rix founded an unqualified conviction that the Gospel Jesus "headed a new spiritual era," "altered the whole face of things," "gave us a new principle to live by," and "revolutionised the whole world of human affection"; [*3] and in his posthumous work, Rabbi, Messiah, and Martyr (1907), he presents one more Life of Jesus framed on the principle of excluding the supernatural and taking all the rest of the gospels as substantially true.

Yet towards the close of his life he seems to have realised either that this process was illicit or that it could not claim acceptance on historical grounds. Writing on the Bab movement, he speaks not only of "those belated theologians who still think the case of a supernatural Christianity can be historically proved by evidence drawn from the latter part of the first century," but of the "utter insecurity of the historical foundation" of Christianity; and he avows "how hopeless it is to try to base religion upon historical

[p. xvii]

documents." [*1] Then comes the exposition of how the Bab movement rose in the devotion evoked by a remarkable personality; and how within thirty years the original account of the Founder was so completely superseded by a legendary account, full of miracles, that only one copy of the original document, by a rare chance, has survived.

The argument now founded on this case is an attempt to salve the historicity of Jesus in surrendering the records. Renan pointed to the Bab movement as showing how an enthusiastic cult could arise and spread rapidly in our own day by purely natural forces. Accepting that demonstration, the Neo-Unitarians press the corollary that the Bab movement shows how rapidly myth can overgrow history, and that we have now a new analogical ground for believing that Jesus, like the Bab, was an actual person, of great persuasive and inspiring power. But while the plea is perfectly reasonable, and deserves every consideration, it is clearly inconclusive. Cult beginnings are not limited to one mode; and the fatal fact remains that the beginnings of the Christist cult are wrapped in all the obscurity which surrounds the alleged Founder, while we have trustworthy contemporary record of the beginnings of the Bab movement. Place the two cases beside that of the Bacchic cult in Greece, and we have a cult-type in which wild devotion is given to a wholly mythical Founder. The rationalist critic does not affirm the impossibility of an evolution of the Christist movement on the lines of that of the Bab: he leaves such a priori reasoning to the other side, simply insisting that there is no good historical evidence whatever, while there are strong grounds for inferring a mythical foundation. And those who abstractly insist on the historicity of Jesus must either recede from their position or revert to claims expressive merely of the personal equation--statements of the convincing force of their "religious experience," or claims to a special faculty of "percipience." To all such claims the sufficient answer is that, arrogance apart, they are matched and cancelled by similar claims on the part of believers in other creeds; and that they could have been advanced with as much justification by ancient believers in Dionysos and Osiris, who had no more doubt of the historicity of their Founders than either an orthodox or a Unitarian Christian has to-day concerning the historicity of Jesus. In short, the closing of historical problems by insistence on the personal equation is no more permissible among intellectual freemen than the settling of scientific

[p. xviii]

questions thereby. Callous posterity, if not contemporary criticism, ruthlessly puts aside the personal equation in such matters, and reverts to the kind of argument which proceeds upon common grounds of credence and universal canons of evidence.

And this reversion is now in process. Already the argument for the historicity of the main gospel narrative is being largely grounded even by some "experts" on the single datum of the mention of "brethren of the Lord," and "James the brother of the Lord," in two of the Pauline epistles. This thesis is embodied in one of the ablest arguments on the historicity question that I have met with. It was put in a letter to me by a lay correspondent, open-mindedly seeking the truth by fair critical tests. He began by arguing that the data of a "Paul party," a "Cephas party," and an "Apollos party" in Corinth, if accepted as evidence for the personalities of the three party-leaders named, carry with them the inference of a Christ of whom some logia were current. If then the writer of the epistle--whether Paul or another--ignored such logia, the "silence of Paul" is no argument for ignorance of such logia in general. This ingenious argument, I think, fails in respect of its unsupported premiss. Christists might call themselves "of Christ" simply by way of disavowing all sectarian leadership. On the face of the case, the special converts of Paul were Christists without any logic of Christ to proceed upon. Equally ingenious, but I think equally inconclusive, is the further argument that the challenge, "Have I not seen Jesus our Lord?" (1 Cor. ix, 1), implies that Paul's status was discredited on the score that he had not seen the Lord, while other apostles had. But the dispute here turns finally on the question of the authenticity of the epistle as a whole, or the chapter or the plea in particular. As coming from Paul, it is a weak plea: multitudes were said to have "seen" Jesus; the apostle would have claimed, if anything, authorisation by Jesus. But as a traditional claim it is intelligible enough. Now, this portion of the epistle is one of those most strongly impugned by the tests of Van Manen as betraying a late authorship and standpoint--that of ecclesiastics standing for their income and their right to marry. The conception of Paul battling against his converts for his salary and "the right to lead about a wife," within a few pages of his declaration (vii, 8-9) to the unmarried and to widows, "It is good for them if they abide even as I; but if they have not continency, let them marry"--this is staggering even to believers in the authenticity of "the four" or all of the epistles, and gives the very strongest ground for treating the irreconcilable passage in chapter ix,

[p. xix]

if not the whole chapter, as a subsequent interpolation. That the same hand penned both passages is incredible.

Thus we come to the "brethren of the Lord" with an indestructible presumption against the text. They are mentioned as part of the case for that claim to marry which is utterly excluded by chapter vii. And the claim for salaries and freedom to marry is as obviously likely to be the late interpolation as is the doctrine of asceticism to be the earlier. Given then the clear lateness of the passage, what does the phrase "brethren of the Lord" prove? That at a period presumably long subsequent to that of Paul there was a tradition of a number of Church leaders or teachers so named. Who were they? They are never mentioned in the Acts. They are never indicated in the gospels. Brethren of Jesus are there referred to (Mt. xii, 46, xiii, 55; Mk. iii, 31, 32; Lk. viii, 19, 20; Jn. vii, 3, 5, 10); but, to say nothing of the facts that three of these passages are plainly duplicates, and that only in one are any of the brethren named, there is never the slightest suggestion that any one of them joined the propaganda. On the contrary, it is expressly declared that "even his brethren did not believe on him" (Jn. vii, 5). How then, on that basis, supposing it to have a primary validity, are we to accept the view that the James of Gal. i, 19, was a uterine brother or a half-brother of the Founder, who before Paul's advent had come to something like primacy in the Church, without leaving even a traditional trace of him as a brother of Jesus in the Acts?

Either the gospel data are historically decisive or they are not. By excluding them from his "pillar texts" [*1] Professor Schmiedel admits that they are bound up with the supernatural view of Jesus. The resort to the argument from the epistles is a partial confession that the whole gospel record is open to doubt; and that the specification of four brothers and several sisters of Jesus in one passage is a perplexity. It has always been so. Several Fathers accounted for them as children of Joseph by a former wife; several others made them children of Clopas and "the other" Mary, and so only cousins of Jesus. If the gospel record is valid evidence, the question is at an end. If it is not, the evidence from the epistles falls. "Brethren of the Lord" is a late allusion, which may stand for a mere tradition or may tell of a group name; and the mention of James as a "brother" (with no hint of any others) in the epistle to the Galatians can perfectly well be an interpolation, even supposing the epistle to be genuine.

[p. xx]

I have here examined the whole argument because it is fully the strongest known to me on the side of the historicity of Jesus; and I am concerned to evade nothing. The candid reader, I think, will admit that even if he holds by the historicity it cannot be established on the grounds in question. He will then, I trust, bring an open mind to bear on the whole reasoning of the Second Part of the ensuing treatise.

As in the case of the second edition of Christianity and Mythology I am deeply indebted to Mr. Percy Vaughan for carefully reading the proofs of these pages, and revising the Index.

April, 1911.

Footnotes

^xiii:1 Die Versuchung Jesu, in Bd. iii, H. 2, of Zur Geschichte and Literatur des Urchristentums, 1907, pp. 92-3.

^xiii:2 Notes on the Four Gospels, etc., 1838, p. 220.

^xiii:3 See the Appendix to the second edition of Christianity and Mythology.

^xiv:1 See Appendix last cited.

^xiv:2 See Appendix C to the present volume.

^xvi:1 Sermons, Addresses, and Essays, 1907, p. 1.

^xvi:2 Id. p. 107.

^xvi:3 Id. p. 5.

^xvii:1 Id. pp. 295-6, 300.

^xix:1 For an examination of these I may refer the reader to the Appendix to the second edition of Christianity and Mythology.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xxi]

  

INTRODUCTION

MY purpose in grouping the four ensuing studies is to complement and complete the undertaking of a previous volume, entitled Christianity and Mythology. That was substantially a mythological analysis of the Christian system, introduced by a discussion of mythological principles in that particular connection and in general. The bulk of the present volume is substantially a synthesis of Christian origins, introduced by a discussion of the principles of hierology. Such discussion is still forced on sociology by the special pleaders of the prevailing religion. But the central matter of the book is its attempt to trace and synthesise the real lines of growth of the Christian cultus; and it challenges criticism above all by its theses--(1) that the gospel story of the Last Supper, Passion, Betrayal, Trial, Crucifixion, and Resurrection, is visibly a transcript of a Mystery Drama, and not originally a narrative; and (2) that that drama is demonstrably (as historic demonstration goes) a symbolic modification of an original rite of human sacrifice, of which it preserves certain verifiable details.

That the exact point of historic connection between the early eucharistic rite and the late drama-story has still to be traced, it is needless to remark. Had direct evidence on this head been forthcoming, the problem could not so long have been ignored. But it is here contended that the lines of evolution are established by the details of the record and the institution, in the light of the data of anthropology; and that we have thus at last a scientific basis for a history of Christianity. As was explained in the introduction to Christianity and Mythology, these studies originated some twenty-five years back in an attempt to realise and explain "The Rise of Christianity Sociologically Considered"; and it is as a beginning of such an exposition that the two books are meant to be taken. In A Short History of Christianity the general historic conception is outlined; and the present volume offers the detailed justification of the views there summarily put as to Christian origins, insofar as they were not fully developed in the earlier volume. On one point, the origins of Manichaeism, the present work departs from the

[p. xxii]

ordinary historic view, which was accepted in the Short History; the proposed rectification here being a result of the main investigation. In this connection it may be noted that Schwegler had already denied the historicity of Montanus--a thesis which I have not sought to incorporate, though I somewhat incline to accept it.

Whether or not I am able to carry out the original scheme in full, I am fain to hope that these inquiries will be of some small use towards meeting the need which motived them. Mythology has permanently interested me only as throwing light on hierology; and hierology has permanently interested me only as throwing light on sociology. The third and fourth sections of this book, accordingly, are so placed with a view to the comparative elucidation of the growth of Christianity. If it be objected that they are thus "tendency" writings, the answer is that they were independently done, and are as complete as I could make them in the space. Both are revisions and expansions of lectures formerly published in "The Religious Systems of the World," that on Mithraism being now nearly thrice its original length. Undertaken and expanded without the aid of Professor Cumont's great work, Textes et Monuments Figures relatifs aux Mysteres de Mithra (1896-9), it has been revised in the welcome light of that magistral performance. To M. Cumont I owe much fresh knowledge, and the correction of some errors, as well as the confirmation of several of my conclusions; and if I have ventured here and there to dissent from him, and above all to maintain a thesis not recognised by him--that Mithra in the legend made a "Descent into Hell"--I do so only after due hesitation.

The non-appearance of any other study of Mithraism in English may serve as my excuse for having carried my paper into some detail, especially by way of showing how much the dead cult had in common with the living. Christian origins cannot be understood without making this comparison. It is significant, however, of our British avoidance of comparative hierology wherever it bears on current beliefs, that while Germany has contributed to the study of Mithraism, among many others, the learned treatise of Windischmann and that in Roscher's Lexikon, France the zealous researches of Lajard, and Belgium the encyclopaedic and decisive work of Professor Cumont, England has produced not a single independent book on the subject. In compensation for such neglect, we have developed a signal devotion to Folklore. If some of the favour shown to that expansive study be turned on serious attempts to understand the

[p. xxiii]

actual process of growth of world-religions, the present line of research may be extended to advantage.

The lecture on the religions of Ancient America has in turn been carefully revised and much enlarged, not because this subject is equally ignored among us--for there is a sufficiency of information upon it in English, notably in one of the too-little utilised collections of "Descriptive Sociology" compiled for Mr. Spencer--but because again the comparative bearing of the study of the dead cults on that of the living has not been duly considered. In particular I have entered into some detail tending to support the theory--not yet to be put otherwise than as a disputed hypothesis--that certain forms and cults of human sacrifice, first evolved anciently in Central Asia, passed to America on the east, and to the Semitic peoples on the west, resulting in the latter case in the central "mystery" of Christianity, and in the former in the Mexican system of human sacrifices. But the psychological importance of the study does not, I trust, solely stand or fall with that theory. On the general sociological problem, I may say, a closer study of the Mexican civilisation has dissolved an opinion I formerly held--that it might have evolved from within past the stage of human sacrifice had it been left to itself.

Whatever view be taken of the scope of religious heredity, there will remain in the established historic facts sufficient justification for the general title of "Pagan Christs," which best indicates in one phrase the kinship of all cults of human sacrifice and theophagous sacrament, as well as of all cults of which the founder figures as an inspired teacher. That principle has already been broadly made good on the first side by the incomparable research of Dr. J. G. Frazer, to whose "Golden Bough" I owe both theoretic light and detail knowledge. I ask, therefore, that when I make bold to reject Dr. Frazer's suggested solution (ed. 1900) of the historic problem raised by the parallel between certain Christian and non-Christian sacra, I shall not be supposed to undervalue his great treasury of ordered knowledge. On the question of the historicity of Founders, I have made answer in the second edition of Christianity and Mythology to certain strictures of his which seem to me very ill-considered. What I claim for my own solution is that it best satisfies the ruling principles of his own hierology.

In this connection, however, I feel it a duty to avow that the right direction had previously been pointed out by the late Grant Allen in his Evolution of the Idea of God (1897), though at the outset of his work he obscured it for many of us by insisting on the

[p. xxiv]

absolute historicity of Jesus, a position which later-on he in effect abandons. It is after ostensibly setting out with the actuality of "Jesus the son of the carpenter" as an "unassailable Rock of solid historical fact" (p. 16) that he incidentally (p. 285) pronounces "the Christian legend to have been mainly constructed out of the details of such early god-making sacrifices" as that practised by the Khonds. Finally (p. 391) he writes that "at the outset of our inquiry we had to accept crudely the bare fact" that the cult arose at a certain period, and that "we can now see that it was but one more example of a universal god-making tendency in human nature." Returning to Allen's book after having independently worked out in detail precisely such a derivation and such a theory, I was surprised to find that where he had thus thrown out the clue I had not on a first reading been at all impressed by it. The reason probably was that for me the problem had been primarily one of historical derivation, and that Allen offered no historical solution, being satisfied to indicate analogies. And it was probably the still completer disregard of historical difficulties that brought oblivion upon the essay of Herr Kulischer, Das Leben Jesu eine Sage von dem Schicksale and Erlebnissen der Bodenfrucht, insbesondere der sogenannten palastinensischen Erstlingsgarbe, die am Passahfeste im Tempel dargebracht wurde (Leipzig, 1876), in which Dr. Frazer's thesis of the vegetal character of the typical slain and rearising deity is put forth without evidence, but with entire confidence.

Kulischer had simply posited the analogy of the Vegetation-God and the vegetation-cult as previous students had done that of the Sun-God and the sun-myth, not only without tracing any process of transmutation, but with a far more arbitrary interpretation of symbols than they had ventured on. His essay thus remains only a remarkable piece of pioneering, which went broadly in the right direction, but missed the true path.

It is not indeed to be assumed that if he had made out a clear historical case it would have been listened to by his generation. The generation before him had paid little heed to the massive and learned treatise of Ghillany, Die Menschenopfer der alten Hebraer (1842), wherein the derivation of the Passover from a rite of human sacrifice is well made out, and that of the Christian eucharist from a modified Jewish sacrament of theophagy is at least strikingly argued for. Ghillany had further noted some of the decisive analogies of sacrificial ritual and gospel narrative which are founded on in the following pages; and was substantially on the right historic track, though he missed some of the archaeological proofs of the

[p. xxv]

prevalence of human sacrifice in pre-exilic Judaism. Daumer, too, went far towards a right historical solution in his work Der Feuer and Molochdienst der alten Hebraer, which was synchronous with that of his friend Ghillany, and again in his treatise Die Geheimnisse des christlichen Alterthums (1847). His later proclamation of Meine Conversion (1859) would naturally discredit his earlier theses; but the disregard of the whole argument in the hierology of that day is probably to be explained as due to the fact that the conception of a "science of religions"--specified by Vinet in 1856 as beginning to grow up alongside of theology--had not then been constituted for educated men. The works of Ghillany and Daumer have been so far forgotten that not till my own research had been independently made and elaborated did I meet with them.

To-day, the conditions of hierological research are very different. A generation of students is now steeped in the anthropological lore of which Ghillany, failing to profit by the lead of Constant, noted only the details preserved in the classics and European histories; and the scientific significance of his and Daumer's and Kulischer's theories is clear in the light of the studies of Tylor, Spencer, and Frazer. Grant Allen, with the ample materials of recent anthropology to draw upon, made a vital advance by connecting the central Christian legend with the whole process of religious evolution, in terms not of a priori theology but of anthropological fact. If, however, the lack of historical demonstration, and the uncorrected premiss of a conventional historical view, made his theory at first lack significance for a reader like myself, it has probably caused it to miss its mark with others. That is no deduction from its scientific merit; but it may be that the historical method will assist to its appreciation. It was by way of concrete recognition of structural parallelism that I reached the theory, having entirely forgotten, if I had ever noted, Allen's passing mention of one of the vital details in question--that of the breaking of the legs of victims in primitive human sacrifice. In 1842 Ghillany had laid similar stress on the detail of the lance-thrust in the fourth gospel, to which he adduced the classic parallel noted hereinafter. And when independent researches thus yield a variety of particular corroborations of a theory reached otherwise by a broad generalisation, the reciprocal confirmation is, I think, tolerably strong. The recognition of the Gospel Mystery-Play, it is here submitted, is the final historical validation of the whole thesis, which might otherwise fail to escape the fate of disregard which has thus far befallen the most brilliant speculation of the a priori mythologists in regard to the Christian legend, from the

[p. xxvi]

once famous works of Dupuis and Volney down to the little noticed Letture sopra la mitologia vedica of Professor de Gubernatis.

However that may be, Grant Allen's service in the matter is now from my point of view unquestionable. Of less importance, but still noteworthy, is Professor Huxley's sketch of "The Evolution of Theology," with which, while demurring to some of what I regard as its uncritical assumptions (accepted, I regret to say, by Allen, in his otherwise scientific ninth chapter), I find myself in considerable agreement on Judaic origins. Professor Huxley's essay points to the need for a combination of the studies of hierology and anthropology in the name of sociology, and on that side it would be unpardonable to omit acknowledgment of the great work that has actually been done for sociological synthesis. I am specially bound to make it in view of my occasional dissent on anthropological matters from Spencer. Such dissent is apt to suggest difference of principle in a disproportionate degree; and Spencer's own iconoclasm has latterly evoked a kind of criticism that is little concerned to avow his services. It is the more fitting that such a treatise as the present should be accompanied by a tribute to them. However his anthropology may have to be modified in detail, it remains clear to some of us, whom it has enlightened, that his elucidations are of fundamental importance, all later attempts being related to them, and that his main method is permanently valid.

In regard to matters less habitually contested, it is perhaps needless to add that I am as little lacking in gratitude for the great scholarly services rendered to all students of hierology by Professor Rhys Davids, when I venture to withstand his weighty opinion on Buddhist origins. My contrary view would be ill-accredited indeed if I were not able to support it with much evidence yielded by his scholarship and his candour. And it is perhaps not unfitting that, by way of final word of preface to a treatise which sets out with a systematic opposition to the general doctrine of Dr. F. B. Jevons, I acknowledge that I have profited by his survey of the field, and even by the suggestiveness of some of his arguments that seem to me to go astray.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

PART I.

  

THE RATIONALE OF RELIGION

  

CHAPTER I.

  

THE NATURALNESS OF ALL BELIEF

  

 section 1.

IT seems probable, despite theological cavils, that Petronius was right in his signal saying, Fear first made the Gods. In the words of a recent hierologist, "we may be sure that primitive man took to himself the credit of his successful attempts to work the mechanism of nature for his own advantage, but when the machinery did not work he ascribed the fault to some over-ruling supernatural power.....It was the violation of [previously exploited] sequences, and the frustration of his expectations, by which the belief in supernatural power was, not created, but first called forth." [*1]

The fact that this writer proceeds to repudiate his own doctrine [*2] is no reason why we should, save to the extent of noting the temerity of his use of the term "supernatural." There are some very strong reasons, apart from the a priori one cited above, for thinking that the earliest human notions of superhuman beings were framed in terms of fear. Perhaps the strongest of all is the fact that savages and barbarians in nearly all parts of the world appear to regard disease and death as invariably due to purposive hostile action, whether normal, magical, or "spiritual." [*3] Not even old age is for

[p. 2]

many of these primitive thinkers a probable natural cause of death. [*1] If then the life of early man was not much less troublous than that of contemporary primitives, he is likely to have been moved as much as they to conceive of the unseen powers as malevolent. "On the Gold Coast," says a close student, "the majority of these spirits are malignant......I believe that originally all were conceived as malignant." [*2]

And how, indeed, could it be otherwise? Those who will not assent have forgotten, as indeed most anthropologists strangely forget when they are discussing the beginnings of religion, that man as we know him is descended from something less human, more brute, something nearer the predatory beast life of fear and foray.

[p. 3]

[paragraph continues] When in the period of upward movement which we term civilisation, as distinct from animal savagery, there could arise thrills of yearning or gratitude towards unknown powers, we are aeons off from the stage of subterhuman growth in which the germs of conceptual religion must have stirred. If the argument is to be that there is no religion until man loves his Gods, let it be plainly put, and let not a verbal definition become a petitio principii. If, again, no numina are to be termed Gods but those who are loved, let that proposition too be put as a simple definition of term. But if we are to look for the beginnings of the human notion of numina, of unseen spirits who operate in Nature and interfere with man, let it be as plainly put that they presumably occurred when fear of the unknown was normal, and gratitude to an Unknown impossible.

But in saying that fear first made the Gods, or made the first Gods, we imply that other God-making forces came into play later; and no dispute arises when this is affirmed of the process of making the Gods of the higher religions, in their later forms. Even here, at the outset, the play of gratitude is no such ennobling exercise as to involve much lifting of the moral standpoint; and even in the higher religions gratitude to the God is often correlative with fear of the evil spirits whom he wards off. This factor is constantly present in the gospels and in the polemic of the early Fathers; [*1] and has never disappeared from religious life. The pietist who in our own day pours out thanks to "Providence" for saving him in the earthquake in which myriads have perished is no more ethically attractive than philosophically persuasive; and the gratitude of savages and barbarians for favours received and expected can hardly have been more refined. It might even be said that a cruder egoism presides over the making of Good Gods than over the birth of the Gods of Fear; [*2] the former having their probable origin in an individualistic as against a tribal instinct. But it may be granted that the God who ostensibly begins as a private guardian angel or family spirit may become the germ of a more ethical cultus than that of the God generically feared. And the process chronically recurs. There is, indeed, no generic severance between the Gods of fear and the Gods of love, most deities of the more advanced races having both aspects: nevertheless, certain specified deities are so largely shaped by men's affections that they might recognisably be termed the Beloved Gods.

[p. 4]

It will on the whole be helpful to an understanding of the subject if we name such Gods, in terms of current conceptions, the Christs of the world's pantheon. That title, indeed, no less fitly includes figures which do not strictly rank as Gods; but in thus widely relating it we shall be rather elucidating than obscuring religious history. Only by some such collocation of ideas can the inquirer surmount his presuppositions and take the decisive step towards seeing the religions of mankind as alike man-made. On the other hand, he is not thereby committed to any one view in the field of history proper; he is left free to argue for a historical Christ as for a historical Buddha.

Even on the ground of the concept of evolution, however, scientific agreement is still hindered by persistence in the old classifications. The trouble meets us on one line in arbitrary fundamental separations between mythology and religion, early religion and early ethics, religion and magic, genuine myths and non-genuine myths. [*1] On another line it meets us in the shape of a sudden and local reopening of the problem of theistic intervention in a quasi-philosophical form, or a wilful repudiation of naturalistic method when the inquiry reaches current beliefs. Thus results which were reached by disinterested scholarship a generation ago are sought to be subverted, not by a more thorough scholarship, but by keeping away from the scholarly problem and suggesting a new standard of values, open to no rational tests. It may be well, therefore, to clear the ground so far as may be of such dispute at the outset by stating and vindicating the naturalistic position in regard to it.

Footnotes

^1:1 F. B. Jevons, Introduction, to the History of Religion, 1896, p. 19; cp. p. 23, p. 137, and p. 177. Cp. Adam Smith, essay on The History of Astronomy, sect. iii.

^1:2 Jevons, as cited pp. 106, 233, 410. Exactly the same self-contradiction is committed by Professor Robertson Smith, on the same provocation of the phrase, Primus in orbe deos fecit timor. See his Religion of the Semites, pp. 27, 35, 55, 88, 129.

^1:3 Cp. John Mathew, Eaglehawk and Crow, 1899, pp. 91, 123, 144; Sir A. B. Ellis, The Tshi-speaking Peoples of the Gold Coast, 1887, pp. 13-14; Livingstone, Travels and Researches in South Africa, ed. 1905, p. 409; Schweinfurth, The Heart of Africa, 3rd ed. i, 144-5; Major Glyn Leonard, The Lower Niger and its Tribes, 1906, pp. 171-sq., 361; Mary H. Kingsley, West African Studies, ed. 1901, pp. 98-100, 105-9, 178; Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes of Central Australia, 1899, p. 48; Northern Tribes of Central Australia, 1904, p. 479; Rev. R. Taylor, Te Ika a Maui: or, New Zealand and its Inhabitants, 1870, p. 137; w. w. Skeat, Malay Magic, 1900, pp. 56-57, 94, 410, 533 sq.; J. Chalmers, Pioneer Life and Work in New Guinea, 1895, p. 199; Thurston, Castes and Tribes of Southern India, 1909, iii. 275; iv, 53, p. 19, 160; vii, 350, etc.; Admiral Lindesay Brine, Travels amongst American Indians, 1894, pp 184-5 363; A. R. Wallace, Travels on the Amazon and Rio Negro, 2nd ed. 1889, pp. 347-8; A. F. Calvert, The Aborigines of Western Australia, 1894, p. 20; G. Taplin, The Narrinyeri: An Account of the Tribes of South Australian Aborigines, 2nd ed. Adelaide, [p. 2] 1878, pp. 19, 25; Perceval Landon, Lhasa, 2nd ed. 1905, p. 39; W. A. Pickering, Pioneering in Formosa, 1898, pp. 73, 75; Turner, Samoa a Hundred Years Ago, 1884, pp. 21, 321; A. E. Pratt, Two Years among the New Guinea Cannibals, 1906, p. 312; Paul Kollmann, The Victoria Nyanza, 1899, p. 166; Lionel Decle, Three Years in Savage Africa, 1900, pp. 75, 152; Dobrizhoffer, An Account of the Abipones, Eng. tr. 1821, ii, 84; W. Ellis, Polynesian Researches, 2nd ed. 1831, i, 395-6; iv, 293, 315; Batchelor, The Ainu of Japan, 1892, pp. 195, 199; B. Douglas Howard, Life with Trans-Siberian Savages, 1893, p. 193; Adolf Bastian, Der Mensch in der Geschichte, 1860, ii, 106 sq., 116 sq.; Tylor, Primitive Culture, 3rd ed. i, 138; E. Clodd, Tom Tit Tot, 1898, pp. 133-4; E. Crawley, The Mystic Rose, 1902. pp. 18-22, 26-28; Ross, Pansebeia, 4th ed. 1672, p. 100; N. W. Thomas, art. in Journal of the African Society, October, 1908, p. 24; D. M. Kranz, Natur- and Kulturleben der Zulus, 1880, p. 106; S. P. Oliver, Madagascar, 1886, ii, 39.

At a higher stage of civilisation, or among tribes who have had some contact with white men, we find a differentiation in which medical treatment is recognised, and only the obscurer maladies or dangerous wounds are magically dealt with. Cp. Schrader, Prehistoric Antiquities of the Aryan Peoples, Eng. tr. 1890, p. 420, with Miss Kingsley, West African Studies, p. 153, and Brine, as cited, p. 174.

It cannot be said that this view of disease was transcended among the most civilised nations of antiquity, the scientific views of the Greek physicians being accepted only by the few. Under Christianity there was a nearly complete reversion to the savage view, which subsisted until the assimilation of Saracen science in the Middle Ages. Cp. Mosheim's notes to Cudworth's Intellectual System, Harrison's trans. 1845, ii, 284-6; A. D. White, History of the Warfare of Science with Theology, 1897, ii, i, 3, 25, and refs.

^2:1 In some cases old age is recognised as a sufficient cause. Cp. Rev. J. Macdonald, Light in Africa, 1890, p. 164; Gill, Myths and Songs of the South Pacific, 1876, p. 35; Decle, as cited, pp. 489, 491; Crawley, as cited, p. 26.

^2:2 A. B. Ellis, as cited, p. 12. Cp. Schweinfurth, as cited, and Major Mockler-Ferryman, British West Africa, 2nd ed. 1900, p. 384: Beneficent spirits are almost unknown to the pessimistic African, to whom existence must seem a veritable struggle." "Their [the Matabele's] idea of power, known or unknown, is always associated with evil" (Decle, as cited, p. 165: cp. pp. 153, 343). To the same effect W. Ellis, Polynesian Researches, i, 336; Rev. R. Taylor, Te Ika a Maui, as cited, and p. 104; Livingstone, Travels and Researches, ed. 1905, pp. 405, 409-10; Calvert, as cited, p. 38; Perceval Landon, Lhasa, 2nd ed. 1905, ii, 36-38, 40; Hyades and Deniker, Mission Scientif. du Cap Horn, 1891, cited by Hobhouse, Morals in Evolution, 1906, i, 46; T. Williams, Fiji and the Fijians, ed. 1870, pp. 189, 155; H. Cayley Webster, Through New Guinea and the Cannibal Countries, 1898, p. 357; Lawes, cited in C. Lennox's James Chalmers of New Guinea, 1903, p. 76; Joh. Warneck, Die Religion der Batak, 1909, pp. 2-3. The last-cited writer is particularly emphatic as to the overwhelming predominance of the factor of fear in the religion which he presents: "Diese Furcht, nicht die Pietat, nicht das Abhangigkeitsgefuhl von der Gottheit, ist die treibende Kraft......" Of the ancient Roman, again, it can be said that "he was beset on all sides by imaginary foes" (Professor Granger, The Worship of the Romans, 1895, p. 75). The same statement can be made with nearly the same emphasis concerning the population of Christian Greece. See J. C. Lawson, Modern Greek Folklore and Ancient Greek Religion, 1910, pp. 9-25, 47, 256, and passim. And as the common folk of Christian Greece are very much on the pagan plane of thought (id. p. 51), the inference as to pagan Greece is clear. Cp. G. Roskoff, Geschichte des Teufels, 1869, i, 20, and Das Religionswesen der rohesten Naturvolker, 1880, pp. 34, 171; Sir H. Johnston, George Grenfell and the Congo, 1908, ii, 635-6; K. Rasmussen, The People of the Polar North, 1908, pp. 123-5; Miss J. E. Harrison, Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion, 2nd ed. 1908, pp. 7, 9; Thurston, Castes and Tribes, as cited, ii, 86, 180, 215, 427; vii, 354. Mr. Decle notes one or two African exceptions; e.g., a tribe on the Tanganika plateau "have a vague sort of Supreme Being called Lesa, who has good and evil passions" (p. 293); the Wakamba have a similar conception, and are further notable for not believing that death is caused by witchcraft (p. 489); and the Wanyamwezi have "the idea of a superior being whose help might be invoked" (p. 316). The exceptions all occur in the lake region. Cp. Kollmann, The Victoria Nyanza, 1899, p. 169.

^3:1 Cp. Arnobius, Adv. Gentes, L. 48-52, ii, 11; Lactantius, Div. Inst. iv, 15; Tertullian, Apol. 23, 40; Augustine, De Civ. Dei, B. passim.

^3:2 This is said in a different sense from that of the proposition of Miss Harrison (Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion, 2nd ed, pp, xii and 6) that the religion of fear of evil has ethical value as recognising the "mystery" thereof.

^4:1 Cp. the author's Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. p. 2.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 2.

In the midst of much dispute, moral science approaches agreement on the proposition that all primitive beliefs and usages, however strange or absurd, are to be understood as primarily products of judgment, representing theories of causation or guesses at the order of things. To such agreement, however, hindrance is set up by the reversion of some inquirers to the old view that certain savage notions are "irrational" in the strict sense. Thus Dr. F. B. Jevons decides that "there is no rational principle of action in taboo: it is mechanical; arbitrary, because its sole basis is the arbitrary association of ideas; irrational, because its principle is [in the words of Mr. Lang] 'that causal connection in thought is equivalent to causative connection in fact.'" [*2] Again, Dr. Jevons lays it down [*3]

[p. 5]

that "Taboo......is the conviction that there are certain things which must--absolutely must, and not on grounds of experience of 'unconscious utility'--be avoided."

It is significant that in both of these passages the proposition runs into verbal insignificance or counter-sense. In the first cited we are told (1) that a certain association of ideas is arbitrary because its basis is an arbitrary association of ideas, and (2) that it is all the while a "causal" (i.e., a non-arbitrary) connection in thought. In the last we are in effect told that the tabooer is conscious that he is not proceeding on an ancestral experience when he is merely not conscious of doing so. When instructed men thus repeatedly lapse into mere nullities of formula, there is presumably something wrong with their theory. Now, the whole subject of taboo is put outside science by the assumption that the practice is in origin "irrational" and "absolute" and "arbitrary" and independent of all experience of utility. As Dr. Jevons himself declares in another connection, the savage's thought is subject to mental laws as much as is civilised man's. How, then, is this dictum to be reconciled with that? What is the "law" of the savage's "arbitrariness"?

Conceivably part of it lies before us in Dr. Jevons's page of denial. The very illustration first given by him for the proposition last cited from him is that "the mourner is as dangerous as the corpse he has touched," "the mourner is as dangerous to those he loves as to those he hates." Here, one would suppose, was a pretty obvious clue to an intelligible causation. Is it to be "arbitrarily" decided that primitive men never observed the phenomena of contagion from corpse to mourners, and from mourners to their families; or, observing it, never sought to act on the experience? Is it not notorious that among contemporary primitives there is often an intense and vigilant fear of contagious disease? [*1]

The only fair objection to accepting such a basis for one species of taboo is that for other species no such explanation is available. But what science looks for in such a matter is not a direct explanation for every instance: it suffices that we find an explanation or explanations for such a principle or conception as taboo, and then recognise that, once set up, it may be turned to really "arbitrary" account by chiefs, priests, and adventurers.

"Arbitrary" has two significations, in two references: it means "illogical" in reference to reason, or "representative of one will as against the general will." In the first sense, it is here irrelevant, for

[p. 6]

no one pretends that taboo is right; but it may apply in the other in a way not intended by Dr. Jevons. For nothing can be more obvious than the adaptability of the idea of taboo, once crystallised or conventionalised in a code, to purposes of individual malice, and to all such procedure as men indicate by the term "priestcraft." Dr. Jevons, in his concern to prove, what no one ever seriously disputed, that priests did not and could not create the religious or superstitious instinct, leaves entirely out of his exposition, and even by implication denies, the vitally relevant truth that they exploit it. And in overlooking this he sadly burdens, if he does not wreck, his own unduly biassed theory of the religious instinct as something relatively "deep," and as proceeding in terms of an abnormal consciousness of contact with "the divine." For if those relatively "arbitrary" and "irrational" forms of taboo do not come from the priest--that is, from the religion-maker or -monger, whether official or not--they must, on Dr. Jevons's own showing, come from "religion."

It may be that he would not at once reject such a conclusion; for the apparent motive of much of his treatment of taboo is the sanctification of it as an element in the ancestry of the Christian religion. For this purpose he is ready to go to notable lengths, as when [*1] he allows cannibalism to be sometimes "religious in intention." But while insisting at one point on the absolute unreasonedness and immediate certitude of the notion of taboo, apparently in order to place it on all fours with the "direct consciousness" which for him is the mark of a religious belief, he admits in so many words, as we have seen, that it is "arbitrary" and "irrational," which is scarcely a way of accrediting it as a religious phenomenon. Rather the purpose of that aspersion seems to be to open the way for another aggrandisement of religion as having suppressed irrational taboo. On the one hand we are told [*2] that the savage's fallacious belief in the transmissibility of taboo was "the sheath which enclosed and protected a conception that was to blossom and bear a priceless fruit--the conception of Social Obligation." This is an arguable thesis, not framed by Dr. Jevons for the purposes of his theorem, but spontaneously set forth by several missionaries. [*3] Here we need but note the implication of the old fallacy that when any good is seen to follow upon an evil we must assume the evil to have been a conditio sine qua non of the good. The missionaries and

[p. 7]

[paragraph continues] Dr. Jevons have assumed that but for the device of taboo there could have been no social code--a thesis not to be substantiated either deductively or inductively. But with this problem we need not now concern ourselves, since Dr. Jevons himself turns the tables on it. After the claim has been made for the salvatory action of taboo, we read [*1] that "it was only among the minority of mankind, and there only under exceptional circumstances, that the institution bore its best fruit......Indeed, in many respects the evolution of taboo has been fatal to the progress of humanity." And again:--

In religion the institution also had a baneful effect: the irrational restrictions, touch not, taste not, handle not, which constitute formalism, are essentially taboos--essential to the education of man at one period of his development, but a bar to his progress later.

But now is introduced [*2] the theorem of the process by which taboo has been converted into an element of civilisation: it is this:--

From the fallacy of magic man was delivered by religion; and there are reasons.....for believing that it was by the same aid he escaped from the irrational restrictions of taboo. [*3]

In the higher forms of religion.....the trivial and absurd restrictions are cast off, and those alone retained which are essential to morality and religion. [*4]

We shall have to deal later with the direct propositions here put; but for the moment it specially concerns us to note that the denoument does not hold scientifically or logically good. The fact remains that irrational taboo as such was, in the terms of the argument, strictly religious; that religion in this aspect had "no sense in it," inasmuch as taboo had passed from a primitive precaution to a priest-made convention; [*5] and that what religion is alleged to deliver man from is just religion. Thus alternately does religion figure for the apologist as a rational tendency correcting an irrational, and as an irrational tendency doing good which a rational one cannot. And the further we follow his teaching the more frequently does such a contradiction emerge.

Footnotes

^4:2 Jevons, Introduction cited, p. 91; Lang, Myth, Ritual, and Religion, 1st ed. i, 95.

^4:3 As cited, pp. 11-12. Cp. p. 68, where the question is begged with much simplicity.

^5:1 E.g., Turner, Samoa a Hundred Years Ago, 1884, pp. 306, 322.

^6:1 P. 201.

^6:2 P. 87.

^6:3 E.g., Rev. Richard Taylor, Te Ika a Maui: or, New Zealand and its Inhabitants, 1870, pp. 8, 163 sq.; Rev. J. Buller, Forty Years in New Zealand, 1878, p. 203.

^7:1 P. 88.

^7:2 P. 89.

^7:3 P. 91.

^7:4 P. 93.

^7:5 Cp. Rev. R. Taylor, as cited, ch. viii.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 3.

At the close of his work, apparently forgetting the propositions of his first chapter as to the priority of the sense of obstacle in the primitive man's notion of supernatural forces, Dr. Jevons affirms that the "earliest attempt" towards harmonising the facts of the "external and inner consciousness"--by which is meant observation and reflection

took the form of ascribing the external prosperity which befell a man to the

[p. 8]

action of the divine love of which he was conscious within himself; and the misfortunes which befell him to the wrath of the justly offended divine will. [*1]

Here we have either a contradiction of the thesis before cited, or a resort to the extremely arbitrary assumption that in taking credit to himself for successful management of things, and imputing his miscarriages to a superior power, the primitive man is not trying to "harmonise the facts of his experience." Such an argument would be on every ground untenable; but it appears to be all that can stand between Dr. Jevons and self-contradiction. The way to a sound position is by settling impartially the definition of the term "religion." How Dr. Jevons misses this may be gathered from the continuation of the passage under notice:--

Man, being by nature religious, began by a religious explanation of nature. To assume, as is often done, that man had no religious consciousness 1, begin with, and that the misfortunes which befell him inspired him with fear, and fear led him to propitiate the malignant beings whom he imagined to be the causes of his suffering, fails to account for the very thing it intended to explain--namely, the existence of religion. It might account for superstitious dread of malignant beings: it does not account for the grateful worship of benignant beings, nor for the universal satisfaction which man finds in that worship.

[paragraph continues] As we have seen, Dr. Jevons himself had at the outset plainly posited what he now describes as a fallacious assumption. On his prior showing, man's experience of apparent hostility in Nature "first called forth" his belief in supernatural power. The interposed phrase, "was not created but," looks like an after attempt to reconcile the earlier proposition with the later. But there is no real reconciliation, for Dr. Jevons thus sets up only the vain suggestion that the primitive man was from the first conscious of the existence of good supernatural powers but did not think they did him any good--another collapse in countersense--or else the equally unmanageable notion that primitive man recognised helpful supernatural being-, but was not grateful to them for their help.

That the argument has not been scientifically conducted is further clear from the use now of the expression "superstitious dread" as the equivalent of "fear," while "grateful worship" stands for "satisfaction." Why "superstitious dread" and not "superstitious gratitude"? A scientific inquiry will treat the phenomena on a moral par, and will at this stage simply put aside the term "superstition." It is relevant only as imputing a superior degree of gratuitousness of belief (whether by way of fear or of satisfaction) at a comparatively

[p. 9]

advanced state of culture. To call a savage superstitious when he fears a God, and religious when he thanks one, is not only to warp the "science of religion" at the start, but to block even the purpose in view, for, as we have seen, Dr. Jevons is constrained by his own motive of edification to assume that the benignant God ought by rights to be sometimes feared.

Footnotes

^8:1 Work cited, p. 410.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 4.

Putting aside as unscientific all such prejudgments, and leaving the professed religionist his personal remedy of discriminating finally between "true" and "false" religion, let us begin at the beginning by noting that "religious consciousness" can intelligibly mean only a given direction of consciousness. And if we are to make any consistent specification of the point at which consciousness begins to be religious, we shall put it impartially in simple animism--the spontaneous surmise, seen to be dimly made or makable even by animals, "that not only animals and plants, but inanimate things, may possess life." Dr. Jevons rightly points out [*1] that this primary notion "neither proceeds from nor implies nor accounts for belief in the supernatural"; and he goes on to show (developing here the doctrine which he ultimately repudiates) how the latter notion would arise through man's connecting with certain agencies or "spirits" the frustrative or molestive power "which he had already found to exercise an unexpected and irresistible control over his destiny." "In this way," continues Dr. Jevons, suddenly granting much more than he need or ought, "the notion of supernatural power, which originally was purely negative and manifested itself merely in suspending or counteracting the uniformity of nature, came to have a positive content." From this point, as might have been divined, the argument becomes confused to the last degree. We have been brought to the supernatural as a primitive product of (a) the recognition of irregular and frustrative forces in nature, and (b) the identification of them as personalities or spirits like man. But immediately, in the interests of another preconception, the theorist proceeds in effect to cancel this by arguing that, when men resort to magic, the idea of the supernatural has disappeared. His proposition is that "the belief in the supernatural was prior to the belief in magic, and that the latter, whenever it sprang up, was a degradation or relapse in the evolution of religion," [*2] inasmuch as it assumed man's power to control the forces of Nature by certain stratagems. And as he argues at the

[p. 10]

same time that "religion and magic had different origins, and were always essentially distinct from one another," it is implied that religion began in that belief in a (frustrative) supernatural which is asserted to have preceded magic. That is to say, religion began in the recognition of hostile or dangerous powers.

Now, a logically vigilant investigator would either not have said that belief in a supernatural was constituted by the recognition of hostile personal forces in Nature, or, having said it, would have granted that magic was an effort to circumvent supernatural as well as other forces. Dr. Jevons first credits the early savage with, among other things, a conception of supernatural power which excluded the idea of man's opposition, and then with the power so to transform his first notion as to see in the so-called supernatural merely forms of Nature. An intellectual process achieved in the civilised world only as a long and arduous upward evolution on scientific lines is thus supposed to have been more or less sudden'': effected as a mere matter either of ignorant downward drift or of perverse experiment by primeval man, or at least by savage man. It is not easy to be more arbitrary in the way of hypothesis.

Combating the contrary view, which makes magic prior to religion, Dr. Jevons writes:--

To read some writers, who derive the powers of priests (and even of the gods) from those of the magician, and who consider apparently that magic requires no explanation, one would imagine that the savage, surrounded by supernatural powers and a prey to supernatural terrors, one day conceived the happy idea that he too would himself exercise supernatural power--and the thing was done: sorcery was invented, and the rest of the evolution of religion follows without difficulty. [*1]

It is difficult to estimate the relevance of this criticism without knowing the precise expressions which provoked it; but as regards any prevailing view of evolution it is somewhat pointless. "One day" is not the formula of evolutionary conceptions. But Dr. Jevons's own doctrine, which is to the effect that magical rites arose by way of parody of worship-rites after the latter had for ages been in undisputed possession, suggests just such a catastrophic conception as he imputes. Rejecting the obvious evolutionary hypothesis that explicit magic and explicit religion so-called arose confusedly together--that magic employs early religious machinery because it is but a contemporary expression of the state of mind in which religion rises and roots--he insists that magic cannot have been tried save by way of late "parody," in an intellectual atmosphere

[p. 11]

which, nevertheless, he declares to be extremely conservative, [*1] and which is therefore extremely unlikely to develop such parodies. [*2]

Dr. Jevons's doctrinal motive, it is pretty clear, is his wish to relieve "religion" of the discredit of "magic," even as he finally and remorsefully seeks to relieve it of the discredit of originating in "fear." Having no such axe to grind, the scientific inquirer might here offer to let "religion" mean anything Dr. Jevons likes, if he will only stick to one definition. But science must stipulate for some term to designate a series of psychological processes which originate in the same order of cognitions and conceptions, on the same plane of knowledge, and have strictly correlative results in action. And as such a term would certainly have to be applied sooner or later to much of what Dr. Jevons wants to call "religion," we may just as well thrash out the issue over that long-established name.

Footnotes

^9:1 P. 22.

^9:2 P. 25.

^10:1 Pp, 35, 36.

^11:1 p. 36

^11:2 Dr. Jevons has latterly (Sociological Review, April, 1908) treated the problem in a very lucid essay on "The Definition of Magic," in which he discusses the positions of Dr. Frazer, MM. Hubert and Mauss, and Professor Wundt. He sums up, without dogmatism, on the side of the view of Wundt, which, as I understand it, is in harmony with that set forth in these pages, and is certainly in apparent opposition to that of Dr. Jevons as here criticised. I infer that Dr. Jevons has now modified his theory, but leave my discussion standing, for what it is worth. [Note to 2nd ed.]

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 5.

The need for an understanding becomes pressing when we compare with the conceptions of Dr. Jevons those of Dr. J. G. Frazer, as set forth in the revised edition of his great work, The Golden Bough. Having before the issue of his first edition "failed, perhaps inexcusably," he modestly avows, "to define even to myself my notion of religion," he was then "disposed to class magic loosely under it as one of its lower forms." Now he has "come to agree with Sir A. C. Lyall and Mr. F. B. Jevons in recognising a fundamental distinction and even opposition of principle between magic and religion." [*3] On this view he defines religion as "a propitiation or conciliation of powers superior to man which are believed to direct and control the course of nature and of human life. In this sense," he adds, "it will readily be perceived that religion is opposed in principle both to magic and to science." [*4]

The first comment on such a proposition is that it all depends on what you mean by "principle." If religion means only the act of propitiation and conciliation of certain alleged powers, its principle "may be placed either in the hope that such propitiation will succeed or in the feeling that it ought to be tried. In either case, the accuracy of the proposition is far from clear. But we

[p. 12]

must widen the issue. It will be seen that Dr. Frazer's formal definition of religion is as inadequate as that implied in the argument of Dr. Jevons, though his practical handling of the case is finally the more scientific. On the above definition, belief is no part of religion; [*1] and neither is gratitude; though fear may be held to be implied in propitiation. Further, religion has by this definition nothing to do with ethics; and even conduct shaped by way of simple obedience to a God's alleged commands is barely recognised under the head of "propitiation." Finally, a theist who has ever so reverently arrived at the idea of an All-wise Omnipotence which needs not to be propitiated or conciliated, has on Dr. Frazer's definition ceased to be religious. It will really not do.

I am not here pressing for a wider definition, as do some professed rationalists, by way of securing for my own philosophy or ethic the prestige of a highly respectable name; nor do I even endorse their claim as for themselves. I simply urge that as a matter of scientific convenience and consistency the word must be allowed to cover at least the bulk of the phenomena to which it has immemorially been applied. Where Dr. Frazer by his definition makes religion "nearly unknown" to the Australian, because the Australian (mainly for lack of the wherewithal) does not sacrifice, [*2] Mr. Lang ascribes to them a higher or deeper religious feeling on that very account. [*3] Such chaos of definition must be averted by a more comprehensive theory. Whether or not we oppose magic to religion, we cannot exclude from the latter term the whole process of non-propitiatory religious ethic, of thanksgiving ritual, and of cosmological doctrine. Later we shall have to deal with Dr. Jevons's attempt to withdraw the term from theistic philosophy and from mythology; but we may provisionally insist that emotional resignation to "the divine will" is in terms of all usage whatsoever a religious phenomenon.

It remains to consider the alleged severance between religion and magic. It is interesting to find Dr. Jevons and Dr. Frazer here partially at one, as against the general opinion of anthropologists. That may be cited from a theologian, Professor T. W. Davies, in whose doctoral thesis on Magic, Divination, and Demonology--a performance both learned and judicious--it is argued that "all

[p. 13]

magic is a sort of religion." [*1] Dr. Frazer, while agreeing with Dr. Jevons that they are "opposed," differs from him in holding that magic preceded religion; and by an odd fatality Dr. Frazer contradicts himself as explicitly as does Dr. Jevons. After avowing the belief that in the evolution of thought, magic, as representing a lower intellectual stratum, has probably everywhere preceded religion," [*2] he also avows that the antagonism between the two

seems to have made its appearance comparatively late in the history of religion. At an earlier stage the functions of priest and sorcerer were often combined, or, to speak perhaps more correctly, were not yet differentiated from each other. To serve his purpose, man wooed the good-will of gods or spirits by prayer and sacrifice, while at the same time he had recourse to ceremonies and forms of words which he hoped would of themselves bring about the desired result without the help of god or devil. In short, he performed religious and magical rites simultaneously; he uttered prayers and incantations almost in the same breath, knowing or reeking little of the theoretical inconsistency of his behaviour, so long as by hook or crook he contrived to get what he wanted. [*3]

Proceeding with his ostensible support of the thesis that magic preceded religion, Dr. Frazer, in his admirably learned way, gives us fresh illustrations of the "same confusion of magic and religion" in civilised and uncivilised peoples. [*4] From Dr. Oldenberg he cites the observation that

"the ritual of the very sacrifices for which the metrical prayers were composed is described in the older Vedic texts as saturated from beginning to end with magical practices which were to be carried out by the sacrificial priests"; and that the Brahmanic rites of marriage initiation and king-anointing "are complete models of magic of every kind, and in every case the form of magic employed bears the stamp of the highest antiquity." [*5]

From Sir Gaston Maspero he accepts the weighty reminder that in regard to ancient Egypt

we ought not to attach to the word "magic" the degrading idea which it almost inevitably calls up in the mind of a modern. Ancient magic was the very foundation of religion. The faithful who desired to obtain some favour from a god had no chance of succeeding except by laying hands on the deity; and this arrest could only be effected by means of a certain number of rites, sacrifices, prayers, and chants, which the god himself had revealed, and which obliged him to do what was demanded of him. [*6]

A closely similar state of things is seen in the practice of the Maoris, who, when using coercive spells "to compel the Gods to

[p. 14]

yield to their wishes, added sacrifices and offerings at the same time to appease as it were their anger for being thus constrained." And the missionary who on these data represents the Maoris as rather coercing their Gods than praying to them, puts their usage on all fours with that of many French Catholics. [*1]

To all this, obviously, Dr. Jevons may reply that it does not prove the priority of magic to religion. [*2] Neither, however, does it give any basis for Dr. Jevons's thesis of the secondariness of magic. It simply sets forth that in the earliest available records, as in the practice of contemporary savages, magic so-called and propitiatory religion so-called co-exist and cohere. In Dr. Frazer's own words, they were not yet differentiated from each other--differentiated, that is, in the moral estimate of priest and worshipper. But in the terms of the proposition, the practice of propitiation was there; and there is nothing to show that it was a late variation on confident magic. On the other hand, the documentary evidence, so far as it goes, is in favour of the priority of magic so-called. "The magical texts formed the earliest sacred literature of Chaldaea. This fact remains unshaken." [*3]

What, then, becomes of the argument that magic and religion so-called are "opposed" because they are logically inconsistent with each other? Like Dr. Jevons, Dr. Frazer makes a good deal of the theoretic analogy of magic with science, both being alleged to rest upon the assumption of the "uniformity of nature" and "the operation of immutable laws acting mechanically." [*4] Now, while we need not hesitate to see in magic in particular, even as in religion in general, man's early gropings towards science, we must not let ourselves be by a mere verbalism confused as to what magic is. Obviously it does not assume the uniformity of nature; inasmuch as it assumes to control nature by different devices, framing

[p. 15]

new procedures where the old fail. It does not even invariably assume strict uniformity in the magical processus itself; but that is the one sort of uniformity of cause and effect that the magician as approaches to conceiving. Now, this conception connects much less with that of what we may term the normal relation of man to nature than with that of his relation to the sets of forces apprehended by late thought as "spiritual," but by early thought merely as unseen. Early man, presumably, had a normal notion of the process of breaking a stone or killing a foe; and there if anywhere lay the beginnings of his science. As Adam Smith put it, "Fire burns and water refreshes, heavy bodies descend, and lighter substances fly upwards, by the necessity of their own nature; nor was the invisible hand of Jupiter ever apprehended to be employed in those matters." [*1] As Comte put it, primitive man never made a god of weight. [*2] But even as he thought the invisible or inferrible personalities could do many kinds of "great" things, so he thought that, by taking pains, he could; inasmuch as he never clearly differentiated them from himself in nature and capacity. Thus his magic was part of his way of thinking about what was for him the "occult" or inferred side of things, which way of thinking as a whole was his religion. To speak in terms of Dr. Jevons's primary position, he was as magician interfering with the sequences of nature as he supposed the occult personalities did.

On yet another ground, we are disallowed from charging inconsistency on primitive or ancient religious thought in respect of divergences from later conceptions. One of the more notable of those divergences is the idea that the Gods themselves are subject to the course of Nature, or the law of Fate: it is reached by modern Native Americans, [*3] as it was by some ancient Egyptians, [*4] and it stands out from the religious speculation of ancient Greece. [*5] In both stages it is compatible with propitiation; and yet it gives a quasi-logical basis for the resort to magic, regarded as a temporary circumvention of the law of things. So with the belief in opposed deities: even if

[p. 16]

none be regarded as evil, like Ahriman, there is nothing specially inconsistent in a magic that seeks to employ a power of which, in the terms of the case, no deity has a monopoly. On this basis polytheism offers an easy way out of the indictment for inconsistency. When Porphyry asked Abammon, "Does not he who says he will burst the heavens, or reveal the secrets of Isis, or expose the arcanum in the adytum, or scatter the members of Osiris to Typhon--does not he who says this, by thus threatening what he knows not and cannot do, prove himself grossly foolish?"--the sage answers with confidence that such threats are used against not any of the celestial Gods but a lower order of powers, and that the theurgist commands these "as existing superior to them in the order of the Gods," and possessing power "through a union with the Gods" in virtue of his magic. [*1]

That is, of course, a late and sophisticated account of the matter the earlier theologian simply did not realise that any charge of inconsistency could arise. In any case, the Old Testament abounds in cases of sympathetic magic: the sprinkling of the blood of the hallowed sacrifice upon the ears and thumbs and toes of the priests; [*2] the holding up of the arms of Moses, [*3] in the attitude of the Sun-God and War-God Mithra, [*4] to sway the battle; the sending forth of the scape-goat; [*5] the blowing of the trumpets before the walls of Jericho; [*6] the raising of the widow's son by Elijah, "stretching himself upon the child three times" [*7]--all these are acts neither of prayer nor of propitiation, but of sympathetic magic, "which is the germ of all magic"; and the theorist may be defied to show that they stood for a "degradation or relapse in the evolution of religion." [*8] If, indeed, he could show it, he would be putting a rod in pickle for his theory of the super-excellence of Hebrew monotheism, which evolved itself with these accompaniments.

The early priest, then, is to be called inconsistent in his resort to magic only on the view that he had the definite modern conception of the Omnipotence of a supernatural power; and this he simply had not. It is, then, quite beside the case to argue, as does even Dr. Frazer, [*9] that "the fatal flaw of magic lies in its total misconception of the particular laws which govern" natural sequences. That is not a differentiation between magic and religion; for the "religious" conception that nature is to be affected by propitiating

[p. 17]

unseen powers is just as fatally wrong; and it arose in the same fashion by "association of ideas," men assuming that nature was ruled by a personality like themselves. Why, then, is the "flaw" dwelt upon? If it be to prepare for the view that at a certain stage a portion of mankind began to "abandon magic as a principle of faith and practice and to betake themselves to religion instead," [*1] the answer is that on Dr. Frazer's own showing men for whole ages practised both concurrently; [*2] and that in the terms of the case they are as likely to have taken to magic because prayer failed as vice versa. Dr. Frazer, indeed, only diffidently suggests that "a tardy recognition of the inherent falsehood and barrenness of magic set the more thoughtful part of mankind to cast about for a truer theory of nature and a more fruitful method of turning her resources to account." But by his own showing he has no right to this hypothesis even on an avowal of diffidence. As well might the contrary theory of Dr. Jevons be supported by the suggestion that the inherent falsehood and barrenness of the theory of prayer and propitiation set the more resourceful part of mankind on a more effectual control of nature by way of magic. [*3] Had not men all along been trying both?

Equally untenable, surely, is the distinction drawn by Dr. Frazer [*4] between "the haughty self-sufficiency of the magician, his arrogant demeanour towards the higher powers, and his unabashed claim to exercise a sway like theirs," and the attitude of the priest "with his awful sense of the divine majesty and his humble prostration in presence of it." Dr. Frazer can hardly mean to be ironical; but his words may very well serve to convey such a sense when applied to the attitude of the priesthoods of all ages, Brahmanical [*5] or Papal, Semitic or Aryan. It would be difficult to distinguish in the matter of modesty between Moses [*6] and the magicians of Pharaoh, or Samuel and the Witch of Endor, or Elijah and the priests of Baal, or an excommunicating and flag-blessing bishop and an incantating wizard.

[p. 18]

[paragraph continues] All the while we have Dr. Frazer's own assurance that for long ages the priest was the magician.

If, seeking to form a just judgment, we turn to actual evidence for the attitude of the primitive magician, it lies to our hand in Livingstone's account of the negro rain-doctors of Bechuanaland. Here we have a typical dialogue between the missionary and the magician. The latter complained in friendly fashion to the missionary, "You see we never get rain, while those tribes who never pray as we do [i.e., Christian fashion] obtain abundance." "This," the missionary confesses, "was a fact; and we often saw it raining on the hills ten miles off, while it would not look at us 'even with one eye.'" When the rain-doctor set to work, on the score that "the whole country needs the rain I am making," there ensues the argument:--

"M.D. [i.e., Livingstone] . So you really believe that you can command the clouds? I think that can be done by God alone.

"Rain Doctor. We both believe the very same thing. It is God that makes the rain, but I pray to him by means of these medicines, and, the rain coming, of course it is then mine......

"M.D. But we are distinctly told in the parting words of our Saviour that we can pray to God acceptably in his name alone, and not by means of medicines.

"R.D. Truly! but God told us differently. He made black men first, and did not love us as he did the white men......Other tribes place medicines about our country to prevent the rain, so that we may be dispersed by hunger and go to them and augment their power. We must dissolve their charms by our medicines. God has given us one little thing which you know nothing of. He has given us the knowledge of certain medicines by which we can make rain. We do not despise those things which you possess, though we are ignorant of them. You ought not to despise our little knowledge, though you are ignorant of it."

"This [adds Livingstone] is a brief specimen of their mode of reasoning, which is often remarkably acute. I never succeeded in convincing a single individual of the fallacy of his belief; and the usual effect of discussion is to produce the impression that you yourself are not anxious for rain." [*1]

Quite so. How could the missionary hope to convince the rain-needy? Delusion for delusion, which was the more "religious"? And which was the plainer "fallacy" of the two fashions of prayer? The true solution of the problem is that set forth in the essay

[p. 19]

[paragraph continues] Sur le totemisme of M. Durkheim, [*1] who may be supposed to speak for scientific sociology if any one does. In that essay he deals incidentally with the view of Dr. Frazer that the Australian Aruntas [*2] are at the stage of pure magic, not having yet reached religion. Dr. Jevons, on the contrary, would regard them as truly religious in respect of their totem sacrament. M. Durkheim, applying the inductive method, notes indeed [*3] that the life of the Aruntas is "stamped with religiosity, and that this religiosity is in origin essentially totemic"; but he adds: "The territory is covered with sacred trees, and groves, and mysterious grottos, where are piously preserved the objects of the cult. None of those sacred places is approached without a religious terror." And he concludes: "What is essential is that the rites of the Aruntas are at all points comparable to those which are found in systems incontestably religious: then they proceed from the same ideas and the same sentiments; and it is arbitrary to refuse them the same title."

The final condemnation of Dr. Frazer's definition, however, is, as we shall see cause later to say of that of Dr. Jevons, that in strictness it ignores the bulk of the religious life of mankind. He himself avows that only a part of mankind has ever abandoned magic and taken to "religion instead." In his own words, magic is a "universal faith," a "truly Catholic creed"; [*4] and he might, without extending his ample anthropological learning, further establish this fact by reference to current religion. If religion is to mean only the ideas of "the more thoughtful part of mankind," we shall simply be committed to a new inquiry as to who are the more thoughtful; and the agnostic will have something to say on that head.

Are they the believers in the efficacy of prayer? Insofar as such believers profess belief in an Omnipotent and Unchanging Providence, they stultify their theistic creed as vitally as ever did the magician. Prayer presupposes the changeableness of a Divine will declared to be unchangeable. Then prayer, like magic, is fundamentally opposed to belief in an omnipotent deity! Where shall we stop? Dr. Frazer [*5] supposes the reader to ask, "How was it that intelligent men did not sooner detect the fallacy of magic?"; and he thoughtfully and rightly answers that before the age of science it was really not easy to detect. But he could hardly say as much of prayer, whereof the "fallacy" was detected among

[p. 20]

[paragraph continues] Hebrews and heathens thousands of years ago. Yet by his definition the contemporary believer in prayer is religious and the ancient worshipper of Isis was not. On such principles there can be no science of religion whatever, any more than there is a science of orthodoxy. In order to classify the very phenomena with which Dr. Frazer mainly occupies himself, we should have to create a new set of terms for nine-tenths of them, recognising "religion" only as a certain procedure that chronically obtruded itself among them. And then would come Dr. Jevons to explain that this religion was not a religion at all, inasmuch as it resulted from a process of reasoning!

Science, then, is driven to reject both apriorisms alike, and to proceed to find a definition by way of a loyal induction.

Footnotes

^11:3 Golden Bough, 2nd ed., pref., p. xvi, and i, 63, note.

^11:4 Golden Bough, 2nd ed. i, 63.

^12:1 A similar criticism, I find, is passed by Mr. Lang (Magic and Religion, 1901, pp. 48. 49, etc.), who seeks to turn Dr. Frazer's oversight to the account of his own theory of an occult primeval but non-primitive monotheism. It is doubly unfortunate that Dr. Frazer's error should thus be made to seem part of the rationalist case against traditionalism.

^12:2 Golden Bough, 2nd ed. i, 71.

^12:3 The Making of Religion: cp. Magic and Religion, passim.

^13:1 Work cited, pp, 1, 3.

^13:2 Pref., p. xvii; cp. i, 70.

^13:3 i. 64-65.

^13:4 See his previous instances, pp. 19, 33, 45.

^13:5 Oldenberg, Die Religion des Veda, pp. 59, 477. Ref. also to pp. 311, 369, 476, 522.

^13:6 Maspero, Etudes de mythologie et d'archeologie egyptienne, i, 106. Cp. Dr. Frazer's farther citations from Erman and Wiedemann, to the same effect; and see Budge, Intr. to trans. of Book of the Dead, p cxlvii.; Davies, Magic, Divination, and Demonology, 1898, p. 2; and Hillebrandt, Ritual-literatur, 1897, p. 167 sq., there cited.

^14:1 Rev. R. Taylor, Te Ika a Maui: or, New Zealand and its Inhabitants, 1870, pp. 180-1. Cp. p. 102 as to prayers and medicine.

^14:2 For that thesis there is some support in the testimonies which limit the "religion" of some primitive tribes to a few forms of magic. According to Messrs. Spencer and Gillen there is hardly anything else in the mental apparatus of many tribes of Australian aborigines. Cp. A. E. Pratt, Two Years Among New Guinea Cannibals, 1906, pp. 314-7; Knud Rasmussen, The People of the Polar North, 1908, pp. 123-5. Mr. Pratt pronounces that "the most elementary ideas of religion do not seem to exist" among the Papuans, who practise a little magic; and Mr. Rasmussen says the Eskimos worship no deity, but merely dread a collective evil power, which they propitiate by observance of customs. Cp. further L. Decle, Three Years in Savage Africa, 1900, pp. 153, 343-6.

^14:3 Sayce, Hibbert Lectures, p. 237. Cp. Jastrow, Religion of Babylonia and Assyria, 1898, pp. 253-4; O. Weber, Die Literatur der Babylonier and Assyrier, 1907, p. 151.

^14:4 Dr. Frazer further writes (p. 61) that in both "the elements of caprice, of chance, and of accident are banished from the course of nature." This is a further and a gratuitous logical confusion. Magic certainly recognises "caprice" in its "nature"; and science certainly notes "chance" and "accident," which are not negations of, but aspects of, the uniformity of nature. Where could science place them, save in nature, if she recognises them; and if she does not recognise them, how can she name or banish them? As to the scientific force of the terms, cp. the author's Letters on Reasoning, vii.

^15:1 Essay on the History of Astronomy, sect. iii.

^15:2 Philosophie Positive, 4e ed. iv, 491.

^15:3 J. C. Muller, Geschichte der Amerikanischen Urreligionen, ed. 1867, p. 149.

^15:4 Prof. Erman, Handbook of Egyptian Religion, Eng. trans. 1907, pp. 91, 255.

^15:5 Herodotus i, 91; Homer, Iliad, xiv, 434-442. Philemon ap Stobaei Serm. lxii. 8; Aeschylus, Prom. Vinct. 908-927; Diogenes Laert. vii, 74 (149); ix, 6 (7); Clemens Alexand. Stromata, v, 14; Plutarch, De Exilio, xi; De Defectu Orac. xxviii-xxix; De Stoic. Repugnant. xxxiv; De Placitis Philos. i,  section 7, 17; ii, 25-28; Aulus Gellius, vi, 1, 2; Seneca, De Providentia, v, 5-7; Cicero, De Diviniatione, ii, 10. A history of the discussion  seems wanting. Cp. H. N. Coleridge, Introduction to the Study of the Greek Classic Poets, Pt. i, 2nd ed. 1834, pp. 184-187: and Ueberweg, History of Philosophy, Eng. trans. i, 194-196. V. Fabricius, in his essay De Jove et Fato in p. Vergili Aeneide (1896, p. 21), sums up: "Nullo Vergili carminis loco Jovem fato subiectum esse plane ac clare dici nobis confitendum est. Sunt quidem nonnulla quibus Jovis potentia et fati vis simul dominari videntur." This coincides with the summary of H. N. Coleridge as to Homer.

^16:1 Jamblichus, De Mysteriis, Ep. Porph. and vi, 5-7. It is noteworthy that according to Abammon the Chaldeans never use threats in their magic, but the Egyptians sometimes do.

^16:2 Ex. xxix, 19-21.

^16:3 Ex. xvii, 9-13.

^16:4 Zendavesta, Mihir Yasht, xxxi.

^16:5 Lev. xvi.

^16:6 Josh. vi.

^16:7 1 Kings xvii, 21.

^16:8 Jevons, Introd. pp. 25, 35.

^16:9 G. B. i, 62.

^17:1 G. B. i. 75.

^17:2 See for further instances in Babylonian practice, Sayce, Hibbert Lectures, pp. 316- Compare Dr. Frazer's Lectures on the Early History of the Kingship, 1905, pp. 46, 94, for instances of late combinations of "magic" with "religion"; and p. 97 for an instance among contemporary primitives.

^17:3 Cp Ellis, Polynesian Researches, 2nd ed. iv, 294-5, where it is noted that the islanders try different priests and sorcerers as more civilised people try different doctors. "The sorcerers were a distinct class among the priests of the island; and their art appears to claim equal antiquity with the other parts of that cruel system of idolatry," etc. (Cp. i, iii, 36-37.) The difference is simply socio-political: the sorcerer is an independent performer who does not run a God or a temple.

^17:4 G. B. i, 64. Contrast Erman, Handbk. of Eg. Rel., p. 148.

^17:5 Cp. Dr. Frazer's own citations as to the Brahmans, G. B. i, 145-6.

^17:6 "And the Lord said unto Moses, See, I have made thee a God to Pharaoh," Exodus vii, 1. Cp. xvii, 11; xvii, 15, etc. Steinthal's theory (Essay on Prometheus, Eng. tr. by R. Martineau in vol. with Goldziher, p. 392), that from the Yahwist point of view Moses must ultimately die for playing the heathen God in bringing water from the rock, will hardly consist with such passages.

^18:1 Missionary Travels and Researches in South Africa, ed. 1861, pp. 17, 18 (ed. 1905, p. 15).

^19:1 L'Annee Sociologique, 5e annee, 1902.

^19:2 Described by Messrs. Spencer rand Gillen (in their Native Tribes of Central Australia, 1899).

^19:3 P. 87.

^19:4 Id. i, 74.

^19:5 Id. i, 78.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 6.

As thus. In terms of many observations, and of some of Dr. Jevons's admissions, we are led to realise that the idea of what we term "the supernatural" not only does not mean for primitive man a consistent distinction: it does not mean it for civilised man. Yet the logical burden of Dr. Jevons's as of Dr. Frazer's indictment against magic is simply that it is inconsistent [*1] with the admission of the "superiority"--the "super"-ness--of the "divine" to the human. For the purpose of his plea, he necessarily ignores the salient historical fact made clear by Dr. Frazer, that men have abundantly practised magic towards the very Gods to whom they prayed, and whose "supernaturalness" they not only avowed but believed in to the extent of holding them "immortal." Assyrian, Egyptian, and Indian religious literatures alike are full of cases of such practice. It may be argued that that is still an imperfect conception of "the supernatural": that the consistent conception requires the ascription of eternity, of omnipotence, of uncreatedness, of never-having-begun. But then men have also humbly prayed, without thought of magic, to Gods to whom they were grateful and whom they believed to be suffering sons of older Gods; and these attitudes of mind Dr. Jevons has fully certificated as "religious." But, again, men have similarly prayed to mere "saints." What degree, then, of recognition of superiority is to be regarded as Constituting recognition of "the" supernatural? One is moved to ask.

[p. 21]

[paragraph continues] What is the theorist's own conception of "the supernatural"? and, What does he mean by the term when he speaks of "supernatural terrors"?

When the critic is himself so far from a clear definition, it is very obviously a mere rhetorical device to say that for the magic-monger the conception of the supernatural "by definition" is inconsistent with his practice. He had never given any definition; [*1] neither had the "religious man" who is alleged to have preceded him; and it was simply impossible that they should. The a priori argument against him is thus irrelevant from the start, no less than the a posteriori; and both are further negligible as being inferribly motived by a non-scientific purpose. The right view is to be reached on another line.

Proceeding on the clear lines of human psychology, we can be absolutely certain of this, that a savage may alternately seek to propitiate and seek to coerce or circumvent a human enemy whom he regards as normally stronger than himself. As Dr. Jevons notes, savage hunters on killing a bear will use a ritual to propitiate the bear clan. As he is well aware, Brahmans and other priests have taught that an ascetic or a ritualist can by his practices gain power to coerce or command the highest Gods, [*2] to whom ordinary men can but pray. Such a notion, he argues, is a negation of a supernatural in that it assumes the Gods to be subject to an order of causation which man can control. But, once more, is it not equally a negation of a supernatural to assume, as the highest religions have done and do, that man can persuade the God by prayer, or propitiate him by confession and sacrifices, or keep him friendly by professing esteem and gratitude? Is not every one of these acts an assumption that the God's moral and mental processes are on a par with those of men, and that he is merely stronger than they? So considered, in what sense is he supernatural? And is not the inconsistency gross when men at once practise prayer and ascribe to their deity fore-ordination of all things? It is not too much to say that the procedure by which Dr. Jevons classifies magic as anti-religious must logically end in so classing every historic religion, and

[p. 22]

leaving the title to the name vested solely in professed Agnostics and Atheists. Some reasoners have actually so allotted the term; but that conclusion will scarcely suit Dr. Jevons's book, so to speak.

In view of the whole facts, the terms "belief in the supernatural" must be recognised as signifying for practical purposes merely belief in a personal power that is superhuman, or rather extra-human, yet quasi-human. And such powers are the Gods alike of the earliest savage and the contemporary Christian, the humble offerer of prayer and the practiser of magic. The offerer of prayer, it is true, remains substantially the original type, loyally prostrate before power; civilisation having developed the original docility of the cowed savage through the deadly discipline of great despotisms. On the other hand, the magician of the past has either succumbed to that discipline or developed into the man of science--a function which he finds the worshipper of power often sharing with him. But just as they can so coincide now in practice, they coincided at the start in psychology. This view of the case finally follows from another of Dr. Jevons's most definite positions; for he repeatedly describes the primitive "sacramental meal" as truly religious, in that it is a "higher" form of sacrifice than the mere gift-sacrifice, being a means of communion with the God, who actually joined in the meal. He does not deny it the title of "religion" even when it involves the conception that in the sacramental meal the God is actually eaten. [*1] In each of these cases the worshipper certainly believed he had acquired a force not previously his own, even as does the practiser of magic; while the eating of the God is the reductio ad absurdum of his "superiority." Here, then, is even a more complete stultification of the logical idea of the supernatural than is committed by the magician, and it is actually made to validate the "religion" of the sacrificer as against the anti-religion of the magic-monger.

Footnotes

^20:1 Dr. Jevons distinguishes between "sympathetic magic" (exemplified in "killing the God" and other devices to produce fertility, rain, etc.) and "art magic." The former, he says, "does not involve in itself the idea of the supernatural, but was simply the applied science of the savage." Art magic, he says, is the exercise by man of powers which are supernatural--i.e., of powers which by their definition it is beyond man to exercise. Thus the very conception of magic is one which is essentially inconsistent with itself" (p. 35).

^21:1 In the Egyptian system, magic was normally operated through a God or Goddess (usually Isis) who "delivers the sick and suffering from the gods and goddesses who afflict them" (Renouf, Hibbert Lectures, 2nd ed. p. 212). It was thus on the same moral plane with not only the religion of the Homeric Greeks but that of Catholic Christianity, in which the saints are separately invoked and the will of Mary is practically omnipotent. So with the virtue of the words of Thoth, and of the names of the Gods (Budge, Introd. pp. cxlviii-ix, clxv): similar beliefs were held by the Jews and by the Christian Father Origen.

^21:2 See Rhys David's Buddhism, 10th ed., p. 34 and American Lectures on Buddhism, p. 103; Frazer, as cited above; Granger, The Worship of the Romans, 1895, pp. 290-1; Sayce, Hibbert Lectures, p. 335.

^22:1 Pp. 224, 295.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 7.

This contradiction naturally reiterates itself in Dr. Jevons's treatise at a hundred points: being fundamental, it strikes through the entire argument. While premising that religion is "universally human," and finally contending that man is "by nature religious," and therefore "began by a religious explanation of nature," [*2] he pronounces [*3] that "four-fifths of mankind, probably, believe in sympathetic magic," which, he declares, not only "does not involve in itself the idea of the supernatural," [*4] but is "hostile from the

[p. 23]

beginning" [*1] to religion, and is the "negation" thereof. [*2] While affirming that the belief in the supernatural (= religion) was prior to magic, he explains [*3] that it was man's "intellectual helplessness in grappling with the forces of nature which led him into the way of religion" (i.e., the way in which he began, before he had tried his intellect), and, again, that religion led certain men out of magic, though at the same time they were converted by simply seeing that magic is inefficacious.

Again, reverting for one purpose to his original doctrine of the primacy of fear, Dr. Jevons writes [*4]:--

Magic is, in fact, a direct relapse into the state of things in which man found himself when he was surrounded by supernatural beings, none of which was bound to him by any tie of goodwill, with none of which had he any stated relations, but all were uncertain, capricious, and caused in him unreasoning terror. This reign of terror magic tends to re-establish, and does re-establish, wherever the belief in magic prevails. [*5]

A few chapters further on, discussing fire-festivals and water rites, without asking wherein they psychologically differ from sacramental meals, he writes [*6]:--

If we regard those fire-festivals and water rites as pieces of sympathetic magic, they are clear instances in which man imagines himself able to constrain the gods--in this case the god of vegetation--to subserve his own ends. Now, this vain imagination is not merely non-religious, but anti-religious; and it is difficult to see how religion could have been developed out of it. It is inconsistent with the abject fear which the savage feels of the supernatural, and which is sometimes supposed to be the origin of religion; and it is inconsistent with that sense of man's dependence on a superior being which is a real element in religion.

The contradiction is absolute. For one purpose, magic is declared to restore the primary reign of terror; for another purpose it is declared to be incompatible with a reign of terror, which is now at once implied and denied to be the primary state. We are in fine told that the savage does and does not fear a "supernatural."

Another series of contradictions is set up by the theorist's determination at certain points so to define "religion" as to secure a unique status for Judaism and Christianity--a breach of scientific method on all fours with his dichotomy of religion and magic. Dealing with the Egyptian conception of a future state, and noting how the first chapter of the Book of the Dead promises a future life which simply repeats the earthly, he declares that "no higher or

[p. 24]

more spiritual ideal entered or could enter into the composition of the Egyptian abode of bliss, because its origin was essentially nonreligious." [*1] Such being, however, the nature of the conception of the future life entertained by at least nine-tenths of the human race, savage and civilised, we are here again asked to associate the "universally human" influence with only a fraction of ostensible religious doctrine on one of the most specifically religious topics.

In the same fashion every modification of religious doctrine under the influence of political and religious thought is classed as non-religious. Thus, we are told [*2] that "the eschatology of the Egyptian and Indian religions......was not generated by the religious spirit, but was due to the incorporation of early philosophical speculations into those religions."

Further (in flat defiance of Mr. Lang's doctrine as to the primary and pious character of savage Supreme Gods), Dr. Jevons lays it down that the idea of a Supreme God, at the head of a pantheon, "is scarcely a religious idea at all; it is not drawn from the spiritual depths of man's nature; it is a conception borrowed from politics"; [*3] and pantheism in turn "is a metaphysical speculation, not a fact of which the religious consciousness has direct intuition." [*4] The upshot is that only that idea is religious which "proceeds from an inner consciousness" of connection with or perception of deity: there must be no process of reasoning, no philosophy, no criticism. Dr. Frazer's view of religion as beginning in criticism of magic is ruled out as Dr. Frazer ruled out magic itself. And if it should be supposed that on this definition primary animism is clearly religious, Dr. Jevons has his veto ready: "In animism man projects his own personality on to external nature; in religion he is increasingly [why only increasingly?] impressed by the divine personality." [*5]

Now, postponing for the moment the scientific answer--the answer of elementary and ultimate psychology--to Dr. Jevons, we have only to turn to the next chapter of his own treatise to find him nullifying this stage of his definition as he has nullified every other. First we are asked [*6] to "note that faith is not something peculiar or confined to religion, but is interwoven with every act of reason," and that "the period of faith does not terminate when the pupil has come to have immediate consciousness of the facts which he could not see." Next, we are assured [*7] that "the religious mind believes that all facts of which we have immediate consciousness can be reconciled with one another," and that "the religious faith which

[p. 25]

looks forward to the synthesis of all facts in a manner satisfying to the reason......covers a much larger area than either science or moral philosophy." Either, then, the religious person becomes utterly irreligious when he thus reasons beyond the immediate "facts," so-called, of his consciousness, or Dr. Jevons's definition of religion is once more cancelled by himself.

If, again, we return to the chapter on "Taboo, Morality, and Religion," where it is argued that religion rationalised taboo, we read that "when the taboos which receive the sanction of religion are regarded as reasonable, as being the commands of a being possessing reason, then the other taboos also may be brought to the test of reason."' [*1] On the later view, this is an essentially irreligious process. It is true that Dr. Jevons hastens to say, [*2] "Taboo has indeed been rationalised, but not in all cases by reason," and to urge [*3] that the prophets and other religious reformers who discriminate between taboos "have usually considered themselves in so doing to be speaking, not their own words or thoughts, but those of their God"--that is, have spoken as do cannibal priests among Polynesians and the impostor priests of the Slave Coast. [*4] This, however, does not save his thesis from the fatal reproach of having explicitly admitted the element of reason for a moment into the religious process. And the lapse recurs, again with a contradiction. In the closing chapter we have from Dr. Jevons successively these three propositions:--

A belief is an inference, and as such is the work of the reason. The reason endeavours to anticipate the movement of facts. [*5]

It is an established fact of psychology that every act, mental or physical, requires the concurrence, not only of the reason and the will, but of emotion. [*6]

Indeed, the reason of primitive man was ex hypothesi undeveloped; and, in any case, religious belief is not an inference reached by reason, but is the immediate consciousness of certain facts. [*7]

These internecine dicta are offered without apology or apparent misgiving as steps in a continuous process of argument. And just such another series occurs in the chapter in which Dr. Jevons undertakes to make out the characteristic thesis that "Mythology is not religion." In passing, and apart from the scientific rebuttal, it may be well to note that what Dr. Jevons calls "the extraordinary notion that mythology is religion," [*8] has never been propounded by any writer in the only sense in which it would be either false or

[p. 26]

extraordinary--that is, that "mythology is the whole of religion." That it is an element in religion and an aspect or function of "the religious consciousness" is affirmed by Dr. Jevons himself in the very act of denying it. As thus:--

Mythology was primitive man's romance, as well as his history, his science, his philosophy. [*1]

The narratives in which primitive speculations [i.e., myths] were embodied were not merely intellectual exercises, nor the work of the abstract imagination: they reflect or express the mind of the author in its totality, for they are the work of a human being, not of a creature possessing reason and no morality, or imagination and no feeling......In the same way, then, as the moral tone and temper of the author and his age makes itself felt in these primitive speculations, so will the religious spirit of the time......Mythology is one of the spheres of human activity in which religion may manifest itself: one of the departments of human reason which religion may penetrate, suffuse, and inspire. [*2]

Mythology is primitive science [etcetera], but it is not primitive religion. It is not necessarily or usually even religious. It is not the proper [!] or even the ordinary vehicle for the religious spirit. Prayer, meditation, devotional poetry, are the chosen vehicles in thought and word; ritual in outward deed and act. Myths originate in a totally different psychological quarter: they are the work of the human reason, acting in accordance with the laws of primitive logic; or are the outcome of the imagination, playing with the freedom of the poetic fancy. In neither case are they primarily the product of religious feeling: IT IS NOT THE FUNCTION OF FEELING TO DRAW INFERENCES. [*3]

It is here categorically asserted, first, that myths are not the work of any one side of the human personality--neither of reason without moral feeling nor of imagination without "feeling." Finally, it is asserted that they are the work either of reason without feeling or of imagination without feeling. After the express denial that any human being can mythologise with one faculty only, and the necessary implication that religious feeling may "penetrate" the other faculties in the act of myth-making or myth-believing, we are told that myths originate in a "totally different psychological quarter" from the "religious spirit."

As to the other italicised propositions, it may suffice at this point to note (1) that it is plainly wrong to say mythology is primitive science, history, etcetera, in the sense in which it is not (i.e., is not the whole of) primitive religion; (2) that prayer and devotional poetry are normally full of myths; (3) that ritual is in many cases conceived (though clearly not originated) by the worshipper as an imitation of an episode in the history of the God (i.e., a myth); and (4) that by explicitly reducing religion to

[p. 27]

[paragraph continues] "feeling" Dr. Jevons, like Dr. Frazer, has eliminated every belief as such from religious consciousness. Tantum relligio! 

Footnotes

^22:2 P. 410. Cp. pp. 7, 9.

^22:3 P. 33.

^22:4 P. 35.

^23:1 P. 38.

^23:2 P. 178. "Fundamentally irreligious" is the expression in the Index.

^23:3 P. 21.

^23:4 P. 177.

^23:5 On p. 290 Dr. Jevons notes how the Indians of Guiana would live in terror of wizards were it not for the protection of other wizards. Here things are balanced! Is magic, then, anti-magical?

^23:6 P. 233.

^24:1 P. 309.

^24:2 P. 331.

^24:3 P. 389.

^24:4 Pp. 389-390.

^24:5 P. 394.

^24:6 P. 406.

^24:7 P. 407.

^25:1 P. 92.

^25:2 P. 93.

^25:3 P. 94.

^25:4 See refs. in Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. p. 84. Cp. Rev. R. Taylor, Te Ika a Maui: or, New Zealand and its Inhabitants, 1870, p. 183, as to the Maoris.

^25:5 P. 403.

^25:6 P. 409.

^25:7 P. 410.

^25:8 P. 266.

^26:1 P. 263.

^26:2 P. 264.

^26:3 Pp. 266-7.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 8.

One sample more may suffice to complete the justification of our criticism that Dr. Jevons's interesting and suggestive treatise is flawed throughout by fatal contradiction. In discussing totemism, he certifies, first, the primitive belief of men in their descent from a totem animal as established or verified for them "in their inner experience--i.e., in the filial reverence and affection which they felt towards him, [*1] thus salving as truly religious the grossest possible "projection of man's own personality" on Nature, while the spontaneous animism which early man shared with animals is denied the status of "direct consciousness." Then, taking the totemist's experience, thus highly classed, he writes:--

Doubtless it was not all or most men who had this experience, or rather it was but few who attended to the feeling; but the best must have paid heed to it and have found satisfaction in dwelling on it, else the conception of the deity would never have followed on the line on which as a matter of fact it was developed. [*2]

Turning to the chapter on "The Evolution of Belief," we have this almost flatly contrary deliverance:--

The perpetuation of any variety [of belief] depends solely on the conditions under which it occurs: whatever varieties of belief are not favoured by the conditions, by their environment, will perish--the rest will survive (the surviving belief will not necessarily be that of the keenest-sighted man, but that which accords with what the average sight can see of the facts). [*3]

In another chapter, yet again, we have still a third view of the process of survival, and one which excludes both of the preceding. In order to credit to the "truly" religious principle the rationalisation of taboo, Dr. Jevons, as we said, claimed that the rationalisers considered themselves to be propounding "not their own words or thoughts, but those of their God"; and he thereupon notes that "this belief has been shared by the community they addressed, otherwise the common man would not have gained the courage to break an ancient taboo. Certainly no mere appeal to reason would counterbalance that inveterate terror." [*4] On this view any dictum of any accredited priest would be decisive, irrespective of the average sight"; and this despite of Dr. Jevons's refusal to recognise priestcraft as a factor in the creation of taboo in particular or religion in general.

[p. 28]

A theory of religion which lands its framer in such a congeries of contradictions as these, I submit, is fully convicted of vital fallacy. And certainly the fallacy is not the result either of imperfect knowledge of the ground or of speculative incompetence: it stands visibly for the misguiding force of a false preconception or prejudice. On much of Dr. Jevons's book every student, I think, will put a very high estimate: it is studious, well-informed, original, independent in method and in doctrine, and, though deeply prejudiced, nearly always temperate even when most fallacious. In places it reaches a really high level of scholarly and critical efficiency, notably in the chapter on "The Mysteries," where the tracing of the adoption and adaptation of the primary Eleusinian cult to the purposes of Athens and the cults of Demeter and Persephone is as satisfying as it is ingenious. Dr. Jevons is there thus successful, to my thinking, because he is on ground which he has surveyed dispassionately and scientifically, unaffected by his occultist predilections. It is when he has his eye on current religion and its line of descent that, omitting much of the due scholarly research and staking all on the vindication of his sympathies, he yields us a series of logical miscarriages fully as striking as his measure of success in his disinterested inquiry.

Howsoever this may be, his series of contradictions leaps to the eyes; and unless consistency is to be a burden only for the naturalists, unless the supernaturalist is to be let dogmatise in hierology as in religion on the basis of his mere "inner consciousness," his main argument must simply be removed from the scientific field.

Footnotes

^27:1 P. 108. Compare this with the decision that a political mode of thought has no part in religion.

^27:2 Pp. 108-109.

^27:3 P. 398.

^27:4 Pp. 94-95.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 9.

The clear solution, as distinguished from the rebuttal, of all such contradictions is to recognise that, however we may grade religious conceptions and systems, they are all parts of one process, even as are political conceptions and systems. To say that magic is hostile to religion is like saying that either republicanism or monarchism is hostile to politics. For primitive man there are no conceptual divisions between religion and science, worship and art; and the distinction between art-magic and sympathetic-magic--made after the express declaration that mere sympathetic magic was "the germ of all magic"--is an arbitrary stroke of pro-Christian classification, which, nonetheless, logically defeats its purpose. For the primitive sacramental meal was demonstrably on the plane of sympathetic magic inasmuch as, even when it did not kill the victim in a mimetic fashion, it was a making-friends with the God in the way of human

[p. 29]

fraternisation; and it is to this sacrament that Dr. Jevons, for obvious reasons, accords the special religious rank. It is worse than idle to seek to keep it on a plane apart by framing a formula of "direct consciousness" on the part of the worshippers that they were descended from an animal progenitor on the score that they felt filially towards him. The professed magic-monger's consciousness was rather more direct than theirs. But the definitions themselves give up the case. "Applied science" is just "art," and "art-magic" is thus just a form of what Dr. Jevons calls sympathetic-magic. Moreover, the ritual of supplication and gratitude, which he declares to be strictly religious, is visibly framed in the same spirit of expectation of profit as is seen in the magic ritual. A study of the human-sacrifice ritual of the Khonds, cited hereinafter, will make clear both the congruity and the conjunction.

It is certainly true that the one ritual becomes hostile to the other when magic is practised by the sorcerer as an outsider, secretly competing with or undermining the priest. [*1] But in that sense any one religious system is hostile to any other in the same field; and in the same sense heresy is hostile to orthodoxy, and dissent to the official cult, without ceasing to be a form of religion. Such a distinction is on all fours with that between "religion" and "superstition," disposed of by Hobbes as a mere marking off of the "allowed" belief from that not allowed." If the alleged "hostility" between religion and magic is reducible to a mere distinction between quasi-communal and individualistic sorcery, the whole dispute passes from the plane of psychological theory to that of simple sociological classification. We pass from a debate over a fallacy to a debate over a mere plea for a particular terminology. [*2] But now there arises a fresh fallacy of ethical discrimination. The communal sorcery, called religion, is falsely certificated as moral and humanitarian. It is no more so than the other. In Africa the private or amateur sorcerer (usually a victim of the professional witch-doctor") is regarded as the enemy of mankind; but it is precisely by the public magician--witch-doctor, rain-doctor, sorcerer--that the alleged amateur is nefariously "smelt out" and given up to slaughter. [*3] If it be argued that "religious" magic aims at the public good and "mere" magic at private harm, the answer is that the public magician is often notoriously a murdering scoundrel, and the alleged private sorcerer an innocent man done to death.

[p. 30]

[paragraph continues] And that is not all. On the separatist theory, the legend of Elijah's calling down fire from heaven makes him an irreligious magician, in that he was not only acting irregularly and unofficially, but going through the procedure of a sorcerer with absolute confidence in his power to control the will of his God. His machinery of supererogatory watering of his sacrifice--which, as regards the coming rain, was sympathetic magic--was "religiously" gratuitous presumption; and he was staking the whole fortunes of his cult on the chance that his prayer would be miraculously answered. He was, in fact, coercing his God by making the God's credit with his people depend upon the God's obedience to his wishes. [*1] It will not avail to acquit Elijah on the score of faith when the faith of the magician in his means of controlling the Gods is made precisely his offence. Among native tribes of the Victoria Nyanza region, "the people, in fact, hold that rulers must have power over Nature and her phenomena." [*2] Here the "anti-theistic" magic is the main element in the communal religion; and once more the separatist theory breaks down.

That priests in many ages and stages of culture have been hostile to magic is true just in the sense in which it is true that--with deeper cause--they have been hostile to science. In the early and "dark" ages of Christendom the priests of the Christian Church, primed by a magical-medical doctrine of the curing of sickness by the laying on of hands, denounced as atheistic the view of disease passed on by pagan science. [*3] Those priests were all the while practisers of exorcisms, [*4] and were none the less, for Dr. Jevons, highly religious. In the same way the intensely religious Ainu of Saghalien, who practise magic for the cure of disease and resort to professional wizards for the same purpose, [*5] resent as irreligious the attempt to promote the earth's fertility by manure. When Mr. Batchelor, the missionary, proposed to dig and manure his garden, and explained his wish to his Ainu gardener, that religious personage, strong in his inner consciousness, thus rebuked him: "What, will you, a clergyman and preacher of religion, so dishonour and insult the Gods? Will not the Gods give due increase without your attempting to force their hand or endeavouring to drive Nature?" [*6]

[p. 31]

[paragraph continues] Here we have the very doctrine of Dr. Jevons and Dr. Frazer: the manuring missionary was an "arrogant" magician, seeking to control the unseen powers in a way which was not the Ainu way. (That, it appears, was usually expectoration.) "Considerably surprised," says Mr. Batchelor, "I looked at him to see if he were joking. But he was quite serious." Poor Mr. Batchelor was being treated as his cloth had treated the doctors in the days of unflawed faith. Happily the Ainu did not possess an Inquisition.

True it may be, again, that magic is at some points a lowering of the religious sentiment; though much of the quasi-scientific reflection on this head appears to be a mere echo of ecclesiastical declamation. If we were seriously to inquire which has done the more harm in the way of hindering civilisation, strangling science, obscuring the facts of Nature, and prompting human cruelty, it would soon be found that the organised cults which curse the magician have been by far the more pernicious. [*1] The barbarisation wrought by the attempts of the courageously "superstitious" few to practise witchcraft is trifling beside that compassed by the no less superstitious many in putting supposed witches to death. This holds good of the general life of Africa through whole millenniums, in which countless millions of human beings have been slain as sorcerers and witches on the accusation of professional witch-doctors; and again of the inferrible life of the Hebrews and the recorded witchcraft-manias of Christendom. And if this side of the problem be waived, the fact remains that the Christian religion, which Dr. Jevons and the rest rank as the highest and purest of religious systems, historically took its rise in the "reversion" from theistic faith to a form of sympathetic magic, the eucharist, and was practically rooted as a State cult throughout Europe by the assumption of magical functions on the part of the priest, not only in the administration of the eucharist itself, but in the claim to exercise "supernatural" powers of exorcism and to wield "supernatural" instruments in the form of holy relics. Such practices certainly represent an intellectual and moral declension from the ethic of all the leading Greek schools and of the nobler rabbins.

In other cases a differentiation between magician and priest may have been in origin economic and political, apart from any ethical motive. Among the Bataks of Sumatra, while ancestors are imaged, and the images, as being made potent by soul-stuff, have

[p. 32]

places in the temples where ancestors are worshipped, the higher Gods are without images or temples, and are prayed to only in conjunction with ancestors or spirits; and here it is noted that the magician "has nothing to do with the worship of the Gods, but operates on the relations with spirits and souls," while the priest attends to the matters relating to the higher Gods. [*1] The explanation appears to lie in the fact that, as among the Romans, every Batak house-father is priest as regards ancestors, souls, and spirits. The priest-managed cult is either the survival of one imposed on the populace by conquerors and specially provided for (as probably was the case in Rome), or a result of priestly enterprise in imitation of foreign systems. [*2] Its ethical content is a matter of other chances.

Granted, yet again, that dissenting magic, whether beneficent or maleficent in intention, is logically inconsistent with the conceptions of deity normally professed by the magic-monger himself, it is here on all fours with the total structure of the official creed, whichsoever it be. The conception of sacrifice in all its forms is morally irreconcilable with the doctrine of divine justice and goodness, and was on that very ground repudiated by the greater Hebrew and pagan moralists; and with the doctrine of salvation by sacrifice falls the doctrine of salvation by faith. Press that one ethical principle, and the whole apparatus of official Christian ethic collapses, even as the apparatus of prayer and providentialism falls by the test of the principles of divine omniscience, beneficence, and foreordination. Dr. Jevons's principle of exclusion, in fact, finally makes tabula rasa of the whole field of religious institutions and religious life, and leaves us recognising only a factor which he has expressly excluded from his definition of the religious consciousness--to wit, philosophy.

Here, again, the theoretic separation is spurious. In terms of many parts of Dr. Jevons's exposition, early religion is just the effort to unify the cosmos through a conception of deity; and early philosophy was nothing else. To stamp as religious only those forms of thought in which the believer has "direct consciousness" of "the divine," excluding every process of meditation and inference as such, is to include in religion the phenomena of hallucination and even of insanity (to say nothing of the liberal expansion of the

[p. 33]

formula to include men's belief in their personal descent from an animal), and to bar out as non-religious the theism which stands on the thesis that "this scheme of things cannot be without a mind."

On the other hand, ordinary animism, which Dr. Jevons rules out, is certainly a belief in terms of almost though not quite unreflecting consciousness; and to proceed to disqualify it on the ground that it is a projection of man's personality into Nature is to evoke a fatal challenge; for if this is to be said of animism, it will certainly have to be said much more emphatically of theism. The "impression of the divine personality" of which Dr. Jevons speaks is precisely the projection of the subject's personality into the unknown, and this by Dr. Jevons's own showing. To judge from his later argument, while he at times professes to waive the question of the veracity of the religious consciousness, he is much disposed to let it be its own verification. [*1] This, however, he can scarcely venture-on in the case of the primitive man's belief that he descended from a fox, a bear, or a serpent. It is one thing to pronounce such a belief "truly religious," by way of securing in advance the "true" heredity of the Christian eucharist; it is another to put such a "fact of consciousness" beside the Christian consciousness of direct divine intercourse and inner answer to prayer. On the latter step must follow the admission that the so-called religious form of "consciousness" is by far the more self-projecting, the less truly receptive, of the two, save indeed where it is merely the mouthpiece of the other. Otherwise Dr. Jevons's undertaking ends in the edifying decree that the company of the truly religious includes every mahdi, every fakir, every sibyl, every savage seer, every spiritualist, every epileptic Salvationist, every Corybantic worshipper of Cybele or Kali, and repels not only a Thomas Aquinas, a Pascal, a Hegel, a Spinoza, a Martineau, but every similar thinker who in antiquity prepared the very doctrines which the "feelers" demonstrably took as the theme of their alleged consciousness. [*2]

It can hardly be that in thus shaping his definition Dr. Jevons aimed at demonstrating subtly the sub-rationality of religion. He has, indeed, by his theorem of "direct consciousness," brought religion to precisely the position he assigned to taboo--that of an "irrational" and "arbitrary" association of ideas. He accepted

[p. 34]

from Mr. Lang, as we saw, the verdict that taboo is thus irrational because its principle is "that causal connection in thought is equivalent to causative connection in fact." Yet this is exactly the principle which he vindicates on behalf of the religious consciousness. Its notion of causal connection is to be in very truth equivalent to causative connection in fact. It is not to reason; it is not to seek evidence or submit to tests; it is to bring all experience in submission to itself. And it is not only the belief in a Good Male God that is thus assured of its superiority in virtue of its arbitrariness; it is every hallucination of every savage, every vision of the Virgin by a neurasthenic Catholic, every epiphany of Isis or Aphrodite or Cotytto in the past--nay more, every dream of a devil! It seems a sinister service to latter-day religion thus to demonstrate that it is on all fours not with purified philosophy, but with the most unintelligible forms of taboo and the darkest forms of "superstition."

Once more, however, the scientific course consists not in taking advantage of the logical suicide of those who conduct the other, but in setting forth the fundamental analogy of the psychological processes thus arbitrarily differentiated. The "direct consciousness" of the theist--sheer hallucination apart--is simply a reversion to the earlier man's confidence in his animistic conceptions, doubled with the conscious resistance to sceptical criticism seen in every dream-interpreter and ghost-seer of the country-side. The persistence is simply a matter of temperament and degree of enlightenment: there are men who can transcend this like other testimonies of their direct consciousness, in learning to see it as a kind of hallucination which may be predicted to arise in some cases in regard to any theistic conception which any thinker may contrive to set up. Where there are images of the Virgin, men and women will have visions of the Virgin; where there are images of animal-Gods, there will be visions of animal-Gods.

Between "impressions" and "projections" there is no such psychological gulf as Dr. Jevons assumes. If there were, the political influence on doctrine which he classes as non-religious would still be in terms of his other theorem truly religious, for the act of thinking of rule in heaven in terms of rule on earth is a sufficiently docile surrender to an impression on consciousness, and would be made by multitudes with the possible minimum of reflection. But, in truth, a minimum of reflection there needs must be in every process of belief; and what Dr. Jevons at times describes as pure processes of direct consciousness are demonstrably not so, or are so

[p. 35]

only in the sense in which the same thing may be predicated of the thinking of the primitive magician. The man who says he is conscious of an inward answer to prayer is not conscious of it as he is of the sound of a voice; what he experiences is a sense of satisfaction, which (albeit only the result of a release of nervous tension) he infers to come as a direct communication from deity; [*1] and such inference is merely a more casual and less meditated process of reasoning than those which Dr. Jevons dismisses as non-religious. It is thus less rational as being less "reasonable"; but it is not "irrational" save in the loose sense of "fallacious." It is more arbitrary, but only in the sense that it is less mindful of reason and more egotistic, more self-willed, than the process which appeals fraternally to other men's judgments. Arbitrary in Dr. Jevons's implied sense of having no basis it cannot be: so to define the term is to reduce it to insignificance. However vicious religious reasoning may be, it remains reasoning.

Footnotes

^29:1 Cp. Tiele, Egyptian Religion, pp. 180-2; Budge, Introd. to Book of the Dead, p. cli; W. Ellis, Polynesian Researches, as cited above.

^29:2 Cp. Prof. E. Doutte, Magie et religion dans l'Afrique du nord, Alger, 1909, pp. 334-5.

^29:3 Cp. Decle, Three Years in Savage Africa, 1900, pp. 152-4.

^30:1 "To control a deity by means other than prayer and good life is anti-theistic" (Jevons, Introd. to Holland's trans. of Plutarch's Romane Questions, 1892, p. xxix).

^30:2 Paul Kollmann, The Victoria Nyanza, 1899, p. 168.

^30:3 Cp. A. D. White, Hist. of the Warfare of Science with Theology, 1897, ii, 26-28 and refs. Lea, Hist. of the Inquisition, 1888, iii, 395. 410, and refs.; Arnobius, Adv. Gentes, i, 48 Augustine, De Civ. Dei, xxii, 8; Tract. 7 in Johann.,  section 12; Clementine Homilies, ii, 12; E. T. Wittington, Medical History, 1894, pp. 121-2.

^30:4 Eusebius, Ecclesiastical History, vi, 43; Clemens Romanus, De Virginitate, Ep. ii, 12 Origen, Against Celsus, vii, 67; Tertullian, Apol., 23, 40. Cp. Lecky, Hist. of Eur. Morals, 6th ed. i, 381.

^30:5 Batchelor, The Ainu of Japan, 1892, pp. 196-7.

^30:6 Id. p. 256.

^31:1 See below, Part iv,  section 5, as to the intensification and perpetuation of both ordinary and sacramental cannibalism and human sacrifice by priesthoods in ancient Mexico, Fiji, and New Zealand.

^32:1 Warneck, Die Religion der Batak, 1909, pp. 5, 6.

^32:2 Warneck notes (p. 4) that the Hindus in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries forced Indian God-forms on the Bataks in place of others of their own, but has no clear theory of the process or the antecedents. He notes again (ib.) that "only gradually were Gods and men differentiated"; but surmises that the habit of speaking reverently of "God" as distinct from the five Over-Gods is a survival of an earlier and purer God-idea" (p. 7). It seems much more likely, in view of his own narrative, to be a derivation from Islam.

^33:1 Pp. 389, 393-4, 397, 405.

^33:2 For an emphatic contradiction of such a view see Mr. Lester Ward's Outlines of Sociology, 1898, pp. 27-29. I do not find, however, that Mr. Ward's doctrine here is in harmony with that laid down by him in Dynamic Sociology, i, 11. For a mediatory view see the end of this chapter.

^35:1 I am not here reasoning a priori, but from a knowledge of concrete cases. It is to be wished that a scientific study should be made of the processes of religious consciousness, familiar and other. But even without that, the crudity of Dr. Jevons's psychological apparatus is sufficiently evident.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 10.

To say this, however, is certainly not to endorse the surprising thesis latterly put forth by Dr. Frazer, to the effect that magic-mongering, after all, has been a great factor in human progress. [*2] His first suggestion was, as we have seen, that a recognition of the inherent falsehood and barrenness of magic set the saner men seeking for a truer insight into nature. But after suggesting this "with all due diffidence," he has latterly come to hold with confidence that it was the clever impostors who, by obtaining monarchic power, were the means of breaking up savage conservatism, and so of making progress possible. It is a singular argument. The public sorcerer "may readily acquire the rank and authority of a chief or king"; and the ablest and most ambitious men of the tribe accordingly follow the profession. The most sagacious are the most likely to see through its fallacies, and, becoming conscious deceivers, will as such "generally come to the top." [*3] Only the cleverest can survive: all sorcerers run a constant risk of being killed for their failures; and the honest men are likely to be soonest knocked on the head. "The general result is that at this stage of social evolution the supreme power tends to fall into the hands of men of the

[p. 36]

keenest intelligence and the most unscrupulous character." [*1] Once supreme, the clever rogue "may, and often does, turn his talents, his experience, his resources, to the service of the public." [*2] Being a knave, he is not likely to miscarry: witness the contrasted careers of Augustus and George III. Thus magic makes the monarch: "it shifted the balance of power from the many to the one: it substituted a monarchy for a democracy, or rather for an oligarchy of old men." The custom-ruled savage in the free tribal state is utterly unprogressive, "and the ablest man is dragged down by the weakest and dullest." But the rise of one man to supreme power breaks the spell; and the tribe "enters on a career of aggrandisement, which at an early stage of history is often highly favourable to social, industrial, and intellectual progress." "The great conquering races of the world have commonly done most to advance and spread civilisation.....The Assyrians, the Greeks, the Romans, the Arabs, are our witnesses in the past......All the first great strides towards civilisation have been made under despotic and theocratic governments." [*3] Great, therefore, was the service of the sorcerer.

Oddly enough, Dr. Frazer, whose outstanding merit is the fulness of his proofs for his theses, offers us no evidence whatever in support of this thesis beyond the perfunctory allusions to ancient civilisation just cited, which are wholly beside the case. He is severe on a priori theories of kingly origins, but his own argument here is almost wholly a priori. True, some savage kings are magicians = priests; but many are not; and the wide learning of Dr. Frazer evidently does not suggest to him a single case in which the clever knave who has achieved kingship performs the services he is supposed to be able to render. [*4] On the contrary, we have the testimony [*5] that "where the chieftaincy and priesthood meet in the same person, both are of a low order"--among the Fijians. There is really no reason to think that early progress was made as Dr. Frazer suggests: his philosophic antinomianism is gratuitous. And it is not persisted in; for once more we find him reverting [*6] to the view that, as the fallacy of magic becomes more and more apparent, it is "slowly displaced by religion: in other words, the magician gives way to the

[p. 37]

priest." The two propositions refuse to quadrate. First, the great merit of the magician king was to break up custom; now he does but pave the way for the priest, who is custom incarnate; who, in point of fact, pursues the very researches which Dr. Frazer credits to the magician; and who, when the chief or king insists upon a humane innovation, makes it his business to poison the innovator. [*1] It is time that the a priori method were abandoned, in this as in other fields of science. It can but yield us a crop of contradictions.

Looking in anthropology and history for the main factors of progress, we find them in very different directions from those indicated by Dr. Frazer. Our first traces of "civilisation," strictly speaking, are in towns--civitates; and their civilisation consists largely in the development of the useful arts by division of labour. The primary determinants are physical--conditions of regular food-supply, as in the valleys of the Nile, the Tigris, the Euphrates, and the Yang-tsze-Kiang; and the widening of knowledge was a matter of manifold development in which men of all classes must have taken part. To say, as does Dr. Frazer, [*2] that the magicians "were the direct predecessors, not merely of our physicians and surgeons, but of our investigators and discoverers in every branch of natural science," is to impose a false symmetry on a vast, irregular process, and is an unwarrantable negation of faculty in all but one fraction of the human race. There is positively no ground for supposing that it was professed magicians or magician-chiefs who invented ploughs and bows and arrows, or tamed cattle, or developed agriculture, or began spinning and weaving and metallurgy. Neither is there reason to think that it was the "rain-makers" who developed irrigation, or the "medicine-men" who oftenest discovered the uses of herbs, whether or not they were the first regular observers of the stars. Neither positively nor negatively can they be shown to be the leaders in vital innovation. [*3]

The spell of custom, where broken at all, has been dissolved by the compulsions of need or the lure of gain: hunters and shepherds are turned into agriculturists by the bait of food or the goad of hunger. The masterful savage knave who breaks through primitive convention and gives a free run to genius is a creature of Dr. Frazer's speculative faculty, suddenly permitted to expatiate in an unwonted vacancy. Masterful primitive chiefs and kings we do indeed find at

[p. 38]

times breaking down evil usages; [*1] but this very service is by way of fighting the priest who (we are told) has supervened on the magician; and in no case, I think, can such a reforming chief or king be shown to have won his power as a sorcerer. As we have seen, the superseding of so-called magic by so-called religion is immeasurably slow; and the idea of taboo subsists in the historic religions to this day.

The things wherein men validly change in the savage state, if we can draw any conclusions from their remains, are the ways and means of living and fighting. Conditions of food-supply determine implements and methods. Weapons are slowly perfected; and if we may reason from the instance of the Romans, the primitive savage was most open to new ideas on that side. There, at least, fas erat ab hoste doceri. But the lift of the race is secular; not a matter of sudden impulsions and emancipations by clever chiefs, rascally or otherwise. Dr. Frazer appears to think concerning the rise of culture as so many theologians still think concerning moral progress. He seeks a "founder" as they seek a Moses, a Buddha, a Zoroaster, a Jesus, for the instauration of morals and of creeds. Whatever magicians might do, only with a vast inertia did the stone ages lapse on, from palaeolithic to neolithic, from neolithic to bronze and to iron; and in savage Africa, pullulating with sorcerers, the trivial tribal cultures have exhibited but a futile fluctuation in five thousand years. Non quis sed quid.

The question of the political conditions of the spread of civilisation is another issue; and the conjoining of it with the first is a fresh proof of the fallacy of Dr. Frazer's new method. These a priori arguments for despotism are products not of induction but of presupposition. If we apply the inductive method which Dr. Frazer professes to follow, we find, for one case in which despotism evokes genius or progress, ten in which it paralyses the first and stifles the second. Under the imperialisms and theocracies of Mesopotamia and Egypt, mayhap, there were laid or retained the foundations of astronomy and mathematics and the beginnings of philosophy; and Greece came into the heritage. The mathematics and the philosophy were developed in democratic Greece as they never had been under the empires; and one of the few cases in which despotism did anything for science was at the later stage when the Ptolemies simply gave astronomy an economic endowment. On the other hand, great literature and great art, great poetry and drama, medicine and biology, were the creations of pre-Alexandrian Greece; and in

[p. 39]

every one of those fields the human achievement sinks and dwindles after free Greece falls before organised militarism. As to religious literature, Dr. Frazer is not wont to represent the Bible of little Jewry as inferior to those of Assyria and Egypt. The whole Roman empire, finally, stands for one brief florescence of the secondary Roman genius, followed by the ruin of the whole antique civilisation which it absorbed; and the later cultures of the Saracens and the Renaissance were growths from the found seeds of Greek science, and from the assimilation of the remains of Roman culture in a turbulent world of free Italian cities, akin to that of dead Greece.

This digression, forced upon us by Dr. Frazer's resort to apriorism in sociology, may not be useless if it serves to put us on our guard against the risks of reactionary method within the proper limits of our problem. Away from induction there is no safety; and Dr. Frazer miscarries even as does Dr. Jevons when he neglects observation and gives the rein to presupposition. It is by reason of this swerving from his own principles that he finally fails to solve the problem of Christian origins, and remains stranded in a compromise between tradition and criticism. Vindications of despotism and primitive charlatanism are psychologically and logically on all fours with vindications of incredible creeds, cruel churches, and the sentimentalism of reaction. The business and the duty of the anthropologist as of the sociologist is to note determinants and trace sequences, neither letting his ethic obscure for him the natural processes, nor letting the recognition of that obscure his ethic, which is an act of discrimination and judgment, or nothing.

Footnotes

^35:2 In his great work on Totemism and Exogamy (iv, 25 sq.) Dr. Frazer has recently argued, without any reference to the wider thesis here under criticism, that magic may be reckoned the nursing-mother of art, inasmuch as it moved early man to copy objects--a more plausible theory than the one here criticised. But it also is open to much objection.

^35:3 Lectures on the Early History of the Kingship, 1905, p. 82.

^36:1 Id. p. 83.

^36:2 Id. p. 84.

^36:3 Id. pp. 84-87.

^36:4 Dr. Frazer does cite a story of a Masai magician chief who "actually discovered a mode of inoculation which protected the cattle against lung disease" (p. 114). "If this statement is correct," he adds, "we have here a striking instance......which illustrates what I have said." It will really not do. In this connection we may note the recorded fact that "The Masai at one time formed an immense and compact nation.....Their cohesion was due to the influence of a very celebrated sorcerer named Battiani. His death was followed by the epidemic of rinderpest which came from the north in 1891. Nearly all the cattle of the Masai perished......Finally, small-pox added its ravages......and, the nation was irretrievably broken" (Decle, Three Years in Savage Africa, 1900, p. 476, We here learn what the sorcerer can and what he cannot do.

^36:5 T. Williams, Fiji and the Fijians, ed. 1870, p. 192.

^36:6 p. 127.

^37:1 Cp. Sir A. B. Ellis, The Ewe-speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast, 1890, pp. 145-147.

^37:2 Lectures cited, p. 92.

^37:3 It is noteworthy that in his comprehensive and valuable survey of Totemism and Exogamy (iv, 17 sq.) Dr. Frazer expressly negates and confutes the theory that the rise of culture, animal-taming, and metallurgy is due to early totemism. Here he is carefully Inductive as against the loose speculation of others.

^38:1 See below, ch. ii.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 11.

Returning to our immediate problem, the evolution of religious ideas, we note that, all error being but incomplete or illicit induction, "irrational" and relatively "rational" ideas are alike products of the general mental process. The recoil from adventurous magic to precatory ritual is no more a renunciation of reason than the contrary progression; and all changes in religion are but better or worse applications of judgment under varying conditions of psychic suggestion and economic pressure. It is indeed true--and be the truth clearly envisaged--that with the conscious resort to critical reason there begins potentially a process which may end in the negation of all the primary religious conceptions and propositions, even in their most purified philosophical form. When that end is reached, we may well say that philosophy and religion are differentiated, even as science is differentiated at once from magical and from precatory

[p. 40]

religion, at the point at which it either repudiates or abandons their premisses, and consciously proceeds on tested induction. But even this reaction is never instantaneously complete: witness the sociology of many physicists, and the meteorology of some sociologising historians; and, on the other hand, there is an aspect or function of religion in respect of which it is structurally continuous with systems of doctrine which either abandon or repudiate its premisses.

From the first, it belonged to his nature that man should connect his ethic with his cosmology, since the one like the other grew out of his instincts and perceptions and his effort to harmonise them. Precisely as he animised Nature, so did he moralise it: that is, he conceived of it in terms of what moral ideas he had. Thus it was that he could alternately resort to propitiation and to magic, and alternately feel fear and gratitude. Granting that his religious conceptions first crystallised on the lines of his fears, it was inevitable that they should in time crystallise also in terms of his satisfactions: the one involved the other, and made it not only possible but probable that he should at times thank the very power he feared. Fear would involve propitiation, and propitiation was the door to gratitude. And thus it was that his Gods were in the long run ethically like unto himself, neither wholly beneficent nor wholly maleficent.

Such an evolution would seem inevitable, even if we do not posit as part of the process his direct deification of his own image in that of his ancestors. But that ancestor-worship is a main factor in the growth of religion is proved both a priori and a posteriori. Once the ancestor was recognised as subsisting spirit-wise, he was only in degree, not in kind, distinguishable from the Gods; and there is evidence that in some cases he was conceived as the God par excellence.

See the evidence (of which Dr. Jevons makes no account) collected by Spencer, Principles of Sociology, vol. i, chaps. xx and xxv; and op. F. W. Christian, The Caroline Islands, 1899, p. 75; Rev. D. Macdonald, Oceania, 1889, p. 161; Basil Thomson, The Fijians, 1908, pp. 5, 57, 111; Glyn Leonard, The Lower Niger and its Tribes, 1906, pp. 67, 89, 98 sq., 104-9, etc.; C. Partridge, Cross River Natives, 1905, pp. 283-4; W. Crooke, Religion and Folklore of Northern India, ed. 1895, vol. i, ch. iv; Sir H. Johnston, The Uganda Protectorate, 1902, ii, 553, 555, 587, 588, 589, 631, 752. "The essence of true negro-religion," says the writer last-named, "is ancestor-worship" (Liberia, 1906, ii, 1062). It is true that some observers (cp. Mary Kingsley, West African Studies, 2nd ed. 1901, pp. 111-114; Sir A. B. Ellis, The Ewe-Speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast,

[p. 41]

[paragraph continues] 1890, p. 24 sq.) deny that certain West Africans "worship their ancestors"; but this, as Miss Kingsley admits, is a matter of culture-stage or variation. African religion is notably impermanent by reason of the peculiar stresses of life-conditions; and no one can trace far the history even of the highest Gods of the indigenes. Cp. Partridge, as cited, pp. 271-3. The higher Gods of a given moment may be ancestors whose ancestorhood has been lost sight of.

Dr. Frazer, Golden Bough, i, 72, note, cites the testimony of Dr. Fison in Australia: "The more I learn about savage tribes, the more I am convinced that among them the ancestors grow into gods." The same witness, again, tells of a great Fijian chief who "really believed himself to be a god--i.e., a reincarnation of an ancestor who had grown into a god" (Id. i, 141, note). The Godhood of chiefs is a familiar phenomenon. "The Gods being no more than deceased chiefs, the arikis [chiefs] were regarded as living ones" (Taylor, Te Ika a Maui: or, New Zealand and its Inhabitants, p. 173). Cp. Hazlewood's testimony (Frazer, last cit.); also Mariner, Tonga Islands, ed. 1827, ii, 99-100; W. Ellis, Polynesian Researches, i, 111 sq.; T. Williams, Fiji and the Fijians, ed. 1870, pp. 19, 197; Comm. V. L. Cameron, Across Africa, 1885, p. 336; and Frazer, Lectures on the History of the Early Kingship, 1905, p. 132 sq.

Among the early Aryan Hindus, the first man who died became Yama, the God of the Shades; [*1] and on another view he and his wife were the first human pair, [*2] though sprung from deities of the atmosphere. [*3] But here, still, we are dealing with late developments: it is still an open question how the first Gods originated. And it is impossible to determine exactly the primary psychic processes. The limitary theorem that all God-worship originated in ancestor-worship has evoked the counter-theorem that God-worship must in origin have preceded ancestor-worship; and Dr. Jevons so reasons. But again his predilection recoils on one of his own theses, for the ancestor is obviously likely to have been early regarded as the friendly spirit; [*4] and we are thus led back to Dr. Jevons's repudiated premiss that the religion of fear had preceded that of gratitude. [*5]

His final view of ancestor-worship is that it was assimilated to that of the Gods, but can never have preceded it. It may be true, he grants, that certain ancestors are somehow raised to the ranks of Gods, but it cannot be proved that they were originally ghosts. Then follows this singular theorem:--

[p. 42]

What then of these gods?......If they are believed to be the ancestors of their worshippers, then they are not believed to have been human; the worshipper's pride is that his ancestor was a god and no mere mortal......If, on the other hand, a god is not believed to be the ancestor of any of his worshippers, then to assert that he was really a "deified ancestor" is to make a statement for which there is no evidence; it is an inference from an assumption--namely, that the only spirits which the savage originally knew were ghosts. That assumption, however, is not true; the savage believes the forces and phenomena of nature to be personalities like himself, he does not believe that they are ghosts or worked by ghosts......The fact is that ancestors known to be human were not worshipped as gods, and that ancestors worshipped as gods were not believed to have been human. [*1]

We might add, using Dr. Jevons's own words concerning the theory he rejects, "Which is simplicity itself." But though in a sense simple, it is unhappily not consistent. For if the savage believed the forces of nature to be "personalities like himself"; if, as Dr. Jevons insists, the magic-monger believed himself on a par with the supernatural in his power to control nature; and if, as Dr. Jevons has previously argued, [*2] it was precisely out of the notion of such personalities or "spirits" that he framed his idea of "supernatural" forces or Gods, then either there is in the terms of the case no contradiction whatever between his counting his ancestors "human" and counting them Gods, or there is no meaning whatever in the phrase "personalities like himself." Dr. Jevons really cannot have it both ways, even for the purpose of confuting the theory of Spencer. All the while he is but modifying Spencer's special theory that all God-ideas began in the idea of quasi-human "spirits," merely refusing to accept "ghosts" as the first form of spirit-idea.

Of course, if Dr. Jevons means that by definition the savage must be held to regard a God-ancestor as "not merely human"--that the savage cannot conceptually mean exactly the same thing by "God" and "man," else there would be no double significance in the terms--he may claim our assent; for in that case he is asserting a mere truism. But by his own showing the question is whether or not in the opinion of the savage the man could become a God; and so far is this from being doubtful that we have many instances of savages regarding some of their contemporaries, and priests regarding themselves, as Gods; [*3] to say nothing of the fact that for the early Hebrews the title "Gods" was certainly applicable to judges or chiefs. [*4] In Sumatra, the human species, "called

[p. 43]

the Gods of the middle world, are conceived as a true copy of the God-world. In heaven the same life goes on as on earth. Only gradually are Gods and men distinguished. The Gods stand over men very much as a powerful chief over the crowd. Therefore were such princes named Gods (Debata) and the Gods in turn 'Grandfather,' with which title eminent men are greeted." [*1] For the people of Mangaia in the Hervey Islands the three Gods Rangi, Mokoiro, and Akatuira, grandsons of the great God Rongo, [*2] were the first inhabitants of the islands, and the ancestors of all the tribes. [*3] And the idea is common. In the same island, Vatea, father of Rongo, is the "father of Gods and men." [*4] The people of Efate in the New Hebrides, down till the time of their conversion, habitually applied to all their Gods the name of "Spirits of the dead"; [*5] and their "first man" is practically identified with Maui, the Creator. [*6] So, among the Bushmen, 'Kaang or Cagn is at once Supreme God, "the Man" or Master of all things, and the "first being," with Coti his wife; [*7] and among the Australian Aborigines "the conception of a supreme being oscillated between a hero and a deity." [*8] Concerning the ancestor spirits in general, a very studious missionary declares that they are "regarded as clothed with all the divine powers in existence." [*9] Nay, the Japanese at this moment regard themselves as universally descended from Gods; and every dead relation becomes a God relatively to the particular household. [*10] Thus Dr. Jevons is contradicted by the evidence as well as by his own earlier argument.

As before, he has fallen into contradiction by reason of having an illicit doctrinal end to gain--this time, the discrediting of the

[p. 44]

ghost theory of religion. In order to destroy that, he has in effect committed himself to the proposition that the primitive savage clearly discriminated between ghosts and spirits. Now there is neither a priori nor a posteriori ground for this view; since all the evidence goes to show that the dead ancestor was originally believed to eat and drink, hunt and ride, like the living; and the same things were certainly believed of the Gods. It is one of Dr. Jevons's own reproaches against the creed of the Egyptians that it regarded the ka or soul in the next world as eating and drinking exactly like the living man. There is really no pretext for believing that the early man ever thought the "spirits" were "not ghosts" or vice versa: it is Dr. Jevons who is here making an unproved assumption. This use of the word "ghost" as representing to early man exactly what it means to us is not only unwarrantable in itself; it is a misrepresentation of the so-called "ghost theory"; for that has regard, among other things, to visions in dreams of the dead as living. If the early savage did see a subjective "apparition" he would doubtless hold it for a "person"; but as regards dreams, peoples comparatively civilised have constantly taken the vision for an objective reality. Of such cases there are several in the Bible.

On the other hand, we have Dr. Jevons's express assurance first [*1] that the totem animal becomes the totem ancestor, who is universally conceived to have been animal, not human, yet quasi-human, yet is made a God; [*2] next, that "in virtue of the kinship between the god and his worshippers, the killing of a fellow-clansman comes to be regarded in a totem-clan as the same thing as killing the totem-god"; [*3] and, further, that when totemism is no longer a living force, the mere altar-stone comes to be identified with the God, who is "conceived as the ancestor of the race." [*4] If, then, a whole community can be conceived as descending from one deified animal or from a stone, it surely might be conceived as descending from one man. As to his possible deification, we have Dr. Jevons's own admission that "eventually......the dead were......on a level with the gods." [*5] That is to say, he credits men with

[p. 45]

superiority to such anthropomorphism at a time when they animised everything, and when, later, they could believe in divine animal ancestors or stone ancestors; and he dates ancestor-worship proper as a still later practice arising in a state of comparatively advanced civilisation, [*1] on the ground that "the family is a comparatively late institution in the history of society."

Now, however, arises a fresh contradiction. The family, surely, was a tolerably old institution among the Romans at the beginning of their written history; but Dr. Jevons had previously committed himself to the proposition that the Romans, down to the time of their assimilation of Greek cults and deities, had not even attained to the stage of polytheism, being at that of simple "animism." [*2] That is, they had no Gods, though they had long been wont to sacrifice to the manes of their ancestors. The mere statement of that thesis, in turn, involves new contradictions. In denying that the deities of the early Romans were properly describable as Gods until they had adopted Greek Gods or identified their own with some of these, he speaks of the "genuine" and "great" Italian Gods, "Janus, Jupiter, Mars, Diana, Venus, Hercules, etc." Then he proceeds to show that the great and genuine Janus was indistinguishable in origin and function from the "inferior, animistic powers to whom the title of spirit is the highest that can be assigned." The general run of those spirits, he contends (following Ihne, Schwegler, and others), "were rather numina or forces than beings"; [*3] and he represents the early Italians as not conceiving them in human form. Yet he admits that Janus was figured as a human head with two faces. The whole theorem is indefensible. To say that an ancient Italian peasant thought of the forces of Nature as abstractions before he had attained to the conception of personal Gods, when all the while he thought of Mars and Diana, Jupiter and Juno, as males and females, is to affirm a countersense. The sole defence offered is the impossible set of definitions by which Chantepie de la Saussaye undertakes to draw a line between Gods proper and Nature powers. [*4] By that definition Gods are not evolved till they have been sculptured--a countersense which at this stage of hierology we might have been spared. The superposition of so many Greek myths upon those of the Romans [*5] gives

[p. 46]

considerable range for mystification; but no process of that kind can save the theorem that the Gods were not anthropomorphised by imagination before they were objectively imaged.

The thesis, finally, that the Romans before the period of Greek influence were "mere" polydaimonists, and that at the same time they thought even of their daimons as impersonal forces, destroys itself, even apart from Dr. Jevons's admission that all the while they had "great Gods." An "inferior" spirit is cognisable as such only by contrast with a superior; and the contention that Janus was evolved from a simple "spirit of doorways," and remained such, is merely one more rebuttal of Dr. Jevons's own division of species. If the spirit of doorways was anthropomorphised, it is idle to contend that the other spirits were not. In the very act of maintaining this untenable thesis Dr. Jevons recognises in the attitude of the Romans towards their manes, "the good," a "worship of deceased ancestors and of spirits which, like Genita Mana, are best explained as spirits of the departed"; [*1] and he decides, further, that the Lares Praestites were conceived under the form of dogs. [*2] In the face of all this his further account of the Italian Gods as "fetishes" reduces the theory to chaos. We are now asked to combine the three conceptions: (1) that ancestor-worship is late; (2) that the Romans had not even reached polytheism long after they had practised ancestor-worship; (3) that they did not anthropomorphise their "spirits," while they did their ancestors and their "great Gods" (whom, all the while, they had not attained to conceiving as such). And, as if this were not confusion enough, Dr. Jevons pronounces that, at this pre-polytheistic stage, "in Rome, as in China, Assyria, and Babylonia, the cult was nothing but organised magic" [*3]--that organised magic which elsewhere he puts as a late degeneration, even as he does here by associating it with the stage of full polytheism in Assyria and Babylonia.

And still we have to note the crowning temerity of the assertion that an imported polytheism was "forced by the State on a people not yet prepared for anything higher than animism and ancestor-worship" [*4]--that very ancestor-worship which in his larger treatise he describes as a late evolution, possible only after Gods have been worshipped. The conception of a State forcing "polytheism" on a people incapable of it--that is, forcing a belief in Gods on a people who had never thought of Gods, and still less of "God"--is really

[p. 47]

fatal to the theorist's differentiation between belief in Gods and belief in spirits. Of this dialectical ruin we can but brush the debris aside.

Footnotes

^41:1 Muir, Original Sanskrit Texts, v, 292.

^41:2 Id. p. 288.

^41:3 Id. p. 301.

^41:4 Cp. J. G. Muller, Amerikanische Urreligionen, p. 72; and Leonard, as cited.

^41:5 It should be acknowledged that there may be cases of retrogression. Thus the 'Kaang or Cagn of the Bushmen "at first was very good and nice, but got spoilt through fighting so many things" (Stow and Theal, Native Races of South Africa, 1905, p. 134).

^42:1 P. 197.

^42:2 P. 23.

^42:3 See refs. on previous page and cp. Spencer's Sociology, ch. xxv, Il 195-197.

^42:4 Cp. Var. Bib. at Ex. xxi, 6; xxii, 8, etc.

^43:1 Warneck, Die Religion der Batak, 1909, pp. 4-5.

^43:2 Compare this with the development of the Sumatran divine family, in which the earlier "Grandfather" Creator God acquires, under Hindu influence, three divine sons. These, in one myth, are men, made by him. Warneck, p. 28.

^43:3 Gill, Myths and Songs of the South Pacific, 1876, p. 16.

^43:4 Id. pp. 3, 17. Mr. Gill's account of the Mangaian notions of the "first things" is interesting: "The heathen intellect has no conception of a Supreme Being creating a universe out of nothing......Whenever the gods make anything, the existence of the raw material, at least in part, is presupposed. The primary conception of these islanders as to spiritual existence is a point. Then something pulsating. Next of something greater, everlasting. Now comes the Great Mother and Originator of things......The Great Mother approximates nearest to the dignity of creator; but when she makes a child, it is out of a bit of her own body. She herself is dependent on these prior existences, destitute of human form." Id. p. 21. (In all likelihood Adam in an early form of the Semitic myth made Eve from his own body.)

^43:5 Rev. D. Macdonald, Oceania, Linguistic, and Anthropological, 1889, pp. 161, 167.

^43:6 Id. pp. 172-173. Mr. Macdonald remarks that though all the deities, including Maui (who dies), are called spirits of the dead, "perhaps originally they were not regarded as the spirits of dead men" (p. 202). But he goes no further. Mr. Macdonald, it should be added, holds the old view that the ancestors of all savages once had the knowledge of a Supreme God ascribed to the first men in the Hebrew Bible.

^43:7 Stow and Theal, Native Races of South Africa, 1905, pp. 113, 134.

^43:8 J. Mathew, Eaglehawk and Crow, 1899, p. 146.

^43:9 Macdonald, Oceania, p. 202.

^43:10 Cp. Lafcadio Hearn, Japan, 1904, pp. 34, 37, 131, 134, 141. Dr. Jevons, however, might argue that the orthodox Japanese do not regard themselves as merely human, since their religious teachers claim that in the matter of divine descent they are unique among the nations,

^44:1 p. 104.

^44:2 The alleged deification of the totem is latterly recognised not to take place while totemism as such subsists. It occurs only when normal totemism is disused. See Frazer, Totemism and Exogamy, 1910, iv, 5. But it is easy to see how such a development could take place. "The aborigines of the northern parts of Victoria believe that the beings who created all things had severally the form of the crow and the eagle The following legend was current on the Murray. Before the earth was inhabited by the existing race of black men, birds had possession of it. These birds had as much intelligence and wisdom as the blacks--nay, some say that they were altogether wiser and more skilful" (Mathew, Eaglehawk and Crow, 1899, p. 15).

^44:3 P. 107.

^44:4 P. 138.

^44:5 P. 194. This seems to be an adoption of the theory of Prof. Max Muller, Introd. to Science of Religion, ed, 1882, p. 143.

^45:1 P. 195.

^45:2 Introduction to Plutarch's Roman Questions, rep. of Holland's trans. 1892, pp. xviii, xxiii.

^45:3 Id. p. lvi. See Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. pp. 82-86 for a criticism of Ihne's views. Cp. A Short History of Freethought, 2nd ed. i, as to Schwegler.

^45:4 Christianity and Mythology, as cited, pp. 75, 85.

^45:5 Cp. Christianity and Mythology, as cited, pp. 78-80.

^46:1 Work cited, pp. xliii-xliv.

^46:2 Id. p. xli.

^46:3 Id. p. xxviii.

^46:4 Id, p. xlvi.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 12.

It is necessary to clear up the historic problem of ancestor-worship in order to reach a sound definition of religion. And to begin with, we find the historical evidence is all against Dr. Jevons's later thesis. Not only have we the many cases in which contemporary savages, like ancient Gnostics, think of a God as an ancestor or of the first man as a God, [*1] and the record in ancient Egypt of the process by which a deceased king became a God; [*2] but we have the relatively late doctrine in Hesiod, [*3] according to which the men of the first age became just and beneficent daimons, passing invisibly over the earth, dispensing rewards and retributions and good fortune.

There is a risk of confusion over this last conception, which, with others of a similar kind, is taken by Mr. Lang as a proof that "early men, contrary to Mr. Frazer's account, suppose themselves to be naturally immortal." [*4] Dr. Frazer's words were that, "lacking the idea of eternal duration, primitive man naturally supposes the gods to be mortal like himself." [*5] Here the verbal confusion is complete. In the very act of claiming that "far from lacking the idea of eternal duration of life, 'primitive man' has no other idea," Mr. Lang admits: "Not that he formulates his ideas in such a term as 'eternal.'" [*6] But neither does he formulate it in such a phrase as "naturally immortal"; he has, in fact, no clear idea to formulate; [*7] and Dr. Frazer of all men should have remembered as

[p. 48]

much. As we have seen, [*1] the savage commonly believes that he would never die save for the acts of hostile spirits, sorcerers, or enemies; yet he knows that all his race die.

What has happened is that men at a certain stage became capable of conceptually noting at once death and the apparent survival (in dreams) of men in some different fashion after death, without framing any theory. But chronic crises in their political or tribal history had the effect of singling out from the vague crowd of ancestral memories those of a particular group or generation who made or led some migration or conquest; and these became for a time "the" ancestors par excellence, early man being unable to construct the human past save by way of some definite beginning. At some point in the long vista he needed a "first man," or beast, or plant, or stone, or pair; and he had to make such out of some of his ancestral material, with whatever fanciful embellishments. In virtue of the same state of mind, we find tribes and even nations convinced of their special descent from one later man, who at one stage definitely ranks as a God, [*2] though another religious concept may ultimately undeify him, as in the cases of Abraham and Jacob.

As a result of all these tendencies, at a stage in which the primordial belief in the "spiritual" or occult survival of ancestors in general has begun to be definitely contradicted [*3] by the conceptual recognition of death, and by disbelief in the land beyond the grave, there emerges a vague compromise in the notion that either the first pair or the men of the first age were of a different order as regarded their liability to death; and this belief holds the ground until haply a general doctrine of resurrection or ghostly immortality pushes it in turn to the background. But though the notion of the survival of ancestors has thus in a succession of forms subsisted from a very remote period, it clearly does not follow that early men conceived themselves to be immortal in the sense in which they were later held to be so by their descendants. The definite or conceptual belief is retrospective. It is, however, sufficiently general to dispose of Mr. Lang's argument that among the Australians Gods cannot be developed from ancestors. "No ghost of a man," he insists, "can grow into a god if his name is tabooed and therefore forgotten." [*4] And again: "In Australia, where even the recent ghosts are unadored is it likely that some remote ghost is remembered as

[p. 49]

founder of the ancient mysteries?" [*1] It is after this contention that, apparently without realising the bearing of the statement upon the argument under notice, Mr. Lang triumphantly tells us that there is Australian as well as other evidence of the nearly universal vogue of the belief that the first men--i.e., ancestors--were deathless.

Obviously the very habit of tabooing proper names might conduce to the deifying of ancestors under special epithets, since that resort is always open under tabooism. [*2] The tabooing of ancestors' names, which is one of the most widespread of savage practices, [*3] can no more destroy the notion that those ancestors have existed than the tabooing of God-names among Egyptians, Babylonians, Hebrews, and Romans put the Gods in question out of recollection. [*4] Was not Yahweh scrupulously specified in many Hebrew rituals as Adonai, the Lord, and by Samaritans as Shema, the Name? [*5] It is well to ask why savages taboo the names of the dead before we deduce views as to the consequences. The reasons doubtless vary, but some instances may illuminate the practice. Among the Battaks, where a man on becoming a father of a boy, N.N., is henceforth known only as "father of N.N.," children must not utter the names of their parents, and spouses call each other "father of N.N." and "daughter of the ----," naming her family. Here the idea is that to know a man's name is to have some power over his various souls. [*6] Among the Narrinyeri of South Australia "the name of the dead must not be mentioned until his body has decayed, lest a want of sorrow should seem to be indicated by a common and flippant use of his name. A native would have the

[p. 50]

deceased believe that he cannot hear or speak his name without weeping." [*1] There is no tendency to oblivion here. In other cases, again, it is clear that when at death a man's name is "buried" he is simply re-named. Among the Masai, "should there be anything which is called by that [the deceased's] name, it is given another name which is not like that of the deceased. For instance, if an unimportant person called Ol-onana (he who is soft or weak or gentle) were to die, gentleness would not be called on-nanai in that kraal, as it is the name of a corpse, but it would be called by another name, such as epolpol (it is smooth)." [*2] If then Ol-onana were an important person, is it to be supposed that his personality would be forgotten? Would not he too be re-labelled? [*3] All dead men's names are tabooed: is it to be supposed that the personalities, or even the old names, of all are forgotten? Re-naming would be a necessity, for men as for things. Among the Narrinyeri, apparently, this would be only temporary, the original name being reverted to after the decay of the body; and even if it were not, the reminiscence would be unbroken, so that a notable man could as well be deified among name-tabooers as among tribes who had not the practice. Nor is there any force in the argument from recent disuse of such deification. Even if we admit the probability that Australian tribes have latterly [*4] ceased to deify ancestors, the fact remains that, as Mr. Lang admits, they think of remote ancestors as undying, even as they do of Gods.

Recognising, however, that the definite conception of ancestors as abnormal in point of deathlessness is retrospective, we must not on the other hand fall into the error of supposing that only in late ages, and by way of poetic retrospect, did men conceive of their deceased predecessors as exercising powers of the kind credited to whatever beings for the time answered to our general notion of "Gods." [*5] The true solution is that in men's vague ideas the early "Gods" approximated much more to themselves; and that gradually

[p. 51]

[paragraph continues] "the Gods" as such were relatively raised, the change proceeding for ages without involving the absolute negation of ancestral spirits, [*1] and, a fortiori, without necessarily removing from the order of fully-established Gods all who might have been ancestors to start with.

Indeed, there is evidence, as we have seen, that in early stages of religion the Gods were actually conceived as destructible; [*2]' and in the Vedas and Brahmanas the Gods actually acquire immortality in different ways--by the help of Agni, by drinking the Soma, by continence and austerity, thus gradually raising themselves above the Asuras, with whom they were originally equal. [*3] So in the Babylonian deluge epic Parnapishtim [*4] and his wife, who had been mortal, are raised to immortality. [*5] This conception may be a reflex of the same doctrine as first framed for mortals; but there the fact stands that the Gods were not definitely conceived as "necessarily immortal" to start with.

To see in the Hesiodic or modern-savage theory only a late or "eventual" raising of ancestors to a divine status would be to do violence to all anthropology. Rather it stands for a theological process of discrimination, by which the priesthoods of the Gods carefully reduced deified ancestors as such to a lower level of divinity, while still recognising their immortality and supernatural power. Such a process had demonstrably occurred in the Hebrew system, where the patriarchs and heroes of the Sacred Books have been actually identified as ancient Semitic deities; [*6] and it was just as likely to occur in those other developments of Semitic theology which can be shown to underlie the cosmology of Homer and Hesiod. [*7] Reasoning a priori, again, we have not the faintest ground for supposing that primeval man discriminated between orders of spirits to the extent of conceiving his ancestors as dispensing supernatural favours and yet at the same time ranking far below Gods who did the same thing. How should men conceivably begin to deify confessed mortals as beside "great" Gods,

[p. 52]

having never ventured to deify them before the Gods had been so magnified? On that line there is no solution. In the words of Professor Robertson Smith, the origins of all religion "go back to a stage of human thought in which the question of the nature of the Gods, as distinguished from other beings, did not even arise in any precise form, because no one series of existences was strictly differentiated from another." [*1] In the light of all the facts, in fine, we realise that the common process, seen among the historic Greeks, [*2] of demi-deifying a hero, was merely prevented by the presence of fully-established cults from developing just as those cults had done earlier. It of course does not follow that they had all originated in that fashion; but that the ancestor cults as it were played into the solar and vegetal cults from time immemorial is on all grounds probable.

On the other line of reasoning under notice we end in a mere counter-sense as to the definition of "ancestor." You cannot have ancestor-worship, says Dr. Jevons at one point, till you have the family. Yet he himself has just been describing the totem of the early community as an "ancestor" worshipped as a God before the family was recognised. We seem to be left with the puzzle: "When is an ancestor not an ancestor?" as the sole fruit of a chapter of investigation. If by a sudden petitio principii ancestor-worship is to be defined as strictly a private or family-cult of the kind seen in historic times, then indeed the denial of the priority of ancestor-worship is justified; and it is justified again if it be meant that hostile Gods preceded friendly ones. But in terms of Dr. Jevons's own theory of the totemistic sacrament, the ancestor-God is the type of the first friendly-God, who on this view is later than the unfriendly Gods; and the friendly-God is ancestral precisely because friendliness was apt to be associated with ancestors, [*3] who were certainly regarded as were "spirits."

The warranted inference, however, is merely that the ancestor-spirit was one of the types of friendly-God. Just as myths so-called can be seen, on a fair induction, to have originated in a dozen different modes of natural fallacy--inference from phenomena, misinterpretation of names and objects of art, constructions from analogy, misinterpretation of ritual, conjunctions of worships, and so forth [*4]--so other religious beliefs so-called are to be inferred as

[p. 53]

originating in many lines of the animistic and explanatory instinct. The God-idea is simply the most typical myth. Adapting the popular rhyme, we may reasonably say that "there are nine-and-twenty modes of making tribal Gods, and every single one of them is"--natural.

There is really no conceptual limit to the primeval faculty of God-making. The Roman pantheon alone, wherein are Gods of diseases, of drains, of sneezing, of every bodily act, and of a hundred verbal abstractions, might have warned any theorist against denying that early man might deify his ancestors; and the record of the fortunes of many cults might equally warn us against denying that any one deity might attain the highest status. Osiris, on one theory, is like Hades a God made out of the abstraction of the abode of the departed; [*1] Dionysos, like Soma, is plausibly held to be the deified abstraction of mere wine, [*2] sacramentally regarded, as Agni is certainly the deified abstraction of the sacrificial fire; and Hathor, who ran Isis hard in divine honours in Egypt, is in origin simply Hat-Hor, the dwelling of Horus, to wit, the Dawn and the Sunset; [*3] as Venus is possibly a Roman deification of the term Benoth in the Carthaginian phrase Succoth Benoth, [*4] the tents of prostitution. The Gods and Goddesses, in fact, are made out of man's needs and passions, his fancies and his blunders, his fears and his hopes; and it would be strange if he never made them, even the highest of them, from the nucleus of his reverent and affectionate retrospect on his own kind. Round his elders and his ancestors were formed his first and fundamental notions of right and duty and obedience. How then should he fail to bring at times his religious and his primary ethical ideals into combination?

Von Ihering indeed has argued that the offerings at the graves of the dead--at least among Aryans--are the products not of love, as commonly supposed, but of fear. [*5] It is characteristic of the mode of progression of the sciences that nobody appears to suppose they might be both, some people fearing the dead, some loving them. [*6]

[p. 54]

[paragraph continues] But even supposing them to have originated in fear of the importunities of the neglected ghost, it would not be unnatural that from the propitiated ghost there should be expected special favour. Doubtless the principle operated differently in different stages. The thesis of Fustel de Coulanges, that "what unites the members of the ancient family is the religion of the hearth and of ancestors," and that "the ancient family......is a religious rather than a natural association," [*1] may be perfectly true (under his own reservation that religion of course did not create the family); and it would follow that ancestor-worship took on special features from the time that the family dwelt by or over the family tomb. But this does not dispose of the problem as to the religion of the nomads who have no fixed hearth and tomb, [*2] and of the peoples who either burned or exposed their dead.

Taking the nomadic period in general, and assuming [*3] that the horde preceded the family in order of evolution, we must admit that there were ideas of "ghosts" and other quasi-human "spirits" before the strict family-ancestor was evolved. But there is nothing to show that the idea of a general ancestor or ancestors was not elaborated in the horde-period, out of the normal idea of the ancestor-ghost as well as out of the idea of the non-ancestral spirit, those ideas being easily able to coalesce. A horde was likely to have a horde-ancestor-God; else why should the Greeks be found speaking of their family Gods, Gods of their blood, paternal Gods, gentile Gods? [*4] If the theos were previously conceived solely as a stupendous cosmocrator, how (once more) came men to make theoi of the household? If on the other hand the family and the tribe were roughly coeval, and the notion of a family-ancestor be about as old as the notion of a tribe-ancestor or First Man, we are still left facing ancestor-worship as one of the norms of the cult of a friendly-God. Even in the Aryan horde elders would make themselves respected, and lost fathers and mothers would be missed; and there was no way in which early man could conceive of a providential or punitive deity save in terms of the punitive and providential practices of elders towards juniors, or of chiefs or patriarchs towards groups; or in terms of the action of hostile groups or persons.

[p. 55]

[paragraph continues] That the abstraction of divine judges and lawgivers and avengers, thus reached, should be employed to sanction the codes or customs of the seniors or the patriarchs, was psychologically a matter of course; but that does not affect the fact of the a posteriori origination.

Footnotes

^47:1 See Kranz, Natur- and Kulturleben der Zulus, 1880, pp. 109-110; Paul Wurm, Handbuch der Religionsgeschichte, 1908, p. 41; Tylor, Primitive Culture, 3rd ed. ii, 311-15; Turner, Samoa a Hundred Years Ago, 1884, pp. 288-9, 318, 345; and J. G. Muller, Amerikanische Urreligionen, 2te Aufl. pp. 133-136. Cp., however, p. 73. And see above, pp. <page 40>-1, and below, p. <page 48>.

^47:2 The argument does not require specification of such a process, but reference may be made to an ancient form of the Book of the Dead (cit. by Budge, Introd. p. cxiv, from the text of Unas; cp. Wiedemann, Religion of the Ancient Egyptians, Eng. trans. 1897, p. 303; Erman, Handbook of Egyptian Religion, Eng. trans. pp. 90-91), where it is told how the deceased king Unas as a soul in the form of a god devours his fathers and mothers and mankind generally and gods. He hunts and entraps the gods in the plains of the next world," and kills, cooks, and eats them. "He eats the hearts carefully so that he may absorb the vital powers of the gods," etc. Wiedemann puts a certain strain on our ideas of definition, as well as on our sense of humour, in calling such conceptions "these Pantheistic views," This text, which dates from B.C. 3333, chances to preserve for us a much earlier conception of deification. But Dr. Frazer notes further that an ancient king often was as such ranked as an actual God, as are many savage kings in our own day. (Golden Bough, i, 8, 130, 141, 145, etc.) So also with the early Hebrew judges.

^47:3 Works and Days, 121, 299. See Mariner, Tonga Islands, 3rd ed. ii, 103-4, 108-9; and compare the similar doctrine among the Khonds, given in Macpherson's Memorials of Service in India, p. 86; and cit. in note on p. 90 as to ancestral Gods in New Zealand. Among the early Aryan Hindus "the Fathers" were separately created, and are thus distinct from men; but are of different degrees of divinity. Muir, Sanskrit Texts, v, 287, 310.

^47:4 Magic and Religion, p. 85.

^47:5 G. B. ii, 1.

^47:6 Last cit. p. 86.

^47:7 Thus in Gen. ii, 17, it is vaguely implied that man was "naturally immortal," and the whole myth is an attempt to account for the origin of death; yet in iii, 22, it is implied that only by eating of the tree of life could man live for ever."

^48:1 Above, pp. 1-2.

^48:2 Cp. Waitz, Anthropologie der Naturvolker, iii, 183; Dobrizhoffer, Account of the Abipones, Eng. tr. 1821, ii, 64, 89; above, pp. 40-41.

^48:3 The contradictory beliefs, it must be remembered survive side by side or at different levels of culture for an indefinite time.

^48:4 Magic and Religion, p. 70.

^49:1 Id. p. 31.

^49:2 Cp. Clodd, Tom Tit Tot, p. 125 sq., and Frazer, G. B. i, 403-447, for a full view of taboos of names, which often apply to the living as well as to the dead, and therefore do not mean oblivion. "The Abipones think it a sin to utter their own names" (Dobrizhoffer, Account of the Abipones, as cited, ii, p. 444). Mr. Lang (Magic and Religion, p. 56) overlooks this, taking it for granted that when a dead man's proper name is tabooed he is forgotten. Among the Native Americans, the slayer of the victim in certain human sacrifices received a new name by way of honour. Lafitau, Early History of Mankind, 1724, ii, 303-4. Similar usages were noted by Dobrizhoffer among the Abipones (work cited, ii, p. 445). Other motives than "honour," of course, may have operated in such cases. Among the Abipones all the friends and relatives of the deceased change their names (Dobrizhoffer, ii, D. 274). Among the Bataks a father changes his name when a son is born to him, and becomes henceforth "father of N.N." (Warneck, Die Religion der Batak, 1909, p. 124).

^49:3 Cp. Waitz, Anthropologie der Naturvolker, iii, 334; Tylor, Early History of Mankind, 1865, 139-143; Lafitau, Moeurs des sauvages ameriquains, as cited, ii, 434; Dobrizhoffer, Account of the Abipones, as cited, ii, 273, 444-5; A. C. Hollis, The Masai, 1905, pp. 304-5; A. F. Calvert, The Aborigines of Western Australia, 1894, p. 20; Sir H. Johnston, The Uganda Protectorate, 1902, ii, 826; Cunningham, Uganda and its Peoples, 1905, p. 14, F. W. Christian, The Caroline Islands, 1899, p. 74; Warneck, as cited; Clodd, Tom Tit Tot, p. 164 sq.

^49:4 Cp. Clodd, Tom Tit Tot, p. 173 sq.

^49:5 Originally the Jews also read "ha-Shem" (J. W. Nutt, Fragments of a Samaritan Targum, 1874, Introd. pp. 38-39, ref. to Geiger, Urschrift, 262; Nicolas, Des Doctrines Samaritan religieuses des Juifs, 1860, p. 167). It is possible that the Jews dropped the word Shem because that was known to be the name of a distinct God, once worshipped in Samaria. where however the Yahwists retained it for purposes of syncretism.

^49:6 Warneck, Die Religion der Batak, 1909, p. 124. Cp. Clodd, as before cited.

^50:1 The Narrinyeri: An Account of the tribes of South Australian Aborigines, by the Rev. George Taplin, 2nd ed. Adelaide, 1878, p. 19.

^50:2 Hollis, The Masai, 1905, pp. 304-5. Among the Samoans, similarly, objects with names resembling those of Gods were often re-named. Turner, Samoa a Hundred Years Ago, 1884, pp. 33, 60.

^50:3 It is told of the Malagasy that they hold it a crime to mention the dead "by the names they had when living." Spencer, Principles of Sociology, i, 274 (1 144), citing Drury. This leaves open a fresh naming.

^50:4 Mr. Lang supposes (Magic and Religion, p. 227) that "the Zulus once had an idea of a creative being; that they reduced him......to a first man; that they neglected him in favour of serviceable ghosts; and that they now think him extinct; like the ghosts themselves when they cease to be serviceable."

^50:5 M. Girard, anticipating Dr. Jevons, speaks of the Hesiodic doctrine as "a sort of apotheosis which raises the first men to the rank of intermediaries between the earth and the Supreme God" (Le sentiment religieux en Grece, 1869, p. 222). If it be implied that never before were men conceived as beneficent daimons, the assumption is illicit. Even if that doctrine came as a novelty to some recipients, the greater antiquity of the notion is anthropologically certain.

^51:1 Compare the universal worship of ancestors in China, and the Roman worship of Lares and Manes.

^51:2 "Dem altesten glauben [of the Greeks] ist die Anschauung, dass die Gotter sterben, ganz gelaufig (E. Meyer, Geschichte des Alterthums, ii, 100).

^51:3 Muir, Sanskrit Texts, 3rd ed. v, 14-15, 266, 316, etc.

^51:4 "Offspring of life." The name is otherwise read Sitnapishtim, and again Shamsnapishta, "The sun of life, and um napishtum, "the day of life."

^51:5 Jastrow, p. 505.

^51:6 See Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. pp. 99-102, 107-8, 306, 309, 325, 370. Cp. Jer. ii 27, where the Jews are described as calling their idols their ancestors. And see Winckler Geschichte Israels, ii, 20-49, 56-60, 70, 75-77, as to the originally divine status of Abraham and Isaac, Jacob and Joseph.

^51:7 Cp. Sayce, Hibbert Lectures, pp. 371-391; Ancient Empires of the East, pp. 157-8; Die Griechische Culte and Mythen, 1887, pp. 165, 577, 587, 589, 593; F. A. Paley, The Epics of Hesiod, 1883, Introd. pp. xvi-xvii; W. Christ, Gesch. der griech. Literatur, 1889, p. 94 and notes; E. Meyer, Geschichte de Alterthums, ii,  section 117.

^52:1 Religion of the Semites, p. 88. Cp. Frazer, G. B. i, 129-130, etc.; Tylor, Primitive Culture, 3rd ed. i, 428-436; Spencer, Principles of Sociology, vol. i, chs. viii, xvi.

^52:2 Cp. Girard, Le Sentiment religieux en Grece, d'Homere a Eschyle, 1869, pp. 227-240.

^52:3 There is, however, abundant evidence as to fear of ancestral spirits among savage,;.

^52:4 See Christianity and Mythology, pp. 21, 28 sq., 32 sq., 68, 79 sq., 107. 121-2, 126, 136, and Part III, passim.

^53:1 Lang, Myth, Ritual, and Religion, 2nd. ed. ii. 146, citing Lefebure, Osiris, p. 129.

^53:2 Spencer, Principles of Sociology, vol. i, ch. xxxii, on plant-worship; Muir, Sanskrit Texts, v, sect. xvi. But cp. Lang, as last cited, ii, 242. Latterly, Miss Harrison has convincingly shown that Dionysos is primarily a beer-God, four of his most obscure epithets being soluble as names of kinds of grain from which beer is made. The wine-idea is later. Proleg. to Greek Relig., 2nd. ed. pp. 413-425.

^53:3 Le Page Renouf, Hibbert Lectures, pref. p. ix, 2nd ed.

^53:4 Selden, De Diis Syris, Syntag. ii c. 7. Cp. Preller, Romishe Mythologie, pp. 382-5 as to the Phoenician connections of the cult.

^53:5 Evolution of the Aryan--Eng. trans. of Vorgeschichte der Europaer--p. 38.

^53:6 Von Ihering (p. 36) has a doctrine, inconsistent with his general principles of racial determination (pp, 70-73), that early Aryans were devoid of all save conjugal family and that (teste the Fifth Commandment) Semites were particularly filial (p. 34). The latter view is no doubt broadly true; but Roman law is tolerably strong on the patria potestas, and rebellions of sons against fathers have always been familiar in the Semitic [p. 54] States, despite the standing precept. On the other hand, female infanticide, which Von Ihering seems to hold specially Aryan, was prevalent among the Arabs before Mohammed. The myth of the dethronement of Uranus, again, which Von Ihering cites against the Aryans (p. 33), is probably Semitic in origin. Finally, it is clear that the highly filial Chinese originally sacrificed abundantly at their parents' graves. Was that from love or from fear?

^54:1 La Cite Antique, pp. 40-41 (ed. Sieme).

^54:2 Fustel de Coulanges of course recognised that there were such nomads (pp. 62, 66), though Von Ihering (p. 47) seems to suppose that he did not.

^54:3 This is not asserted as an established fact.

^54:4 Refs. in Fustel de Coulanges, p. 37.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 13.

Tribal ethic, then, would progressively mould tribal religion and be moulded by it--that is to say, a moral step enforced by political circumstances would be reflected more or less clearly in religion, as in the case of the blood covenant with the God, or in the reduction of the pantheon to monarchic or familial order; while on the other hand the established ethical view of the God would prime the ethical view of the political system. It was not that man was primarily, as it were, incapable of moral ideas as such, or that his notion of mutual duty could arise only, as Dr. Jevons seems to suppose, in the sheath of the idea of taboo. Thus to credit men's ethic wholly to their religion, while claiming for their religion a separate root in a separate order of consciousness, is merely to beg the question in the interests of occultism. What happened was a habitual interaction of the norms of conduct. Theism would help the king; and monarchy would help theism. The outcome was that the entire ethic of the community had as it were a religious shape, [*1] from which rational criticism could only gradually deliver it. When, then, religious reformers arose whose end and aim was the moral life, they would carry into their ethic the psychology of their religion, were it only because that had been the matrix, so to speak, of the most serious reflection--this even if they did not state their moral doctrine in terms of a recasting of the current religious belief. For Dr. Jevons, such a recasting would be irreligious unless the reformer professed to have direct intercourse with deity; [*2] but we have seen that line of distinction to be untenable, and we cannot consistently deny either religious spirit or religious form to the argument: "God must be good: how then could he have ordained a cruelty or an injustice?"

Inasmuch, however, as all such reforms of morals took effect in modifying the current code for action, the very conception of such a code is historically a religious growth; [*3] and while the concept of public law would quite early differentiate from that of morality as

[p. 56]

standing for What-is compared with What-ought-to-be, the idea of a code which had a superior moral authority as coming from a God through a Good Teacher remains so nearly homogeneous with that of a code framed by a new Teaching-God or a Good Teacher that they have far more in common than of incompatible. The essential structural continuity rests on the conception of spiritual authority, of "religious" obedience. Where that is present, the religious temper is substantially conserved even if the cosmological premisses of religion are disregarded or dismissed. Thus it is that such a system as that of Buddhism is not merely a posteriori but a priori to be regarded as a religion. To refuse so to regard it is once more to embrace the anomaly of the decision that what serves for religion to half the human race is non-religion.

Where ethics decisively diverges from the religious norm is the point at which it is freed from the concept of external authority. This point, indeed, is slow to become clear; and Kant, who is definitely anti-religious in his repudiation of all forms of ritual of propitiation, but finds his moral authority in a transcendental imperative, is still partly on the religious plane. Fichte, who brushed aside Kant's identification of religion with ethic, and insisted that religion is knowledge in the sense of philosophy--Fichte will be pronounced by others than Dr. Jevons to be nonreligious as regards his ethic, though he is still religious in respect of his pantheism. It is only when both are divested of apriorism that religion is done with. Then, though some may still claim to apply to their independent philosophy of life the name of religion, on the score that it is at least as seriously framed and held as ever a religion was, the anthropologist may reasonably grant that a real force of differentiation has emerged. When every man consciously shapes his own "religion" out of his conceptions of social utility, the term is of no descriptive value; and when many do so and many more still cleave to religious cosmology and to the ethic of specified authority, the description as applied to the former is misleading. In any case, it is a historical fact that only slowly do ethical schools lose the religious cast. Jurare in verba magistri is their note in all save vigorously progressive periods; and the philosophical schools of the Middle Ages all strike it. That those of to-day have wholly abandoned it, perhaps few would considerately assert; but it is at least obvious that it belongs as essentially to Buddhism as to Christianity, whether or not the individual Buddhist accepts, as most do, a mass of religious beliefs alien to the alleged doctrine of the Master.

Footnotes

^55:1 Cp. Exodus xv, 16-23; Deut. i, 17.

^55:2 Cp. p. 24.

^55:3 Cp. Exod. and Deut. as above cited; Ex. xxi, 6; xxii, 8, Heb.; Kuenen, The Hexateuch, Eng. tr. p, 272. Tiele, Egypt. Relig. Eng. tr. pp. 73, 93; Hist. comparee, p. 247; Letourneau, Sociology: Eng. tr.  iv, c. viii, p. 345.; Maine, Ancient Law, pp. 4-5; Pulszky, Theory of Law and Civil Society,  section 38; Sayce, Hibbert Lectures, p. 368; Oettli, Das Gesetz Hammurabis und die Thora Israels, 1903, p. 84. And see below, Part II, ch. ii,  section 1.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 57]

  

 section 14.

We may now circumspectly sum up the constructive argument, and in so doing we arrive at an inductive definition of religion.

1. Religion consists primarily in a surmise or conception, reached by way of simple animism, of the causation and control of Nature (including human life) in terms of inferred quasi-human personalities, whether or not defined as extra-Natural. On the belief proceed certain practices. Beginning on the side of fear, it necessarily expands in time, with the rise of culture, to the side of gratitude; and it expresses itself accordingly. But its magical or strategical and its simply precatory or propitiatory forms proceed on the same premisses, and are in origin contemporary and correlative, being respectively the expression of the more and the less self-confident sides of men's nature [*1] in the state of ignorance.

2. The primary surmise or conception involves itself in a multitude of beliefs, of which one of the most significant is that of kinship between animal and man (making possible a religious development of totemism), and the animal descent of the latter. From animism in general and this belief in particular comes an endless diversity of mythic narratives, all of which must be regarded as part of religion.

3. On the basis of animism, and of primitive inference of causation in all coincidence, arise a multitude of special practices, as taboo, which are first and last religious, being invariably bound up with the religious ideas aforesaid.

4. In virtue of the inevitable correlation of moral with cosmological thought in early man through animism, religion thus becomes secondarily a rule for the human control of human life; and it remains structurally recognisable on this side when the primary aspect has partly faded away.

5. Alike when such a rule for life is ascribed to a mythical founder--whether God or demigod or supernormal man--or to a historical personage credited only with moral genius, the special sanctity or authority ascribed to his code partakes of the nature of religion. Thus the religious element in Positivism consists as much in the reverence given to the founder as in the elements of his teaching. [There is a varying measure of a common religious element in the kind of honour paid to Zoroaster, Buddha, Moses, Jesus, the Hebrew prophets, Apollonius of Tyana, Paul, Saint Augustine, Saint Francis, Luther, Calvin, Arminius, Jansen, Glas,

[p. 58]

[paragraph continues] Sandeman, Muggleton, Auguste Comte, Mrs. Eddy, and Madame Blavatsky.]

6. Philosophic, scientific, and ethical thought may be defined as specifically non-religious when, but not before, they have abandoned or repudiated the cosmological premisses of religion, found their guiding principle in tested induction, and, in the case of ethics, ceased to found the rule of life on either alleged supernatural revelation or the authority of an alleged supernormal or specially gifted teacher.

7. Even after conceptual thought has thus repudiated religion, however, what is termed "cosmic emotion" remains in the psychic line of religion.

 

In fine, religion is the sum (a) of men's ideas of their relation to the imagined forces of the cosmos; (b) of their relation to each other as determined by their views of that, or by teachers who authoritatively recast those views; and (c) of the practices set up by those ideas.

Under this definition there is room for every religion ever historically so-called, [*1] from fetishism to pantheism, and from Buddhism to Comtism, without implicit negation of any claim made for any one religion to any moral attribute, save of course that of objective truth or credibility.

Footnotes

^57:1 The point is not one to be settled by authority, but for a competent affirmation of this view see G. Roskoff, Das Religionswesen der rohesten Naturvolker, 1880, p. 144.

^58:1 None of the current definitions, I think, is thus inclusive. Cp. the many cited by Chantepie de la Saussaye, Manual of the Science of Religion, Eng. tr. pp. 56-58, and those discussed in Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. pp. 42 sq., 70 sq., 74 sq. That proposed by M. Salomon Reinach: "A body (ensemble) of scruples which put obstacles to the free exercise of our faculties" (Orpheus, 6e. edit. p. 4), is obviously defective. As M. Reinach goes on to avow, he has in view only a particular kind of scruples--to wit, taboos. But this delimitation of religion, like that of Dr. Frazer, excludes the main body of credences and myths. One of the most symmetrical is that of Professor A. Reville:--"La religion est la determination de la vie humaine par le sentiment d'un lien unissant l'esprit humain a l'esprit mysterieux dont il reconnait la domination sur le monde et sur lui-meme, et auquel il aime a se sentir uni" (Prolegomenes, p. 34). But this is finally marked by theological particularism, and is thus not truly inductive. Constant's was more objective:--"Nous avons defini le sentiment religieux, le besoin que l'homme eprouve de se mettre en communication avec la nature qui l'entoure, et les forces inconnues qui lui semblent animer cette nature" (La Religion, 1824, i, pt. ii, p. 1). But Constant extends his definition in practice to simple cosmic emotion. Citing from Byron's Island the passage beginning

"How often we forget all time, when lone,"

he writes: "On nous assure que certains hommes accusent Lord Byron d'atheisme et d'impiete. Il y a plus de religion dans ces douze vers que dans les ecrits passes, presents et futurs de tous ces denonciateurs mis ensemble" (pt. i, pp. 106-7).

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 59]

  

CHAPTER II.

  

COMPARISON AND APPRAISEMENT OF RELIGIONS

  

 section 1. Early Forces of Reform.

THE main obstacle to a "science of religion," naturally, is the survival either of simple belief in a given religion or of sociological predilections set up by such a belief; and we have seen how a scholarly treatise may still be affected by one or the other. That a learned and thoughtful "Introduction to the History of Religion" should treat the whole vast drama of religious development up till the period of the Roman Empire as "the propaideutic of the world to Christ" [*1] is perhaps not to be wondered at in view of English culture-conditions in general; but it is none the less unfortunate. A view of the history of religion which merely ignores or discredits on the one hand the entire religious life of the non-Christian world, and on the other the entire monotheistic or unitarian evolution in the Christian world, cannot meet the needs of scientific thought. The perorational statement that "of all the great religions of the world it is the Christian Church alone which is so far heir of all the ages as to fulfil the dumb, dim expectation of mankind," is but a sectarian shibboleth; and the claim, "In it alone the sacramental meal commemorates by ordinance of its founder the divine sacrifice which is a propitiation for the sins of all mankind," is an all-too-simple solution of the historic problem. We are being treated merely to a new adjustment of "Christian Evidence."

On the side of science, again, there is certainly a danger that the necessary effort to eliminate partisanship and predilection may somewhat sway the balances. Dr. Jevons justly argues [*2] that religion is no more to be conceived or classified in terms of primeval superstition than science is to be classified in terms of primeval animism and magic. But the very tactic of his own treatise, aiming as it does at certificating one set of developments on behalf of the special apparatus of the Christian Church, is a hindrance to the recognition of religion as an aspect of the process of civilisation. In terms of the analogy with science, religion ought to be to-day at a far higher level than it was in ancient Syria, or in the Graeco-Roman

[p. 60]

decadence. But here the special-pleader reverts to the Newmanian thesis of "special genius," arbitrarily placing the highest genius for religion in antiquity, and implying (apparently) that whatever genius there has been since is joyfully subservient to that.

Now, genius is certainly a factor in every line of mental evolution, in the sense that all marked mental capacity is a "variation"; and insofar as religions have been moralised or rationalised, genius for righteousness or for reason has clearly been at work. But just as certain as the fact of genius is the fact that it is in large part wasted; and we shall utterly misread the history of mankind if we conceive the "religious consciousness" as readily susceptible of impulses from the moral or rational genius of the gifted few. [*1] On the contrary, nothing is harder than even the partial imposition of the higher view on the religious multitude; and this precisely because the crowd supposes (with the countenance of Dr. Jevons) that it has "inner consciousness" of the veracity of its congenital beliefs. King Akhunaton of Egypt, presumably, had such consciousness of the truth of his monotheism; but even his autocratic power failed to annul the inner consciousness of the polytheists around him, or, for that matter, the "direct consciousness" of the priests that their bread was buttered on the polytheistic side. [*2]

There is, I think, no known case in history of a "going" priesthood reforming its own cult, in the sense of willingly making an important change on moral lines. There is indeed abundant reason to credit priesthoods with the alteration of the rule under which the priest himself was the primary subject for sacrifice; [*3] but the change consisted solely in laying the burden upon others. Apart from the presumptive changes of view set up in Israel during the exile, it seems to have been always by kings (or queens or heroes [*4]) that human sacrifices were suppressed in antiquity, never by the choice of priesthoods. [*5] Thus King Eurypylus is associated with the abolition of the human sacrifice to Artemis Triclaria; [*6] Cecrops with the substitution of cakes for living victims to Zeus Lycaeus; [*7]

[p. 61]

[paragraph continues] Iphicrates [*1] and Gelon [*2] with the attempted stoppage of human sacrifices at Carthage; King Diphilus with its cessation at Cyprus; Amosis with its abrogation at Heliopolis in Egypt. [*3] In the ancient history of Japan, it is an Emperor who, about the beginning of the Christian era, recoils from the practice of burying servitors alive at the funeral of a prince; and it is on his appeal that one of his ministers hits on the device of substituting clay images. [*4] Among the Samoans one legend ran that the human sacrifices to the Sun, which were destroying the race, were put an end to by the lady Ui giving herself up and being accepted by the pacified Sun as his bride; while another version makes Ui the daughter of the King of Manu'a, who gave up his daughter as a final sacrifice, and then abolished the practice. [*5] In another case a Tongan queen, named Manu, saved alive a number of those destined for her husband's cannibal feasts; and in yet another a cannibal God--presumably the priest or incarnation of a higher deity--is destroyed by the action of a daring youth. [*6] The powerful King Finow of Tonga, again, showed a disposition to check some forms of human sacrifice; [*7] and King Gezo of Dahome is credited with "materially reducing the number of human sacrifices throughout his kingdom" [*8] during his lifetime. King Gelele, again, promising that "by and by, little by little, much may be done" in the way of curtailing the sacrifices, declared: "If I were to give up this custom at once, my head would be taken off to-morrow." [*9] Such was the power of the priests. Similarly the abolition of human sacrifices in ancient China was effected only by the action of humane princes; and the attempt in earlier times seems to have involved insurrection and desperate war. [*10]

Elsewhere such attempts are known to have failed, and the work of King Gezo of Dahome was undone after him. "The

[p. 62]

fetisheer is all-powerful in Dahome. The last monarch was notably desirous of modifying the horrors and the expenses of the national worship: his son has been compelled to walk in the old path of blood." [*1] The strongest characteristic of priesthoods is their conservatism; and though moral and religious innovators have arisen among them, practical moral reforms have always to be forced on them from the outside. [*2] Where a powerful king resists them from humane motives, even if he put them down by force for the time, he is not unlikely to be the victim in the end. [*3] Where substitutes have been made for human sacrifices among "nature-folk" without governmental pressure, as apparently among the Malays and some tribes in India, there is no priesthood to speak of; and these simple people have silently attained what passes for a great "reform" where "religious history" is concerned. [*4]

For every man of moral genius, probably, who has been able to modify for the better the form or course of an organised religion, there have been ten who were slain or silenced by its organisation. Indeed, if we reckon solely the ostensible historical cases of fortunate innovation on the direct appeal of genius, the balance is immeasurably the other way. What is more, the economic and social conditions in antiquity were such that the man who succeeded even indirectly in modifying a cult or creed for the better did so by some measure of fraud. Dr. Jevons, as we have seen, lightly decides that such reformers "have usually considered themselves......to be speaking, not their own words or thoughts, but those of their God." If they did, be it said once more, they would only be feeling as did the common run of early priests in their normal procedure. The full significance of the case will come out much better if we say that reformers found they stood the best chance of a hearing when they professed to be speaking the words of the God. What this meant in the way of demoralisation it is depressing to surmise.

It is indeed customary of late to substitute for the exaggerated notion of "pagan" priestcraft that used to be held by most Christians and by some freethinkers the much more arbitrary notion of an absolute rectitude in the pristine "religious consciousness"; but critical science can accept no such fantasy. There are

[p. 63]

evidences of conscious fraud on the surface of the most primitive-looking cults known to us; [*1] the majority of travellers unhesitatingly impute fraud to the magicians and priests of savage tribes; and while there is reason to believe that early man and savage man have a less clear sense than we of the difference between truth and falsehood (in this respect partly approximating to the child-mind), there is really no reason for supposing them less capable of resort to wilful deception. On the contrary, they seem in religious matters to have been more prompt at fabrication, in the ratio of the greater credulity they met with. Unless, then, we proceed with Dr. Jevons to make gratuitous exceptions in favour of all cases on the line of evolution of our own creed, we must conclude that the ancient conditions often, if not always, drove reformers to make-believe.

Footnotes

^59:1 Work cited, Index, s.v. Sacrifice, end. Cp. p. 415.

^59:2 Work cited, p. 9.

^60:1 Dr. Jevons, to be sure, has denied that the religious process is either moral or rational; but here we must try to save his thesis from himself. Otherwise it becomes a mere disguised assertion that all religious truth is revealed, that genius consists in getting the revelation, and that beliefs otherwise got are either not true or not religious. Of such a doctrine there can be no historical discussion.

^60:2 Cp. Tiele, Egyptian Religion, pp. 23, 179-185; Maspero, Hist. ancienne des peuples de l'orient, 4e edit. pp. 53-54, 285-6; Diodorus Siculus, i, 73.

^60:3 Cp. Adolf Bastian, Der Mensch in der Geschichte, 1860, iii, 114; Frazer, Golden Bough, ch. i,  section 1; ch. iii,  section 1; Lectures on the Early History of the Kingship, p. 291; Jevons. Introd. to Hist. of Relig., pp. 281-296.

^60:4 Dr. Frazer gives a list of hero-stories in his note on Pausanias in his edition, ix, 26, 7.

^60:5 Cp. Bastian, as cited, iii, 109.

^60:6 Pausanias, vii, 19.

^60:7 Id. viii, 2.

^61:1 Porphyry, De Abstinentia, ii, 56.

^61:2 Plutarch, Regum et imper. apophtheg., Gelon, i.

^61:3 Porphyry, last cit. ii, 55.

^61:4 J. Murdoch, A History of Japan, 1910, i, 69.

^61:5 Turner, Samoa a Hundred Years Ago, 1884, pp. 201-2.

^61:6 Id. pp. 236-8.

^61:7 Mariner, Tonga Islands, 1827, ii, 178.

^61:8 Sir A. B. Ellis, The Ewe-speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast, 1890, pp. 128, 136.

^61:9 Burton, A Mission to Gelele, 1864, ii, 359.

^61:10 Cp. Kurz, Memoire sur l'etat politique et religieux de la Chine 2300 ans avant notre ere, from Nouveau Journal Asiatique, 1830 (7), pp. 74-82; and Miss Simcox, Primitive Civilisations, ii, 36-37. Terrien de la Couperie pronounces all human sacrifices in ancient China to have been introduced under alien influence (Western Origin of the Early Chinese Civilisation, 1894, pp, 134,.362-3, citing in support Edkins, Church Review, xvi., 339; xix, 55-6). The practice of siun--the voluntary submission of servants to be buried alive in grave of their masters--he represents to have begun 678 B.C. in the west State of Ts'in, "undoubtedly under Tartar influence," and to have been common in the fourth century, but to have ceased after 210 B.C., when it had been made compulsory at the funeral of She Hwang Ti. Thereafter wooden figures were buried in the graves as surrogates, as in Japan. M. La Couperie, however, appears to accept simple suttee as indigenous; and it is hard to see how the purely alien character of either siun or human sacrifice proper can be established for all China (pp. 133-8). He notes that the drowning of girls, as brides for the River God, was suppressed in Wei after 424 by a new Governor, but survived elsewhere. (Pp. 90, 359.)

^62:1 Burton, A Mission to Gelele, 1864, ii, 149. "To abolish human sacrifice here," says Burton in another passage, "is to abolish Dahome. The practice originates from filial piety; it is sanctioned by long use and custom; and it is strenuously upheld by a powerful and interested priesthood." (Id. ii, 26.)

^62:2 See below, Part IV,  section 5, as to the similar rule in the lower civilisations of Polynesia, and in ancient Mexico.

^62:3 See the case of King Mesi of Porto Novo, narrated by Sir A. B. Ellis, The Ewe-Speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast, 1890, p. 145; and cp. B. Thomson, The Fijians, 1909, introd. p. xi.

^62:4 The legend of the saving of Sunahsepa, offered for a sacrifice on behalf of King Harischandra (R. W. Frazer, Lit. Hist. of India, pp. 87-89), is obscure.

^63:1 Cp. the author's Short History of Freethought, 2nd ed. i, 27.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 2. Reform as a Religious Process.

The case may become clearer if we look for illustration to the phenomena of fictitious literature. It will hardly be suggested that the Semites and Greeks who wrote religious treatises or hymns and ascribed them to famous men of centuries before, were under a hallucination as to the source of their thoughts. They did but seek for them the passport of a name that challenged respect. Precisely, then, as the "prophetic" writer put his words in the mouth of a dead prophet (a common way of aiming at reforms), making him say, "Thus saith the Lord," so in many cases at least the living prophet must have been perfectly conscious that his spoken words were "not the Lord's, but his own." In fact, the saner the prophet, and the saner his counsel, the more likely was he to know how he came by it; though his feeling that he was on the side of the God would greatly relieve his scruples about professing to be the God's mouthpiece. The man who, on the other hand, was so far beside himself as to suppose that Omnipotence was speaking through him, was much less likely to have wise counsels to give. In any case, crazed or prudent, right or wrong, all alike ran the risk of being denounced by the others as "false prophets," [*2] and stoned accordingly. Thus reform was a matter either of persuading kings or of managing fellow-priests and fellow-worshippers; and genius for management would be fully as important as genius for righteousness.

In the case, for instance, of a substitution of animal for human sacrifices, or of dough-dolls for sacrificial animals or men or children,

[p. 64]

the reformer of a priest-ruled cult had to play at once upon the credulity and the self-interest of the worshippers. It is clear from the Hebrew books that for the early Hebrews as for the Phoenicians the first-born of man as well as of animals was at one time a customary sacrifice; [*1] and the myth of Abraham and Isaac confesses the fact in the act of supplying a pretext for a change. In the story of the sacrifice of Jephthah's daughter, again, it is evident that human sacrifice must once have been normal to permit of the idea of the application of the vow to a human being; and the declaration that a special annual mourning was set up for the alleged tragedy of mischance is an ethical fiction. In all likelihood the ground of it was an annual sacrifice of a maiden, which was transmuted into an act of lamentation for one traditionally sacrificed. So with the obvious fiction of Joshua's imprecating on the rebuilder of Jericho the curse of slaying his sons for the foundations: [*2] the practice had clearly been normal, and the representing of it as a foredoomed horror is a late invention. And no less clear is it, from the story of the sacrifice of a virgin imposed by the Delphic Oracle on the Messenians in their war with the Spartans, [*3] that the practice, wherever it originated, was religiously established among the early Greeks.

Such story-telling as that of the Isaac myth, and that of the suicide of the despairing Aristodemus, convinced that he had slain his daughter in vain, [*4] was the natural device [*5] of the humane reformer, who was much more likely to be relatively a rationalist than to be abnormally subject to religious ecstasies or trances. Mohammed is indeed a case to the contrary, he being credited with opposing the practice of female infanticide; but the very fact that in the Koran no tale is framed to carry the point is a confirmation of our view. In an old cult, a bald command to forego or reverse an established rite would be bewildering to the worshippers, whereas a myth describing a process of commutation would find easy acceptance where such a commutation was already agreeable to normal feeling.

Normal feeling, on the other hand, was often the matrix of the

[p. 65]

reformative idea. There was a natural tendency to relax human sacrifices in times of prosperity unless a zealous priesthood insisted on them; [*1] and a long period of prosperity would make men loth to shed the blood of their own children. Thus either the political accident of a prolonged peace or the opening of a new era of government was the probable condition of the effectual arrest of child-sacrifice among the Hebrews; and the myth of Abraham and Isaac and the ram was in all likelihood framed at such a time. Its inclusion in a sacred book was some security against such a reversion to child-sacrifice as we know to have occurred among the Carthaginians in times of great distress or danger, after periods in which it was disused. [*2] The same tendency is implied in the story--whether true or false--of a cannibal sacrament among the members of the conspiracy of Catiline. [*3] Nations, like men, are apt to be driven to worse courses by terror and disaster; [*4] and it is not only conceivable but probable that the Hebrews made their main steps towards religious betterment when they were temporarily razed from the list of the nations and set to cultivate their religious consciousness in a captivity which withheld them from political vicissitude without reducing them to slavery. [*5]

For the explanation of religious evolution, then, we must look not so much to genius for right thought as to genius for hitting the common taste or for outmanoeuvring rival cults. By far the clearest case of cult- or creed-shaping by a single genius is that of Mohammed; [*6]

[p. 66]

and here, to the historical eye, it is the political expansion of Islam at a critical moment that makes the fortunes of the faith, not the rise of the faith that makes the fortune of the Moslems. Had not the Saracens at the moment of the successful emergence of Mohammed's movement found their chance to overrun great territories of the enfeebled Christian empire, that movement might never have been aught but an obscure tribal worship, or might indeed have been speedily overlaid by the surrounding polytheism. It was the sense of triumphant opposition to Christian tritheism and Mary-worship and to Persian fire-worship that sharply defined the Moslem dogma; and once a religion has its sacred book, its tradition of triumph, and its established worship, the conservatism of the religious instinct counts for much more in preserving it than the measure of genius that went to the making of its doctrine. Every religion, in fact, sees supreme genius, both literary and religious, in its own Bible simply because it is such. No Christian can have a devouter conviction of the splendour of his sacred books than the Moslem enjoys concerning the Koran, the Brahman over the Vedas, or the Buddhist in respect of the large literature of his system.

Footnotes

^63:2 Cp. Jeremiah xxvi, 11; xxvii, 9-10; xxviii, 1-17; xxix, 8, 9, etc.

^64:1 Cp. Exod. xiii, 2; xxxiv, 20; Lev. xxvii, 28-29; Numb. iii, 41; xviii, 15.

^64:2 Josh. vi, 26; 1 Kings xvi, 34. It is not unlikely that the sons of King Hiel were sacrificed to the God Joshua. See below, Pt. II, ch. i,  section 10.

^64:3 Pausanias, iv, 9.

^64:4 Paus. iv, 13.

^64:5 Compare the myth (Apollodorus, iv, 3,  section 2) of the kid substituted for the child Dionysos by Zeus to save him from Here (a myth with a purpose) and that of the bull substituted for a man in sacrifice by the intervention of the Khond God Boora (Macpherson, Memorials of Service in India, 1865, p. 109). There is reason to surmise that the story of Perseus and Andromeda may derive from a similar suppression of a sacrificial rite. Cp. Frazer, Lectures on the History of Early Kingship, 1905, pp. 182, 184.

^65:1 See below, Part IV, as to the Aztecs; and cp. Prof. Granger, The Worship of the Romans, 1895, p. 300.

^65:2 Diodorus Siculus, xx, 14; Plutarch, De Superstitione, end; Regum et imper. apophthegmata: Gelon, f; Porphyry, De Abstinentia, ii, 56; Plato, Minos, p. 315 C.; Justin, xvii, 6; Varro, in Augustine, De civ. Dei, vii, 19. Cp. Macpherson, Memorials of Service in India, pp. 113-115, as to special pressures. The many wars and straits of the Carthaginians is the reasonable explanation of their reversion to child-sacrifice at a time when it had been long disused in Tyre. See F. W. Newman (Miscellanies, 1869, p. 302) as to the case of Tyre (Quintus Curtius, iv, 3,  section 38). Prof. Newman, in throwing doubt on the statement of Diodorus, does not note the testimony of Plato, Plutarch, and Porphyry; and in doubting Pliny's story (Hist. Nat. xxxvi,  section 4, 26 [12]) of an annual sacrifice to Hercules he does not note Porphyry's account of the sacrifice at Rhodes. See below, Part II, ch. i,  section 4.

^65:3 Plutarch, Cicero, 10. Sallust (Cat. 22) expresses doubt; but on the point of probability cp. Merimee, Etudes sur l'histoire romaine, 1844, ii, 113-116.

^65:4 Cp. Plutarch, Marcellus, 3.

^65:5 Professor Huxley, in his much over-pitched account of the monotheism and the ethic of the Jews (discussed below), expressly ascribes the special development to "a vigorous minority among the Babylonian Jews." Cp. I. Sack, Die altjudische Religion im Uebergange vom Bibelthume zum Talmudismus, 1889, pp. 25-27.

^65:6 Precisely here, nevertheless, Dr. Jevons refuses to recognise progress, though the establishment of monotheism is in terms of his own doctrine a great progressive achievement. "Polytheism may in some few civilised peoples rise towards pantheism, but in most cases degenerates into fetishism; monotheism passes in one case from Judaism into Christianity, but in another into Mohammedanism" (p. 395). This though Mohammedanism is by far the stricter monotheism of the two, and though Mohammedanism resisted magic and divination, which the Rabbis had maintained. (Cp. Davies, Magic, Divination, and Demonology, pp. 41 sq., 64 Mohammed's 74-89). Dr. Jevons is here in company with Prof, Robertson Smith, who argues that Mohammed's claim to have knowledge of a past historic episode "by direct revelation," a claim never made by "the Bible historians," is "to thinking minds one of the clearest proofs of Mohammed's imposture" (The Old Testament in the Jewish Church, 2nd ed. p. 141, note). What the Professor thought of the Hebrew claim to have knowledge of future history by direct revelation is thus hard to divine. Cp, p. 283, and p. 161, note.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 3. Polytheism and Monotheism.

Broadly speaking, religious evolution is far from being a steady progress, and, such as it is, is determined in great measure by political and social change. It was certainly a political process, for instance, that established a nominal monotheism among the Hebrews in Palestine; even as it was a political process that established a systematic polytheism in other States. [*1] Primarily, all tribes and cities probably tended to worship specially a God, ancestral or otherwise, who was the "Luck" of the community and was at first nameless, or only generically named. Later comparison and competition evolved names; and any association of tribes meant as a matter of course a pantheon, the women of each taking their deities with them when they married into another clan. Ferocious myths and theological historiography in the Hebrew books tell amply of the anxiety of the priests of Yahweh at a comparatively late stage to resist this natural drift of things; and the history, down to the Captivity, avows their utter failure.

Neither in the attempt nor in its failure is there anything out of the ordinary way of religious evolution. While some theorists (with Renan) credit Israel with a unique bias to monotheism, others,

[p. 67]

unable to see how Israel could be thus unique, infer either an early debt to the higher monotheistic thought of Egypt or (with Ewald) an original reaction on the part of Moses against Egyptian polytheism. All three inferences are gratuitous. Renan's thesis that a special bias to monotheism was set up in the early Semites by their environment is contradicted by all their ancient history, and is now abandoned by theologians. [*1] The story of Moses in Egypt is a flagrant fiction; and "Moab, Ammon, and Edom, Israel's nearest kinsfolk and neighbours, were monotheists in precisely the same sense in which Israel itself was" [*2]--that is to say, they too had special tribal Gods whom their priests sought to aggrandise. There is no reason to doubt that such priests fought for their Baals as Yahwists did for Yahweh. The point of differentiation in Israel is not any specialty of consciousness, but the specialty of evolution ultimately set up in their case through the conquest of Babylon by Cyrus.

All the earlier Palestinian groups tended to be monotheistic and polytheistic in the same way. When tribes formally coalesced in a city or made a chief, a chief God was likely to be provided by the "paramount" tribe or cult, [*3] unless he were framed out of the local fact of the city, or the mere principle of alliance. [*4] In the case of the Hebrews, the cult of Yah, or Yahu, or Yahweh, was simply a local worship sometimes aggrandised by the King, and documentally imposed on the fictitious history of the nation long afterwards. [*5] In the miscellaneous so-called prophecies ascribed to Jeremiah there is overwhelming testimony to the boundless polytheism of the people even in Jerusalem, the special seat of Yahweh, just before the Captivity. Either these documents preserve the historic facts or they were composed by Yahwists to terrorise yet a later generation of Hebrew polytheists. Not till a long series of political pressures and convulsions had eliminated the variant stocks and forces, and built up a special fanaticism for one cult, did an ostensible monotheism really hold the ground in the sacred city. [*6]

[p. 68]

That this monotheism was "religious" in the arbitrary and unscientific sense of being neither ethical nor philosophical it might seem needless to deny; but the truth is that it represents the ethic of a priesthood seeking its own ends. The main thesis of the prophetic and historical books is simply the barbaric doctrine that Yahweh is the God of Israel, whom he sought to make "a people unto him"; that Israel's sufferings are a punishment for worshipping the Gods of other peoples; and that Yahweh effects the punishment by employing as his instruments those other peoples, who, if Yahweh be the one true God, are just as guilty as Israel. There is here, obviously, no monotheism properly so-called, even when the rival Gods are called non-Gods. [*1] Such an expression does not occur in the reputedly early writings; and when first employed it is but a form of bluster natural to warring communities at a certain stage of zealotry; it is known to have been employed by the Assyrians and Egyptians as spontaneously as by the Hebrews; [*2] and it stands merely for the stress of cultivated fanaticism in priest-taught communities. The idea that Yahweh used other nations as the "rod of his anger" against Israel and Judah, without desiring to be worshipped by those other nations, is a mere verbal semblance of holding him for the only God; and arises by simple extension of the habit of seeing a chastisement from the tribe's God in any trouble that came upon it.

Here we are listening to a lesson given by priests. On the other hand, the politic course of conciliating the Gods of the foe, practised by the senate-ruled Romans, tells of the grafting of the principle of sheer worldly or military prudence on that of general religious credulity in a community where priesthood as such was but slightly developed. Morally and rationally speaking, however, there is no difference of plane between the Roman and the Hebrew conceptions. [*3] Jeremiah, proclaiming that "the showers have been withheld" by "the Lord that giveth rain," [*4] is on that side, indeed, at the intellectual level of any tribal medicine-man; and if the writers of such doctrine could really have believed what their words

[p. 69]

at times implied, that the alleged one sole God desired the devotion of Israel alone, leaving all other peoples to the worship of chimaeras, they would have been not above but below the intellectual and moral level of the professed polytheists around them.

On any view, indeed, they were morally lower in that they were potentially less sympathetic. So far as can be historically gathered, the early monotheistic idea, so-called, arose by way of an angry refusal to say, what the earlier Yahwists had constantly said and believed, that other nations had their Gods like Israel. There is thus only a quibbling truth in the thesis that monotheism does not grow out of polytheism, but out of an "inchoate monotheism" which is the germ of polytheism and monotheism alike. [*1] The "inchoate monotheism" in question being simply the worship of one special tribal God, is itself actually evolved from a prior polytheism, for the conception of a single national God is relatively late, and even that of a tribal God emerges while men believe in many ungraded Gods. It is quite true that later polytheism arises by the collocation of tribal Gods; but there is absolutely no known case of a monotheism which did not emerge in a people who normally admitted the existence of a multitude of Gods. Even, then, if the first assertors of a Sole God were so in virtue of a special intuition, that intuition was certainly developed in a polytheistic life. And there is absolutely no reason to doubt, on the other hand, that in Israel as elsewhere there were men who reached monotheism by philosophic progression from polytheism.

The historic evolution of Jewish monotheism, however, was certainly not of this order. It was not even, as Robertson Smith with much candour of intention implied, "nothing more than a consequence of the alliance of religion with monarchy." [*2] Monarchy in Mesopotamia and Egypt never induced monotheism; and most of the Jewish kings were on the face of the record polytheists. The development, as we shall see, was post-monarchic and hierocratic; and the immediate question is whether the spirit which promoted it was either morally or intellectually superior. The judicial answer must be that it was not. Insofar as it was a sincere fanaticism, a fixed idea that one God alone was to be recognised, though he devoted himself to one small group of men, it partook of the nature of mono- mania, since it utterly excluded any deep or scrupulous reflection on

[p. 70]

human problems; and insofar as it was not fanatical it was simply the sinister self-assertion of priests bent on establishing their monopoly.

The contrary view, that a belief in the existence of the Gods of other tribes than one's own is "obviously" a "lower form of faith than that of the man who worships only one god and believes that as for the gods of the heathen, they are but idols," [*1] must just be left to the strengthening moral sense of men. Such an assumption necessarily leads, in consistency, to the thesis that the man who believes his tribe has the One God all to itself does so in virtue of a unique "revelation"; and this is implied in the further description of true monotheism as proceeding on an "inner consciousness that the object of man's worship is one and indivisible, one and the same God always." On this basis, sheer stress of egoism is the measure of religiosity; and as the mere scientific reason cannot suppose such egoism to have been a monopoly of the Hebrews, it would follow, for ordinary minds, that revelation occurred in every separate cult in the world. It is indeed certain that even among polytheists a special absorption in the thought of one God is a common phenomenon. [*2] Thus there are as many revelations as there are Gods and Goddesses, all alike being vouched for by the "spiritual depths of man's nature."

Unless rational thought is once more to be bridled by absolutism, such a line of reasoning must be classed with the pretensions of the medieval papacy. Men not already committed to dogma cannot conceive that a religion is to be appraised in utter disregard of its relation to universal morals, on a mere a priori principle as to the nobility of monotheism--especially when the principle is set up for one monotheism alone. It is merely a conventional result of the actual course of the evolution of the Christian system that quasi-monotheism as such should be assumed to be an advance on other forms of creed, with or without exception of the case of Islam. A certain intellectual gain may indeed arise where a cult dispenses with and denounces images; this, even if the variation arose, as is likely, not by way of positive reasoning on the subject, but by the simple chance of conservatism in a local cult which had subsisted long without images for sheer lack of handicraftsmen to make them. [*3]

[p. 71]

[paragraph continues] But the gain is slight indeed when the anthropomorphic idea of the God's local residence is stressed exactly as his imaged presence is stressed elsewhere, and when in every other respect his worship and ethic are on the common anthropomorphic level. [*1] In any case it is clear that such monotheism could not be made by mere asseveration, with or without "genius," to prevail against the polytheism of a population not politically selected on a monotheistic basis.

Even if it were, however, it would depend on further and special causes or circumstances whether the worshippers underwent any new moral development. [*2] The conventional view unfortunately excludes the recognition of this; hence we have the spectacle of a prolonged dispute [*3] as to whether savage races can ever have the notion of a "Supreme Being" or "Creator" or "High God," or "All Father," with the assumption on both sides that if the affirmative can be formally made out the savages in question are at once invested with a higher intellectual and spiritual character--as if a man who chanced to call his God "High" and "Good" thereby became good and high-thinking. [*4] All the while Mr. Lang, the chief champion of the affirmative, avows that his Supreme-Being-worshipping savages in Australia would kill their wives if the latter overheard the "high" theistic and ethical doctrine of the mysteries. [*5] Even apart from such an avowal, it ought to be unnecessary to point out that terms of moral description translated from the language of savages to that of civilised men have a merely classifying force, and in themselves can justify no moral conclusion in terms of our own doctrines, any more than their use of terms like "Creator" can be held to imply a philosophical argument as to a "First Cause." [*6]

Two moral and intellectual tests at least must be applied to any

[p. 72]

doctrine or cult of "monotheism" before it can be graded above any form of polytheism: we must know whether it involves a common ethic for the community of the worshipper and other communities; and whether it sets up a common ethic of humanity within the community. Either test may in a given case be partially satisfied while the other is wholly unsatisfied. Thus we have the pre-exilic Hebrews and (perhaps) some modern Australian aborigines [*1] affirming a "One God" who is "Creator" of all, and yet treating all strangers as outside of the God's providence or law; while on the other hand we had till recently the Khonds, with their human sacrifices to the Goddess Tari and their doctrine of a Supreme God, proclaiming that the victim whom they liturgically tortured or tore to pieces was sacrificed for "the whole world," the responsibility for its welfare having been laid on their sect. [*2] To set such "monotheism" or such Soterism above late Greek or Roman polytheism or Hindoo pantheism is possible only under an uncritical convention. [*3] We must try Hebrew religion by moral tests if we are to grade it in a moral scale with others; and by such tests it is found to be anti-moral in its very monotheism. As for its records, we find its most impressive myths (to say nothing of the others) duplicated among some of the primitive tribes in India in our own day. One such tribe ascribes to a sacred bull the miracle of Joshua, the turning back of the sun in its course; another has a legend that is a close counterpart of that of the Exodus--the dividing of the waters by the God to enable the tribe to escape a pursuing king. [*4]

Genius, no doubt, did arise in the shape of an occasional monotheist with both literary gift and higher ethical and cosmical ideals than those of the majority; and though there is reason to surmise lateness as regards the "prophetic" teachings of that order, [*5] it is not to be disputed that such thinkers (whom Dr. Jevons would deny to be thinkers) may have existed early. But the broad historic fact remains that by the ostensibly latest prophet in the canon Yahweh is represented as complaining bitterly of the frauds committed on him in the matter of tithes and sacrifices. "Offer it now unto thy governor: will he be pleased with thee?" he is made to say concerning the damaged victims brought to his altar. [*6] And the very prophet of the Restoration lays down, or is made to lay

[p. 73]

down, the old doctrine of the tribal medicine-man very much in the language of a modern company-promoter:--

And it shall come to pass that every one that is left of all the nations which came against Jerusalem shall go up from year to year, to worship the King, the Lord of hosts, and to keep the feast of tabernacles [more correctly booths].

And it shall be that whoso of all the families of the earth goeth not up unto Jerusalem to worship the King, the Lord of hosts, even upon them there shall be no rain.

And if the family of Egypt go not up, and come not, neither shall it be upon them; there shall be the plague [or upon them shall be the plague] wherewith the Lord will smite the nations that go not up to keep the feast of tabernacles. [*1]

If this were the whole or the principal historical clue to the motives of the Return, we should be moved to decide that that movement was simply a sacro-commercial venture, undertaken by men who had seen how much treasure was to be made by any shrine of fair repute for antiquity and sanctity. The other records, of course, enable us to realise that there entered into it the zeal of a zealous remnant, devoted to the nominal cult of their fathers' city and the memories of their race. But with such a document before us we are forced to recognise, what we might know from other details in sacerdotal history to be likely, that with the zealots there went the exploiters of zealotry. It is certain that the men of the Return were for the most part poor: a Talmudic saying preserves the fact that those who had done well in Babylon remained there; [*2] and, on the other hand, it holds to reason that among the less prosperous there would be some adventurers, certainly not unbelievers, but believers in Mammon as well as in another God.

Such men had abundant reason to believe in Yahweh as a source of revenue. The prophetic and historic references to him as a rain-giver are so numerous as to give a broad support to Goldziher's theory that the God of the Hebrews had been a Rain- God first and a Sun-God only latterly; and in sun-scorched Syria a God of Rain was as sure an attraction as the Syrian Goddess herself, who in Lucian's day had such treasure-yielding prestige. But even if we ignore the economic motive, obvious as it is, the teaching of Zechariah remains undeniably tribalist and crassly unedifying. To such doctrine as this can be attributed neither the

[p. 74]

intellectual nor the moral advantages theoretically associated with monotheism in culture-history. It is historically certain that science never made in Jewry any such progress as the monotheistic conception has been supposed to promote; and whatever general elevation of moral thought may have taken place among the teachers of later Jewry is clearly to be ascribed not to a fortuitous upcrop of genius--though that was not absent--but to the chastening effect of disaster and frustration, forcing men to deep reverie and the gathering of the wisdom of sadness. And to this they may have been in a measure helped by the higher ethical teachings current among their polytheistic conquerors and neighbours. There emerges the not discomforting thought that it is from suffering and the endurance of wrong, not from triumph and prosperity, that men have reached an ideal in religion which renounces all the egoisms of race and cult. Such an experience could have come to other victims of Babylon, brought within the Babylonian world before the Jews. But the trouble was that only there could a wisdom of self-renunciation subsist in any communal shape: in the Hebrew books, however introduced, it was forever doubled with the lore of savagery and tribalism, the worst religious ethic always jostling the best.

Footnotes

^66:1 See below,  section 4-7.

^67:1 Cp. Prof. Karl Marti, Gesch. der Israelit. Relig. 1907. p. 23.

^67:2 Wellhausen, Israel, in vol. with tr. of Prolegomena, p. 440. Cp. Marti, as cited, p. 64.

^67:3 Cp. Jevons, p. 391.

^67:4 E.g. "the covenant God" in Jud. ix, 46.

^67:5 Cp. Joshua xxiv, 2, 14, 23, and the myth in Exodus vi, 3 (Heb.), where it is admitted early Israelites had worshipped El Shaddai. To speak of the "constant back-slidings" of the people, as Dr. Jevons still does, is but to revive the hallucination set up by the pseudo-history. There never was, before the exile, any true national monotheism to backslide from.

^67:6 Cp. Marti, as last cited. "Had, then, the Mosaic law no sort of authority in the had form of Judah--could it be transgressed with impunity? The answer is simple. It had force in so far as the king permitted to have any. It had no authority independently of him. It was never either proclaimed or sworn to."--Kuenen, Lecture on The Five Books of Moses, Muir's trans. 1877, p. 22. And even the assumption that there was a "Mosaic law" is open to challenge.

^68:1 E.g., Jer. v, 7. As Kuenen notes (Religion of Israel, Eng. tr. i, 51-52), such passages are few in the prophetic books. In Hosea xiii, 4, there is no such implication; and the "non-God" passages are all presumptively late. The Aramaic verse, Jer. x, 11, is an interpolation; and the whole chapter is relatively late.

^68:2 Cp. Isa. x, 16-11; 2 Kings, xviii, 33-35; Sayce, Hibbert Lectures, p. 129; Tiele, Histoire comparee des anciennes religions, Fr. trans. pp. 243, 247.

^68:3 Gladstone, it will be remembered, confessed that the ethic of the early Hebrews is below that of the Achaean Greeks. Landmarks in Homeric Study, p. 95. If, indeed, we could believe the awful tales of God-commanded massacres told in the Hexateuch, we should have to place the "Mosaic" Hebrews on a level with the most cruel savages of whom we have any record. The priests who compiled these hideous fables were doing their best to sink Hebrew life and morals far below the plane of those of Babylon.

^68:4 Jer. iii. 3; v, 24.

^69:1 This argument of Dr. Jevons (pp. 385-7) is a revival of an old thesis. "Monotheism and polytheism," writes J. G. Muller (Amerik. Urrelig. p. 19), "diverge not through grade the Godhead but through difference of principle, through the primarily different relation to the Godhead. From polytheism nations emerged not by mounting on the same ladder, by leaving it, by the inception of a new spiritual force (Geistes schopfung)."

^69:2 Religion of the Semites, p. 74.

^70:1 Jevons, p. 387.

^70:2 Cp. Max Muller, Introd. to Science of Relig. ed. 1882, pp. 80-81; Tiele, Egypt. Relig., pp. 33, 223; Sayce, Hibbert Lectures, pp. 89, 90, 96, 97, 100, 108, 109.

^70:3 That Yahweh was, however, imaged in northern Israel as a young bull--a symbolic form common to him and Moloch--is beyond doubt. Cp. Kuenen, Religion of Israel, 1, 235-6. Here the Yahwists probably adopted images made by more advanced races. Cp. on the other hand Goldziher's theory that the early Hebrews worshipped the night sky and the cloudy sky--objects not adaptable to images (Mythology among the Hebrews, Eng. tr. pp. 220-227).

^71:1 The barbarous Khonds, who till recently practised human sacrifice, rejected both images and temples as absurd; and the cults of the Maories, though not imageless, as is stated by Macpherson (Memorials of Service in India, p. 102), made small account of images as such. They were in fact treated as being in themselves nothing, being "only thought to possess virtue or peculiar sanctity from the presence of the God they represented when dressed up for worship" (Rev. R. Taylor, Te Ika a Maui, 1870, pp. 211-214). They were thus in the strict sense fetishes. But the Khonds are without durable houses (Id. p. 61); and they and the Maories alike were of course backward in the arts. In Fiji a similar state of things prevailed (Seeman, in Galton's Vacation Tourists, 1862, p. 269). As to the Vedic Aryans there is debate, Max Muller holding them to have had no idols (Chips, i, 38), while Muir cites texts which seem to imply that they had them (Original Sanskrit Texts, v. 453-4).

^71:2 Prof. A. Reville, a monotheist and semi-Christian, avows that "nous trouvons en plein paganisme une obscure et grossiere tendance au monotheisme. On pressent que la divinite n'est, en realite, ni masculine ni feminine, qu'elle possede les deux sexes ou n'en possede aucun. De la des symboles monstrueux, des mutilations, ou des impuretes indescriptibles" (Prolegomenes de l'histoire des religions, 3e edit. p. 172).

^71:3 See it carried on in Mr. Lang's Magic and Religion, as against Dr. Tylor, who has latterly taken up the negative position. Mr. Lang's thesis is discussed in the author's Studies in Religious Fallacy, and in Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. pp. 46-68. Like that of Dr. Jevons, Mr. Lang's view has much in common with the teaching of Prof. Max Muller, which is closely criticised by Mr. Spencer in App. B. to vol. i of his Principles of Sociology, Some of Mr. Spencer's own arguments there are, however, open to rebuttal.

^71:4 "Good" was one of the epithets of Assur. Sayce, p. 124.

^71:5 Magic and Religion, p. 460

^71:6 Cp. Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. pp. 47-8.

^72:1 Lang, Making of Religion, pp. 190-8.

^72:2 Macpherson, Memorials of Service in India, pp. 98, 115, 116, 117, 122.

^72:3 Cp. Tiele, Hist. comp. des anciennes religions, Fr. trans. pp. 502-3.

^72:4 Thurston, Castes and Tribes of Southern India, 1909, iii, 221; y, 74-75.

^72:5 Cp. A Short History of Freethought, i, 104-9.

^72:6 Malachi, i, 8. Cp. i, 14; iii, 8-10.

^73:1 Zechariah xiv, 16-18. Compare the less explicit utterances of deutero-Isaiah (Isa. lx, etc.), which, however, imply no higher, conception of the relation of Judaism to the Gentiles.

^73:2 Prideaux, The Old and New Testaments Connected, Pt. i, B. iii.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 4. Hebrews and Babylonians.

We must indeed guard against throwing on the side of Assyria and Babylon the balance of prejudice which has so long been cast on the side of Jewry. There can have been no more of general ethical or rational elevation in the great polytheistic States than in the small. But it lies on the face of the history of religion alike in India, Mesopotamia, and Egypt, that in great and rich polytheistic priesthoods there arose naturally a habit of pantheistic speculation [*1] which at least laid the basis for a higher philosophy, science, and ethic; and it would be precisely the men of such enlarged views in the great Mesopotamian capitals who would most readily hold intercourse with the conquered or travelling Israelites. Certain it is that the cosmogony of Genesis is adapted directly from that preserved and partly developed in Mesopotamia from pre-Semitic times. Thus the so-called genius of the Hebrews for religion founded itself on the common Asiatic tradition of many thousands of years. [*2]

[p. 75]

That the Hebrews should have learned anything worth learning from the Babylonians is a notion for which most people are still unprepared by education. [*1] As it was put in the last generation by one apologist: "The moral chasm which separates us from heathens is so great that we can hardly realise their feelings." [*2] But when it is realised that the Hebrews adopted the mythic cosmology of their neighbours [*3] it should be easier to conceive that they got from them ideas of a more advanced order. [*4] And if the ethical tone of the "inchoate monotheism" of the Hebrew books be thoughtfully noted, it will be realised that only in the larger community was there any appreciable chance for the development of a relatively enlightened creed.

There had there arisen perforce a measure of tolerance in virtue of the very compulsion to polytheism. Early Assyria was as primitively tribal as early Israel: Assur was at least as loudly vaunted and as devotedly trusted as Yahweh; and his worshippers were presumptively not more but less ready to accept other Gods, precisely because they were so much more successful in their wars. Yet when by conquest city was added to city, and kingdom to kingdom, a systematic polytheism was as inevitable in Mesopotamia as in Egypt. There we see kings specially devoted to one God; [*5] but when one king's zeal leads him to impose his cult on all, the outcome is the razing of his own name, as well as his God's, from the monuments [*6] after his death. Whole populations could not be driven out of one

[p. 76]

worship into another; and as the sense of national unity arose, the priesthoods of the capitals would more and more readily accept the Gods of the outlying communities. The mere vicissitudes of warfare were always a reason, in military eyes, for desiring to widen the field of divine assistance; and no mere soldier or soldier-king could conceivably doubt the existence of the Gods of his enemies, however he might in battle affect to deride them. It was among the priests, or other thoughtful men of leisure, that there would arise the inference that all the God-names were but varying labels for one great non-tribal Spirit, [*1] who might be conceived either (as among the Brahmans and Egyptians) pantheistically, or on the lines of the relation of the earthly autocrat to the states he ruled. And it was only through some such theorizing as this that any moral or intellectual progress could be made; for only on this line could monotheism become international. [*2]

It is part of the convention aforesaid to treat the preservation of the Hebrew creed as a gain to civilisation equal with that of the Greek victory over the invading Persians: the heritage of Jewish monotheism, it is assumed, is as precious as the heritage of Hellene literature, philosophy, and art. [*3] If, however, there is to be any rational comparative appraisement of cults, it must be in terms of their service either to ethics or to science, including philosophy; and the service to ethics must finally be gauged in terms of human happiness and freedom. Now, we have seen that in the last pages of the Old Testament canon the religion of the Jews is tribal, trivial, narrow; [*4] and it is the historic fact that to the day of the final fall of Jerusalem it remained tribalist and localist; a gospel of racial privilege and a practice of barbaric sacrifice; a law of taboo and punctilio, proclaiming a God of ritual and ceremonial, dwelling unseen in a chosen house, with much concern about its furniture and its commissariat. There is no ethical principle in its whole literature that is not to be found in the sacerdotal literatures of Egypt, Persia, India, or in the non-sacerdotal literature of China and Greece. And with the Hebrew ethic there is almost constantly bound up the ethic-destroying concept of the One God as the patron of one people, who only through them consents to recognise the rest of the human race.

[p. 77]

It matters little whether, on the other hand, we think of the pantheistic or monotheistic element in the Egyptian and other systems as effective: [*1] the question is whether either polytheism or monotheism lifted morals and promoted science and civilisation. Now, the polytheistic empires and the Hebrew State alike failed to reach any principle of international reciprocity, so that on that score they availed nothing against the fatal egoism of race; and as regards moral reciprocity within the State, any discoverable difference of code is rather in favour of the polytheists. [*2] The every-day code of the Egyptian funerary ritual [*3] supplies the main practical ethic of the Gospels, and is closely echoed in the probably non-Hebraic book of Job; [*4] but while a similar social spirit is incidentally met with in the psalms and the prophets, the outstanding and emphasised ethic of the Hebrew historical and prophetic books is really that national and regal righteousness consist in worshipping the Hebrew God and renouncing the others, while to worship them is to commit the sin of sins. The abstractly pietistic sentiment of the Hebrew books, of which the most important element is the sense of contrition, belongs to the psalmodic literature of the Babylonians and the Egyptians alike; [*5] and all that is called by pietists "cold" and "hard" and "materialistic" in other religious lore is abundantly paralleled within the covers of the Bible.

 

In one respect, indeed, the Hebrew ethic is distinctly more refined than that of the other creeds, that is to say, in its relation to the principle of sex; but here, it is quite clear, the general elevation is post-exilic, seeing that every form of sexual vice is

[p. 78]

constantly asserted to have prevailed in and around the cult of Yahweh before the Captivity. It thus appears that the Israelites either acquired their purer ethic among the Babylonians, where an ideal of purity certainly co-existed with a practice of sanctified licence, [*1] or developed such an ethic as the result of the post-exilic struggle against the seductions and competition of the neighbouring cults. And from this doctrinal evolution, finally, there resulted, apart from the abolition of licentious worship as such, no betterment of the position of women [*2] or the practice of men in Jewry as compared with Greece and Rome. Not only did normal sexual vice subsist as elsewhere, [*3] but the Hebrew code of divorce was iniquitous, and the law for the special punishment of women offenders remained at least formally barbarous down to the Christian era. [*4]

Footnotes

^74:1 Cp. Short History of Freethought, 2nd ed. i, 46, 48, 49, 53, 61-62, 70.

^74:2 Dr. Jevons does not hesitate to assert (p. 265) that the resemblances between the Babylonian and the Hebrew cosmological myths are "due to the human reason, which in different places working on the same material comes to similar inferences"--an untenable position. He adds that "The difference which distinguishes the Hebrew from all other [p. 75] primitive narratives testifies that the religious spirit was dealt in a larger measure to the Hebrews than to other peoples." Is brutish ferocity the religious spirit? It appears to be implied that reason is "dealt" in an absolutely equal degree to all peoples. Not a word in specification of the alleged "difference" is vouchsafed; but on the next page we read that the primitive science of those early narratives was the work of the human reason, and proceeded from a different source from that whence the religious elements in them came." In terms of Dr. Jevons's own definition of religion we must suppose that the Hebrew Peculiarity he has in view is simply monotheism, though the plural term Elohim gives the proof that for the Hebrews also polytheism was primordial. Other hierologists again, such as Prof. Hommel (Die semitischen Volker and Sprachen, 1881, i, 316) and Mr. Sayce (Hibbert Lectures, pp. 314, 317), argue that some religious developments short of monotheism can be explained only by the irruption of a new doctrine from the outside, the former writer looking to the Hebrews and the latter to Semites as against non-Semites. Both arguments are a priori, and lead back to supernaturalism and revelation as against the principle of evolution. Mr. Sayce, besides, is confuted by his own admissions, pp. 316, 320, 337, 339. H. Zimmern (Babylonische Busspsalmen, 1-2) reasonably suggests that national misfortunes altered the religious tone and temper. Cp. Sayce, p. 205, and Huxley's Essays, as cited below.

^75:1 While the first edition of these pages was being printed, the truth was newly insisted on, with awakening force, by Professor Delitzsch at Berlin; and the extensive discussion on Babel und Bibel which followed brought the truth home to multitudes of readers.

^75:2 A. S. Farrar, Critical History of Freethought (Hampton Lectures for 1862), p. 99.

^75:3 Stade, Geschichte des Volkes Israel, pp. 416, 428, notes; Gunkel, Schopfung und Chaos. 1895, p. 15; Zimmern, The Babylonian and the Hebrew Genesis, Eng. tr. passim; Tiele, Hist. comparee, Fr. trans. pp. 496-7.

^75:4 Cp. Jastrow's Religion of Babylonia and Assyria, pp 542-3, 560, 567, 611, 628, 642, 681, 696.

^75:5 Tiele, Hist. of Egyptian Religion, Eng. tr. pp. 125, 143, 152-3.

^75:6 As to the attempt of Akhunaton or Chuenaten (name spelt in nine ways) = Amunhotep (or Amenophis) IV, cp. Tiele, pp. 161-5; Maspero, Hist. anc. des peuples del 'orient, 4e edit. pp. 209-212; Brugsch, Hist. of Egypt under the Pharaohs, Eng. tr. ed. 1891, ch. x; Breasted, Hist. of Egypt, 1906; A. E. P. Weigall, art. on "Religion and Empire in Ancient Egypt," Quart. Rev., Jan. 1909; King and Hall, Egypt and Western Asia in the Light of Recent Discoveries, 1907, Pp. 383-7.

^76:1 Cp. Prof. Adolf Erman, Handbk. of Egypt. Rel., Eng. tr. pp. 80-82.

^76:2 "Unless a monotheistic conception of the universe is interpreted in an ethical sense. monotheism (or monolatry) has no great superiority, either religiously or philosophically, over polytheism" (Jastrow, p. 696).

^76:3 So Huxley in his essay on "The Evolution of Theology," in Nineteenth Century, April, 1886, p. 502; rep. in Essays, vol. iv, pp. 363-4.

^76:4 "Their universalism continues particularist" (Tiele, Outlines, p. 89).

^77:1 For the affirmative view as to Egypt see Brugsch, Religion and Mythologie der alten Aegypter, I. Halfte, 1884, pp. 90-99. His many citations prove that some at least of the Priests had a monotheistic philosophy. Cp. Le Page Renouf, Hibbert Lectures, 2nd ed. pp. 215-216, 218-230; Tiele, Egypt. Rel., pp. 82, 152, 156-7, 216, 222. But, on the other hand, uniqueness was predicated of many local Gods singly, and there was no universalist cult popularly accepted as such. See the views of Maspero and others, cited by Mr. Lang, Myth, Ritual, and Religion, 2nd. ed. ii, 111 sq.; and compare Renouf (Hibbert Lectures, p. 230), who, however, puts it that the Egyptian doctrines "stopped short in Pantheism."

^77:2 Huxley, after asserting that the Hebrews "created the first consistent, remorseless, naked monotheism which, so far as history records, appeared in the world," affirms that "they inseparably united therewith an ethical code which for its purity and for its efficiency as a bond of social life was and is unsurpassed" (Essay cited, p. 501: Essays, iv, 363). Of these propositions not an atom of proof is offered. In his eulogy of the Bible as a school book, Huxley gave an equally gratuitous certificate to the popular creed, with unfortunate results. Arnold's panegyric of Hebrew ethics, which is equally uncritical, is not so surprising as coming from him, being in keeping with his traditionist and aesthetic attitude; and his naivete made it more transparent. Cp. the author's Modern Humanists, pp. 151-159.

^77:3 Book of the Dead, ch. cxxv.

^77:4 Cp. Matt. xxv.

^77:5 Cp. Hommel, Die Semitischen Volker und Sprachen, pp. 316-322; Jastrow, Religion of Babylonia and Assyria, pp. 313-327, 694; Sayce, Hibbert Lectures, pp. 348-352 and App. V.; Boscawen in Religious Systems of the World, 2nd ed. p. 19; Book of the Dead, cc. xiv, Tiele, Egyptian Religion, p. 228; O. Weber, Die Literatur der Babylonier u. Assyrier, 1907, pp, 119, 122, 140; Prof. Erman, Handbook of Egypt. Rel., pp. 82-84.

^78:1 Cp. Kuenen, Religion of Israel, Eng. tr. i, 91; Tiele, Hist. comparee des anciennes religions, trad. Fr., pp. 206, 209, 318-319; Sayce, Hibbert Lectures, pp. 129, 133, 267-8; Menzies, History of Religion, 1895, pp. 159, 168-171; Robertson Smith, Religion of the Semites, p. 458; J. M. R., Short History of Freethought, i, 103.

^78:2 Cp. Hershon, Genesis with a Talmudical Commentary, 1883, pp. 122, 125, 126, 168; and, as to the higher status of women in old Akkadia and Babylon, Sayce, Hibbert Lectures, p. 176; Jastrow, Religion of Babylonia and Assyria, p. 694.

^78:3 See art. TALMUD in McClintock and Strong's Biblical Cyclopaedia, x, 174, and Hershon, p. 63, as to the tone of the Talmud in sexual matters.

^78:4 Cp. Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. p. 423.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 5. Forces of Religious Evolution.

The true judgment on the comparative merits of religions is to be reached by noting the manner of their evolution; and when this is impartially done the student is led, not to any racial palm-giving on the score of "religious genius," but to a new sense of the significance of social and political factors, and a compassionate realisation of the ill-fortune of all high aspirations among men. Genius for moral and philosophical thought as distinguished from literary expression is to be recognised here and there in all the old religious literatures; and even as regards literary genius there is little weight in estimates which appreciate the Hebrew books on the one hand in an enthusiastically eloquent rendering and on the other dimly divine the Gentile literatures through the cerecloths of dead scripts, whereof the scrupulous interpreters convey the very deadness as assiduously as the Elizabethans sought for transfigurement in translation. What is common to all the ancient literatures is the fatality by which the "general deed of man" determines the general thought.

In ancient Babylonia, the scholars are now agreed, there was a highly evolved yet not highly imperialised State, ruled by an enlightened Akkado-Babylonian king named Hammurabi, [*5] two

[p. 79]

thousand three hundred years before our era, and long ages before historic Hellas was so named. This polity failed and fell, and on its ruins there rose successively the terrible and tyrannous empires of Assyria and later Babylon, wherein no doctrine of civil freedom could survive, though the code of Hammurabi remained the code of his people. Under such rule, whatever flower of moral genius might bloom in high or cloistered places, men in the mass could not be aught but fixedly superstitious, morally shortsighted, good only in virtue of their temperaments and the varying pressure of crude law and cruder custom. Whether they worshipped one God or many, a Most High or a Mediator, a Mother Goddess or a Trinity, their ethic was unalterably narrow and their usage stamped with primeval grossness; for wherever the life of fortuitous peace bred a gentler humanity and a higher civilisation, the Nemesis of empire and conquest hurled a new barbarism on its prey, only to adopt anew the old cults, the old lore, the old delusions. So, on the bases of civilisation laid by the old Sumer-Akkadians, the Babylonian and the Assyrian wrestled and overthrew each other time and again till the Persian overthrew the Babylonian; and all the while the nameless mass from generation to generation dreamed the old dreams, with some changes of God-names and usages, but no transformation of life, and no transfiguration of its sinister battlefield.

In no ancient State, certainly not in pre-exilic Jewry, did men think and brood more over religion, in theory and practice, than they did in Babylon; [*1] and in such a hotbed "religious genius" must be presumed to have arisen. But while it could leave its traces in higher doctrine, and join hands fruitfully with nascent science, it could never restore the freer polity of Sumer-Akkadia, though it could humbly cherish the Akkadian dream that Hammurabi would come again, [*2] as Messiah, to begin a new age. On the broad fields of sword-ruled ignorance there could thrive only such vain hopes and the rank growths of superstition. Better Gods were not to be set up, save in unseen shrines, on a worsening earth. As in Egypt and in Hindostan, religion was of necessity determined in the main by the life-conditions of the mass; and to the mass, or to powerful classes, priesthoods must always minister.

What Mesopotamian civilisation finally yielded to the common stream of human betterment was the impulse of its cosmogony and its esoteric pantheism to science and philosophy in the new life of unlit perialised Greece, and the concrete store of its astronomical

[p. 80]

knowledge, alloyed with its astrology. Its current ethic was doubtless abreast of the Ten Commandments and the Egyptian ritual of the judgment day; and its commerce seems to have evolved an adequate working system of law, besides a notable system of banking; but a civilisation which itself failed to reach popular well-being and international equity could pass on no important moral ideal to posterity. On the contrary, it bequeathed the fatal lust of empire, so that on the new imperial growth of Persia there followed, by way of emulation, that of Macedonia, to be followed by that of Rome, which ended in the paralysis and prostration of the whole civilisation of the Mediterranean world. And in the last stages of that decadence we find arising a nominally new religion which is but a fresh adaptation of practices and principles as old as Akkadia, and which is beset by heresies of the same derivation.

Footnotes

^78:5 Winckler, Gesch. Babyloniens and Assyriens, 1892, pp. 64-65; Jastrow, Relig. of Bab. and Assyr., pp. 38-39. Cp. Miss Simcox's Primitive Civilisations, 1894, i, 282-3.

^79:1 Jastrow, pp. 245-8; Tiele, Hist. comp., Pp. 243-247.

^79:2 Jastrow, pp. 532-3.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 6. The Hebrew Evolution.

At this point the Mesopotamian succession is seen to mingle with that of Judaea, which in turn falls to be conceived and appraised, as a total evolution, in terms of the conditions. As has been briefly noted above, Judaic monotheism was equally with Mesopotamian polytheism a result of political circumstances. The Jewish national history as contained in the sacred books is demonstrably a vast fiction to one half of its extent, as tested by the admissions of the other; and the fiction was a gradual construction of its priests and prophets in the interest of the cult which finally triumphed.

From the more ancient memories or documents which are preserved among the priestly fictions--records such as are included in the closing chapters of the book of Judges--we realise that after the alleged deliverance from Egypt and the fabulous Mosaic legislation in the wilderness the religion of Israel in Canaan was one of local cults, with no priesthood apart from the local functioning of single "Levites," presumably members of a previous race of inhabitants who knew "the manner of the God of the land." [*1] These functionaries can best be realised as belonging to the lower types of Indian fakirs and Moslem dervishes. [*2] And even in this primitive stage, when the only general political organisation was an occasional confederation of tribes for a given purpose, [*3] some had already developed the abnormal vices associated with corrupt civilisations. [*4] It is not unlikely that the beginnings of a centralised system occurred at a shrine answering to the description of that of Shiloh in the book of

[p. 81]

[paragraph continues] Samuel; but the legend of that "prophet" is more likely to be an Evemerised version of the fact that the God of the shrine was Samu-El, a form of the Sem or Samos of the Samaritans and other Semites, who is further Evemerised as Samson in the book of Judges. [*1] At this stage we find the priests of the shrine notoriously licentious, and their methods primitively barbaric; [*2] and the only semblance of a national or even tribal religion is the institution of the movable ark, a kind of palladium, containing amulets or a sacred stone, which might be kept by any chief or group strong enough to retain it [*3] and able to keep a Levite for its service.

Even on the face of the official and myth-loaded history, it was by a band of ferocious filibusters at this level of religion that an Israelite kingdom or principality was first set up, and a shrine of Yah or Yahweh instituted in the captured Jebusite stronghold of Zion, where a going worship must already have existed. From such a point forward the kingdom, waxing and shrinking by fortune of war, would tend to develop commercially and otherwise on the general lines of Semitic culture, assimilating the higher Syrian civilisation wherever it met with it. The art of writing by means of the alphabet, received either from the kindred Phoenicians or direct from Babylon, [*4] would be early acquired in the course of the traffic between the coast cities and the inland States; and with such culture would come the religious ideas of the neighbouring peoples.

It is impossible to construct any save a speculative narrative of the religious evolution out of the mass of late pseudo-history, in which names known to have been those of Gods are assigned to patriarchs, [*5] heroes, kings, and miracle-working prophets, all in turn made subservient to Yahweh of Israel. But from the long series of invectives against other cults in the pseudo-historical and prophetic books, the contradictory fiats as to local worships in the Pentateuch, [*6] and the bare fact of the existence of Yahweh's temple at Jerusalem, we can gather clearly enough that that particular worship at that place was aggrandised by a few kings of Israel or of Judah, and relatively slighted by many others; that its priests did their utmost,

[p. 82]

but in vain, by vaticination, literary fraud, and malediction, to terrorise kings and people into suppressing the rival shrines and cults; that all the while their own had the degraded features of the rest; [*1] and that their "monotheism" was merely of the kind ascribed by Flaubert to the sun-priests at Carthage, who derided their own brethren of the cult of the moon--though rage rather than derision is the normal note of the priests of Yahweh. The main motives of their separatism are visibly their perquisites and their monopoly.

There is a certain presumption that the story of the reforms of King Josiah--a movement which compares with that of Akhunaton in Egypt--is founded on fact, seeing that the record confesses Josiah to have died miserably, where the general burden of the history required him to prosper signally, as a reward for his Yahwism. It may well have been that the hostility he evoked among his subjects wrought his ruin. In any case it may be taken as certain that even had ho prospered, his effort to abolish the multitude of cults would have failed as Akhunaton's did; and there is finally no disguise of the fact of its failure. Neither in Israel nor in Judah had even the merely monopolist monotheism of the Yahwist priests made popular headway; and if at this stage there did exist monotheists of a higher type, prophets whose aim was just government, wise policy, and decent living, they stood not a better but a worse chance of converting kings or commoners, rich or poor. The popular religion was determined by the popular culture-stage and life-conditions.

In Babylon, however, while many doubtless went over bodily to the native cults, the stauncher Yahwists would tend to be made more zealous by their very contact with the image-using systems; and the state of critical consciousness thus set up [*2] would tend to give a certain new definiteness to the former less-reasoned hostility to the rival worships. The conception of Yahweh as incapable of being imaged would promote a kind of speculation such as had already occurred among the "idolatrous" priesthoods themselves; and that intercourse took place between the Yahwists and some Babylonian teachers is proved by their now giving a new significance to the Assyro-Babylonian institution of the Sabbath, [*3] and developing their whole ceremonial and temple law on Mesopotamian lines. [*4] Indeed, the simple fact that from this time forward the spoken language of Judaea became Aramaic or "Chaldee" is evidence that their Babylonian sojourn affected their whole culture.

[p. 83]

With the anti-idolatrous Persian conquerors of Babylon, again, a Jewish sympathy would naturally subsist; and the favourable conditions provided for the captives by Cyrus may explain the apparent feebleness of the first Return movement. However that may be, it is probable that to the intervention of Cyrus is due the very existence of the later historic Judaism, and of the bulk of the Hebrew Bible. Had he not conquered Babylon, Hebrew "monotheism" would in all likelihood have disappeared like the other monotheisms of Palestine, absorbed by the mass of Semitic polytheism in the Semitic empire; for even when the Return began, the monotheistic ideal had no great force. It is true that the commercial success which began to accrue to many of the Jews in Babylon would dispose them afresh to magnify the name of Yahweh as the God of their salvation; [*1] but a merely Babylonian Judaism, despite its Talmud, could have had no historic fruit. It is clear that, despite the preliminary refusal to join hands with the Samaritans and other populations around, [*2] the immigrants gradually mixed more and more with the surrounding Semitic tribes, whose cults were singly of the same order as the Yahwist; and the old polytheism would thus have re-arisen but for the coming, a century later, of new zealots, whose sense of racial and religious separateness may have been sharpened at Babylon by competition, as well as by concourse, with the Mazdean cult. The alternation of the Persian phrase "God of heaven" with "God of Jerusalem" [*3] in the books of Ezra and Nehemiah, with the final predominance of the former title in the latter book, suggests a new process of challenge and definition, which, however, would concern the majority of Yahwists much less than it did their theologians. What all could appreciate was the consideration that if the cult were not kept separate it would lose its revenue-drawing power.

When once the laxer elements had been eliminated, or at least sacerdotally discountenanced, the social conditions were vitally different from the pre-exilic. Gathered together on the traditional site for the very purpose of instituting the cult of Yahweh and no other, the recruited and purged remnant gave their priests such an opportunity for building up a hierocracy as had never before been in that region; and the need and the opportunity together wrought the evolution. To speak of the doctrine thus instituted as the product of a unique order of religious consciousness is to substitute occult

[p. 84]

forces for natural laws. Insofar as it had any philosophic content, any breadth of cosmic conception, it borrowed from the inductive monotheism or pantheism (the conceptions constantly and inevitably shade into each other) of the deeper thinkers of Babylon [*1] or its Persian conquerors; and such a content was precisely that element in the creed which counted for least in its institution. What drew or held the votaries together was the concept of a God dwelling in the temple of Jerusalem, and there only; and conferring special favours in the matters of rainfall and healing on those who brought gifts to his shrine. The worshippers were no more transcendentalist than their priests. They were but hypnotised by the unexampled series of literary fabrications on which the creed was refounded--a body of written sacrosanct lore such as had never before been brought within the reach of any save priestly students.

We are in danger, perhaps, of unduly stigmatising the Hebrew forgers when we consider their work by itself, keeping in mind the enormous burden of delusion and deceit that it has so long laid upon mankind. In their mode of procedure there was really nothing abnormal; they did but exploit the art of writing--first acquired by the race for commercial purposes--on the lines of immemorial priestly invention; and we must not pass upon them a censure that is not laid on the mythologists and scribes of Egypt or the theologers and poets of India and Greece. Our business is to understand, not to blame, save insofar as a sophistic praise still compels demur. And the historical processus may be sufficiently realised in noting, without binding ourselves to, the conclusions broadly reached by scholars a generation ago, to the effect that the first collected edition of the pretended Mosaic law, comprised in the Pentateuch and the book of Joshua, contained some eighty chapters; and the second, over a century later, a hundred and twenty; ninety more being added afterwards. [*2]

[p. 85]

Such a literary usage, indeed, gave a unique opportunity to literary and religious genius, and it was variously availed of. Lyrics of religious emotion, commonly ascribed to the semi-mythic David, to whose legend apparently accrued the lyric attributes of the God of that name; [*1] sententious and proverbial wisdom, similarly fathered on Solomon; dramatic discussion of the ethical dilemma of all theism, in the singularly isolated and foreign-seeming book of Job; and express argumentation against the fanatical racial separatism of the post-exilic theocracy, in the hardly less isolated romances of Ruth and Jonah--all this goes with the mass of pseudo-history, cosmology, and prophecy, to make up the library which we call the Hebrew Bible. It may be taken as certain that a body of students familiar with the whole range of such a literature had from it an amount of intellectual stimulation not theretofore paralleled in the Semitic world; and from the rabbinical life of centuries we might reasonably expect some fine fruit of ethical and philosophic thought. But again, on close inquiry, we become sadly aware of the fatality of the evolutionary process, in little Jewry as in the great States that decayed around.

Footnotes

^80:1 2 Kings xvii, 26.

^80:2 Cp. Marti, Gesch. der isr. Relig.,  section 23, p. 96.

^80:3 Jud. xx.

^80:4 Jud. xix, 22.

^81:1 This circumstance reminds us of the risk of assuming, with some critics, that Herkles had been first deified among the Greeks between the time of the composition of the Iliad and that of the Odyssey, because in the first poem he is a mere human hero, in the second a demigod (H. N. Coleridge, Introd. to the Classic Poets, Pt. I, 2nd ed. 1834, p. 278.) He may have been Evemerised in Ionia at the time of the framing of the Iliad, though previously of divine status; whereas the Odyssey may have been composed in another environment, where his divine status was maintained (cp. Samuel Butler, On the Trapanese Origin of the Odyssey, 1893, and The Authoress of the Odyssey, 1897, chs. vii-x). Neither solution is certain.

^81:2 1 Sam. ii, 13-16, 22.

^81:3 1 Sam. vii, 1-2.

^81:4 L. Geiger, Development of the Human Race, Eng. tr. 1880, p. 67.

^81:5 Cp. Winckler, Gesch. Israels, Th. II, 1900; E. Meyer, Gesch. des Alterthums, i,  section 309.

^81:6 Cp. Deut. xii and xv, 20, with Ex. xx, 24-26.

^82:1 2 Kings xxiii, 7.

^82:2 Cp. the special denunciations of idols in Ezekiel xx.

^82:3 Cp. Sack, Die Altjudische Religion im Uebergange vom Bibelthume zum Talmudismus, 1889, p. 22; Sayce, Hibbert Lectures, pp. 76-77.

^82:4 Jastrow, pp. 610-611, 696-8; Sayce, pp. 77-78.

^83:1 Cp. E. Meyer, Gesch. des Alterthums (1901), iii, 216.

^83:2 Cp. Robertson Smith, Old Test. in Jewish Church, 2nd ed. p. 278.

^83:3 Ezra, i, 2, 3; iii, 1; iv, 1; vii, 6, 12, 15-19, 21.

^84:1 As to these cp. Hommel, Semitischen Volker and Sprachen, i, 315-316; Jastrow, Relig. of Bab. and Assyria, pp. 147, 437-442; Sayce, Hib. Lect. pp. 108, 142, 191-2, 215, 305, 346 Baentsch, Altorientalischer and israelitischer Monotheismus, 1906, pp. 5-35, 101-4. Marti (Gesch. der isr. Rel. 1907, pp. 25-26) throws doubt on the reality of the monotheising or pantheising tendency seen by Baentsch in the higher Babylonian lore. Akhunaton, he argues, is the only clear case of the kind in remote antiquity. Akhunaton was really more of a sectarian than of a pantheist. For the monotheism of the later prophets, finally, Prof. Marti falls back devoutly on supernaturalism. Not the reflection of the prophets, not logic, not philosophy, but "Jahwe selber, der sich seinen Propheten kundgab" ( section 34. p. 168). Solvuntur tabulae.

^84:2 Kuenen, Lecture on The Five Books of Moses, Eng. tr. 1870, pp. 13-14. Later criticism tends to date everything later. Cp. Kuenen's Hexateuch, Eng. tr. pp. 299, 307, 315; Wellhausen, Prolegomena to the History of Israel, Eng. tr. p. 9. Prof. Marti, a conservative supernaturalist, dates the primary Yahwist scroll before 800 B.C.: that of the Elohist about 750; their combination between 650 and 600; the Kernel of Deuteronomy about 621; the Law of Holiness (Lev. xvii-xxvi) between 540 and 520; the Priestly Codex between 500 and 450; its combination with the Law of Holiness before 450; and the final combinations b5' Ezra's successors about 400 (Gesch. der isr. Rel.,  section 14). We are not here concerned, however, to work out the details of the documentary problem.

^85:1 Cp. Winckler, Geschichte Israels, ii, 170, sq.; and refs. in A Short History of Freethought, i 101.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 7. Post-Exilic Phases.

If we look first to the vogue of Biblical Judaism in Palestine, we have to note that from the consummation of the Return the cult was jealously closed not only to the people of Samaria, who presumed to worship a Yahweh on their own sacred hill, but to the country people around who had been left behind by the Assyrian conqueror. [*2] The sociological conditions were thus such that, when the first force of the new conditions was spent, intellectual anchylosis was bound to set in. The learned class, devotedly absorbed in a literature regarded as divinely inspired, must rapidly become in general incapable of new thought; and their religious philosophy could of itself make no further progress. This is what is seen to take place. But for their traditional rejection of images--a principle in which they had been encouraged by the Mazdeans whom they had met at Babylon--they would even have reverted by that path to normal polytheism. As it was, remaining peculiar in this respect, they did but think of their God as an imageless yet anthropomorphite being who made his home in their temple and either ignored or detested the neighbour nations which had idols.

[p. 86]

[paragraph continues] Save for higher speculations which could not appeal to the majority even of the student class, they made no progress towards a consistent and comprehensive monotheism.

What extension of speculative thought occurred was rather in the direction of dualism. The doctrine of the Adversary, developed either from the Persian Ahriman or the Babylonian figure of the Goat-God, [*1] or else from both, begins to figure in the later writings; and, once dramatically installed in the brilliant book of Job, was sure to figure more and more in the general consciousness. All the while, the normal eastern ideas of multitudinous angels and evil spirits had never been absent, though they were denounced when associated with other cults; and in point of general superstition there can have been little to choose between Jew and Gentile. [*2] On the side of the belief in angels, again, the very desire to spiritualise and elevate the deity of the older traditions led to the imagining of new divine beings. Among the Samaritans, who, setting out with a Pentateuch, developed quite as much zeal as had the Judeans for the God of Israel, the expression "angel of God" or "angels of God" was frequently substituted for "God" or "Gods" in Genesis; and the Chaldee paraphrasts did as much, at times adding further "the word of the Lord" or "the Shekinah" as a compromise where "angel" seemed inadequate. [*3] Similarly the later Jews read "angels of God" where their sacred books inconveniently spoke of "Gods." [*4] In the book of Nehemiah, yet again, we have the mention of the "Good Spirit" of God, [*5] an idea apparently derived from Mazdeism, [*6] and sure to set up a special divine concept. Such conceptions in all likelihood grew up by way of analogy from the phenomena of monarchical government [*7] in which the "word" or "hands" or "eye" of the autocrat became names for his chief functionaries or representatives.

It would be hard to show that a "monotheism" which really accepted, as absolutely as any polytheism, a vast plurality of divine beings, had any moral or spiritual efficacy in virtue of merely setting forth a tyranny of a Supreme God over hosts of angels, with a rebel party included, rather than a kind of feudal family oligarchy like that of Olympus, in which the Chief God is partially thwarted by

[p. 87]

the others. The difference is much more one of political habit and outlook than of either ethic or philosophy. The Jews derived from Babylon the idea of a Creator-God; [*1] and if that be the valuable principle in monotheism their polytheistic kindred are entitled to the credit. So with the idea of a Supreme-God: [*2] the Hebrew specialty lay solely in putting a greater distance between God and Angels than did the Mesopotamian, and in rejecting (for the time being) the notions of triads and of a divine family. So little difference was there between the two states of mind that the Christian Fathers freely applied the term "Gods" to the Angels of the Judaeo-Christian system. [*3] For the rest, it is significant that the beginnings alike of rational science and of rational ethics were made, not among the Hebrew monotheists, but among Babylonian and Greek polytheists, who went far in cosmic and moral philosophy while the post-exilic Jews were devotees of a God whose passionate and capricious will took the place of both natural and moral law.

A "consistent, remorseless, naked monotheism," in short, never prevailed among the Jews any more than in any other people. Such a concept, save in the case of scattered thinkers, as often Gentiles as Jews, has never doctrinally or conceptually flourished till the rise of modern Deism, Islam having in turn capitulated to the notion of inferior good and evil spirits. Some small and isolated communities in antiquity probably approached nearer than the Jews ever did to the bare notion of a single (tribal) God, without "sons," or angels, or a Chosen One, and without an Adversary; and the ancient pantheists, tending as pantheism usually does to repass into theism, at times reached in that way a far purer form of monotheism [*4] than that of the Hebrew books.

While the creed, despite its rooted traditionalism, was thus of its own nature lapsing into new indirect forms of polytheism, the secular problem of political life was no more being solved in Jewry than elsewhere. In the day of the Restoration we already find the rich taking usury from the poor; [*5] and in the last of the canonical prophets we find crudely indicated the pressure of that deep doubt as to the God's good government which makes the theme of the book of Job. That the faithful deceive the deity and each other,

[p. 88]

and that many despair of Yahweh's rule [*1]--such are the testimonies of the closing pages of the Old Testament. Only the cohesive power of ceremonialism, the unchanging pressure of popular superstition, and--last, but certainly not least--the economic success of the shrine, maintained the priestly State. There had presumably now begun among the dispersed Jews the rule of sending gifts to the temple, a practice which in a later age made an economic basis for a whole order of rabbins and scribes; and on the same basis there would be partly maintained a considerable population of pauper devotees. Under such circumstances the high-priest, another Babylonian adaptation, was practically what the king had been in the past; and the post was intrigued for, and at a pinch murdered for, [*2] like any other eastern throne.

One indirect result of the priestly policy was the development of the faculty of the Jews for prospering in other lands. Placed as they were, a small community among great States, it behoved them, like the Dutch of to-day, to be linguists for the sake of their commerce; and when the post-exilic priesthood, like that of post-Reformation Scotland, found their account in teaching their people to read the sacred books, they were at once preparing them to succeed among the less-schooled populations around and creating an abnormal tie between the dispersed ones and the sacred city.

But, on the other hand, the surrounding cultures could not but affect the Jewish. On the Persian overlordship followed the Macedonian; and where the similar Persian creed had failed to do more than modify the Jewish, the manifold Greek culture which spread under the Seleucids and the Ptolemies penetrated Syrian life in all directions. In that world of chronic strife and deteriorating character, where already all men had attained the fatal temper, seen later at large in decadent Rome, of acquiescence in the rule of the most successful commander as such, the tranquil cynicism of Greek cosmopolitan culture was as appropriate in Jewry as elsewhere. So far did the assimilation go that the hierarchy at length was definitely faced by a Hellenising party, convinced of the futility of the tribal religion, even as the pre-exilic Yahwists had been; and high-priests were found to take the bribes and do the work of heathenism. There was, as we have seen, no moral or philosophic elevation in the Judaic cult to countervail intellectually such a movement; and had not Antiochus Epiphanes, in a spirit of fanaticism wholly alien to the general policy of the Diadochi, proceeded to coerce and outrage

[p. 89]

the zealots of Jerusalem, their worship would have dwindled very much as it did in the old time. But that act elicited the singular genius of the Maccabean family, under whom the desperate tenacity of the most devoted part of the race at length triumphed over its foes to the point of re-establishing a State in which the king was priest, as previously the priest had been king. In the face of such a consummation, all the promises and pretensions of the old cult seemed newly justified; and a newly exultant faith emerged.

Footnotes

^85:2 2 Kings xxiv, 14; xxv, 11-12.

^86:1 Cp. Christianity and Mythology, Part III, Div. i,  section 10. The vision of the high-priest Joshua (Zech. iii, 1, 2) standing before "the angel of the Lord" (originally, no doubt, "the Lord," as in v. 2) with "the Satan" (= the Accuser or Adversary) on the right hand to accuse him, seems to me clearly Babylonian and not Persian.

^86:2 See refs, in A Short History of Freethought, i, 120.

^86:3 G. L. Bauer, Theology of the Old Testament, Eng. tr. 1837, p. 5.

^86:4 Cp. Ps. xcvii, 7, 9, and Heb. i, 6.

^86:5 Neh. ix, 20.

^86:6 See below, Part III,  section 5.

^86:7 Cp. Jastrow, Religion of Babylonia and Assyria, p. 433.

^87:1 Cp. Jastrow, pp. 433-4, 441-2; Sayce, pp. 142, 205. "The knowledge that there is a supreme spiritual Being, unique in his nature, Creator and upholder of all things, is wholly wanting to ancient Israel" (Stade, Geschichte des Volkes Israel, p. 428).

^87:2 Sayce pp. 122-129, 187

^87:3 See the point full set forth in J. A. Farrer's Paganism and Christianity, ch. i. Cp. Supernatural Religion, ed. 1902, in 71-80.

^87:4 Le Page Renouf, while pronouncing that the Egyptian doctrine of the one and only God "stopped short in Pantheism" (Hibbert Lectures, p. 230), admits that Egyptian doctrine better meets the definition of Cardinal Newman than any other (Id. pp. 215-216).

^87:5 Neh, v, 6.

^88:1 Malachi i, 7-8. 14; ii, 8-10, 17; iii, 5, 8-14.

^88:2 Josephus, 11 Antiq. vii, 41.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 8. Revival and Disintegration.

Thus for a second time was a Yahwist remnant selected, the bulk of the educated class passing over to the neighbouring polities, and their place being taken by new popular material of a more zealous order. Judaism was in fact the product not of a racial bias but of a socio-political selection, such as might have taken place under similar conditions in any race whatever; and ever since the Dispersion the same selective process has continued, the unzealous Jews always tending to be absorbed in the populations among whom they live. Something similar has actually occurred among the Parsees. Even, however, if the Jewish evolution were as unique as it is conventionally represented to have been, the special case would no more be an exception to universal sociological law than is the phenomenon of marsupials to biological law. There has simply been survival in the Judaic case, chiefly in virtue of the fact of Sacred Books, where similar creed-tendencies were usually annihilated under the ancient regimen of tyrannous violence. One result of the desperate frequency of bloodshed and massacre in the Jewish sphere was a passion for fecundity, as against the need for restraint of numbers that was felt in the City States of Greece in their progressive period; and the Jews thus abounded, and carried their religion with them, where other creeds died out.

Irresistible, however, is the law of strife among unenlightened men, and no less so the law of change among all. In the stress of the Maccabean struggle we find the doctrine of the Messiah already so far developed that a secondary God is the due result. The Christ of the Book of Enoch is substantially a deity: "before the sun and the signs were created, before the stars of heaven were made, his name was called before the Lord of the Spirits"; [*1] he is at once Chosen One, Son of God and Son of Man; he is judge at the Day of Judgment; [*2] and as "Son of the Woman" [*3] he clearly

[p. 90]

relates to the Babylonian myth in the Book of Revelation. And seeing that "in him dwells the Spirit of Wisdom" he is in effect at once the Sophia and the Logos of the Apocrypha and of the Platonising Philo Judaeus.

But the evolution did not end there. Under the new Asmonean dynasty there broke out in due course all the violences native to the hereditary monarchy of the ancient world; and once again the play of outside influences, which the feuds of competitors for the throne brought to bear, affected the hereditary creed within its central sphere. The Greek translation of the sacred books became the normal version; and to that version were added books not admitted into the Hebrew canon, some of them elaborating new theological conceptions. As the Jewish State came more and more into the whirl of the battling empires of Seleucids and Ptolemies, soon to be crushed by Rome, the dynasty of king-priests passed away before the energy of new competitors; and once more kings, not even Jewish by descent, subsisted beside high-priests of their own choosing. At length, under the Idumean Herod the Great, a man born to rule amid plots and feuds, to drown rebellions in blood and to outwit enemies by outgoing them in audacity, Eastern craft exploited at once Greek culture and Roman power with such address that Hellenism gained ground against the utmost stress of organised conservatism; while among the common people, conscious of an evil fate, movements of quietism and asceticism and Mahdism undermined the ancient prestige of the temple-cult. Once again the tribal faith was being disintegrated.

One of the movements emerging though not originating at this time is the cult associated with the quasi-historic name of Jesus. As organised Yahwism had been retrospectively fathered on the fictitious legislation of Moses, so the Jesuine cult is in turn fathered on Jesus in a set of narratives stamped with myth, and incapable of historical corroboration even when stripped of their supernaturalism. To the eye of comparative science the central feature in the cult as it appears in the oldest documents is the eucharist, an institution common to many surrounding religions, and known to have been in ancient and secret usage among sections of the Jews. [*1] Descending perhaps from totemistic times, it invariably involved some rite or symbolism of theophagy, or eating of a divine victim; and a sacrificed God-man was the natural mythic complement of the ritual.

[p. 91]

In the case of the Jesuine cult, an actual historic person may or may not have been connected with the doctrine; and for such a connection there is a quasi-historic basis in an elusive figure of a Jesus who appears to have been put to death by stoning and hanging about a century before the death of Herod. [*1] On the other hand the name in its Hebrew and Aramaic forms had probably an ancient divine status, being borne by the mythic Deliverer Joshua, and again by the quasi-Messianic high-priest of the Restoration. It was thus in every aspect fitted to be the name of a new Demigod who should combine in himself the qualities of the Akkadian Deliverer-Messiah and the Sacrificed God of the most popular cults of the Graeco-Roman, Egyptian, and west-Asiatic world. In this aspect only is it to be historically understood. But before considering it in its type, we have to consider it in its genetic relation to Judaism, and so complete our estimate of the evolution of that cult to the moment of its definite arrest.

That the cult of Jesus the Christ was being pushed in rivalry with that of pure Judaism among the Jews of the Dispersion before the destruction of the Temple appears from the nature of the oldest documents as well as from the tradition. Such competition was the more easy because the life of the synagogue was largely independent of that of the central temple, and craved both rites and teaching which should make up for the sacrificial usages which were the chief institutions at Jerusalem. But that Jesuism could have successfully dispensed with the main cult among either Jews or Gentiles while the Temple remained standing is inconceivable. When it did begin to make substantial progress late in the second century of its own era, its main prestige undoubtedly came from the Jewish sacred books; and had the Temple been allowed to remain in active existence, that prestige would have accrued to it as of old. Conceivably, however, there might have happened a development of Jesuism under Judaism, the new cult exploiting the old and being tolerated or adopted by it. In that case there would have occurred yet once more a disintegration of a quasi-monotheism in terms of a virtual polytheism. And towards such disintegration marked progress had been made under the aegis of Judaism.

Note has already been taken of the entrance of new and practically polytheistic ideas into the cult at the very moment of its ostensible purgation of polytheistic tendencies; and in the course of four centuries these ideas had been much developed. To the "Good

[p. 92]

[paragraph continues] Spirit" of Nehemiah and the Logos or "Word" of intermediate writers had been added the personified Sophia or "Wisdom" of the books of Proverbs and Ecclesiasticus and Enoch; and while the Samaritans seem to have conceived, on old Semitic lines, of a female Holy Spirit, symbolised like several Gods and Goddesses by a dove, [*1] the Jews proper who came into contact with Greek thought developed with the help of the Platonists the originally eastern notion of the Logos into a new Jewish deity. [*2] In their anxiety to avoid Goddess-worship, they even represented the Deity as generating the Son out of himself (ek gastros); [*3] and those who later made Jesus speak of "My Mother the Holy Spirit" [*4] were unable to prevail against the old prejudice. It was thus on Judaically laid lines that Jesuism ultimately completed its theology. But had not the Temple been overthrown, either the Judaic evolution would have kept the Jewish Logos in organic relation to the Yahwist worship and sacred books, or the movement would have been overshadowed.

All would have depended on its economic sustenance. Had it promised a useful reinforcement to the Jewish high-priest's powers of attracting proselytes and revenue, [*5] it would doubtless have been exploited in the name of Judaism, very much as it was by the early Christists; and in view of the historic facts it is reasonable to say that had their system survived, the temple-priests would so have exploited it. Inasmuch, finally, as the element of Messianism, reduced to a form of purely theological Soterism, was actually exploited by the Christists without specially calling forth the wrath of Rome, the temple priesthood might have done as much. It was in fact the catastrophe of the destruction of Jerusalem, provoked by the desperate courage of the zealots of the old faith, that alone made possible the separate rise of Christism and its ultimate erection into the State religion of the declining Roman empire.

To say this, however, is to say that Jewish monotheism so-called--in reality a tribal system using a monotheistic terminology--was

[p. 93]

from first to last an unstable doctrine, always running risk of dissolution into polytheism, avowed or sophisticated; that it was so

dissolving at the time of the destruction of its temple; and that its offshoot, Christism, is a resultant of the process. If then monotheism is as such intrinsically superior to other forms of religion, Christianity is one of the inferior faiths, representing as it does the dissolvent process in question. To the eye of science, of course, it is neither inferior nor superior save in respect of its ethical and intellectual reactions; and towards an estimate of these we proceed by a comparative study of the religious principles on which Christism is built up.

Meantime, while the Hebrew literature obviously plays a large part in the intellectual colouring of the new Christist world, it would be difficult to show that Judaism made for higher life in the post-Roman world. So far as it made proselytes, it was by appealing to normal superstition, to belief in the mysterious potency of a particular God-name, and of the rites of his cult. [*1] To scientific and philosophical thought it passed on no moralising and unifying conception of life, for it had none such to give. Moslem monotheism, in furnishing a temporary habitat for scientific thought, [*2] did more for civilisation both directly and indirectly; but Moslem thought had to be fertilised by the re-discovered philosophy of Greece before it could attain to anything. And insofar as a philosophical and scientific monotheism arose in the medieval period, it inherits far more from Greek thought--which indeed had early undergone Semitic influences--than from Hebrew dogma.

As for the direct influence of Judaism on life, the most favourable view is to be reached by noting that the most applauded moral teaching of the Gospels is either Judaic or a Judaic adaptation of other codes. The first Gospel-makers did but put in the mouth of the demigod sayings and ideals long current in Jewry. But this again amounts to saying that men with ideals in Jewry were glad to turn to a new movement in which their ideals might have a place, finding the established cult sunk in ceremonialism. And when we contemplate the mass of its ceremonial law, the endless complex of taboo and sacrifice and traditionary custom and superstition, we can but say that if men were good under such a regimen it was in spite of and not in virtue of it. Moral reason is there outraged at every turn; and the anti-sacrificial doctrines of the

[p. 94]

prophets were stedfastly disregarded to the end. If it be suggested that in such a system religion has got rid of the irrational element in taboo, and left only what is "essential to religion and morals," we can but recall the classic case of the Briton's verdict on the folly of the French nation in making the uniforms of its army "white, which is absurd, and blue, which is only fit for the artillery and the blue-horse."

We come within sight of the truth when we listen to Renan's dictum that of the Jewish race we may say the very best and the very worst without fear of error, since it presents both extremes. Therein the Jewish race is simply on all fours with all others, as Renan might easily have realised if he could once have got rid of the racial presupposition in his moral estimates. Judaism, in short, wrought no abnormal development in thought or life; and its very failure was on the lines of the failures of the systems and civilisations around it. The champion of the current creed, though an expert in Greek lore, resorts to the conventional judgment  that "the Greek with his joyous nature had no abiding sense of sin." It is the dictum also of Renan: "A profound sentiment of human destiny was always lacking to the Greeks": they had "no arriere pensee of social disquietude or melancholy": their childlike serenity was "always satisfied with itself": "gaiety has always characterised the true Hellene."  A closer student of Greek religion than Renan, and one perhaps more sympathetic than Dr. Jevons, declares of this doctrine: "It is the absolute contrary of the facts I seek to set forth."  And two of the Germans who have studied Greece most closely and most independently have agreed in the verdict that "The Greeks were less happy than most men think."  Their verdict is likely to cancel the conventional formula for those who will weigh both in critical balances. It was the Greeks, when all is said, who passed on to Christianity its type of torturing fiend:  it was the Greek adoption of Christianity, "the religion of sorrow," that preserved to the world that growth from a pagan germ on Judaic soil; and it was "the Greek," finally, who constructed the Christian creed.

Footnotes

^89:1 Schodde's trans. xlviii, 3, 6. As to the date of the book, see pp. 26, 41-43, 237, 239.

^89:2 Cp. Schodde's Introd., pp. 52, 54, 134.

^89:3 Enoch lxii, 4, 5.

^90:1 See below, Part II, ch. i.

^91:1 Cp. Christianity and Mythology, pp. 298, 345, 363 4, and A Short History of Christianity, pp. 8, 14, 402-3. Also below, Part II, ch. i,  section 10.

^92:1 As to the Samaritan cultus of a sacred dove, see Reland, Dissert. de Monte Garizim,  section 13 (Diss. Misc. 1706, i, 147). Schurer (Hist. of the Jewish People in the Time of Jesus Christ, 2nd Div. Eng. tr. i, 8, note) says: "The assertion that the Samaritans worshipped the image of a dove is a slander first appearing in the Talmud"; but that it was for them a divine symbol is another proposition. The Samaritan symbol may or may not have been borrowed from Egypt, where Amun, as the spirit of life, was represented as a bird hovering above the body of Osiris when he is about to resume life. Being thus "the usual symbol of the soul and of new life" (Tiele, Egypt. Rel. p. 150), it would readily apply to the idea of the God's baptism (Matt. iii, 16). As to the ancient symbolism of Dove, Wind, Life, and Holy Ghost, see Gubernatis, Letture sopra la mitologia vedica, 1874, p. 145, sq.; and as to the belief that the Gods entered into birds cp. Ellis, Polynesian Researches, 2nd ed. i, 323, 366.

^92:2 See below, Part II, ch. ii.

^92:3 Septuagint version of Ps. cx, 3 (cix in Sept.).

^92:4 Origen, Comm. on John iii,  section 63. Other heretics made the Holy Spirit the Sister of Jesus. Epiphanius, Haeres. liii.

^92:5 Cp. Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. p. 347.

^93:1 Cp. A Short History of Freethought, i, 120.

^93:2 Reville (Prolegomenes, p 313) admits the nullity of Judaism on the scientific side. He seems to imply that it made an end of the notion of planetary deities; but it really held by planetary angels all along, and passed on the idea to Kepler.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 9. Conclusion.

There has thus emerged from a survey of the comparative

[p. 95]

evolution of religions the conclusion that not only do all undergo change in spite of the special religious aversion to change, but all evolve by the same laws, their differences being invariably reducible to effects of environment. Of this the decisive proof is the fact that, under the very roof of a professed monotheism, there arose as aforesaid a secondary God-idea on the lines of a normal process of polytheism. The law of the process is everywhere an interposition of a new God, evolved by later psychosis, between the worshippers and the earlier God, so long as the God-idea remains a psychic need. Only the violent rupture with Christism, and the ensuing feud, prevented Judaism from obeying the law in the normal manner: what happened was that on the severance of the new cult from the old, the older deity was himself modified, with, for a time, somewhat grotesque results. [*1] But for Christists the new God stands to the old in the convenient relation that was normal in the original environment--that of son. Even as Apollo, and Athene, and Attis, and Herakles, and Dionysos, had to become children of Zeus, and Merodach the son of Ea, and Khonsu the son of Amun at Thebes, [*2] and Mithra the son of Ahura-Mazda, the Judaeo-Greek Logos had to be the son of Yahweh, the anti-Judaic animus of the Gnostics failing to oust the already formed myth. [*3]

Such an evolution stands in all cases alike for the simple need of the worshipper who has ceased to relate fully to the old environment, and is appealed to by a cult coming from an environment like his own, or adapts his old God to a new moral climate. In the oldest systems known to us such modifications are seen taking place. Already in the Vedas, Indra, originally a God of thunder and storm, has been "touched with emotion" till he becomes of the order of the Beloved Gods, giving and receiving the love of men; [*4] and still his cult was in its own sphere largely superseded by that of Krishna, [*5] who could better be made to play the part. In Egypt, again, Osiris is visibly made to meet the need for a "nearer God" by assuming new characteristics from age to age; [*6] and yet, after millenniums of possession, he seems to have waned before Serapis, who in turn ceded, not without force, to Jesus. [*7] All the while, indeed, inferior

[p. 96]

deities were popular by reason of the same general need for a God "near at hand." [*1]

In the so-called "Aryan" religions the process is essentially the same. Apollo had to supervene on Zeus, as Zeus had done on Kronos; and "that father lost, lost his," in a sufficiently primitive myth. Where new culture-contacts follow each other rapidly, and the rites of one accredited Son-God fail to meet the newest psychic needs, another is given him as a brother; and so Dionysos, grouped in another triad, stands alongside of Apollo. This is accomplished in spite of the most furious resistance of kings and men who see in the new cult only evil and madness; till in time the priests of Apollo, who can have been no less resentful, give it a place in their chief temple. [*2] In all such developments, the new God partially supersedes the older, [*3] whatever formalities be maintained; and no further explanation is needed for the fact, so fallaciously stressed in some modern propaganda, that many savages recognise a Supreme God or Creator to whom they do not sacrifice or pray. [*4] The Supreme God, so to speak, has retired from business, in virtue not of any superiority of character but of the law of divine superannuation.

Nor is there any limit to the process of substitution save in the cessation of the need. All heresy, all dissent, is but a subsidiary phase of the process which in old time evolved new Gods. The early Church could live down the manifold imaginations of Gnosticism, because they were framed for the speculative minds, and such minds tended to disappear as the intellectual decadence continued; but only after long convulsions, desperate persecution, and much exhaustion, could it live down its more intimate heresies; and when Arianism and Manichaeism seemed at length destroyed, it was only to rise again in new forms, philosophic on the one side, popular on the other.

And the Gods survive in the ratio of their capacity to meet either order or need--that is to say, in the ratio of the adaptive skill and economic address of their prophets and priests. Without such adaptation they are insalvable. In the orthodox Christian trinity, framed under Judaic restrictions, the Holy Spirit has been

[p. 97]

from first to last, technically speaking, a failure, being for all practical purposes superseded by the Virgin Mother, and for all philosophic purposes merged in the Logos on the one hand and in the Father-God on the other. But just as Jesus tended to supersede Yahweh, so Mary in large measure tended to supersede Jesus, who is seen to have become more inaccessible and supernal as his Mother was made in her turn to play the part of Mediator. There are even traces in later medieval art of a tendency to make Mary's mother, Saint Anna, take the place of the Father in a new trinity; and the similar tendency to create a secondary trinity out of the human father and mother and son, Joseph and Mary and Jesus, is not yet exhausted. [*1] It depends upon the total fortunes of civilisation whether that tendency shall be realised, or be arrested by the culture-forces which are at present disintegrating all theistic thought.

In fine, Christ-making is but a form or stage of God-making, the Christs or Son-Gods being but secondary Gods. Of necessity they are evolved out of prior material--the material, it may be, of primitive cults to which men reverted in times of distress and despair of help from the Gods in nominal power; but when the reversion persists the old material is transformed, and the result is a new God who, Antaeus-like, has fresh vitality through contact with the primary sources of religious emotion, but is turned to the account of new phases of emotion, moral and other. Thus in the Hellenised cult of the Thrakian Bacchus, out of the very riot of savagery, the reek of blood and of living flesh torn by the hands and teeth of wine-maddened Moenads, there arises the dream of absorption in the God, and of utter devotion to his will, even as we meet it in the suicide-seeking transports of the early Christians. [*2] And thus, on the aesthetic side of the evolution, from the rude block of the rustic Beer-God [*3] there is ultimately fashioned, under the hands even of the unbelieving Euripides, the gracious form of the calm God of Joy:--

     No grudge hath he of the great;
      No scorn of the mean estate;
 But to all that liveth His wine he giveth,
      Griefless, immaculate. [*4]

[p. 98]

[paragraph continues] And even such a mystery as Hellenic hands wrought out of the hypostasis of the Beer-God, Hellenistic hands could shape from that of a man of sorrows, moulding from the sombre figure of the human sacrifice, slain a million times through aeons of ignorance, a God of another and a more enduring cast. In the understanding of this secondary process lies the comprehension of the history of what may be conveniently termed "culture-religion" as distinguished from the "Nature religion" studied under the head of anthropology. In terms of this distinction we may say that hierology proper begins with the typically secondary Gods, where anthropology in the ordinary sense ends. [*1] But it is essential to a scientific view that we remember there has been no break in the evolution, no supernatural or enigmatic interposition; and this will be sufficiently clear when we study the evolution of the secondary Gods in detail.

Footnotes

^94:1 Jevons, Introduction, p. 334.

^94:2 Les Apotres, ed. 1866, pp. 324, 328, 329.

^94:3 J. Girard, Le Sentiment religieux en Grece, p. 7. Cp. Miss Harrison, Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion, 2nd ed. pp. ix, 1-10.

^94:4 Burckhardt, Griechische Culturgeschichte, i, 11, citing Boeckh.

^94:5 E.g.. Eurynomos, "who according to the antiquarians at Delphi is a daimon in Hades, and eats the flesh of the dead clean to the bones......His colour is a blueish-black, like that of the flies that infest meat, and he shows his fangs." Pausanias, x, 28.

^95:1 Cp. Hershon, Genesis with a Talmudical Commentary, 1883, pp. 1, 45, 60, 98, 121, 124,

^95:2 As to the evolution of humbler "popular" Gods, see Erman, Handbook, as cited, pp. 74-79.

^95:3 Cp. A Short History of Christianity, pp. 113-117.

^95:4 Muir, Sanskrit Texts, v. 103 sq.

^95:5 Vishnu Purana, B. v., cc. 10, 11, 12, 30 (Wilson's trans. 1840, pp. 522-8, 588). Cp. Muir, Texts, iv, ch. ii,  section 5.

^95:6 Cp. Tiele, Egyptian Religion, Eng. tr. pp. 118-120, 139, 140, 167, 168, 185, etc.; Erman, as cited, pp 1.

^95:7 The Egyptian cults were forcibly abolished by Theodosius in 381.

^96:1 Cp. Prof. Erman, Handbook, as cited, p. 75.

^96:2 Plutarch, De Ei ap. Delphi, ix. Cp. Girard, Le Sentiment religieux en Grece, 1861 p. 240.

^96:3 Cp. Sayce, Hibbert Lectures, p. 103; Maspero, Hist. ancienne, pp. 286-7; Jastrow, p. 118; Tiele, Egypt. Rel. p. 155.

^96:4 Cp. A Short History of Freethought, i, 94; Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. pp. 48 sq.); Barth, Religions of India, p. 18 (as to Varuna); Ellis, Polynesian Researches, i, 324; Mariner, Tonga Islands, ii, 105-6; and cases cited by Krasinski, Sketch of the Religious History of the Slavonic Nations, ed. 1851, p, 13, and by Buchner, Force and Matter, Eng. tr. p. 393.

^97:1 Cp. A Short History of Christianity, pp. 235-6.

^97:2 Cp. Girard, Le Sentiment religieux en Grece, pp. 396-402. K. O. Muller had previously put it (Hist. Lit. Anc. Greece, p. 289) that there was an "intense desire felt by every worshipper of Bacchus to fight, to conquer, to suffer, in common with him," and that this led to the satyric element in the festivals. Haigh (Tragic Drama of the Greeks, 1896, p. 21) points out that the satyric chorus was anything but devotional, and that the temper in question belonged to "the orgiastic worship of Dionysos, as performed by ecstatic Moenads at Thebes and Delphi, where the dominant note, undoubtedly, was one of agonised sympathy with the sufferings of the God." Cp. Miss Harrison, Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion, ch. X.

^97:3 Cp. Miss Harrison, Prolegomena, 2nd ed. pp. 415-425.

^97:4 Bacchae, 421-3. Gilbert Murray's translation.

^98:1 Cp. Tiele, Outlines, p. 6.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 99]

  

PART II.

  

SECONDARY GOD-MAKING

  

CHAPTER I.

  

THE SACRIFICED SAVIOUR-GOD

  

 section 1. Totemism and Sacraments.

THERE is an arguable case for the theory that the belief in a dying and re-arising Saviour-God, seen anciently in the cults of Adonis, Attis, Herakles, Osiris, and Dionysos, originated obscurely in the totem-sacraments of savages who ate a sacred animal in order to preserve their identity of species with it. [*1] There is, however, a much stronger case for the simpler theory that the belief in question originated on another line in the practice of sacrificing by way of sympathetic magic a victim who, as such, became a God, but was not supposed to rise again in his own person. [*2] The first of these theories is in the nature of the case incapable of proof; [*3] and it is not necessary, for a rational comparison and appreciation of the historic cults, to establish it, any more than to assume that either derivation excludes the other. We should profit little by our knowledge of the manifold God-making powers of early man if we supposed that any given Saviour-cult could originate only in such a line or lines of descent; and in point of fact the proposal to hark back to totemism seems to overlook the fact that a sacramental meal ostensibly can originate apart from totemism.

It is not plausible to suppose, for instance, that the eating of bread in a primitive eucharist implied that the partakers originally

[p. 100]

had the corn for their special totem; [*1] or (supposing the God Dionysos to have been a simple deification of the sacramental Soma or Haoma, as Agni was of the sacrificial fire) [*2] to conclude that the first Soma-drinkers made their ritual beverage on the score that they were of the grape or any analogous totem. Both inductively and deductively we seem rather led to conclude that totems might or might not be sacramentally eaten; and that animals like men might be sacramentally eaten without any reference to totemism. It is apt to be forgotten that at bottom the word "sacred" (hieros) equates with "taboo"; and that an animal might be made taboo for a variety of reasons--as being too valuable to kill, or as being unwholesome, or as being for occasional killing only.

On the difficult subject of totemism, the suggestion may here be incidentally offered that the totem was in origin merely the group's way of naming itself. [*3] Such group-names were as necessary as individual names; and while a person could readily be labelled from the place of his birth or any family incident at that period, or by a physical or moral peculiarity, clans of the same stock could with difficulty be distinguished in the nomadic state save by arbitrary names, which could best be drawn from the list of natural objects. Indeed, it is hard to conceive how otherwise nomadic clans could first name themselves. What other vocables were available? [*4] Spencer's suggestion that totemism originated in misinterpretation of nicknames [*5] raises the difficulty that nicknames presuppose names. Spencer fully realises this in the case of individuals, but overlooks it in the case of the group, since he apparently supposes the tribal totem-name to come through the nickname of an already-named individual. When we realise that for sheer lack of other words the

[p. 101]

early group could hardly have any name whatever save from a natural object, and when we so recast the explanation, the objection which meets the first form of the nickname theory--that it ascribes too much latitude to verbal misunderstanding [*1]--falls to the ground. In the primitive state, we must presume, objects and actions were first named by onomatopoeia, or else, sensations and actions being first so named, objects were metaphorically named from sensations and actions; [*2] and so with attributes. A definite doctrine as to beginnings is hard to justify, and is not here essential: it suffices to realise that objects would be somehow named before individuals and groups were, whether or not individuals were named before groups. And while persons might readily be named or nicknamed Tall or Short, Straight or Crooked, Quick or Slow, tribes could only in rare instances be so distinguished; while nothing would be more easy than for one family or clan to say to another, You are the Wolves, we the Bears; you the Trees, we the Birds, and so on. [*3]

Some such agreement would be necessary; for the mere bestowal of names of whim or derision by groups or clans on each other--sometimes suggested as an explanation of the phenomenon--would yield a multitude of names for each group. [*4] The same difficulty meets Spencer's theory that the belief in animal descent came through a nickname, and the totem symbol from that. Spencer, I repeat, had not fully considered the special conditions of the naming of groups. His correction of common assumptions as to the naming of individuals [*5] is important, though it is perhaps precarious in respect of the assumption that contemporary savage ways of naming children were primordial; but there is a clear hiatus between his doctrine of individual names and nicknames, and his suggestion as to tribal totem-names. He merely rejects other explanations without justifying his own. "Why," he asks," [*6] did there occur so purely gratuitous an act as that of fixing on a symbol for the tribe? That by one tribe out of multitudes so strange a whim might be displayed is credible. But that by tribes unallied in type and scattered throughout the world, there should have been independently adopted so odd a practice, is incredible." Now, the naming of groups is no more gratuitous or strange than the naming of individuals: groups needed to name themselves and each other as such, just as individuals did; and as Spencer admits animal-nicknames to be natural, [*7] he

[p. 102]

cannot well deny animal names to be natural in the case of clans or tribes. If there is anything certain about early man it is that he regarded animals as on a level with him, and all objects as possibly animate. For tribal purposes, then, these were the natural names; and a formal agreement would be required for their adoption. In no other way could groups speak with each other about each other, at least when they became numerous. And until fixed dwellings or hamlets did away with the need, the expedient would subsist for the reason for which it began.

This period, however, would be immensely long, and the memory of the genesis would infallibly be lost. Given the original circumstances, "verbal misunderstanding" was thus inevitable. [*1] When, that is to say, the comparatively early savage learned that he was "a Bear," and that his father and grandfather and forefathers were so before him, it was really impossible that, after ages in which totem names thus passed current, he should fail to assume that his folk were descended from a bear, which as a matter of course became at a later stage an Ancestor-God. [*2] The belief was inevitable precisely because the totem was not a nickname, but a name antecedent to nicknames; and because descent from an animal was the easiest way of explaining or conceiving a "beginning" of men. And while some totem names might conceivably have been chosen by way of striking up a helpful alliance with an animal family, [*3] the fact that the list of totems includes sand, sparrows, pigeons, bats, and so on, is hardly open to that interpretation; while the principle of simply naming from an already-named object seems to meet all cases alike.

Such a procedure has actually been noted among the contemporary natives of the island of Efati in the New Hebrides, where "the people are all divided into families or clans, each of which has a distinctive name, such as manui, the cocoa-nut, namkatu......a species of yam, naui, the yam," etc. [*4] Similarly the exogamous

[p. 103]

[paragraph continues] "classes" of the Australian tribes are always named from animals, plants, objects, etc.; [*1] and in most of the tribes of West Africa there are some men with a totem surname who with men of the same surname in other tribes claim a common descent from the original totem. [*2] Livingstone noted the same usage among the Bechuanas, whole tribes being known as "they of the monkey," [*3] and so on--a state of things in which the cognomen could be carried from any one tribe into others. So among the Narrinyeri of South Australia, "every tribe has its ngaitye, that is, some animal which they regard as a sort of good genius, which takes an interest in their welfare--something like the North-American Indian totem No man or woman will kill her ngaitye, except it happens to be an animal which is good for food, when they have no objection to eating them. [*4] Nevertheless, they will be very careful to destroy the remains," from the usual fear of sorcery. [*5] Here we have the rationale of the totem. "It appears to me," writes the last witness, "that the ngaitye of the Narrinyeri is the same as the aitu of the Samoans, but it is not regarded with so much veneration by the former as by the latter. The names are evidently derived from one original, ngaitye being the same word as aitu, only with the addition of consonants." [*6]

Now, the aitu of Samoa is simply the primary form of the Gods. "At his birth a Samoan was supposed to be taken under the care of some God, or aitu, as it was called. The help of several of these Gods was probably (sic) invoked in succession on the occasion, and the one who happened to be addressed just as the child was born was fixed on as the child's God for life." [*7] Each God was supposed to appear in "some visible incarnation"--beast, fish, bird, animal, shell-fish, or creeping thing. "A man would eat freely of what was regarded as the incarnation of the God of another man, but the incarnation of his own particular God he would consider it death to injure or eat." "This class of genii, or tutelary deities, they call aitu fale, or Gods of the house."

In fine, the family-name or tribe-name, plant or animal or what not, first becomes an ancestor, who re-incarnates himself, and as

[p. 104]

such is not normally to be eaten. This is the rule in the vast majority of cases. [*1] But among the ill-supplied Australians [*2] he may be eaten when he is eatable, being regarded all the while as a God-ancestor, [*3] whose remains must be safeguarded from sorcery; while among the well-supplied Samoans he is strictly taboo, though any man may eat another man's ancestor-God. In neither case is there any sign of the idea of a totem-sacrament; and Livingstone's Bechuana tribes, like the Samoans, never ate their totem, "using the term ila, hate or dread, in reference to killing it." And it is difficult to conceive that a sacramental eating of the totem was originally a matter of course. To say nothing of the normal veto on the eating of one's own kin, the people whose totem was the sand, or the thunder, or the evening star, or the moon, or the hot wind, for instance, must have been hard put to it to conform to the principle; and while those of the centipede might contrive to accept it, the folk of the lion-totem must have found their sacrament precarious. While, again, in virtue of the primeval logic which regarded interfusion of blood as a creation of kinship, and the eating of lion as a way of becoming brave, the belief in the totemic descent, once set up, might at times lead to the practice of eating the totem, the eating of a lamb sacrament, on the other hand, is not plausibly to be so accounted for. There is, however, no difficulty in understanding how the totem animal might come to be at once revered and shunned, or regarded as "unlucky" when met. For instance, a Basuto of the crocodile totem, who did not often see crocodiles, might naturally feel when he met one as "civilised" people have been known to feel when they see an ancestor in a dream--he might take the meeting, that is, as a warning that trouble or death was about to overtake him. On the totem name had followed inevitably the belief in the totem ancestry, and occasionally the prohibition of the totem animal as food; and to both concepts attached all the hallucinations that early clustered around names.

When, however, we come to deal with religions as distinguished from religion, we are at a stage far removed from simple totemism, though many of the early hallucinations still remain in possession,

[p. 105]

as in the animal-Gods of Egypt and the animal-angels of Judaism. For our purpose of comparison and comprehension, then, we may fitly take up the conception of the slain Saviour-God as it existed, on the one hand, in the ancient cults amid which Christianity arose, and as it has been found, on the other hand, elsewhere and in later times in cults of primitive cast.

Footnotes

^99:1 Cp. S. Reinach, Cultes, Mythes, et Religions, i (1908) introd. and passim; and Orpheus, introd.; Durkheim, Sur le totemisme, in L'Annee Sociologique, 5e Annee, 1902, pp. 114, 117; F. B. Jevons. Introd. to Hist. of Relig. 1996, p. 154. A clear case of totem-sacrament was said to be lacking till the discovery of that of the Aruntas, discussed by M. Durkheim, and by Dr. Frazer in the preface to the second edition of his Golden Bough. But a case of the same order, apparently, is noted by J. G. Muller from the testimony of a traveller among the Native Americans in Arkansas. Geschichte der Amerikanischen Urreligionen, 2te Aufl., pp. 277, note.

^99:2 Cp. Frazer, Golden Bough, 2nd ed. vol. iii. ch. iii.  section section 15, 16.

^99:3 It should be noted that the whole theory of the totemistic origin of agriculture, animal-culture, metallurgy, etc. originated by Dr. Jevons and confidently developed by M. Reinach, is rejected by Dr. Frazer in his recent monumental work on Totemism and Exogamy (4 vols. 1910). In point of fact, totems are not found to coincide with the special pursuits of totem-tribes. Work cited, iv, 19.

^100:1 Dr. Jevons appears to argue (pp. 115-117) that the first agriculturists were so only in virtue of having made totems of the cereals they cultivated. He explicitly suggests that the agricultural comes later than the pastoral stage "because animal preceded plant totems." On this view men of the bear or wolf or eagle totem could have neither crops nor herds. The interesting argument of M. Reinach (as cited above), a development of that of Dr. Jevons, raises the same set of difficulties.

^100:2 See above, <page 53>.

^100:3 In his Social Origins (1903) Mr. Andrew Lang quite independently advanced a theory of the totem which is broadly in accord with the following, put forth by me in the same year. He, however, inferred the process of naming to have begun in "sobriquets given by group to group," showing that such ostensible sobriquets occur in France, England, and elsewhere, to this day. (Cp. his Secret of the Totem, 1905, p. 126 sq.) But, admitting his contention that a group has "far more need of names for its neighbours than of a name for itself," I still submit that a group needed a name for itself, were it only to answer the question of a stranger or new neighbour, "who are you?" If this be recognised, there need be no trouble about reconciling the adoption by late groups or clans of "derisive" nicknames with the thesis that the early group-names were "rather honour-giving than derisive." Need they have been either?

^100:4 Mr. Mathew (Eaglehawk and Crow, 1899, p. 109) notes the very suggestive fact that Australian communities as wholes are often named from one of their own verbal negatives, as if the No" of a tribesman to the alien whom he could not understand gave the latter his ground for naming. Here we have purely alien naming. In the exogamous classes within the tribes, again, we have naming by consent, with animal names.

^100:5 Principles of Sociology, 3rd ed. vol. i,  section 172, n. 327.

^101:1 Frazer, Totemism, p. 95.

^101:2 Geiger, Development of the Human Race. Eng. tr. 1880, pp. 24, 28-29.

^101:3 Kangaroo and emu, eaglehawk and crow, iguana, oppossum, etc. are among the names of the Australian "classes."

^101:4 This consideration does not seem to be met by Mr. Lang's "sobriquet" theory.

^101:5 Vol. cited,  section 170, p. 333.

^101:6 Note to  section 176, p. 346.

^101:7  section 170, 181.

^102:1 The later evolution of totemism is searchingly studied in Mr. Lang's Secret of the Totem.

^102:2 Dr. Frazer (Totemism, 1887, p. 95) remarks: "Sir John Lubbock also [with Spencer] thinks that totemism arose from the habit of naming persons and families after animals; but in dropping the intermediate links of ancestor-worship and verbal misunderstanding he has stripped the theory of all that lent it even an air of plausibility" (citing the Origin of Civilisation, p. 260). Those links being duly inserted, the theory, let us trust, has rather more air of plausibility" than some of Dr. Frazer's own hypotheses in other fields. His own final theory of the totem (Totemism and Exogamy, 1910, iv, 57 sq.) is quite unsatisfactory.

^102:3 So Dr. Jevons, Introd. to Hist. of Relig. pp. 101-104. "The fundamental principle of totemism," he finally asserts (p. 120),"is the alliance of a clan with an animal species."

^102:4 Rev. D. Macdonald, Oceania: Linguistic and Anthropological, 1889, pp. 182-3. The primitiveness of the Efatese is attested by the fact that "The woman is the mother of the clan--that is, every child, male or female, belongs to the family of the mother." Id. Totemism," observes Mr. Lang (The Secret of the Totem, 1905, p. 142), "certainly arose in an age when, if descent was reckoned, and if names were inherited, it was on the spindle side."

^103:1 J. Mathew, Eaglehawk and Crow, 1899, pp. 100, 102 sq., 108-9; Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes of Central Australia, 1904, App. B.

^103:2 Major Mockler-Ferryman, British West Africa, 2nd ed. 1900, p. 394.

^103:3 Missionary Travels and Researches in South Africa, 1857, p. 13; ed. 1905, p. 5.

^103:4 Cp. Stewart, as cited from Fison and Howitt by Frazer, Totemism, p. 7; and Mathew, as cited, p. 110.

^103:5 Rev. G. Taplin, The Narrinyeri, 2nd ed. p. 63. In Formosa, again, the natives observe "a kind of totemism, each tribe being supposed to under the tutelage of some bird, beast or of reptile." W. A. Pickering, Pioneering in Formosa, 1898, p. 72.

^103:6 Taplin, p. 64; Mathew, p. 112. It is noteworthy that by the account of Thevenet the true form of the word totem was ote = family or tribe. Frazer, Totemism, p. 1.

^103:7 Turner, Samoa a Hundred Years Ago, p. 17.

^104:1 See Frazer on Totemism, passim.

^104:2 The old disputes as to the food supplies of the Australians may here be revived. See Prof. Keane, Man, Past and Present, 1900, pp. 148-9; and cp. Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes of Central Australia, 1899, pp. 21, 25, 37, 46, 50; Northern Tribes, 1904, pp. 36-7. Mr. Mathew (Eaglehawk and Crow, pp. 80, 89) in general denies that the aborigines are hunger-pinched, but does not show much of a case to the contrary. Even in New Zealand, where, though the natives were at a higher culture-level, there were no land animals, famines were so often set up by wars that this is suggested as the origin of their cannibalism. Rev. R. Taylor, Te Ika a Maui: or, New Zealand and its Inhabitants, 1870, pp. 9-10.

^104:3 Stewart, as above cited, and the other instances given by Dr. Frazer.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 2. Theory and Ritual of Human Sacrifice.

The sacrifice of a Saviour-God is a specialisation of the general practice of human sacrifice, which takes many forms. [*1] The most readily intelligible are those in which (a), after a tribal war, captives are ritually slain to appease or compensate the spirits of those killed in fighting; (b) those in which, in time of pestilence or 1 danger, or by way of precaution, victims are slain to propitiate the deities supposed to be concerned; (c) those by way of thank-offerings to the Gods after a victory; [*2] and (d) those in which, on the death of a savage chief, slaves and wives--and, it may be, animals--are slain to accompany him in the "other" life, whatever it may be. The victims in the last case are the analogues of the weapons and the food placed in or on or near the grave in ordinary savage burial.

The fourth form of ritual slaying is sometimes differentiated from human sacrifice "in the true sense" as being simply a provision, dictated by filial piety, for the comfort and dignity of a savage aristocrat in the other world. [*3] It is well to note the distinction; but it is no less important to realise how completely the conception in this case fuses psychologically with that behind the express sacrifice of a victim to appease a deity, and, further, how the funeral sacrifice leads up to the "messenger" and "scapegoat" sacrifices, which blend in that of the Saviour-God-Man. All three of the forms specified are common in savage and barbaric life, and it is in the psychic atmosphere of such conventional blood-shedding that there grows up the whole body of the religious doctrine of sacrifice. Human sacrifice, indeed, may be defined as one specialisation of ritual slaughter and sacrament.

Strictly speaking, the "messenger" and "scapegoat" victims are also outside the primary conception of sacrifice inasmuch as

[p. 106]

they are not, or not necessarily, offered up to any God by way of propitiation. The pharmakos or "magic-man" (literally "medicine-man," but not in the received sense of that term) who was ritually beaten and put to death in the festival called Thargelia at Athens was strictly a scapegoat, upon whom were put all evils, the people's sins included: he took them away, and was killed to complete the process of riddance, but was not "offered up" to any God. [*1] But in point of fact the Hebrew scapegoat was specifically a "sin offering"; and of the two goats concerned one was "for the Lord" and the other "for Azazel," the Goat-God. [*2] And even in the Greek case the act of ritual slaying is akin to the others inasmuch as all alike are supposed to work either the salvation or benefit of the community or the good of an eminent individual. As we shall see, the slaying which it most concerns us to trace, that of the Saviour-God, may in some cases be only in this general sense a sacrifice, being conceivably rather an act of ritual magic, like the slaying of the pharmakos, than a propitiation of a God, since the victim (even in the case of the scapegoat) is a God. But, as we shall see, the forms of the slaying assimilated, all being alike "religious," and the psychic connotations were very much the same. [*3]

Of the first of the four common forms above specified the typical examples are those furnished by the practice of the North-American Indians, [*4] who commonly added cannibalism [*5] to their torture-sacrifices, apparently combining the motives which led some savages to eat their dead by way of symbolic "communion," and those which suggested the eating of brave enemies, or animals, in the hope of acquiring their courage. This last is still common in Africa; where, again, we have instances of individual appeasement of the slain. "In cases of murder or manslaughter a sacrifice is made to lay the spirit of the victim"; [*6] and among the Nilotic negroes, when a warrior has killed a man, he must in propitiation shave his head, catch a fowl, hang it round his neck by the beak, and cut away the body, leaving the head hanging. [*7] Here the fowl is a surrogate for

[p. 107]

the man. In the case of funeral sacrifices also, we shall see, the element of cannibalism enters; and here too the primary principle appears to have been that which underlay "kin-eating," though a new sacramental element begins to be involved. In any case the procedure is clearly religious. A contemporary anthropologist tells that among the Unyoro and other tribes of Uganda, before British rule, on the death of a king,

"a circular pit was dug, not more than five feet in diameter, and about twelve feet deep. The king's bodyguard seized the first nine Unyoro men they met and threw them alive into the pit. Then the dead body of the king was rolled in bark-cloth, and the skin of a cow, newly killed, wrapped round it and sewn. This bundle was then lowered in the midst of the nine men in the pit, no clay was filled in, but another cowskin was stretched tightly across the opening and pegged down all round. A covering of grass was then neatly laid over the skin, and the multitude who were present at the funeral set to work at once to build a temple over the grave. [*1] A headman was appointed as watcher, and very many of the personal servants of the deceased were appointed to live in the temple, and their descendants after them. It was the duty of the surrounding country to see that they were supplied with food."

[paragraph continues] "How any beings could hit on this method of honouring a dead king," he concludes, "passes the range of the most morbid imagination." [*2] The really surprising thing is that a professed anthropologist in the twentieth century should have been so perplexed. The cruelly simple usage in question is one of the most familiar types of human sacrifice; [*3] and even the further development of "messenger" sacrifices, which we shall have to consider later, proceeds on the same primitive and transparent reasoning. In the still later development of the Man-God sacrifice, which partly involves the last-mentioned, the psychic causation is more complicated, and, as we shall see, the variations of practice set up a variety of problems. In some forms it is simple enough. At Benin, for instance, hundreds of criminals were sacrificed annually at one festival, at the rate of twenty-three a day. On these occasions the king, regally attired, "addressed

[p. 108]

the victims in a kind voice, telling them he was sending them with a message [*1] to his father. They were to salute his father, and tell him that his son was not ready to join him yet, but he sent them, the victims, to be with his father and salute him." [*2] In less primitive societies we shall find the office of messenger doubled with that of the sacrificed God-Man. He in turn appears at times to be doubled with the Scapegoat, or remover of sins and evil spirits; and there are yet other variants--e.g., the simple sacrifices of victims slain in treaty-making as "blood of reconciliation." [*3] But if each phase be handled in a scientific spirit, it will be found to reveal in turn much if not all of its anthropological significance.

The most remarkable of the Man-God-slaying cults which have come under what maybe termed scientific observation, while actually in force, is that which prevailed till fifty or sixty years ago among the mountaineer Khonds, [*4] or Kui, of Orissa. The first observer, Major Macpherson, was a man abnormally qualified in his day both for the study of the sacrificial rite and for its peaceful abolition; and science owes him on the former head nearly as much as civilisation does on the latter. It would be hard to find an anthropological research before his day more marked by the scientific spirit.

On the face of his report, there are various reasons for regarding the Khonds as a Dravidian race [*5] driven to the hills (where they subjugated other aborigines) by invading Oriyas; and one of several grounds for surmising that their religion derives from ancient Central-Asiatic sources is the fact that, like the Chinese, they show great respect for parents and ancestors. One of their boasts is, or was, "that they reverence their fathers and mothers, while the Hindus treat theirs with contempt." [*6] Another reason is their rejection alike of temples and images. "They regard the making, setting-up, and worshipping of images of the Gods as the most signal proof of conscious removal to a hopeless distance from communion with them; a confession of utter despair of being permitted to make any

[p. 109]

direct approach to the deity: a sense of debarment which they themselves have never felt." [*1] Yet another reason is the fact that they had no official priesthood, the function being open to anyone who felt called to assume it, and went through the normal preliminary symptoms of a state of trance.

Politically the hill Khonds of Orissa were governed in general by patriarchs, patriarchal councils, and popular assemblies; and there was no trace of Christian influences--the very existence of the tribes having been unknown to the Government before 1835. Their religious system was a normal polytheism, with a Supreme Creator God, known as Boora Pennu or Light God, at the head. Under him were Tari (or Bera) Pennu, [*2] the Earth-Goddess, and certain second-class deities of natural or social forces, as rain, vegetation, increase, hunting, war, and boundaries. Next came the deified sinless men of the first age, who were the tutelary Gods of tribes and septs; and under these ranked a multitude of local spirits, all named Gods, who presided over villages, houses, hills, fountains, streams, forests, and so forth. With the second order of Gods was ranked Dinga, the judge of the dead and allotter of retribution, who has some appearance of being taken over from another cult.

It was to Tari, the Earth-Goddess, that human sacrifices were offered; and from the fact that they occurred only among certain tribes, who theoretically admitted the inferiority of Tari to Boora, but gave her their chief devotion and credited her as the Boora-worshippers did Boora with raising fallen man from misery and introducing civilisation, it may be inferred that the cults were originally independent. In the Maliahs (hill districts) of Goomsur, the sacrifice was to "Thadha Pennu," the Earth-Goddess, symbolised as a peacock. [*3] To the last, the sect of Boora regarded human sacrifice "with the utmost abhorrence as the consummation of human guilt, and believed it to have been adopted under monstrous delusions devised by Tari as the mother of falsehood, with a view solely to the

[p. 110]

final destruction of her followers." [*1] It is told of Boora, too, that he interfered, through a minor God, according to one myth, to substitute a buffalo for a man as an oblation to Tari; and this miracle is commemorated at an annual great festival of Boora, called the "jakri" or "dragging," on account of the way in which the buffalo--previously treated as a meriah--is finally handled. According to another account, Boora sent four divine agents to prevent a human sacrifice for which Tari had called. Afterwards, however, her worshippers relapsed. [*2]

The common relationship of exogamous tribes, who are constantly at war yet habitually intermarry, [*3] is the apparent explanation of such a permanent schism. But it seems not impossible that the sacrificial cult was originally that of a conquered race, and that a section of the Khonds adopted it from them, as so often happens where a primitive rite or mystery practised by aborigines is able to appeal to later comers. [*4] It was from an apparently subject race who participated in the cult that the Tari-worshipping Khonds purchased their human victims. [*5]

As normally practised, the rite was not totemistic, [*6] but of the nature of "sympathetic magic," and the purpose was to promote agricultural fertility; but it was also resorted to as a special means of propitiation in the case of a pestilence or other sign of divine displeasure, such as a calamity in the family of a chief; and individual families similarly made propitiation for individual disaster. [*7] The victim, called the meriah, or tokki, or keddi, [*8] was in all cases either purchased from the procuring caste (who at times kidnapped children from the plains for the purpose) or bred as a hereditary victim, a number of families being set apart and cherished for the purpose, so that he--or she, for it was often a woman--was either personally willing to be slain on religious grounds or was the property of the sacrificers. As it was the universal conviction that

[p. 111]

the meriah became a God by the act of sacrifice, there was no difficulty in keeping up the supply; and in times of famine Khonds would sell their own children as victims, considering the sacrificial death a highly honourable one. And the Meriah, being consecrated from the beginning, had unlimited sexual liberty, his intercourse with the wife or daughter of any tribesman being welcomed as a boon from the deity. Generally, however, he had assigned to him a wife, herself a destined victim, and mother of victims to come. [*1]

The special religio-ethical feature of the rite was the universally accepted doctrine that the victim, if not a volunteer, must be "bought with a price," [*2] and died "for all mankind," not merely for the Khonds; [*3] and this view was set forth in the ritual, though it also expressed distinctly the local demand for greater wealth. An odd feature of it was that, although the flesh of the slain victim was cut up into shreds so that a piece might be buried in every field, the recited myth told that Tari demanded blood because when the earth was soft mud she made it firm by the blood she dropped when she cut her finger. [*4] And there was put in her mouth the injunction: "Behold the good change! cut up my body to complete it." [*5] It thus appears that originally the victim had represented the Earth-Goddess herself; and in a variant of the Khond legend in which two women, Karaboodi and Thartaboodi, figure as the "only two females on the earth," each with a male son, the former, finding that a drop of her blood hardens the wet earth, tells her son to cut her up, which he does. Thereafter the God "Boora Panoo" comes upon the scene, and the cult of human sacrifice is methodically established, the spirit of Karaboodi insisting on its continuance when her descendants offer a monkey as a substitute for a man. [*6] Obviously it is an agricultural rite; and it may be that the pretence of drying up the soft mud was a magical device to put the evil spirits of drought on a false scent.

The sacrificial rite lasted three or five days. On the first, the meriah's hair, previously kept long, was shaved off--save in cases where it had been shorn ten or twelve days before--and the people

[p. 112]

passed the night in a licentious revel. [*1] On the second, he was carefully bathed and newly clothed, taken in procession to the sacred (or taboo) Meriah grove, where he was fastened to a stake, [*2] seated, and anointed with ghee, oil, and turmeric [*3] (red dye), garlanded with flowers, and worshipped during the day by the assembly, who again spent the night in debauchery. On the third day he was given milk to drink, and the final act of ritual and sacrifice began. At this stage we are struck by the importance of the priest: "a great and fitly instructed priest alone can officiate"; and it is to be gathered from the accounts of the Janni, as well as from the ritual (1) that he was traditionally a celibate and recluse, parading his austerities and securing sanctity by personal uncleanness; (2) that it was primarily his function to brave the curse of the sacrificed and deified victim; and (3) that it was thus the priestly influence that maintained the sacrifice. Four days after the sacrifice of the meriah there was sacrificed a buffalo, of which the remains were left for the meriah's spirit [*4]--a safeguard against blood-guiltiness. [*5] The ritual, however, was so framed to begin with as to distribute the responsibility over the village headman or patriarch and the body of the people. On the one hand, the victim reproached his slayers while avowing the belief that he was made a God by the act; on the other hand, the priest and the headman, pleading this, defended themselves by reciting the circumstances under which he was purchased and dedicated, he consenting as a child. The idea seems to have been to set forth thoroughly both points of view, so that there should be no misunderstanding about the religious nature of the act, and the responsibility of the entire community for it; but whether by way of sympathetic imagination on the part of some ritual-making priest, or by simple adoption of the actual language of some past sufferer, the victim in one form of the ritual was made to invoke a curse upon the priest, while the latter declared that it was he, as minister of the Creator God, who gave the death its virtue, and threatened to deprive the resisting one of a place among the Gods. [*6] Finally he was either fastened to a cross of which the horizontal bar, pierced by the upright, could be

[p. 113]

raised or lowered at will, [*1] or placed in the cleft or split made in a long branch of a green tree, which was made to grasp his neck or chest, the open ends being closed and tightly tied so as to imprison him in the wood, and make as it were a cross, of which he was the upright; and it appears to have been at this stage that there occurred one of the most significant acts in the entire ritual. It being essential that the victim should finally not resist, his arms and legs, or, where the arms were sufficiently secured, the legs only, were broken, save in cases where the end was attained by drugging him with opium or datura. [*2] This accomplished, the priest slightly wounded the victim with an axe, and the crowd instantly cut him to pieces, leaving untouched the head and intestines. These, after being carefully watched in the interim, were next day, in some cases, burned to ashes with a whole sheep; and the ashes were spread over the fields, or laid as a paste over the houses and granaries. In the same spirit, the portions of flesh were solemnly carried to the participating villages, religiously divided among the people, and buried in the fields, each man placing his piece in the earth "behind his back without looking."

Upon this ritual there were many local variations. Major-General Campbell, who had followed Macpherson in the Khond agency, tells of a form of the rite in which the victim was first drugged, then taken to the place of execution, where his head and neck were placed in the cleft of a strong split-bamboo, the ends of which were secured and held; whereafter the priest with his axe broke the joints of the legs and arms, and the sacrifice was consummated by the people in the usual frightful way. [*3] Among the Khonds of the Maliahs of Goomsur there was much feasting and intoxication for a month prior to the sacrifice; on the day before the rite the victim was intoxicated with toddy, garlanded, bound to a post bearing the peacock effigy of the Earth-Goddess, [*4] and ritually addressed as a God. On the next day he was again intoxicated and anointed with oil, of which each one present sought to obtain a touch for his own head. Finally a hog was sacrificed; and the

[p. 114]

victim was stifled in the mud made with its blood, then cut in pieces. A buffalo calf was afterwards maimed in front of the post, and on the third day was killed and eaten, [*1] visibly as a surrogate. Among the hill tribe called Codooloo, as among the Khonds, there were two sects, of which one offered human sacrifices to the God "Jenkery." In this case the purchased victim had absolute sexual liberty and the right to eat and drink whatever he would. From the moment of seizure till the sacrifice he was kept intoxicated. The signal for slaughter was a wound in the stomach, with the blood from which the image of the God was besmeared. Then he was cut to pieces, everyone trying to secure a morsel, to be presented to the God of his own village. [*2]

In yet other cases, according to M. Elie Reclus, the two methods of preventing the victim's struggles were combined. "She must not die in her bonds, since she dies voluntarily, of her own freewill, as they say. He [the priest] loosens her from the stake, stupefies her by making her gulp down a portion of opium and datura, then breaks her elbows and knees with the back of the hatchet. [*3] Other variations are noted in the use of the drug; [*4] and in different districts the entire sacrifice varied. Thus among the Kotaya hill tribes the victim was taken before the image of the Earth-Goddess, and rice, coloured (red) with turmeric, was thrown on his hair, [*5] while he was kept under the influence of opium. In this case the victim had enjoyed special privileges for an unspecified period, all his wishes being granted, and every woman in the village being at his command as a concubine. [*6] No quasi-crucifixion is specified, the victim being simply stabbed "in the stomach," and the blood used to bathe the idol, whereafter he was cut to pieces by the crowd. [*7] In yet another case (at Ramgherry and Lutchampore) the victim was placed in irons, new clothed, made drunk with arrack, and forced into the "temple" of the Goddess, a hole three feet deep. There his throat was cut and his head cut off; the remains being

[p. 115]

covered with earth and with a pile of stones. When the next victim was to be sacrificed, the hole was cleared out afresh for the purpose.

In this district occurred yet another variation. Every third year two victims were sacrificed in honour of the Goddess; and, whether thus triennially or annually, at Bundair in Jeypore there were sacrificed to the Sun-God at one festival three victims, "one at the east, one at the west, and the third in the centre of the village." [*1] In this case each victim was tied by the hair to a post near his grave, over which he was suspended horizontally with the face downwards, his legs and arms being held outstretched by the assistants. [*2] He was then beheaded, and the head, stuck on the stake, was there left to decay. A further variation was in the direction of the principle that the infliction of pain made the sacrifice specially efficacious. [*3] In some districts the victim, after being exposed on a couch, and led in procession round the place of sacrifice, was put to death by slow burning, or by applying hot brands to the body on a sloping pyre, and tortured as long as possible, "it being believed that the favour of the Earth-Goddess, especially in respect of the supply of rain, will be in proportion to the quantity of tears which may be extracted." [*4] It is needless to recapitulate the further variants at any length. "Victims were stoned, beaten to death with tomahawks or heavy iron rings......; they were strangled; they were crushed between two planks; [*5] they were drowned in a pool in the jungle, or in a trough filled with pig's blood......Sometimes the victim was slowly roasted......; sometimes he was despatched by a blow to the heart, and the priest plunged a wooden image into the gaping wound, that the mannikin might be gorged with blood." [*6]

All that is constant is the principle of a redemptory bloody sacrifice. But by way of synopsis it may be noted that there prevail certain principles of procedure and symbolism, especially (1) that of (2) stupefying or laming the victim to secure apparent acquiescence; the counter-principle of the need either for suffering as such or for such suffering as shall cause the victim to weep much--a conception belonging to sympathetic magic; (3) the anointing, and the

[p. 116]

consequent sanctification of the oil; (4) the deification of the victim; (5) the according to him of remarkable privileges, sexual and social; and (6) a certain propensity to the symbol of the cross.

Seeing that the drinking of the soma was primordially a religious act in the East, and that intoxicants play a similar part among modern Polynesians, [*1] it seems not impossible that the drugging or intoxicating of the victim was a development from a form of the rite in which he took part in a common banquet; but of this no clear trace had been left, save among the Native Americans of the past. [*2] It is to be noted, too, that while the destined child victim among the Khonds went about freely, in some cases at least the adult victim was kept fettered, though well fed, in the house of the village patriarch. [*3]

Very significant, further, is the horrible stratagem employed by the Bataks of the Malay Peninsula to secure acquiescence from the boy victim in their Pangulabalang, a sacrifice of one "to be sent out for the overthrow of enemies." "A boy is taken from a stranger tribe, and for a time well-fed with titbits, till he has grown quite trustful. Then one day he is taken and blindfolded; a hole is dug, and he is put in it; and the sorcerer comes and asks him: 'Wilt thou go where we send thee?' 'Wilt thou do only good to us, and evil to our enemies?' 'Wilt thou aid us in war and overthrow our enemies?'--and so on. To all the questions the trusting boy answers 'Yes.' Meanwhile lead has been melted on the fire; it is thrown suddenly on his neck, whereof he dies. The corpse is burned; but the ashes and fat are carefully preserved. These remains are now precious magic-medicine, for through them the spirit of the dead may be forced to do all he promised in life." [*4] Here too the victim is evidently deified, and his ritual "willingness" is an essential element in the efficacy of the sacrifice.

It is to be noted, finally, that when, by the persuasions of Macpherson or the menaces of his successors, open human sacrifices were put an end to among the Khonds, they treated the henceforth substituted buffalo very much as they had treated the meriah. The ritual accosts him as a human being, and commiserates him, as it

[p. 117]

did the meriah, for being sold; he is frequently anointed; he is implored to be a willing sacrifice; cakes are offered to him; he is promised a happy immortality in the paradise of the Earth-Goddess; and he is instantly cut to pieces, and the fragments buried in the fields, as was done with the flesh of the human victim. A song preserves (inaccurately) the memory of the work done by Macpherson and Campbell. [*1] Among the Koyis "a langur monkey is frequently substituted" for the human victim, "and called for occasion Ekuroma Potu--i.e., a male with small breasts. This name is given in the hope of persuading the Goddess [Mamili or Pele] that she is receiving a human sacrifice." [*2] The sheep or goats offered by the same tribe to the smallpox-Goddess are given toddy to drink; their acceptance is regarded as of good omen; and when they are eaten the women are excluded from the repast, [*3] as happens in so many cannibal banquets. [*4] And, again, there is record that it is or was recently "the practice, a few years ago, at every Dassara festival in Jeypore, Vizagapatam, to select a specially fine ram, wash it, shave its head, affix thereto red and white bottu and naman (sect marks) between the eyes and down the nose, and gird it with a new white cloth after the manner of a human being. The animal being then fastened in a sitting posture, certain puja (worship) was performed by a Brahman priest, and it was decapitated." [*5]

Here we have the plainest substitution of the animal for the man; and the process entitles us to credit the old record in the Satapatha Brahmana that "in the beginning the sacrifice most acceptable to the Gods was man," and that "for the man a horse was substituted, then an ox, then a sheep, then a goat, until at length it was found that the Gods were most pleased with offerings of rice and barley." [*6] What has happened under our own eyes is very likely to have happened in progressive periods of ancient civilisation. The progression from man to animals has repeatedly occurred, [*7] and it is impossible to explain such cases as either survivals or revivals of totem sacrifices. The victims are the

[p. 118]

ordinary domestic animals; [*1] and they are ceremonially invested with the attributes and the divinity of the human being. It is reasonable to assume that the same evolution as is here traced took place in at least some of the ostensible surrogate sacrifices in Greece [*2] and elsewhere, seeing that there are so many records or traditions of the suppression of human sacrifices in the countries in question. And all this is in keeping with the theory of the present inquiry.

Footnotes

^105:1 For lists of instances in all times and countries see Adolf Bastian, Der Mensch in der Geschichte, 1860, iii, 110-112; Constant, De la religion, liv. xi, ch. ii (ed. 1833, vol. iv, p. 158 sq.); and Kalisch, Comm. on Leviticus, 1867, i, 326 sq.

^105:2 "Those thank-offerings are not as a rule spontaneous; the Gods demand them, as their fruits of the victory, through the priests" (A. B. Ellis, The Ewe-speaking Peoples, 1890, p. 119).

^105:3 Cp. Major Mockler-Ferryman, British West Africa, 2nd ed. 1900, p. 389; Mary H. Kingsley, Travels in West Africa, 1897, p. 442.

^106:1 See the argument of Miss J. E. Harrison, Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion, 2nd ed. 1908, pp. 95-109.

^106:2 Lev. xvi, 5-11. Marg.

^106:3 Miss Harrison (p. 109) begs the question when she says that "the ceremonials of sacrifice and riddance express widely different conditions and sentiments in the mind of the worshipper."

^106:4 Lafitau, Moeurs des sauvages ameriquains, 1724, ii, 266 sq.; Waitz, Anthropologie der Naturvolker, iii, 159.

^106:5 Not always. The Pani and the Natchez are said not to have practised cannibalism, though the latter at times and the former customarily offered human sacrifices (waltz, iii, 159). But these tribes were among the least savage.

^106:6 Livingstone, Popular Account of Missionary Travels and Researches, 1861, p. 292: ed. 1905, p. 405. Compare the slaughter of Polixena on the grave of Achilles. Euripides, Hecuba, 535 sq.

^106:7 Sir H. H. Johnston, The Uganda Protectorate, 1002, ii, 794.

^107:1 There is here suggested the interesting question whether the adytum or cave which was the nucleus of Semitic and other ancient temples (see Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. p. 306) was originally a victim-pit or grave. On the other hand compare the usage as to "upper chambers," noted hereinafter.

^107:2 Uganda and its Peoples: Notes on the Protectorate of Uganda, especially the Anthropology and Ethnology of the Indigenous Races, by J. F. Cunningham, F.R.G.S., F.Z.S., 1905, 0. 31. Cp. pp. 56, 318.

^107:3 Mr. Cunningham notes (pp. 32-33) that the nine victims must belong to the king's tribe. The reason is obvious: they must be his friendly servants. This is quite clear in the case of the Baganda kings, whose chief attendants were sacrificed. Cp. Allen and Thomson, Narrative of the British Expedition to the Niger, 1848, i, 328. In other parts of Africa the number of twelve victims is common: see Great Benin, by H. Ling Roth, 1903, p. 70. It is hardly necessary to recall the sacrifices of twelves in the Hebrew cult, or that of the twelve Trojans to the manes of Patroclus by Achilles. In the latter case the theory would be that the slain would serve as slaves to Patroclus in the Shades, an office for which, in the circumstances, only enemies were available.

^108:1 "The slaying of victims to convey messages is a later modification; and is seemingly at variance with the accepted idea that the dead are cognizant of what is taking place in the world." Sir A. B. Ellis, Ewe-speaking Peoples, p. 118.

^108:2 C. Punch, cited by H. Ling Roth, Great Benin, 1903, p. 74.

^108:3 Major Glyn Leonard, The Lower Niger and its Tribes, 1906, p. 444.

^108:4 The name is often spelt Kandh or Khand, but it is officially declared that the proper spelling is Kondh. See Thurston's Castes and Tribes of Southern India, Madras, 1909, iii, 356. Kondh or Khond (from the Telugu word Konda, a hill) is a name given by neighbouring peoples. Those so named call themselves Kui. The race is found, in various stages of civilisation, and with varying dialects, in other parts of southern India. Id. pp. 357, 367.

^108:5 Cp. Elie Reclus, Primitive Folk, pp. 247-8; Tyler, Primitive Culture, 3rd ed. ii. 271. Dalton, Ethnography of Bengal, p. 243, classes the Khonds as certainly Dravidian. So Grierson, in Thurston, iii, 357.

^108:6 Memorials of Service in India. From the Correspondence of the late Major S. C. Macpherson, C.B. Edited by his brother, William Macpherson. London, 1865, p. 67.

^109:1 Id. p. 103. It is open to question whether the psychological analysis here does not partly stand for the thought of the observer. Lack of art, and of permanent dwellings, may be the true explanation. See above, Pt. I, ch. ii, p. 71 note, and cp. the Memorials, p. 106, n., as to similar phenomena among mountaineers in Siam. See also Lubbock, Origin of Civilisation, 5th ed. p. 374, as to the lack of temples and images among the Malagasy, the wild tribes of Cambodia, the Toorkmans, and other races of Siberia; and Turner, Nineteen Years in Polynesia, 1861, p. 88, as to the primitive Tannese, who "have no idols." Dapper, a seventeenth-century Dutch traveller, who sojourned at Benin, describes the natives as holding that it would be absurd to make images of "God" who is invisible, though they have many images of their "idol-Gods." Here again the psychology of the observer is suspect. (Roth, Great Benin, 190 t, p. 50.)

^109:2 Dr. John Shortt, "Contribn. to the Ethnology of Jeypore" in Trans. of Ethnol. Soc. N.S. vol. vi (1868), p. 271, gives the names of the two deities in another district as Bona Peimu and Tari Peimu.

^109:3 Report of Mr. Russell, 1837, in Selections from the Records, Govt. of India, No. V. Human Sacrifice and Infanticide, 1154, cited by E. Thurston, Ethnographic Notes in Southern India, 1906, p. 511; also in Castes and Tribes of Southern India, iii, 372.

^110:1 Macpherson, p. 98. Cp. p. 131, and Shortt, as cited, p. 271.

^110:2 Macpherson, pp. 108. 109; Shortt, as cited.

^110:3 Macpherson, p. 69.

^110:4 See Memorials, p. 124; and cp. Short History of Freethought, 2nd ed. i, 43-44. The Sect of Boora represent that the Tari-worshippers, debased by her tuition, lived like savages "until by intercourse with us, as in receiving wives, they became civilised" (p. 110). But tribes of the Boora-worshippers practised female infanticide (p. 113).

^110:5 Id. pp. 65, 114, 115.

^110:6 In one case, where an Elephant-God was worshipped, the victim was fastened to and swung by the proboscis of a wooden elephant, and thus identified with the God (Major-General Campbell, Narrative of Thirteen Years' Service among the Wild Tribes of Khondistan, 1864, pp. 51, 126). This rite may have been totemistic; but where the Earth-Goddess was figured as a bird, and the Earth-God as a peacock, these creatures were not sacrificed (Id. pp. 51. 54).

^110:7 So also in the Maliahs of Goomsur. Russell, cited by Thurston, p. 511. Both motives were acted on in the human sacrifices of the Pawnees and the Dakotas in North America. Lindesay Brine, Travels amongst American Indians, 1894, p. 132.

^110:8 Meriah is the Oriya word; the others are Khond terms. The former probably means "messenger"--the victim being a messenger to the deity. Dalton, Ethnography of Bengal. 1872, p. 29.

^111:1 Macpherson, p. 116.

^111:2 Shortt, as cited, p. 273; Campbell, as cited, p. 52; Russell, as cited by Thurston. Among the Khonds of the Maliahs of Goomsur, private families purchased children, and reared them as future victims. "Criminals, or prisoners captured in war," says Russell, "are not considered fitting subjects."

^111:3 Macpherson, pp. 98, 115, 116, 117, 122, 136.

^111:4 Shortt, p. 271; Macpherson, pp. 121, 124.

^111:5 Macpherson, p. 121; Shortt, p. 271. M. Elie Reclus (Primitive Folk, pp. 312-313, 316- 317) makes the doctrine more explicit, saying that according to the Khond legend "Tari had intended each time to submit to the sacrifice in her own person," saying, "I am the meriah: I come to be immolated," and that her worshippers in each case persuaded her to accept a proxy.

^111:6 Thurston, Castes and Tribes, iii, 368-370, following the statement of Mr. A. B. Jayaram Moodaliar.

^112:1 Macpherson, pp. 107, 117, 118; Shortt, as cited.

^112:2 Sometimes placed between two shrubs. Macpherson, p. 118.

^112:3 Turmeric is a principal crop with the Khonds, and part of their argument for a blood sacrifice was that blood was needed to secure the deep red colour of the plant.

^112:4 Macpherson, p. 130. Cp. p. 108, as to the buffalo sacrifice to Boora Pennu. And see hereinafter as to the buffalo sacrifice among the Bataks.

^112:5 The primitive sense of the danger incurred by the sacrificer is often apparent in these Dravidian rites. See Thurston, Castes and Tribes, iv, 313.

^112:6 Macpherson, pp. 120-7. An abbreviated account of the ritual is given in J. Ludlow's British India, its Races and its History, 1858, i, 25-30.

^113:1 See the photograph of a preserved "Meriah sacrifice post," given by Thurston, Notes, p. 510; Castes and Tribes, iii, 377.

^113:2 Shortt, p. 274; Macpherson, p. 119. The main details are confirmed by Major-General Campbell (Narrative of Thirteen Years' Service among the Wild Tribes of Khondistan, 1864), who, following the report of Mr. Russell, describes the victims as being stupefied with toddy" (pp. 54-5). Similarly in the human sacrifices formerly offered by the nomad tribe of Koravas, the victim (tricked) was made drunk. Thurston, Castes and Tribes, iii, 464.

^113:3 Narrative cited, pp. 112-113.

^113:4 There appears to be some confusion, as the effigy was further associated with the village deity Zakaree Pennu, represented by three stones. This deity appears to be of the generic type elsewhere called "Jenkery," and propitiated in the same fashion. Thurston, Ethnographic Notes, pp. 512-513; Castes and Tribes, iii, 374-5.

^114:1 Russell, cited by Thurston, Notes, pp. 511-13.

^114:2 Report of Mr. Arbuthnot, 1837, cited by Thurston, Notes, pp. 513-514; Castes, iii, 375.

^114:3 Elie Reclus, Primitive Folk, Eng. tr. p. 319. In the matter of references M. Reclus is notably careless, and I have been unable to trace all of his authorities. His own special studies, however, give his synopsis a measure of authority. The inadequacy of our English works of reference in regard to India is more surprising than the laxities of M. Reclus. Even the valuable recent compilations of Mr. Thurston, a monument of disinterested scientific devotion, does not give all the details; but he appends a bibliography to his article on the Kondhs.

^114:4 H. B. Rowney (Wild Tribes of India, 1882, p. 105) follows Russell's report (cited also by Campbell, pp. 54-55).

^114:5 So among the Coodooloo, who coloured the rice with saffron, and brought the victim before the God. Arbuthnot, as cited. Among the hill Koyis (kin of the Khonds) of the Godavari district, again, sheep sacrificed to the Goddess of small-pox and cholera "have garlands hung round their necks, their heads are adorned with turmeric, and pots of cold water are poured over them." Thurston, iv, 59. 7

^114:6 Arbuthnot, as cited.

^114:7 Shortt. pp. 274 5.

^115:1 Shortt, p. 275.

^115:2 On this method cp. Dalton, Ethnography of Bengal, 1872, p. 292.

^115:3 This concept is found among the Ostiaks of Siberia, who used to sacrifice reindeer "in the manner of a bloody atonement," killing them slowly by stabbing in different parts, or suffocating by repeated immersion. Erman, Travels in Siberia, Eng. tr. 1848, ii, 54.

^115:4 Macpherson, pp. 118, 130; Shortt, p. 274.

^115:5 For this see Campbell, as cited. pp. 57-58.

^115:6 Reclus, Primitive Folk, pp. 319-330. M. Reclus (in translation) always speaks of the single victim as a woman, but either sex served.

^116:1 "There is no public rite whatsoever, and scarcely any in private, at which the ceremony of drinking cava does not form a usual and often most important part." Mariner, Tonga Islands, 1827, ii, 150. Cp. p. 167, and Turner, Samoa, 1884, pp. 20, 51, 334; also Cook's Voyages, iii (by King), 1785, p. 161.

^116:2 Cp. Lafitau, Moeurs des sauvages ameriquains, 1724, ii, 295.

^116:3 Hunter, Orissa, ii, 97; Shortt, as cited, p. 273. Major-General Campbell, whose attempts to discredit some of Macpherson's statements recoiled badly on himself, states first (p. 53) that meriahs "are seldom subjected to any restraint," and again that "when of age to understand for what purpose they are intended they are chained; two had been years in chains; one so long that he could not recollect ever having been at liberty" (p. 57).

^116:4 Wurm, Handbuch der Religionsgeschichte, etc., Aufl. 1908, p. 70; Warneck, Die Religion der Batak, 1909, pp. 64-65.

^117:1 Thurston, Castes and Tribes, iii, 371, 378-9, 381-2-4-5.

^117:2 Id. iv, 58.

^117:3 Id. iv, 59.

^117:4 This is the probable explanation of the throwing of clods by the women at the men in the surrogate sacrifice of the buffalo among the Khonds of the Ganjam Maliahs. Id. iii, 385.

^117:5 Id. iv, 379.

^117:6 R. W. Frazer, Lit. Hist. of India, 1898, p. 43, citing the Satapatha Brahmana, xii, 3, 5. Cp. p. 85, citing the Aitareya Brahmana, iii, 8.

^117:7 Among the natives of the Gold Coast, where human sacrifices are a matter of simple killing and use of blood, "a regularly descending scale of sacrifice, from human victim to bullock, from bullock to sheep, and from sheep to fowl, may be traced. The Chama god Prate, to which human victims were formerly offered, has now a bullock sacrificed to him; and Behnya, the war-god of Elmina, has descended from human victim to bullock, and from the latter to sheep. Fohsu, at the Salt Pond at Cape Coast, has within a short period descended from sheep to fowl," A. B. Ellis, The Tshi-Speaking Peoples, p. 72,

^118:1 There are reasons, hereinafter set forth, for seeing in the sacrifice of cocks, in certain cases, an old substitution for human sacrifices; and the same surmise arises in some sacrifices of goats. (See Thurston, Castes and Tribes, i, 74; iv, 193; v, 235; vi, 76: as to cocks see v, 106, 392, 467, and as to sacrifice of he-goat and three cocks, ii, 376.) But the point can be made out in the case of other animals in recent times.

^118:2 Cp. Paul Stengel, Opfergebrauche der Griechen, 1910, p. 93, citing his Kultusaltertumer, 117 sq.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 3. The Christian Crucifixion.

To those who have not realised how all religion has been evolved from savage beginnings, it will seem extravagant to suggest that the story of the Christian crucifixion has been built up from a practice such as those above described. And yet the grounds for inferring such a derivation are extremely strong. Some doubt has been cast, not quite unjustly, upon such inferences in general, as a result of criticism of Dr. Frazer's ingenious guess that the gospel crucifixion incidentally reproduced the features of the sacrifice of a mock-king in the Perso-Babylonian feast of the Sacaea. The vital difficulty of such a theory is that it takes the gospel episode as historical on the strength of detailed narratives which--save in the episode of Barabbas, whereby the main history is undermined--give no hint of such a coincidence as is surmised, and which, if true narratives, could not conceivably omit to record it had it occurred.

But scientific hierology is not held down to that theory, which, in any case, seeks to account only for certain features of the crucifixion story, notably the mock-crowning and the scourging. These features are indeed probably to be explained through the analogies to which Dr. Frazer points, though not on his assumption of a historical episode; but there are other features, such as the cross itself, and the resurrection, to which the clues lie, unemphasised, in other sections of Dr. Frazer's survey; and there are yet others which he has not ostensibly studied. Some of these are illuminated by the rite of human sacrifice among the Khonds. Their placing of the victim, for instance, either on a cross or in a cleft bough in such a way as to make a living cross, [*3] wherein the God is as it were part of the living tree, is a singularly suggestive parallel. But no

[p. 119]

less so is the detail as to the breaking of the victim's arms and legs, to make him seem unresisting, and the substitution of opium as being less cruel.

This last principle is found to have been acted on by the Karhada Brahmans of Bombay. In their secret human sacrifice, described by Sir John Malcolm, the unsuspecting victim--often a stranger long hospitably entertained for the purpose--was drugged; and in his drugged state was led three times round the idol of the Goddess, whereafter his throat was cut. [*1] Yet again, the same principle is found so far away as Mexico, where, in one annual sacrifice to the Fire-God, the victims were painted red like the Khond meriah, and a narcotic powder was thrown in their faces. They too were subjected to special suffering, being thrown into the fire before being sacrificed with the knife in the usual way. [*2] And in the Mexican sacrifice, also, the God was expressly represented by a tree, stripped of bark and branches, but covered with painted paper.

Let us now take the Christian parallels.

In the fourth gospel it is told that after the death of Jesus on the cross, in order "that the bodies might not stay on the cross on the Sabbath," the Jews "asked of Pilate that their legs might be broken and they might be taken away." But the soldiers broke only the legs of the "two others," these not being yet dead: Jesus they spared, piercing his heart with a lance, "that the scripture might be fulfilled: A bone of him shall not be broken." The other gospels say nothing on this point; but all four tell of the offering of a drink, and the first two synoptics mention it both before and after the act of crucifying. In Matthew, "vinegar mixed with gall" is offered beforehand, and refused after tasting; and a sponge of vinegar is offered, apparently in sympathy, after the cry of Eli, Eli. In the first passage the text has evidently been tampered with; for the Vulgate and Ethiopic versions, the Sinaitic, Vatican, and Bezan codices, and many old MSS., read wine for vinegar, while the Arabic version reads myrrh for gall. [*3] In Mark, more significantly, the first drink becomes "wine spiced with myrrh," and is refused without tasting; and here the commentators recognise that the purpose was presumably to cause stupefaction, and so lighten the suffering. [*4] In

[p. 120]

[paragraph continues] Luke, this detail entirely disappears, and the vinegar offered on the cross is given in mockery. In John also, only the drink offered on the cross is mentioned; and of this it is said that "When Jesus had received the vinegar he said, It is finished." Then follows the detail as to the breaking of the legs.

It is needless here to challenge afresh the historical value of the conflicting records, wherein a slight detail, of no historical importance, enters only to take varying forms for symbolical reasons. What we are concerned with is the source of the symbolism. One compiler clearly knows of a drink offered before the crucifixion, and implies that it was intended to cause euthanasia, for he notes that it was refused. The divine victim must be a conscious sufferer. A later compiler ignores altogether this detail, and notes only that the slayers tormented the victim with a drink of vinegar. Both details alike are un-Roman, [*1] for the torment was trivial, while the narcotic would be inconsistent with what was meant to be an exemplary punishment. The theologising fourth gospel, in turn, makes the victim accept the drink of vinegar as the last symbolic act of sufferance; [*2] but then suddenly alludes to a detail not specified by the others--a concluding act of limb-breaking, from which the divine victim escapes for dogmatic reasons, the fact of his death being made certain by a lance-thrust in the side. We must infer that the limb-breaking was known to occur in certain circumstances, and that the writer or an interpolator of the fourth gospel saw need to make it clear that the bones of the Messiah remained unbroken. He being, according to the fourth gospel, the true paschal sacrifice, it was important that the law as to the Passover should in him be fulfilled. [*3]

On what data, then, did the different evangelists proceed? What had they under notice? Not an original narrative: their dissidence is almost complete. Not a known official practice in Roman crucifixions; for the third gospel treats as an act of mockery what the first and second do not so regard; and the fourth describes the act of limb-breaking as done to meet a Jewish demand, which in

[p. 121]

the synoptic narrative could not arise. Mere breaking of the legs, besides, would be at once a laborious and an inadequate way of making sure that the victims were dead; [*1] the spear-thrust would be the natural and the sufficient act; yet only one victim is speared. Only one hypothesis will meet the whole case. The different narratives testify to the existence of a ritual or rituals of crucifixion or quasi-crucifixion, in variants of which there had figured the two procedures of breaking the legs of the victim and giving him a narcotic. Of these procedures neither is understood by the evangelists, though by some of them the latter is partly comprehended; and they accordingly proceed to turn both, in different fashions, to dogmatic account. Their conflict is thus insoluble, and their testimony alike unhistorical. But we find the psychological clue in the hypothesis of a known ritual of a crucified Saviour-God, who had for universally-recognised reasons to appear to suffer as a willing victim. [*2] Being crucified--that is, hung by the hands or wrists to a tree or post, and supported not by his feet but by a bar between his thighs--he would tend to struggle (unlike the Khond victim, whose arms were free) chiefly with his legs; and if he were to be prevented from struggling, it would have to be either by breaking the legs or by stupefying him with a drug. The Khonds, we have seen, used anciently the former horrible method, but learned to use the latter also. Finally, the detail of the spear-thrust in the side, bestowed only on the ostensibly divine victim, suggests that in some similar ritual that may have been the mode of ceremonial slaying. We have but to recognise that among some of the more civilised peoples of the Mediterranean similar processes had been sometimes gone through about two thousand years ago, and we have the conditions which may account for the varying gospel narratives.

And if there had occurred in the Mediterranean world such an evolution as we see among the Khonds and elsewhere, we have in the story of the betrayal by Judas, incredible and unintelligible as the narratives stand, one more item of sacrificial practice. The Pauline phrase "bought with a price" (1 Cor. vi, 20) ostensibly conveys the meaning of "ransomed," and is not applied to Jesus. But the paying of a price to Judas by the high-priests would become quite intelligible as one more detail in a mystery-drama

[p. 122]

growing out of a ritual of human sacrifice. "Judas" in any case is presumably only a development from Joudaios, a Jew; [*1] and the basis of the episode, thus understood, would be the Gentile imputation on the Jews of having sold the Lord as a human sacrifice. And the doctrine put in the mouth of Caiaphas in the fourth gospel (xi, 50-51) is a doctrine of human sacrifice.

Footnotes

^118:3 This detail is observed in a surrogate sacrifice of a pig in Polynesia, and in sacrifices of goats and human beings in Nigeria. See below,  section 8.

^119:1 Crooke, Popular Religion and Folklore of Northern India, 1896, ii, 170-1.

^119:2 Clavigero, History of Mexico, Eng. tr. ed. 1807, B. vi,  section 34 (i. 306-7).

^119:3 See Varior. Bible, Alford's Greek N.T., Blackader's N.T., McClellan's N.T., and Gill's Exposition on Mt. xxvii, 34.

^119:4 According to several Talmudic passages, the Jews gave to any man about to be executed "a grain of frankincense in a cup of wine," and the tradition runs that the ladies of Jerusalem gave this to the doomed ones. Gill's Expos. on Mk. xv, 23, citing T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 43, 1 ; Bemdbar Rabba, sect. 10, fol. 198, 4, etc. Cp. Hershon, Genesis with a Talmudical Commentary, 1883, p. 150 note 10. But if this were so, the practice was [p. 120] extended to executions from sacrifices. It cannot have originated as an amelioration of a punishment of which the first purpose was to cause suffering. In any case, there is no suggestion that any drink was offered to the two thieves: here we are dealing with a sacrificial ritual in which only the central victim is a true sacrifice. See below,  section 9.

^120:1 Josephus indeed tells (Wars, V, 11,  section 1) that during the siege of Jerusalem the Romans crucified vast multitudes of the Jews who sought to escape, first scourging them, and then torturing them in different ways; but this is expressly declared to be an act at once of military vengeance and of terrorism, whereas the drink of vinegar was either a mere trifling insult or an act of relief.

^120:2 Psalm lxix, 21, would lead Judaists ignorant of old Jewish usage so to regard such a draught.

^120:3 Exodus xii, 46; Num. ix, 12 (cp. Ps. xxxiv, 20, where "the righteous" would be held to apply to the Messiah). This very law points to memories of the act of limb-breaking in sacrifice.

^121:1 The statement of Lactantius (Div. Inst. iv, 26) that it was usual for the executioners to break the bones of those crucified is without foundation, and is confuted by the absence of the detail from the synoptics. The crurifragium, or punishment by limb-breaking, was quite a different thing.

^121:2 "Even the sacrificial victims are required to be of a willing mind." Tertullian, Ad Scapulam, 2. Cp. Macrobius, Sat. iii, 5; Lucan, Pharsalia, i, 611.

^122:1 Cp. Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. p. 354.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 4. Vogue of Human Sacrifice.

Given the prima facie fitness of the hypothesis, however, there at once arises the question, What positive evidence have we for the existence in the Mediterranean world of any such man-sacrificing ritual about the beginning of the Christian era?

As to the commonness of the practice among "savage" or primitive peoples, there is no question. It is frequent to this day in parts of Africa, [*2] and in the Malay Archipelago; [*3] it is probably not wholly obsolete in India; [*4] and it occurs from time to time in primitive Russia, among ignorant and fanatical peasants. [*5] In Polynesia and Maori New Zealand it was normal in the past century; and among Native Americans it occurred, as a religious usage in war time, as late as 1837. [*6] And the ancient testimonies show the practice at no distant time to have subsisted among nearly all the races then known, especially among the Semites and the "barbarians." Despite some allegations to the contrary, human sacrifices were normal among all branches of the Aryan race. [*7] Lusitanians, [*8] Gauls, [*9] and Teutons [*10] alike, at the period of their contact with the Romans, normally

[p. 123]

sacrificed to their Gods captives and prisoners, sometimes by burning, [*1] sometimes by hanging, [*2] sometimes by crucifying, [*3] sometimes by throat-cutting or other letting of blood. [*4] Of the ancient Slays we have equivalent records. [*5] Among some tribes of the more easterly Galatae [*6] and the Massagetae [*7] and other Scythians [*8] similar usages were reported; and while human sacrifices had in the time of Herodotus, by his account, long ceased to be offered in Egypt, [*9] the memory of them was, to say the least, sufficiently fresh among the Greeks and Romans. [*10]

The records of the substitution of a goat for a boy in sacrifice to Dionysos at Potniae, [*11] and of a hart in substitution for a virgin at Laodicea; [*12] the stories of King Athamas, called upon by the Delphic oracle to sacrifice his firstborn son Phryxos, [*13] of King Lycaon who sacrificed a child to Zeus, [*14] of Aristodemos offering up his child on the call of the oracle when the method of the lot failed, [*15] and of Menelaos sacrificing two children in Egypt when stayed by contrary winds, [*16] tell of a once recognised conception and practice; and those of the sacrificing of three Persian boys to Dionysos Omestes at the battle of Salamis, [*17] and of seven children by the Persians to the God of the Underworld when they were entering Greece, [*18] are equally significant. Among the Eretrians and Magnesians, again, sacrifices of human firstlings were said to have been anciently offered; [*19] in Sparta, in Chios, and in Tenedos, [*20] there were similar memories; and the custom was notoriously well established in Thrace. [*21] There is reason, too, to infer an act of child sacrifice behind Pausanias's tale of the infant placed in the forefront of an Elean army. [*22]

Anciently, it would seem, human sacrifice of all kinds was

[p. 124]

common to the Hellene stock; [*1] and the attempts of Mr. Gladstone and others to elevate that race by ascribing their unquestioned acts to the influence of their neighbours, merely substitute a confession of weak imitativeness for one of savage proclivity.

The sacrificing of children in particular may or may not have spread from the Semites, among whom it was at one time normal, [*2] as it was among the pre-Christian Mexicans and Peruvians, [*3] and seems to have been till quite recently among the northern Zulus. [*4] Female infants were frequently put to death among the Arabs before Mohammed, [*5] whether or not by way of sacrifice; as they have been in China and elsewhere in Asia in recent times; [*6] and they were sacrificed on special grounds in the South Sea Islands [*7] before the arrival of the missionaries. Among the North American Indians propitiatory sacrifices of children are known to have occurred in the nineteenth century. [*8] It was among the Semites, in any case, that they were most common in the Mediterranean world. The standing provision in the Hebrew code, and the stories of Abraham and Isaac and Jephthah's daughter tell of a once regular practice; and the Greek and Latin testimonies as to Carthaginian usage are overwhelming. [*9] The association of Carians with Greeks in the sacrifice of the sons of Phanes in the Perso-Egyptian war--a rite consummated by the drinking of their blood, mixed with wine and water--suggests the preponderance of eastern influence, especially as regards the sacramental conception. [*10]

Such practices gradually became more and more rare among the civilised peoples, and are held to have subsisted latterly in only one or two places in the civilised parts of the Roman Empire; [*11] and there are various traces of the gradual process of mitigation. In the Leucadian sacrifice of a man to Apollo by throwing him from a rock into the sea--of which Strabo preserves the memory. [*12]--the last stage

[p. 125]

seems to have been one in which not only was the victim a condemned criminal, but attempts were made to ease his fall by attaching to him wings and even birds, while many men waited below, in boats, to rescue him and carry him beyond the boundaries, Such mitigations were likely to be common; [*1] but it is on record that only in the time of Hadrian was the annual human sacrifice to Zeus abolished at Salamis in Cyprus; [*2] and the possibility of either secret or open survivals in Asia Minor in the first century would thus seem to be considerable. There are, indeed, indications which cannot be put aside, of occasional resort to human sacrifice in the Greek-speaking world in modern times. [*3] The stories of its practice by Elagabalus seem not impossible; [*4] and the various accounts of the manner of the sacrifice of a slave by the Catalinarian conspirators may point to various forms of survival. [*5]

To begin with, we have Strabo's account of human sacrifice as being practised in his time by the primitive Albanians, who lived south of the Caucasian mountains and west of the Caspian sea, in the land watered by the Cyrus and the Araxes. Under the high-priest of the Moon-Goddess were a number of "sacred" slaves (hierodouloi); and when one of these became divinely possessed and wandered alone in the woods he was seized, bound with sacred fetters, and maintained sumptuously for a year. When the festival day came he was anointed with a fragrant ointment, and slain by being pierced to the heart with a sacred lance through the side. Auguries were then drawn from the manner of his fall, and the body was carried away to a certain spot and ceremonially trampled upon by all as a means of purification. [*6] Here we have a sacrifice corresponding in one notable detail to one of the gospel narratives, and having other marked features in common with other well-known rites of human sacrifice. [*7] In the annual spring sacrifice at Salamis, again, the victim was led thrice round the altar (as in the rite of the Karhada Brahmans), then pierced by the priest with a lance, and the corpse was finally burned on a pyre. [*8] And that this mode

[p. 126]

of sacrifice in turn had a far-eastern origin or precedent may be inferred from the manner of the buffalo-sacrifice of the Bataks of Sumatra [*1] to the "Sombaon"--a term expressive of sacro-sanctity. In certain cases the buffalo is tied to a stake which has been decked and dedicated; the slayer is robed, and crowned with leaves; and he spears the victim in the side after asking the onlookers, "Shall I spear?" In all likelihood the buffalo is a surrogate for an ancient human sacrifice.

Later testimony brings us closer to civilisation in the same period. Tertullian is not the best of witnesses; and when he asserts that children are secretly sacrificed by non-Christians in Carthage in his own day, [*2] he is but doing what he denounces the pagans for doing as against his own sect--publishing a rumour which had never been investigated. But when he tells that children were publicly sacrificed to Saturn as late as the proconsulship of Tiberius, who therefore "crucified" a number of priests on the sacred trees beside their temple, he is saying something that squares with a good deal of testimony as to Semitic practices. Thus we have the explicit record [*3] that Hamilcar sacrificed his own son at the siege of Agrigentum, 407 B.C., and the many testimonies as to wholesale sacrifices of children among the Carthaginians. There is good evidence that an annual sacrifice of a boy to Kronos had anciently taken place at Tyre, but that it was given up, the citizens refusing to renew it when the city was besieged by Alexander; and the writer who records this also asserts that the Carthaginians maintained the practice of one annual sacrifice till the destruction of their city. [*4] To the same effect, Pliny alleges [*5] that the victim was annually sacrificed before the image of Hercules--that is, Melkarth. Even the lack of agreement as to dates of cessation is a proof that such usages could subsist without exciting much concern in the more civilised sections of the Roman empire. The story of the ecclesiastical historian Sokrates, [*6] to the effect that the Mithraists in Alexandria had habitually offered human sacrifices to Mithra down till somewhere before or after the year 300, is on the face of it worthless; [*7] but that there had been such sacrifices at Alexandria at some period is not incredible. Among the Arabs, it seems certain, human sacrifices subsisted in the generation before Mohammed; [*8]

[p. 127]

among the Japanese, they flourished later still; [*1] among the Hindus, as we have seen, they have lasted down to our own time among the primitives.

In view of the importance of this point to our inquiry, it has to be remarked, first, that there is no clear record of the date of cessation of the human sacrifices in the Thargelia at Athens. The historians pass over these matters with no apparent sense of the social and moral significance of such a problem. Grote does not so much as mention the Thargelia in connection with the practice of human sacrifice; and even Dr. Frazer [*2] remarks that "the Athenians regularly maintained" a number of possible victims, without suggesting any period for the usage. Professor Mahaffy, on whom as a culture-historian the problem pressed, makes a notable admission. "I think," he writes, "that Aristophanes alludes to this custom as bygone, though the scholiasts do not think so; but its very familiarity to his audience shows a disregard of human life strange enough in so advanced a legal system as that of Athens." [*3] The fact seems to have been that where criminals were concerned no notion of humanity or illegality came into play; though in the story of the sacrifice of the daughter of Aristodemus there is an evident prevalence of horror at the act. [*4] The horror of Themistocles at the demand that he should sacrifice captives of princely blood at Salamis [*5] is really no ground for thinking, as does Professor Mahaffy, that he or any other Athenian would wince at putting a criminal to death by religious rites; and such usages, ceasing to be called human sacrifices, may have subsisted long after the Periclean period. [*6]

Secondly, there is reason to infer from the uneasy language of Pausanias [*7] that human sacrifice to Lycaean Zeus was still performed in his time during periods of prolonged drought; and, as we shall see, there are more explicit albeit doubtful assertions as to its continuance at Rome at a still later period.

Among the barbarians, too, there were cannibal sacraments. Herodotus tells that his "Androphagoi" were the only people among the Scythians who ate human flesh; [*8] but he also asserts that "when a Scythian overthrows his first enemy he drinks his

[p. 128]

blood"; that when the Scythians make solemn covenants they mix their blood with wine and drink thereof; [*1] that the Massagetae sacrifice their aged kinsmen and eat their flesh; [*2] and that the Issedones eat the flesh of their dead fathers, mingled with animal flesh, at a grand banquet. [*3] Of the "Indian" Callatians and Padaeans he gives similar accounts. [*4] From such testimony it appears that an anthropophagous sacrament could subsist among a people not generally given to cannibalism; nor does it appear from Herodotus that even the Androphagoi were at all shunned by other tribes. Substantially following Herodotus, Pomponius Mela, in the chapter in which he mentions the Androphagoi and Sacco, tells of some in their region who hold it best to slay nothing, and of some who, when a near relative is growing weak through age or sickness, slay him as a sacrifice and hold it fas et maxime pium to eat of their bodies. [*5] Pomponius's geography is certainly of the wildest; but it is sufficient to note that he locates these sacramentalists in the region of Nysia, of mount Meros, sacred to Jove, and of the cave in which was nourished Father Liber. As there is little doubt that the ancient Akkadians and later Babylonians sacrificed their first-born children, [*6] there need be none as to similar practices among later Asiatic barbarians.

Returning to the civilised pale, we have the terse testimony of Pliny that among the Druidical rites suppressed by Tiberius had been one in which hominem occidere religiosissimum erat, mandi vero etiam saluberrimum. [*7] On this Pliny declaims, in the imperialistic manner, that nec satis aestimari potest, quantum Romanis debeatur for ending such horrors. Yet we have not only the record of the early burying alive of four alien men and women in the Forum Boarium of Rome, 216 B.C.; [*8] we have also Pliny's own avowals that only in the year 657 of Rome (97 B.C.) was there passed a senatus-consultus forbidding human sacrifices; [*9] and that despite this there had been seen in his own time (etiam nostra aetas vidit) such a sacrifice, [*10] in the form of the burying alive of two aliens of a nation with which Rome was at war. The law, it appears, referred only to private sacrifices, not to public. [*11] It had been even an established rule that before a battle a dictator or consul or praetor was entitled to sacrifice any Roman soldier--quem velit ex legione 

[p. 129]

[paragraph continues] Romana scripta civem devovere. [*1] We have also the innuendoes of Horace [*2] and Juvenal [*3] to the effect that even in their own day ancient savageries, such as the sacrifice of boys by slow starvation, could be performed in private, as well as the records of the sacrifice of two soldiers of Julius Caesar to Mars, [*4] and of the slaying of three hundred of the enemies of Augustus as a sacrifice to the deified Julius. [*5] Lastly, Suetonius explicitly asserts that the dreadful rites of the Druids, which Pliny declares to have been abolished by Tiberius, were not put down till the time of Claudius, and in this connection he adds that only under Augustus were those rites forbidden to the citizens of Rome. [*6] Here, again, the divergence of the testimony tells of indefinite possibilities of survival for bloody rites, even near the centre of government. [*7]

On the general question, for the rest, we have from Porphyry, without dates, a list of cases of human sacrifices formerly practised by the Greeks, as in Rhodes, Chios, Tenedos, Salamis, Crete, Athens, and Sparta, no less than by Egyptians, Arabs, and Phoenicians. [*8] And not only Porphyry, but Eusebius, [*9] Minucius Felix, [*10] and Lactantius [*11] speak of the sacrifice of a man to Latiarian Jove as being still practised in their time; while Plutarch [*12] tells of a secret rite, by implication one of human sacrifice, which he declares to be practised in the month of November in the Rome of his day. Of the eating of sacrificed human victims Porphyry mentions no cases among civilised peoples; and he gives but a loose account of the practice among the Bassaroi of Thrace, who had imitated it from the Taurians; [*13] but Tertullian is again more explicit and, at the same time, very circumstantial. "At this day," he writes, "among ourselves (isthic) blood consecrated to Bellona, taken in the palm from a punctured thigh, is given to her sealed ones"--i.e., her initiates. [*14] In another passage, he speaks of a surviving usage of drinking human blood in the

[p. 130]

worship of the Latiarian Jove. [*1] His further allusion to the practice of drinking the blood of slain gladiators as a remedy for epilepsy suggests many further possibilities of the same kind; and he expressly asserts that the men of his day have seen a man burnt alive as Hercules. [*2]

Footnotes

^122:2 See above, pp. 106-9; and cp. Miss Kingsley, West African Studies, 2nd ed. 1901, pp. 120, 123; Major Glyn Leonard, The Lower Niger and its Tribes, 1906, pp. 161, 200; Partridge. Cross River Natives. 1905, pp. 56-59, 62; Cunningham, Uganda and its Peoples. 1905. pp. 218, 226; Sir A. B. Ellis, The Ewe-Speaking Peoples, 1890, p. 117 sq.; The Tshi-Speaking Peoples, pp. 32, 35-72, 85, 228-30, etc.; Mockler-Ferryman, British West Africa, ed. 1900, pp. 41-42.

^122:3 Warneck, Die Religion der Batak, 1909, p. 126.

^122:4 As to recent instances in India, see Crooke, Popular Religion and Folklore of Northern India. ed. 1896, ii, 169 sq.: Thurston, Castes and Tribes of Southern India, iii, 379, iv, 56-58; and Prof. H. L. Strack, The Jew and Human Sacrifice, Eng. tr. 1909, p. 42. Cp. R. W. Frazer, Lit. Hist. of India, p. 43, as to surviving fears on the subject. Cp. Sir G. S. Robertson, The Kaffirs of the Hindu-Kush, ed. 1900, p. 401, as to the occasional sacrifice of Moslem prisoners of war by the Aryan Kafirs before their subjection to Afghanistan.

^122:5 Prof. H. L. Strack, The Jew and Human Sacrifice, as cited, pp. 38-42: Westminster Gazette, Feb. 6, 1906.

^122:6 Lindesay Brine, Travels amongst American Indians, 1894, p. 132.

^122:7 As to ancient Aryan India, cp. Rajendralala-Mitra. Indo-Aryans, 1881, ii, 70; Tylor, Primitive Culture, 3rd ed. i, 465-7; W. Crooke Popular Religion and Folklore of Northern India, ii, 167, and refs., and p. 320; Barth, Religions of India. Eng. tr. pp. 57-59; H. H. Wilson, Jour. of Roy. Asiat. Soc., vol. xiii, 1852, pp. 96-107; R. W. Frazer, Lit. Hist. of India, 1898, pp. 43, 89.

^122:8 Strabo, iii, 3,  section section 6, 7.

^122:9 Cicero, pro. M. Fonteio, xiv; Caesar, De Bello Gallico, vi. 16; Lactantius, Div. Inst. i, 21; Strabo, iv. 4,  section 5; Dionys. Halicarn. i, 38; Pomponius Mela, iii, 2; Lucan, i, 444-5; Tertullian, Apologeticus, ix; Justin, xxvi, 2.

^122:10 Strabo, vii, 2,  section 3; Tacitus, Germania, ix, xxxix; Procopius, Bell. Goth. ii, 15. Other testimonies are collected by Grimm, Teutonic Mythology, Eng. tr. i, 44-6. Cp. Montelius, Temps prehistoriques en Suede, Reinach's tr. 1895, pp 263, 300. See also Vigfusson and Powell, Corpus Poeticum Boreale, i, 120, 409-10, as to the human sacrifices to Thor.

^123:1 E.g., among Gauls, as described by Caesar.

^123:2 Paulus Orosius, v, 16; Procopius, as cited.

^123:3 Among the Gauls. Strabo, iv, 4,  section 5.

^123:4 Among the Cimbri (Strabo, vii, 2,  section 3) and Scythians (Herodotus. iv, 62).

^123:5 Rambaud, Hist. de la Russie, 2e edit. pp. 32-34, 53, 57, 85; Bastian, Der Mensch, iii, 108.

^123:6 Diodorus, v, 32.

^123:7 Herod. iv, 94.

^123:8 Herod. iv, 103.

^123:9 Herod. ii, 45, 119. Cp., however, Diodorus, i, 88; Amelineau, La morale egyptienne quinze siecles avant notre ere, 1892, introd. p. 76; Lane, Manners and Customs of Modern Egyptians, ed. 1871, ii, 229-230; Constant, De la Religion, 1833, iv, 180; and Ghillany, Die Menschenopfer der alten Hebraer, 1842, pp. 116-117. The testimonies as to human sacrifice in early Egypt are abundant. Cp. the citations from Manetho in Eusebius, Praeparatio Evangelica, iv, 16; In laude Constantini, c. 13; Porphyry, De Abstinentia, ii, 55; Plutarch, Isis and Osiris, c. 73 (cp. c. 31); and the scenes on the monuments copied by Pleyte, La religion des pre-Israelites, 1862, Pl. v.

^123:10 Cp. Ovid, Fasti, v, 621, 629; Lactantius, Div. Inst. i, 21; Aeneid, x, 517, 520; Macrobius, Saturnalia, i, 7; Plutarch, Quaest. Roman. 83.

^123:11 Pausanias, ix, 8.

^123:12 Eusebius, In laude Constantini.

^123:13 16 Apollodorus, i, 9,  section1 1, 2; Herodot. vii, 197; Pausanias, ix, 34.

^123:14 Pausanias, viii, 2. Cp. iv, 9.

^123:15 Pausanias, iv, 9.

^123:16 Herodot. ii, 119.

^123:17 Plutarch, Themistocles, xiii. They were said to be nephews of Xerxes.

^123:18 Herodot. vii, 114.

^123:19 Plutarch, De Pyth. Orac. xvi.

^123:20 Porphyry, De Abstinentia, ii, 55; Eusebius, In laude Constantini, c. 13. See also above, p. 60, as to the sacrifices to Artemis at Patrae in Achaia.

^123:21 Herodot. ix, 119.

^123:22 Pausanias, vi, 20. Cp. J. C. Lawson, Modern Greek Folklore and Ancient Greek Religion, 1910, pp. 272-3.

^124:1 Cp. R. H. Hall, The Oldest Civilization of Greece, 1901, p. 297; Murray, Rise of the Greek Epic, 1907, p. 12.

^124:2 Above, p. 64.

^124:3 Acosta, followed in Purchas his Pilgrimes, ed. 1906, xv, 304, 331-2.

^124:4 Rev. J. Macdonald, Light in Africa, 1890, p. 157. Cp. Colenso, sermon on Abraham's Sacrifice, 1864, p. 2, as to Zulu sacrifices. Quasi-sacrificial treatment of the body of a chief's child which died while its father was sick is noted by the missionary Holden, cited by Krapf, Natur- und Kulturleben der Zulus, p. 107. As to the burying alive of infants see A. B. Ellis, The Tshi-Speaking Peoples of the Gold Coast, 1887, p. 234.

^124:5 Sale, Prelim. Diss. to Koran, 1833, p. 137.

^124:6 Prof. E. H. Parker, China, 1901, p. 273; Thurston, Ethnographic Notes in Southern India, 1906, p. 502 sq. The Chinese practice is, of course, wholly economic. Reclus and Keane, Universal Geography, vii, 157. So in early Greece. Cp. Murray. pp. 150-1.

^124:7 Mariner's Tonga Islands, 1827, i, 190, 300; ii, 22.

^124:8 Admiral Lindesay Brine, Travels amongst American Indians, 1894, pp. 171-3.

^124:9 See refs. above, p. 61; also Diodorus, xiii, 86, xx, 65; Cyril on Micah, vi, 7, and Jud. xi, 31; Suidas, s.v. Zarduios gelus; Silius Italicus, iv, 770; Quintus Curtius Rufus, v, 3.

^124:10 Herodot. iii, 7. But cp. ii, 119, as to the sacrifice of children by Menelaos in Egypt.

^124:11 Cp. Grote, Part i, e. 6 (i, 119, note, ed. 1888).

^124:12 B. x, c. ii,  section 9. Cp. Kaliach, Comm. on Leviticus, i, 341 sq., as to the general tendency to mitigation,

^125:1 Cases occur to-day among primitives, e.g. the mock sacrifice of a little girl to a sacred tree in one tribe in Uganda. A slight incision was made in her neck and she was thrown into a lake, where a man was ready to save her. She was then dedicated to perpetual virginity--presumably as the bride of the tree. Sir H. H. Johnston, The Uganda Protectorate, 1902, ii, 720.

^125:2 Lactantius, as cited; Porphyry, De Abstin., ii, 56.

^125:3 See J. C. in Lawson, Ancient Greek Folklore, etc., as cited, pp. 339-342, 436. Cp. p. 266.

^125:4 Lampridius, Heliogabalus, c. 8.

^125:5 Plutarch (Cicero, 10) describes a cannibal sacrament of eating and drinking. Dio Cassius (xxxvii, 30) specifies a placing of the hands of the conspirators in the entrails of the victim; Sallust (Cat. 22), and Florus (iv, 1), a simple drinking of the blood.

^125:6 Strabo, xi, 4,  section 7.

^125:7 The use of the spear in one animal sacrifice is noted among the Oddes (or Voddas or Wudders) of Southern India. Thurston, Castes and Tribes, v, 422.

^125:8 Eusebius, Praep. Evang. iv, 16.

^126:1 Warneck, Die Religion der Batak, 1909, pp. 106-8.

^126:2 Apologeticus, ix.

^126:3 Diodorus, xiii, 86.

^126:4 Quintus Curtius, iv, 3, 1 38.

^126:5 Hist. Nat. xxxiv, 4,  section 26.

^126:6 Eccles. Hist. B. iii, c. 2.

^126:7 See below, Part III, 1 8.

^126:8 Cp. Weil, Biblical Legends of the Mussulmans, Eng. tr. 1846, p. 63; Curtiss, Primitive Semitic Religion To-day, 1902, p. 209 and context.

^127:1 Lafcadio Hearn, Japan, 1904, p. 166.

^127:2 G. B. iii, 125.

^127:3 Social Life in Greece, 3rd ed. p. 239, citing the Ranae, 732; Hipponax, Fr. 4-9, ed. Bergk; Archilochus, Fr. 113; Ister, Fr. 33, ed. Muller. Professor Murray, Rise of the Greek Epic, pp. 12-16, also leaves the matter vague.

^127:4 Paus. iv, 9, 13.

^127:5 Cp. Plutarch's stories concerning Pelopidas (cc. 20-26) and Agesilaus (c. 6).

^127:6 Cp. Miss Harrison, Prolegomena, as cited, pp. 97, 104.

^127:7 vii, 38 Cp. Augustine, De civ. Dei, xviii, 17, and Frazer, G. B. iii, 149, note.

^127:8 iv, 106.

^128:1 iv, 70.

^128:2 i, 216.

^128:3 iv, 26.

^128:4 iii, 38, 99.

^128:5 De situ orbis, iii, 7. Cp. Strabo, xi,  section 6; vii, 3,  section 9.

^128:6 Tiele, Hist. comparee des anciennes religions, trad. Fr. p. 247; Sayce, Hibbert Lectures, p. 78.

^128:7 Hist. Nat. xxx, 4.

^128:8 Livy, xxii, 57; Plutarch, Marcellus, 3.

^128:9 Hist. Nat. xxx, 3. 

^128:10 Id. xxviii, 3.

^128:11 Cp. Bastian, Der Mensch in der Geschichte, iii, 105.

^129:1 Livy, viii, 10. In the early story of the capture of a maiden "for Talassius" Livy (i, 9) Probably preserves record of a sacrifice of a maiden to the sea--a common practice among primitives.

^129:2 Epod. v, 12, 32-39.

^129:3 Sat. vi, 548-552.

^129:4 Dio Cassius, xlii, 24.

^129:5 Suetonius, Aug. xv

^129:6 Suetonius, Claudius, xxv.

^129:7 The late resort to human sacrifices by Elagabalus (Lamprid. Heliogab. cc. 7, 8) is spoken of as an innovation, and is not further traced; but its toleration suggests that the Principle had not become obsolete. The story preserved by Eusebius (Hist. Eccles. vii, 10) that Valerian was led by the "chief of the Egyptian magi" to resort to child sacrifice is clearly a pious fiction. The story against Nero (Sueton. 36) is more probable.

^129:8 De Abstinentia, ii, 54-57. Cp. cc. 8, 27, 51.

^129:9 In laude Constantini, c. 13; Praep. Evang. iv, 16.

^129:10 Octavius, ed. var. 1672, p. 297.

^129:11 Lactantius, i, 21, says only sanguine humano colitur. Porphyry (56) says they slay a man (sfazomenon anthrupon). The victim was probably a criminal, dying as a gladiator. Cp. Tertullian, Apologeticus, ix, and Ghillany, Die Menschenopfer der alten Hebraer, 1842, Pp. 112-113, note. The shrine was of Etruscan foundation.

^129:12 Marcellus, 3.

^129:13 De Abstin. ii, 8.

^129:14 Apologeticus, ix.

^130:1 Adv. Gnosticos, 7.

^130:2 Id. xv.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 5. The Divinity of the Victim.

On the classic side there is thus abundant evidence as to the practice of human sacrifice, and some as to sacramental cannibalism, in the historic period; but what the theory finally requires is either the sacrifice of a victim who, as being specifically divine, is the subject of a eucharist, or the proof that such a eucharist could be combined with the sacrifice of a divine victim. Now, in the Khond cult, as we have seen, not only is the victim deified, but the propitiated Goddess figures in the myth as the original sacrifice. An ostensibly similar myth is found in ancient Babylon, in a creation story, where Marduk is actually decapitated in order that the first man may be made from his blood and "bone." [*3] After such precedents, the deification of sacrificed victims could readily follow; though the probability is, of course, that the myth was framed to explain an already established usage of deification. Of this conception we have already seen a clear trace in the old Mediterranean world in the sacrifices of the Albanians to the Moon-Goddess; and for fuller light we turn first to the cult of Dionysos. Not only is there the story of the substitution of a goat for a boy in the sacrifice to Dionysos at Potniae, [*4] but there is the combined significance of (a) the myth of the rending of the divine boy Dionysos, in the form of a bull, by the Titans; [*5] (b) the fact that in the ritual mystery the worshippers tore a live bull to pieces with their teeth; [*6] (c) the peculiar Dionysiak ritual at Tenedos, where a gravid cow was treated as a woman in labour, and her calf, devoted to the God, was made to wear the tragic cothurni, while the slayer was formally pursued with stones and had to fly into the sea; [*7] (d) the actual rending of men as Dionysiak sacrifices at Chios and Tenedos; [*8] and (e) the peculiar procedure in the Athenian Bouphonia or religious "murder

[p. 131]

of the ox," [*1] where the ceremonial flight of the slayers, their repudiation of guilt, and the solemn trial and condemnation of the weapons used as being the guilty things, all go to show that the ox represented either a divinity or a human victim, or the former by development from the latter. [*2] The theory of Robertson Smith, that the animal sacrifice is the earlier, need not be here considered. It rests on the assumption that the primordial communion-sacrifice was totemistic; and this has not been and cannot be proved. On the other hand we have many traces of the substitution of an animal for a human sacrifice in historic times; and this is all that is required to solve the historic problem.

From another side we see the same principle at work in the old Theban sacrifice to Amun, [*3] wherein the ram, the symbolic and sacred animal of the God, never otherwise sacrificed, was on the annual festival-day of the God offered up to him, the skin being placed on the God's statue. As Herodotus tells the story, there was then brought beside the image of Amun an image of "Herakles," presumably Khonsu, the Son of the God in the Theban Trinity; [*4] whereafter "all who are in the temple beat themselves in mourning for the ram, and then bury him in a holy sepulchre." Whatever may have been the parts played by father and son respectively in this rite, it is clear that the slaying of the ram--presumptively a lamb--represented the death of the God, whose resurrection would necessarily follow, like that of Osiris. In the ritual worship of Herakles, the man burned alive represented the God, [*5] who in the myth dies on the funeral pyre. Another rite practised in the worship of the Syrian Goddess indicates in a different way the original connection of an animal sacrifice with a human sacrifice and a sacrament. In the Syrian ritual, the stranger who came to sacrifice had to offer up a sheep, of which he partook, on whose skin he knelt, and whose head he placed on his in the act of supplication. [*6] The symbolism is here fairly complete. And in yet another rite, that of the sacrifice and sacramental eating of a camel among the Sinaitic Arabs of the fourth century, [*7] it was clearly avowed that the young white camel was a

[p. 132]

substitute for a human sacrifice, young and beautiful captives being the preferred victims. In this case the blood of the wounded camel was drunk by the tribesmen, and the animal was cut to pieces and instantly devoured raw. That at a remote period the human victim was so eaten, it is difficult to doubt. [*1]

Proceeding on the maxim that the myth is always long posterior to the rite which it pretends to explain, we must suppose that before the composition of the legends concerning the Titans and the birth, death, and rebirth of Dionysos, such a primitive rite as the legend describes had actually been performed. Between a ritual in which the victim is torn to pieces for burial in the fields, and one in which the victim is eaten by the worshippers, there is a process of development to be accounted for. Two hypotheses are open. The Khond rite may be a modification of an original ritual of cannibalism; or the ancient Dionysiak rite may stand for a transformation of the typical rite, in which, an animal having been substituted for a human victim, the eating of it became a means to communion with the God whom the animal mystically represented. Broadly speaking, one process is as likely as the other; and both have evidently taken place. While the Khonds did not eat their human sacrifice, the Gonds, a kindred Dravidian race, by one account actually did; [*2] and many medieval and modern instances of kin-eating and other ritual cannibalism are on record. [*3] In one of the most recently noted instances of human sacrifice among contemporary savages, which is also the most primitive that has been observed--the cult of the Snake-God at Ebritum in Southern Nigeria--the annual victims seem to have been eaten regularly; and of the four hundred slain on the occasion of the death of a great chief, "all were killed at Ebritum as offerings to the God, and then eaten by the Aro people, the flesh being distributed through the late chief's country. These victims were looked upon as sacred, and those who ate their flesh ate Gods, and thus assimilated within themselves something of the divine attributes and power. The victims were not fattened before being killed." [*4] In another tribe, the Ibo, the sacrifice and eating of a male or female slave is still a regular part of the "Okuku" or post-funeral ceremony for a chief; and in this case the victim is "bought with a price" after the chief's death, fattened, and treated

[p. 133]

with particular kindness, in the Asiatic fashion. [*1] Instances of ritual cannibalism may easily be multiplied. In the annual human holocaust at Whydah, a century ago, the sacrifice of one man thrown from a height with his hands tied, a muzzled crocodile, and a pair of pigeons with clipped wings, terminated the celebration; and the man in this case was devoured by the multitude. [*2] And to this day, in the words of one observer, "no great human sacrifice offered for the purpose of appeasing the Gods and averting sickness or misfortune is considered to be complete unless either the priests or the people eat the bodies of the victims." [*3] The same sacramental element is seen in the eating of parts of the sacrificed captives of war at Bonny. [*4]

In the Tonga Islands, again, the bodies of enemies slain in war were dedicated to the Gods, and a few sacramentally eaten: this at a stage of civilisation at which many of the community, and particularly the women, regarded the proceeding with disgust; [*5] and similar survivals were noted in the Marquesas. [*6] In Fiji [*7] and Tahiti [*8] dedication to the Gods was a preliminary to every act of public cannibalism. Among the Niam-Niams of Nubia, too, it appears to have been chiefly in times of war that cannibalism was resorted to; and though a white onlooker ascribed the act in such a case to sheer "blood-thirstiness and hatred," [*9] it was doubtless a religious proceeding. The same inference arises in the cases in which Native Americans in modern times have been known to eat human flesh in time of war; since they did it "with repugnance," though they believed it to produce courage. [*10] Even the infliction of torture may have a religious as distinct from a merely revengeful motive, [*11] as in a sacrifice among the Native Americans in which the victim, a slave, was burned by a slow fire, with progressive mutilation and partial eating, followed by killing and the eating of the remains. Finally the partakers beat on their huts "to compel the soul of the defunct to abandon the village." [*12] Here we have a systematic ritual. [*13]

[p. 134]

We may therefore conclude that primordially the human sacrifice was normally eaten, as it was by the semi-civilised Mexicans at the time of the Spanish conquest. It is in fact certain that anthropophagy has been practised in all parts of the world in the savage and semi-civilised stages; [*1] and it is no less certain that cannibalism had persisted long in its religious form after it had ceased to be a normal practice: the rationale of the act being, not that men to the last offered the Gods that which they commonly liked for themselves, but that they held it a sacred experience to continue to eat what they believed the God to eat. [*2] On the other hand, the recoil from cannibalism which everywhere marks the rise of humanity would, in the more civilised Asiatic states, lead on one hand to the setting apart of criminals for the human sacrifices, and on the other to the substitution of an animal, which, partly in virtue of survivals of totemism and partly in virtue of the current conception of all sacrifice, [*3] could pass as the representative and incarnation of the God, and would at the same time serve for the typical sacramental meal, but no longer in a totemistic sense. [*4]

A certain difficulty arises as to the use of criminals for sacrificial purposes. As we have seen, the Khonds vetoed it, and rejected

[p. 135]

even prisoners of war. In view of the nearly universal principle [*1] among the higher races of antiquity that the sacrifice must be pure and without blemish, a criminal would seem to be the last man to suit the part; and among the Mesopotamian Semites a genuine and precious sacrament was anciently insisted on. [*2] This appears to have been the idea underlying the common rule that the victim should be a male, which prevailed among the peoples of Nigeria in recent times as regards both men and animals. [*3] Yet these tribes, as we have seen, sacrifice indifferently a female or a male slave to-day; [*4] and of the practice at Benin it is told that "the people who were kept for sacrifice were bad men or men with bad sickness--they were all slaves"; and that a slave who committed a murder was put apart as a fit victim for the common good. [*5] A woman again, was the usual sacrifice to the Rain-God; [*6] and women slaves were among those sacrificed to save the city. [*7] So among the Egyptians, even in our era, there was a usage of sacrificing a virgin annually to the Nile. [*8] The idea of fitness, in short, could easily and spontaneously vary. [*9] So, among the Greeks, virgins are typical victims for human sacrifice; and the Goddess known simply as Parthenos, sometimes associated with Athene, and by Herodotus identified with Iphigeneia, [*10] is probably but an abstraction from a once annual virgin-sacrifice. But it is found that in primitive communities the act of execution "constantly assumes sacrificial forms"; [*11] and it is told of the Bataks of Sumatra that they ate their executed criminals, without any other resort to cannibalism, the relatives of the executed man being entitled to the best pieces, [*12] The same is told of the people of Francis Island in the South Pacific: "Thieves were killed and their bodies eaten: only in such cases was there cannibalism." [*13] In the case of the Bataks at least

[p. 136]

there would seem to be a clear survival of an anthropophagous sacrament, as it can hardly he supposed that people not otherwise cannibalistic would desire to devour an executed relative for the sheer pleasure of eating human flesh. And the accepted explanation of Batak practice is one which chimes with all we know of the motives to theophagy. "The cannibalism so common in Sumatra derives in any case originally from the desire to obtain, through the means of the eaten flesh of a newly-slain man, the enrichment of one's own life-stock by his tondi" [*1]--that is, the many specific spirits which animate his limbs and organs. The Bataks of to-day hardly realise the motive, though their licit cannibalism is now limited to the eating of brave warriors wounded and taken captive, and of certain criminals, as aforesaid. [*2] But with other primitives there is no discrimination. An old Chinese description of Tibet preserves record of a Tibetan practice of sending criminals of certain kinds to be eaten by a tribe of savages north of Burma. [*3] The latter may have proceeded on the Batak principle; but of this there is no trace, they being ostensibly ready to eat anybody's exiles. Among the Manyema of Uganda, till the other day or even now, it has been the rule that the dead are always eaten by their kindred in the nearest village [*4]--a limitation which suggests modification of an original kin-eating by the example of cannibalism after warfare.

The view that the criminal was a proper sacrifice, in fact, might readily grow out of the circumstance that the earlier victims had been normally captives; [*5] and this collocation of ideas we actually find in the custom of Dahome, where human sacrifice was so recently and so systematically practised. The annual victims, as distinguished from the holocaust at the death of a king, were commonly captives and criminals, these being normally the king's perquisite. [*6] As the death holocaust proceeded on the assumption that the king must enter the Death-land well attended, so the annual sacrifices, which might number about thirty, were contributions of filial piety to that retinue. The time of sacrifice was accordingly the only time of capital punishment in the year. [*7] Here the process of reasoning is

[p. 137]

sufficiently transparent. If an enemy of the tribe from without could suffice, so, it might be argued, would an enemy of the tribal law from within, he being, besides, one of the king's or God's own people. And among the Aztecs, accordingly, we find the law decreeing that thieves who had stolen gold and silver--thieves par excellence, so to speak--were annually sacrificed with the regular victims to the God Xipe, patron of the goldsmiths. Like many other victims, they were flayed, and the priest wore their skins, thus figuring as the God in their persons. [*1]

We have, again, the record of Caesar that in the wholesale human sacrifices of the Gauls the offering up of those who had committed thefts or other crimes was considered "more grateful to the immortal Gods"; but that "when the supply of that species fell short, they descended to sacrifices of the innocent." [*2] And there is reason to think, with M. de Belloguet, [*3] that the peculiar sacrifices in question (in which numbers of men were burned alive in large simulacra) were derived from some early Carthaginian or other Phoenician cult. Needless to say, the simple recoil in more civilised periods from the idea of a wilful sacrifice of the innocent--a recoil clearly seen in Greek and Semitic legends--would encourage the resort for victims to the unfortunates under sentence of death.

Finally, we have the express statement of Porphyry that in the annual sacrifice of a man to the ancient Semitic deity Kronos at Rhodes, a prisoner condemned to death was selected and kept till the Kronian festival, when he was led outside the city gates and, having been given wine to drink, put to death. [*4] Here we have at length a close parallel in the Mediterranean world to what we have seen reason to regard as a typical detail in the gospel mystery-play. [*5] The Kronian victim at Rhodes we know cannot have been originally a criminal; and it is much more likely than not that he originally personated either the God Kronos, [*6] or, as seems most probable, the "only-begotten son" Ieoud, whom in a Phoenician myth [*7] Kronos is said to have sacrificed after dressing him in royal robes. To this clue we shall return after a further survey. In the meantime, we may take it as established (1) that the giving of a narcotic to the

[p. 138]

victim--which we have seen practised among the Khonds, and which we find transferred in India and elsewhere to animal victims [*1] who are presumably surrogates--derives from ancient usage; and (2) that the original purpose of the rite was not held to be defeated by the selection for sacrifice of a prisoner sentenced to death.

In a community where social duty was deeply impressed on all, as in medieval Japan, it was possible to secure every year a victim who practised ascetic abstinence, and was finally put to death on behalf of the community, [*2] and this may well have been the early ideal. [*3] As the Japanese human scapegoat, though of course no longer sacrificed, is even now called the "one-year god-master," and was anciently called "the abstainer," it is not difficult to conceive that this may have been one of the ways in which kingship grew up. [*4] But in more sophisticated societies, as we know, the extremer obligations of the kingship were overridden, and victims must in most States have been hard to procure. [*5] It is true that in primitive communities the fear of death seems surprisingly slight among doomed victims; [*6] and the known readiness of Chinamen to sell themselves as substitutes for condemned criminals points the same moral. But none the less there has been an evolution of the faculty of apprehension. An intermediate stage is seen in the medieval State of Malabar, where condemned men volunteered to immolate themselves in honour of a God, giving themselves twelve wounds with as many knives, and thereby winning funeral honours. [*7] The tendency in less rigorously drilled communities than Japan would be, first, towards a general unwillingness which had to be met by the bribe of a year's licence, and, later, to a state of things in which nobody would volunteer, and the victim must be either bred and bought, as among the Khonds, or taken from among the condemned criminals. These, however, would include persons condemned for impiety, who even for the Christians were explicitly anathemata, that is, objects "devoted" to the Gods. [*8] The same title of anathema 

[p. 139]

was given to the sacred objects hung up or deposited in the temples and to the man denounced for impiety. [*1] So that, even if the widespread usage of granting abnormal privileges to the victim, whether human or animal, [*2] were originally a way of asserting his divinity, a criminal was not ineligible.

Thus, though it does not seem to be clearly proved that the victims put to death in the Thargelia festival at Athens were latterly criminals, [*3] it is highly probable that they were. Early religion looked to the physical side of sacrifice; and if the criminal were whole, no question of his fitness would arise for more primitive worshippers, save where, as among the Khonds, the practice of purchase set up a special credence. [*4] In one Greek sacrifice, indeed, that performed at Leucadia, an "ugly or deformed person" seems to have been chosen as the victim. [*5] When, again, the developing religious consciousness became capable of shrinking from the anomaly of calling a criminal "sacred," there was, as we shall see later, a symbolical way out of the difficulty.

Symbolism, too, would further the modification of the sacrificial meal. Long before the more civilised peoples revolted from the act of human sacrifice, they would recoil, we must suppose, from the act of anthropophagy; and in regard to many rites of human sacrifice we find stories of substitution of animals and of waxen and other images and cakes by order of humane kings. [*6] The Roman devices of the kind are well known, and their resort to images of straw is paralleled among the Gonds of India in our own time; [*7] while the modern Malays offer dough models of human beings, called "the substitute," [*8] and the Bataks of Sumatra employ a number of symbolic sacrifices of images of human beings, some made of bananas, some of wood--all plainly suggestive of a process of substitution for former human sacrifices. [*9] The same process of substitution may be confidently inferred in the case of the rite practised in the Chinese

[p. 140]

[paragraph continues] Spring Festival, held annually on the fourth of February. The chief magistrate of each department, crowned with flowers, is carried in a chair in procession, surrounded by figures representing mythological personages; and before him is carried a huge decorated figure of a buffalo, in terra-cotta, with gilded horns, behind which goes a child, with one foot shod and the other naked, who constantly beats the buffalo. Behind him march labourers carrying their agricultural implements; and the procession goes out (and returns) by the eastern gate of the town, "to meet the spring." When it is over, the buffalo is broken up, and the pieces, with a vast number of small buffalo figures carried in the interior of the figure, are distributed to all the people; whereafter the governor delivers a discourse in praise of agriculture. [*1] What has historically taken place, doubtless, is first a substitution of a buffalo, as among the Khonds, for the original human victim, of whom the flower-crowned governor is a surviving trace. Later, Chinese thrift and mandarin policy substituted an image for the buffalo, adding a multitude of small figures of it for distribution with the pieces of the image, as was once done in the case of the living victim.

For the rest, the turn of mind which made myths out of the misunderstood survivals of totemism would have no difficulty in finding reasons for eating any given animal in the worship of any given God, whether or not the primordial sacrifice had been that of an animal. Thus the worshippers of Dionysos could feel they were commemorating the dismemberment of the God when they ate the raw flesh of a bull or a kid; other devotees ate a young dog; [*2] and further symbolic modification easily followed, on lines common to many pagan cults.

Footnotes

^130:3 L. W. King, The Seven Tablets of Creation, 1902, Introd. i, pp. l-lx, lxxxvii.

^130:4 Pausanias, ix, 8.

^130:5 Pausanias, viii, 37; Nonnus, Dionysiaca, vi, 205; Arnobius, Adv. gentes, v, 19.

^130:6 Arnobius, as cited; Firmicus Maternus, De errore profan. relig. vii. Lactantius, Div. Inst. i, 21; Clemens Alexandr. Protrept. ii; Plutarch, De Ei, ix; Isis and Osiris, xxxv. See the whole mythology collected by Dr. Frazer, G. B. ii, 160 sq.

^130:7 Aelian, De nat. animal. xii, 34. Cp. Robertson Smith, Relig. of the Semites, p. 451; 2nd ed. p. 300.

^130:8 Porphyry, De Abstinentia, ii, 55.

^131:1 Pausanias, i, 24, 28; Porphyry, De Abstin. ii, 29-30.

^131:2 See the argument of Dr. Frazer, G. B. ii, 294-5; and the remarks of MM. Hubert et Mauss, Essai sur le sacrifice, in L'Annee Sociologique, 2e Annee, 1899, pp. 68-69.

^131:3 Herodotus, ii, 42.

^131:4 Cp. Wilkinson's note in Rawlinson's Herodotus, vol. ii, p. 78; and Wiedemann, Rel. of the Anc. Egyptians, Eng. tr. pp. 104, 124-5. The identification, however, is not certain. Osiris was "the child" at Thebes (Renouf, Hibbert Lectures, 2nd ed. p. 84); and Horus has Heraklean features (Tiele, Egypt. Rel. p. 42). But Khonsu at Thebes was Khonsu-Ra, and at Komombo was compounded with Horus. Wiedemann, as cited.

^131:5 Tertullian, Apol. c. 15. Cp. Robertson Smith, Relig. of the Semites, p. 353, citing K. O. Muller, as to the burning of an effigy of the God on the pyre. See also Frazer, G. B. iii, 171.

^131:6 Lucian, Dea Syria, lv. Cp. Robertson Smith, Rel. of the Semites, p. 455.

^131:7 See the story of Nilus as given by Prof. Robertson Smith, Religion of the Semites, pp. 263, 320, 342 sq.

^132:1 The argument of Robertson Smith to the contrary (p. 345) is quite inconclusive. That the human sacrifice was not eaten by Arabs in the fourth century is no proof that in more savage times it was not eaten by that as by other races.

^132:2 Frazer, G. B. ii, 241, citing Punjab Notes and Queries, ii, 127 sq.,  section 721.

^132:3 Above, p. 128; Hartland, Legend of Perseus, ii, 245-6. and ch. 13.

^132:4 C. Partridge, Cross River Natives, being some Notes on the Primitive Pagans of Obubura Hill District, Southern Nigeria, 1905, p. 59.

^133:1 Major A. Glyn Leonard, The Lower Niger and its Tribes, 1906, p. 161. Cp. p. 160 as to the wholesale sacrifices of the past. Major Leonard mistakenly ascribes the good treatment of the victim to fear of driving him to suicide or to escape. It is to be understood in the light of Khond and other practices.

^133:2 A. B. Ellis, The Ewe-Speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast, 1890 p. 154.

^133:3 Mockler-Ferryman, British West Africa, 2nd ed. 1900, p. 390. There follows an account of one such carnival sacrament by Consul Hutchinson, who witnessed it at Bonny

^133:4 J. Smith, Trade and Travels in the Gulph of Guinea, 1851, p. 82.

^133:5 Mariner, Tonga Islands, 3rd ed. 1827, i, 172-3.

^133:6 Herman Melville, Typee, ch. xxxii.

^133:7 T. Williams, Fiji and the Fijians, ed. 1870, pp. 43, 177.

^133:8 W Ellis, Polynesian Researches, ed. 1831, iv, 317, 358-9; J. Williams, Narrative of Missionary Enterprise, ed. 1838, pp. 472-3-4.

^133:9 Schweinfurth, The Heart of Africa, 3rd ed. i, 285.

^133:10 Admiral Lindesay Brine, Travels amongst American Indians, p. 135.

^133:11 See above, <page 115>.

^133:12 Lafitau, Moeurs des sauvages ameriquains, 1724. ii, 277-9.

^133:13 For another case of ritual sacrifice and sacrament see Lafitau, pp. 295-304.

^134:1 Cp. Prof. Joly, Man before Metals, Eng. tr. 1883, pp. 341-351; Letourneau, Sociology, Eng. tr. B. iii, ch. 12; Spencer, Principles of Sociology. 3rd ed. i, 265; A. Reville, Prolegomenes, p. 183; .7. G. Muller, La Terre et l'Homme, p. 629; Maury, La Terre et l'Homme. 4e ed. pp. 751-2; Lubbock, Prehistoric Times, 5th ed. p. 177; Peschel, The Races of Man, Eng. tr. 1876, pp. 161-4; Keane, Man, Past and Present, 1900, p. 78.

^134:2 J. G. Muller, as cited, p. 632. "Cannibalism as it now exists among them [the Nigerians] is purely a religious relic." "It is evident that cannibalism not only had. but still has, a spiritual or sacrificial significance" (Major Glyn Leonard, The Lower Niger and its Tribes, 1906, pp. 324, 403). Mr. Basil Thomson pronounces no less emphatically, as to the cannibalism of the Fijians, that "the tabus and ceremonies surrounding it clearly indicate its religious origin," giving many details in support (The Fijians: A Study in the Decay of Custom, 1908, p. 104). Similarly Major Mockler-Ferryman (British West Africa, as cited, p. 390) pronounces that the religious psychic idea of cannibalism, as being ordained by the Gods, "is the primary cause of West African cannibalism, and very possibly the origin of it among anthropophagous peoples." Among the Sese Islanders of the Victoria Nyanza, again, there is a secret society, the Bachichi, whose object is to continue the custom of eating the dead (Cunningham, Uganda and its Peoples, 1905, p. 73; Sir H. Johnston, The Uganda Protectorate, 1902, ii, 692-3; Liberia, 1906, ii, 1059). See below, <page 136>. The cannibal Papuans of New Guinea, it is noted, "would not.....commit cannibalism in the presence of a white man or a native woman" (A. E. Pratt, Two Years among the Cannibals of New Guinea, 1906, p. 224). The same observation applies to the Fijians (Thomson, as above cited). See W. Schneider, Die Naturvolker, 1885, i, 195-200, for the theory that religious cannibalism began as an imitation of the supposed practice of the Gods. Cp. Thomson, as cited, p. 103; Rev. R. Taylor, Te Ika a Maui, p. 191; and Peschel, as cited, p. 164. Prof, Robertson Smith similarly argues that Arab sacrifices were neither gifts to the Gods nor--even in the sacrifice of first-born sons--offerings of what was most precious to the sacrificer, but offerings of the most sacred kind of victim, as the sacred blood of the species there flows purest and strongest (Rel. of Semites, 2nd ed. note E, p. 465). This squares to some extent with the view ascribed to Varro (in Augustine, Civ. Dei, vii, 19) that the Phoenicians and the Gauls offered human sacrifices quia omnium seminum optimum est genus humanum.

^134:3 MM. Hubert et Mauss, in their valuable Essai sur le sacrifice (L'Annee Sociologique, 2e Annee, 1899), seem to argue that sanctity was in all cases wholly conferred on the victim by the ritual. This was certainly the rule, but there were exceptions, notably in the case of human victims. The essential point is that every victim had something divine (Id. p. 127).

^134:4 Cp. Frazer, G. B. ii, 438-9, as to the sacrament of the sacred ram among the Kalmucks.

^135:1 The Spartans seem to have made a partial exception. Plato, Alcib. ii. Cp. as to the later attitude, Athenaeus, viii, 67; Malachi, i, 7, 8, 13.

^135:2 Sayce, Hibbert Lectures, p. 78; Tiele, Hist. comparee, p. 247; Smith, Relig. of the Semites, p. 343; Kalisch, Comm. on Leviticus, i, 337-341.

^135:3 H. Ling Roth, Great Benin, p. 70; Major Glyn Leonard, Tribes of Lower Nigeria, 1906, p. 200.

^135:4 Above, <page 132>.

^135:5 Ling Roth, p. 70.

^135:6 Id. pp. 54. 71.

^135:7 Id. App. p. x.

^135:8 Lane, Manners and Customs of the Modern Egyptians, ed. 1871, ii, 229-230.

^135:9 Evidently the female victim was selected with some idea of furnishing a bride to the Propitiated deity. Cp. Frazer, Lectures on the Early History of the Kingship, 1905, p. 179 sq.

^135:10 Newton, Essays in Art and Archaeology, 1880, pp. 435-6. Cp. Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. p. 373, as to Helena Dendrites.

^135:11 Robertson Smith. Religion of the Semites. p. 351, note. Cp. Macrobius, Saturnalia, iii, 7; Dionys. Halicarn. ii, 30; K. O. Muller, Dorians, Eng. tr. i, 354-5, and Ramsay, Rom. Antiq. 1851, p. 309. It seems clear that the barbaric mind regarded the executed criminal very much as it did the enemy in battle; and the "devoting" of captured enemies as sacrifices is anciently common to Hebrews, Teutons (above,  section 4), American indigenes (below, Part IV,  section 5), Romans (Livy, viii, 10), and Greeks (Diodorus Siculus, xi, 65). As to the connection of sacrifice with execution see also Dennett, Nigerian Studies, 1910, pp. 193-4.

^135:12 Maury, La Terre et l'Homme, 4e edit. pp. 751-2.

^135:13 Turner, Samoa, p. 300.

^136:1 Warneck, Die Religion der Batak, 1909, p. 9. Cp. Rev. R. Taylor, Te Ika a Maui, 1870, pp. 352-3.

^136:2 Maury assumes that all Batak criminals are or formerly were eaten: Warneck limits the usage to "certain criminals--for example, adulterers." The selection is explained by the tondi motive, adulterers being instances of excessive sexual energy.

^136:3 Klaproth, Description du Tibet (tr. from Chinese), 1831, pp. 72, 273.

^136:4 J. F. Cunningham, Uganda and its Peoples, 1905, p. 318.

^136:5 Cp. in this connection the Rouen legend discussed by Dr. Frazer, Lectures on the Early History of Kingship, 1905, pp. 186-192.

^136:6 Cp. A. B. Ellis, The Tshi-Speaking Peoples, p. 229.

^136:7 Burton. A Mission to Gelele, 1864, ii, 19-20, 22, 28. Similarly Allen and Thomson, Narrative of the British Expedition to the River Niger, 1848, i, 249, note that among the Ibus the human beings sacrificed "are mostly slaves or persons convicted of great offences," But these offences, it should be remembered, may be purely ceremonial.

^137:1 Clavigero, History of Mexico, Eng. tr. ed. 1807, B. vi,  section 30 (i, 297).

^137:2 De Bello Gallico, vi, 16.

^137:3 Ethnogenie Gauloise, Ptie iii, Le Genie Gaulois, 1868, pp. 190, 203.

^137:4 De Abstinentia, ii, 54. Dr. Frazer (G. B. iii, 149) reads made him drunk with wine," which goes somewhat beyond the Greek, oinoy potisantes; but some degree of stupefaction may be inferred.

^137:5 In the Arab sacrifice described by Kilns, the sacrificers drank wine with the victim (Smith, p. 344, note), but this act may have had another significance.

^137:6 So Dr. Frazer, G. B. iii, 149-150.

^137:7 Preserved by Eusebius from Philo of Byblos, Praeparatio Evangelica, iv, 16,

^138:1 Crooke, Popular Relig. and Folklore of N. India, 1896, i, 173; Lindesay Brine, Travels amongst American Indians, 1894, pp. 368-9 (case of turkey sacrifice in Central America).

^138:2 Lafcadio Hearn, Japan, p. 166.

^138:3 At Benin in 1825 Fawckner "saw a man who had given himself as a sacrifice to the fetish," and the sacrificial procession in his case was immense. For some time before, he had had the free run of the market-place, on the usual principle; and before being drowned he was made drunk (Ling Roth, Great Benin, 1903, p. 84). In India, again, Brahmans committing suicide from ascetic motives have been frequently deified in modern times (Crooke, The Religion and Folklore of Northern India, as cited, i, 193). This squares with the deification of Amilcar by the Carthaginians on the score that he had sacrificed himself for his country (Herod. vii, 167). In Nigeria a mother could be deified for sacrificing her son. Dennett, Nigerian Studies. 1910, p. 23.

^138:4 Cp, the theory of Jevons, Introd. to Hist. of Relig., p. 275 sq.

^138:5 Cp. Jevons, p. 280.

^138:6 Cp. Ling Roth, Great Benin, pp. 43, 64, 65, 66, 74, 82, 84; and ch. xiv of B. Thomson's The Fijians, on "The Insouciance of Native Races."

^138:7 Marco Pole, Voyages and Travels, iii, 20 (Morley's ed. p. 151).

^138:8 1 Cor, xvi, 22,

^139:1 Cp. C. T. Newton, Essays in Art and Archaeology, 1880, p. 193; also index, s.v., Dedications.

^139:2 Above, pp. 111, 114; below, pp. 154, 183; and Part IV,  section 3, 5.

^139:3 Cp. Frazer, G. B. iii, 125, and art. THARGELIA in Smith's Dict. of Antiq. The victim "cast out" at Massilia in a similar rite is expressly described as a poor man who sold himself for a year's keep (Petronius ap. Serv. in Virg. Aen., iii, 57); and as poor men can be thus bought to undergo the death penalty in China to day, they may have been so purchaseable at Athens.

^139:4 Another exception will be found noted below, Part II, ch. ii,  section 15.

^139:5 Frazer, as last cited. Cp. Schomann, Griechische Alterthumer, ii, 225, as to the resort to criminals for human sacrifices.

^139:6 Porphyry, De Abstin. ii, 55. Above, <page 60>.

^139:7 Crooke, Religion and Folklore of N. India, ii, 176. See also p. 167. Cp. Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. p. 208, note, and below, Pt. IV,  section 6, as to Mexico; and Thurston, Castes and Tribes of Southern India, iv, 58, as to the making of an earthen figure of a woman for a propitiatory sacrifice by the Koyis.

^139:8 W. W. Skeat, Malay Magic, p. 72

^139:9 Warneck, Die Religion der Batak, 1909, pp. 95-98, 125,

^140:1 Pauthier, Chine Moderne, 2e partie, 1853, pp. 649-650.

^140:2 Pliny, Hist. Nat. xxix, 14. Cp. Robertson Smith, Rel. of Semites, p. 273. In a dog-sacrifice by hill tribes in India, the victim is first drugged with spirits and hemp, then killed with sticks and stones. So elsewhere with a buffalo. (Crooke, Relig. and Folklore of N. India, i, 173.) In such cases, as we have seen, there is a strong presumption that the animal is a surrogate for a human being. Cp. Dennett, Nigerian Studies, p. 124.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 6. The Cannibal Sacrament.

Given such a modification, however, we have to reckon with a tendency that is seen to have been chronic in religious history--the tendency, namely, to revert to a foreign or archaic form of sacrifice or mystery in times of national disaster and uncertainty. [*3] It is expressed alike in the Roman resort to eastern and Egyptian Gods

[p. 141]

in times of desperate war, in the revival or preservation of the cults of subdued races, [*1] in the multiplication of magical rites for decaying civilisations, and in the chronic reversion during times of excitement to palmistry and other modes of fortune-telling. [*2] And that the idea of religious anthropophagy prevailed in the early Christian world is obvious from the central ritual of the cult, where the formulas: "Take eat, this is my body"; "Drink ye all of it, for this is my blood," cannot conceivably be other than adaptations from a mystery ritual in which a sacrificed God so spoke by the mouth of his priest. [*3] In the fourth gospel we have an amplification in the same sense, the act of symbolical anthropophagy or theophagy being made the means to immortality:--

I am the bread of life......I am the living bread, which came down out of heaven: if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever: yea, and the bread which I will give is my flesh, for the life of the world......Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink his blood, ye have not life in yourselves. He that eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood hath eternal life; and I will raise him up at the last day. For my flesh is true meat, and my blood is true drink. He that eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood abideth in me, and I in him. [*4]

The very repetitions are ritualistic; we have them in the ritual of the Khonds, and in the ritual of the pre-Christian Mexicans. [*5] And there is another curious parallel in a certain ritual of Dahome, where, with all the stress of human sacrifice, cannibalism occurred in one set of cases only--those killed by lightning, a death "which renders sepulture, as among the Romans, unlawful." In these cases the official "wives" of the Thunder-God place the body upon a platform, cut from it lumps which they chew without eating, crying to passers-by: 'We sell you meat, fine meat, come and buy.'" [*6]

Now, the eucharist stands both in the myth and in the nature of the cult in the closest relation to the act of human sacrifice; and to explain the latter without reference to the former is to miss part of the problem. For the compilers of the fourth gospel, as we have noted, the Crucified One is the final and universal paschal sacrifice, being slain at the time of the paschal lamb-eating, whereas in the

[p. 142]

synoptics he had previously partaken thereof. And that this conception existed among the Judaeo-Christists before the gospels were written is clear from the book of Revelation, where we have a Judaic writer of the early days of the Gentile schism [*1] identifying Jesus with the Alpha and the Omega = the Almighty, and at the same time with "the Lamb that was slain," and that has seven horns and eyes, like the symbol of Mithra, the slain God actually appearing as a Lamb in the vision. Thus in the Jesuine eucharist, as in so many others, there is embodied the primitive countersense of the God eating himself, in that the sacred or sacrificial animal which he eats is his own manifestation. There could not well occur in respect of the lamb the further myth-evolution seen in some other cults, as in that of the goat-eating Dionysos, where "we have the strange spectacle of a God sacrificed to himself on the ground that he is his own enemy." But the primary principle is the same: whether through totemism or through an early application of the zodiacal principle, making the spring sacrifice consist in a lamb because the Sun is then in the constellation of the Ram-Lamb, the lamb stands for the God; and "as the God is supposed to partake of the victim offered to him, it follows that, when the victim is the God's own self, the God eats of his own flesh." [*2] In the gospel legend this happens by a double necessity, inasmuch as the God must found his own eucharist before his death.

It was doubtless by way of refining upon the earlier practice of flesh-eating that in the synoptics the God is made to call the bread his flesh; though in the course of the supper he presumptively ate of the prescribed flesh of his special symbol and representative, the lamb. In the same way the Mithraists, whose God was symbolised by both the bull and the lamb, had a sacred meal of bread and wine and one of bread and water, though the God is normally figured as slaying the bull, and a lamb was at certain times eaten in the mysteries. [*3] So in the mystical eucharist of the Egyptians, wherein the divine beings "eat the God Bah [God of the water-flood] and drink the drink offerings," [*4] the "cakes and ale" so constantly mentioned in the funeral ritual clearly stand for bread and wine as symbolising flesh and blood, the cakes being made of white grain, and the ale from red grain. [*5] The worshippers of Dionysos inferribly did the same when his worship was linked to that of Demeter or Ceres, the Corn-Goddess, and in his cult in turn the wine was

[p. 143]

mixed with water. [*1] But it is on record that though some Christian worshippers in the second century and later, whether imitating the Mithraists or proceeding on general ascetic principles, substituted water for wine in the normal sacrament (a mixture of wine and water being the common usage), [*2] an actual lamb was in many churches anciently sacrificed and eaten at Easter, and that when that usage ceased a baked image of a lamb was substituted. [*3] And vestiges of both customs survive to this day in the practice of the Catholics of Italy, wherein an actual body of a lamb as well as a confectionery image is blessed by the priest, with the Easter eggs, and sometimes bread. [*4]

There were in reality two ideals in the early Church: that set forth by a number of the Fathers down to Augustine, according to which the ritual of the Holy Supper is purely mystical; [*5] and another, resting on the natural feeling that the ritual language was gratuitously fantastic if taken as wholly mystical. This, the realistic view, founds on the whole historical analogy of sacrifice, which always meant a communion with the God in partaking of a common meal, [*6] and often, further, a partaking of the God [*7] under the form of his animal or human representative--this after the principle of totemism, if ever present in the particular cult, had been long overlaid by a later mysticism.

In short, if men ate the paschal sacrament of the Lamb by way of eating the God, they were doing what was pleasing to the God; and if they further regarded the God as incarnate in human shape, they were equally entitled or committed to eating him in that form. But are we then to suppose that in any Mediterranean population about the beginning of the Christian era a religious sect could sacrifice a human being and afterwards sacramentally eat of the flesh? In the records of the man-sacrifice of the Babylonian Sacaea or Zakmuk, to which Dr. Frazer looks for the original of a rite

[p. 144]

copied by the Jews in their Purim feast and incidentally applied to the execution of a historic Jesus, there is no trace of a subsequent anthropophagous or other sacrament; any more than a rite of resurrection. Yet such a sacrament would seem to be primordial; and the idea of resurrection, developed as a doctrine of individual immortality from the primary conception of the annual revival of vegetation, had become part of the mystery rituals of Osiris and Dionysos, and of the Eleusinia, long before the Christian era.

It is the same doctrine that we find in pro-Christian Mexico, particularly in the worship of Huitzilopochtli, concerning which a discerning mythologist of the last generation noted that the practice of making from dough and seeds and children's blood small images of the God, which were treated like human victims and eaten, signified his death and the eating of his body:--

Whereas the God dies, it must be religiously and as a sacrifice; and whereas the anthropomorphic God dies, he dies as a human sacrifice according to the established usages......his heart is cut out and his body eaten as was done in every human sacrifice. Was the thought thereby signified that the God, when his body was eaten, became part thereof, and so communicated himself? Doubtless, but not abstractly, metaphysically, or at all Christianly or morally, but simply on his Nature side, which is the essence of the Feast-God. In seeds he gives his body to nourish his worshippers......Broadly, the God entertains the sacrificer at the sacrifice through the sacrificial meal; and when the slave, as so often happens, represents the God to whom he is sacrificed, the eating of his flesh is an eating of the God's. [*1]

With the comparative "morality" of the heathen and Christian sacraments we need not here concern ourselves. But it is to be noted that among the early Christians the sacramental bread was treated as having medicinal virtue; and that in the Middle Ages it became practically a fetish. [*2]

Footnotes

^140:3 Cp. Robertson Smith, Semites, p. 339; Pausanias, iv, 9; vii, 38; viii, 2; ix, 34; Granger; The Worship of the Romans, 1895, p. 300; Gibbon, ch. ii, Bohn ed. i, 41; ch. xxxiv (iii, 554): Boissier, La Fin du Paganisme, i, 31; Mariner, Tonga Islands, 3rd ed. i, 190, 300; J. Williams, Narrative of Missionary Enterprises, 1837, p. 549; Rhys, Celtic Britain, 2nd ed. p. 69; Murray, Rise of the Greek Epic, p. 15; and above, <page 65>.

^141:1 Cp. K. O. Muller, Introd. to Mythology, Eng. tr. pp. 169, 193-4; 2 Kings xvii, 26; Herodotus, if, 171. Cp. Short History of Freethought, i, 43-5.

^141:2 Such a revival was noted among upper-class people in England in connection with the extensive volunteering for service in South Africa in 1899-1900; and there are clear traces of it in every age.

^141:3 See Frazer, G. B., 2nd ed. ii, 134, and refs., as to the priests of Attis at Pessinus and Rome; and cp. Jevons, pp. 273-5. The usage was widespread, being found among the Polynesians and the aboriginal magicians of California, and in several of the cults of pre-Christian Mexico. See J. G. Muller, Amerikanische Urreligionen, pp. 77, 493, 577; Mariner, Tonga Islands, 1827, i, 101, 290; W. Ellis, Polynesian Researches, 2nd ed. i, 373-5; iv, 309-10.

^141:4 John vi, 48-56.

^141:5 Cp. Sahagun, passim.

^141:6 Burton, A Mission to Gelele, 1864, ii, 143.

^142:1 Cp. Rev. ii, 9; iii, 9.

^142:2 Frazer, G. B., ii, 167.

^142:3 See below, Part III, Mithraism,  section1 6, 9.

^142:4 Book of the Dead, ch. lxv, Budge's tr. pp. 120, 156.

^142:5 Id. ch. cxxiv, tr. p. 187.

^143:1 Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. p. 360.

^143:2 Bingham, Antiq. of the Christian Church, B. xv, ch. ii,  section section 5, 7.

^143:3 Hatch, Hibbert Lectures, p. 300. The criticism of Dr. Cheatham on this passage (The Mysteries, Pagan and Christian, 1897, p. 149) denies the sacrifice on the altar (cp. Bingham, Bk. xv, ch. ii,  section 3), but admits that a lamb, blessed by the Pope, was eaten. But there is evidence that a lamb is actually sacrificed on the altar in at least one place to this day. A picture representing the practice was published some years ago in (I think) the Daily Graphic.

^143:4 Order of Divine Service for Easter, according to the use of the Church of Rome (Art and Book Company: London), 1899, p. 99. "The offices of "Blessing of the Houses--the Lamb--the Eggs" are not given in the official Office of Holy Week according to the Roman Rite, published by Washbourne, London, 1896.

^143:5 Augustine, De Doctr. Chr. iii, 16,  section 24; Justin Martyr, Dialogue with Trypho, xli; Clemens Alexandr. Paedagogus, i, 6; Tertullian, Against Marcion, iv, 40.

^143:6 Cp. Jevons, p. 288; and The Dynamics of Religion, pp. 146-53. The blunder of Bentley, sometimes recklessly backed up by Christian writers to this day, is repudiated by all competent scholars. Cp. Newton, Essays in Art and Archaeology, 1880, p. 186.

^143:7 Cp. Lang, Myth, Ritual, and Religion, 2nd ed. ii, 251, and Decharme, as there cited.

^144:1 J. G. Muller, Geschichte der Amerikanischen Urreligionen, 2te Aufl. 1867, p. 606.

^144:2 Bingham, Christian Antiquities, B. xv, iv,  section1 7-20; v,  section section 5-9; Lea, History of the Inquisition, i, 49.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 7. The Semitic Antecedents.

In view of such an evolution, which may or may not have a historical connection with the old Asiatic rite seen surviving among the Khonds and Gonds, we may perhaps infer where we cannot trace the development that preceded the reduction of the Jesus myth to its present form. An important light is also thrown on the problem by the speculation of Dr. Frazer, inasmuch as it indicates clues which are not affected by the miscarriage of his actual theorem; and to these we may profitably turn.

Dr. Frazer's hypothesis is that the "mockeries" of the

[p. 145]

crucifixion represent the application to the case of Jesus of the usages of the Perso-Babylonian festival of the Sacaea, [*1] which he is disposed to identify with the very ancient New Year festival known as the Zakmuk or Zagmuku. [*2] From this he holds the Jews to have derived their (certainly post-exilic) feast of Purim, of the origin of which such a fictitious account is given in the book of Esther, whereof the Esther and Mordecai strongly suggest the God-names Ishtar and Merodach. Purim, in its main features, resembles alike the accounts given of the Sacaea and those given of Zakmuk; and the suggestion is that the Jews, in borrowing the festival, may have copied from the Babylonians the Sacaea practice of putting to death at that date "a malefactor, who, after masquerading as Mordecai, in a crown and royal robe, was hanged or crucified in the character of Haman." This in itself is not incredible; nor is it unlikely that the fast which precedes the feasting of Purim was, in Babylon, a ceremonial mourning for a God or demigod who died like Tammuz or Adonis, and like him rose again on the third day. Then comes the suggestion that Jesus was crucified in the character of Haman.

Now arises, however, the problem as to dates. Purim occurred in the middle of the lunar month of Adar, the last of the Jewish sacred year, which, says Dr. Frazer, "corresponds roughly to March." In Condor's Handbook, as it happens, it is made to run from January 28th to February 25th, leaving (for us) an interval of eleven days unaccounted for between the end of the year and the beginning of the next, which sets out with 1st Nisan = 8th March. What the Jews did to round the cycle was to insert a thirteenth lunar month seven times in nineteen years. This intercalary month was presumptively placed at the end of the year, with the effect of retarding the New Year and making Nisan (also called Abib = ripe ears) run into our April. The practical point for us, then, is that there were several weeks between Purim and the Babylonian Zakmuk, which fell "early" in Nisan. Doubtless the Jews put Purim earlier to prevent its clashing with their Passover, which was originally a spring festival of the same order. But then the Sacaea, according to Berosus, fell in the Babylonian month of Lous, which answers to July; [*3] and Jesus, again, is crucified at the Passover, which occurs in the middle of Nisan, the lamb being set apart on the 10th, while "unleavened bread" began on the 15th. Thus none of the dates

[p. 146]

fit, Jesus being crucified, according to the story, a month after the Jewish festival in which Haman figures, and months before that of the Sacaea in which a mock king was hanged or crucified.

Of these difficulties, which Dr. Frazer avows, Mr. Lang makes the most. [*1] Dr. Frazer's suggested solutions are--(1) that Berosus may be wrong about the date of the Sacaea; (2) that Jesus may really have been crucified in Adar, at the feast of Purim, and not in Nisan, at the feast of the Passover--Christian sentiment preferring the latter date, and making the change in tradition; (3) that the Jews may sometimes (cp. Esther iii, 7) have put Purim alongside of the Passover. For the rest, he suggests that Barabbas was the Mordecai of the year; and cites from Philo the story of Carabbas, who was made to play the part of a mock king at Alexandria, by way of burlesquing King Agrippa. [*2] The name Carabbas, it is suggested, may be a copyist's error for Barabbas, which, Dr. Frazer thinks, may have been the standing name for a figure in a mock sacrifice, since it means "Son of the Father," and points to the old Semitic cults in which king's sons were sacrificed by or for their fathers.

Now, the mere difficulty about dates would not be fatal to Dr. Frazer's very interesting and ingenious theory if that were otherwise on a sound footing. That there were two calendar usages in regard to the Sacaea becomes probable when we note (1) that the Jews, under Babylonian influence, had separated their ecclesiastical from their civil year--their ecclesiastical new year (the older) being in autumn, while the civil year began in spring, [*3] and (2) that they had a second or little Passover, a month after the first, for those who could not keep that. [*4] Under the changing dynasties of Mesopotamia there might easily be such a duplicating of the Sacaea; and as a matter of fact Zakmuk was a festival day in many Babylonian cults. [*5] On the other hand, the Jews would readily antedate their Purim to separate it from the Passover; and Christian tradition might very well falsify a date of which it had no documentary record. But this last consideration calls up a far more serious

[p. 147]

objection to the form of Dr. Frazer's proposition--the above-noted objection, namely, that he is accepting the historic actuality of the crucifixion, the inscriptions on the cross, the "of Nazareth," the mockery by the soldiers, the utterances of Pilate, the episode of Barabbas, and all the rest of it. To a critic who accepts all this the critical answer obviously is: If you thus take for granted the genuineness of such a highly detailed narrative, how can you possibly account for its absolute omission of any shadow of allusion to the Haman-and-Mordecai show of which you suppose the crucifixion to have accidentally become part? This objection Dr. Frazer does not try to meet; and it is hard to see how he could meet it.

A thorough inquiry, surely, must take account of all aspects of the gospel problem, not merely of ostensible parallels in pagan usage to one aspect of the crucifixion story. The whole documentary problem, surely, must be taken into account; and the historical criticism of the entire legend reckoned with. We are not dealing with a generally credible and corroborated narrative in which a single episode raises surmise of extraneous factors not recognised in the text, but with one which begins and ends in absolute and immemorial myth and is stamped with supernaturalism in every sentence. By Dr. Frazer's own repeated avowal, we ought not to look to the current narrative of the origin of a rite for the historical fact, but to the rite for the origin of the narrative. If this law does not hold of the Christian eucharist it holds of nothing; and the eucharist is the keystone of the arch built over the death of the God in the gospels.

Dr. Frazer obviously proceeds on the common assumption that the teachings of the Gospel Jesus testify to an indubitable personality. But that view, so natural at first sight, has reached its lowest degree of credit among special students precisely at the moment of Dr. Frazer's unquestioning acceptance of it. [*1] Anthropology and hierology cannot afford thus to ignore the special historical problems of the very creed on which confessedly their results must finally come to bear. Several of Dr. Frazer's remarks, however, suggest that in the very act of bringing his invaluable research into relation with the creeds of his contemporaries he had regarded as outside his field of study some of the most significant and best-established facts as to the doctrinal evolution of Christism among the Jews. [*2]

Footnotes

^145:1 Mentioned by Berosus, as cited in Athenaeus, xiv, 44 (p. 639 C.); and by Dio Chrysostom, Orat. iv, p. 6 (ed. Dindorf, vol. i, p. 76).

^145:2 Mentioned in recently recovered cuneiform inscriptions. See Sayce, Hibbert Lectures, pp. 64--68; and Jastrow, Religions of Assyria and Babylonia, Index, under Zagmuk.

^145:3 Or may possibly be as late as September. Lang, Magic and Religion, p. 145.

^146:1 Sometimes very amusingly, but with unwonted diffuseness and repetition, in Magic and Religion, pp. 123-204. As Mr. Lang shows (p. 138, etc.), Dr. Frazer has left in his text (ii, 254, note; iii, 152-3) contradictory surmises as to dates. The immense mass of details in his book may well excuse such an oversight; but Mr. Lang undoubtedly shows his theory to be otherwise inharmonious in detail.

^146:2 Dr. Frazer states (iii, 193, note) that "the first to call attention to this passage" in Philo was Mr. P. Wendland, in Hermes, in 1898. This, I may mention, is a mistake. I myself discussed the Carabbas story in the National Reformer so long ago as March 3rd, 1889, and certainly some previous writer--I think Rabbi Wise--had called my attention to it.

^146:3 Wellhausen, Prolegomena, Eng. tr. pp. 108-9; cp. Exodus xii, 2. Cp. Max Muller, Natural Religion, pp. 529-530. Cp. Sayce, Hibbert Lectures, p. 232.

^146:4 Num. ix, 10, 11.

^146:5 See Jastrow, Index, under Zagmuk.

^147:1 See hereinafter, Pt. II, ch. ii,  section1 4-6; and Christianity and Mythology, Pt. III.

^147:2 E.g. his note (ii, p. 3, n. 3) on the anticipations of the Christian doctrine of the Trinity in Philo Judaeus.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 148]

  

 section 8. The Judaic Evolution.

Rejecting, then, as not merely unwarranted but excluded by the evidence, Dr. Frazer's assumption of the historicity of the crucifixion, we have to note carefully the inferences which his research really warrants. When these are drawn it will be found that his notable hypothesis does not fall to the ground in its essentials. He has really added signally to his former great services by bringing together the evidences for the existence of a mock-kingly sacrifice among the Semites before the Christian era, and by skilfully elucidating the whole primitive psychology of such rituals. It needs only that his procedure be freed, on the principles of scientific mythology, from the difficulty set up by accepting one set of palpable myths as history. When criticism has done its worst against his manipulation of the Sacaea, Zakmuk, and Purim, it will be found that there remains clearly open the inference that certain details of the crucifixion myth are drawn from some old Semitic rite resembling the Sacaea, not by way of Purim in its Evemerised Jewish form, but in a simpler form, in which there was no Ishtar or Merodach. [*1]

Precisely because the practice of human sacrifice to the Vegetation-God was so nearly universal as Dr. Frazer has shown it to be, it is unnecessary to assume that the Jews owed their variant of it solely to a late contact with another nation. The Athenians had in their Thargelia, which like the Passover was a feast of first fruits, [*2] a usage of human sacrifice which as we have seen corresponded at points with the Babylonian, inasmuch as the victims were maintained in potentially riotous ease, and were latterly chosen from the criminal class, though they cannot originally have been so. The sacrifice, indeed, does not seem to have belonged to the earlier worship of Apollo at all, [*3] and the calling of the victims pharmakoi, "medicine-men," suggests an adaptation of a West-Asiatic usage, the more so as quasi-Semitic sacrifices were in use among the Eretrians and Magnesians. [*4] In all likelihood this was the very sacrifice of purification said to have been prescribed to the plague-stricken Athenians

[p. 149]

by the Cretan Epimenides, [*1] when two youths voluntarily gave themselves as victims. [*2] But if the Athenians could take such a rite from Crete or Asia Minor, there is reason to conclude that it was known in Palestine, in a simpler form than the Babylonian, before the exile. That there were such forms is to be inferred from both early and late evidence.

Firstly, we have the whole tradition of the Passover, with which, and not with Purim, the crucifixion myth comes chronologically in touch on the face of the case. Among the aspects of the gospel myth which the analogy of the Sacaea leaves untouched are (1) the mourning for the victim; (2) his alleged divinity and his titles of Son of God and Son of Man; (3) his participation in a sacramental meal in which his flesh is mystically eaten; (4) his execution along with two criminals; (5) his resurrection; (6) his subsequent status as Messiah or Christos. Now, the first three of those characteristics are as cognate with the paschal rite as they are alien to Purim; the fourth can be shown historically to connect with paschal usage; and the others develop naturally from the preceding. That there is no need to go to Purim for an actual killing or sacrificing of quasi-royal victims or malefactors in connection with a sacrificial festival appears from the legend of the hanging of seven king's sons "before the Lord," an event which happens according to the narrative at the barley harvest, that is, at the time of the Passover. [*3]

In the face of this familiar record it is obliviously asserted by Mr. Lang that "sacrificed victims are not hanged." [*4] He has given thirteen cases of human sacrifice in which victims were not hanged, but has apparently not consulted his Bible. Now, the expressions "before the Lord" and "unto the Lord" mean sacrifice or nothing; [*5] and that the hanging of Saul's sons was by way of propitiation is clear from the remark in the context that "after that, God was intreated for the land." [*6] Further, hanging is the mode not only in the sacrificing of Saul's sons but in the offering up "unto the Lord"

[p. 150]

of the heads of the people as described in Numbers xxv, 4. Equally sacrificial, in spirit and in occasion, though the usual formula is not applied to it, is the hanging of the five kings by Joshua in the pseudo-history; and in the case of his hanging of the king of Ai, where the procedure is exactly the same, it is explicitly told, in the Hebrew, that he "devoted" all the people of Ai, as he had done those of Jericho. [*1] As Ai is an imaginary city, [*2] we must conclude that the legend points to a customary rite. Finally, a comparison of a passage in Deuteronomy in which every hanged man is declared to be "the curse of God," [*3] with the passages cited from the book of Joshua, proves that "the curse of God" meant "devoted to God," [*4] since in the former the course prescribed is precisely that followed in the pseudo-history, namely, the taking down and burying of the victim within the day. Thus all hanged men were in ancient Jewry sacrifices to the Sun-God or the Rain-God, [*5] and the Pauline epistle unconsciously clinches the point in citing the misunderstood text. [*6] It may in fact be taken as historically certain that human sacrifice in this aspect was a recognised part of Hebrew religion down till the Exile. [*7]

And here, as at so many other points, we find a specific parallel between Hebrew usage and that of the natives of Africa. At the death of a Nigerian chief or notable, the slaves slain to "raise him up by the head and feet" are buried with him; and others are "hung in the different compartments of the house" and in the street or roadway; the heads of these being afterwards cut off and regarded as conveying luck. [*8] Again, near a certain Long Juju shrine in Southern Nigeria, where human sacrifice was regularly practised until its capture by the British troops, it was noted that beside a minor temple at Ibum were "trees on which murderers and thieves used to be hanged." [*9] That the hanging had a religious significance is proved by the fact that when the capture took place there was

[p. 151]

found "the last sacrifice, a white goat, trussed up in the branches of a palm-tree and starving to death." [*1] And it is expressly explained concerning the sacrifice of a woman to the Rain-God at Benin that "a woman was taken, a prayer made over her, and a message saluting the Rain-God put in her mouth; then she was clubbed to death and put up in the execution-tree" [St. Andrew's-cross-wise] "so that the rain might see." [*2]

Semitic usage is all that need be proved in the present connection; but it may be further noted (1) that animal victims were hanged to a tree in the cult of the Syrian Goddess in the second century of our era; [*3] (2) that human victims were bound or hanged to trees in the sacrificial rites of the pre-Christian Mexicans; [*4] (3) that human victims were frequently if not habitually hanged in sacrifice to Odin, [*5] as well as to other Teutonic deities; [*6] (4) that in certain cases of human sacrifice in Tahiti the slain victim was "suspended from the sacred tree"; [*7] (5) that the devoted bodies of slain enemies were hanged on a tree by the Tongans; [*8] (6) that among Obubura natives a lamb in a propitiatory sacrifice was "fastened into the topmost prong of a pole" and set up, with a palm branch on which was impaled a yam, at the entrance of the compound; [*9] (7) that some of the northern Native Americans hanged dogs to poles with running knots "in honour of their divinities"; that the nomads similarly attached skins of wild beasts to trees; and that the Floridans elevated other offerings. [*10] It is significant that among the early Odin-worshippers, as among Greeks and Semites, king's sons were sacrificed in substitution for their fathers; and that latterly slaves and criminals were substituted in such rites. [*11] From the nature of the case, too, it is probable that the victim was hanged not by the neck but by the hands. [*12] In some of the Scandinavian cases the victim was wounded with a javelin as well as hanged; and one myth specifies a hanging which lasted nine nights. [*13] In any

[p. 152]

case, hanging by the wrists was the normal mode of ancient "crucifixion" so-called. [*1]

But, further, it is clear that the Passover rite, of which the narrative in Exodus is a fictitious account, was originally one of sacrifice of firstlings, [*2] including the first-born sons; and the conflicting laws on the subject prove that only with difficulty was the substitution of lambs for children carried out. [*3] To this day, at least among continental Jews, [*4] the principle of "redemption" is ritually recognised, in the festival ceremony of Pidyen Haben. A month after the birth of a first son, a friendly Cohen is selected to officiate, who sacerdotally asks certain questions of the mother, one being, "Is this child the first fruit of your womb?" If he be poor, he receives a small fee; [*5] if not, the mother throws a small gold chain round his neck; and he in return, during certain prayers, puts it round the neck of the child, who is thus "redeemed." And that the first-born were at one time set apart as a victim-class, [*6] liable either to be sacrificed or to be employed as hierodouloi, appears from the announcement of Yahweh in the priestly code: "I have taken the Levites from among the children of Israel instead of all the first-born......and the Levites shall be mine; for all the first-born are mine." [*7]

As regards the private continuance of the practice after the Levites had been set apart as a specific tribe, we can only inferentially trace the evolution. Certainly the priesthood did not of itself set up the movement against child sacrifice: such reforms always begin through rulers or lay reformers, never through the priestly organisation, save when a new cult supersedes an old. [*8] Circumcision,

[p. 153]

a rite of sacrifice with the same significance, [*1] seems to have been introduced, or at least stressed, comparatively late, [*2] for the same purpose; and as an official Yahwistic feast the Passover seems also late; [*3] though the manner of its enactment in the first redaction of the law indicates that it was in some form already a standing practice. [*4] It doubtless needed the late myths of Abraham and Isaac [*5] and of the Exodus to persuade even Yahwists to drop the child sacrifice; and in the rival cults the practice seems to have been common. [*6] It is in this connection that there presumptively occurred the usage first of breaking the victims' limbs, and later of drugging them, to prevent the struggles which were usually held to make a sacrifice inauspicious; [*7] and the manner in which the caveat against breaking the bones of the paschal lamb is introduced--an apparent interpolation made at the close of the original narrative of the exodus [*8]--indicates it to be either a late provision against a practice which definitely recalled the rite of human sacrifice, or a specific assertion of the principle that the victim must be without blemish, as against the practice of a human sacrifice in which the victim had to be either maimed or drugged in order to make him seem willing. But, as in the practice of the Khonds, so in that of the Jews, the principle that the victim must be "bought with a price" is visibly a later development, grafted on the other. Originally the victim is voluntary; this is his special sacrificial virtue. When the voluntary victim can no longer be procured, one "bought with a price," being the property of the sacrificers, is the next best thing; and in his case "willingness" is ostensibly secured by trick, bribe, or brutality. The underlying reasoning is of a piece.

We are faced again, however, by the difficult problem of the historic transmission of such usages. On the whole the evidence from anthropology goes far to support the thesis, otherwise well made out, of the Asiatic derivation of the Oceanic peoples. [*9] In certain South Sea Islands in modern times, when the practices of

[p. 154]

human sacrifice and cannibalism had latterly dwindled, [*1] the first missionaries found in use forms of animal sacrifice which seem to affiliate at many points to the ritual we have seen in operation among Khonds and westerly Semites. Thus the pigs set apart for sacrifice [*2] at certain temples, "when presented alive, received the sacred mark, and ranged the district at liberty; when slain, they were exceedingly anxious to avoid breaking a bone, or disfiguring the animal. One method of killing them was by holding the pig upright on its legs, placing a strong stick horizontally under its throat, and another across upon its neck, and then pressing them together until the animal was strangled." [*3] Here we have (1) the common Asiatic and American usage of leaving the doomed victim for a time at liberty; [*4] (2) the avoidance of bone-breaking, [*5] as in the case of the paschal lamb; (3) the preservation of the cross-figure as seen in the Khond sacrifice; and (4) the evident imitation of human sacrifice in the posture of the victim. [*6] Seeing, further, that only a portion of the pig thus sacrificed was eaten, and that only by "the priests and other sacred persons who were privileged to eat of the sacrifices," the remainder being left on the God's altar till it decomposed, we may fairly surmise that it was a surrogate for a sacrificed human being, formerly eaten as a sacrament in the Aztec fashion.

Among the natives of South Nigeria who practised human sacrifice and ritual cannibalism down till the beginning of the twentieth century, we again find the use of the cross-figure. The victims sacrificed for rain were stretched on a rude scaffolding in the form of the St. Andrew's cross; and goats, as we have seen, were similarly "trussed." "Crucifixion" of a kind, as we have seen, was practised at Benin: and the term is frequently used by eye-witnesses in describing the treatment of victims." [*7] The usual form of sacrifice," says Gallwey, "is crucifixion." [*8] Yet again, some of the women-slaves sacrificed, at the approach of the punitive expedition

[p. 155]

to Benin, had the "abdominal wall cut in the form of a cross." There are traces, too, of leg-breaking, one goat being found by the punitive expedition at Benin with its legs broken, as a native explained, "to prevent white man coming"; [*1] and Burton tells of a victim whose legs "had been broken at mid-shin with awful violence." [*2] He also records that "a slave bound for the other world is always plied with a bottle of rum before the fatal cord is made fast." [*3] In Uganda the usage of limb-breaking is found to have been common. The God Kitimba or Kitinda of Damba and elsewhere was represented by a crocodile, his "priest," and to appease him men were sacrificed to the crocodiles in the lake. The victim was taken to the brink, "where his knees and elbows were broken, so that he could not crawl away," [*4] whereafter the crocodiles came and devoured him. [*5] Here the primary motive is unusually clear; and it is noted that in the case of the victims thrown alive into the pit-grave of the chief among some tribes there is no limb-breaking, they being unable to escape. [*6] It is not impossible that limb-breaking originated in this simple fashion, and later became a ritual usage with an ethical connotation. But among the Manyema of the same African region, on the other hand, we find that at the burial of a chief ten women victims had their legs and arms broken at the knees and elbows and were thrown into the grave; the king's dead body, wrapped in bark-cloth, was laid upon theirs; and then ten men victims were similarly treated, and their bodies laid over the king's. [*7] Thus the idea of simulated "willingness" cannot be confidently excluded from even the most primitive phenomena. The main reason for doubt is the fact that in ordinary burial the limbs of the dead are by the same peoples broken at the elbows and knees to admit of their being placed in the sitting posture [*8]--a practice which, however, is ascribed to certain of the North American Indian tribes [*9] without any mention of limb-breaking being resorted to. And in the sacrifices of slaves at the death of chiefs, as practised

[p. 156]

in the Sandwich Islands when they were visited by Captain Cook, the victims were clubbed suddenly, having "not the most distant intimation of their fate." [*1] Here the exclusion of willingness is so complete that we are led to infer a late and, so to speak, debased form of the rite.

Yet again, there is a solitary testimony that in the human sacrifices offered by the Algonkins at the beginning of the hunting season it was a rule that not a bone of the victim must be broken. [*2] Seeing that other Native Americans observed the principle of the Semites, that at the sacrificial feast the victim "must be all eaten, and nothing left," [*3] there would thus seem to be not merely an ancient racial affinity between the aborigines of America and some race or races of Asia, but a direct heredity in the matter of special primitive rites. But even if we waive the latter presumption, we can infer the probable line of movement all round in the matter of the usages under notice. As thus:--

1. Originally a "willing" victim is desiderated; and willingness is secured by the bribe of a period of ease and licence.

2. This kind of victim becoming hard to procure, one "bought with a price" was substituted, as representing a voluntary offering by his owner or owners.

3. Still seeking the semblance of a "willing" sacrifice, the sacrificers first broke the limbs of the human victim.

4. Feeling (on some reformer's urging) that such a mangled victim was an unseemly sacrifice, they resorted to narcotics.

5. At a higher stage of social evolution, recoiling from the sacrifice of an innocent victim, men fall back upon condemned criminals, and these in turn are stupefied, from humane or other motives.

6. Being next persuaded that the stupefied victim was either an unseemly or an inefficacious because non-suffering sacrifice, or being on other grounds inclined to abandon human sacrifice, they substituted the old sacrifice of an animal, giving it in certain cases human attributes, and in others some of the privileges formerly accorded to the taboo human victim. In the case of the animal it was not as a rule felt necessary either to break bones or to use narcotics, though either plan might be used. But reformers would stress the avoidance of bone-breaking by way of showing the

[p. 157]

superiority of the new sacrifice; hence the need for a veto on imitations of the old practice. [*1]

Such an evolution might conceivably take place independently in different communities. It is true indeed that in the redemptory sacrifices offered by modern Semites for boys, care is taken not to break a bone, "because they fear that if a bone of the sacrifice should be broken, the child's bones would be broken too"; [*2] but that appears to be a theory framed subsequent to and not antecedent to a reform.

It is of the nature of such reforms, however, to be introduced with difficulty and to be rebelled against and reverted from; and even without the above-cited evidence of a slowly-wrought transformation in Hebrew usage, it is certain, from the whole drift of religious history, that the practice of child-slaying, which was systematically legislated against only after the exile, would be revived in times of trouble by Jews, as we know it to have been by Carthaginians. It is through reversions of this kind to old and terrible rites, then, that we must suppose the ancient mode of sacrifice to have been kept in men's knowledge. Such a doctrine rested on the most obvious and therefore the most fully developed side of the conception of sacrifice--the offering to the God of a peculiarly precious gift, representing a maximum of self-deprivation in the sacrificers.

Meanwhile, though it is not certain that the mode of "hanging before the Lord" by the wrists ever placed the victim in the form of a cross, as has been done in our own time at Benin, it would appear that the rite of the Passover was closely associated with the cross sign. [*3] That is the "mark" specified in Ezekiel [*4] for the saving of the elect from a general massacre; and the blood mark placed on the doorposts and lintels at the Passover [*5] is inferentially the same, [*6] as is the "seal" on the foreheads of the saved in the Apocalypse. To this day, the Arabs make the tau-mark with sacrificial blood on at least one Moslem shrine. [*7] In any case, the pre-Christian use of the

[p. 158]

[paragraph continues] Cross as a symbol of the Sun-God and as a sign of "immortal life" is undisputed, and we shall see reason to infer that the form of slaying represented in the Christian crucifix--which does not appear in Christian art till about the seventh century [*1]--was conceived from certain rites in which the initiate extended his arms upon a tree or cross, [*2] probably in reminiscence of some such mode of treating the sacrificed victim as we have seen described in the case of the Khonds.

Footnotes

^148:1 Much of Mr. Lang's criticism of Dr. Frazer's theory turns on the fact that it seeks to combine a great many disparate sacrificial motives. This is not absolutely an effective objection, inasmuch as religion is full of inconsistencies; but Dr. Frazer imputes too much power of combination to a given cult. Popular sacrifice must clearly subsist on a simple basis. And there may have been forced changes, as the Sacaea is said by Strabo to as have name of a Persian Goddess (Strabo, xi, 8,  section 5). Cp. Selden, De Diis Syris, ed. 1680, pp. 269-270.

^148:2 Preller, Griech. Mythol. 2nd ed. i, 202, note; Frazer, iii, 127, and refs.; Meyer. Gesch. des Alterthums, ii,  section 74.

^148:3 K. F. Hermann, Gottesdienst. Alterth.  section 60; Culturgesch. der Griechen and Romer. 1857, i. 54.

^148:4 Plutarch, De Pyth. Orac. xvi.

^149:1 Diogenes Laertius, i, 110 (I, x, 4); Athenaeus, xiii, 78.

^149:2 As no mention is made either of any later voluntary sacrifice or of any selection of innocent victims, the inference seems clear that they were latterly bought, or condemned criminals." See above, <page 138>.

^149:3 Cp. 2 Sam. xxi, 6-9, with Deut. xvi, 9; Lev. xxiii, 10-14; and see Robertson Smith, Religion of the Semites, p. 398. Cp. Ghillany, p. 544, and Tract Sanhedrin, f. 89, 1, there cited, as to the custom of executing criminals during the festival. The barley harvest, it should be noted, began in the Jericho plain and Jordan valley at passover time, and became general in the uplands in the next month, wheat ripening later. In Egypt the harvests are still earlier, flax and barley being harvested in March, and wheat in April. Mr. Lang (Magic and Religion, p. 116-117) has overlooked the fact that a feast could thus be at once a harvest feast and "vernal." The Thargelia in May was in similar case.

^149:4 Magic and Religion, pp. 131, 132, 174.

^149:5 Cp. the admission of the Rev. Edward Day, The Social Life of the Hebrews, New York, 1900, p. 213; Kalisch, Comm. on Leviticus, f, 391-2.

^149:6 2 Sam. xxi, 14. In the same way the stoning and burning of Achan and his family and cattle is clearly a sacrificial act. Josh. vii, 24-26.

^150:1 Josh. viii, 24-29; x, 15-26.

^150:2 Winckler, Geschichte Israels, ii, 110.

^150:3 Deut. xxi, 23, margin.

^150:4 The double meaning is found also in the Greek term anathema = devoted, and accursed.

^150:5 Cp. Robertson Smith, Rel. of the Semites, p. 264, as to the principle that the sacrifice should be seen only by the God or planet propitiated. In the old sacrifices to the sun among the Samoans, "the body was laid out on a pandanus tree, and there the sun devoured it." Turner, Samoa a Hundred Years Ago, 1884, p. 201. On p. 342 (2nd ed. p. 3611 Smith argues that early executions for infamous crimes were not sacrifices; but as already noted he says later (p. 351, note) that all executions became sacrificial.

^150:6 Gal. iii, 13.

^150:7 Cp. Ghillany, Die Menschenopfer der alten Hebraer, 1842; Daumer, Der Feuer and Molochdienst der alten Hebraer, 1842, passim; Kalisch, Comm. on Leviticus, i, 381-416; Dar. The Social Life of the Hebrews, 1901, p. 212. A selection from the epithets bestowed upon Ghillany, who first laid stress on the facts, will be found in Kalisch (i, 404-5, note), who zealously balances between avowal and repudiation.

^150:8 Major Glyn Leonard, The Lower Niger and its Tribes, 1906, pp. 444-5.

^150:9 C. Partridge, Cross River Natives, 1905, p. 60.

^151:1 Id. p. 55. "Everything which is sacrificed, such as cattle, goats, fowls, &c., must be white." Id. p. 56. Cp. A. B. Ellis. Tshi-Speaking Peoples, p. 85.

^151:2 H. Ling Roth, Great Benin, 1903, p. 71. See the photographs reproduced on the cover and at pp. 52, 54; and compare the frontispiece of Burton's Mission to Gelele, where some victims are crucified head downwards, in the St. Andrew mode. The St. Andrew-cross Position, again, is found in the tortures of the Native Americans. Lafitau, Moeurs des sauvages ameriquains, 1724, ii, 261, 292.

^151:3 Lucian, De Dea Syria, xlix.

^151:4 See below, Part IV,  section 8.

^151:5 See H. M. Chadwick, The Cult of Othin, 1899, pp. 15-20, 32, 37, 53, 73-74.

^151:6 See above, <page 123>.

^151:7 W. Ellis, Polynesian Researches, 2nd ed. ii, 129.

^151:8 Mariner, Tonga Islands, ed. 1827, i, 272.

^151:9 Partridge, Cross River Natives, 1905, p. 296.

^151:10 Lafitau, Moeurs des sauvages ameriquains, 1724, i, 180.

^151:11 Chadwick, p. 27. The Teutons also "devoted" whole armies of their enemies to the God.

^151:12 Tal. Jer. Sanhedrin, Schwab's French tr. ch. vi, 7 (9), vol. x, p. 282; Tal. Bab. fol. 46, col. 1, Eng. tr. by Hershon, Genesis with a Talmudical Commentary, p. 436, n. 6.

^151:13 This has been regarded as an echo of Christian doctrine. But even if it were, the fact of sacrificial hanging would remain certain.

^152:1 See H. Fulda, Das Kreuz and die Kreuzigung, Breslau, 1878,  section section 34-36 and Tab. 1; and cp. Ghillany, as cited. pp. 531-2. note.

^152:2 Cp. Robertson Smith, Relig. of the Semites, p. 445; Wellhausen, as there cited; and Ghillany. pp. 518-552.

^152:3 Compare Ex. xiii, 2; xxii, 29; xxxiv, 20; Lev. xxvii, 28, 29; Num. xviii, 15; Micah vi, 7. Mr. Lang (Magic and Religion, p. 53) will not admit that any people ever practised such a yearly massacre of first-born children as Dr. Frazer infers. But Mr. Lang pays no heed to the conflicting laws here specified, some of which insist on the "devoting" of all first-born males, human as well as animals, while the others prescribe that the human males shall be "redeemed." Both sets of laws are utterly inexplicable save on the theory of an original practice of child-sacrifice. Cp. the admissions of A. Reville, Prolegomenes, p. 185; and Kuenen, ii, 30, 90-94. As to child-sacrifice in other races, see Dennett, Nigerian Studies, p. 70; Murray, Rise of the Greek Epic, p. 277; J. M. R., Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. pp. 209-10; and below, Pt. iv,  section section 3, 4, 5.

^152:4 A number keep up the practice after coming to England. Cp. J. Low, Die Lebensalter in der judischen Literatur, 1875, pp. 110-118, cited by Frazer, G. B. ii, 50.

^152:5 Generally 15s., I am privately informed.

^152:6 It is noteworthy that among the Tahitians, when a victim was taken from any family, the rest were held to be "devoted"--a conception partly analogous to that of the Khonds. J. Williams, Narrative of Missionary Enterprises, 1837, p. 554. Cp. W. Ellis, Polynesian Researches, 2nd ed. i, 347. The same principle was noted among the Native Americans (Lafitau, ii, 307). In Mangaia there was a series of tribes "devoted to furnish human sacrifices" (Gill, Myths and Songs of the South Pacific, pp. 24, 36-38, 290, 300, 302). And the story of the Messenian and Achaean sacrifices in Pausanias (iv, 9) and Herodotus (vii, 197) specify a particular family which must supply the victim.

^152:7 Num. iii, 12. There are, however, some grounds for supposing that the first Levites were members of a conquered race.

^152:8 See above, <page 60>, and below, Part IV,  section 5.

^153:1 The assertion of Kalisch (Comm. on Levit., i, 409) that circumcision "bore nowhere the remotest relation to human sacrifices" is mere declamation. No other explanation of the rite is valid.

^153:2 Gen. xvii is part of the late priestly code. E. J. Fripp, Composition of the Book of Genesis, 1893, p. 164.

^153:3 2 Kings xxiii, 23.

^153:4 Deut. xvi, 2.

^153:5 Gen. xxii, 1-13.

^153:6 Cp. 2 Kings xvi, 3; 2 Chron. xxviii, 3; Ps. cvi, 37, 38.

^153:7 The Greek and Roman device of putting barley or water in the ear of the sacrificial ox at the altar, to make him bow his head as if signifying willingness to be slain, is found to be closely paralleled in recent times in the sacrifices of the Aryan Kafirs of the Hindu-Kush, who were particularly solicitous on the point. So also the Hindu Thugs. See Sir G. S. Robertson's Kafirs of the Hindu-Kush, ed. 1899, p. 423.

^153:8 Ex. xii, 42-51. The clause in v. 46 may even be an addition to the interpolation.

^153:9 See the Rev. D. Macdonald's Asiatic Origin of the Oceanic Languages, Luzac and Co. 1894; and Oceania: Linguistic and Anthropological, 1889, pp. 15, 17, 19, etc.; and Keane, Ethnology. 1909, p. 288. Cp. the Nubische Grammatik of Lepsius, 1880, for the thesis that the Egyptian, Libyan, and Kushitic languages are of Asiatic origin.

^154:1 W. Ellis, Polynesian Researches, 2nd ed. i, 357.

^154:2 Dr. Jevons argues (p. 161) that human sacrifice arose in Polynesia because of lack of domestic animals, there being only pigs and rats. But the pigs could have sufficed in early times as well as late; and the negroes of Africa have freely offered both kinds. And why did not Australians, lacking domestic animals, set up or continue human sacrifices 2 Because men were scarce, probably.

^154:3 W. Ellis, Polynesian Researches, 2nd ed. i, 345.

^154:4 Above, pp. <page 111>-<page 114>; below,  section 13; and Part IV,  section section 3, 5.

^154:5 In the Tonga Islands, the occasional child-sacrifices were also by strangulation. (Mariner's Tonga Islands, 3rd ed. i, 190, 300). See also Ellis, iv, 151, as to other cases of avoidance of mangling; and cp. Moerenhaut, Voyage aux Iles du Grand Ocean, 1837, i, 508.

^154:6 Long pig, it will be remembered, was a name among Polynesian cannibals for their human victims.

^154:7 H. Ling Roth, Great Benin, 1903, pp. 51, 54, 64, 66, 69, 86, 173; and App. p. ix. Cp. Decle, Three Years in Savage Africa, 1900, p. 73, as to cases of crucifixion noted by him.

^154:8 Id. p. 66.

^155:1 H. Ling Roth, Great Benin, 1903, pp. 52, 54, 64, 68, 69, 161; and App. x. Cp. citation from Commander Bacon, p. 175, as to the "crucifixion tree."

^155:2 Id. p. 65.

^155:3 Again: "The African rarely......sacrifices men without stupefying them with drink or drugs." Roth notes that "the descriptions of human sacrifices given by Landolphe and Beauvais do not leave the impression that the victims were intoxicated before being killed" (p. 64, note). At Benin, as elsewhere, the drugging was apparently a late device. Latterly it was common. Id. p. 84.

^155:4 J. F. Cunningham, Uganda and its Peoples, 1905, pp. 88-89. Cp. pp. 188, 217-218, 318. Sometimes 200 or 300 men were sacrificed at a time. On the occasion of the finishing of a king's palace, as many as 700 were at times slaughtered to the leopard-demon.

^155:5 In this connection it is significant that in the time of Herodotus anyone seized and killed by a crocodile was treated as a divine victim, and buried with special reverence as something more than human" (ii, 90)--evidently a survival from the ancient rite of human sacrifice.

^155:6 Cunningham, p. 56.

^155:7 Id. p. 318.

^155:8 Id. p. 10.

^155:9 Waitz, Anthropologie der Naturvolker, iii, 340.

^156:1 Cook's Voyages to the Pacific, iii (by King), 162.

^156:2 Tanner's Narrative, cited by Lubbock, Origin of Civ. 5th ed. p. 367.

^156:3 Lubbock, last cit. quoting Schoolcraft. Cp. H. Youle Hind, Explorations in the Labrador Peninsula, 1863, ii, 17-18.

^157:1 What looks like a reminiscence of the old sacrificial practice is described by W. Ellis (i, 310) as occurring after battles, when the legs and arms of the dead bodies of defeated warriors were broken and the bodies hung by the neck, and moved up and down "for the amusement of the spectators."

^157:2 Curtiss, Primitive Semitic Religion To-day, 1902, pp. 177-8.

^157:3 There is a passage in Justin Martyr (Dial. with Trypho, xl) which seems to assert that the paschal lamb was "roasted and dressed in the form of the cross"; whence it would follow that the original human victim had been crucified, or bound somewhat in the manner of the Khond sacrifice. It is not known, however, whether roasted lambs in general may not have been dressed in the same fashion.

^157:4 Ezek. ix, 4, 6. Cp. Heb. and Varior. Bible.

^157:5 Exod. xii, 7, 13, 29.

^157:6 Cp. Didron, Christian Iconography, Eng. tr. i. 371, note, where also is noted the tradition that the "two sticks" of the widow of Zarepta were a cross. The prophet's miracle implies the same figure (1 Kings, xvii, 12, 22).

^157:7 Curtiss, as cited, pp. 192-3. Different forms of the cross are made by Hindus on the [p. 158] shrines of Ganesa. See the photograph in Crooke's Popular Religion and Folklore of Northern India, ed. 1896, i, 105, 110.

^158:1 Rev. St. John Tyrwhitt, Art Teaching of the Primitive Church, S. P. C. K., pp. 232, 234.

^158:2 See below.  section 15.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 9. Specific Survivals in Judaism.

Apart from definite revivals, the memory of human sacrifice is clearly stamped not only on the Passover but on the two other typical sacrificial feasts of the Jews--the indeterminate sacrifice of the Red Heifer, loosely said to have been performed only eight times since Moses, and the annual sacrifice of a scape-goat on the Day of Atonement. In the case of the former, which was prescribed to take place on the Mount of Olives, the high-priest, his eldest son, and the Messiah Milchama--the deputy High-Priest anointed for war--were all three anointed with holy oil, the mark of a cross being made with it on their foreheads. But further, in one of the two Talmudic accounts, "in anticipation of the performance of the rite, a pregnant woman was brought into one of the chambers of the temple, which was set apart for the purpose, and kept there till her child was born. The child so born was brought up within the sacred precincts, and protected from any chance of incurring ceremonial pollution. When the time for the rite arrived, this child was seated on a wooden litter borne by bullocks, and conducted to the fountain of Siloah. There the child descended, and drew water from the spring in an earthen vessel, bearing which, he was reconducted, as he came, to the Temple." [*3] But by another account "pregnant women" were brought to Jerusalem, and placed in courts built on the rock, with an excavation underneath, and they and their children were there kept "for the use of the red heifer" [*4] till the children were seven or eight years old, when they ceased to be held ceremonially pure. Here it becomes fairly clear that a regular supply of children-victims had anciently been provided for sacrifice, and that the heifer was the child's representative. Some trace of the knowledge is preserved in the Talmud, in the dubiously significant

[p. 159]

saying that "as the red heifer atones for sin so also does the death of the righteous atone for sin." [*1] Being sacrificed with her face to, the south and her head to the west, [*2] the heifer was presumably dedicated either to the setting or winter sun or to the Moon-Goddess. [*3]

By an equally clear clue in the ritual, we can reach the original character of the sacrifice of the scapegoat, which in its official form is clearly post-exilic. [*4] In the preparation for that, the high-priest was removed from his own house to the council-chamber seven days in advance, and at the same time a sagan or deputy was appointed who should take his place in case of his being incapacitated. On the night before the day of sacrifice he was not allowed to eat meat, or to sleep, being watched by the younger priests. At that stage, "the elders of the great Sanhedrin handed him over to the seniors of the priestly order, who escorted him to the upper chamber of the house of Abtinas, [*5] and there they swore him in, and, after bidding him farewell, departed. In administering the oath, they said: "My lord high-priest, we are ambassadors of the Sanhedrin; thou art ambassador of the Sanhedrin, and our ambassador also. We adjure thee, by Him who causes his name to dwell in this house, that thou deviate not from anything we have rehearsed to thee. Then they parted company, both he and they weeping." [*6] An absurd Talmudic explanation is given for the weeping: "He wept because they suspected he was a Sadducee; and they wept because the penalty or false suspicion is scourging." [*7] Whatever may have been the historical fact concealed by the last phrase, it is sufficiently clear that the rite was originally one of human sacrifice in which either the priest or his deputy, the Sagan or Segan, was put to death as

[p. 160]

[paragraph continues] "ambassador" of the people to the God or Gods, [*1] that is, as scapegoat for their sins. And in this Sagan we probably have the true interpretation of the Graecised term Zoganes [*2] applied to the mock victim of the Sacaea. He was simply the deputy [*3] of the originally due victim, the priest, who must thus have solved his personal problem at a very early date. [*4]

In all likelihood the Hebrews had practised some form of this rite long before the Captivity. And as regards the later practice we have a significant Talmudic clue, in the saying of Rabbi Eleazar that it is lawful to slay an Amhaaretz (one "ignorant of the law," rustic "pagan") on the Day of Atonement, even (?) when it falls on a Sabbath. There were discussions on the point, and it is explained that the victim must not be slain with a knife, as "that would necessitate a formal benediction; but to kill him by tearing his nostrils open no benediction is required." Another Rabbi chimes in that "Rabbi Yochanan has said that it is lawful to split up the Amhaaretz like a fish"; "and that from the neck too," adds yet another. [*5] The date explains the proposition. Whether as a regular and sanctioned or as a sporadic practice, the sacrifice of a human victim on the Day of Atonement had in all likelihood been practised at or near Jerusalem both before and after the Return from the Captivity. [*6]

The modified sacrifice of the scapegoat, then, was but another variant of the primordial principle of human sacrifice or "sin-offering" for the good of the people, and is in many respects the complement of the Passover. The Passover victim was set apart on the tenth day of the civil New Year, which dated from spring; the Day of Atonement was the tenth day from the ecclesiastical

[p. 161]

[paragraph continues] New Year, which, as we have seen, began in autumn. It is probable that the latter is the older of the two; but both hold their ground in reference to the sun's progress, the spring festival standing for his youth and waxing period, the autumn for his maturity and waning. That they had a common principle in the sacrifice of a pure victim appears from the detail that in both cases the victim before sacrifice is put in an "upper chamber," the idea being to provide that no contamination should arise from a grave beneath. [*1] And both festivals, it is to be noted, could be celebrated apart from the Temple, the Passover being a domestic as well as a temple-feast, and the Day of Atonement being celebrated in Babylon as well as at Jerusalem. [*2]

It is important to note this circumstance in view of the theoretic universalism of the traditional rite of sacrifice, which even the Khonds declared to be for "mankind," and on which the Gentilising Christians founded their gospel. Jewish sacrifices were strictly national; but in their later contacts with other races they were constantly being attracted towards more cosmopolitan ideals. [*3] It sufficed that they had as basis the communal idea, and that it was capable of development on popular lines. In the legend of the slaying of Saul's seven sons they preserved the belief (seen in force among the Moabites, and at the same time in Israel [*4]) that a king's son, offered up by and for his father, was an irresistibly potent sacrifice; and among some sections of the Semitic race, as we have seen, there was current the myth preserved by Eusebius from Philo of Byblos, that Kronos, "whom the Phoenicians call Israel," adorned his son called Ieoud, "the only," with emblems of royalty, and sacrificed him. The actuality of such a belief among the Phoenicians is proved by the story of Maleus crucifying his only son, crowned and robed in purple, before the walls of Carthage, in order to conquer the city. [*5] He was fulfilling an august rite. Always it is a typically divine or racial "father"--Kronos, Israel, Abraham

[p. 162]

[paragraph continues] --who figures in the myths of son-sacrifice; [*1] and when it is remembered that the God-name Tammuz signified in its original Akkadian form "the son of life," and was by the Semites interpreted to mean "the offspring" or "only son," [*2] we are led to conclude that this conception, bound up with that of the God's death and resurrection, had a general and strong hold on both non-Semitic and Semitic races; for a Hebrew cult of the dying and re-arising Tammuz was in the period before the exile carried on in the very temple of Yahweh. [*3]

Footnotes

^158:3 Conder, Bible Handbook, 1880, pp. 105-107.

^158:4 Hershon, Genesis with a Talmudical Commentary, 1883, p. 40, citing Tal. Bab. Tract Succah, fol. 21, col. 1, and Parah, ch. iii, 2, 3. As to the authority of Tract Parah, cp. Condor, p. 106.

^159:1 Tal. Bab. Moed Katon, fol. 28, col. 1, cited by Hershon, Treasures, p. 103; Genesis, p. 198.

^159:2 Conder, Handbook to the Bible, 1880, p. 107.

^159:3 In Christianity and Mythology, 1st ed. p. 349, I connected the sacrifice of the red heifer with the Egyptian sacrifice of a red ox to Typhon (Plutarch, I. and O. 31--ref. wrong in C. and M.). But though that also was clearly a substitution for a human sacrifice, the sacrifice of a red heifer was on the whole more likely to belong originally to a Goddess-cult, and in Egypt all she-calves were sacred to Isis (Herod. ii, 41). On the whole problem cp. Spencer, De Legibus Hebraeorum, 1. ii, c. 15.

^159:4 The dogmatic assertion of Bleek (Einleit. in das alte Test., ed. Wellhausen, 1878,  section 55) as to the clearly Mosaic authorship of Lev. i-vii, xi-xvi, is a sample of the fashion in which criticism of the Pentateuch was so long darkened. All critics now place Leviticus in the Priestly Code; and ch. xvi is no exception. Cp. Driver, Introd. c. i,  section 3; Kuenen, The Hexateuch, Eng. tr. pp. 86, 312; and the Kautzsch Bible. If Lev. xvi be pre-exilic, why is there no trace of it in Deuteronomy?

^159:5 A family who prepared the sacred incense. See Yoma, ch. iii, 9. Schwab's Fr. trans. vol. v, pp. 199-200.

^159:6 Tract Yoma, Schwab's Fr. tr. vol. v, pp. 161-2, 163-4, 165, 169, 170, 172; Tal. Bab. fol. 18 A and B, fol. 19 B. Eng. trans. by Hershon, Treasures of the Talmud, 1882, p. 90. The last detail is not given by Conder, who probably did not see its significance.

^159:7 Schwab seeks to make the passage more plausible by the rendering (p. 170) that he wept at being supposed capable of unfaithfulness to his instructions, they because of the painful necessity of adjuring him to be faithful. Hershon's translation is the more exact.

^160:1 This was clearly the idea in the sacrifice of a man to Zamolxis by the Massagetae. Herod. iv, 94, 95. See above, <page 110>, note, as to the Khonds, and below, ch. ii,  section 15.

^160:2 Athenaeus, xiv, 44.

^160:3 Cp. Selden, De Diis Syris, Syntag, ii, c. 13, and refs. in Schurer, Jewish People in the Time of Christ, Div. II, Eng. tr. i, 257. Schurer, recognising no problem as to the special function of the segan in the sacrifice, decides that he must have been the strategos tou ierou or "captain of the temple" (p. 258). But this identification would not exclude the origin above argued for.

^160:4 As to the Babylonian God Azazel, see Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. pp. 320, 323. Standing for the Goat-God = Capricorn, he probably represented the winter-sun. For the Jews of the Maccabean period he was simply a Satan. Book of Enoch, Schodde's trans. cc. viii, 1; ix, 6; x, 4, 6; liv, 5.

^160:5 Tr. Pesachim, fol. 49 B, cited by Hershon, Treasures of the Talmud, p. 95; Genesis with a Talmud. Comm. pp. 56, 73.

^160:6 Prof. H. L. Strack, in his learned and valuable work on The Jew and Human Sacrifice (Eng. trans. 1909, p. 160), replying to the anti-Semitic ravings of Prof. Rohling, argues that the passage first above cited "is not to be taken literally, but is merely a proof of the fanatical hatred dividing those learned in the law from those ignorant of it," and offers as proof of his contention a saying of Rabbi Aqiba on the same page of Tr. Pesachim "When I was an Amha-arez, I said, 'Give me a learned man that I may bite him like an ass.'" The great mass of Dr. Strack's argument in his book is sound, and his refutation of the malignant rubbish of the anti-Semites is complete; but I can see no force in his reasoning here. He has ignored the comments (above cited) on the saying of Rabbi Eleazar, which exclude his solution.

^161:1 Cp. Hershon, Genesis with a Talmudical Commentary, pp. 40, 41.

^161:2 Yoma, fol. 66, A and B. Ext. in Hershon, Treasures of the Talmud, p. 93.

^161:3 See below,  section 15.

^161:4 2 Kings iii, 27. The meaning of the sentence is that the Israelites felt the king's sacrifice of his son must be efficacious, and so gave up the contest in despair. Compare the story (above, p. 126) of Hamilcar's sacrifice of his son. So in the story of the sacrifice of the sons of King Hiel as foundation-Gods for Jericho (Josh. vi, 26; 1 Kings xvi, 34) it is implied that a tremendous efficacy had accrued to the practice; and so again when Maleus has sacrificed his son on a high cross in regal attire he speedily takes Carthage (Justin, xviii, 7). Exactly the same principle is found among the Maoris of New Zealand. A war-chief on the verge of defeat "cut out the heart of his own son as an offering for victory," whereafter, making a desperate onset, he and his tribe triumphed: "the war-demon had much praise, and many men were eaten" (Old New Zealand, by a Pakeha Maori, ed. 1900, p. 150). Cp. Bastian, Der Mensch, iii, 104, as to the cases of the Norse Hakon Jarl and the Egyptian Mahdi Mohammed Ben Amar. And see J. C. Lawson, Modern Greek Folklore and Ancient Greek Religion, 1910, p. 273, as to Pausanias' story (vi, 20) of the child placed in the battle-front by the Eleans.

^161:5 Last cit.

^162:1 See cit. from Varro in Lactantius, Div. Inst. i, 21, and Macrobius, Saturnalia, i, 7, for the legend of a Greek oracle commanding to "send a man to the Father"--i.e. Kronos.

^162:2 Sayce, Hibbert Lectures, p. 232, citing W. A. I. ii, 36, 54.

^162:3 Ezek. viii, 14.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 10. The Pre-Christian Jesus-God.

We are thus prepared to interpret the crux set up for Christian commentators by the ancient reading "Jesus Barabbas" in Matt. xxvii, 16, 17. That this was long the accepted reading in the ancient church is to be gathered from Origen; [*4] and the problem has always been reckoned a puzzling one. Had Dr. Frazer noted it, he might have seen cause to look deeper for his solution of the problem of the simple name Barabbas in the Gospel story and in Philo. The natural inference from the Barabbas story is that it was customary to give up to the people about the time of the Passover a prisoner, who was made to play a part in some rite under the name of Barabbas, "Son of the Father"; and the reading "Jesus Barabbas" suggests that the full name of the bearer of the part included that of "Jesus"--a detail very likely to be suppressed by copyists as an error. Is not the proper presumption, then, this: that the preservation of the name "Jesus Barabbas" tells of the common association of those names in some such rite as must be held to underlie the Gospel myth--that, in short, a "Jesus the Son of the Father" was a figure in an old Semitic ritual of sacrifice before the Christian era? The Syrian form of the name, Yeschu, closely resembles the Hebrew name Yishak, which we read Isaac; and that Isaac was in earlier myth sacrificed by his father is a fair presumption. We have here the inferrible norm of an ancient God-sacrifice, Abraham s original Godhood being tolerably certain, like that of Israel. [*5] In Arab legend, Ishmael is sacrificed by his father, though apparently the sacrifice is commuted for a ram in the manner of the story in Genesis. [*6]

[p. 163]

As a hypothesis the proposed solution must for the present stand; but the grounds for surmising a pre-Christian cult of a Jesus or Joshua may here be noted. The first is the fact that the Joshua (Jesus) of the book so named is quite certainly unhistorical, [*1] and that the narrative concerning him is a late fabrication. We can but divine from it that, having several attributes of the Sun-God, [*2] he is like Samson and Moses an ancient deity, latterly reduced to human status; and as Jewish tradition has it that he began his work of deliverance on the day fixed for the choosing of the paschal lamb, and concluded it at the Passover, [*3] it is inferrible that his name was anciently associated with the rite and the symbol, as well as with the similarly significant rite of circumcision, which is connected with the Passover in the pseudo-history of Joshua. [*4] That he, who is never mentioned by the psalmists or prophets, should not only be put on a level with Moses as an institutor of the prime ordinances of the Passover rite and circumcision, but should be credited with the miracle of staying the course of the sun and moon--a prodigy beyond any ascribed to Moses--is not to be explained save on the view that he held divine status in the previous myth. [*5] As his name was held in special reverence among the Samaritans, who preserved a late book ascribing to him many feats not given in the Jewish record, the probability is that he was an Ephraimite deity, analogous to Joseph, whose legend has such close resemblances to the myth of Tammuz-Adonis.

No less clear is the inference from the pseudo-prediction inserted in a list of priestly vetoes in the book of Exodus. [*6] It is there promised that an Angel, in or on whom is the "name" of Yahweh, shall lead Israel to triumph against the Amorites, the Hittites, and the Perizzites, and the Canaanites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites. This is the very list (lacking one) put in Joshua's mouth as that of the conquests effected by the Lord through him, [*7] so that he is Pseudo-historically identified with the promised Angel. [*8] That personage, again, in virtue of his possession of the magical "name," [*9] is in the Talmud identified with the mystic Metatron, who is in turn identifiable with the Logos. [*10] Thus the name Joshua = Jesus is

[p. 164]

already in the Pentateuch associated with the conceptions of Logos, Son of God, and Messiah; and it is in view of such knowledge that the pseudo-prediction is framed. Only the hypothesis that in some Palestinian quarters Joshua had the status of a deity can meet the case.

To the nature of that status we have certain clues which have never been considered in correlation, Jews and Christians alike being led by their presuppositions either to ignore or to misconceive them. One clue is, as already noted, the evidently Judaic and pre-Christian character of the Lamb-God Jesus in the Apocalypse. The slain God is there identified not only with the Logos, [*1] before the appearance of the Fourth Gospel, and with the Mithraic or Babylonian symbols of the Seven Spirits, but with the Alpha and the Omega; and the accessories are markedly Semitic and Judaistic. Thus the four-and-twenty elders play a foremost part; the twelve apostles are present only in an interpolation; [*2] and the saved are pre-eminently Jewish. [*3] Not only, in short, is the Child-God of the dragon-story, in the twelfth chapter, not the Christian Jesus: [*4] the Jesus of the whole book is pre-Christian, the book being in fact a Jewish Apocalypse slightly edited for Christian purposes. [*5] So much is now admitted by many students; and it is the failure to learn this and other lessons of the documents that still permits of wrong hypotheses to account for the Messianic doctrine in the Book of Enoch, a distinctly pre-Christian work. [*6]

But the same problem arises in connection with that crucial document, "The Teaching of the Twelve Apostles." Not only are the first six chapters of that book wholly Judaic, without mention of any divinity save "God," "the Lord," "the Father," unless "the Spirit" be taken to stand for a second deity; but even the formula of baptism in the seventh chapter, which belongs to a secondary stratum in the compilation, is not clearly Christian; and the eucharistic formula in the ninth is clearly non-Christian. It runs: "We thank thee, our Father, for the holy vine of David thy servant, which thou hast made known to us by Jesus thy servant," [*7] an expression quite irreconcilable with the accepted Christian narrative and liturgy. Nor is there a single allusion in the entire document, whether in the late or the early portions, to the death of Jesus by

[p. 165]

crucifixion or otherwise. Thus it appears that not only was the nucleus of the document a teaching of twelve monotheistic Jewish apostles--the apostles of the High Priest to the Dispersion [*1]--but even the earlier Jesuist additions were made by Judaic Jesuists who had not the Christian doctrine of a divine sacrifice, whether or not they already had the trinitarian doctrine set forth in the baptismal formula of the seventh chapter. Thus the allusion to the "gospel of the Lord" in the eighth chapter is presumptively an interpolation, occurring as it does in a document in which hitherto "the Lord" had always meant Yahweh; and even at that, the reference is presumptively to the inferred primary form of the first gospel, which had no account of the crucifixion and resurrection [*2]--a gospel, in short, which had grown up solely by way of sayings and doings ascribed to the mythical Jesus, without the existing birth legend, and without his twelve apostles. Here again the theological critics recognise the Judaic character of the matter, [*3] but fail to draw the obvious inferences.

There remains to be considered in the same connection the fact that in the Jewish liturgy for the ecclesiastical New Year there is or was mention of Joshua (Jeschu = Jesus) as "the Prince of the Presence." [*4] This is of course interpreted as a title signifying Joshua's relation to Moses; but in the light of the Apocalypse it seems to have quite another significance. After the deletions effected in the pseudo-history, [*5] the matter is sufficiently obscure; but the clues left, when colligated, tell of something very different from the written word. Tentatively, we may surmise that as the Day of Atonement, which comes ten days after the New Year, is the consummation of the annual Day of Judgment, [*6] Joshua in the liturgy played very much the same part as the Judaic Jesus in the Apocalypse.

Finally, we have to note (a) the remarkable Persian tradition which makes Joshua the Son of Miriam, [*7] whose death day in the

[p. 166]

[paragraph continues] Jewish calendar is that of the beginning of his work, the tenth of Nisan, whereon was chosen the paschal lamb; and (b) the fact that according to some Jews the "Week of the Son" (circumcision and redemption of the first-born male child) was called the rite of "Jesus the Son." [*1] Whether or not we have here the true origination of the myth which makes the Gospel Jesus the Son of Mariam, there is a fair presumption from mythological analogy that the Miriam of the Pentateuch, who dies and is buried at Kadesh, [*2] "the holy" city, is a Goddess Evemerised, [*3] and that the day of Joshua's setting out on his fictitious march was in the original myth the day either of his birth or of some act of popular salvation wrought by him. If he were originally a variant of Tammuz, and Miriam a variant of Ishtar, if male infants were circumcised in his honour, and if he died to save men at the Passover, the details to that effect would certainly be excluded by the later Yahwists from any narrative they preserved or framed concerning him. As it is, we may at least argue for a connection between the Judaic "Jesus the Son" and the traditional "Jesus the Son of the Father."

Beyond conjectures we cannot at present go; but the significance given to the name of Jeshua, the high-priest of the Return, in the book of Zechariah, [*4] at a time when the book of Joshua did not exist, tells of a Messianic idea so associated when Messianism was but beginning among the Jews. And as the Messianic idea seems to have come to them, as it fittingly might, during their exile, perhaps from the old Babylonian source of the myth of the returning Hammurabi--who in his own code declares himself the Saviour-Shepherd and the King of Righteousness [*5]--or from the later Mazdean doctrine that the Saviour Saoshyant, the yet unborn Son of Zarathustra, is at the end of time to raise the dead and destroy Ahriman, [*6] it may have had many divine associations such as later orthodox Judaism would sedulously obliterate.

What is specially important in this connection is the fact that the doctrine of a suffering Messiah gradually developed among the Jews, for the most part outside the canonical literature. For the doctrine that "the Christ must needs have suffered" [*7] can be

[p. 167]

scripturally supported only from passages like the fifty-third chapter of Isaiah, where our A. V. alters the past tense into the present, thus making a description of Israel's past sufferings serve as a mystic type. Cyrus, who is called Messiah in Deutero-Isaiah, was reputed to have been crucified, but not in his Messianic capacity. [*1] The presumption then is that the doctrine was extra-canonical, and was set up by Gentile example. Even in the Book of Enoch, where the Messianic doctrine is much developed, the Messiah does not "suffer." The first clear trace of that conception in Judaic literature appears to be in the doctrine that of the two promised Messiahs, [*2] Ben Joseph and Ben David, Ben Joseph is to be slain. [*3] Whence came that theorem it is for the present impossible to say; but it is presumptively foreign, [*4] and there are clear Gentile parallels.

An obvious precedent to begin with lay in the Greek myth of the crucified Prometheus; [*5] but on the whole the most likely pagan prototype is to be seen in the slain and resurgent Dionysos, one of whose chief names is Eleuthereos, the Liberator, [*6] who was specially signalised as the God "born again." As the Jewish Messiah was to be primarily a "deliverer," like the series of legendary national heroes in the book of Judges, a popular God so entitled was most likely to impress the imagination of the dispersed Jews and their proselytes. The same epithet, indeed, may well have attached to ancient deities such as Samson, who is a variant of the deliverer Herakles, and was one of the "deliverers" of the pseudo-history, as well as to the original Jesus whose myth is Evemerised in Joshua. Samson, too, like Dionysos, was "only-begotten." [*7] But in any case a proximate motive is needed to account for the post-exilic or post-Maccabean revival of such conceptions in a cult form; and it is to be found in the prevailing religious conceptions of the surrounding Hellenistic civilisation, where, next to Zeus, the Gods most in evidence were Dionysos and Herakles, and the Son-sacrificing Kronos. [*8]

Footnotes

^162:4 See Nicholson, The Gospel According to the Hebrews, 1879, pp. 141-2.

^162:5 Refs. above, p. 51.

^162:6 Weil, Biblical Legends of the Mussulmans, Eng. tr. pp. 62-66: Curtiss, Primitive Semitic Religion To-day, 1902, p. 175.

^163:1 Cp. Stade, Gesch. des Volkes Israel, 1881, pp. 64-65: art. Joshua in Encyclopaedia Biblica; Winckler, Geschichte Israels, ii, 101-2, 107-9; Robertson Smith, Old Testament in the Jewish Church, 2nd ed. p. 131.

^163:2 E.g., his crossing of the water dryshod (iii, 13, 17), and his selection of twelve who function with him (iv, 4).

^163:3 Josh. v, 10.

^163:4 Cp. Josh. v, 2-10.

^163:5 The statement in Josh. ix, 22, 27, suggests a trace of a Joshua cult among the Hebrews. Stade (as cited, p. 65) pronounced the Joshua saga wholly Ephraimitish.

^163:6 Ex. xxiii, 20-23.

^163:7 Josh. xxiv, 11.

^163:8 In Josh. v, 13-15, again, "the captain of the host of the Lord," a separate divine Personage, reveals himself to Joshua.

^163:9 See hereinafter, Pt. II, ch. ii,  section 2.

^163:10 Below, Pt. III,  section 8.

^164:1 iii, 14, 15; xix, 13.

^164:2 xxii, 14. Cp. A Short History of Christianity, p. 17.

^164:3 vii, 5-9. Cp. xxii. 16.

^164:4 Gunkel, Schopfung und Chaos, p. 173; Eberhard Vischer, as there cited.

^164:5 Gunkel, p. 19. Cp. Davidson, Introd, to N. T. 2nd ed. i, 253, 263, 267-9; 3rd ed. ii, 214; Martineau, Seat of Authority in Religion, pp. 224-5.

^164:6 Cp. Schodde's introd. to his translation, 1882, pp. 46-58.

^164:7 The reading "thy son," given by some clerical translators, is indefensible. The same word, paidos, is applied to David and Jesus.

^165:1 Cp. Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. pp. 341 sq., 411, 421; A Short History of Christianity, pp. 17-21, 83, and refs. pp. 403-4.

^165:2 Cp. The Synoptic Problem for English Readers, by A. J. Jolley, 1893--giving the conclusions of the school of Bernhard Weiss.

^165:3 Cp. the admissions of Mr. Rendel Harris, in his edition of The Teaching, p. 89; of Dr. C. Taylor in his lectures on it, 1886; of the American editors, Hitchcock and Brown, in their edition; of Canon Spence in his (1885, pp. 37, 90-91); of the Rev. J. Heron in his (Church of the Sub-Apostolic Age, p. 57), and of, Dr. Salmon, as there cited (p. 58).

^165:4 Tal. Bab. Tract. Yevamoth, fol. 16, col. 2, Josephoth, cited by Hershon. Genesis with a Talm. Comm., p. 24, note. j.

^165:5 Cp. Winckler, Geschichte Israels, ii, 102.

^165:6 "All things are judged on the New Year's Day," said Rabbi Meir, "and their sentences are sealed on the Day of Atonement." Other Rabbis agreed on the first head, but not on the second. Rosh Hashannah, fol. 16 A, cited by Hershon, Treasures of the Talmud. pp. 98-99.

^165:7 Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. p. 99.

^166:1 Tal. Bab. Tract. Baba-Bathra, fol. 60, col. 2, cited by Hershon, Genesis with a Talm. Comm., p. 26.

^166:2 Num. xx, 1.

^166:3 As to the reduction of the ancient Goddesses, Helena, Medea, Harmonia, and others, to human status in late legends, cp. K. O. Muller, Introd. to Mythology, Eng. tr. pp. 77-8, 86; Preller, Griech. Mythol. ii, 108 sq.; Pais, Anc. Leg. of Rom. Hist. chs. iv, v, x.

^166:4 Zech. iii, 1-9; vi, 10-12.

^166:5 Oettli, Das Gesetz Hammurabis and die Thora Israels, 1903, pp. 82-83.

^166:6 Bundahish, xi, 6; Zendavesta, Vendidad, Fargard xix, 18. Cp. Spiegel's note in loc., and his Einleitung, p. 32.

^166:7 Acts xvii, 3; xxvi, 23. Cp. Luke xxvi, 26, 46.

^167:1 Diod. Sic. ii, 44.

^167:2 Cp. Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. p. 303.

^167:3 Reichardt, Relations of the Jewish Christians to the Jews, p. 37; Bousset, The Antichrist Legend, Eng. tr. p. 107; Nutt, Fragments of a Samaritan Targum, 1874, p. 69. Cp. Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. p. 303, as to Christian opinion on the doctrine.

^167:4 Bousset, as cited. And see below, Pt. II, ch. ii,  section 15. In this connection, however, see the important thesis of Gunkel (Zum. Verstandnis des N. T., p. 78) that the mystic type in Isaiah stands for a dying and re-arising God.

^167:5 That Prometheus was crucified is not only implied in his traditional posture, but asserted by Lucian, and shown in ancient art. Cp. Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed, p. 371, and Hochart, Etudes d'histoire religieuse, 1890, p. 345.

^167:6 He bore also the equivalent name Lysios; and in Latin he is best known as Liber. Twice-born is one of his common epithets.

^167:7 This title is applied in the Orphic Hymns to Persephone, Athene, and Demeter as well as to Dionysos (xxix, 2; xxxii, 1; xl, 16).

^167:8 Schurer, 2nd Div. i, 22.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 168]

  

 section 11. Private Jewish Eucharists.

There arises thus the further presumption that such a cult as we are tracing may have flourished in a Jewish community elsewhere than in Jerusalem. Dr. Frazer, in surmising a celebration of Purim with a real victim at Jerusalem, does not take account of the fact that the bulk of the Jews deported to Babylon had remained and flourished there, many remaining Yahwists; that there then began the institution of the synagogue, permissible to any group of Jews in any place; and that wherever in the East there was a Jewish synagogue outside of Judea there was an opening for usages not recognised at Jerusalem. But the existence of many such synagogues is clearly an important condition of the problem; and precisely because there were no regular sacrificial rites, apart from the Passover, for expatriated Jews, there is a likelihood that among them in particular would revive rites of sacrifice and sacrament which had a great tradition behind them, but were not latterly practised at the temple. This craving for a sacrifice in which they could participate is the special note of the Epistle to the Hebrews; and indeed the habit and doctrine of sacrifice were far too deeply rooted to permit of a contented submission of all the myriads of scattered Jews to a complete deprivation of the practice. [*1]

Significantly enough, the most notable sacrificial survival among the race in modern times is one that demonstrably preserves the principle of human sacrifice--that, namely, of the Kapparoth ("atonements"), the slaying of a white cock on the eve of Yom Kippur, the Day of Atonement. [*2] One Jewish convert to Christianity, Hyam Isaacs, puts it that "the more self-righteous Jews" provide a cock, which is slain by an inferior Rabbi, whereafter the sacrificers swing it nine times over their heads, praying to God that the sins of the year may enter into the fowl. It is not strictly a scapegoat, for it is given to the poor to eat. As to the "self-righteousness" involved, Isaacs admitted that while he remained in the old faith he set great store by the procedure, and "thought he was justified." [*3] Theologically he was. It is not disputed that the Hebrew word Gever stands for both "a cock" and "a man." [*4] Another Jewish convert, Hershon, describing the custom, and noting the eagerness with which white cocks are bought by Jews on the eve of Yom 

[p. 169]

[paragraph continues] Kippur, declares that it is "still in vogue amongst those who pride themselves upon their orthodoxy," and decides that it is "one of many relics of Oriental paganism which the Jews brought from the banks of the Euphrates, from the land of their exile, the fatherland of Rabbinic faith and worship." [*1] It has been strictly preserved in the interim. In an English account of the rite as practised among the Jews of Barbary in the seventeenth century it is noted that the sacrifice came after the reading of the ancient Confession held to be made by the high-priest in sacrificing the scapegoat. The narrator continues:--

Since the destruction of their City, the Jews have no place for a proper sacrifice; and therefore, instead thereof, when they come from the Synagogue, every Father of a Family takes a cock (a white one if possible) upon the ninth day of the Feast, and, calling his Household about him, repeats several sentences of Scripture; among which the principal are the 17 vers. of Psalm 107......and 23 vers. of Job 13 (33?)......After the repetition of these Scriptures, he waves the cock three times [*2] about his head, at each of which he useth these or the like words: Let this Cock be a commutation for me: Let it be my substitute: Let it be an expiation for me: Let the Bird die, but let life and happiness be to me and all Israel. Amen. Then he again swings the cock thrice about his head, once for himself, once for his sons, and once for the strangers that are with him. Then he kills the cock and saith, I have deserved thus to die. The woman takes a hen, and does the like for those of her sex. In Barbary, where the houses are flat-roofed, they cast the garbage thereon, to be devoured by some ravenous birds, in token that their sins are removed as the entrails they cast out. Now the reason why they chuse a cock for the expiatory is drawn from the ambiguous word in the Talmud, which may signifie either man or cock. So that they repute the death of a cock as much as that of a man; and to this Domestick Bird the 53 of Esay, [*3] with many other Passages of Holy Writ, are prophanely and ridiculously applied......When they have done with the cock they repair to the sepulchres, where they repeat......their prayers and confessions. They bestow the value of their cocks upon the poor, to whom formerly they gave their carkasses, which they now keep to furnish out their own tables. [*4]

This differs from the recent accounts only in respect of the eating of the sacrifice by the sacrificers in person--a closer adherence to the fundamental principle. In no case, however, is there any obscurity as to that. I have seen in recent years an illustrated postcard, made for the use of German Jews, whereon is represented a Jew in hat and long coat, holding a white cock, and

[p. 170]

standing before a table with a book on it; while below is the Hebrew text (Job xxxiii, 24), "Deliver him from going down to the pit: I have found a ransom"; with the addition, "May you be inscribed for a prosperous year," and afterwards, in German, the greeting, "Hearty Good Wishes for the New Year." Two other details complete the identification. (1) The sacrificer, holding with his right hand the tied legs of the bird, "with his left hand on its head coaxes it to keep it quiet" [*1]--the old effort to secure the willing victim. (2) The procedure includes a "ransom for the Kapparoth"--that is, a ransom for the ransom, [*2] a principle familiar to the student of ancient sacrifice. [*3] Here the substitution of a lesser for a human sacrifice is almost undisguised, after two thousand years.

A remarkable parallel to the Jewish practice is found at the present day among many of the peoples of the Congo and other regions of Western Africa.

Between Isangila and Manyanga [writes Sir H. H. Johnston] there are many eunuchs in the large villages, who seemed to be attached to a vague phallic worship with which is intricately connected a reverence for the moon. When the new moon appears, dances are performed by the eunuchs, who sacrifice a white fowl, which must always be male, in its honour. The bird is thrown up into the air and torn to pieces as it falls to the earth. I was told that in former days a human victim was offered up on these occasions, but that in later times a white fowl had been substituted. [*4]

The question here arises why black races should make white fowls or animals surrogates for men, and an Asiatic origin for the practice suggests itself. That it is, however, also an ancient if not a primary savage practice appears to follow from the frequency of sacrifices of white fowls among the Nigerians [*5] and other tribes.

The Krus, Intas, Dahomians, Ibus, Eggarahs, and the littoral inhabitants of Cameroons, Bonny, Calabar, Fernando Po, all mark the season of planting their yams and grain by a religious ritual, and a festive meeting of all the tribe. With the exception of the Ashantis, and perhaps the Ibus and Eggarahs, the ceremony is untainted by human blood; the offerings being goats, sheep, and white fowls, portions of which, after being roasted, are laid together with palm wine as oblations before the idols: this done, they continue the entertainment for several days. [*6]

What is here inferential becomes quite explicit in the religious folk-lore of the Malays, whose wizards invoke the ancestor-spirits to inform them in a dream what sacrifices are required at a given juncture,

[p. 171]

whereafter "Whatever sacrifice is asked for must of course be given, with the exception of a human sacrifice, which, as it is expressly stated, may be compounded by the sacrifice of a fowl." [*1] And there are several reasons for supposing that the rite is eastern and not African in origin. A special reason is its connection, as noted by Sir H. Johnston, with "a reverence for the moon." As he and other writers also note, worship of the heavenly bodies is very uncommon among the African tribes. "As a rule the West African apparently pays no attention" to the sun, moon, and stars, "though not uncommonly his principal deity is the general controller of the firmament, a Jupiter or Sky-God in fact." [*2] "I have never encountered," says Sir Harry, "a race of purely Negro blood that took much interest in the stars"; [*3] and again: "I have never yet encountered a purely Negro race that attributed divinity to the sun." [*4] Now, the Hebrew and other Semitic records go to show that sun-worship and moon-worship evolved together among the Semites; and the inference from the data before us is that it was from Semitic contacts that some of the negro races in antiquity acquired those cults, and the correlative sacrifice of the white fowl.

Other traces of the connection we find among the ancient Greeks. At Methana in Troezen Pausanias saw two men tear a white cock in halves [*5] and run round the vines in opposite directions, each carrying a half. When they met they buried the parts together. The purpose was to avert the evil wind called Lips, which dried up the young shoots of the vines. [*6] The Methanian cock, says Miss Harrison, "is a typical sfagion [thing slaughtered]: it is carried round for purification......It is really of the order of pharmakos ceremonies rather than a sacrifice proper. For a sfagion we should expect the cock to be black, but on the principle of sympathetic magic it is in this case white. The normal sacrifice to a wind was a black animal.....Winds were underworld Gods." [*7] But they were certainly sacrificed

[p. 172]

to; and it has been argued that the sacrifice of Iphigeneia "was, in the words of Aeschylus, 'a sacrifice to stay the winds.'" [*1] In any case, "the word sfagion is always used of human victims and of such animals as were in use as surrogates. The term is applied to all the famous maiden sacrifices of mythology As a sfagion Polyxena is slain on the tomb of Achilles." [*2] So that we come back once more to the white cock as a substitute for a human victim; and as the winds were either Gods or Genii, it was strictly a sacrifice.

Again, among the Dravidian Ghasiyas of Mirzapur, "the most degraded of the Dravidian tribes," after a man's death his son sacrifices a white fowl as the recipient of his father's spirit, or otherwise as placating him, [*3] and a white cock is a common sacrifice to the Sun-God among other tribes of the same race. [*4] On that view, the surrogate cock sacrifice is probably ancient among the Semites; [*5] and the late continuance of human sacrifice was with the Hebrews as with other races a result of the pressures of perturbing calamity on the one hand, and a ritual survival on the other. On any view, it is not to be supposed that in the age of sacrificial worship the dispersed Jews, craving for its usages, would abstain from other private rituals of a sacrificial and eucharistic kind. It is a Rabbinical doctrine that "so long as the Temple existed the altar made atonement for Israel; but now it is a man's table that makes atonement for him." [*6] "Table" is interpreted to mean "hospitality," an unplausible gloss. It would certainly be understood by most Jews of the sacrificial age to mean individual rites of a quasi-sacrificial kind; and the principle would hold for exiled Jews before the fall of the Temple.

By reviving such mysteries, those of the Dispersion could in a measure compensate themselves for their exclusion from the orthodox sacrifices, which were a monopoly of the holy city. And when we find the later Christists practising rites closely analogous to those of pagan deities such as Mithra and Dionysos, we cannot well doubt that Jews in the large eastern cities would be at

[p. 173]

times inclined to resort to mysteries of sacrament sacrifice for which they had a precedent in their own traditions. The story of the "Karabbas" episode at Alexandria, in fact, is an item of positive evidence not yet matched by any in regard to Jerusalem; unless it be the story to the effect that Antiochus Epiphanes found in the temple at Jerusalem a Greek captive who was to be sacrificed and sacramentally eaten. [*1] In view of all the clues, notably that of the Rabbinical saying as to the lawfulness of slaying a pagan rustic on the Day of Atonement, [*2] we cannot pronounce that story incredible; and the retort of Josephus, that one victim could not supply a meal to the multitude of worshippers, is at once disposed of by the principle that "sin-offerings were too holy to be eaten except by the priests." [*3] Nor can we quite confidently reject the theorem of Ghillany, that there was an element of actual ritual cannibalism in the paschal meal of the Jews in the pre-exilic period, though the proof is incomplete. [*4] It suffices, however, to note that when revived rites of sacrament were seen to flourish among the Dispersion, there would be a tendency at Jerusalem to recognise them for economic reasons. The more we study the history of Judaism, the more clearly we realise that it was never immune from change, never long a triumphant fixed cult realising the ideal of its sacred books. Even in the immediate sphere of the temple itself, then, revived or innovating rites could make their way.

Such an acceptance would require only one condition--that the innovating rites were professedly Yahwistic. In the exilic period there had been many resorts to "unclean" sacraments, such as the mystical eating of dogs, mice, and swine, [*5] men desperately seeking help from alien rites when their own God had wholly failed to help them; and our ablest Hebraist, while noting that "the causes which produced a resuscitation of obsolete mysteries among the Jews were at work at the same period among all the northern Semites," decides that the rites in question "mark the first appearance in Semitic history of the tendency to found religious societies on voluntary association and mystic initiation, instead of natural kinship and nationality." [*6] Whatever may have been the origins, it suffices that the alleged "first appearance" was not the last. However the tendency may have been held in check at Jerusalem, it cannot have been equally repressed among the dispersed Jews, who saw all around them attractive mystical cults emanating from their own

[p. 174]

[paragraph continues] Semitic kindred; and who had in their own sacred books pretexts enough for "clean" sacraments in honour of Yahweh. For in all the orthodox sacrifices, it is to be remembered, an eating and drinking with the Deity, a sitting at his table as his guest, even as one would sit at a great banquet, was the essential notion, the ideal for the laity as well as the priesthood. [*1] It would be strange indeed if the dispersed myriads wholly renounced such an experience.

The law permitted at the temple of Jerusalem private as well as public sacrifices of all kinds; and in the case of the peace- or thank-offerings "only the fat was burned on the altar, while the flesh was used by the owner of the sacrifice himself as material for a jocund sacrificial feast." [*2] And "as was only natural, it was the numerous private offerings of so many different kinds that constituted the bulk of the sacrifices." Their number was in fact "so vast as to be well-nigh inconceivable." [*3] That is to say, the private proclivity to sacrifice was the predominant religious factor. At a time, then, when movements of dissent and innovation and even of "anticlericalism" [*4] were being set up by a variety of forces, new and old, it is not to be supposed that the multitudes of Jews distributed through the Hellenistic world submitted passively to a monopoly which deprived them of most of the normal sensations of religion.

The obscurest side of the problem, perhaps, is that of the weekly eucharist, the "Holy Supper" of bread and wine, which in the later Jesuist cult we find in such close connection with the sacrifice of the God, but in the earlier form of the "Teaching of the Twelve Apostles" does not appear to be so connected. Yet the very phenomenon of the Teaching points to what we have other reasons for surmising--a weekly rite of old standing among the Jews of the Dispersion. The Passover came but once a year; and any act of real or simulated human sacrifice would be no more frequent. Would the dispersed Jews then forego all such weekly rites as occurred among the Gentiles? If normally they abstained from "drink offerings of blood" presented to other Gods, [*5] had they no permissible libation? That there was a weekly eucharist among the Mithraists is practically certain: the Fathers who mention the Mithraic bread-and-wine or bread-and-water sacrament never speak of it as less frequent than the Christian; [*6] and the Pauline allusion

[p. 175]

to the "table of daimons," with its "cup," implies that that was as habitual as the Christian rite, [*1] which was certainly solemnised weekly in the early Church. And that this weekly rite, again, is not originally Mithraic, but one of the ancient Asiatic usages which could reach the Jews either by way of Babylon or before the Captivity, is to be inferred from the fact that the Brahmanic Upavasatha, the fast-day previous to the sacrament of the Soma, occurred four times in each lunar month; [*2] and was thus closely analogous to the Sabbath, which was originally a lunar feast. [*3] As the Soma feast was connected with the worship of the moon, it would be a "supper" on the night of the day before moon-day--that is, on the night of the Sunday, which was clearly "Lord's Day" long before the Christian era. That the Sumerians or Akkadians, who had the seven-day week, were the source of the weekly bread- and-wine supper for both the Hindus and the Persians, seems the natural hypothesis. [*4]

Footnotes

^168:1 As to the avowed Jewish craving for sacrifices, cp. Hershon, Genesis with a Talmudical Commentary, pp. 167, 285.

^168:2 See Buxtorf, Synagoga Judaica, and other authorities cited by J. M. Wheeler. Footsteps of the Past, 1895, pp. 141-2.

^168:3 Ceremonies, Rites, and Traditions of the Jews, (n.d. circa 1820?), p. 54.

^168:4 Hershon, Treasures of the Talmud, p. 105.

^169:1 Id. p. 113.

^169:2 Hershon's account likewise says "three times," as against Isaacs' "nine times"; and gives the same texts, but Job 33 instead of 13.

^169:3 Note the support here given to the thesis of Gunkel (above, <page 167>. n.).

^169:4 The Present State of the Jews: More particularly relating to those in Barbary, by L. Addison, one of His Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary. London, 1675, pp. 185-7.

^170:1 Hershon, p. 106.

^170:2 Id. p. 112.

^170:3 Frazer, G. B. 2nd ed.

^170:4 The River Congo, ed. 1895, p. 279.

^170:5 Above, <page 151>, note.

^170:6 Allen and Thomson, Narrative of the British Expedition to the River Niger, 1848, ii, 398. Among the Andoni in Nigeria, again, we find the sacrifice of a white ram. Major Glyn Leonard, The Lower Niger and its Tribes, 1906, p. 381.

^171:1 W. W. Skeat, Malay Magic, 1900, p. 211. Cp. pp. 143-4, where Mr. Skeat infers a progressive substitution of victims--buffalo, goat, fowl, and finally egg, as symbol of the fowl--for the original human victim, sacrificed at the founding of a house. Mr. Skeat does not mention whether the fowl is white; but on p. 72 he says it must be a cock. He there notes also the offering of dough models of human beings, called "the substitute."

^171:2 Major Mockler-Ferryman, British West Africa, 2nd ed. 1900, p. 384.

^171:3 The Uganda Protectorate, 1902, ii, 697.

^171:4 Liberia, 1906, ii, 1062, note. Cp. Sir A. B. Ellis, Tshi-Speaking Peoples, 1887, pp. 21, 117-8.

^171:5 Note in this connection the Rabbinical saying about splitting the human victim in two. Above, <page 160>.

^171:6 Pausanias, ii, 34.

^171:7 Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion, 2nd ed. p. 67, quoting Aristoph. Frogs, 847. As it happens, when a Haida Indian wishes to obtain a fair wind he fasts, shoots a raven, singes it in the fire, and then, going to the edge of the sea, sweeps it over the surface of the water four times in the direction in which he wishes the wind to blow" (Frazer, Golden Bough, 2nd ed. i, 119)--a curious parallelism to the Jewish ritual above described, although the purpose is entirely different. It would appear that a sacrifice to the Wind-Gods became the type of another. (The dreaded winds, it should be noted, were not merely of the underworld, but demonic, though Boreas at times was pictured with a [p. 172] nimbus, as being aithregenes or aithregenetes. Preller, Gr. Mythol. ed. 1860, i, 370, note.) Of Chinese sailors, again, it is told that in times of imminent peril they sacrifice a cock to the spirit of the waters, wringing off its head, and sprinkling the blood over deck, masts, etc. (Hershon, Treasures, p. 114).

^172:1 J. C. Lawson, Modern Greek Folklore and Ancient Greek Religion, 1910, p. 270, quoting the Agamemnon, 214, 1418.

^172:2 Miss Harrison, as cited, pp. 64-65, quoting Euripides, Ion, 277-8, and Hecuba, 121.

^172:3 W. Crooke, Popular Religion and Folklore in Northern India, ed. 1896, i, 176.

^172:4 Id. i, 9-10.

^172:5 According to the Rabbis, the Babylonian God Nergal, a Sun-God, was symbolised by a cock (Hershon, p. 113), as was Apollo. Sun-worship may then be either an early or a late basis for the sacrifice.

^172:6 Hershon, p. 102, citing Berachoth, fol. 55 A.

^173:1 Josephus, Against Apion, ii, 8.

^173:2 Above, p. 160.

^173:3 Smith, Semites, p. 369.

^173:4 Menschenopfer, pp. 518, 525, 533-4.

^173:5 Isa. lxv, 4-5; lxvi, 3, 17.

^173:6 Smith, Semites, p. 339.

^174:1 Cp. Spencer, De Legibus Hebraeorum, ed. 1686, ii, 76; Smith, Semites, p. 206 sq.; Wellhausen, Prolegom. to Hist. of Israel, Eng. tr. p. 71 and refs.; Bahr, Symbolik des Mos. Cultus, 1835, i, 433-4.

^174:2 Schurer, Hist. of Jewish People in time of J. C. 2nd Div. Eng. tr. i, 279.

^174:3 Id. p. 299.

^174:4 Cp. Schurer, as cited, pp. 222, 230.

^174:5 Ps. xvi, 4. Cp. verse 5. In Clemens Alexandrinus (Paedagogus, ii, 2) the grape is "the Logos," and its juice is "His blood."

^174:6 See below, Part III,  section 7.

^175:1 1 Cor. x, 16, 21; xi, 26.

^175:2 Rhys Davids, Buddhism, pp. 140-1; Koeppen, Die Religion des Buddha, 1854, i, 563-4 ii, 307.

^175:3 Wellhausen, Prolegomena, Eng. tr. pp. 111-112.

^175:4 Cp. art. "The Sabbath Day," by Chilperic, in the Reformer, July, 1904, p. 442.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 12. The Eucharist in Orthodox Judaism.

That there were both orthodox and heterodox forms of a quasi-Mithraic bread-and-wine ritual among the Jews is to be gathered even from the sacred books. In the legend of the Exodus, Aaron and the elders of Israel "eat bread with Moses' father-in-law before God" [*5]--that is, twelve elders and the Anointed One or Christos eat a bread sacrament with a presumptive ancient deity, Moses himself being such. And wine would not be wanting. In the so-called Song of Moses, which repudiates a hostile God, "their Rock in which they trusted, which did eat the fat of their sacrifices, and drank the wine of their drink-offering," Yahweh also is called "our Rock"; and in an obscure passage his wine seems to be extolled. [*6] Even if the Rock in such allusions were originally the actual tombstone or altar on which sacrifices were laid and libations poured, there would be no difficulty about making it into a God with whom the worshipper ate and drank; [*7] and such an adaptation was as natural for Semites as for Aryans.

But there are clearer clues. Of the legend of Melchizedek, who gave to Abraham a sacramental meal of bread and wine, and who

[p. 176]

was "King of Peace" and "priest of El Elyon," [*1] we know that it was a subject of both canonical [*2] and extra-canonical tradition. He was fabled to have been "without father, without mother, without genealogy, having neither beginning of days nor end of life, but made like unto the Son of God." [*3] As the name meant King of Righteousness, and El Elyon was a Phoenician deity, the legend that Abraham paid him tithes tells simply of one more extra-Yahwistic cult among the Israelites; and the description cited must originally have applied to the Most High God himself. "Self-made" was a title of the Sun-Gods, [*4] and King of Righteousness a title of many Gods (not to mention Hammurabi and Buddha) as well as of Yahweh and Jesus. [*5] It is vain to ask whether the bread-and-wine ritual was connected directly with the solar worship, [*6] or with that of a King of Peace who stood for the moon, or both moon and sun; but it suffices that an extra-Israelitish myth connected with such a ritual was cherished among the dispersed Jews of the Hellenistic period. And the use made of the story of Melchizedek by Justin Martyr [*7] and Tertullian, [*8] as proving that a man could be a priest of the true God without being circumcised or observing the Jewish law, would certainly be made of it by earlier Jews of the more cosmopolitan sort.

Further, the denunciations of the prophets against the drink-offerings to other Gods did not veto a eucharist eaten and drunk in the name of Yahweh. Those denunciations to start with are a proof of the commonness of eucharists among the Jews about the exilic period. Jeremiah tells of a usage, especially popular with women, of incense-burnings and drink-offerings to the Queen of Heaven. [*9] This, as a nocturnal rite, would be a "Holy Supper." And in the last chapters of the Deutero-Isaiah [*10] we have first a combined charge of child-sacrifice and of unlawful drink-offerings against the polytheistic Israelites, and again a denunciation of those who "prepared a table for Gad (Fortune), and that fill up mingled wine unto Meni." [*11] Now, Meni, translated "Destiny," is in all

[p. 177]

likelihood simply Men the Asiatic Moon-God, who is virtually identified with Selene-Mene the Moon-Goddess in the Orphic hymns, and like her was held to be twy-sexed. [*1] In that case Meni is only another aspect of the Queen of Heaven, [*2] the wine-eucharist being, as before remarked, a lunar rite. Whether or not this Deus Lunus was then, as later, identified with Mithra, we cannot divine. It suffices that the sacrament in question was extremely widespread. [*3]

The allusion to the "mingled wine" apparently implies an objection such as we know existed in Greece to any dilution of the wine devoted to the Wine-God. There the practice was to keep unmixed the cup to the "Good Deity" (agathos daimon) Dionysos, [*4] but to mix with water that which was drunk to Zeus the Saviour, he being the rain-giver. [*5] In the worship of Yahweh, whether or not he were originally a variant of Dionysos, [*6] the priests would naturally stipulate for a drink-offering of unmixed wine, since in all likelihood they themselves consumed it, [*7] though there is a suggestion in the code that it sweetened the burnt-offering. [*8] In Philo Judaeus there is a passage which notably combines the idea of the virtue of unmixed wine with that of its mystical connection with human sacrifice:--"Who then is the chief butler of God? The priest who offers libations to him, the truly great high-priest who, having received a draught of everlasting graces, offers himself in return, pouring in an entire libation of unmixed-wine." [*9] Here, as so often

[p. 178]

elsewhere in Philo, the conception of sacrifice has become mystical; but his identification of the sacrifice with the Logos, which "pours a portion of blood" for the purposes of the bodily life; [*1] and his comparison of the celestial food of the soul to manna, which the Logos "divides in equal portions among all who are to use it, caring greatly for equality," [*2] tells of a more concrete interpretation of texts among the more normally religious.

On the other hand, as Yahweh like Zeus was the rain-giver, and good sense vetoed much drinking of the strong unmixed wine, there was no solid reason why in the Hebrew cult also the wine should not be diluted; and in the Talmud we find the act in a measure prescribed, [*3] the practice of the Ebionites and the early Christians [*4] being thus anticipated. In any case, we find the drink-offering of wine expressly connected in one--apparently interpolated--section of the priestly code [*5] with the passover feast of first-fruits and the firstling lamb; and here it is stipulated that no bread shall be eaten till the oblation has been made. Thus both as an orthodoxy and as a heresy a Holy Supper of bread and wine in connection with a symbolic sacrifice of a firstling lamb was known among the pre-Christian Israelites.

What bearing, finally, the practice may have had on the use of the sacred shew-bread of the temple remains problematic; but that the shew-bread stood for some quasi-sacramental meal is the only explanation we have of it. [*6] Concerning the twelve cakes or loaves of fine flour which were placed every sabbath day "upon the holy table before the Lord," the code prescribed that "it shall be for Aaron and his sons; and they shall eat it in a holy place; for it is most holy unto him of the offerings of the Lord." [*7] A sacrament is implied in the description. And when we remember that the oxen sacrificed at the temple of Yahweh wore crowns and had their horns gilt [*8] exactly like those sacrificed by the pagans, [*9] we are entitled to doubt whether the temple-priests did not in most other respects conform to common pagan practice. [*10] Priestly sacramental banquets

[p. 179]

of flesh and cakes we know to have been usual in Rome. [*1] Even on Judaic principles, however, the priests were likely to make of their sacred loaves--or a few of them, for they were large--a Banquet for Twelve. [*2] According to Maimonides, the daily sacrifice required thirteen priests for its performance; [*3] and on the principle that the bread and wine constituted a sacrifice, the presiding priest and twelve others would be the fit consumers. We know further that there was a dispute between the school of Shamai and that of Hillel as to the meal on the Sabbath-eve, wherein wine was drunk, the Shamaites holding that a blessing should first be asked on the day, the Hillelites putting first the wine, which consecrated the day. [*4] If, then, the loaves and the wine were eaten on the evening following the Sabbath, it would represent a pre-Christian bread-and-wine eucharist or Holy Supper of thirteen priestly persons on the Day of the Sun. In this, as in all sacraments, the God mystically joined; and if the High Priest presided there was in his person a Christos or Anointed One. [*5]

Now, we know (1) that the High-Priest officiated on the sabbaths; [*6] (2) that the retiring course of priests received six of the loaves and the incoming one the other six; [*7] and (3) that they were eaten stale, each sabbath's supply being consumed on the next sabbath. [*8] Here then was an apparent necessity for an eating of the sacred bread by the priests in the company of the High-Priest, as representing Aaron; and inasmuch as wine was forbidden to all during their period of service [*9] there is an implication that they were free to drink it when the service was over [*10]--that is, on the sabbath day, after the high-priest had officiated. [*11]

Of course the number may not have been twelve; it may have been twenty-four, the number of the courses of the priests [*12] and of the heavenly band of "elders" in the Judaeo-Christian Apocalypse; [*13]

[p. 180]

and the bread may have been eaten not with wine but with water. Either way, at least, there was a sacrament very much on the later Christian lines; and this suffices for our theory, which does not require that we should find in the very temple a close Judaic precedent for the Christian weekly supper of bread and wine. Indeed, there is a presumption that it originated, as before suggested, outside of the immediate sphere of the temple priesthood. But the fact that there was a certain precedent in the priestly practice would be a point in favour of an outside rite, which might conceivably be specialised among the Twelve Apostles of the High-Priest, whose official function is the real basis of the myth of the Twelve Apostles of Jesus. [*1] Even this hypothesis, in turn, is not essential to our theory of sacramental evolution. It suffices that beyond all question there were many Gentile precedents for the eucharist, and that its connection with the Lord's Day [*2] was quite independent of the myth of the Lord's resurrection on the first day of the week; the rite being so fixed in both its solar and its lunar connection, which was implicit in the cults of Dionysos and Mithra, both of them two-formed, and both combining the attributes of sun and moon. [*3] And as the myth of the sacrifice of the God-Man as king, and the kindred sacrament of the Lamb-God, were derived through Judaic channels, there is a presumption that the habitual rites of the first Christists came in the same way. On that view it remains to trace further the Judaic evolution.

Footnotes

^175:5 Exod. xviii, 12.

^175:6 Deut. xxxii, 31-33, 37-39.

^175:7 Cp. Jevons, Introd. to Hist. of Relig. pp. 291, 295; Prof. Kittel, Studien zur hebraischen Archaologie, 1908, 102 sq., 114 sq.

^176:1 Gen. xiv, 18.

^176:2 Cp. Ps. cx, 4.

^176:3 Heb. vii, 3. Cp. v, 6, 10; and vii, 11, 17.

^176:4 E.g., Helios and Herakles in the Orphica, viii, 3; xii, 9. Nature also is "autopator" and "without father." Id. x, 10. A Talmudic writer identifies Melchizedek with Shem (Encyc. Bib. s.v. Melchisedek). Cp. Gregorie, Works, ed. 1671, pref., for an Arabic genealogy which makes Melchisedec son of Heraclim or Phaleg.

^176:5 Ps. xlv, 6, 7; Heb. i, 8.

^176:6 According to one account, wine was never offered in the Greek worship of the Sun-God (Athenaeus, xv, 48); but in the assimilation of the cults of Apollo and Dionysos this rule was probably got over, lust as in the assimilation of those of Dionysos and Demeter wine was used, though that was originally nefas in the worship of the Corn-Goddess. Cp. Servius on Virgil, Georg. i, 344, and the discussion in Alexander ab Alexandro, Genial. Dier. ed. 1673, 1, 695-6. 705-6.

^176:7 Dialogue with Trypho, c. 19.

^176:8 Adversus Judaeos, cc. 2, 3.

^176:9 Jer. xliv, 17, 18, 25. Cp. xix, 13; xxxii, 29.

^176:10 Isa. lvii, 5-6.

^176:11 Isa. lxv, 11 (marg.).

^177:1 Orphica, ix, 1-3; Athenaeus, xiii, 71 (v. 15); Gerhard, Griechische Mythologie, 1854,  section 481, Anh.  section 1001 L.; Lenormant, Chaldean Magic, p. 133; Foucart, Des Associations religieuses chez les Grecs, pp. 26, 119; K. O. Muller, Manual of Ancient Art, Eng. tr. p. 532. See also below, Pt. III., Mithraism,  section 5. The Hebraists apparently refuse the identification because the traditional vocalisation of the word in its solitary mention in Isaiah is Meni--a very insufficient reason as against the implications of Men and Mene. In Pontus, where there was a great temple of Men of Pharnaces at Ameria, the royal oath was, "By the Fortune of the King, and by Men of Pharnaces" (Strabo, B. xii, c. iii.  section 31)--the same collocation as we find in Gad (Fortune) and Meni. The connection between the fixed recurrence of the changes of the moon and the idea of Destiny is clear in the Egyptian worship of Maat, the Measurer, and Goddess of Law (Renouf. Hibbert Lectures, 2nd ed. pp. 71-119). Dr. Cheyne (Encyc. Bib. art. FORTUNE AND DESTINY) suggests the old Arabic deity Manah or Manat (Koran, Sura, liii, 20), as to whom see Sale, Prelim. Discourse, ed. 1833, i, 40, 41. The sex of Manah is not clear, but the God seems to have been associated with bloody sacrifices, and to connect with the place Mina, still the valley of sacrifices for Moslems. There is finally a possibility that such a Manah may connect with the mythic "manna," "the bread which the Lord hath given you to eat" (Ex. xvi, 15). The Revised Version and the Kautzsch version not very plausibly decide for the reading "What is it?" as against the alternatives "It is manna" or "It is a portion," on the theory that man is a contracted Aramaic particle = What? Sayce and Lenormant tell of an Assyrian God of Destiny, Manah, but he seems a bare name.

^177:2 Cp. Kalisch, Comm. on Levit., i, 370.

^177:3 Cp. Jerome in. loc.; Spencer, De legibus Hebraeorum, ed. 1686, ii, 138-9; Selden, De Diis Syris, ed. 1680, pp. 6-8.

^177:4 Athenaeus, ii, 7, p. 38; xv, 47, 48, pp. 69.2-3. This had to be merely tasted, by reason of the strength of the unmixed wine of the ancients.

^177:5 Id. ii, 7; xv, 17, p. 675; Diodorus Siculus, iv, 3.

^177:6 Cp. Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. pp. 99.

^177:7 It was poured out at the base of the altar (Josephus, Antiq. iii, 9,  section 3; cp. Smith, Rel. of Semites, p. 213 and note); and it is extremely unlikely that the enormous quantity of, wine offered in libations was allowed to drain away as mere sewage. Cp. the tone of Joel, i, 9, 13.

^177:8 Num. xv, 7, 10. But cp. v, 24; xxviii, 7; Ex. xxix, 40. Presumably a little of the wine would be thrown on the fire or on the sacrifice,

^177:9 De Somniis, ii, 27; Yonge's translation.

^178:1 Quis haeres rer. div. c. 28.

^178:2 Id. c. 39.

^178:3 "No blessing is to be pronounced over the cup of wine, unless water has first been mixed with it. Such are the words of Rabbi Eleezer (1st c.). But the wise men are not particular." Berachoth, fol. 50, col. 1, cited by Hershon, Genesis, p. 231, n. 26.

^178:4 Cp. Justin Martyr, Apol. 1, 55-57.

^178:5 Lev. xxiii, 9-14. Verses 8 and 15 appear to have been originally in context.

^178:6 Cp, Robertson Smith, Religion of the Semites, pp. 207-8; Bahr, Symbolik des Mosaischen Cultus, 1835, i, 425-438. Gesenius (Comm. uber den Jesaja, ii, 287, cited by Bahr) decides that the table of shew-bread was simply a Lectisternium.

^178:7 Lev. xxiv, 5-9. Cp. Philo Judaeus, De Victimis, 3.

^178:8 Schurer, Hist. of the Jewish People in the time of Jesus Christ, 2nd Div. Eng. tr. i, 237.

^178:9 Porphyry, De Abstinentia, ii, 15, 60; Homer, Iliad, x, 294; Virgil, Aeneid, ix, 627. Cp. Newton, Essays in Art and Archaeology, 1880, p. 174. As to Chinese practice, see above, <page 140>.

^178:10 On pagan Lectisternia and "shew-bread" in general, cp. Bahr, as cited.

^179:1 Suetonius, Claudius, 33; Vitellius, 13.

^179:2 Cp. Bahr, as cited, p. 430. The fact that Philo (De Victimis, 3) and Josephus (Wars, v, 5,  section 5) refer the number of loaves respectively to the months and to the signs of the zodiac, suggests the presence of the same symbols in other cults; and as the twelve stones on the breastplate of the high-priest stood for the signs of the zodiac (Clem. Alex., Stromata, i, 5; Philo, De Mose. iii, 12; De Monarchia, ii, 5--cp. De Profugis, 14, where the patriarchs are divided in two ranks like the signs) there is a strong presumption that the detail came directly from Babylon, where the twelve signs represented twelve Gods (Jastrow, pp. 434, 462-3).

^179:3 Cited by Conder, Handbook to the Bible, p. 109.

^179:4 Hershon, Genesis with a Talm. Comm. p. 230, n. 11, citing Succah, fol. 56, col. 1; and Maimonides, Hilch. Shabbath, Sect. 29, Halachah 7.

^179:5 Schurer, as cited, pp. 215-216.

^179:6 Josephus, Wars, v, 5,  section 7.

^179:7 Schurer, as cited, p. 236, note, ref. to Succah, v, 7, 8. In the same way there were always six lambs ready for sacrifice. Conder, p. 110.

^179:8 Josephus, Antiq. iii, 10,  section 7.

^179:9 Ezek. xliv, 21; Lev. x, 8. Cp. Schurer, p. 278.

^179:10 This is clearly implied by Josephus, Wars, v, 5,  section 7.

^179:11 Schurer, pp. 273-4, and refs.

^179:12 Id. pp. 219, 275. Cp. Conder, p. 108.

^179:13 Rev. iv, 10, etc. This number probably came from the twenty-four "counsellor-Gods" of the Babylonian religion (Diod. Sic. ii, 31; Tiele, Hist. comp. p. 249; Gunkel, Zum religionsgeschichtlichen Verstandnis des Neuen Testaments, 1903, p. 43), where the golden tables of Bel (Herod. i, 181, 183) may have served for a lectisternium. Cp. Bahr, Symbolik des Mosaischen Cultus, i, 438.

^180:1 Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. p. 344.

^180:2 That the word Kyriakos is not a Christian coinage is now fully established. See Deissmann in Encyc. Bib. s.v. LORD'S DAY, citing his own Neue Bibelstudien, 1897, 0.44, sq., and cp. the expression kyriaken Kyrioy in the Didache, ch. 14.

^180:3 Below, Part III,  section 5; Orphica, xxx, 2, 3; xlii, 4. The double sex of Dionysos in the mysteries is often ignored by the mythologists. E.g., Preller does not give his epithets difyes and dimorfos; and Gerhard (1 451, 1) makes the latter term apply to his different ages and animal shapes.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 13. Special Features of the Crucifixion Myth.

Of the evolution of the Jewish religion between the closing of the Hebrew canon and the rise of Jesuism we know, broadly, that it consisted in (1) the establishment of the doctrine of a future life, in despite of its complete absence from the Mosaic law; (2) the development of the belief in a Messiah who should either restore the temporal power of Jewry or bring in a new religious world; (3) the growth of the idea of an only-begotten Son of God, otherwise the Word, who is alternately the nation of Israel and a God who represents it; [*4] and (4) the growth of independent sects or movements, such as that of the Essenes. Of the historical circumstances we know more. They included, as we have seen, a recurrent paganisation of portions

[p. 181]

of the priesthood; an interlude of absolute pagan domination; and finally, after a period of triumph for the traditional faith, the advent of an Idumean dynasty, far from zealous for orthodox Judaism.

During centuries of this evolution, the Jewish people tasted many times the bitterness of despair, the profound doubt denounced by the last of the prophets; and in periods in which many went openly over to Hellenism it could not be but that ancient rites of the Semitic race were revived, as some are declared to have been in earlier times of trouble. Among the rites of expiation and propitiation, as we have seen, none stood traditionally higher than the sacrifice of a king or a king's son; and such an act the Jews saw as it were performed for them when the Romans under Antony, at Herod's wish, scourged, crucified [lit. "bound to a stake"], and beheaded Antigonus, the last of the Asmonean priest-kings, in the year 37 B.C. [*1] In a reign in which two king's sons were slain by their own father, the idea would not disappear; but in so far as it held its ground as a religious doctrine it would in all likelihood do so by being reduced to ritual form, like the leading worships of the surrounding Gentile world. In the case of nearly every God who mythically died and rose again--as Osiris, Dionysos, Attis, Adonis, and Mithra--the creed of the God's power to give immortal life was maintained by a ritual sacrament, generally developed into a mystery-drama. Such a mystery-drama, however, would be at bottom a perpetuation of the latest form of the primitive rite as it had been publicly performed; and as we have seen in the gospel myth the clear trace of the ancient usage of disabling or drugging the victim to make him seem a willing sufferer, so we may infer from it that the latest public form of the human sacrifice in some Syrian communities was the sacrificing of three criminals together.

Of a sacrifice of this special number the explanation may very well be the great and then growing vogue of the number three in eastern mysticism. Among the Dravidians of India we have seen three victims sacrificed to the Sun-God. [*2] In the legendary sacrifice of Saul's sons there figured the sacred and planetary number seven, which appears also in the special "restoration feast" of the Hervey and other South Sea Islanders; [*3] in the legendary sacrifice of the kings by Joshua we have the older planetary number, five; and in

[p. 182]

western as in eastern Asia the number three might naturally have its votaries, in respect of trinitarian concepts as well as of the primary notion of "the heavens, the earth, and the underworld," with their respective Gods. [*1] There is even a hint of such possible developments in the single sacrifice of the Khonds to the Earth-Goddess, wherein the victim was kept for three days bound to a post which was often placed between two shrubs, before being finally sacrificed at a post around which were usually set up four larger posts. [*2] But there is an explanation lying in the nature and purpose of the sacrifice, which was probably the determining cause of the detail in the Syrian rite.

The tradition, we have seen, called for a king or a king's son; but a victim of royal blood was normally out of the question; and whether by consent of latitudinarian kings or high-priests, or by way of simple popular licence, the natural evolution would be that which took place in a similar connection elsewhere--the sacrificing of condemned criminals in the capacity of kings or kings' first-born sons. But, as has been already remarked, though this substitution was quite acceptable to the average mind, there was something repugnant to the higher doctrine of sacrifice in the selection of a criminal, who was morally the analogue of the blemished animal, rejected by nearly all sacrificial rituals. How then could the compulsion of such a choice be best reconciled with the purpose and spirit of the rite? By a device framed in the spirit of "sympathetic magic," which was in fact the spirit of all such rites. The sacrificers could by their ritual of mock-crowning and robing distinguish one of the malefactors from his fellows; and by calling the others what they were, while he was paraded as king, they would attain the semblance of a truly august sacrifice. If in any Jewish community, or in the Jewish quarter of any eastern city, the central figure in this rite were customarily called Jesus Barabbas, "Jesus the Son of the Father"--whether or not in virtue of an old cultus of a God Jesus who had died annually like Attis and Tammuz--we should have the basis for the tradition so long preserved in many MSS. of the first gospel, and at the same time a basis for the whole gospel myth of the crucifixion. And when we remember how the common attitude towards criminals permitted the strange survival of human sacrifice in the Thargelia at Athens, we can hardly doubt that

[p. 183]

eastern cities could on the same pretext be as conservative of ancient usage.

That such a victim should be at times chosen and freed in advance, and permitted a measure of sexual licence as well as a semblance of royal state, is quite conceivable. The usage of a year's dedication or respite seems to have been general in connection with such sacrifices, alike among Asiatics, Greeks, Polynesians, Mexicans, and American aborigines; we have seen it among Strabo's Albanians; and there are clear traces of it among the Arabs just before the time of Mohammed. [*1] At an early stage of civilisation, indulgence to a victim so situated would on many grounds be a matter of course. As we saw, indeed, Japan could secure annual victims who throughout their year of duty seem to have practised rigid abstinence, as the non-sacrificed official does to-day; but in general such altruism must have been hard to secure. In the triennial sacrifice of a beautiful girl at Bonny to the Sea-God, the victim had her every wish fulfilled, and everything she touched became her property; [*2] and among the Native Americans a captive slain to appease the spirit of a slain man of the tribe had given to him the wives or sisters of the dead man, with whom he was allowed to live for a time. Then came a sacrificial banquet, after which he was put in durance and at length ritually slain [*3] and eaten. [*4]

Perhaps the most suggestive instance of all is that of the Asvamedha [*5] or horse-sacrifice among the ancient Hindus. [*6] Concerning this the doctrine runs that kings who received from a Brahman a certain special anointing and "made the sacrifice of the horse" were thereby enabled to attain boundless conquests. [*7] With regard to the horse so sacrificed it was stipulated in the ritual that during an entire year beforehand it must be left free to wander at

[p. 184]

its will, carefully protected the while by guards set to the task. [*1] As this horse is further clearly identified with the sun, [*2] there can be little doubt that it was a substitute or equivalent for a more ancient human sacrifice to the Sun-God, and was on that account regarded as of overwhelming efficacy. [*3] Until the present century, among the Aryan Kafirs of the Hindu-Kush, a sacrifice of a horse was reckoned to have abnormal virtue, one being "occasionally, not more than once in many years," sacrificed at a certain sacred pit near the temple of Imra at the sacred village of Kstigigrom, in Presungul. [*4] So deeply fixed was the idea that among the Bataks of Sumatra, who were for a time influenced by the Hindus, the white horse is still a special offering to the higher God or Gods, though it is now as a rule devoted without being slain. In the latter case it remains permanently holy and inviolable; [*5] and among the Siberian Yakuts, who latterly are recorded to have consecrated a stallion every year, the animal, though not sacrificed, henceforth does no more work. [*6] The horse, we may note in passing, may have been in this case a totem animal. Among the negroes of Nigeria at the present day, however, not only the bullocks specially set apart for sacrifice to the governing God, but cattle in general, including sheep and goats, are treated as if sacred, and the males are eaten only at religious ceremonials. [*7] The totemistic hypothesis, therefore, is not necessary to the argument, the divinity of the victim as such being clear in any case. And sacredness in animals is not restricted to victims. In Southern India, in some parts of Ganjam, large numbers of Brahmini bulls are treated as sacred; and castes which do not copy them in giving sacred burial to a bull often set free sacred cows or calves. Among the Adivi or forest Gollas, again, "the people of every house in the village let loose a sheep, to wander whither it will, as a sort of perpetual scapegoat"; and among the Badagas a scape-calf is let loose at every funeral, to bear the sins of the deceased. Henceforth it is free, like the animals otherwise "sacred." [*8]

We are now prepared to understand that the freedom permitted to the Babylonian mock-king before the Sacaea originated, not, as

[p. 185]

has been suggested, [*1] by way of making the mock-king commit the act of technical high treason, entering the harem, but as a result of the contingent divinity of the victim in the primitive cult. The formal trial of a victim may be otherwise explained, as a primitive process of degrading a discredited priest-king. [*2] In the case of the Khonds, who had no harlots [*3] and few concubines, intercourse on the part of a destined male victim with either the wives or the daughters of the inhabitants was welcomed as a high boon, [*4] though he often had allotted to him a victim wife; and the same idea seems to have underlain the treatment of the doomed God-man in ancient Mexico. [*5] A study of these cases will suggest that in a primitive tribal state, when annual voluntary victims were otherwise hard to get, men may very well have been got to accept the role on condition of a year's quasi-regal licence. Savages notoriously set present pleasure far before future pain in their thought. And out of such a religious kingship may have separately arisen both the function of the priest-king as seen in Greece and Rome, and the phenomenon of the mock-king of the Sacaea. On this view the improbability of the annual slaying of the acting king, urged by Mr. Lang [*6] against Dr. Frazer, does not arise; while the theory fundamentally stands. What is certain is that no principle of indulgence could have been accepted in the Christian legend, arising as it did in a cultus of asceticism. But in the character of the Messiah as one who associated with publicans and sinners; in his association with women; and in the obstinate legend which, apart from the text, made Mary Magdalene--a visibly mythical character [*7]--figure as a former harlot, we may have another such survival as has been surmised to underlie the tradition of "Jesus Barabbas"; and the common belief of the early Church that the ministry of Jesus lasted for only one year [*8] may have a similar basis in the old usage. Further, as Dr. Frazer has suggested, the story of the triumphal entry into Jerusalem may preserve a tradition of a mock-royal procession for the destined victim. Even the legend of the riding on two asses, which, as has been elsewhere shown, [*9] preserves an ancient zodiacal symbol, and at the same time a myth concerning Dionysos, might have anciently figured in the procession of a God-victim of the Dionysiak type. As the zodiacal symbol stands for

[p. 186]

the autumn equinox, and the crucifixion is placed at the spring-equinox, these details would be chronologically separate; but Tammuz, like Dionysos, seems to have had two feasts; [*1] and in any case the legend was free to include different ritual episodes. Finally, the explanation of the ascription of the title of "Nazarite" to Jesus--a perplexing detail which led the redactors to frame the myth of his birth at Nazareth [*2]--may be that the Jewish victim, like the Khond, wore his hair unshorn. It would be natural that he should; the institution of the nazir, a word which means "dedicated," being an inheritance from the ancient times of common human sacrifice, and being associated with the myth of Samson, in which the shorn Sun-God is as it were sacrificed to himself.

We have now followed our historic clues far enough to warrant a constructive theory. Indeed, it frames itself when we colligate our main data. As thus:--

1. In the slaying of the Kronian victim at Rhodes we have an ancient Semitic [*3] human sacrifice maintained into the historic period, by the expedient of taking as annual victim a criminal already condemned to death.

2. In Semitic mythology, Kronos, "whom the Phoenicians call Israel," sacrifices his son Ieoud, "the only," after putting upon him royal robes.

3. The feast of Kronos is the Saturnalia, in which elsewhere a mock-king plays a prominent part; and as Kronos was among the Semites identified with Moloch = "King," [*4] the victim would be ostensibly either a king or a king's son. A trial and degradation were likely accessories.

4. Supposing the victim in the Rhodian Saturnalia to figure as Ieoud, he would be ipso facto Barabbas, "the son of the father"; and in the terms of the case he was a condemned criminal. At the same time, in terms of the myth, he would figure in royal robes.

5. In any case, the myth being Semitic, it is morally certain that among the many cases of human sacrifice in the Graeco-Semitic world the Rhodian rite was not unique. And as the name "Ieoud," besides signifying "the only," was virtually identical with the Greek and Hebrew names for Judah (son of "Israel") and Jew (Yehuda,

[p. 187]

[paragraph continues] Ioudaios), it was extremely likely, among the Jews of the Dispersion, to be regarded as having special application to their race, which in their sacred books actually figured as the Only-Begotten Son of the Father-God, and as having undergone special suffering.

6. That the Rhodian rite, Semitic in origin, was at some points specially coincident with Jewish conceptions of sacrifice, is proved by the detail of leading the prisoner outside the city gates. This is expressly laid down in the Epistle to the Hebrews, [*1] as a ritual condition of the sacrificial death of Jesus.

The case, of course, is not staked on any assumption that the Rhodian rite was the exact historical antecedent of the Jesuist rite as preserved in the gospels. That the Jews had much traffic with Rhodes maybe gathered from Josephus's account of Herod's relations with the place; [*2] but we are not committed to the view that the Jews had any hand in the Rhodian sacrifice ritual, or that the gospel myth followed that. So far as the records go, the coincidence is incomplete, since (1) the Rhodian Saturnalia was a June or July festival, and thus disparate from the Passover; and (2) there is no hint of a triple execution. But it suffices, firstly, that we have here a clear case of a variant from a type to which the Christian crucifixion-ritual belongs; and, secondly, that the Rhodian rite further points to the decisive development which we have yet to trace in the case of the gospel story. For Porphyry incidentally mentions that the Rhodian sacrifice, after having subsisted long, had latterly been modified (meteblethe). As to the precise nature of the modification we have no further knowledge; but we are entitled to conclude that it was either a simple rite of mock-sacrifice or a mystery-drama. Both stages, indeed, would be natural, the step to the latter being dependent on the connection of the rite with a eucharist. But the essential point is that in this case--the memory of which is preserved, like so many items in our knowledge of ancient life, by an incidental sentence in a treatise to which the subject was barely relevant--we have exactly the kind of transition from actual human sacrifice to a conventional rite of mock-sacrifice which our theory implies. And seeing that the actual sacrifice was once normal in the Semitic world, there can be little doubt that the cases and modes of modification were many.

Meantime, the bearing of such a development on our total problem is obvious. We have traced on the one hand a Semitic and probably Israelitish tradition of an annually (or periodically) sacrificed

[p. 188]

victim, "Jesus the Son of the Father," and seen reason to surmise the contact of dispersed Jews with such a rite in Hellenistic eastern towns. On the other hand we have traced a Jewish bread-and-wine eucharist, which we find emerging in documentary knowledge in the pre-Christian eucharist of the "Teaching of the Twelve Apostles," with the name of Jesus attached to a strictly Judaic personage of quasi-divine status, not said to be crucified or otherwise sacrificed. Of these forms of doctrine and rite there took place a fusion, forming the historic Christian cultus. Of such a fusion, the most likely and most intelligible means would be the mystery-drama, whose existence has now to be demonstrated. But first we have to note certain historic possibilities on which the fusion might partly depend.

Footnotes

^180:4 Ps. ii, 6, 7, 12; lxxxix, 26, 27; Heb. i, 2-12.

^181:1 Dio Cassius, xlix, 22. Cp. note in Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. p. 364. It is almost certain that Josephus would suppress such a detail if he knew it; but if the detail in Dio be doubted on the score of his lateness, it would still point to a tradition of king-crucifying.

^181:2 Above, <page 115>.

^181:3 J. Williams, Narrative of Missionary Enterprises, 1837, p. 549. The feast in question was one of re-sanctification, after an invasion.

^182:1 Thus the Assyrian temples had sometimes three terraces, for the Gods of the "three worlds"; sometimes five, for the five planets; and sometimes seven, for the planets and sun and moon. Tiele, Outlines, p. 75.

^182:2 Macpherson, Memorials, pp. 118, 127.

^183:1 Pococke, Specimen Histor. Arab., 1650, p. 72, citing Al Meidani and Ahmed Ebn Yusef; Sale, Preliminary Discourse to the Koran, 1883, pp. 44-45. Cp. Robertson Smith, Rel. of the Semites, pp. 343-4, as to the experience of Nilus among the Sinaitic Arabs in the fourth century. A variation in respect of time occurs among the Khonds in the sacrifice of the buffalo to Boora Pennu as a divinely ordained surrogate for the human victim. It is "consecrated at its birth and allowed to range at will over all fields and pastures until five or six years old." When it is to be sacrificed, a crowd of men fasten ropes to its neck and hind legs and rush about with it till it is brought exhausted to the sacrificial tree, "when the priest declares its submission to be a miracle." Macpherson, Memorials, p. 108. Cp. Crooke, Folk-Lore of N. W. India, i, 173, as to drugged animal victims.

^183:2 J. Smith, Trade and Travels in the Gulph of Guinea, 1851, pp. 60, 68.

^183:3 Lafitau, Moeurs des sauvages ameriquains, 1724, ii, 295 sq. Cp. pp. 308-9,

^183:4 Id. pp. 303-4.

^183:5 Otherwise the Ashummeed Jugg. See an account of a late form of the rite in Halhed's Code of Gentoo Laws, ed. 1777, ch. iii, sect. ix, p. 112. It figures prominently in the Ramayana, where, however, it is not always efficacious. Cp. i, 10-13 with i, 40-43. It should be noted that the French trans. of the Ramayana by Fauche is excessively abridged; and that his account of the Asvamedha (p. 5) does not accord with that in the Italian trans. by Gorresio.

^183:6 This is said to be "a custom in its origin essentially Turanian or Scythian." (R. W. Frazer, Lit. Hist. of India, 1898, p. 242.)

^183:7 Senart, Essai sur la legende de Buddha, 2e edit. p. 66.

^184:1 Id. p. 69.

^184:2 Id. pp. 72-73.

^184:3 In the Mahabharata (ii, 524 sq. cited by Senart, pp. 66-67) there is mention of a tyrant who, like Joshua, sacrifices kings to the Supreme God.

^184:4 Sir G. S. Robertson, The Kafirs of the Hindu-Kush, ed. 1899, p. 393.

^184:5 Warneck, Die Religion der Batak, 1909, p. 7. Cp. p. 4.

^184:6 Erman, Travels in Siberia, Eng. tr. 1848, p. 410. This, it should be noted, is an Arab usage. By old Arab law camels which had attained certain degrees of fertility were turned loose and exempted from all service. No less than four usages of this kind--Bahira, Saiba, Wasila, and Hami--are specified. Sale, Prelim. Disc. to Koran, ed. 1833, i, 135-7.

^184:7 Major Glyn Leonard, The Lower Niger and its Tribes, 1906, pp. 199, 200, 402.

^184:8 Thurston, Castes and Tribes, i, 116; ii, 161-2, 287.

^185:1 By Mr. Lang, Magic and Religion, p. 198.

^185:2 Grant Allen, Evol. of Idea of God, pp. 235, 311, 385.

^185:3 The female victims seem at times to have had promiscuous relations. See Reclus, Primitive Folk, as above cited.

^185:4 Macpherson, Memorials, p. 116.

^185:5 See below, Part III.

^185:6 Magic and Religion, p. 102.

^185:7 Cp. Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. pp. 297-302.

^185:8 Cp. Baur, Church History, Eng, tr. i, 41, note.

^185:9 Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. pp. 338-41.

^186:1 Jastrow, Religion of Babylonia and Assyria, p. 484.

^186:2 Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. pp. 311-18.

^186:3 As to the Phoenician origins of Rhodian religion cp. Duncker, Gesch. des Alterthums, 2te Aufl. iii, 163, 229, 380, 384; Meyer, Gesch. des Alt. i,  section section 191, 192; Busolt, Griech. Gesch. 1885, i, 172.

^186:4 Selden, De Diis Syris, Syntag. i, c. 6; Duncker, Gesch. des Alterthums, 2te Aufl. iii, 331, note; Smith, Rel. of Semites, p. 355; Tiele, Outlines, p. 209. Cp. J. Spencer, De legibus Hebraeorum, 1. ii, c. 10.

^187:1 Ch. xiii, 12. Cp. Robertson Smith, as cited, pp. 352-6.

^187:2 Wars, i, 14,  section 3; 20, section1; 21,  section 11.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 14. Possible Historical Elements.

One concrete feature in the crucifixion myth remains to be accounted for--the scourging. Mr. Lang presses this feature of the Sacaea as an argument against the view that the victim died as representing a God. [*1] In reality, the assumption that sacrificed victims were never scourged is no better founded than the assertion that they were never hanged. The human victims in several Asiatic Greek rites were whipped before being sacrificed. [*2] Scourging, besides, actually took the place of human sacrifice, by tradition, in certain Greek cults; the scourging (which at times was fatal) being accepted as a sacrificial act. [*3] The deity specially connected with such acts of scourging was Artemis, concerning the Asiatic savageries of whose cultus we have the disgusted testimony of Plutarch; [*4] and it is noteworthy that the Rhodian victim had been slain near the temple of Aristobula [*5]--a name of Artemis, [*6] who is thus in late as in early times connected with human sacrifice. [*7] It is therefore not unlikely that, when the Rhodian rite was modified, scourging was substituted as a means of obtaining at least the sacrifice of blood; and when the rite reached the stage of a mystery-drama, that detail would naturally be preserved.

[p. 189]

It is to be remembered, however, that the original principle of such scourging may be independent of any act of substitution. It is partly indicated in the Khond doctrine in connection with the rite of slow burning--that the more tears the victim shed the more abundant would be the rain. Here indeed there is a plain conflict between two sacrificial principles, that of the symbolism of the victim's acts and that of his willingness. But both principles are known to have existed, some of the Khonds and the Aztecs attaching importance to the tears shed by the victims, while the Carthaginians sought to drown the cries of their children, and the mothers were forbidden to weep. [*1] In the case of the original human sacrifice on the Jewish Day of Atonement, as we have seen,' [*2] there was a ritual act of weeping, and perhaps one of scourging; and we have no ground for doubting that scourging could take place.

But there was a ritual need for blood as well as tears. It is noted that in the human sacrifices of Polynesia the victims were rarely much mutilated, but were always made to bleed much; [*3] and a perfect obsession of blood pervades the whole Judaic religion, down to the end of the New Testament. In the "hanging unto the Lord" of the sons of Saul, indeed, there was ostensibly no bloodshed; but Joshua is declared to have "smitten" the five kings before he hanged them. The "sin-offering" too was one of blood; and a blood sacrifice was the normal one in all nations. [*4] Scourging would yield the blood without making the victim incapable of enduring the hanging or crucifixion; and in the gospel record that the doomed God sweated as it were drops of blood [*5] we may have a further concession to the idea. Finally, there is the possibility that, as in the case of the victims in the Asiatic Thargelia and other festivals, who were ceremonially whipped before being put to death, the scourging belonged to the conception of the scapegoat, who thus as well as by banishment bore the people's sins. [*6]

In these various ways, then, we can comprehend the gradual evolution of a ritual with which could be associated on the one hand a belief in a national deliverer, and on the other hand a general doctrine of salvation and immortality. The idea of the resurrection of the slain God is extremely ancient: we have it in the myths of Osiris and of the descent of Ishtar into Hades to rescue Tammuz;

[p. 190]

and in the Syro-Greek form of the cult, the resurrection of Adonis was a chief feature of the great annual ritual. So with the other cults already mentioned. From the God, the concept of resurrection was extended to the worshippers, this long before the Christian era. It needed only that the doctrines of divine sacrifice, resurrection, and salvation, temporal or eternal, should be thus blended in a mystery ritual with the institution of a eucharist or holy sacrament, to constitute the foundation of the religion of Jesus the Christ as we have it in the gospels.

That a mystery-drama actually existed, and was the basis of the gospel narrative, will be shown in the next section. But in passing it may be well to note that certain features of the crucifixion myth, though fairly explicable on the lines above sketched, may be due to contemporary analogies from other rites or from actual occurrences. The posture of the victim in the traditional crucifix, which we shall see some reason for ascribing to a ritual in which the worshipper embraces a cross, may on the other hand derive from the Perso-Scythian usage of slaying a "messenger" to the God, flaying him, and stuffing his skin with the arms outstretched. [*1] This sacrifice, indeed, has obvious analogies to that of the "ambassador" in the old Jewish rite above traced; [*2] and in both cases the idea of the cross-form may derive from the fact that in the gesture-language and picture-writing of savages, which are probably primeval, that is the recognised attitude and symbol of the ambassador or "go-between." [*3] Or the cross-form may connect with some other principle involved in the Semitic representation of the Sun-God with arms outstretched, [*4] which probably underlies the myth of the outstretching of the arms of Moses. [*5] On the whole, seeing that the Phoenician symbol of a figure with outstretched arms is found to derive historically from the Egyptian crux ansata, [*6] which was certainly an emblem of salvation, [*7] we are entitled to conclude that from time immemorial the posture of the cross had had a religious significance, partly of expiation, partly of beneficence, and that this general significance surrounded the Christian myth.

[p. 191]

Yet again, the repetition of the offer of a drink to the victim, or the mention of gall in that connection, might be motived by the example of the mysteries of Demeter, in which there figured a drink of gall. [*1] Whatever were the original meaning of that detail, it might be added to that of a narcotic used as above explained. It has been elsewhere shown, too, that such a detail as the crown of thorns might conceivably stand for the nimbus of the Sun-God, or for the crown placed upon the heads of sacrificial victims in general, [*2] or for the crown which was worn by human victims in such a sacrificial procession as is to be inferred from Herodotus' story of Herakles in Egypt, or for the actual crowns of thorns which were in vogue for religious purposes in the district of Abydos, or for some other ritual practice which is sought to be explained by the myth of the mock-crown of Herakles [*3] No limit can well be set to the possibility of such analogies from pagan religious practice.

Actual or alleged history, too, may have given rise to some details in a mystery-ritual such as we are considering. In the gospel story as it now stands, though not as an original and dramatic detail in it, we find one remarkable coincidence with a passage in Josephus. The historian tells [*4] that during the Passover feast, while Jerusalem was being besieged, "the eastern gate of the inner sanctuary, which was of brass and very solid, which in the evening was with difficulty shut by twenty men, and which was supported by iron-bound bars and posts reaching far down, let into the floor of solid stone, was seen about the sixth hour of the night to have

[p. 192]

opened of its own accord"; and that this was felt by the wise to be an omen of ruin. In the synoptics it is told that after the robbers taunted Jesus, "from the sixth hour darkness was over the land till the ninth hour," whereupon Jesus uttered his cry of Eli, Eli, and immediately afterwards, "having again cried with a loud voice, gave up his spirit. And lo, the veil of the temple was rent in two from top to bottom." The three hours of darkness, it would appear, are alleged in order to give time for the passover meal, by way of assimilating the synoptic account to the Johannine. In the second gospel--in an apparently interpolated passage--Jesus is crucified at "the third hour": in the fourth, "it was Preparation of the Passover: it was about the sixth hour" when Jesus is sent to be crucified; and on that view his death would be consummated when the Passover sacrament was--the gospel, however, giving no further details. The space of silent suffering in the synoptics, from the sixth hour to the ninth, makes the stories finally correspond as to the hours, though not as to the day. In the third gospel, however, the reading is confused by the placing of the sentence: "And the sun was darkened, and the veil of the temple was rent in the midst," after the mention of the three hours' darkness and before the Lord's death. Thus, while the actual time of the veil-rending is loft in the vague, the passage can be read as saying that the veil was rent when the darkness began, at the sixth hour.

In any case, whether or not the darkness of three hours is a late modification of the synoptic text (on which view the death may be held to have been originally placed at the sixth hour, and the rending of the temple veil at the same moment), the story in Josephus is extremely likely to have been the motive of the veil-rending myth in the gospels. It actually did lead to the insertion of a gloss in an early text--perhaps originally Syriac--of the third gospel, where the stone placed at the mouth of the Lord's tomb is alleged to be such that twenty men could hardly roll it away; and in the existing old Syriac texts, significantly enough, it is the "front of the gate" of the sanctuary or temple that is rent in the gospel story--not the veil. [*1] And the parallel does not end here. The story of the rising of the saints, so awkwardly interpolated in the first gospel and in that only, is no less clearly an adaptation of the story of Josephus, in the same passage, to the effect that at the feast of Pentecost the priests when serving by night in the inner temple felt a quaking,

[p. 193]

and heard a great noise, and then a sound as of a multitude saying: "Let us remove hence." The whole series of portents in Josephus, as it happens, winds up with the story of Jesus the son of Ananus, who had so long "with a loud voice" cried "Woe to Jerusalem," and at last was slain by a stone from an engine, crying "Woe to myself also" as he gave up the ghost.

In view of such a remarkable suggestion to the early Jesuists, it seems unnecessary even to ask whether the myth of the veil-rending may be a variant popularly current at the same time with those given by Josephus. In all likelihood the interpolators of the Greek gospel modified both episodes in order either to escape contradiction or to make them more suitable symbolically. [*1] That they were interpolated after the transcription of the mystery-play we shall see when we consider that as such; but for the present we have to recognise that if the transcribed narrative could be thus influenced, the play itself might be.

The scourging and crucifixion of Antigonus, again, must have made a profound impression on the Jews; [*2] and it is a historic fact that the similar slaying of the last of the Incas was kept in memory for the Peruvians by a drama annually acted. [*3] It may be that the superscription "This is the King of the Jews," and even the detail of scourging, [*4] came proximately from the story of Antigonus; though on the other hand it is not unlikely that Antony should have executed Antigonus on the lines of the sacrifice of the mock-king. But it is noteworthy that where the existing mystery-drama, which was doubtless a Gentile development from a much simpler form, introduces historical characters, it does so on the clear lines of sacrificial principle set forth in the ritual of the Khonds, where already the symbol of the cross is prominent in the fashion of slaying the victim. Though the Gentile hostility to the Jews [*5] would dictate the special implication of the Jewish priests and people, and of King Herod as in the third gospel, the total effect is to make it clear that the guilt of the sacrifice rests on no one official, but is finally taken by the whole people upon them. Even the quotation put in the mouth of the dying God-Man, "My God, My God, why hast thou forsaken me?" [*6] has the effect of implying that he had hitherto suffered voluntarily. Thus does the ritual which was to grow into a world religion preserve in its consummated quasi-historical form the primeval

[p. 194]

principle that "one man should die for the people" by the people's will; and, as we have seen, not even in extending the benefit of the sacrifice to "all mankind" does the great historic religion outgo the religious psychology of the ancient Dravidians.

When this is realised it will be seen to be unnecessary to suppose that any abnormal personality had arisen to give the cult its form or impetus. In view, however, of the story fortuitously preserved in the Talmud, that one Jesus ben Pandira was stoned and hanged on a tree at Lydda on the eve of the Passover in the reign of Alexander Jannaeus about 100 B.C., [*1] we are not entitled to say that a real act of sacerdotal vengeance did not enter into the making of the movement. The evidence is obscure; and the personality of the hanged Jesus, who is said to have been a sorcerer and a false teacher, becomes elusive and quasi-mythical even in the Talmud; but even such evidence gives better ground for a historical assumption than the supernaturalist narrative of the gospels. [*2] In any case, there is no reason to ascribe any special doctrinal teaching whatever to Jesus ben Pandira. He remains but a name, with a mention of his death by "hanging on a tree," a quasi-sacrifice, at the time of the sacrificial rite which had anciently been one of man-slaying and child-slaying. Leaving the case on that side undetermined, we turn to a problem which admits of solution.

Footnotes

^188:1 Magic and Religion, p. 131.

^188:2 Frazer, G. B. ii, 126-7.

^188:3 The bloody scourging of young Spartans at the altar of Artemis (Pausinias, iii, 16; Philostratus, Life of Apollonius, vi, 20; Cicero, Tusculans, ii, 14; Lucian, De Gymnast. c 38; Plutarch, Lycurgus, c. 17) is one of the best known cases. As to the principle of human sacrifice behind the scourging cp. K. O. Muller, Dorians, B. ii, c. ix,  section 6. Cicero and Lucian tell of the occasional fatal results. In Mexico, finally, the Tlascalans in one festival fixed a victim to a low cross and killed him by bastinado. Clavigero, Hist. of Mexico, Eng. tr. 1807, vi,  section 20 (1, 283).

^188:4 De Superstitione, 10.

^188:5 Porphyry, as cited.

^188:6 The title of "good counsel" suggests the better side of the Goddess, yet we find that the temple built by Themistokles to Aristobula at Melite was "at the place where at the present day the public executioner casts out the bodies of executed criminals and the clothes and ropes of men who have hanged themselves." Plutarch, Themistokles, 22.

^188:7 Herodotus, iv, 103.

^189:1 Plutarch, De Superstitione, 13.

^189:2 Above, <page 159>.

^189:3 Moerenhout, Voyage aux Iles du Grand Ocean, i, 508.

^189:4 Cp. Kalisch, Comm. on Leviticus, i, 341-3.

^189:5 On this cp. Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. p. 362.

^189:6 Cp. Dr. Frazer's view (iii, 122-7) that the scourging was supposed to expel evil influences from the victim. Prof. Murray (Rise of the Greek Epic, pp. 13-14, and App. A) argues that there is no evidence for actual slaying in historic times.

^190:1 Below, ch. ii,  section 14.

^190:2 Above, pp. <page 159>-60.

^190:3 I have before me an extracted magazine article, undated, in which the symbol is reproduced and so explained.

^190:4 See the figures reproduced by Gesenius, Script. Ling. Phoen. Monumenta, 1837, Pt. III, Tabb. 21, 24 (inscriptions translated i, 197, 211), and in the Transactions of the Royal Asiatic Society, III, Pt. iii, pl. 23. Cp. Peitschmann, Geschichte der Phonizier, 1889, pp. 205, 214. One is that of Baal Ammon, with arms outstretched, holding in his hand the holy tree.

^190:5 Exod. xvii, 11-12.

^190:6 Meyer, art. PHoeNICIA, in Encyc. Biblica, iii, 3739; Geschichte des Alterthums, i, 242.

^190:7 It had further the hieroglyphic force of "good," and was at the same time a name of Osiris--"Onofri"--which survives in that of the Christian saint Onophrius, constructed out of the God. Cp. Champollion, Precis die systeme hieroglyphique, 1821, Tab. gen. figg. 441-2: expl. p. 44; Sharpe, Egypt. Mythol. pp. 53-4; Meyer, Gesch. des Alt. i, 30; Tiele, Egypt. Rel. pp. 42, 44, note.

^191:1 Such symbolical explanations may in certain cases be substituted for those offered by Dr. Frazer, whose Virgilian "golden bough," to start with, is shown by Mr. Lang to be very imperfectly identified with the bough of the tree in the Arician grove. Mr. Lang, who is apt to be severe on loose conjectures, for his own part "hazards a guess" that "of old, suppliants approached gods or kings with boughs in their hands," and that the Virgilian bough is such a propitiation to Persephone (Magic and Religion, pp. 207-8). Though the "gold" might plausibly be thus explained, it does not follow that the wool-wreathed boughs of suppliant groups, which played the part of our white flags (Aeschylus, Supplices, 22-3, 190-2, etc.), were normally used in approaching kings, or all Gods. In Polynesia boughs were indeed presented to certain Gods (Ellis, i, 343), and were carried before chiefs, serving also as peace symbols or "white flags" (Turner, Nineteen Years in Polynesia, 1861, p. 314). But, on the other hand, boughs in the ancient world had a special connection with Gods and Goddesses of vegetation (Cp. Grant Allen, Evol. of Idea of God, p. 384), who were first and last Gods of the Underworld (Cp. Aesch. Supplices, 154-161). It was doubtless in this connection that a branch became in Egypt a symbol of time and of eternity (Tiele, Eg. Rel., p. 154). The explanation of the Virgilian bough, then, probably lies in that direction. It is not known." says Mr. Lang, "whether Virgil invented his bough, or took it from his rich store of antiquarian learning" (Id. p. 207). It is extremely unlikely that he should have invented it. But he might very well know that in one of the paintings of Polygnotus at Delphi (Pausanias, x, 30) Orpheus is represented as touching with his hand a branch of the willow-tree, which in Homer (Odyssey, x, 509-510) grows with the poplar in the grove of Persephone. Orpheus had been in Hades and returned. May not the bough then have had this general symbolical significance, and hence figure as a passport to the underworld?

^191:2 Even the Cimbri, whose priestesses cut the throats of their devoted human victims, crowned them beforehand (Strabo, vii, 2,  section 3). Similarly the North American Indians. Lafitau, ii, 266.

^191:3 Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. pp. 365-6. See also pp. 364, 369 sq., as to the clues for the cross-motive.

^191:4 Wars, B. vi, c. v,  section 3.

^192:1 Dr. F. H. Chase, The Syro-Latin Text of the Gospels, 1895, pp. 82-67, 95. Jerome, again, tells that in the Gospel according to the Hebrews it is not the veil of the temple that is rent, but the lintel stone that falls. Comm. in Matt. xxvii, 51; Ad Hedyb. viii.

^193:1 On either view, it remains arguable that the Syriac Gospels here represent an earlier text than the present Greek.

^193:2 Cp. Strabo, in Josephus, Antiq. xv, 1,  section 2.

^193:3 Below, Part IV,  section 9.

^193:4 See above, <page 117>, as to the scourgings mentioned by Josephus.

^193:5 Cp. Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. p. 354.

^193:6 Psalm xxii, 1.

^194:1 Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. pp. 363-4.

^194:2 Dr. J. E. Carpenter (First Three Gospels, 3rd ed. p. 312) indignantly cites this proposition with the remark that it erects one passage of the Talmud "into an authority before which the gospels must vanish." Such language hides the issue. Historically, the supernaturalist narrative of the gospels has no authority for critical science. Professor Schmiedel reduces their scientific authority to nine texts, which, however, will not meet the tests he admits to be applicable. See App. to Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. Dr. Carpenter appears to wish to suggest that I take any Talmudic story as a disproof of any analogous story in the gospels--a complete misrepresentation. The gospel stories are historically unacceptable apart from any Talmudic evidence.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 15. The Gospel Mystery-Play.

It is not disputed that one of the most marked features of the popular religions of antiquity, in Greece, Egypt, and Greek-speaking Asia, was the dramatic representation of the central episodes in the stories of the suffering and dying Gods and Goddesses. Herodotus has been charged with pretending to knowledge that he did not possess; but there is no reason to doubt his assertion [*3] that on the artificial circular lake at Sais the Egyptians were wont to give by night--presumably once a year--representations of the sufferings of a certain one whom he will not name, which representations they called mysteries. The certain one in question we know must have been the God Osiris; [*4] and that the sufferings and death of Osiris

[p. 195]

were dramatically represented, modern Egyptology has freshly established from hieroglyphic documents. [*1] We, know, too, from the concluding rubric of the "Lamentations of Isis and Nephthys for Osiris that those Goddesses were personated in the ritual by two beautiful women. [*2]

In the worships of Adonis and of Attis there was certainly a dramatic representation of the dead God by effigy, and of his resurrection; [*3] and in the mysteries of Mithra, as given among the Greeks, there appears to have been included a representation of the burial of a stone effigy of the God, in a rock tomb, and of his resurrection. [*4] So, in the great cult of Dionysos, with whose worship were connected the beginnings of tragedy among the Greeks, there was a symbolic representation of the dismemberment of the young God by the Titans, this being part of the sacrament of his body and blood; [*5] and in the special centres of the worship of Herakles, or at least at one of them, Tarsus, there was annually erected in his worship a funeral pyre, on which his effigy--but sometimes a man--was burned. [*6] The same motive is worked out in the Trachiniae of Sophocles. Among the Greeks, again, a dramatic representation of the myth of the loss of Persephone, the mourning of her mother Demeter, and her restoration, was the central attraction in the Eleusinian mysteries; and the return of Persephone was separately dramatised. [*7]

Of all those mysteries the mythological explanation is doubtless the same: they mostly originated in primitive sacrificial rituals to represent the annual death of vegetation, and to charm it into returning; and in the cult of Mithra, who, like Herakles, is specifically a Sun-God, there may have been an adaptation from the rites of the Vegetation-Gods. In the later stages the magic which had been supposed to revive vegetation is applied to securing the life of the initiate in the next world. We are not here concerned, however, with the origin of the usage. For our purpose it suffices

[p. 196]

us to know that such rites were rites of "salvation," and that they were the most popular in ancient religion. [*1]

As Christism first became popular by the development or adaptation of myths and ritual usages like those of the popular pagan systems, notably the Birth-myth, the Holy Supper, and the Resurrection, it might be expected that it should imitate paganism in the matter of dramatic mysteries. The mere Supper ritual, indeed, is itself dramatic, the celebrant personating the God as Attis was personated by his priest; [*2] and in the remarkable expression in the Pauline epistle to the Galatians (iii, 1)--"before whose eyes Jesus Christ was openly set forth crucified"--we have probably a record of an early fashion of imaging the crucifixion. [*3] In the same document (vi, 17) is the phrase, "I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus"; and various other expressions in the epistles, describing the devotee as mystically crucified and as having become one with the crucified Lord, suggest that in the early stages of the cult it dramatically adopted the apparently dramatic teaching of the Egyptian Book of the Dead, wherein the saved and Osirified soul declares: "I clasp the sycamore tree; I myself am joined unto the sycamore tree, and its arms are opened unto me graciously"; [*4] and again: "I have become a divine being by the side of the birth-chamber of Osiris; I am brought forth with him, I renew my youth." [*5] In the fifth century, we know, mystery-plays were performed either in or in connection with the churches; [*6] and the identity between the birth-story and several pagan dramatic rituals is too close to be missed. [*7] But apart from the parallels above indicated the dramatic origination of the story of the Christ's Supper, Passion, Betrayal, Trial, and Crucifixion, as it now stands, has yet to be established. The proof, however, I submit, lies, and has always lain, before men's eyes in the actual gospel narrative.

[p. 197]

[paragraph continues] It is the prepossessions set up by age-long belief that have prevented alike believers and unbelievers from seeing as much.

Let the reader carefully peruse the story of the series of episodes as they are given in their least sophisticated form, in the gospels of Matthew and Mark. From Matthew xxvi, 17, or 20, it will be noted, the narrative is simply a presentment of a dramatic action and dialogue; and the events are huddled one upon another exactly as happens in all drama that is not framed with a special concern for plausibility. In many plays of Shakespeare, notably in Measure for Measure, [*1] there occurs such a compression of incidents in time, the reason being precisely the nature of drama, which, whether or not it holds theoretically by the unities, must for practical reasons minimise change of scene and develop action rapidly. Even in the Hedda Gabler of Ibsen, the chief master of modern drama, this exigency of the conditions leads the dramatist in the last act to the startling step of making the friends of the suicide sit down to prepare his manuscripts for the press within a few minutes of his death. To realise fully the theatrical character of the gospel story, it is necessary to keep in view this characteristic compression of the action in time, as well as the purely dramatic content. The point is not merely that the compression of events proves the narrative to be pure fiction, but that they are compressed for a reason--the reason being that they are presented in a drama.

As the story stands, Jesus partakes with his disciples of the Passover, an evening meal; and after a very brief dialogue they sing a hymn, and proceed in the darkness to the mount of Olives. Not a word is said of what happened or was said on the way: the scene is simply changed to the mount; and there begin a new dialogue and action. A slight change of scene--again effected with no hint of any talk on the way--is made to Gethsemane; and here the scanty details as to the separation from "his disciples," and the going apart with the three, indicate with a brevity obviously dramatic the arrangement by which Judas--who was thus far with the party--would on the stage be enabled to withdraw. Had the story been first composed for writing, such an episode would necessarily have been described; and something would naturally have been said of the talk on the way from the supper-chamber to the mount. What we are reading is the bare transcript of a primitive play, in which the writer has not here attempted to insert more than has been shown on the scene.

[p. 198]

In the Passion scene, this dramatic origination of the action is again twice emphasised. Thrice over Jesus prays while his disciples sleep. There is thus no one present or awake to record his words--an incongruity which could not well have entered into a narrative originally composed for reading, where it would have been a gratuitous invention, but which on the stage would not be a difficulty at all, since there the prayer would be heard and accepted by the audience, like a soliloquy in an inartistic modern play. No less striking is the revelation made in verses 45 and 46, where in two successive sentences, with no pause between, Jesus tells the sleeping three to sleep on and to arise. What has happened is either a slight disarrangement of the dialogue or the omission of an exit and an entrance. Verse 44 runs: "And he left them again, and went away, and prayed a third time, saying again the same words." If verse 45, from the second clause onwards, were inserted before verse 44--where, as the text stands, Jesus says nothing--and verse 46 introduced with "and saith unto them" immediately after the first clause of verse 45, the incongruity would be removed. Only in transcription from a dramatic text could it have arisen.

Then, without the slightest account of what he had been doing in the interim, Judas enters the scene exactly as he would on the stage, with his multitude, "while he [Jesus] yet spake." With an impossible continuity, the action goes on through the night, a thing quite unnecessary in any save a dramatic fiction, where unity of time--that is, the limitation of the action within twenty-four hours, or little more, as prescribed by Aristotle [*1]--was for the ancients a ruling principle. Jesus is taken in the darkness to the house of the high-priest, "where the scribes and the elders were gathered together." The disciples meanwhile had "left him and fled," and not a word is said as to what they did in the interim; though any account of the episode, in the terms of the tradition concerning them, must have come through them.

But it is needless to insist on the absolutely unhistorical character of a narrative which makes the whole judicial process take place in the middle of the night, a time when, as Renan notes, an Eastern city is as if dead. The point is that the invention is of a kind obviously conditioned by a dramatic purpose. In the dead of night the authorities proceed to hunt up "false witnesses" throughout

[p. 199]

[paragraph continues] Jerusalem, because the witnesses must be produced in the trial scene as closely as possible on that of the capture; and the process goes on till two give the requisite testimony. Then Jesus is questioned, condemned, buffeted, and (presumably) led away; and Peter, remaining on the scene, denies his lord and is convicted of treason by the crowing of the cock. Of what happens to the doomed God-Man in this interval there is not a hint; though it is just here that a non-dramatic narrative would naturally follow him most closely.

Morning has thus come, and "when morning was come" the priests and elders, who thus have had no rest, "take counsel" afresh to put Jesus to death, and lead him away, bound, to Pilate. But this evidently happens off the scene, since we have the interlude in which Judas brings back his thirty pieces of silver, is repudiated by the priests, and goes away to hang himself. The story of the potter's field is obviously a later writer's interpolation in the narrative. An original narrator, telling a story in a natural way, would have given details about Judas: the interpolator characteristically wants to explain that "Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremiah the prophet."

As usual, not a word is said of the details of the transit from place to place: the scene simply changes all at once to the presence of the Governor; and here, with not a single touch of description such as an original narrator might naturally give, we plunge straight into dialogue. Always we are witnessing drama, of which the spectators needed no description, and of which the subsequent transcriber reproduces simply the action and the words, save in so far as he is absolutely forced to insert a brief explanation of the Barabbas episode. The rest of the trial scene, and the scene of the mock crowning and robing, are strictly dramatic, giving nothing but words and action. In the account of the trial before Herod, which is found only in Luke, the method of narration is significantly different, being descriptive and non-dramatic, as the work of an amplifying later narrator would naturally be. The words of Herod are not given; and the interpolation was doubtless the work of a late Gentile, bent on making Jewish and not Roman soldiers guilty of mocking the Lord. [*1] In the first two gospels, even the episode of the laying hold of Simon of Cyrene, to make him bear the cross, might have been introduced at this point on the stage, without involving the attempt--impossible in drama--to present the

[p. 200]

procession to the place of crucifixion. Of that procession Matthew and Mark offer no description: they simply adhere to the drama, leaving to the later narrative of Luke the embellishment of the mourning crowd of daughters of Jerusalem, and the speech of Jesus to them on the way. Even Luke, however, offers no description of the march; and even his added episode might have been brought into a dramatic action, either at the close of the crowning-scene or at the beginning of that of the crucifixion.

Here, as before, the action is strictly dramatic, save for the episode of the Scriptural explanation of the casting of lots, which may or may not have been a late addition to the action. No word is said of the aspect of Jesus, a point on which an original narrator, if writing to be read, or telling of what he had seen, would almost certainly have said something. In a drama, of course, no such details were needed: the suffering God-Man was there on the stage, seen by all the spectators. The same account holds good of all the remaining scenes in the gospel story, with a few exceptions. The three hours of darkness and silence could not be enacted, though there might be a shorter interval; and the rending of the temple veil, which could not take place on the scene, is to be presumed a late addition to the transcribed narrative; but a machinery of commotion may very well have been employed, and the wild story of the opening of the graves of the saints may actually derive from such a performance, though the absurdity of the 53rd verse is wholly documentary. Such a story would naturally be dropped from later gospels because of its sheer extravagance; but such a scruple would not affect the early dramatists. Even the episode of the appeal of the priests and Pharisees to Pilate to keep a guard on the tomb, though it might be a later interpolation, could quite well have been a dramatic scene, as it presents the Jews "gathered together unto Pilate, saying....."

The resurrection scene, like that of the crucifixion, is wholly "staged." The two Maries, who sat before the sepulchre when Joseph closed it, appear again late on the Sabbath day, having presumably been driven away by the guard before. Nothing is said of what has gone on among the disciples; nothing of the communion of the mourning women: the whole narrative is rigidly limited to the strictly consecutive dramatic action, as it would be represented on the stage. Even the final appearance in Galilee is set forth in the same fashion, and the gospel even as it stands ends abruptly with the words of the risen Lord. When the mystery-play was first transcribed, it may have ended at Matt. xxviii, 10, verses 11-15

[p. 201]

having strong marks of late addition. But it may quite well have included verses 16-20, with the obvious exception of the clause about the Trinity, which is certainly late. In any case, it ended on a speech.

Why should such a document so end, if it were the work of a narrator setting down what he knew or had heard? Why should he not round off his narrative in the normal manner? The "higher criticism" has recognised that the story of the betrayal and the rest do not belong to the earlier matter of the gospels. The analysis of the school of Bernhard Weiss, as presented by Mr. A. J. Jolley, [*1] makes the "Primitive Gospel" end with the scene of the anointing. I hold that scene to have been also dramatic, and to have been first framed as a prologue to the Mystery-Play; [*2] but the essential point is that all that portion which I have above treated as the Mystery-Play is an addition to a previously existing document. Not that the play (in some form) was not older than the document, but that its transcription is later. And this theory gives the explanation as to the abruptness of the conclusion. Where the play ended the narrative ends. Only in the later third gospel do we find the close, and some other episodes, such as the Herod trial and the account of Joseph of Arimathea, treated in the narrative spirit--in the manner, that is, of a narrative framed for reading. In Luke's conclusion there is still a certain scenic suggestion; but it is a distant imitation of the concrete theatricality of the earlier version; description is freely interspersed; speeches are freely lengthened; and the story is rounded off as an adaptive writer would naturally treat it.

In the earlier gospels such a treatment has not been ventured on. There are but a few doctrinary and explanatory interpolations; the descriptive element is kept nearly at the possible minimum; the scenic action is adhered to even where interpolated description would clearly be appropriate for narrative purposes; the transcriber even stumbles over his text to the extent of joining two speeches which should have an entrance and an exit between them; and when the last scene ends the gospel ends. The transcriber has been able to add to the previous gospel the matter of the mystery-play; and there he loyally stops. His work has been done in good faith, up to his lights; and he does not presume to speak of matters of which he knows nothing. Later doctrinaires, with a dogma to support, might tamper with the document: he sticks to his copy. Doubtless the addition was made by Gentile hands. In the play the apostles

[p. 202]

are unfavourably presented, and the episode of the treason of Peter is probably a Gentile invention made to discredit the Judaising party, who held by a Petrine tradition, though on the other hand the gospel text about the rock is presumably a late invention in the interest of the Roman See.

In this connection there arises the question whether the specifically dramatic "Acts of Pilate," as contained in the non-canonical "Gospel of Nicodemus," may not likewise represent an original drama. Broadly speaking, it seems to do so, and it may conceivably proceed upon a dramatic text independently of the synoptics. On the ground, not of its dramatic form but of the occasional relative brevity and the general consistency of its narrative, it has even been argued [*1] that its matter is earlier than the version of the story in any of the gospels. With that problem we are not here concerned; but it is relevant to note that the dramatic action of the non-canonical gospel is not earlier but later than that preserved in the canonical. In the "Acts of Pilate" the trial scene is composed by reducing to drama a whole series of episodes from the previous gospel history, the various persons miraculously cured by Jesus coming forward to give evidence on his behalf. Even the story of the water-wine miracle is embodied from the fourth gospel. This expansion is manifestly a late device, and has the effect of making the already impossible trial scene newly extravagant. And while the trial in the "Acts" is in passages more strictly dramatic than in the gospel, those very passages tell of redaction, not of priority. Thus Pilate is made to utter in his address the explanation concerning the usage of releasing a prisoner, and volunteers allusion to Barabbas, where the gospel gives those details by way of narrative. It is clear that in the natural and original form of such a drama Pilate would not so speak: the speech is a sophistication.

Whether or not, then, the "Acts" proceeded on a separate dramatic text, it does not preserve an earlier version. That it does not give the absurd detail about the risen saints visiting the holy city after the resurrection is merely a fresh proof that the first gospel is at that point interpolated. The mere fact that the "Acts" gives names to personages who are without names in the canonical gospels--as, the two thieves and the soldier who pierced the Lord's side--tells of lateness. What the document does signify is the apparent extension of the mystery-play beyond the limits of that embodied in the first gospel, and under the same pressure of

[p. 203]

[paragraph continues] Gentile motive, the whole effect of the extension being to throw a greater guilt of perversity on the Jews and to put Pilate in a favourable light. That the play in the "Acts" came from a source to which the Syrian sacrificial tradition was alien is further suggested by the fact that it places the act of mock-crowning at Golgotha, not in the Praetorium, and that for the scarlet robe it substitutes a linen cloth; while a formal sentence of scourging is passed by Pilate. Finally, the resurrection does not happen upon the scene, but is related by the mouths of the Roman soldiers, as if the dramatist or compiler were bent on producing new and stronger evidence in proof of the event.

On any view, however, the dramatic form of the "Acts" serves to strengthen the presumption that dramatic representations of the death of Jesus were early current, and thus to support the foregoing interpretation of the gospel story. That interpretation, it is submitted, fits the whole case, and at once explains what otherwise is inexplicable, the peculiar character of what is clearly an unhistorical narrative. Assume the story to be either a tradition reduced to writing long after the event, or the work of a deliberate inventor desirous of giving some detail to a story of which he had received the barest mention. Either way, why should that impossible huddling of the action, that crowding of the betrayal and the trial into one night, have been resorted to? It does not help the story as a narrative for reading: it makes it, on the contrary, so improbable that only the hebetude of reverence can prevent anyone from seeing its untruth. The solution is instant and decisive when we realise that what we are reading is the bare transcription of a mystery-play, framed on the principle of "unity of time."

As has been remarked, it is not to be supposed that the play as it stands in the gospel is primordial; rather it is a piece of technical though unliterary elaboration, albeit older than the play in the "Acts of Pilate," for if we divide it by its scenes or places we have the classic five acts:--first, the Supper; second, the Agony and Betrayal, both occurring on the mount; third, the trial at the high-priest's house; fourth, the trial before Pilate; fifth, the Crucifixion. If we suppose this to have been one continuous play, the resurrection may have been a separate action, with five scenes--the removal of the body by Joseph; the burial; the placing of the guard of soldiers; the coming of the women and the address of the angel; and the appearance of the risen Lord. But similarly the early action may have been divided: the anointing scene, the visit of Judas to the priests, the visit of the disciples to the "certain man" in whose

[p. 204]

house the Supper was to be eaten--all these may have been dramatically presented in the first instance. The scene of the Transfiguration, too, has every appearance of having been a dramatic representation in the manner of the pagan mysteries. But the theory of the dramatic origin of the coherent yet impossible story of the Supper, Agony, Betrayal, the two Trials, and the Crucifixion, does not depend on any decisive apportionment of the scenes. It is borne out at every point by every detail of the structure of the story as we have it in transcription; and when this is once recognised, our conception of the manner of the origin of the gospels is at this point at least placed on a new, we might say a scientific, basis.

Footnotes

^194:3 B. i, c. 171.

^194:4 Cp. Plutarch, Isis and Osiris, cc. 25, 35, 39.

^195:1 Budge, Papyrus of Ani, Introd., cxv-cxvi, citing Ledrain, Monuments Egyptiens, Pl. xxv. Cp. Brugsch, "Das Osiris-Mysterium von Tentyra," in Zeitschrift fur Aegyptische Sprache, 1881; Wiedemann, Rel. of the Anc. Egyptians, Eng. tr. p. 215; Prof. Erman, Hdbk. of Eg. Rel. Eng. tr. p. 249; Grant Allen, Evolution of the Idea of God, 1897, p. 399; and art. by Chabas, in Revue Archeologique, 15 Mai, 1857, p. 76.

^195:2 Records of the Past, 1st ser. ii, p. 119. Cp. Brugsch, Religion and Mythologie der alten Aegypter, 1885-88, p. 623 sq.; and Chabas, Revue Archeologique, 15 Juillet, 1857, pp. 207-8.

^195:3 The main authorities are given by Dr. Frazer, G. B. 2nd ed. ii, 116, 131. Cp. Foucart, Des Associations religieuses chez les Grecs, 1873, p. 82.

^195:4 Below, Part III,  section 7. Cp. Firmicus Maternus, De Errore, c. 22 (23); and see Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. p. 381, note, as to the significance of the passage, which Dr. Frazer, as I think, misapplies to the cult of Attis.

^195:5 Clemens Alex. Protrept. ii.

^195:6 Robertson Smith, Religion of the Semites, p. 353. As to the resurrection of Herakles, see pp. 449-450. See also above, pp. <page 124>, <page 126>.

^195:7 Cp. Newton, Essays on Art and Archaeology. 1880, p. 185.

^196:1 Cp. Lactantius, Div. Inst. v, 20; Cheetham, The Mysteries, Pagan and Christian, 1897, p. 71.

^196:2 This usage seems to have been normal in Egypt (see Tiele, Egyptian Religion, p. 107) and common in primitive cults (J. G. Muller, Amerikanische Urreligionen, pp. 77, 493, 597).

^196:3 Cp. 1 Cor. xi, 26, A.V. and margin. The expression in Galatians suggests either a pictorial setting forth or an effigy. Cp. Canon Cook's Comm. in loc.; and note the bearing of the doubtful passage in a rubric to ch. cxlviii of the Book of the Dead (Budge's tr. p. 263), apparently describing a eucharist in presence of painted figures of the Gods. Such a eucharist would approximate to the Roman Lectisternium. Mr. E. K. Chambers (The Medieval Stage, 1903, ii, 3 note), citing the essay in which the above argument was first formulated, takes it as suggesting a dramatic representation in the case of the epistolary references. That was not the intention. His citation of Lightfoot's denial that the word progafein can mean "paint," I may add, does not meet the case.

^196:4 Book of the Dead, ch. lxiv, Budge's tr. p. 115. Cp. the rubric to ch. clxv (p. 296) describing a figure with the arms outstretched; and see also the account of the pillar, p. 46, as to which compare Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. p. 410, and Tiele, Egyptian Religion, Eng. tr. pp. 46, 187. It will be remembered that in France in the eighteenth century, among the wilder Jansenists, "une des devotions les plus appreciees consistait a se faire crucifier comme le Christ" (A. Reville, Prolegomenes de l'histoire de religion, 3e edit. p. 173).

^196:5 Book of the Dead, ch. lxix, p. 125. Cp. p. 82, and p. 261 note.

^196:6 See Christianity and Mythology, pp. 218-23.

^196:7 Id. Part II,  section section 11, 12, 13.

^197:1 See the author's essay, The Upshot of Hamlet.

^198:1 Poetics, v. Mr. Chambers (Med. Stage, as cited), understanding that I suppose the mystery-play to have been "on classical lines," remarks that the narrative before us "cannot on the face of it be derived from a classical drama." I entirely agree. It is a non-literary drama, "classical" only in regard to the unities. Mr. Chambers suggests as a type the Graeco-Jewish Exaguge of Ezechiel, 1st c. B.C.

^199:1 Such a scene may have been enacted in one version of the mystery-play; but it is not transcribed in Luke as the earlier play is in Matthew.

^201:1 The Synoptic Problem for English Readers, Macmillan, 1893.

^201:2 Cp. Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. pp. 337-8.

^202:1 By C. B. Waite, in his History of the Christian Religion to the Year 200, 3rd ed. Chicago, 1881, pp. 108-212.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 16. The Mystery-Play and the Cultus.

In all probability the performance of the mystery-play was suspended in the churches [*1] when it was reduced to narrative form as part of the gospel. The suspension may have occurred either during a time of local persecution or by the deliberate decision of the churches, in the second century. But such a deliberate decision is likely to have been taken when the cult, having broken away from Judaism, was also concerned to break away from the paganism in contact with which the play would first arise. How far away from Jerusalem that may have been we can hardly divine. Greek drama certainly came much closer to Jewish life than has been recognised in the histories. Not only were theatres built by Herod, as Josephus testifies, at Damascus and Jericho, [*2] but ruins of two theatres exist at Gadara, [*3] described by Josephus as a Greek town, [*4] and known to have produced a number of notable Hellenistic writers. [*5] But the presumption from what we know of Christian origins is that the cult developed rather in the larger than in the smaller Hellenistic cities; and it would need a fairly strong group to produce such a mystery-play. It may indeed never have been performed in full save at important centres, such as Antioch or Alexandria; and when once the cult was at all widely established such a state of things

[p. 205]

would be inexpedient on many grounds. The reduction of the play to narrative form put all the churches on a level, and would remove a stumbling-block from the way of the ascetic Christists who objected to all dramatic shows as such.

But the manner of the transcription happily preserves for us the knowledge of the fact that it was such a show to begin with. And if we suppose it to have grown up in a Gentile environment, say in Alexandria, on the nucleus of the eucharist, after the model of an actual sacrifice in which a "Jesus Barabbas" was annually offered up, we shall be so far within the warrant of the evidence. Whether the official stoning and hanging of an actual Jesus on a charge of sorcery and blasphemy in the days of Alexander Jannaeus had served as a fresh point of departure, is a question that cannot at present be decided. All that is clear is that the gospel story is unhistorical. The placing of the action of the mystery-play in Jerusalem would be the natural course for Gentiles who were seeking to counteract the Judaising party in a cult which founded on a slain Jewish Jesus; since the more clearly Jerusalem and Jewry were saddled with what had come to be regarded as an act of historic guilt, the clearer would be the grounds for a breach with Judaism.

To locate the first performance of the play in its present shape is beyond the possibilities of the case as the evidence stands. The detail of the two Maries suggests Egypt, where the cult of Osiris had just such a scene of quasi-maternal mourning; and the Egyptian ideas in the Apocalypse, such as those of the "lake of fire" and "the second death," [*1] further point to Alexandrian sources for early Jesuism; but the eucharist and burial and resurrection are apparently Mithraistic, as are various details in the Apocalypse; [*2] and the Osirian ritual, like the Mithraic, would be known in many lands. We can but say that the death-ritual of the Christian creed is framed in a pagan environment, and that, like the myth of the Virgin-birth, [*3] it embodies some of the most widespread ideas of pagan religion. In strict truth, the two aspects in which the historic Christ is typically presented to his worshippers, those of his infancy and his death, are typically pagan.

But indeed there is not a conception associated with the Christ

[p. 206]

that is not common to some or all of the Saviour cults of antiquity. The title of Saviour, latterly confined to him, was in Judaism given to Yahweh, [*1] and among the Greeks to Zeus, [*2] to Helios; [*3] to Artemis, [*4] to Dionysos, [*5] to Herakles, [*6] to the Dioscuri, [*7] to Cybele, [*8] to Aesculapius; [*9] and it is the essential conception of the God Osiris. So, too, Osiris taketh away sin, and is judge of the dead, and of the last judgment; and Dionysos, also Lord of the Underworld, and primarily a God of feasting ("the Son of Man cometh eating and drinking"), comes to be conceived as the Soul of the World, and as the inspirer of chastity and self-purification. From the Mysteries of Dionysos and Isis comes the proclamation of the easy "yoke"; and the Christ not only works the Dionysiak miracle, [*10] but calls himself "the true vine." [*11] Like the Christ, and like Adonis and Attis, Osiris and Dionysos suffer and die to rise again; and to become one with them is the mystical passion of their worshippers. All alike in their mysteries give immortality; and from Mithraism the Christ takes the symbolic keys of heaven and hell, [*12] even as he assumes the function of the Virgin-born Mithra-Saoshyant, the destroyer of the Evil One. [*13] Like Mithra, Merodach, [*14] and the Egyptian Khonsu, [*15] he is the Mediator; like Khonsu, Horus, and Merodach, he is one of a trinity; [*16] like Horus, he is grouped with a divine Mother; like Khonsu, he is joined with the Logos; [*17] and like Merodach, he is associated with a Holy Spirit, one of whose symbols is fire. [*18] In fundamentals, in short, Christism is but paganism re-shaped: it is only the economic and the doctrinal evolution of the system--the first determined by Jewish practice and Roman environment, [*19] and the second by Greek thought [*20]--that constitute new phenomena in religious history.

Footnotes

^204:1 It has been argued, with considerable probability, that one or two Gnostic sects had rites of initiation in which were included a mystery-play of the crucifixion (G. R. S. Mead, Fragments of a Faith Forgotten, 2nd ed. 1906, pp. 426-444). But the same writer's-thesis (Did Jesus Live 100 B.C.? 1903, p. 410) as to a rite of resurrection in the late Isiac worship at Alexandria is not borne out by the passage of Epiphanius (Haer. li, 22) upon which he founds. That tells solely of a symbolising of the "birth of the aeon" through the Virgin Goddess. The symbol of the cross on the forehead, knees, and hands of the image carried round the temple on the night of Epiphany is not proof of any concept of crucifixion being involved. Mr. Mead, it should be added, believes in a historical Jesus or Christ with supernormal powers.

^204:2 Wars, i, 21,  section 11; Antiq. xvii, 6,  section 3.

^204:3 Schurer, Jewish People in Time of Christ, Div. II, Eng. tr. i, 27, 100, n.

^204:4 Antiq. xvii, 11, 5 4; Wars, ii, 6,  section 3.

^204:5 Schurer, as cited, i, 27, 103.

^205:1 Cp. Rev. xxi, 8; Book of the Dead, cc. 24, 86, 98, 125, 126, etc. The "Amen" Logos is also Egyptian (Rev. iii, 14; B.D. c. 165).

^205:2 Thus the Logos as "faithful and true" and righteous judge and warrior (Rev. xix, 11) points to Mithra; and though Thoth had seven assistants, the sacred "sevens" of the Apocalypse and the whole imagery of the Lamb seem specially Mithraic. Still the "Lamb slain" figured notably in the worship of Amun, being laid on the image of the God Amun and ritually mourned for, while the image of the Sun-God stood by (Herodotus, ii, 42). And the warrior Logos may stand for Horos-Munt (Tiele, Egyptian Religion, p. 124).

^205:3 Cp. Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. pp. 292-7.

^206:1 Ps. clvi, 21; Isa. xliii, 4, 11, etc.; Hos. xiii, 4, etc., etc.

^206:2 Athenaeus, xv, 17, 47, 48; Pausanias, ii, 37; Pindar, Ol. v, 33.

^206:3 Paus. viii, 31.

^206:4 Id. i, 44; ii, 31.

^206:5 Id. ii, 31, 37.

^206:6 Preller, Gr. Myth. ii, 274, n.

^206:7 Orphica, Ad Musaeum, 21.

^206:8 Id. In Rheam, xiv, 11; xxvii, 12.

^206:9 Id. In Aesculap. lxvii, 8.

^206:10 Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. pp. 329, 388.

^206:11 John, v, i.

^206:12 Below, Part III,  section 12.

^206:13 Id.  section 10.

^206:14 Cp. H. Zimmern, Vater Sohn und Fursprecher, 1896, pp. 11-12.

^206:15 Maspero, Hist. ancienne des peuples de l'orient, 4e edit. pp. 286-8.

^206:16 Le Page Renouf, Hibbert Lectures, p. 83.

^206:17 Tiele, Egyptian Religion, pp. 154, 178.

^206:18 Cp. "The Babylonian Father, Son, and Paraclete," by Chilperic, in Free Review, Jan., 1897; Zimmern, as last cited.

^206:19 Cp. A Short History of Christianity, chs. ii. and iii.

^206:20 Cp. Hatch, Infl. of Greek Ideas and Usages upon the Christian Church.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 17. Further Pagan Adaptations.

One likely result of the non-performance of the mystery-play as such would be a modification of the sacramental meal. When the crucifixion was represented in sequel to the supreme annual eucharist,

[p. 207]

the bread and wine of the weekly Supper were somewhat definitely presented as symbols, whereas the merely priestly representation of the God by the ministrant in the simple eucharist would emphasise the declaration "this is my body." As to what may have ritually occurred in this connection either shortly before or after the period of the mystery-play we can but speculate, as aforesaid; but we have seen that the ritual eating of a lamb did take place in the post-Pauline period, as in the mysteries of Mithra and Dionysos; and there is reason to infer that for similar reasons there was long and commonly practised among Christists the usage of eating a baked image of a child at the Easter communion. [*1] That is the only satisfactory explanation of the constant pagan charge against the Christians of eating an actual child--a charge met by the Fathers in terms which convey that there was something to conceal. [*2] As it was made and repelled long after the gospels were current with the mystery-play added, there would be no reason for the attitude of mystery unless the ritual included some symbolism not described in the books. Given that this symbol was bread shaped in a human form, Christism was exactly duplicating one of the practices of the man-sacrificing Mexicans, who at the time of the Spanish conquest employed such a symbol in some of their sacraments alongside of still surviving rites of man-eating, and constant human sacrifice. [*3]

When, however, the Christian cult was officially established, there needed no such primary symbolism to secure for the habitual sacrament the reverence of the faithful. The general belief that the sacred bread became the flesh of the God, and as such had miraculous virtue, could be maintained on the strength of the bare priestly blessing; and though the consecrated wafer is itself copied from pagan practice, [*4] it is finally a symbol of a symbol. For the same reason the church was able to put down a tendency which can be traced in the second and third centuries, and even later, to set up a new sacramental symbol for the Christ--to wit, the Fish. [*5] This peculiar symbolism was superficially traced to the fact that the Greek word Ixthus, Fish, is got from the initial letters of the phrase,

[p. 208]

[paragraph continues] Iesous Khristos Theou Yios Suter--Jesus Christ, God's Son, Saviour. But such a solution is incredible: the anagram is framed after the symbol, not before it; and the true explanation must be that whereas the divine lamb had long been identified with the zodiacal sign Aries, into which the Sun enters at the vernal equinox, the time of the crucifixion, the precession of the equinoxes had for some time made the sun's zodiacal place at that season not the constellation Aries, but the constellation Pisces. [*1] Either for the same reason, or in virtue of the simpler myth according to which the Sun was a fish who every evening plunged in the sea, Horus had long been "the Fish" in Egypt; and in some planispheres he was represented as fish-tailed, and holding a cross in his hand. It was he, and not Jesus, who figured for the Gnostics as the Divine Fish; [*2] and it was probably through the Gnostics that the symbol entered the Christian system. And though the Egyptian precedent was inconvenient, and the symbol recalled both the Philistine Fish-God Dagon and the Babylonian Oannes, many Christists would be the more led to such a change of symbol because the lamb symbol was awkwardly common to both Judaism and Mithraism; and because in particular the phrase of the Judaistic Apocalypse, "washed in the blood of the Lamb," pointed very inconveniently to the Mithraic rite of the criobolium, which with the taurobolium was a highly popular pagan rite of "purification." [*3] The catacomb banquet scenes in which fishes figure as the food [*4] are probably due to this motive; and the story of the sacred meal of fish in the fourth gospel was probably shaped in part under the same pressure, though the idea of a banquet of seven was also Mithraic. [*5]

A State Church was able to dispense with such tactics, though it saw fit to discourage the use of the lamb symbol. That, nevertheless, survived with the equally pagan symbol of the Easter egg, which has no place in the sacred books, but was taken by the Gnostics from the lore of the Orphicists. The bread symbol, finally attenuated to the wafer, served as the supreme or official sanctity. Yet in this remotely symbolical fashion the historical Church has sedulously preserved the immemorial principle, common to paganism and Judaism, of a constantly repeated sacrifice; and by that doctrine the Church of Rome stands to this day, the Church of England

[p. 209]

leaning strongly towards it. [*1] Hierologically speaking, they are quite justified; the eucharist is a sacrificial meal or nothing; and those who recoil from the sacrificial principle, if they would be equally consistent, have by rights but one course before them, that of relegating the Christian cultus to the status of those of paganism.

But in the way of such a course there stands the agelong prepossession in favour of the Gospel Jesus as a personality and as a teacher. In these his moral aspects, men think, he stands apart from the Christs, mythic or otherwise, of the Gentile world, and is worthy of a perpetual attention. In these aspects, then, finally, must the Christian God-Man be comparatively studied.

Footnotes

^207:1 See the evidence for this view given in Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. pp. 205-215; and cp. Frazer, Golden Bough, ii, 343 sq., and Grant Allen, Evolution of the Idea, of God, pp. 344-5.

^207:2 Cp. Hatch, as cited, pp. 292-305.

^207:3 Below, Part IV,  section 6.

^207:4 Cp. Lea, History of Sacerdotal Celibacy, 2nd ed. p. 44. To begin with, the early sacramental bread was certainly in round cakes or rolls (Bingham, B. xv, c. ii,  section section 5, 6), as were the paniculi of the pagan sacrifices. Originally it was taken from the oblations offered by the people, and was therefore not unleavened. It was only after such oblations had practically ceased that the Church began to supply the sacred bread in the form of wafers, for economy's sake, and, these being necessarily unleavened, argued that they ought to be so.

^207:5 Tertullian, De Baptismo, 1; Augustine, De Civ. Dei, xviii, 23. Cp. Lundy, Monumental Christianity, 1876, pp. 130-140, as to the Christian and pre-Christian symbolisms. The Messiah is already identified with Dag, the Fish, in the Talmud.

^208:1 See below, Part III,  section 6, and compare Gubernatis, Letture sopra la mitologia vedica, 1874, pp. 216-232, as to the wide bearings of the Fish myth.

^208:2 See the Gnostic Seal (Brit. Mus. No. 231) engraved in Mr. Gerald Massey's Natural Genesis, 1883, i, 454; and compare the planispheres in that vol. and vol. ii of his Book of the Beginnings, 1881.

^208:3 Below, Part III,  section 6.

^208:4 Northcote and Brownlow, Roma Sotteranea, 1879, ii, 67-71.

^208:5 Christianity and Mythology. 2nd ed. p. 382.

^209:1 See The Eucharistic Sacrifice, by A. G. Mortimer. Longmans, 1901.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 18. Synopsis and Conclusion: Genealogy of Human Sacrifice and Sacrament.

Meantime it may be helpful to draw up a tentative genealogical scheme of the history of the sacrificial idea as we have sketched it up to Christianity, and further to reduce this to diagram form. We set out with the dim primeval life in which

A. All "victims," whether animal or human, are not strictly sacrificed but commonly eaten, the "Gods" and the "dead" being held to share in the feast, as a feast. Dead relatives are similarly eaten, and parents filially slain and eaten, to preserve their qualities in the family or tribe. On such habits would follow the sacrifices of human beings at funerals, [*2] held by Mr. Spencer to be primordial forms of sacrifice proper. [*3]

[p. 210]

Thence would differentiate--

B. Offerings to the Gods. These would include burnt-offerings, fruits and libations, especially first fruits, and latterly incense, [*1] corn, and wine; and with them might correlate

B'. Totem-Sacrifices, in which the victim might be eaten either as (a) the God or as (b) a mode of union with the God-ancestor or totem species; and

B". Human Sacrifices as such, normally of captives, which would be eaten (a) along with the God as thank-offering or as food for the slain dead, or (b) as propitiatory or "sin" offerings, or (c) as vegetation-charms and life-charms, or else (d) buried in morsels as vegetation-charms, or (e) as sanctifying foundations of houses or villages. [*2]

In virtue of the general functioning of the priest there would thus arise the general conception of

C. Priest-blessed ritual sacrifices, eaten as sacraments, including

C'. The quasi-totem-sacrifice, in which the God eats himself, as animal or as symbol, in a sacramental communion with his worshippers; and

C". Human sacrifices, in which the victim (a) represented the God, or (b) had a special efficacy as being a king or a king's son, or (c) a first-born or only son. In the case of Goddesses, the sacrifice might be a virgin; and this concept would react on the conception of the God in an ascetic movement, making him either double-sexed or virtually sexless. For the sacrifice, nevertheless, the victim must latterly be as a rule a criminal. These various victims might or might not be eaten.

There is thus evolved (1) the general conception of a peculiarly efficacious Eucharist or sacramental meal in which is eaten, symbolically or otherwise, a sacrificed animal or human being, normally regarded as representing the God, though the God eats thereof. Latterly men often assume that the animal so sacrificed is thus treated as being an enemy of the God, where the nature of the animal admits of such an interpretation. Finally, after public human sacrifices are abolished or made difficult, there is found (2)

[p. 211]

Click to enlarge

[p. 212]

the practice of a Mystery-Drama, symbolical of the act of human sacrifice, in which the victim is sympathetically regarded as an unjustly slain God.

Such practices competing successfully with the official or public rites and sacrifices, they in turn elicit a priesthood which raises them to official ritual form. Thus there arises

D. The priest-administered eucharist, of which the mean or norm is Bread and Wine = Body and Blood, but which may retain the form of

D'. The symbolical animal, or a dough image thereof, or

D". A baked image of the God-Man or Child.

In virtue, however, of the symbolical principle, and of the priestly function, the thing eaten, though still called the host (= hostia, victim), may be reduced to a single symbol, which stands for the living body, including its blood. Such is the "communion in one kind" or consecrated wafer of the Catholic Church, repudiated by Protestants, who revert to the "communion in two kinds" or bread and wine of the sacred books. The Catholic practice is practically on a par with some of the usages of the pre-Christian Mexicans; while the Protestant reverts to the Mithraic and Dionysiak usages which were imitated by the early Church.

Thus is an appallingly long-drawn evolution summed up for the modern world in a symbol which to the uninstructed eye tells nothing of the dreadful truth, and presents a fable in its place. If to die as a human sacrifice for human beings be to deserve the highest human reverence, the true Christs of the world are to be numbered not by units, but by millions. Almost every land on this globe has during whole ages drunk their annually shed blood. According to one calculation, made in the last century, the annual death-roll from human sacrifice and female infanticide in one section of British India alone was fifteen hundred. [*1] Taking the sacrifices at only a fifteenth of the total; noting further the calculation of Sir George Grey, which gives four millions of victims for New Zealand alone in 2,000 years; [*2] taking into account the known holocausts of modern Africa and Polynesia, [*3] and pre-Christian Mexico, [*4] and the universal practice of pre-Christian Europe, we are

[p. 213]

led to an estimate beside which every Christian reckoning of the "army of martyrs" becomes insignificant. We are forced to reckon by thousands of millions: the truth is too vast for realisation. Tantum relligio. Thus has the human race paid in death for its faith in immortality. "Laugh as much as you please," wrote Dobrizhoffer a century ago, "at the sepulchral rites of the Abipones; you cannot deny them to be proof of their believing in the immortality of the soul." [*1] Even so. And for rites at which madness itself could not laugh, we have the same explanation. Of these miserable victims of insane religion, the majority were "innocent" even by the code that sacrificed them; and of the rest, in comparison with those who slew them, who shall now predicate "guilt"? Thus have nameless men and women done, many millions of times, what is credited to the fabulous Jesus of the Christian gospels; they have verily laid down their lives for the sin of many; and while the imaginary sacrifice has been made the pretext of a historic religion during two thousand years, the real sacrifices are uncommemorated save as infinitesimals in the records of anthropology. Twenty literatures vociferously proclaim the myth, and rivers of tears have been shed at the recital of it, while the monstrous and inexpugnable truth draws at most a shudder from the student, when his conceptual knowledge becomes for him at moments a lightning-flash of concrete vision through the awful vista of the human past. In a world which thus still distributes its sympathies, a rational judgment on the historic evolution is not to be looked for save among the few. Delusion as to the course of religious history must long follow in the wake of the delusion which made the history possible. [*2]

Footnotes

^209:2 As to the vogue of these, see Letourneau, Sociology, Eng. tr. pp. 226, 231, 232, 234-5, 237, 240, 242-4, 246, 291-3. Cp. Grant Allen, Evol. of the Idea of God, pp. 248, 282, 319.

^209:3 Principles of Sociology, i,  section 141. See also Dr. Jevons, Introd. to the Hist. of Relig., pp. 161, 199-200; and Mr. Lang, Myth, Rit., and Relig., 2nd ed. i, 257, 263. Both Dr. Jevons and Mr. Lang, however, seem to distinguish inconsistently between a "savage" and a "barbaric" stage; and both at this point arbitrarily exclude propitiatory (or sympathetic-magical) sacrifices, dealing only with the honorific and Macular. Dr. Jevons treats the slaughter of persons at the grave of a "savage chieftain" as "early"--that is, as prior to human sacrifice to the Gods. But tolerably "low" savages in South America sacrificed captives on Asiatic lines (J. G. Muller, Amerik. Urrelig., pp. 58, 143, 282-3); and Dr. Jevons (p. 201, note) cites high testimonies to the moral character of the Australian aborigines, whom for the purposes of this argument Mr. Lang treats as low or backward. Again, Dr. Jevons (p. 161) ascribes human sacrifice among the Americans and Polynesians to lack of domestic animals, though the Polynesians have pigs and poultry; while Mr. Lang lays stress on its absence among the Australians, who had no domesticated animals at all. Letourneau (Sociology, p. 210) suggests lack of animals as the reason for the common cannibalism of the Maoris; but this view is negated by the case of many African peoples who have domestic animals, and yet practise human sacrifice and cannibalism. We seem rather led to regard human sacrifice as a specialty of the general Polynesian race, to which the Australians do not appear to belong. New Zealand is pronounced by Letourneau (L'Evolution Religieuse, 1832, pp. 140-1) "the most archaic of the Polynesian archipelagos, from the point of view of civilisation"; and Ellis (Polynes. Researches, 2nd ed. iii, 348) heard of no human sacrifices among them, despite their cannibalism; but such sacrifices had certainly taken place in the past, the victims being sometimes eaten, sometimes not. (White, Anc. Hist. of the Maori, Wellington, 1887, i, 12.) Sir George Grey sums up that the creeds of the Maoris were "based upon a system of human sacrifices to the Gods," and, as we said, reckons that in a period of 2,000 years at least four millions of human beings had been sacrificed in the islands where the usage Prevailed (Polynesian Mythology, pref. end).

^210:1 This is found in the East among Turanians, Dravidians, and Semites; in the West among the races reached by early Semitic culture; and in America in the form of tobacco. (Lafitau, Moeurs des sauvages ameriquains, 1724, ii, 133-4; Brine, Travels amongst American Indians, 1894, p. 170; Waitz, Anthropologie der Naturvolker, iii, 155, 181, 220.) The principle seems to have been the same as that of the burnt-offering--that the God was reached by odours.

^210:2 Presumably by way of feeding, and so propitiating, the earth deities. But cp. Grant Allen, Evol. of Idea of God, p. 249, for another theory--that the victim was to be a protecting God.

^212:1 Calcutta Review, vol. x, Dec. 1848, p. 340.

^212:2 Above, <page 209>, note.

^212:3 Leonard, The Lower Niger and its Tribes, 1906, pp. 160, 400; Partridge, Cross River Natives, 1905, pp. 56. 59, 62; H. Ling Roth, Great Benin, 1903, pp. 63, 69, 72, 77, etc.; Cunningham, Uganda and its Peoples, 1905, p. 215; Burton, A Mission to Gelele, 1864, ii, 20, 24: A. B. Ellis, The Tshi-Speaking Peoples, 1887, pp. 35-72, 160, 161, 166, 170; The Ewe-Speaking Peoples, 1890, pp. 120, 124, 1.25, 126, 128; W. Ellis, Polynesian Researches, ed. 1831, i, 104, 348; iv, 362-3; Gill, Myths and Songs of the South Pacific, 1876, pp. 14, 15, 24, 37, 289-90, 297.

^212:4 Below, Part iv,  section 5.

^213:1 Account of the Abipones, Eng. tr., ii, 269.

^213:2 How slow is the evolution may be gathered from the testimony of a modern anthropologist: "To this day, as I can testify from personal observation, the Samaritans on Mount Gerizim (where alone in all the world the passover-blood is now shed, year by year) bring to mind the blood covenant aspect of this rite, by their uses of that sacred blood. The spurting life-blood of the consecrated lambs is caught in basins, as it flows from their cut throats; and not only are all the tents promptly marked with the blood as a covenant-token, but every child of the covenant receives also a blood-mark on his forehead, between his eyes, in evidence of his relation to God in the covenant of blood friendship." (H. Clay Trumbull. D.D., The Blood Covenant: A Primitive Rite and its Bearings on Scripture, 1887, p. 232.) On the theory of the Blood Covenant, the lamb is the blood-brother of those who drink the blood. Even so, of old time, was the slain child or man for whom the lamb was substituted.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 214]

  

CHAPTER II.

  

THE TEACHING GOD

  

 section 1. Primary and Secondary Ideas.

THOUGH the secondary Gods are not always sacrificed, they are nearly always in some measure teachers; and here, of course, they are developed from earlier forms. A general conception of the God as teacher belongs to early religion, inasmuch as he is held to have given the moral laws which are associated with his cult; and where his worship is specially bound up with rites of agriculture he is conceived as having taught men that and other arts. Among the Narrinyeri of South Australia, the Supreme God Nurundere "instituted all the rites and ceremonies which are practised by the aborigines, whether connected with life or death. On enquiring why they adhere to any custom, the reply is, because Nurundere commanded it." [*1] Among the ancient civilisations the same doctrine is common. Thus Oannes the Fish-God (identified with Ea) [*2] taught the Babylonians agriculture and the building of cities, writing, laws, cosmology, religion, the sciences, and the arts, including the measurement of lands--in a word, everything appertaining to civilisation; [*3] and Shamas dictates the laws of Hammurabi. [*4] On a less comprehensive scale, in Egyptian myth, Thoth gave men language and names, the art of writing, and the rules of worship and sacrifice; [*5] Osiris taught the Egyptians the art of agriculture, and gave them laws, and guidance as to worship; [*6] Janus and Saturn did as much for the Italians; [*7] Huitzilopochtli no less for the Aztecs; [*8] and Apollo, though in one myth he has to learn divination from Pan [*9] as he learns music from Hermes, in another gives laws to the Hyperboreans [*10] and thereafter speaks oracles at Delphi for the Greeks, teaching them a more civilised way of life. [*11] Dionysos similarly

[p. 215]

had a teacher in Silenus, but himself taught men in particular the culture of the vine; and Demeter, who must needs introduce some of the arts of agriculture, [*1] is also a lawgiver [*2] for both Greeks and Romans. [*3] Isis in turn divides with Osiris the honours of agriculture, she having shown men how to make use of wheat and barley; and she too gives men laws, and even leechcraft. [*4] The Goddesses, indeed, are as commonly as the Gods credited with introducing culture. Athene teaches all crafts; [*5] Cybele like Isis is a teacher of healing; [*6] and the Gallic Minerva (Belisama) was reputed the giver of arts and crafts. [*7] Similarly the Gallic Apollo (Grannos or Mahon) was held to drive away disease; [*8] as also the Teutonic Odin. [*9] This idea of the Gods as the givers of healing is indeed common to the whole Aryan race; and in the religion of India medicine was held to come immediately from them like the Veda itself. [*10] So in Hawaii there is found a tradition that "many generations back a man called Koreamoku obtained all their medicinal herbs from the gods, who also taught him the use of them; that after his death he was deified, and a wooden image of him placed in the large temple at Kairna, to which offerings of hogs, fish, and cocoa nuts were frequently presented......Two friends and disciples of Koreamoku continued to practise the art after the death of their master, and were also deified after death." [*11] Elsewhere, again, "From the gods the priests pretended to have received the knowledge of the healing art"; [*12] while in Tahiti there was a God of physic and two of surgery, as well as the usual guild-Gods of the different avocations. [*13] In Samoa, yet again, the War-God Tu was in time of peace a doctor. [*14]

The universality of the idea is best realised when we turn to the Gods of the more primitive peoples. We have seen how the Dravidian Khonds ascribe to Boora and Tari the raising of men from savagery and ignorance to comfort by means of instruction, and to Boora a moralising purpose as against the sacrificial cult. So, in the higher mythology of Peru, the Sun sent Manco Capac and Mama Ocello to teach savage men true religion, morality, agriculture, arts, and sciences; while on another view Pachacamac, finding the first breed hopeless, turned them into tiger cats or apes,

[p. 216]

and made a new set, whom he taught arts and handicrafts. This idea of teaching or reformation pervades the whole cosmogony of the Incarial period. [*1] So with the Gods of pre-Christian Mexico: the national deity of each tribe or nation is nearly always specified as the giver of its laws, and at times as the inventor of fire and clothing, [*2] and in at least one case he is the writer of the sacred books. [*3]

Where this conception is not prominent in a primitive religion, the explanation appears to be that the enlightening power of the Gods operates by way of inspiring the priests. Thus in the Tonga Islands, where there seems to have been little trace of a general culture-myth, inspiration of the priest by his God was held to be common; [*4] and even the God Tangaloa, "God of artificers and the arts," appropriately had for his priests only carpenters. [*5] When inspired, the priest as a matter of course spoke in the first person, as being the God for the time being. [*6] Similar inspiration, however, was held to come from the divine spirits of deceased nobles; [*7] and it is thus intelligible that the general development of this species of "trance mediumship" should keep in the background the thought of any special Teaching God.

With the growth of culture and literature and sacerdotalism, however, the notion of a God who inspires priests or oracles is developed into or superseded by that of a God who especially represents the principle of counsel or wisdom or revelation; and in the polytheistic systems we have accordingly such deities as the Assyrian Nabu or Nebo, [*8] the wise, the all-knowing, the wisdom of the Gods, patron of writing and literature, and son and interpreter of Merodach, who in turn is the interpreter of the will of his father Ea, the earlier God of wisdom; the Indian Agni, in his secondary character of messenger or "Mouth of the Gods"; [*9] and the Egyptian Thoth, who, originally the Moon-God and therefore the Measurer becomes as such the representative of the principle of instruction and the writer of the sacred books. [*10] In this latter capacity he has an obvious advantage over Maat, the Goddess of Law and Truth, and at once the daughter and the mother of Ra. [*11] Thus, while every

[p. 217]

[paragraph continues] Egyptian God proper is neb maat, "lord of law," Thoth is in particular the Logos, Reason, or Word; and so becomes the sustainer of Osiris against his enemies. [*1]

This latter conception is seen entering Greek mythology at three stages, first in the myth of (1) Hermes, who is Logos in the sense of being either a Moon-God like Thoth [*2] or simply Wind-God and so the messenger of the Gods; [*3] later, in the ennobled worship of (2) Apollo and Athene, of whom the former is the mouth of Zeus and revealer of his counsel, hence the typical God of oracles, and the latter, grouped with her brother and father in a triad, [*4] is also her father's wisdom; [*5] and still later, in the period of developing theosophy, in the myth of (3) Metis, essentially the personified Reason and Intelligence of Zeus. [*6]

In a more sophisticated form, the idea of the God as lawgiver is met with in the myth of Zeus and Minos, [*7] the Cretan institutor--himself a purely mythical figure, like Moses, and, like him, presumably a deity of an earlier age; [*8] and again in the legend of King Numa and his Egeria. [*9] Such myths may conceivably rise either as an inference from the ordinary phenomenon of the seer or sorcerer or priest who claims to have sought and to have been inspired by the God, or as the attempts of a late theosophy to remove anthropomorphism from the popular lore. On the latter view, they are paralleled by the attempts of the Evemerists to explain the Teaching God as a myth set up by the fame of a human teacher. Thus Ouranos is figured as a mortal who first gathered men in cities, gave them laws and agriculture, and taught them to observe the stars, the movements of the sun, and the division of months and the year; whence his final deification; [*10] and similarly Orpheus becomes "sacer interpreterque Deorum," who deterred savage men from slaughters and foulness of life. [*11] And, either by way of spontaneous evolution or as a result of Semitic or other eastern influence, we find among the Yorubas of Nigeria an Oracle-God and Teaching God, If a, who utters moral maxims, and figures alternately as a

[p. 218]

demigod who mastered and taught medicine, divination, and prophecy, and so was deified, and as the first-born son of the Creator and the Mother Goddess, the Saviour-God being the second-born. [*1]

Footnotes

^214:1 Taplin, The Narrinyeri, 2nd ed. p. 55.

^214:2 Lenormant, Chaldean Magic, p. 157; Sayce, Hibbert Lectures, pp. 133-4.

^214:3 Berosus, ap. Alex. Polyhistor. Cp. Sayce, pp. 368-370.

^214:4 Oettli, Das Gesetz Hammurabis and die Thora Israels, 1903, p. 84.

^214:5 Diodorus, i, 16; Erman, Handbook of Eg. Rel. Eng. tr. p. 11.

^214:6 Plutarch, Isis and Osiris, 13. Diodorus, i, 14, adds that he made an end of cannibalism.

^214:7 Macrobius, Saturnalia, i, 7; Tertullian, Apol. c. 10.

^214:8 J. G. Muller, Amerikanische Urreligionen, ed. 1867 p. 597.

^214:9 Apollodorus, i, 4,  section 1.

^214:10 Pindar, Ol. iii, 24 sq., etc.

^214:11 Strabo, citing Ephorus, B. ix, ciii,  section 11.

^215:1 Virgil, Georg. i, 147-8; Ovid, Fasti, iv, 401-2.

^215:2 Callimachus, Hymn to Demeter, 19-22; Diodorus, i, 14.

^215:3 Virgil, Aeneid, iv, 58.

^215:4 Diodorus, i, 14, 25.

^215:5 Iliad, xv, 412.

^215:6 Diodorus, iii, 58.

^215:7 Caesar, Bel. Gallic. vi, 17.

^215:8 Id. ib.

^215:9 Grimm, Teutonic Mythology, Eng. tr. i, 149.

^215:10 Weber, History of Indian Literature, Eng. tr. p. 265.

^215:11 Ellis, Polynesian Researches, 2nd ed., 1831, iv, 335-6.

^215:12 Id. iii, 36-37.

^215:13 Id. i, 333.

^215:14 Turner, Samoa a Hundred Years Ago, p. 61.

^216:1 J. G. Muller, Amerikanische Urreligionen, pp. 304, 319, 330.

^216:2 Id. pp. 394 sq., 587, 594-6-7.

^216:3 Id. p. 587. The God in question was Huemac, national deity of the Toltecs, latterly known as Quetzalcoatl. Below, Part IV,  section 7.

^216:4 Mariner's Account of the Tonga Islands, 3rd ed. 1827, i, 104, 190, 290; ii, 115, etc.

^216:5 Id. ii, 108.

^216:6 Id, ii, 87. So in Polynesia generally. Cp. Ellis, i, 375, etc.

^216:7 Mariner, ii, 108.

^216:8 Jastrow, Religions of Babylonia and Assyria, pp. 124, 129-30, 229, 344, 348, etc.; Sayce, Hibbert Lectures, pp. 50, 98, 112-115, 120-1; Tiele, Hist. comp. des anc. relig., trad. fr. 1882, p. 202.

^216:9 Max Muller, Physical Religion, 1891, p. 168; below, Part III,  section 4.

^216:10 Tiele, Egyptian Religion, pp. 62-3, 178; Le Page Renouf, Hibbert Lectures, 2nd ed. p. 116; Book of the Dead, ch. lxviii.

^216:11 Renouf, pp. 119-122.

^217:1 Book of the Dead, cc. xviii, xx; Tiele, Egyptian Religion, p. 63.

^217:2 Cp. Ernst Siecke, Hermes der Mond-Gott, 1908.

^217:3 According to Tiele (Outlines of the History of the Ancient Religions, Eng. tr. p. 211), it was as Wind-God that Hermes became God of music and (horresco referens) of eloquence.

^217:4 Athene is possibly in origin one with Tanith (Tiele, Outlines, p. 210), and with Anaitis (Id. Egyptian Religion, pp. 135-6), who was bracketed with Mithra, and so brought near to Ahura-Mazda. See below, Part III,  section 5. But cp. E. Meyer, who decides (Gesch. des Alt. ii, 115) that Athene is simply the place name Athenai = Athens.

^217:5 Iliad, v, 875 sq. viii, 5 sq.; Hesiod, Theog. 896; Odyssey, xvi, 260.

^217:6 Cp. Preller, Griechische Mythologie, 2nd ed. i, 150 and refs.

^217:7 Plato, Minos; Strabo, x, 4,  section 8; xvi, 2,  section 38. Cp. Burrows, The Discoveries in Crete, 1907, pp. 25, 43, 126-7; Murray, The Rise of the Greek Epic, 1907, pp. 32, 127.

^217:8 Preller, as cited, ii, 118 sq.

^217:9 Plutarch, Numa, cc. 4, 13, 15.

^217:10 Diodorus, iii, 56.

^217:11 Horace, Ars poet. 391-2.

^218:1 Dennett, Nigerian Studies, 1910, pp. 58, 63, 86-90. As to Semitic traces see pp. 11, 99.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 2. The Logos.

All such doctrines, it is probable, were represented in the later, if not in the earlier, Babylonian religion; and the idea of the Logos is probably early in Mazdeism; [*2] but in any case it was from the outside that it was pressed upon Judaism, to the extent, as we have seen, [*3] of making a personality out of that Word of God which originally "came" to the prophets in the sense that his spirit was held to have entered into them. The whole evolution is noticeably parallel to that of the principles of law and government in States, from the stage in which the king or chief is judge and as such "God" to that in which he is surrounded by graded orders of priests and councillors, jurists and administrators. The Logos is in a manner the heavenly Grand Vizier. [*4]

It is impossible, however, to fix a date for the origin of the special dogma of the Logos. To take it as a Greek invention is to ignore the very problem of origins. An eminent Sanskritist assures us in one passage not only that the doctrine of the Logos is "exclusively Aryan," but that "whoever uses such words as Logos, the Word, Monogenes, the Only-begotten, Prototokos, the First-born, Hyios tou theou, the Son of God, has borrowed the very germs of his religious thoughts from Greek philosophy"; [*5] while in another passage he admits that the conceptions of the Word as found in the Psalms [*6] and of the Angel as found in the Pentateuch "are purely Jewish, uninfluenced as yet by any Greek thought." [*7] Other eminent Sanskritists, again, have shown that the River-Goddess Sarasvati is in the later Brahmanic mythology "identified with Vach" or Vac [= Speech] "and becomes under different names the spouse of Brahma and the goddess of wisdom and eloquence, and is invoked as a Muse"; while in the Mahabharata she is called the "mother of the Vedas." [*8] Elsewhere the personified Vach enters into the

[p. 219]

[paragraph continues] Rishis or sages as inspiration. [*1] Again, "When the Brahmarshis were performing austerities prior to the creation of the universe 'a voice derived from Brahma entered into the ears of them all: the celestial Sarasvati was then produced from the heavens!'" [*2]

As among the Greeks and the Jews, so among the Hindus the doctrine of the sacred or creative Word is various. In the Satapatha Brahmana, Prajapati (who is "composed of Seven Males") first of all things created the Veda, which became the foundation on which he "created the waters from the world in the form of speech. Speech belonged to him. It was created. It pervaded all this." In the same document the cosmic egg is the primordial source: "From it the Veda was first created--the triple essence. Hence men say, 'the Veda is the first-born of this whole creation.....They say of a learned man that he is like Agni, for the Veda is Agni's mouth.'" [*3] The personified Vach, Sarasvati, River-Goddess and Goddess of Speech, is doubtless the later evolution, [*4] just as is the Graeco-Jewish Sophia; but there can be no question that the conception of the Veda as the Word, the first-created thing or first-born Being, is fully present in the Brahmanas. In the Taittariya Brahmana, "Vach (speech) is an imperishable thing......the mother of the Vedas, and the centre point of immortality"; [*5] being thus identified with Sarasvati as aforesaid; but this does not affect the dogma, set forth by Sankara, that "from the eternal Word the world is produced." [*6] Again, in the Satapatha Brahmana "Speech is the Rig-Veda, mind the Yajur Vedah, breath the Sama Veda." [*7] In the Taittariya, it is true, the Veda is created after the Soma; [*8] but such a variation, we shall see, occurs also in Jewish lore. And among the Vedantists, finally, "the 'word' (sabda) is 'God' (Brahma)." [*9] As regards, again, the more philosophical side of the Logos doctrine, the conception of an all-pervading and primordial Reason (Tao or Tau), we find it most explicitly and coherently set forth in China by Lao-Tsze, with a doctrine of a unity and trinity of forms of existence, [*10] in the sixth century before our era. [*11]

Are we then to suppose that such speculation originated with the Ionian Greeks, was passed on by them to the Jews, and by Jews or

[p. 220]

[paragraph continues] Greeks or both to the Persians, and thence to the Brahmans and the Chinese? Such a hypothesis is visibly unmanageable. The Pythagorean derivation of Plato's doctrine of the Logos is tolerably clear; and its connection with the planetary lore of the eight heavenly powers, as well as with the lore of numbers and proportion, [*1] tells of a source such as only the Chaldean or Egyptian schools of astrology and astronomy can be supposed to represent in the early Greek sphere. Babylonian religion contains the principle of the Logos in its most definite primary form, the doctrine of the Divine Name, which is the germ of the Platonic doctrine of ideas no less than of the Philonic and Johannine theology. We even find it in a form approximated-to in the Pentateuch (where the "name" of Yahweh is "in" the promised "Angel" leader), [*2] and made familiar later by the Jewish Toledoth Jeschu as well as by the modified Christian formula--the teaching, namely, that the mystic name of the Supreme God is known to him alone, and is revealed by him solely to his son, who has thus virtually all power in heaven and on earth. [*3]

"This idea, which prevailed equally in Egypt and in Western Asia, is purely animistic. To pronounce a name is to call up and conjure the being who bears it. The name possesses personality...... To name a thing is to create it: that is why creation is often represented as accomplished by the word." [*4]

[paragraph continues] Further, we know from Damascius--whose list of Babylonian God-names is made good by the remains actually discovered in recent times--that Tauthe, Mother of the Gods, first bore a son, Moymis, who was "the intelligible world." [*5] Here is the very formula of Philo. Of the God Nebo, too, who has so many attributes of the Logos, it is noted that his Akkadian prototype "was once the universe itself" [*6]--a likely source of such an identification in his case. If then the Jews had the Logos idea before their contact with the Greeks and the Mazdeans, [*7] the reasonable assumption is that they had it from a source from which the Mazdeans and Ionian Greeks could also have it--the Babylonian lore, in which were accumulated the current fancies of thousands of years of Asiatic speculation, including that of the ancient civilisation from

[p. 221]

which was derived that of the Chinese. And when we find the Brahmanic philosophy, like the Babylonian and Greek, making all things originate from a watery abyss, [*1] and again from the cosmic egg, [*2] we have at least cause to surmise that the Babylonian and Indian systems draw from one central source. It is true that the Indian lore seems best to combine the ideas of origination through the Word and through Water; and that the word Saras means not only Water but Voice, whence Sarasvati = not only "the watery" but also "the vocal" or "the sounding." [*3] Here, too, we seem to be in touch with primitive thought, for among the (perhaps partly Semitised) Yorubas of Nigeria there seems to have been a primary conception of moving water as the source of sound and of wisdom. [*4] But while this is visibly more homogeneous than the late Hebrew evolution of a creative Sophia who equates with the creative Logos without any adaptation to the primordial abyss of waters (or "Ocean Stream" as in Homer) on which the "Spirit" had creatively moved, on the other hand the relative lateness [*5] of the evolution of Vach and Sarasvati leaves open the presumption that a foreign influence has been at work. Agni, also, the Fire-God, is finally identified with the Word; he too, in the Vedas, is the Son of the Water and messenger of the Gods; [*6] and his worship connects visibly with the fire-worship not only of the Mazdeans but of the Babylonians, for whom also Gibil and Nusku (or Gibil-Nusku) the Fire-Gods are sons of the Creator, Gibil in particular being "the first-born of heaven (Anu) and the image of his father," while Ea, the Water-God, is the lord of life, and also the father of the Fire-God, who in turn is the messenger and counsellor of the Gods, clothed with their attributes. [*7] The blended characteristics of Sarasvati, finally, are found in the Babylonian Goddess Sarpanitum, who, as finally blended with Erua, the daughter of Ea, was at once "lady of the deep," "voice of the deep," and "the possessor of knowledge concealed from men "attributes all deriving from the fact that "wisdom and the life-giving principle were two ideas associated in the Babylonian mind with

[p. 222]

water." [*1] In these various nations, surely, we have the true "germs" alike of the Hindu, the Heraklitean, and the Platonic concepts of the Word or Reason; of the conception of Hermes as Logos and Messenger of the Gods; of Apollo as his father's wisdom; of the Hindu, of the Hebrew, and of the Greek formulas of "First-born" and "Only-begotten"; and so alike of the later Judaic and the Christian theosophy.

The further research is carried into the affiliation of the cults and creeds of Asia Minor and Syria, the more clearly does it appear that all relate to the great central mass of theosophy accumulated in Babylonia, which was still a culture force in the earlier centuries of the Christian era. [*2] That system had inferribly given to the Christian Gnostics their astrology and magic; their doctrine of the immortality of souls (not bodies); their Sophia; their conception of a Saviour, Knowledge-Giver, and Mediator: [*3] it is sufficiently unlikely, then, that it had failed to evolve as did Brahmanism the concept of the Logos. The rational presumption is that it gave that concept to Greek and Jew alike.

But the Jewish evolution was apparently piecemeal. Different ideas and doctrines, such as that of Metis, Thoth, Thoth-Khonsu, the combined Logos (Moon-God) and Sun-God; [*4] Vohumano, the "Good Mind," combined with Mithra; [*5] and the Platonic Logos, probably motived the separate evolution in Judaic literature of the personifications of Sophia or Wisdom, [*6] the "Good Spirit," [*7] and the later Logos. In one book the Logos "leaps down from heaven out of the royal throne," [*8] and "as a fierce man of war" wields the divine command as a destructive sword; [*9] in another, Sophia is as distinctly personified: she "came out of the Most High," but he created her "from the beginning before the world," and she alone "encompassed the circuit of heaven." [*10] The writer means to be metaphorical, but for the many the effect must be graphic. And

[p. 223]

this development took place and prepared for yet others, though Judaism was ostensibly bound to resist the multiplication of personalities thus set up, and was further predisposed to a male as against a female principle. In this respect, as in so many others, it exhibits its derivations from and affinities with savage thought, for among the Yorubas of Nigeria, in our own time, we find the primary conception, first, of the "natural" trinity of Father, Mother, and Son, with the general concept, behind that, of the Mother of All, who in time tends to be resolved into or superseded by a male; [*1] perhaps as a result of the supersession of the matriarchate. Some such progression seems to have taken place among the Hebrews. The original "Holy Spirit," properly feminine, had in general been kept very much in the background, perhaps in fear of the old developments of goddess-worship, in which the symbol of the dove, taken by the Christists as standing for chastity, had really represented sexuality and fecundity. [*2] But the mythopoeic faculty, in its new forms of verbalism and pseudo-philosophy, was stronger than dogma, and stronger than fear. Accordingly we have Philo, at the traditional beginning of the Christian era, accumulating round the Logos the various aspects of the earlier Word and Sophia, and fitfully adding to them those of divine Sonship and Messiahship, and even the creative function of Demiourgos, thus at times reducing Yahweh to a somewhat remote abstraction.

Footnotes

^218:2 See Below, Part III,  section section 4, 5, 9. The first known use of the term Logos as = orderly causation is by Herakleitos (in Hippolytus, Refut. Haeres. ix, 9 [4]. Cp. Ritter and Preller, Hist. Philos. ed. 2a, n. 31, 38, 41, 42). Thus the idea arises in Ionia, in the sphere of the Babylonian culture. Logos is translated "truth" by Fairbanks, First Philos. of Greece, p. 25. Cp. Zeller, as there cited. But Prof. Julicher (Encyc. Bib. art. LOGOS) adheres to the usual interpretation. For a full exposition of that see Drummond, Philo Judaeus, 1888, i, 32-47, following Heinze.

^218:3 Above, pp. <page 86>, <page 90>, <page 178>.

^218:4 Above, <page 86>

^218:5 Max Muller, Theosophy, or Psychological religion, 1893, pref. p. x.

^218:6 Ps. xxxiii, 6; cvii, 20; cxlvii, 18.

^218:7 Work cited, p. 405. Cp. Nicolas, Des doctrines religieuses des Juifs, p. 190 sq.

^218:8 Muir, Ancient Sanskrit Texts, 3rd ed. v, 342. Cp. Gubernatis, Letture sopra la mitologia vedica, 1874, pp. 132-3; Barth, Religions of India, pp. 16, 256.p

^219:1 Muir, iii, 105.

^219:2 Id. first cit.

^219:3 Id. iv, 22-23.

^219:4 Oldenberg, Die Religion des Veda, 1894, p. 63.

^219:5 Muir, iii, 10. As to the various meanings of Vach see i, 325, n.

^219:6 Id. iii, 104-5.

^219:7 Id. iii, 1.

^219:8 Id. iii, 8.

^219:9 Ballantyne, Christianity Contrasted with Hindu Philosophy, 1859, p. 193.

^219:10 Compare the Tau Teh King, cc. 1, 14, 42, with Plato's Parmenides and Philebus.

^219:11 Pauthier, Chine Moderne, p. 351 sq. Cp. Chalmers, The Speculations of Lau-Tsze, p. xi. The Chinese translation of the New Testament uses Tau for the Logos in John i, 1. Id. p. xii. Cp. ch. xxv of the Tau Teh King (Chalmers, p. 19). And Lao-Tsze not only lays down (ch. 63) the Golden Rule, but has a set of six maxims closely resembling the Beatitudes (ch. 22).

^220:1 Cp. Caesar Morgan, Investigation of the Trinity of Plato and of Philo Judaeus (1795), ed. 1853, pp. 1, 3, 5.

^220:2 Exod. xxiii, 20-23. In the Talmud, this angel, though he is represented in the pseudo-history by Joshua, is declared to be the Metatron, who in turn is identified with the Logos. Above p. 163. and below, Part III,  section 8.

^220:3 Tiele, Hist. comparee des anc. religions, p. 175.

^220:4 Id. ib.

^220:5 Id. p. 183; Cory's Ancient Fragments, ed. 1876, p. 92; Sayce, p. 386.

^220:6 Sayce, p. 405.

^220:7 Cp. Nicolas, as cited above.

^221:1 Muir, i, 24. Cp. Sayce, Hibbert Lectures, p. 371.

^221:2 Muir, iv, 22-23.

^221:3 Gubernatis, Letture sopra la mitologia vedica, pp. 132-3.

^221:4 Dennett, Nigerian Studies, pp. 210, 212.

^221:5 Relative, that is, to such a God-idea as that of Indra (Oldenberg as cited above). But the Brahmanas are yet "the oldest rituals we have, the oldest linguistic explanations, the oldest traditional narratives, and the oldest philosophical speculations" (Weber, Hist. of Indian Literature, p. 12).

^221:6 Max Muller, Physical Religion, pp. 151, 168; Gubernatis, p. 120. Agni is also born of stone, wood, herbs, and the skies. Muller, p. 146. Cp. Gubernatis, p. 109, sq. This is simple naturalism. But he is joined with Matarisvan, for whose name there is no Aryan etymology (Muller, p. 152). A Central-Asiatic influence must be inferred. Cp. Tiele, Outlines, pp. 109-110, 115. In the Babylonian system the Fire-God Gibil, protector of the family and the hearth, seems the source of the Indian cult. Cp. Justi, Gesch. der oriental. Volker im Altertum, p. 147; Jastrow, Religion of Babylon and Assyria, 1898, p. 277.

^221:7 Jastrow, Religion of Babylonia and Assyria, pp. 275-280.

^222:1 Id. pp. 122-3. Cognate names to Sarasvati are found in the Bactrian Haraqiti and the Persian Harauvati. Tiele, last cit. p. 115.

^222:2 A collection of Babylonian hymns of the times of the Seleucids and Arsacids, bringing the life of the system down to 86 B.C., has been published by the Berlin Museum. Anz, Zur Frage nach dem Ursprung des Gnosticismus (in Gebhardt and Harnack's Texte and Untersuchungen, Bd. 15, Leipzig, 1897), p. 60. And three priestly schools are recorded to have survived in Babylonia--at Sippar, Uruk, and Babel-Borsippa--in the times of Strabo (B. xvi, c. i,  section 6) and Pliny (Hist. Nat. vi, 30, 6). Cp. Anz, pp. 61-3, as to the later religious developments.

^222:3 Anz, as cited, p. 55 (as to general derivation), 90-3 (as to Ishtar-Sophia), 93-8 (as to Marduk the Saviour and Mediator).

^222:4 Tiele, Egypt. Relig. pp. 154, 178.

^222:5 See below, Pt. III,  section section 5, 9.

^222:6 Cp. Prov. iii, etc., Wisd. of Sol. i, 6; vii, 22, etc.; Ecclesiasticus, passim.

^222:7 Nehemiah, ix, 20.

^222:8 Or "off royal thrones": cp. Var. Bib. Either way, the logos seems to be already conceived as pros ton Theon.

^222:9 Wisdom of Solomon, xviii, 15-16.

^222:10 Ecclesiasticus, xxiv, 3, 5, 9.

^223:1 Cp. Dennett, Nigerian Studies, pp. 63, 64, 79, 81, 85, 100. As to other Hebrew parallels, see pp. 99, 114.

^223:2 Cp. Gubernatis, Letture sopra la mitologia vedica, pp. 144-5; Lang, Myth, Ritual, and Religion, 2nd ed. ii, 271.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 3. Derivations of the Christian Logos.

It is significant of the difficulty of winning a hearing for an important new truth in hierology that, a hundred years after the elaborate development of the Logos doctrine in Philo Judaeus was fully demonstrated, the fact is no part of ordinary knowledge even among scholars, if they be not theologians. [*3] Bryant, who first among English writers made the complete demonstration, held that Philo derived his ideas from association with the Christians. That is obviously a delusion; [*4] but there can be no question about the actuality of the parallel between the Philonic and the Johannine and other Christian forms of the doctrine; and it may be that a

[p. 224]

list of Philo's dicta as drawn up by the unsuspecting Bryant [*1] will be more acceptable than one of those compiled by later scholars.

Attributes of the LOGOS in the writings of Philo Judaeus. [*2]

1. Son of God. De Agricultura, 12; De confusione linguarum, 14; De Profugis, 20.

2. Second divinity. De Legum Allegoriarum, ii, 21; Frag. in Euseb. Praep. Evang. viii, 13.

3. First-begotten Son of God. De Agric. 12; De Somniis, i, 37; De Conf. ling. 14, 18; Quod Deus immutab. 6.

4. Image of God. De Mundi Opific. 8; De Somn. i, 41; De Conf. ling. 14, 18, 20, 28; De Profug. 19; De Monarchia, ii, 5.

5. Superior to angels. Frag. in Euseb. Praep. Evang. viii, 13; De Conf. ling. 28.

6. Superior to all things. De Leg. Alleg. iii, 31, 60, 61.

7. Instrument by whom the world was created. De Mundi Opif. vi; De Cherubim, 35; De Monarchia, ii, 5; De Profug. 18; De leg. alleg. iii, 31.

8. Vice-gerent of God, on whom all depends. De Agric. xii; De Somn. i, 41; De Profug. 20.

9. Light of the World. De Somn. i, 13, 15, 18.

10. Alone can see God. De Conf. ling. 20.

11. Resides in God. De Profug. 18, 19.

12. Most ancient of God's works. De Profug. 19; De leg. alleg. iii, 60, 61.

13. Esteemed the same as God. De Somn. i, 12, 23, 41; ii, 36.

14. Eternal. De Plantat. Noe, 5.

15. Beholds all things. De leg. allegor. iii, 59.

16. Maintains the world. De Mose, iii, 14; De Profug. 20; De Somn. i, 47.

17. Nearest to God, without any separation. De Prof. 19.

18. Free from all taint of Sin. De Profug. 20, 21; De Somn. i, 23.

19. Presides over the imperfect and the weak. De leg. allegor. iii, 61, 62.

20. Fountain of Wisdom. De Profug. 18, 25.

21. A messenger sent from God. De Agric. 12; Quis rerum divin. haeres, 42; De Abrahamo, 36; De Prof. 1.

22. Advocate (Paraclete) for Man. Quis rer. div. haeres, 42. De Mose, iii, 14.

23. Orderer and disposer of all things. Quis rer. div. haer. 46, 48.

24. Shepherd of God's flock. De Agric. 12.

25. Governor of the World. De Profug. 20.

[p. 225]

26. Physician who heals all evil. De leg. alleg. iii, 62.

27. The Seal of God. De Prof. 2; De Plant. Noe, 5.

28. Sure refuge of those who seek him. De Somniis, i, 15; De Profug. i, 18, 19, 21.

29. Gives heavenly food to all who seek it. De leg. allegor. iii, 56, 58-62; De Profug. 25; Quis rerum divin. haeres, 39.

30. On men's forsaking their sins gives spiritual freedom. De Somn. i, 15; De Congressu quaerendae erud. gratia, 19, 30.

31. Frees men from all corruption. De Congressu, 30; De Prof. 18, 21; Quis rer. div. haeres, 38. (Is the water of everlasting life. De Prof. 18.)

32. Not merely Son of God, but well-beloved child. [Ref. to De leg. alleg. iii, 64, where, however, agapetoy teknoy does not refer to the Logos.]

33. Means of man's spiritual happiness. Quis rerum divin. haeres, 42.

34. Admits to the assembly of the perfect. De Sacrificiis, 2, 3 (De Profug. 18).

35. Raises the just to the presence of the Creator. Ibid.

36. The true high priest. De Somniis, i, 37; De leg. allegor. iii, 26; De Profug. 20.

37. Word, High Priest, and Mediator. Quis rer. div. haeres, 42; De Somn. i, 37; De Mose, iii, 14.

Much discussion has taken place over the question whether Philo really conceived his Logos as a person [*1]--a problem of which the futility may be realised after asking whether Christians to-day conceive of the Holy Ghost as a person. That Philo should be inconsistent; that he should successively make his Logos a deity, a spoken utterance, a creative power, an instrument, an aspect of the deity, a far-seeing spirit, a refuge, the first-born son of the deity, a high-priest and mediator, the covenant, [*2] the co-ordinating law of the universe, an eternal entity, the first-created thing, an angel, [*3] the sun, [*4] the chief of the angels, [*5] a body of doctrine, the Scriptures, Moses [*6], an abstraction of wisdom, the soul of the world [*7]--all this belonged to his mental habit and that of the students of his age. It was impossible for such minds to be consistent or even momentarily clear: all philosophic thought was for them a shapeless cloud of words and verbal images. But where the born verbalisers fluctuated through a hundred forms of phrase, simpler minds inevitably reduced abstractions to personalities sans phrase. [*8]

[p. 226]

[paragraph continues] In the Book of Enoch the Messiah is identified, apparently long before Philo, with a First-Created power who has the characteristics of the Logos. [*1] For most neologising Jews, in short, the Logos passed into personal status just as did Vohumano, "the Good Mind," for the Mazdeans, because the perpetual naming of an abstraction in religious lore or ritual sets up for the believer an idea of separate personality or nothing. The personalisers were but doing what their simpler ancestors had done before when they gave personality to natural objects, winds, rivers, diseases, thunder, and lightning. They did so because they could not help it; and Philo, with his superior verbal resources, psychologises helplessly all the while on the primitive plane.

It is thus quite misleading to say that in his writings "from first to last the Logos is the thought of God, dwelling subjectively in the infinite mind, planted out and made objective in the universe." [*2] Supposing such a formula to have real significance for any one to-day--supposing it to be compatible with a theistic proposition of personality--it could have no meaning for Philo, who would not have written as he did if he could so have formulated; though the triplication of Thought and God and Infinite Mind may be said to be a good deal in his spirit. What we learn from such a verbal construction is that if a modern academic cannot propound a Logos-Idea without self-contradiction, much less could an Alexandrian Jew. And the historical conclusion remains clear, that the Christian doctrine of the Logos is simply a deposition in dogmatic form, round the nucleus of a sacramental cult, of the vaporous haze of thought set up in the Jewish world by Yahwistic speculation on Gentile notions. [*3]

It was the presence of the Jesuist nucleus that wrought the solidification. For Philo there was no bar to a multiplication of Logoi; and besides making Logoi of both Moses and Aaron [*4] he has a multitude of lesser Logoi who figure endlessly as thoughts, words, angels, laws, forces, and reasons. [*5] His Bible withheld him from

[p. 227]

deifying the actual priest or emperor; Moses was for him definitely reduced to human status; and to the prophets he pays remarkably little attention, merely citing one occasionally as a "companion of Moses." [*1] Finally, he appears in several treatises to be, like the writer of the fifty-first psalm, [*2] ethically indifferent to sacrifice [*3]--so much so that it would be difficult to believe that the same hand wholly wrote these and others in which he accepts a modified form of the principle of atonement, [*4] were it not for the numerous proofs in every treatise that his philosophy is always in a state of flux. In one passage he adumbrates a combination of the ideas of the mediatorial Logos and the national Messiah; [*5] but a mind so fixed as his on allegory and symbol and abstraction was unprepared to make a definite Logos out of a sacrificed demigod, even had he lived to see the new Jesuist movement. It is the merest truism, therefore, to say that in his lore the Logos-idea never comes to dogmatic birth. Jesuism precipitated it on the eucharistic sacrifice, thus excluding further vacillations; but the idea of the Sophia, which, following the book of the Wisdom of Jesus ben Sirach, he also manipulates, [*6] and which was no less potentially adaptable, never came to dogmatic birth at all, save in Gnostic teachings which the Church was finally able to suppress.

On the other hand, Philo's doctrine of the Holy Spirit [*7] (which

[p. 228]

in his theosophy remains as indeterminate as his notion of the Logos, and is much less stressed than either that or the notion of the Sophia, with both of which it vaguely blends) did find dogmatic acceptance in the formula of the Christian Trinity. The Sophia would have been on many grounds more suitable, supplying as she would the normal demand for a Mother-Goddess; and the male Spirit, as a matter of fact, has always remained an extremely dim conception, availing very little for the Christian cult. But the formation of a Trinity was forced upon Christism by many of its theosophic precedents; [*1] and the admission of a Goddess was vetoed by the ascetic principle which was in the ascendant when the doctrine was formulated: so many and various are the forces which determine the growth of a syncretic system in a religiously crowded environment.

Such are the chances of social selection. Had not the ascetic principle been thus temporarily active, and had not the craving for a secondary Teaching-God been for the time satisfied by identifying the Sacrificed God with the Logos, an identification of Mary with both Sophia and the Spirit (originally feminine) would have been an equally natural and an equally facile proceeding, the preparation having been sufficiently made on Judaic lines. As it was, the exaltation of Mary, when it came about afterwards as a result of the stressing of the metaphysical aspects of the Son, was undertaken too late for the grafting of a dogmatic Sophia on the new sacred books; and the still later attempt at a new gospel in the thirteenth century was crushed by the preponderating power of the Papacy. But it is none the less clear that the doctrine of the Logos is a product of the same process of primitive psychology as produces deities of any order.

Footnotes

^223:3 See above, <page 147>, note.

^223:4 It may be freely granted that the writings of Philo are likely to have suffered like others from the ancient obsession of literary fraud. On this point, antiquity had hardly evolved any moral sense, much less a moral standard. But however Philo's writings may have been tampered with, and with whatever purpose, it was not by Christian hands. The Christian frauds in the way of Sibylline predictions, etc., betray themselves at a glance. No Philonic passages have that hall-mark.

^224:1 The Sentiments of Philo Judaeus concerning the LOGOS, 1797, p. 106, sq.

^224:2 I have added a number of references to those given by Bryant.

^225:1 E.g., Principal Drummond's Philo Judaeus, 1888, ii, 222-273; Caesar Morgan, Investig. of the Trinity of Plato and of Philo, 1795 (ed. 1853, p. 63 sq.).

^225:2 De Somniis, i, 36.

^225:3 Id. i, 41.

^225:4 Id. i, 15; De Profug. i.

^225:5 De conf. ling. 28.

^225:6 De Congressu, 30.

^225:7 De Profug. 20.

^225:8 See below, Pt. III,  section 5.

^226:1 Enoch, xlviii, 2, 3, 4; xlix, 2, 3, 4; li, 3; lii, 4. Cp. Reichardt, Relation of the Jewish Christians to the Jews, p. 29, as to the same identification in the paraphrase of Jonathan.

^226:2 Drummond, Philo Judaeus, ii, 273.

^226:3 For a thorough discussion of the close connections between Philo, Justin Martyr, and the New Testament books as regards the notion of the Logos, see Supernatural Religion, Rationalist Press ed. pp. 444, 450, 454 seq. Cp. Hausrath, History of the N. T. Times: Times of the Apostles, Eng. tr. 1895, i, 171-180; Nicolas, Des Doctrines religieuses des Juifs, 1860, p. 178 sq.; and Schurer, Jewish People in time of Christ, Eng. tr. Div. II, iii, 374-6.

^226:4 De leg. alleg. iii, 15, 33.

^226:5 De Somniis, i, 12, 13, 19, 23, 31, 34; De Sacrificiis, 13; De conf. ling., 17; De Posterit. Caini, 25-26. Principal Drummond decides that "the Logoi have nothing personal about them" (ii, 225)--another unwarranted specification. There is nothing to show that Philo ever asked himself what he understood by personality. It is essential to an understanding of him to realise that his philosophy derives from a stage of speculation more akin to animism than to science.

^227:1 De conf. ling. c. 14. Cp. De Inebrietate, c. 8. Philo's relation to the Scriptures is certainly not that of the traditional instructed Jew. His reading is in the main limited to the Pentateuch. Cp. Dr. H. E. Ryle, Philo and Holy Scripture, 1895, pp. xvii, xxxii.

^227:2 Ps. li, 16-17. Vv. 18-19 are obviously from another hand.

^227:3 E.g., De Plant. Noe, c. 39; De Mose, iii, 10; De Sacrificantibus, 3, 8; Quis haeres rer. div. 16; De Leg. ad Caium, 39. In the last-cited passage he makes Herod Agrippa wholly ignore the annual sacrifice of atonement, speaking only of the offering of incense; in the treatise De Humanitate regard is had mainly to the Deuteronomic code, where atonement is not mentioned; and in the De Sacrificantibus and Quis Haeres all sacrifice is as such made light of.

^227:4 Thus, in the treatise De Victimis, the ordinary view of sacrifice is taken for the most part, the citations on that head being solely from Leviticus. Even there, indeed (c. 14), repentance is expressly set forth as the condition of salvation, and sacrifice as a mere symbol of repentance. So also in De congressu quaer. erud. gratia, c. 14, sacrifices are reduced to ideas; even supplication is declared unnecessary; good works and contrition are all. So also in the De leg. alleg. cc. 30, 57, 61. Cp. De Abrahamo, cc. 1, 3, 4, 5; De Migratione Abr. cc. 1, 5. Yet in the De Abrahamo (cc. 33-35) the act of child sacrifice is treated as not unnatural. Again in the De Confusion Linguarum (c. 20) the "ransom and Price for the salvation of the soul" is not sacrifice; and in De Sacrificiis (c. 36) and Quis haeres rer. divin. (c. 24) the function of the Levites as ransomed sacrifices is mystically interpreted.

^227:5 De Execrationibus, c. 9.

^227:6 E.g., "The mind......shall leave both its father, the God of the universe, and the Mother of all things, namely, the Virtue and Wisdom of God" (De leg. alleg. ii, 14). Again the Creator.......is also the Father of his Creation, and the Mother was the Knowledge of the Creator with whom God uniting......became the Father of Creation. And this Knowledge having received the seed of God......brought forth her only and well-beloved Son......this world" (De Inebrietate, c. 8. There follows a quotation from "some one of the beings of the divine company" which points to Prov. viii, 32-3, but differs from both the Septuagint and the Hebrew). Yet again "the abrupt rock [pierced by Moses] is the Wisdom of God" (De leg. alleg. ii, 21). And yet again Sophia the daughter of God "is both male and a Father" (De Profug. c. 9. Cp. 20).

^227:7 De Gigantibus, cc. 5, 6, 7. Like the other personifications in the Judaeo-Christian creed, this in all its aspects--as Wind, Fire, Dove, Generator, Inspirer, Uniter--is common to older eastern mythologies. Cp. Gubernatis, Mitologia vedica, p. 142 sq.

^228:1 It is partly developed in Philo, De leg. alleg. i, 13; De Sacrificiis, 14; Quis rer. div. 44, 45; De Congressu, 2; De Abrahamo, 24. Cp. Reichardt, as cited, pp. 54-57, concerning other Judaic precedents.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 4. The Search for a Historical Jesus.

Thus far there is no difficulty in tracing a purely speculative process: the doctrine of the Logos is indeed the first stumbling-block of those who seek to reconcile the fourth gospel with the synoptics as a biographical document. And the very abstractness of the conception moves men at the first brush to turn with the more confidence to the concrete teachings put in the God's mouth in the other books. But if they continue critically to reflect, they find one cause after another to regard this concreteness as illusory. [*2] Many

[p. 229]

of the utterances of the God, when weighed, are seen to be of the same order as those of the fourth gospel: hence the many vindications of that document; and vigilant attention to the differences of content in the synoptics sets up insoluble doubts as to their authority. Long ago it was pointed out, with no very clear view of the inference to be drawn, that the Sermon on the Mount is a patchwork from previous Jewish literature. [*1] And at length the pressure of criticism has forced the more intelligent professional students of the New Testament to admit the insecurity of the old assumptions, and to attempt a restatement of the case for belief in the historicity of Jesus. The present state of the argument can perhaps be best set forth by way of criticism of the most important of these attempts, the second section of the article "Gospels" in the Encyclopaedia Biblica, written by Professor Schmiedel, of Zurich. It is a masterpiece of critical arrangement and expert knowledge, demanding the attention of every serious student; so that our time could not be better spent.

Passing in review all the main attempts to resolve the gospels into a few mutually interactive primary "sources," Professor Schmiedel comes to the conclusion that no such attempt will hold good. This verdict disposes of an amount of laborious research grievous to think of. For a full hundred years, German theologians by the score have been struggling with this problem, toiling devotedly, trying hypothesis upon hypothesis, refining upon refinements, always hoping to get to, or sure of having reached, a solid textual and historical foundation, even as they so long sought for one in the quicksands of the Pentateuch. At length, in the name of professional exegesis, Professor Schmiedel sounds the retreat. There are no true "sources," no really primary and trustworthy documents in the gospel amalgam! There are only nine [*2] "entirely credible" texts! One thinks of Meredith's figure of the hosts upon hosts of charging waves, whose achievement is only

To throw that faint thin line upon the shore!

And what are the entirely credible texts? With due care and respect let us enumerate the forlorn handful of unwounded survivors:--

1. Mk. x, 17 ff. ("Why callest thou me good?" etc.).

[p. 230]

2. Mt. xii, 31 ff. (blasphemy against the Son of Man pardonable).

3. Mk. iii, 21 ("He is beside himself").

4. Mk. xiii, 32 ("of that day and hour knoweth no man," etc.).

5. Mk. xv, 34; Mt. xxvii, 46 ("My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?").

6. Mk. viii, 12 ("No sign shall be given to this generation").

7. Mk. vi, 5 ("he was able to do no mighty work").

8. Mk. viii, 14-21 (rebuke to the disciples concerning bread and leaven).

9. Mt. xi, 5; Lk. vii, 22. (Passage to be taken in the sense of spiritual healing, since it ends with mention of preaching--not a miracle at all.)

[paragraph continues] It will be seen on what principles Professor Schmiedel proceeds. Where Jesus speaks simply as a man, making no pretence to divinity, to miraculous powers, to prophecy, or to a Messianic mission, and where he is represented as failing to impress his relatives and neighbours with any sense of his superiority--there the record is entirely credible. From this position Dr. Schmiedel makes a leap to the conclusion that the entirely credible--that is, the possible--is the demonstratively historical. Let us take his own words ( section 139)

These......passages......might be called the foundation-pillars for a truly scientific life of Jesus. Should the idea suggest itself that they have been sought out with partial intent, as proofs of the human as against the divine character of Jesus, the fact at all events cannot be set aside that they exist in the Bible and demand our attention. In reality, however, they prove not only that in the person of Jesus we have to do with a completely human being, and that the divine is to be sought in him only in the form in which it is capable of being found in a man; they also prove that he really did exist, and that the Gospels contain at least some absolutely trustworthy facts concerning him. If passages of this kind were wholly wanting in them, it would be impossible to prove to a sceptic that any historical value whatever was to be assigned to the Gospels: he would be in a position to declare the picture of Jesus contained in them to be purely a work of phantasy, and could remove the person of Jesus from the field of history.

[paragraph continues] This will shock the believer without satisfying the scientific naturalist. The proposition in the words I have italicised, I submit, is absolutely untenable. On this point may be staked the whole dispute as to the actuality of the Gospel Jesus. The merely credible is not the trustworthy, the proved: if to be credited with plausible utterances be a proof of the actuality of a personage in literature, then we must believe in the historic actuality of half the characters in fiction.

Footnotes

^228:2 See Christianity and Mythology, Part III, Div. ii.

^229:1 Cp. C. C. Hennell, Inquiry Concerning the Origin of Christianity (1838 and later), ch. xvii.

^229:2 At first the Professor specifies five as "the foundation-pillars for a truly scientific life of Jesus," but he afterwards adds four. It is noteworthy that seven of the nine occur in Mark, six of them there only; and only three in Matthew. Those of us who hold that Mark is late, and not early--a redaction of the other gospels and not of an "Ur-Marcus" can best appreciate the significance of such facts.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 231]

  

 section 5. The Critical Problem.

The problem is one that has been before now debated on other issues; and it may be well here to take up these by way of illumination and test. Grote, putting in scientific form a thesis sometimes more summarily phrased by "the plain man," insisted that

"The utmost which we accomplish by means of the semi-historical theory is that, after leaving out from the mythical narrative all that is miraculous or high-coloured or extravagant, we arrive at a series of creditable [= credible] incidents--incidents which may perhaps have really occurred, and against which no intrinsic presumption can be raised. This is exactly the character of a well-written modern novel......To raise plausible fiction to the superior dignity of truth, some positive testimony or positive ground of inference must be shown......A man who tells us that on the day of the battle of Plataea rain fell on the spot of ground where the city of New York now stands, will neither deserve nor obtain credit, because he can have no means of positive knowledge; though the statement is not in the slightest degree improbable. On the other hand, statements in themselves very improbable may well deserve belief, provided they be supported by sufficient positive evidence. Thus the canal dug by Xerxes across the promontory of Mount Athos, and the sailing of the Persian fleet through it, is a fact which I believe because it is well-attested--notwithstanding its remarkable improbability, which so far misled Juvenal as to induce him to single out the narrative as a glaring example of Grecian mendacity. [*1]

To this contention it is objected by Sir A. C. Lyall that "if we may only receive as credible those ancient narratives which could not possibly turn out to be very plausible fiction, we shall be hard pushed for the trustworthy authentication of much early history, religious and secular. Secondly, the example of the supposed assertion as to simultaneous rainfall at Plataea and in Massachusetts is hardly fair. A man's assertion of an isolated fact of which he could not possibly have any positive knowledge, either directly or by hearsay, is a very different thing from affirming credible facts which might reasonably, and according to the known habits of the people who relate the facts, have been handed down by tradition from the persons who witnessed them to those who related them." [*2] To this very reasonable argument the answer is that it does not meet Grote's case; and that when we have assented to it the problem remains as before. In regard to many credible facts which might conceivably have been handed down by tradition we are still bound to say that, when related concerning supernatural personages, they are not tolerable evidence of anything done by a real person whose history formed the nucleus of the myth. The proposition as

[p. 232]

to rain on the site of New York on the day of Plataea is an illustration, not a universal parallel. The fact remains that there is no common-sense ground for crediting any one "credible" assertion made concerning an ostensibly mythical character when we cannot on independent grounds show how the credible story came to be attached to the fable.

Sir Alfred Lyall's argument overlooks the demurrer that all particular or specific tradition of a quasi-historical kind is untrustworthy when not corroborated by other evidence, inasmuch as (1) such tradition usually goes hand in hand with obvious supernaturalist fable, and (2) many such traditions have been disproved by solid evidence. The question is not whether something traditionally asserted to have been said or done by a demigod may not actually have been said or done by a man of the same or another name, but whether, in the absence of other evidence, we are ever entitled to believe and assert that it was. To Grote's negative answer there is no valid demurrer. The strength of Sir A. C. Lyall's general claim, that Gods or God-myths have been built up on bases of actual deeds and events, lies in the concrete proof that this has occurred in modern times; but no such demonstration can enable us to distinguish between the merely possible and the true in ancient tradition. It is conceivable that the Feridun of the Shah Nameh is constructed on a nucleus of reality, to which was added a mass of detail taken from sheer mythology, as myths were heaped upon the story of Cyrus. But in the latter case we have a means of discrimination; in the former we have none; and when we find the very name of Feridun to be a modification of an old God-name, [*1] we have no right of historical belief left.

For the rest, it is beside the case to argue that much accepted history will be cancelled if we accept only narratives which "could not possibly turn out to be plausible fiction." Grote never argued that history proper, the record of a time by those who lived in it, is to be so tried; and he constantly accepts narratives which might conceivably be plausible fictions--nay, he occasionally accepts tales which appear to some of us to be fictions. It is when we are dealing with myths that he denies our power to discriminate: in history proper he undertakes--at times too confidently--to discriminate. Broadly speaking, he is entitled so to proceed insofar as he deals with cases on their merits. Some early historical narratives allege facts which could well be known to the narrator or to the community

[p. 233]

in general, and may be fairly taken as true; some are obviously fanciful, unplausible, ill-vouched; and in many cases they are to be doubted even when free from supernaturalism. Historiography consists in a rational selection.

It is true that there are some cases wholly or partly on the borderland between the possible and the incredible, where we may fairly surmise a nucleus of fact; but in regard to these Grote's warning should be always kept in mind. Professor Huxley, who invented the word "agnostic" to cover, among other things, the practice of saying that miracles are "not impossible," was notably accommodating in his attitude to narratives of the possible. Concerning the story of Saul's visit to the witch of Endor, he observes that it does not "matter very much whether the story is historically true," but that "it is quite consistent with probability"; and then he adds: "That is to say, I see no reason whatever to doubt......that Saul made such a visit." [*1] The leap here is clearly illicit. There is certainly "reason to doubt" the whole story so long as it cannot be shown to have been reduced to writing near the time of Saul. "History" is full of discredited "probabilities" of the same kind: the story of Bruce and the spider is a type. The very fact that kings and commoners in ancient Israel did normally consult witches is as much a reason for admitting that the story could easily be invented as for allowing that it could easily have happened; and the details of the apparition, to which Professor Huxley oddly extends a measure of his credence, give good ground for suspecting the entire episode to be fiction.

All such cases, in fine, must be tried on their documentary as well as their h priori merits; and, returning to our special problem, we note that the "credible" sayings put in the mouth of the Gospel Jesus are in no way certified by their credibility, but are on the contrary put in complete suspicion by their surroundings. Here is Professor Schmiedel's case, reduced to logical form: There are in the gospels hundreds of unlikely sayings ascribed to Jesus; there are nine which are likely; then the nine not only establish his historic reality, but give a basis for surmise that many of the less likely, as well as many of the narratives of faith-healing, are also historical! The answer is (1) that it must be a desperately bad fiction in which not five per cent. of the speeches and episodes are "credible." On Dr. Schmiedel's view, if only the ancients had ascribed ten reasonable sayings as well as twelve more or less

[p. 234]

unlikely labours to Herakles he would be entitled to rank as a historic character. On the other hand (2) the very fact that the figure of the Gospel Jesus won belief much more in virtue of the hundreds of improbabilities and falsities in the gospels than in virtue of the "credible" texts, quashes the plea for his actuality based on these texts. The true inference is, not that such texts, being unnecessary, must be genuine and not invented, but that since a substantially false or unlikely biography could win ready credence in the period in question there is no reason to surmise a nucleus of actuality which was never demanded, and that the credible texts stand merely for the proportion of plausibility that might reasonably be looked for in any conglomerate of sayings and statements round a fictitious personage. Paul or the forgers, it is evident, believed in a crucified Jesus as to whom they had no biographical record, whether of sayings or doings. Scores of unlikely utterances, it is admitted, were credited to Jesus after Paul's time. Why were they so credited? Plainly because certain men or certain sects desired to give their views the sanction of the God-Man's authority. What then does it signify if besides these sayings there are fathered on him a few that are relatively reasonable? And, knowing as we do that the Ebionites, who attributed to him unlikely sayings, nevertheless regarded him as a mere man, what does it signify if sometimes in the gospel he is so represented? Yet again, what plausibility remains in the cry on the cross, "Why hast thou forsaken me?" when we remember that it is a quotation from the Psalms, and that the whole cult proceeded on the doctrine that "the Christ must needs suffer"? [*1]

It may seem ungracious thus to press the argument against a professed theologian who has already come within sight of "the great surrender" to reason. Schmiedel has indeed gone further in his loyalty to the critical principle than do many professed rationalists. It is only a question of time, however, when his view shall be tested as he has tested other men's, and the process may as well begin here and now.

Footnotes

^231:1 Grote, History of Greece, ch. xvi, ed. 1888, i, 382.

^231:2 Sir A. C. Lyall, Asiatic Studies (1st series), 2nd ed. 1884, p. 31.

^232:1 Cp. Max Muller, Biographical Essays, 1884, pp. 287-8.

^233:1 Essays, iv. pp. 291-2 (essay on "The Evolution of Theology").

^234:1 Professor Schmiedel, in his preface to Dr. Neumann's Jesus (1907), objects that I have here dealt with only one of his nine "pillar" texts. In response, I have dealt with the whole nine in the Appendix to the second edition of Christianity and Mythology (1910).

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 6. Collapse of the Constructive Case.

First, then, he has not recognised (1) the primary reason for doubting the genuineness of every detail of teaching set forth in the gospels--namely, the total ignorance of those teachings shown in the

[p. 235]

[paragraph continues] Pauline epistles. He takes as genuine the plainly interpolated passage in 1 Cor. xi as to the institution of the Eucharist, then concludes [*1] that "the details of the life of Jesus had so little interest for Paul that" he fails to quote him when he effectively might. To reason thus is to ignore a far greater difficulty than many which the exegete admits to be insuperable. (2) He makes his arguments at some points [*2] turn on the assumption of the general certainty of the whole narrative as to Jesus being a teacher with disciples, who established his cult; whereas the existence of the disciples is no better proved than many of the data already surrendered. (3) He is evidently biassed to his illicit inference (that Jesus really existed) by other inferences which, on his own showing, he was not entitled to draw. For instance, he decides [*3] that Jesus probably accomplished faith-healing as distinguished from miracles, because "this power is so strongly attested throughout the first and second centuries that, in view of the spiritual greatness of Jesus and the imposing character of his personality, it would be indeed difficult to deny it to him." What then proved the spiritual greatness and the imposing character of Jesus? The nine credible texts? Clearly they amount to no such proof, even if they were genuine: a thousand rabbis might have uttered them. What, again, is the value of the "strong attestation" of the first and second centuries in the face of the silence of Paul, ostensibly the first witness? The first and second centuries, that is to say the gospels (which certainly did not exist within thirty years of the date alleged for Jesus' death), and the people who believed them, equally attest the prodigies which Professor Schmiedel rejects. Is a witness who solemnly affirms twenty impossibilities to be believed whenever he happens to assert something that might be true, while a more important witness, who in the terms of the case ought to have heard of it if it happened, has evidently never heard of it at all?

Such reasoning, we may say without hesitation, cannot stand: it is negated by the tests on which Schmiedel has proceeded as against the source-finders; and the latter might very well turn upon him with a confident tu quoque. Take, for instance, the passage [*4] in which he presses the point of the obvious untrustworthiness of the reports of Jesus' discourses, and yet lets pass the assumption that these reports may be genuine condensations:--

Even if the public ministry of Jesus had lasted for a few months only, he must have uttered a thousand-fold more than all that has been recorded in

[p. 236]

the Gospels. His longest discourse would, if delivered in the form in which it has come down to us, not have taken more than some five minutes in the delivery. However self-evident, this has been constantly overlooked by the critics. They are constantly assuming that we possess the several words of Jesus that have been reported approximately in the same fulness in which they were spoken.

[paragraph continues] In the parables and in one or two other utterances, the Professor admits, the reports are more extended:--

In what remains, however, it can hardly be sufficiently emphasised that we possess only an excessively meagre precis of what Jesus said--namely, only so much as not only made an immediate impression when first heard, but also continued to survive the ordeal of frequent repetition In this process not only was an extraordinary number of utterances completely lost, but a large number of the sayings of Jesus now received for the first time that consecutive and pointed form which made them seem worthy of further repetition. Without doubt Jesus must very often have repeated himself, but what he assuredly often repeated in many variations has been preserved to us only in a single form.

[paragraph continues] Here again the believer will be perturbed, while the scientific critic will not be propitiated. If there are only nine texts that quite credibly indicate the existence of a man Jesus who taught anything, how can we possibly know "without doubt" that (1) he often repeated himself, and that (2) the existing reports are abbreviations of any spoken discourses whatever? The longest of all, the "Sermon on the Mount," is demonstrably a pen-made compilation from Hebrew literature; and Professor Schmiedel's previous argument has fully conceded that many of the reports, condensed in appearance as they are, are inventions. That is to say, a brief account of an alleged speech is not to be presumed an epitome of a real speech. The gospel discourses are short, not because they are records of remembered passages from long speeches, but because the framers had no critical consciousness, and were not accustomed to composing long documents. When we come to the fourth gospel we find longer discourses, in the actuality of which Professor Schmiedel does not believe. But if one gospel-maker could invent long discourses, his less literary predecessors could invent short. Once more, if the synoptic discourses are records of commonly remembered passages from Jesuine discourses, how comes it that Paul never cites a word of them? To miss that crux is to make as great an oversight as that of the critics who regarded the so-called Sermon on the Mount as the full report of a real sermon. The fact is that the higher criticism of the New Testament has thus far missed the way just as the higher criticism of the Old so long did, by taking for granted

[p. 237]

the general truth of the tradition. [*1] It sought to found on the hollow fiction of the Exodus and the Mosaic legislation of the desert, when one intelligent glance at the Book of Judges might have shown that the tabernacle of the desert was a myth. In a similar way it clings to the conception of a preaching and cult-founding Jesus, when an intelligent perusal of the epistles of Paul [*2] can suffice to show that the preaching Jesus was created after they wore written.

It does not indeed follow that Paul's period was what the tradition represents. The reasonable inference from his doctrine is that his Jesus was either a mythic construction or a mere tradition, a remote figure said to have been crucified, but no longer historically traceable. If then Paul's Jesus, as is conceivable, be merely a nominal memory of the slain Jesus ben Pandira of the Talmud (about 100 B.C.), Paul himself may belong to an earlier period than that traditionally assigned to him. Certainly the most genuine-looking epistles in themselves give no decisive chronological clue. But such a shifting of his date would not finally help the case for "Jesus of Nazareth." Escape the argument from the silence of Paul by putting Paul a generation or more earlier, and you are faced by the fresh incredibility of a second crucified Jesus, a second sacrificed Son of God, vouched for by records for the most part visibly false, and containing but a fraction of plausible narrative. The only conclusion open is that the teaching Jesus of the gospels is wholly a construction of the propagandists of the cult, even as is the wonder-working God.

Footnotes

^235:1  section 147.

^235:2  section1 138 a, f; 144 a; 145 f.

^235:3  section 144.

^235:4  section 145 a.

^237:1 An emphatic exception, certainly, must be made as regards the Pauline epistles, which by the late Professor van Manen and others are rejected as entirely spurious.

^237:2 For the purpose of this argument, it matters not whether any of these epistles be genuine or not, since in any case they are early; and forgers would have used gospel sayings if they had them to use. The point is that even interpolations upon the originals yield but one gospel datum.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 7. Parallel Problems.

The natural impulse to reject this view with violence may be somewhat modified when it is remembered that it does but place the Christ on a historic level with all the other Teaching Gods of antiquity. All the leading Gods, as we have seen, were in some measure regarded as teachers; and for none of them do we surmise a historic original in the sense of a real teacher and lawgiver. But it is not only the so-called Gods who are thus dislimned by criticism; the sub-divine or religion-founding and God-proclaiming institutors are found to be no less fabulous, down to the historic period, than

[p. 238]

the Gods they were held to have served. Menu, Lycurgus, Numa, Moses--a whole series of revered founders of codes and creeds--are as such dismissed by criticism to the realm of fable; for even those hierologists who still speak of Moses as a historic person, [*1] and treat the Exodus as a historic event, concede to Kuenen that the liberator wrote nothing, and can no more be supposed to have invented the Ten Commandments than did Romulus or Numa the Twelve Tables.

Difficulty, indeed, is still made over the alleged personality of Zarathustra; but few who closely consider the evidence will say that it supports the claim. [*2] If Zarathustra was a historical character, the proposition is not to be proved by the documents; and those who hold to the affirmative do so on the strength not of the records but of the tradition, and of the presumption in favour of a personal influence behind a notable development. It is the same with the personalities of Orpheus and Musaeus: wherever the tradition tells of a founder of doctrines or mysteries, criticism on search finds myth; and if we leave open the bare surmise that there was an Orpheus who taught something, it must be with the avowal that we know nothing of what he specially taught. If we take the whole series of traditional teachers down to the Christian era, we find them to be more or less clearly the products of the same tendency as led to the conception of Teaching Gods--the habit of supposing that every thing held to be good came from a specifically divine or supernormal source.

Conservative opinion will naturally rally round the remaining non-Christian cases that are either admitted or still claimed to be historical--in particular, those of Mohammed and Buddha. What a man has admittedly done, it may be argued, may have been earlier done by other men. If Mohammed founded a new religion, why not Zoroaster; if Buddha gave a virtually new and potent teaching, why may not a Jesus have done so? The case may very well be tried over those points.

First let us note wherein consists the clear historicity of Mohammed. (1) He is far down within the historic period. (2) His religion rose to far-spread power and notoriety within a generation of his death--a far swifter development than that of Christism, so often described as miraculous. (3) He actually left written documents; and though these were certainly redacted, most of them have none of the well-known marks of late fabrication. (4) In virtue of the relation of Islam to Christianity, which had a

[p. 239]

body of sacred books and claimed a monopoly of truth, a fierce critical light played upon the new cult from the first days of its expansion beyond Arabia. (5) The accounts of the life of Mohammed are normally biographical, and, though not quite certainly true in detail, at no point typically mythical, save as regards the tales of marvels at his birth and in his infancy, wherein the record conforms to the normal mythopoeic practice of antiquity, seen in the biographies of Plato and Confucius as well as in those of Jesus, Moses, and the Gods and demi-gods in general. Apart from these embellishments, and the tales of his intercourse with angels, he is born and lives and dies normally at known dates; works no miracles; makes no claims to divinity; is traceable long before his period of notoriety; is, in short, recognisable as a historic type of masterful fanatic. In every one of these respects his record differentiates sharply from those of Buddha and Jesus.

Absolute date, of course, is not a decisive consideration: we believe in the historicity of certain Jews B.C., and disbelieve in the legend of William Tell, who is placed thirteen hundred years later. But when we consider the environments in which Jesus and Buddha are supposed to have lived, it becomes clear that the possibilities of fable round such names are boundless. Of neither is it now pretended that he left a written word; for neither do critical scholars now claim that his immediate associates have left written accounts of him; in regard to both it is admitted that many sayings are falsely ascribed to them. Instead, then, of letting the supposed historicity of Buddha plead for that of Jesus, we are led to ask whether the one is not as problematic as the other.

Footnotes

^238:1 So the late Professor Tiele, Outlines, p. 85.

^238:2 See below, Part III,  section 3.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 8. The Problem of Buddhist Origins.

At the first critical glance into Buddhistic origins, the student becomes aware of a dilemma. The Buddha, we are told, delivered a teaching which, though it did not directly repudiate, yet ignored and treated as valueless the belief in deities; and the movement he set up was thus practically atheistic; yet the legends of his own birth, and many of the narratives concerning his life, are in terms of the supernaturalist beliefs of both earlier and later times. As regards the birth legends, they are found to quadrate in large measure with those of the God Krishna, and at the same time to point to many of the myths of the Vedas; [*1] so that, whatever may have been

[p. 240]

the origin of the Buddhist movement, it must have been heavily overgrown with supernaturalism when the life of the Founder was thus written.

The conservative student naturally answers that, though such overlaying and perversion of the Master's teaching did take place, he remains none the less a real person; and that the proof lies in the many narratives which represent him as speaking like any other mortal teacher. A critical study of the teaching, however, only doubles the dilemma. The accomplished and devoted English scholar who has done so much during the past thirty years to make known the documents of Buddhism to the western world, has no misgivings as to either the historicity of Gotama or his personal establishment of the Buddhist movement in the fashion set forth by the narratives; but the expositor's own scholarly candour puts before us a dozen grounds for doubt. Every cause for scepticism that exists in the cases of Jesus and Moses exists here, with differences of degree. Firstly, the Buddha wrote nothing. Secondly, none of his disciples or contemporaries wrote of him. Thirdly, some of the documents that seem nearest in time to the alleged period of Gotama, such as the Dialogues, are thoroughly factitious, and strike a student as the reverse of trustworthy; while others are admittedly literary creations, ascribing to the Buddha extemporaneous verses of a highly finished quality. Fourthly, much of the teaching put in his mouth is of a nature known to be current before his period.

As to the nature of his teachings the obscurity is equally great. It is not merely that they contain inconsistencies such as may be fallen into by any teacher: they are so disparate, so discursive, so various in their tone, purpose, and point of view, that a very short critical study reveals difference of source, time, and aim; and when we contemplate their metaphysic, their minuteness, their demand for leisurely attention and assimilation, we are at a loss to conceive how they could have set up a far-reaching popular movement in any country at any time. As little do we realise why they should have set up any religious society whatever. And the ordinary histories make the assertion without explaining the case.

On the other hand, much of the earliest literature exhibits all the marks of doctrinary myth--this by the implicit admission of the scholars who stand critically but confidently for the historicity of the teaching Buddha:

"The books [of the Sutta Pitaka] profess to give, not merely the belief itself, but the belief as the Buddha uttered it, with an account of the time when, and the place at which, he uttered it.

[p. 241]

[paragraph continues] The Buddha's new method of salvation, his new doctrine of what salvation was, did not present itself to the consciousness of the early Buddhist community as an idea, a doctrine, standing alone, and merely on its own merits. In their minds it was indissolubly bound up with the memory of the revered and striking personality of him who had proclaimed it." [*1]

[paragraph continues] Thus it lies on the face of the case that any narrative could find acceptance which was put in circumstantial form; and that for any doctrine whatever a narrative frame was invented as a matter of course. After the Dhamma, or collection of short scriptures in verse, had come into vogue,

"The members of the Order were no longer contented to learn, and to understand the meaning of, the various Rules of the Patimokkha [part of the Vinaya or Rules of the Order]. A desire sprang up to have, for each of them also, a historical basis; to know the story of how the Buddha himself came to lay down the Rule to his disciples. And it was only the Brother who was properly acquainted with all this, who was accounted a real 'Doctor of the Law.'" [*2]

[paragraph continues] Now, the Dhamma-pada is believed to be wholly compiled from previous books; and some of its best doctrines are avowedly ancient, as thus: "Hatred does not cease by hatred at any time: hatred ceases by love: this is an old rule." [*3] Here, then, we have the cult making its Teaching-God on the ordinary lines, describing him as supernaturally born, calling him the "Blessed One," and visibly creating for the traditional Teacher a flatly fictitious biography. At this early stage, then, Buddhism is seen making its Buddha; and in the act, instead of yielding support by analogy to the belief in the historic Jesus, it vividly suggests a similar process of construction in the case of Christism. We are thus far merely left asking what primitive Buddhism really was.

Footnotes

^239:1 See E. Senart, Essai sur la legende de Buddha, 2e edit. 1882; Prof. Kern, Histoire du Bouddhisme dans l'Inde, Fr. tr. 1901, vol. i, liv. i, ch. ii.

^241:1 Rhys Davids and Oldenberg, Vinaya Texts, Part I, Introd. p. xvii ("Sacred Books of the East," vol. xiii).

^241:2 Ib. p. xviii, proceeding on the Kullavagga, ix, 5, 1.

^241:3 Dhamma-pada i, 5. Max Muller's trans. S.B.E. x. Professor Rhys Davids indeed translates the last clause "this is always its nature" (Buddhism, p. 128); but he notes (p. 126) other cases of avowed quotation; and the collection is visibly a far-reaching compilation. See p. 20, note.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 9. Buddhism and Buddhas.

Our English guide, than whom no man knows more of Buddhism, gives us a definition: "There can be little doubt but that the doctrines of the Four Noble Truths and of the Noble Eightfold Path, the 'Foundation of the Kingdom of Righteousness,' were not only the teaching of Gotama himself, but were the central and most

[p. 242]

essential part of it." [*1] The teachings in question are too well known to need quotation here: they are simply a formal and symmetrical statement of the rules of self-repression by which the Buddhist is to attain the inward peace of Nirvana, or deliverance from blind desires. Let us then assume that these teachings are for Buddhism primordial: what is there to prove that they are the utterances of one Gotama, "the Sakya sage"; and that his proclamation of them set up an "Order" of disciples?

The Order, by all accounts, was one of Mendicants. Either there were, or there were not, such Orders in existence before the Buddhist. If not, we are to suppose that one man, by the simple proclamation of a certain set of quietest principles, calling for self-restraint without any painful self-mortification, induced numbers of men and women, many of them instructed, to take up a new way of life in a country not much given to changes or experiments, and through this host of disciples instituted an Order that was to set a great mark on the history of religion. The unlikeliness of such a sudden growth will be generally granted; and indeed it is fully conceded--though this is rarely mentioned in the more popular accounts of Buddhism--that a Sangha or Society of the kind was no new phenomenon in Buddha's day. [*2] There seem to have been many; and the Buddhist Order avowedly copied their practices:--

According to Buddhist tradition--and we see no sufficient reason for doubting the correctness of the account--the monks of other, that is, non-Buddhistic sects, used to meet together at the middle and at the close of every half-month, and were accustomed then to proclaim their new teaching in public. At such times......the different sects found an opportunity of increasing their numbers and their influence. The Buddhists also adopted the custom of these periodical meetings, but confined themselves to meeting twice in each month. [*3]

Our authorities argue indeed that the penitential practice of the Buddhist meetings "seems [*4] to have been an original invention of the Buddhists themselves"; but here we have on the one hand an avowal that the Buddhists "invented" notable usages not prescribed by the traditional Founder, and on the other hand a failure to demonstrate that the Buddhist practice was not pre-Buddhistic. [*5] On the face

[p. 243]

of the case, the claim is distinctly improbable, in view of the other data. For the rest, the Jainist movement admittedly dates from the same period; mendicant sages are recognised in the Buddhist books as common phenomena before Buddha; [*1] and the same kinds of rules of conduct seem to have been general, save that the Buddhist was not so painfully ascetic as some others.

The Buddhist movement, then, was one on anciently familiar lines. What is more, the title of "the Buddha," which means "the enlightened," so far from making claim to a new departure, was an implicit acknowledgment of continuance in established ideals.

"In the Pali and Sanskrit texts the word Buddha is always used as a title, not as a name. The historical Buddha is represented to have taught that he was only one of a long series of Buddhas who appear at intervals in the world, and who all teach the same system. After the death of each Buddha his religion flourishes for a time and then decays, till it is at last completely forgotten, and wickedness and violence rule over the earth. Gradually then the world improves; until at last a new Buddha appears who again preaches the lost Dharma or Truth.....The names of twenty-four of these Buddhas who appeared previous to Gotama have been handed down to us.....The Buddhavansa or 'History of the Buddhas'.....gives the lives of all the previous Buddhas before commencing the account of Gotama himself; and the Pali commentary on the Jatakas gives certain details regarding each of the twenty-four." [*2]

[paragraph continues] The number and the names may very well be, as our historian argues, late inventions; but there can be no question as to the fact of the belief. An early tradition avows that, after "the" Buddha had made sixty converts in three months, sent them in different directions to preach and teach, and again converted the whole population of Rajagriha, the capital of King Bimbisara, he encountered a period of hostility, in which his disciples were ridiculed as preachers of a doctrine of depopulation. Appealed to by them for counsel, he advised them "to say that the Buddha was only trying to preach righteousness, as former Buddhas had done." [*3] Even in the late Commentary of Buddhaghosa on the Dialogues of Gotama, "the Blessed One" is represented as exhorting his disciples to be earnest, because "hard is it to meet with a Buddha in the world." [*4] So in

[p. 244]

the Dhamma-pada we have the text: "A Buddha is not easily found. Wherever such a sage is born, the race prospers." [*1] And the name Bhagava, "the Blessed One," is equally impersonal, the Buddhist traditions themselves telling of Gotama's discussions with "Bhagava, Alara, and Udraka." [*2] Finally, in the fourth century of our era, "there was certainly near to Sravasti a sect of Buddhists who rejected Gotama, reverencing only the three previous Buddhas, and especially Kasyapa, whose body they believed to be buried under one of the dagabas at which they, as well as the orthodox, worshipped, while another was said to be built over the spot where he had died." [*3]

There were probably current, then, at and before the time of Gotama's alleged teaching, any number of teachings credited to "the Buddha" and "the Blessed One"; and these might include many afterwards ascribed to Gotama. Given, then, an absolute absence of evidence for the transcription of any teachings of Gotama in his lifetime, on what grounds are we to believe that they were with knowledge ascribed to a man of that name, whose life answered to the non-supernatural details given in the legends? Nay, seeing that even the name Gautama or Gotama is on the one hand a common one, [*4] and on the other hand (as "Gautama of the race of Gotama") full of mythological associations; [*5] and seeing further that there was admittedly another Gotama known to the early Buddhists who also founded an Order, [*6] what proof is there that sayings and doings of different Gotamas may not have been ascribed to one person? On the view, again, that the Four Noble Truths and the Noble Eightfold Path are the oldest doctrines of the Buddhist movement, and were formulated by one Gotama, what reason is there to believe that the movement either (a) arose or (b) made any progress on the simple basis of those teachings? Baur, believing in the historicity of the Gospel Jesus, yet makes the avowal: "How soon would everything true and important that was taught by Christianity have been relegated to the series of long-faded sayings of the noble humanitarians and thinking sages of antiquity, had not its teachings become words of eternal life in the

[p. 245]

mouth of its Founder?" [*1] Similarly may we not ask, How, in much-believing India, could any large organised movement develop on the simple nucleus of a teaching of self-control, which differed from the common practice of Hindu asceticism only in its renunciation of positive self-maceration? Nay, supposing a sage to have framed an eightfold path of "Right Belief, Right Aims, Right Speech, Right Actions, Right means of Livelihood, Right Endeavour, Right Mindfulness, Right Meditation," how should he intelligibly proceed to establish his way by forming an Order of Mendicants? [*2] Our guide himself explains that these "classified statements of moral truth" were "addressed to Brahmans skilled in the dialectics of the time"; and they certainly have that aspect. But why should they be offered as a primary code for a new mendicant Order?

It will doubtless be answered that such a priori objection is unwarranted; that we must take the evidence as we find it and recognise as the primary teaching of the founder of Buddhism the doctrines repeatedly ascribed to him in the oldest documents. But when we inquire historically into the oldest documents and their authenticity we learn from our leading instructors that the received tradition of the First Buddhist Council which "collected the sayings of the Master" is proved to be late and untrustworthy by an early Sutta, which gives all the story of the heresy that is historically stated as the motive for the Council, but says nothing of such a Council taking place. "The author of the Mahaparinibhana-Sutta," says Dr. Oldenberg, "did not know anything of the First Council"; and Professor Rhys Davids agrees. [*3] And this very Sutta ("The Book of the Great Decease") is open to suspicion of lateness, inasmuch as it makes the Blessed One figure at the head of a great movement in his lifetime, travelling sometimes with five hundred and sometimes with twelve hundred and fifty disciples. What is more, it represents him as giving forth a kind of teaching hard to reconcile with other doctrine ascribed to him as typical; for in the very first chapter of the Sutta ( section 4) he is made to lay it down as one of the conditions of the permanent prosperity of a certain tribe of Vaggians that they "honour and esteem and revere and support the Vaggian shrines in town or country, and allow not the proper offerings and rites, as formerly given and performed, to fall into

[p. 246]

desuetude." [*1] It may well be said of such a teacher that, so far from having opposed Hinduism and "destroyed a system of iniquity and oppression and fraud," he "lived and died a Hindu." [*2] But does such doctrine correlate with the denial of the permanence of the Gods, and of the value of prayers and sacrifices, also ascribed to the Buddha by tradition and documents?

The traditional First Council, then, which figures as the first historical authority for the existence of the Buddha's teachings, is later (if it ever took place at all) than a Sutta which ascribes to him a teaching wholly different in spirit and aim from those commonly held to be typical and essential in his doctrine. But indeed Pali scholars are more and more convinced that the First Council is a mere literary myth, to assign to which a historical date is to put a false problem. [*3] And if the First Council thus goes by the board, of what value is the late tradition that the Council of Vesali was held a hundred years after the Buddha's death? Our authorities argue that since the "Ten Points" said to have been there vehemently discussed are not mentioned in the earlier sections of the Mahavagga, these must be prior to the Council; and that as the Patimokkha is visibly older still, the last-named section of the Vinaya must be very old indeed. [*4] The answer is (1) that the Council of Vesali [*5] may have been centuries later than the date traditionally assigned to it, and (2) that the Vinaya texts in general, if relatively old, have nothing of the character of an innovating propaganda, nothing of the nature of an appeal which would create a new Order, but rather correspond to the late code of rules framed for monastic orders in Christendom a thousand years after the foundation of the Christian cult. The fact that they are all ascribed to the Founder is but one more evidence of the total lack of the critical or historical sense among the members.

Footnotes

^242:1 Rhys Davids, General Introduction to the Buddhist Suttas, vol. xi of "Sacred Books of the East" series, p. xxi.

^242:2 Cp. Kuenen, Hibbert Lectures, p. 248 sq.; Kern, as cited, ii, 1-3; and Prof. Davids' trans. of Dialogues of the Buddha, 1899, p. 57, p. 61, note, pp. 64, 66, 77, 78, 102, 105, 220-1. It appears that even the Buddhist yellow robe was common to other Orders (Id. pp. 77, 78).

^242:3 Rhys Davids and Oldenberg, Introd. to Vinaya Texts, Pt. ii, p. x, proceeding on the Mahavagga, ii, 1, and ii, 4, 2.

^242:4 This modifies Koeppen's "ohne Zweifel" (Die Religion des Buddha, 1857-9, i, 366).

^242:5 Koeppen (i, 367, note) says that "Die Beichte trat an die Stelle des bramanischen Opfers." But sacrifice had already been superseded in the teaching of some Brahmanists. Below, <page 248>.

^243:1 Dialogues of the Buddha, pp. 214-221.

^243:2 Davids, Buddhism. pp. 179-180. Cp. Weber, History of Indian Literature, pp. 27, 167, 284-5, as to the Brahmanic connections of the word. A Nepalese list gives eight. Wilson, Essays and Lectures on Relig. of Hindus, 1862, ii, 7.

^243:3 Davids, Buddhism, pp. 55, 61-2, 63-4, and refs.

^243:4 Id. American Lectures, p. 111; cp. Dialogues of the Buddha, 1899, p. 87.

^244:1 Dhamma-pada, xiv, 193 (Max Muller's trans. S. B. E. x). "The awakened" is used in both the singular and the plural throughout the chapter.

^244:2 Davids, Buddhism, p. 34, citing Beal, Romantic Legend of Buddha, pp. 152-177.

^244:3 Davids, Buddhism, p. 181. Professor Davids avows that the sayings ascribed to Kasyapa Buddha in the Amagandha Sutta are "quite in the manner and spirit of all the teaching ascribed to Gotama himself."

^244:4 Davids, Buddhism, p. 27, note. Cp. Buhler's Introd. to Inst. of Gotama in Sacred Laws of the Aryas (S. B. E. II), Pt. i, 2d ed. pp. l-li. "Siddartha" is admittedly a dubious name. The Nepalese list gives neither that nor Gotama. Wilson, as cited.

^244:5 Prof. H. Kern, Histoire du Bouddhisme dans l'Inde, tr. fr. 1901, i, 253-4.

^244:6 Dialogues, p. 222.

^245:1 Das Christenthum and die christliche Kirche der drei ersten Jahrhunderte, 1853, pp. 35-36. (Eng. tr. i, 38.)

^245:2 It may be argued that he was giving the preference to mendicancy as a means of livelihood over the wrong means, such as fortune-telling and astrology, said in the Dialogues of the Buddha (Davids' trans. 1899, pp. 16-25) to be practised by "some recluses and Brahmans." But on this view the "rightness" is merely negative.

^245:3 Introd. to the Buddhist Suttas, S.B.E. xi.

^246:1 Last cit. pp. 3-4.

^246:2 Davids, Buddhism, p. 83; American Lectures, p. 116. [In the last ed. of his Buddhism Prof. Davids substituted for "Hindu" the phrase "typical Indian," adding: Hinduism had not, in his time, arisen."] See the Buddhism (pp. 138, 149, 165, etc.) for many instances in which the Buddha is made to speak of "the Gods" as a believer in them; and cp. Wilson, Essays and Lectures, as cited, ii, 28.

^246:3 Cp. R. Otto Francke, art. on "The Buddhist Councils" in Journal of the Pali Text Society, 1908, pp. 68-74.

^246:4 Rhys Davids and Oldenberg, Vinaya Texts, i, Introd. p. xvii. Cp. Buddhism, p. 163. 

^246:5 As to this cp. Koeppen, Die Religion des Buddha, i, 155-6.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 10. The Buddhist Cruces.

Looking, then, for a foothold among the shifting sands of Buddhist tradition, we note the following clashing records:--

1. The Buddha is represented alike in ostensibly early and in

[p. 247]

late tradition as speaking of "the Gods" with full belief in their existence. [*1]

2. He is represented on the one hand as discouraging sacrifices, [*2] and on the other hand as prescribing for a whole tribe a strict adherence to ancient rites. [*3]

3. King Asoka, who figured as a good Buddhist in the early vigour of the movement (about 250 B.C.), habitually called himself "the delight of the Gods," as did his contemporary the "pious Buddhist king of Ceylon." [*4]

4. The Buddha is represented as throwing his Order open to all classes, and at the same time as making the name "Brahman" a term of honour for his Arahats or saints. Brahmans, too, are said to have been among his most distinguished disciples; and the Dialogues represent his conversations with them.

5. Much teaching that certainly did not come from Buddha is admittedly ascribed to him, the principle being that he delivered the whole canon.

6. Much philosophic matter set forth as his teaching is nearly identical with much of the Sankhya system, of which at least the germs are admittedly pre-Buddhistic. [*5]

The last two circumstances are fully acknowledged by our Buddhist scholars. Oldenberg writes: "I have essentially modified my previous scepticism in regard to the connection of the two systems, and seen reason to place Buddhism considerably closer to the Sankhya than my former researches suggested." [*6] And Professor Rhys Davids, enumerating the long list of advantages claimed by the Buddha in one of the Dialogues for the life of a recluse, concedes that "it is perfectly true that of these thirteen consecutive propositions, or groups of propositions, it is only the last, No. 13, which is exclusively Buddhist," [*7] the exception being "the realisation of the Four Truths, the destruction of the Asavas [lusts, errors, and ignorance], and attainment of Arahatship." Professor Davids goes

[p. 248]

on to make the claim: "But the things omitted, the union of the whole of those included into one system, the order in which the ideas are arranged ......all this is also distinctively Buddhist." This claim, however, does not affect the significance of the admission, and is itself provocative of a new pressure of criticism. For if the exclusively Buddhist section be the last of all, is not the fair presumption this, that the Buddhist formula here has merely been added to an existing doctrine, appropriated by Buddhists? Among the specified rules of conduct admitted to be not exclusively Buddhist are many that go far to constitute the content of the "Eightfold Path," which is thus obviously but a separate classification of precepts or ideals common to other schools.

The same question arises again over the admission [*1] that "the Eightfold path is not mentioned in our Sutta" (the Sammana-Phala); and that, as regards three of the four lines of ethical precept to be traced in the teaching under notice, Buddhism in the first "goes very little beyond the current ethics of the day"; in the second and third proceeds mainly on the practice of pre-Buddhistic recluses and Orders; and only in the fourth--specifying the Buddhistic program for Arahatship--takes up a special stand. [*2] But on analysis it is found that this excepted doctrine is at most only verbally special to Buddhism, since the other schools also certainly professed to put down lust of life and physical pleasure, error, and ignorance; and it is not pretended that the word "Arahat" was a Buddhist monopoly. The further we go, the stronger becomes the stress of doubt. Where we are not certainly dealing with pre-Buddhistic doctrine under the form of dialogues held by the Buddha, we are reading, as in so many passages of the Dhamma-pada, sayings of a literary construction, often in verse, which in their present form come from Buddhistic writers long after the alleged period of Gotama, though they too may derive from remote antiquity. Among these, even as happens in the later sections of the Christian gospels, are some of the noblest ethical teachings of Buddhist literature.

What doctrines, then, were special to Buddhism? Not Karma: that was common property, shared-in by Buddhism. [*3] Wherein did it ethically innovate? Not in asserting the superiority of a right mind to sacrifice: that was a primary doctrine of the Jainas, and admittedly pre-Buddhistic both within and without the pale of Brahmanism. [*4] Not in seeking a way of Salvation independently of the Vedas: that had been done by many teachers, in various

[p. 249]

sects. [*1] Not in the doctrine that defilement comes not from unclean meats, but from evil deeds and words and thoughts: that is given by the Buddhist writers as pre-Buddhistic, "being one of the few passages in which sayings of previous Buddhas are recorded." [*2] Not in the search for peace through self-control and renunciation: that was the quest of a myriad recluses, the goal of all previous Buddhas. Not in the view that there is a wisdom higher than that attained by mere austerities: that too is pre-Buddhistic. [*3] Not in the doctrine that non-Brahmans could join an order and attain religious blessedness: the other Orders were equally open to men of low social status or even slaves; [*4] and indeed the rigid ideal of caste separateness was not yet established in the days or in the sphere of early Buddhism; [*5] for though Brahman claims had long been exorbitantly high, it appears that there were many Brahmans who rationally waived them, and as regards ascetics they were not raised, or at least not pressed. [*6] In Buddhist practice, too, as in that of the early Christians, runaway slaves were not received into the Order. [*7] As little was the admission of women to the Order a Buddhist innovation: that too was practised by the Jainas; and even the tradition makes the Buddha accept it reluctantly, in the twenty-fifth year of his preaching. [*8] There seems, in short, to be nothing on the face of the doctrine to account for the special expansion of the Buddhist movement. [*9]

Footnotes

^247:1 Rhys Davids, Buddhism, 18th ed. pp. 35, 55-56, 79, 99, 149, 154; American Lectures on Buddhism, 1896, pp. 121, 138, 165; Dialogues of the Buddha, tr. 1899, p. 79, etc.

^247:2 Davids, Buddhism, p. 61; Dialogues, Sutta v.

^247:3 Yet Oldenberg goes so far as to see (wir durfen sagen) a true utterance of Buddha in the dialogue on sacrifices, when the other dialogue, giving the contrary view, has equal authority (Der Buddha, 3te Aufl. p. 196).

^247:4 Davids, Buddhism, p. 84. So, among the later princes of the Andhras, who were great patrons of the Buddhists, we have one called Vedisiri, "he whose glory is the Veda," and another Yanasiri, "he whose glory is the sacrifice" (Buhler, Introd. to the Apastamba in "Sacred Laws of the Aryas" (S.B.E. II, Pt. i, 2nd ed. p, xxxix). On the other hand, however, the Andhras are spoken of in the Aitareya-brahmana as degraded and barbarous. As to the laxity of the Buddhism of early kings, cp. Bloch, Zeitschr. d. deutsch. morgenland. Gesellsch. lxiii (1909), Heft ii, note "Zur Asoka-Inschrift von Bairat," pp. 325-7.

^247:5 Davids, American Lectures, pp. 24-29.

^247:6 Der Buddha, sein Leben, seine Lehre, seine Gemeinde, 3te Aufl., 1897, Excurs, p. 441.

^247:7 Dialogues of the Buddha, as cited, p. 59.

^248:1 Id. p. 62.

^248:2 Id. p. 63.

^248:3 Id. pp. 72, 105; Buddhism, pp. 99-100.

^248:4 Dialogues, pp. 164-5.

^249:1 Oldenberg, Der Buddha, 3te Aufl. p. 76.

^249:2 Dialogues, p. 104.

^249:3 Id. p. 211.

^249:4 Id. pp. 77, 103.

^249:5 Id. pp. 101, 103, 107, 285-7. Prof. Davids cites Fick, Sociale Gliederung im nordostlichen Indien, pp. 50, 51.

^249:6 Oldenberg, Der Buddha, pp. 71, 175.

^249:7 Davids, Dialogues, p, 103. citing Vinaya Texts, S.B.E. i. 199.

^249:8 Koeppen, Die Religion des Buddha and ihre Entstehung, 1857, i, 104; Rhys Davids, Buddhism, p. 66.

^249:9 Cp. Senart, Essai, pp. 447-451.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 11. Sociological Clues.

Seeking for sociological explanations, we first turn to the economic conditions. As was to be expected, there are clear traces of an economic pressure that drove men into the Order. In the Milinda Prashnaya ("Questions of Menander"), Nagasena, the founder of the Madhyamika school of northern Buddhism, in answer to a question from Milinda, the Greek King of Sagala in the Punjaub, [*10] as to whether all members join the Order for the high end of renunciation, is represented as answering: "Certainly not, sire. Some for these reasons; but some have left the world in

[p. 250]

terror at the tyranny of kings. Some have joined us to be safe from being robbed; some harassed by debt; and some perhaps to gain a livelihood." [*1] Nagasena himself, again, is made to say that he joined as a mere boy, seeking to be taught. [*2] This account would in all likelihood hold good of the social conditions before the Greek invasion; and on the face of the case there is no difficulty in understanding that any Order which secured men a measure of peace and security would find adherents, even as did the monasteries and monkish orders of the Middle Ages in Europe. But the same pressure would send applicants to other Orders as well as the Buddhist; and we have still to ask why it was that the Buddhist was specially sought, and became specially powerful, as well as how it began.

To begin with, there are strong reasons for regarding the Jainas and Buddhists alike as having been originally either simple sects, or sections of one sect, of Brahmanism; and as this view is held by two leading authorities, Weber and Jacobi, and is, as we have seen, now partially yielded to by Oldenberg, we may reasonably try it as a working hypothesis. Weber goes so far as to assert categorically (1) that Brahmanic speculation anciently sundered on two main lines, one finding the First Cause in indiscrete matter, the other finding it in spirit; (2) that the latter theory gradually became the orthodox one; and (3) that "from among the adherents of the former view, which came by degrees to be regarded as heterodox, there arose, as thought developed, enemies still more dangerous to orthodoxy, who......before long threw themselves into practical questions also, and eventually became the founders of the form of belief known to us as Buddhism." [*3] On this view (which, it will be seen, implicitly modifies all the ordinary assumptions as to the origin of Buddhism in one man's teaching), the quasi-atheistic element in Buddhism is primordial; and the popular development is a mere sequel of a movement originally, as it were, academic. In Weber's opinion, the Jainas in turn are only one of the oldest sects [*4] of Buddhism; Buddha being for him a real personage who propounded to the people without distinction of caste a teaching in which there was "absolutely nothing new," but which had previously "been the possession of a few anchorites" and had "never before been freely and publicly proclaimed to all." Hence "the enormous

[p. 251]

success that attended his doctrine: the oppressed all turned to him as their redeemer." [*1]

Jacobi on the other hand, pointing to the ancient protest of the Brahmanic writer Vasishtha [*2] against the neglect of the Veda by ascetics, concludes that "the germ of dissenting sects like those of the Buddhists and the Jainas was contained in the institute of the fourth Asrama (grade), and that the latter was the model of the heretical sects; therefore Buddhism and Jainism may be regarded as religions developed out of Brahmanism, not by a sudden reformation, but prepared by a religious movement going on for a long time." [*3] For this view of the two sects as merely cognate there are various grounds--for instance this, that while both Buddhists and Jainas have adopted the five vows of the Brahmanic ascetics, the Buddhists opposed the Brahmanic doctrine of the Atman or personal soul, and the Jainas accepted it with modifications, holding that all parts of the elements as well as animals and plants have souls. This and various other details suggest rather an original independence than a splitting-off. And Jacobi confidently claims [*4] that "we know for certain that Buddha at least addressed himself chiefly to the members of the aristocracy, and that the Jainas originally preferred the Kshatriyas [the warrior caste] to the Brahmans." [*5]

Thus far, it will be seen, both forms of the theory accept broadly the tradition as to Buddha's preaching, though that tradition, as apart from the incidental revelations in the documents, says nothing of an acceptance of a Brahmanic basis by Buddha for his Order; and Weber leaves his conception far from clear, inasmuch as he speaks at one time of a body of heretics as "the founders" of Buddhism, and at another of Buddha as "one of its representatives," and as the first to publish broadcast doctrines previously confined to "a few anchorites." And when we come to compare the legend of Buddha with the Jaina legend of Mahavira ["the great hero"], our difficulty deepens. The Jaina legends refer the preaching of Mahavira "exclusively to the same district which Buddhism also recognises as its holy land"; and in Weber's opinion they "display so close an affinity to the accounts of Buddha's ministry that we cannot but recognise in the two groups of narratives merely varying forms of common reminiscences." [*6] But, if reminiscences, why are they to be held as being primarily Buddhistic? And why, above all, are

[p. 252]

they to be certificated as reminiscences? Mahavira is actually described as son of "Siddartha"--a name of Buddha--and husband of "Yasoda," the name of the mythic nurse of Krishna. [*1] The Jainas, says Jacobi, "have reproduced the whole history of Krishna, with small variations, in relating the life of the twenty-second Tirthakara, Arishtanemi, who was a famous Yadava." [*2] In the same way the Buddhists have put much of the history of Krishna into their stories of Buddha. Such adaptation is, in fact, a normal religious practice, common to many races and cults. [*3]

A somewhat better reason than any Weber gives for regarding the Jaina legends as the later is that according to them Mahavira did twelve years' penances as against Buddha's six, was convinced of their necessity, and persevered in some of them after becoming a Tirthakara or prophet. [*4] Such a comparison is avowedly post-Buddhistic. But such a detail might be added to an established Jaina legend just as the Buddhists undoubtedly added to theirs. Granting, however, that the Jainas may represent a secession from the Buddhist movement--their greater asceticism (involving a measure of uncleanliness [*5]) being on the lines of the schism said by the Buddhist tradition to have been set up by Gotama's cousin Dewadatta, [*6] identified by Jacobi with Mahavira--we have really no sound ground for believing that on either side we are dealing with facts in the life of any sect-founder. The Buddhist legend runs that Ajatasatru, son of the Buddhist rajah Bimbisara, was induced by Dewadatta to kill his father, Dewadatta at the same time causing three attempts to be made on the life of Buddha. Such a tale is on all fours with the efforts of the early Christians to make out that certain rival cults, such as that of "Simon Magus," were set up by way of schism from Christianity, when in reality those cults were the elder [*7] Jacobi puts it that Ajatasatru killed his father and warred on his grandfather, who was uncle of Mahavira and patron of the Jainas, thereafter siding with their rivals the Buddhists, whom he had formerly persecuted as friends of his father's. [*8] Here we have apparently one more attempt to draw a truth of history from a bare tradition; and on the principles followed in this inquiry

[p. 253]

there is no scientific warrant for such extraction. But there is on the other hand a clear scientific value in the suggestion that monarchic or other political forces may have determined the success of a particular Order at a particular time. [*1]

Footnotes

^249:10 Professor Davids admits (Introd. to vol. cited, p. xx) that it is told alike of Milinda and of Buddha that many cities sought their ashes, and agreed finally to divide their relics and raise to them monuments--another light on the Buddha legend. As to the identification of Menander, whose coins are extant, with Milinda, see Weber, History of Indian Literature, Eng. tr. p. 306, note.

^250:1 The Questions of King Milinda (S.B.E. xxxv), ii, 1,  section 5. Trans. i, 50. Cp. Kern, as cited by Kuenen, Hibbert Lect. pp. 277-8.

^250:2 There would be others, seeking light rather than shelter. Cp. Oldenberg, Buddha, p. 74.

^250:3 History of Indian Literature, Eng. tr. p. 27. Cp. pp. 284-5.

^250:4 Indische Studien, xvi, 210; History of Indian Literature, pp. 296-7, note.

^251:1 History, pp. 289-290.

^251:2 [Ch. x, 4, Buhler's trans.]

^251:3 Hermann Jacobi, Introd. to Jaina Sutras (S.B.E. xxii), Pt. i, p. xxxiii. Cp. Senart, Essai. p. 453.

^251:4 Here following Oldenberg, Der Buddha, Ste Aufl. pp. 176-9.

^251:5 Jacobi, as cited, p. xiii.

^251:6 Weber, History, p. 296, note. Cp. Wilson, Essays, ii, 10-11.

^252:1 Guerinot, Essai de Bibliographie Jaina, 1906, p. v-vi. On this fact no comment is made by M. Guerinot, who insists on the historicity of both Buddha and Mahavira.

^252:2 Jacobi, as cited, p. xxxi, note. Cp. Senart, p. 453.

^252:3 Senart notes (Essai, Introd. pp. xxi-xxii) that the numerous sects of Buddhists follow the same myth types in their legends, despite their other differences, many of which date very far back.

^252:4 Jacobi, as cited, pp. xvii-xviii.

^252:5 Jacobi, as cited, p. xxvi.

^252:6 Rhys Davids, Buddhism, pp. 75-6.

^252:7 Cp. the author's Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. pp. 369, 435, and Short History of Christianity, pp. 33-4.

^252:8 As cited, p. xiv.

^253:1 Jacobi's view to this effect was accepted by Max Muller: "Take away the previous growth of Brahmanism, and Buddha's work would have been impossible. Buddhism might in fact have remained a mere sect of Brahmanism, unless political circumstances had given it an importance and separate existence which other rival sects did not attain" (Natural Religion, p. 555, citing Jacobi as above).

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 12. Buddhism and Asoka.

When Buddhism first emerges in what may be termed the light of history, it is as an established system highly favoured by the great king Asoka, about 250 B.C. It is made clear by his edicts that only a small number of scriptures, whose titles are only partially identifiable with known extant writings, were then recognised as preserving the spoken discourses of the Buddha. [*2] And among those named is "The Terrors of the Future," which "seems to be a description of the different worlds of purgatory, one of which is described in the Pettavatthu, the 7th Book of the 5th Division of the 2nd Pitaka." So that thus early in the known history of the Order it figures as holding in Buddha's name one of the common superstitions which Buddha is supposed to have repudiated. And Asoka, as we have seen, called himself "the delight of the Gods," as did his friend the contemporary Buddhist king of Ceylon.

The first sociological problem is to account for the favour shown by such kings to such an Order. Constantine, we know, raised up Christianity to be the State cultus because of its obvious political uses as a far-reaching organisation, easily attachable to his interest. Had the kings of Magadha a similar motive? Chandragupta, according to both Greek and Hindu accounts, [*3] began his career as a robber-chief in the time of Alexander, whose camp he had visited on the banks of the Hyphasis, as a defeated rebel; and after seizing the throne of Nanda, the murdered rajah of Magadha, about 315 B.C., he defeated Seleukos, the Greek governor of the Indus provinces, driving the Greek power out of India. If then "it is clear that it was just when Chandragupta and his low-caste followers from the Punjab came into power that the Buddhists, the party of reform, the party who made light of caste distinctions, began to rise rapidly in numbers and influence," [*4] it is quite intelligible that the upstart

[p. 254]

dynasty found in the moral and didactic influence of such an Order a useful political support, as Ajatasatru may have done earlier, supposing him to have attained power by killing his father. The record that Ajatasatru, after favouring the Buddhists, captured Sravasti, their headquarters, and totally destroyed Kapilavastu, their sacred place, [*1] tells further of friction and complications, all presumably of a political character. Usurpers in such cases would be apt to have arrayed against them the influence of the Brahmans; and the midway position of the Buddhists, who at once paid respect to Brahmanism and departed from its caste principles, would place them in a certain imperfect measure of harmony with the illegitimate monarch. [*2]

But there is a further reason for ascribing to Chandragupta a decisive influence on Buddhism in its relation to Brahmanism. If Weber is right, the peoples of the Punjab "never submitted to the Brahmanical order of things, but always retained their ancient Vedic standpoint, free and independent, without either priestly domination or system of caste. For this reason, too, they were the objects of a cordial hatred on the part of their kinsmen, who had wandered further on; and on this account also Buddhism gained an easy entrance among them." [*3] But if Chandragupta with his Punjabis accepted Buddhism they would be strengthening the tendency existent in Buddhism to ignore caste; and, again, we have it from the same authority that "Buddha's teaching was mainly fostered in the district of Magadha, which, as an extreme border province, was perhaps never completely Brahmanised; [*4] so that the native inhabitants always retained a kind of influence, and now gladly seized the opportunity to rid themselves of the Brahmanical hierarchy and the system of caste." [*5] This view, it will be observed, diverges essentially from the other proposition, above cited, that Buddha in person undermined the principle of caste in a fashion "altogether novel and unwonted." If caste had never at all been recognised in the Punjab, and had never triumphed in Magadha, there would be nothing very

[p. 255]

novel there in the teaching that personal salvation did not depend on it. For such a teaching, Oldenberg avows, there was not only no necessity in that age and environment, but there was no inclination. "Any thought of any reformation of social conditions (Staatsleben), any notion of the founding of an earthly ideal kingdom, a pious Utopia, was wholly alien to these [early Buddhistic] circles. Anything like a movement of social change was unknown in India." In short, the conception of Buddha as a kind of popular liberator is rejected by one of the leading scholars who still stand for the historicity of Buddha. [*1] And though Brahmanists of Sankhya leanings were presumably not great sticklers for caste to begin with, it may well have been the anti-caste bias of the Punjabis that first gave the Buddhist Order a marked leaning of that kind, and supplied the basis for the belief that the Founder had been a Kshatriya. Such a state of things, too, would perfectly account for the fact that the Buddhist scriptures were, and remain, composed not in Sanskrit but in the popular idiom. [*2] It only needed that a beginning should be made, to stamp a given language as the sacred tongue of Buddhism.

What Ajatasatru presumably began and Chandragupta some generations later carried further, the grandson of the latter, Asoka, consummated. He found the Buddhist Order flourishing, and fully established it through his extensive kingdom; not, however, in direct opposition to Brahmanism, with which the now firmly seated dynasty would naturally make terms of mutual accommodation. For him, it seems clear, Buddhism was an organisation rather than a religion. It was compatible with Brahmanism while capable of being used to keep Brahmanism in check; and the "delight of the Gods" was not concerned with its atheistic philosophy. [*3] "Reverence towards Brahmans and members of the Order" was impartially prescribed in his edicts; and he repeatedly stipulates for an equal toleration of all sects, and an abstention all round from detraction of others. [*4] He was thus a Buddhist only in the sense that he made use of all organisations alike, and it is even doubtful whether he assimilated with more than a section of the Buddhists of his time. [*5] Nor is there any clear warrant for the conclusion that "Buddhism in the time of Asoka was still comparatively pure" because in the edicts "we hear nothing of metaphysical beings or hypothetical deities, nothing of ritual, or ceremonies, or charms." [*6] Edicts were not the natural

[p. 256]

place for such allusions; but the mention of the treatise on "The Terrors of the Future" is surely significant enough. [*1] The Mahavansa tells that under the sun of royal favour "heretics assumed the yellow robe in order to share in its advantages: whenever they had opinions of their own they gave them forth as doctrines of the Buddha." [*2] In that case they were doing what other Buddhists had done before them; and it is certain that most of what Buddhists accept as Buddha's teaching was penned long after Asoka's time.

We thus reach a critical conception of Buddhist origins. The Teaching Buddha, considered as the wondrous sage who in his lifetime creates by his own influence a great movement and establishes a great Order, shrinks in the light of criticism to the vanishing point. The early suspicion of a keen scholar [*3] that "after all, Sakya Muni is an unreal being," is justified on the closest scrutiny. The Order, probably originating among ascetic Brahmans, who may have been led to rationalism as a result of their primary renunciation of the Vedas, [*4] becomes intelligible simply as a monastic or mendicant sect on the ordinary Brahmanical bases, but tolerant on the subject of caste to start with, and tending to diverge from Brahmanism in doctrine and practice in the ratio of its numerical success, especially as regards its rejection of caste distinctions--a course obviously conducive to its expansion. On these lines, however, it could take many Brahmans with it; and inasmuch as it was primarily an Order living under rules, rather than a school of doctrine, it could all along include ordinary believers in the Gods as well as rationalists who turned their backs on official and popular Brahmanism because of its systematic exploitation of superstition.

But to an energetic rationalism in such an Order there was a fatal obstacle in the central principle or datum of the cult--the obtrusion of the supernatural Buddha as the source of all true wisdom. The very thinkers who framed the dialogues and discourses in which the Buddha most rationally teaches by argument were there building up the belief in a supernatural being in whom they themselves cannot have believed. To change the familiar phrase, they literally builded worse than they knew. On the popular craving for a Teaching God they relied for securing the popularity of their Order; and they thus frustrated the higher aims

[p. 257]

of their doctrine, inasmuch as superstition always drives out judgment. By the admission of Professor Rhys Davids, the Northern Buddhists took a step "far removed from Gotama's doctrines," "the step from polytheism to monotheism." But, on the other hand, they built up, on Brahmanic lines, a new Buddhistic polytheism, according to which there are five Dhyani Buddhas, mystical and divine beings, living in bliss; with five Bodhisatvas, or Buddhas Elect, destined to be born; and five Manushi or human Buddhas, of whom Gotama is the fourth: the fifth, Maitreya, the Buddha of love, being still to come; and for all such creations we have the sufficient explanation that the dreamers "craved after Buddhist gods to fill the place of the dead gods of the Hindu pantheon." And the northern Buddhism, finally, is as completely given over to polytheistic superstition as the southern. [*1]

It may, indeed, have been the higher intelligence of the rationalising Buddhists that secured the special success of their Order, as compared with that of the Jainas, whose bias to systematic self-mortification, as well as their greater superstition, accounts for the unintellectual character of their literature. The less ascetic Buddhists would at once be better able to propitiate kings and better able to attract recruits. Among them would circulate such maxims as that in the Dhamma-pada:--

Not nakedness, not platted hair, not dirt, not fasting, or lying on the earth, not rubbing with dust, not sitting motionless, can purify a mortal who has not overcome desires. He who, though dressed in fine apparel, exercises tranquillity, is quiet, subdued, restrained, chaste, and has ceased to find fault with all other beings, he indeed is a Brahmana, an ascetic, a friar (bhikshu). [*2]

But behind such sane maxims stood forever the fabulous figure of the Buddha, the giver of all the wisdom in his Order, and the imposer of all its artificial rules. Instead of the mass of myths concerning him being a late accretion to a body of high ethical teaching purporting to come from a normal human being, it is now seen to be probable that, as is contended by M. Senart, the mythical figure was there first, [*3] and the ethical teaching grew up fortuitously around it, even as the gospel teachings in all likelihood grew up round the name of a sacrificed Jesus who for his earlier worshippers was merely a name. To this, our initial problem, we now finally return, prepared to appreciate aright the issues.

Footnotes

^253:2 Cp. Rhys Davids, Buddhism, pp. 224-6. [In his last ed., 1910, Professor Davids modifies this passage, and protests against the inference that Asoka's list represents all the canonical writings known in his time.]

^253:3 Cp. Elphinstone, History of India, Cowell's ed. 1889, pp. 152-4; Rhys Davids, Buddhism, pp. 220-1.

^253:4 Rhys Davids, Buddhism, pp. 221. Cp. Jacobi, as cited, p. xiv: "With the extension [p. 254] of the limits of the empire of Magadha a new field was opened to both religions [Jainism and Buddhism], over which they spread with great activity. It was probably this auspicious political conjunction to which Jainism and Buddhism chiefly owed their success, while many similar sects attained only a local and temporary importance."

^254:1 Id. p. 77.

^254:2 Mr. Lillie, while recognising the success of Buddhism before Asoka (Buddhism in Christendom, p. 188), raises a needless difficulty by supposing it to have "struggled on in obscurity and perhaps in secrecy" till his advent (Id. p. 215). The latter view is excluded by the former.

^254:3 History of Indian Literature, p. 4.

^254:4 This view of the matter is not considered by Mr. Lillie, who insists (Buddhism in Christendom, pp. 187-8) that Asoka's stones declare Brahmanism to have been the official creed all over India before his reign.

^254:5 Weber, History, pp. 286-7. Cp. Davids, Early Buddhism (1908), p. 10.

^255:1 Oldenberg, Der Buddha, pp. 173-5. Cp. Kuenen, Hibb. Lect. p. 246.

^255:2 Weber, Ind. Lit., p. 179.

^255:3 But cp. Kern, Hist. du Bouddhisme, i, 274.

^255:4 Cp. Max Muller. Introd. to Sc. of Religion, ed. 1882, pp. 5-6 23; Davids, Buddhism, p. 223.

^255:5 Cp. Kern, i, 261., Cp. T. Bloch, "Zur Asoka-Inschrift von Bairat," in Z. D. M. G. lxiii, 2 (1909), p. 325.

^255:6 Davids, last cit.

^256:1 One of the other treatise-titles in Asoka's list appears in Max Muller's version as "The Supernatural Powers of the Masters," where Prof. Davids reads it "The State of the Just."

^256:2 Cited by Davids, p. 224.

^256:3 H. H. Wilson, Essays and Lectures, ii, 346. Cp. pp. 8-9.

^256:4 Cp. Barth, The Religions of India, Eng. tr. 1882, p. 81; Max Muller, Hib. Lect. p. 357: Kuenen, Hib. Lect. p. 252; Wilson, Essays and Lectures, ii, 347.

^257:1 Buddhism, pp. 199-211; Wilson, Essays and Lectures, ii, 25-39.

^257:2 Dhamma-pada, x, 141, 142, Max Muller's trans. Cp. Rhys Davids, Buddhism, p. 155.

^257:3 Cp. Kern, Histoire du Bouddhisme dans l'Inde, i, passim.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 258]

  

 section 13. The Buddha Myth.

In the introduction to M. Senart's Essai sur la legende de Buddha, the most comprehensive and scientific attempt of the kind yet made, the central problem is thus posited:--

"Either the historical data are the primary nucleus and as it were the central source, the legendary elements representing an ulterior action, in part accessory, without necessary cohesion; or, inversely, the mythological traits form a whole connected by a higher and anterior unity with the personage on whom they are here grafted, the historical data, if there are really any, being associated with them only in virtue of a secondary adaptation. It is at the first point of view that the inquiry has stood up to the present time. There has been drawn the practical conclusion that it suffices to suppress all the incredible details, what is left being taken for accredited history. I seek to show that for this first point of view we ought decidedly to substitute the second." [*1]

The conclusion to which the present argument points is exactly this, adhered to, however, more strictly than is the case in M. Senart's admirably learned treatise. For while he thus seems to imply that the supernatural element is the beginning of Buddhism as such, he finally assumes that there actually was a "founder." Certainly he sufficiently attenuates his conception:--

"A sect has a founder, Buddhism like every other. I do not pretend to demonstrate that Sakyamuni never existed. The question is perfectly distinct from the object of this treatise, It follows, certainly, from the foregoing researches that hitherto the sacred personage has been given too much historical consistence, that the tissue of fables grouped around his name has been too facilely transformed, by arbitrary piecings, into a species of more or less unplausible history. Scepticism acquires from our analyses, in some regards, a greater precision: still, it does not follow that we should indefinitely extend its limits. In this epic and dogmatic biography, indeed, there remain very few elements which sustain a close examination; but to say this is not to say that among them there has not entered some authentic reminiscence. The distinction is certainly very difficult. Where we are not in a position to show for a tradition its exact counterpart in other cycles, a decision is an extremely delicate process. All that is suspicious ought not necessarily to be eliminated: it is right that whatever is rigorously admissible ought to be retained. There is no alleged deity--not Vishnu, or Krishna, or Herakles--for whom we might not

[p. 259]

construct a sufficiently reasonable biography by proceeding as has hitherto been done in regard to the legend of Buddha.

"Under these reserves, I willingly recognise that there remain a certain number of elements which we have no absolute reason for thinking apocryphal: they may represent real historical reminiscences: to that, for my part, I have no objection. It is possible that the founder of Buddhism may have come from a tribe of Sakyas, though the pretended history of that race is certainly quite fictitious. It is possible that he may have come of a royal line, that he may have been born in a city called Kapilavastu, though this name arouses grave suspicions, opening the door to either mythological or allegorical interpretations, and the existence of such a town is very feebly certified. The name Gotama is certainly historic and well-known, but it is a borrowed name which tells us little. Much trouble has been taken to explain how this strictly Brahmanic patronymic might have passed to a family of Kshatriyas [the warrior caste] . Apart from Buddha, it is above all closely associated with his supposed aunt, the legendary Prajapati......I do not speak of his genealogy: it has certainly no value, being borrowed whole from epic heroes, in particular from Rama. On the other hand, it may well be that the teacher of the Buddhists entered on his religious career at the age of thirty-nine [*1]......"

[paragraph continues] And so on. Let us pause at the last clause to remember how the Jesus of the gospels "began to be about thirty years of age" when he began his teaching career, and to ask on what rational ground we can suppose such a detail to have been biographically preserved when the surrounding narrative yields no sign of biography whatever? There is in fact no single detail in the legend that has any claim to critical acceptance; and the position of the latest conservatives, as Oldenberg, is finally only a general petitio principii. India, admits that candid scholar, always was, as it is, "a land of types," wherein the lack of freedom stunts the free growth of individuality; and in the portraits of the Buddha and all his leading disciples we have simply the same type repeated. Yet, he contends, "a figure such as his certainly has not been fundamentally misconceived (fundamental missverstanden worden ist eine Gestalt wie die seine gewiss nicht)." [*2] Critical logic will not permit such an A, priori reinstatement of a conception in which every element has given way before analysis. It is but an unconscious resort to the old fallacy of meeting the indictment of a spurious document with the formula, "Who else could have written it?" [*3]

[p. 260]

We recur to the old issue--the thesis that "every sect must have had a founder." Such was the unhesitating assumption of Minayeff, who did so much to bring historic clearness into early Buddhist history. "It is beyond doubt that at the origin of great historic movements always and everywhere appear important and historic personalities. It was so, certainly, in the history of Buddhism, and its development unquestionably commenced in the work of the founder." [*1] Here we have something more than the proposition of M. Senart--we have a doctrine which would ascribe to definite founders the cults of Herakles and Dionysos and Aphrodite, the worship of fire, and the institution of human sacrifice. Dismissing such a generalisation as the extravagance of a scholar without sociology, [*2] we bring the issue to a point in the formula of M. Senart. Plainly that is significant in the sense only that someone must have begun the formation of any given group. It is clearly not true in the sense that every sect originates in the new teaching of a remarkable personage. And we have seen reason to infer that there was a group of heretical or deviating Brahmanists, for whom "a Buddha" was "an enlightened one," one of many, before the quasi-historical Buddha had even so far emerged into personality as the slain Jesus of the Pauline epistles. Brahmanic doctrine, Brahmanic asceticism and vows, and Brahmanic mendicancy--these are the foundations of the Order: the personal giver of that rule and teaching, the Teaching God, comes later, even as the Jesus who institutes the Holy Supper comes after the eucharist is an established rite. Every critical scholar, without exception, admits that a vast amount of doctrine ascribed to Buddha was concocted long after his alleged period. It cannot then be proved that any part of the doctrine is not a fictitious ascription; and there is not a single tenable test whereby any can be discriminated as genuine. In the words of Kuenen, "we are not free to explain Buddhism from the person of the founder." [*3] Nor is there any more psychological difficulty in supposing the whole to be doctrinal myth than in conceiving how the later Brahmanists could put their discourses in the mouth of Krishna.

The recent attempts to establish the historicity of Gotama Buddha by excavated tomb-remains [*4]--a kind of evidence which obviously could prove nothing as to the achievements or teaching

[p. 261]

of the person interred--have broken down on their merits. Dr. Fleet's claim to date an inscribed vase before Asoka's time on the strength of its letter-forms is peremptorily rejected; [*1] and Professor Davids' theory that the remains found under one stupa are those of Buddha has to compete with the theory of Dr. Fleet that they are those of massacred Buddhana Sakiya = "kinsmen of Buddha," which in turn is rejected by M. Barth as an impossible interpretation. On such lines there can be no establishment of any relevant historic facts; and we are left to the decision that "No extant inscription, either in the north or south, can be referred with confidence to a date earlier than that of Asoka. [*2]

Professor Kern, coming to conclusions substantially identical with those of M. Senart, posits for us finally an ancient Order of monks, absorbing an ancient popular religion, and developing for people of the middle and lower classes the ideals of a spiritual life current in the schools of the Brahmans and the ascetics. "It is very possible," he goes on, "that the Order had been founded--whatever be the precise sense which we attach to that word--by a single man peculiarly gifted, even as, for example, it is possible that Freemasonry may have been so founded. We may even, by an effort of imagination, adorn this founder with all sorts of good qualities; but we have no right to say that the amiability of the Buddha of the legend has any other origin than the antique belief according to which the Buddha, in his quality of cherishing sun, is manno miltisto" [*3]--the kindest of men, in the words applied by an old German prayer-chant to the deity.

This is the warranted attitude of scientific criticism; and the mere "may-be" as to the possible Founder is exclusive of any Evemeristic solution. M. Senart's necessary founder, and Professor Kern's possible founder, are wholly remote from the Buddha alike of the Buddhist and of the rationalising scholar, bent on saving a personality out of a myth. On the face of the case, there is a presumption that, while there may easily have been, "about 500 B.C., a man who by his wisdom and his devotion to the spiritual interests of his kind made such an impression that contemporaries compared him to a pre-existing ideal of wisdom and goodness, and that posterity completely identified him with this ideal," [*4] the Order was not founded by any such person. No Buddha made the Buddhists--the Buddhists made the Buddha. [*5]

[p. 262]

An obviously sufficient conceptual nucleus for "the" Buddha lay in the admittedly general Brahmanic notion of "Buddhas." There is even a tradition that at the time when Sakyamuni came many men ran through the world saying "I am Buddha! I am Buddha!" [*1] This may be either a Buddhist way of putting aside the claims of other Buddhas or a simple avowal of their commonness. But a real Buddha would be a much less likely "founder" than one found solely in tradition. Any fabulous Buddha as such could figure for any group as its founder to begin with: to him would be ascribed the common ethical code and rules of the group: the clothing of the phantom with the mythic history of Vishnu-Purusha or Krishna, the "Bhagavat" of earlier creeds, followed as a matter of course, on the usual lines. M. Senart "holds it for established that the legend as a whole was fixed as early as the time of Asoka." [*2] Some of the latest surveys of the problem end in an inference that the oldest elements in the legend consist of fragments of an ancient poem or poems embedded in the Pitakas. [*3] The quasi-biographical colour further given to mythical details is on all fours with that of the legends of Joseph, Moses, Joshua, and Jesus, all late products of secondary mythology, in periods which systematically reduced God-legends to the biographic level. As we have seen, the fabrication of narrative-frames for the teachings ascribed to the Buddha was early an established Buddhist exercise. And this accumulation of quasi-biographical detail, as we have also seen, goes on long after the whole cycle of prior supernaturalist myth has been embodied. It is after Jesus has been deified that he is provided with a mother and a putative father and brothers; and it is in the latest gospel of all that we have some of the most circumstantial details of his life and deportment. There is even a case for the thesis that some of the characteristics of the Buddha are derived from sculptures which followed Greek models. [*4]

On these grounds, then, it is here submitted that the traditional figure of the Buddha, in its most plausibly rationalised form, is as unhistoric as the figure of the Gospel Jesus has been separately shown to be. Each figure simply stands for the mythopoeic action of the religious mind in a period in which Primary-God-making had given way to Secondary-God-making, and in particular to the craving for a Teaching God who should originate religious and moral ideas

[p. 263]

as the other Gods had been held to originate agriculture, art, medicine, normal law, and civilisation. And if by many the thought be still found disenchanting, they might do well to reflect that there is a side to the conception that is not devoid of comfort.

Buddhism, like Christianity, is from the point of view of its traditional origins a "failure." Buddhism, indeed, notably in the case of Burmah, has done more to mould the life of a whole people towards its ostensibly highest ethic than Christianity ever did; but Buddhism, being at best a gospel of monasticism, quietism, and mechanical routine, collapsed utterly in India, the land of its rise; and its normal practice savours little of moral or intellectual superiority to any of the creeds around it. [*1] Brahmanism, which seems to have ultimately wrought its overthrow, set up in its place a revived and developed popular polytheism, on the plane of the most ignorant demotic life. Christianity, in turn, professedly the religion of peace and love, is as a system utterly without influence in suppressing war, or inter-racial malignity, or even social division. The vital curative forces as against those evils are visibly independent of Christianity. And here emerges the element of comfort.

On our Naturalistic view of the rise of the religions of the Secondary or Teaching Gods, it is sheer human aspiration that has shaped all the Christs and all their doctrines; and one of the very causes of the total miscarriage is just that persistence in crediting the human aspiration to Gods and Demigods, and representing as superhuman oracles the words of human reason. Unobtrusive men took that course hoping for the best, seeking a short cut to moral influence; but they erred grievously. So to disguise and denaturalise wise thoughts and humane principles was to keep undeveloped the very reasoning faculty which could best appreciate them. Men taught to bow ethically to a Divine Teacher are not taught ethically to think: any aspiration so evoked in them is factitious, vestural, verbal, or at best emotionally superinduced, not reached by authentic thought and experience. When, haply, the nameless thinkers who in all ages have realised and distilled the wisdom or unwisdom given out as divine are recognised in their work for what they were, and their successors succeed in persuading the many to realise for them- selves the humanness of all doctrine, the nations may perchance become capable of working out for themselves better gospels than the best of those which turned to naught in their hands while they held them as revelations from the skies.

Footnotes

^258:1 E. Senart, Essai sur la legende de Buddha, 2e edit. 1882, pp. xi-xii.

^259:1 Id. pp. 441-3.

^259:2 Der Buddha, 3te Aufl. pp. 159-160, 180.

^259:3 Cp. Baur's answer to Ruckert, Paulus, Kap. iv, note 2 (p. 417). And now Baur's own assumptions as to Paul are rejected by the school of van Manen.

^260:1 I. p. Minayeff, Recherches sur le Bouddhisme, trad. fr. 1894, p. 2.

^260:2 Cp. Oldenberg's strictures on Minayeff, "Buddhistische Studien," in Z. D. M. G.. vol. lii, 1898.

^260:3 Hib. Lect. p. 264.

^260:4 Davids, Early Buddhism, 1908, pp. 29, 49; Buddhist India, p. 17; H. Hackmann, Buddhism as a Religion, 1909; Dr. Fleet, Journ. Roy. Asiat. Soc., 1906.

^261:1 By M. Barth in the Journ. des Savants, October, 1906.

^261:2 Vincent Smith, Early History of India, 1908, p. 14.

^261:3 Histoire du Bouddhisme dans l'Inde, 1901, i, 263-4; cp. p. 241.

^261:4 Kern, i, 264.

^261:5 Cp. I. p. Minayeff, Recherches sur le Bouddhisme, trad. fr. 1894, pp. 157-180.

^262:1 Senart, Essai, p. 448.

^262:2 Essai, Introd. pp. xxii-xxiii and p. 451.

^262:3 Bishop Copleston, Buddhism Primitive and Present, ed. 1905, p. 53; Geiger, Dipavamsa and Mahavamsa, 1905, p. 11.

^262:4 Bloch, "Einfluss der altbuddhistischen Kunst auf die Buddha-Legende." in Z. D. M. G., 1908, Heft 2, pp. 370-1.

^263:1 Cp. Koeppen, Die Religion des Buddha, i, 565; Davids, Buddhism, pp. 210, 246-250.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 264]

  

 section 14. The Problem of Manichaeus.

On the fringes of the historical problem of Buddhism there lies one which is worth at least a passing scrutiny in this connection--that, namely, of the origins of the heretical quasi-Christian sect of Manichaeans. The Christian tradition runs that one Scythianos, a Saracen, husband of an Egyptian woman, "introduced the doctrine of Empedocles and Pythagoras into Christianity"; that he had a disciple, "Buddas, formerly named Terebinthus," who travelled in Persia, where he alleged that he had been born of a virgin, and afterwards wrote four books, one Of Mysteries, a second The Gospel, a third The Treasure, and a fourth Heads. While performing some mystic rites, he was hurled down a precipice by a daimon, and killed. A woman at whose house he lodged buried him, took over his property, and bought a boy of seven, named Cubricus. This boy she freed and educated, leaving him the property and books of Buddas-Terebinthus. Cubricus then travelled into Persia, where he took the name of Manes and gave forth the doctrines of Buddas Terebinthus as his own. The king of Persia [not named], hearing that he worked miracles, sent for him to heal his sick son, and on the child's dying put Manes in prison. Thence he escaped, flying into Mesopotamia, but was traced, captured, and flayed alive by the Persian king's orders, the skin being then stuffed with chaff and hung up before the gate of the city. [*1]

For this narrative, the historian Socrates, writing in the fifth century, gives as his authority "The Disputation [with Manes] of Archelaus bishop of Caschar," a work either unknown to or disregarded by Eusebius, who in his History briefly vilifies Manes [*2] without giving any of the above details. In the Chronicon of Eusebius the origin of the sect is placed in the second year of Probus, C.E. 277; but this passage is probably from the hand of Jerome. [*3] According to Jerome, Archelaus wrote his account of his Disputation with "Manichaeus" in Syriac, whence it was translated into Greek. The Greek is lost, and the work, apart from extracts, subsists only in a Latin translation from the Greek, of doubtful age and fidelity, [*4] probably made after the fifth century. By Photius it is stated that Heraclean, bishop of Chalcedon, in his book against the Manichaeans, said the [Greek] Disputation of Archelaus was

[p. 265]

written by one Hegemonius--an author not otherwise traceable, and of unknown date.

In the Latin narrative, "Manes" is said to have come, after his flight from court, from Arabion, a frontier fortress, to Caschar or Carchar, a town said to be in Roman Mesopotamia, in the hope of converting an eminent Christian there, named Marcellus, to whom he had sent a letter beginning: "Manichaeus apostle of Jesus Christ, and all the saints and virgins with me, send peace to Marcellus." In his train he brought twenty-two [or twelve] youths and virgins. At the request of Marcellus, he debated on religion with bishop Archelaus, by whom he was vanquished; whereupon he set out to return to Persia. On his way he proposed to debate with a priest at the town of Diodorides; but Archelaus came to take the priest's place, and again defeated him; whereupon, fearing to be given up to the Persians by the Christians, he returned to Arabion. At this stage Archelaus introduces in a discourse to the people his history of "this Manes," very much to the effect of the recapitulation in Socrates. Among the further details are these: (1) that Scythianus lived "in the time of the Apostles"; (2) that Terebinthus said the name of Buddas had been imposed on him; (3) that in the mountains he had been brought up by an angel; (4) that he had been convicted of imposture by a Persian prophet named Parcus, and by Labdacus, son [*1] of Mithra; (5) that in the disputation he taught concerning the sphere, the two luminaries, the transmigration of souls, and the war of the "Principia" against God; (6) that "Corbicius" or Corbicus, about the age of sixty, translated the books of Terebinthus; (7) that he made three chief disciples, Thomas, Addas, and Hermas, of whom he sent the first to Egypt, and the second to Scythia, keeping the third with him; (8) that the two former returned when he was in prison, and that he sent them to procure for him the books of the Christians, which he then studied. According to the Latin narrative, finally, Manes on his return to Arabion was seized and taken to the Persian king, by whose orders he was flayed, his body being left to the birds, and his skin, filled with air, hung at the city gate.

That this narrative is historically worthless is admitted by all critical students since Beausobre; and recent historians turn from the Christian to the oriental accounts of the heresiarch for a credible view. There "Mani" is described as a painter, [*2] who set up a

[p. 266]

sectarian movement in opposition to Zoroastrianism, then in renewed favour in Persia, in the reign of Shapur I. Being proceeded against, he fled to Turkestan, where he made disciples and embellished with paintings a Tchighil [Chinese name for a temple or Picturarum Domus] and another temple called Ghalbita. Provisioning in advance a cave which had a spring, he told his disciples he was going to heaven, and would not return for a year, after which time they were to seek him in the cave in question. They then and there found him, whereupon he showed them an illustrated book, called Ergenk, or Estenk, which he said he had brought from heaven: whereafter he had many followers, with whom he returned to Persia at the death of Shapur. The new king, Hormisdas, joined and protected the sect; and built Mani a castle. The next king, Bahram or Varanes, at first favoured Mani; but, after getting him to debate with certain Zoroastrian teachers, caused him to be flayed alive, and the skin to be stuffed and hung up as alleged by the Christians. [*1] Thereupon most of his followers fled to India, and some even to China, those remaining being reduced to slavery.

In yet another Mohammedan account we have the details that Mani's mother was named Meis or Utachin, or Mar Marjam (Sancta Maria); and that he was supernaturally born. [*2] At the behest of an angel he began his public career, with two companions, at the age of twenty-four, on a Sunday, the first day of Nisan, when the sun was in Aries. He travelled for about forty years; wrote six books, and was raised to Paradise after being slain under Bahram "son of Shapur." Some say he was crucified "in two halves" and so hung up at two gates, afterwards called High-Mani and Low-Mani; others that he was imprisoned by Shapur and freed by Bahram; others that he died in prison. "But he was certainly crucified." [*3]

Thus the sole detail which the Mohammedan and Christian writers have in common is that of the execution with its exemplary sequel.

Both accounts, it will be observed, make Mani an innovating heretic; but the Persian treats him as inventing his doctrine, while the Christian makes it traditive. The Persian story, however,

[p. 267]

makes him compose and illustrate his book in Turkestan, with the possible implication that such a book was a novelty in Persia, despite Mani's profession. Baur and Neander, accordingly, combining the Christian clue of the name Buddas with the Persian clue to Turkestan, infer that in that territory Mani acquired a knowledge of Buddhism. [*1] To this solution, however, there are several objections. In the first place, there are in Manichaeism only shadowy analogies to Buddhism; and in the second, the name Buddas is plausibly interpreted as being merely a Greek corruption of Butm or Budm, the Chaldaic name of the terebinth tree--a simple translation of Terebinthus. [*2] On the other hand, Ritter has conjectured that "Terebinthus" may be a corruption of Buddha's title "Tere Hintu," Lord of the Hindus. Finally, it has to be noted that Herodotus repeatedly mentions a people called the Budini, [*3] among whom were settled the Neuri, who "seem to be magicians"; so that "Buddas" might be a reminiscence of their repute. We have thus a pleasing variety of choices!

Footnotes

^264:1 Socrates, Hist. Eccles. i, 22.

^264:2 Eusebius, Hist. Eccles. vii. 31.

^264:3 So Tillemont and Lardner (Works, ed. 1835, iii, 256, 261). Beausobre (Hist. de Manichee et du Manicheisme, 1734, i, 122) held it to be by Eusebius.

^264:4 Cp. Neander, Gen. Hist. of Christ. Church, Eng. tr. (Bohn) ii, 166, note, as to the evidence for embellishment in the Greek and Latin versions.

^265:1 Epiphanius, citing the Greek version, has neokoros, "temple officer."

^265:2 Dr. Marcus Dods, in his preface to Mr. Stothert's translation of the writings of Augustine against the Manichaeans, writes: "Hyde......tells us that in Persian mani means painter, and that he was so called from his profession." This is a careless repetition of an old blunder of two good scholars, Fabricius and Wolff, exposed by [p. 266] Beausobre (ed. 1734, i, 71), from whose work Dr. Dods quotes a passage (cited by him as on i, 79) which occurs only two pages later. Hyde simply wrote: "Manes Persa, in eorum libris dictus Mani pictor, nam talis fuit professions sua" (c. 21, p. 280).

^266:1 D'Herbelot, Bibliotheque Orientale, s.v. Mani, following the Persian historian Khondemir and others. Hyde (De relig. vet. Persar. c. 21), also following Khondemir, gives the detail as to temple-painting; reads "Ertengh" as the name of Mani's book; has no mention of Hormisdas, making "Behrem" reign when Mani returns to Persia; and states that Mani was crucified.

^266:2 Gustav Flugel, Mani, seine Lehre and seine Schriften, 18f 2 (trans. from the Fihrist of Muhammad ben Ishak al Nurrak, with commentary), pp. 83-4. Meis is a name of the lotus or pepper-tree. Id. p. 117.

^266:3 Id. pp. 84, 97, 99-100, 102-3; Beausobre, i, 206.

^267:1 Neander, as cited, ii, 170, regards the cave in Turkestan as a "Buddhist grotto."

^267:2 Beausobre, i, 54-55; Hyde and Bochart as there cited; Neander, as cited, p. 166, note.

^267:3 Herod. iv, 105-9.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 15. The Manichean Solution.

Seeking for a solution, we may assume that whatever tradition the Christians had concerning Manes they got from the east; and it is conceivable that from the datum of Turkestan they evolved the ideas of "Scythianus" and "Buddas," with or without the help of the knowledge that "Budh" might stand for "Terebinthus" in Chaldea. [*4] But the Persian tradition in itself has little weight, being merely a way of saying that Mani's doctrine had associations with other lands. On the face of the story, he was heretical before he left Persia; and the medley of theosophic doctrines associated with Manichaeism can be traced on the one hand to the general storehouse of Babylonian lore, whence came the lore of Christian Gnosticism, and on the other hand to Mazdeism. Such an amalgamation could very well take place on the frontiers of the Persian and Roman empires, early in the Christian era. But it has to be asked how and why Manichaeism, which at so many points resembles the Gnostic systems so-called, should have held its ground as a cult while they were suppressed. Its Jesus and Christ were as far as theirs from conforming to the doctrines of the Church, and it was furiously

[p. 268]

persecuted for centuries. The explanation apparently lies in the element of cultus, the exaltation of the Founder. Was this then a case in which an abnormal Teacher really founded a religion by his doctrine and the force of his personality?

In order to form an opinion we have first to note two outstanding features of Manichaeism--the doctrine that Manichaeus was "the Paraclete"; and the fact that his quasi-crucifixion was devoutly commemorated by his devotees in the Bema festival at the season of the Christian Easter. [*1] Concerning the first datum, the most significant consideration is that the equivalence of the names Mani or Manes and Manichaeus is to be explained only on Usher's theory that they are both variants of an eastern name equivalent to the Hebrew name Menahem, which has in part the same meaning as Paraclete. [*2] Seeing that Manes is declared to have called himself the Paraclete promised in the Christian gospel, the question arises whether he was in Syria called Menahem = Manichaios on this account, or whether Mani was for Persians, as was Manes or Mane for Greeks and Romans, a passable equivalent for Menahem, in which the third consonant was a guttural. And seeing that the same name is Graecised as Manaen in the book of Acts, this appears to be the fact. Now, the name Menahem, being framed from the root nahem, often translated in the Septuagint by menonoeu, strictly signifies only "the comforter," and has not in Hebrew the various senses of advocate, mediator, messenger, and intercessor, conveyed by parakletos; but there are some reasons for holding that in post-Biblical use it may have had a similar significance with the Greek term. In particular, we find it in late Judaic lore practically identified with the title of Messiah, the Messiah ben David being called the Menakhem ben Ammiel, while the Messiah ben Joseph is named Nehemia ben Uziel. [*3] The Talmud brings the identification in close touch with Jesuism. "R. Joshua ben Levi saith, His name is tsemach, 'A Branch'" [Zech. iii, 8. Tsemach, it will be remembered = Netzer]. "R. Juda Bar Aibu saith, His name is Menahem." [*4] Jesus, it will be remembered, becomes the parakletos in the sense of

[p. 269]

an intercessor, being yet at the same time an atonement. [*1] And if there is reason to refer the doctrine of the two Messiahs to an extra-Judaic source, [*2] a similar surmise is permissible as to the two Menahems. [*3]

In this connection we have next to note, as did Baur long ago, that the story of Mani's concealment in the cave is a strikingly close parallel to the old story in Herodotus concerning the reputed Thracian God Zalmoxis or Zamolxis, of whom "some think that he is the same with Gebelezeis." [*4]

"Every fifth year they despatch one of themselves, taken by lot, to Zalmoxis, with orders to let him know on each occasion what they want. Their mode of sending him is this. Some of them are appointed to hold three javelins; while others, having taken up the man......by the hands and feet, swing him round, and throw him into the air upon the points. If he should die, being transfixed, they think the God is propitious to them; if he should not die, they blame the messenger himself, saying that he is a bad man; and having blamed him they despatch another." [*5]

Gebelezeis may be the Babylonian Fire-God Gibil, identified with Nusku. In that case the sacrifice to him of a messenger is one more instance of sacrificing the God to himself, as Gibil-Nusku was the messenger of all the Gods. [*6] According to the Greeks of the Hellespont and Pontus, Zalmoxis was a man who had been a slave, at Samos, to Pythagoras, son of Mnesarchus, then was freed, became rich, and retired to his own country, Thrace, where he taught the doctrine of immortality. While teaching this in a dwelling he caused to be built, "he in the meantime had an underground dwelling made, and when the building was finished he vanished from among the Thracians; and having gone down to the underground dwelling he abode there three years." In the fourth year he reappeared to the Thracians, who had deemed him dead, and thus his teaching became credible to them. [*7] The good Herodotus, "neither disbelieving nor entirely believing" the legend, was "of opinion that this Zalmoxis lived many years before Pythagoras"; and we in turn, seeing in the story of the three years' stay underground

[p. 270]

a remote form of the myth of the God-man's three days in the grave, pronounce that the legends of the freed slave Mani and his concealment in the cave are of similar antiquity. [*1] He is inferribly the Menahem or messenger of the cult of the Thracian Getae; and in another "Scythian" record we have a clue to the legend of his death, as well as to the myth of "Scythianus." The flaying of slain enemies was a Scythian usage; and "many, having flayed men whole, and stretched the skin on wood, carry it about on horseback." [*2] As with the enemy, so with the "messenger," [*3] whose function is a recognised one in barbaric sacrifice. At the death of a king, they strangled and buried one of his concubines, a cup-bearer, a cook, a groom, a page, a courier, and horses, "and firstlings of everything else." A year later they strangled fifty of his young men-servants and fifty of the finest horses, and, having disembowelled them, stuffed them with chaff and sewed them up. The bodies of the horses were then transfixed lengthwise with beams and placed in the curves of half-wheels to support them; the bodies of the fifty young men were similarly transfixed and mounted on the horses; and the whole ghastly cavalcade was placed around the "high-place" made over the king's grave. [*4] An evolution of such funerary and honorific sacrifices into sacrifices to the Gods is in the normal way of religious history. In modern Dahome, again, it was de rigueur that every occurrence at court should be reported to the spirit of the king's father by a male or female messenger, who was commonly though not always sacrificed. [*5]

The Thracian Getae, who carried on the cult of Zalmoxis and the ritually slain messenger, were subdued by Darius, and embodied in his empire, [*6] with other Scythian tribes; and in that vast aggregate their sacrificial rites had the usual chance of being adopted by their conquerors--if indeed they were not already associated with the worship of Gibil-Nusku the Babylonian Fire-God, and so known to the Persian fire-worshippers. And, whether or not by way of such an adoption, we find that after the death of the captive emperor Valerian his skin was dyed red and stuffed with straw, and was so preserved for centuries in the chief temple of

[p. 271]

[paragraph continues] Persia [*1]--a course strongly suggestive of religious symbolism. By certain Arab tribes, who worshipped the star Mars, a warrior in blood-stained garments was annually sacrificed by being thrown into a pit; and the God was worshipped in a temple of red colour [*2]--a kindred conception. Such a proceeding as the Persian, in fact, would have been impossible in a temple without religious precedent; and in the sacrificial practices of the pre-Christian Mexicans, which we find so many reasons for tracing back to an ancient Asiatic centre, [*3] we find clear duplicates of both details of the quasi-sacrifice of Valerian, together with the messenger-sacrifices of the Khonds and Getae. On the one hand it is recorded that the Mexican "knights of the sun" on a certain day sacrificed to the Sun a human victim whom they "smeared all over with some red substance......They sent him to the Sun with the message......that his Knights remained at his service, and gave him infinite thanks for the great.....favours bestowed on them in the wars." [*4] So, again, in the sacrifice to Xiuhteuctli the Fire-God in the tenth month the victims were painted red. [*5] On the other hand, in a great annual festival held on the last day of the first month, in which a hundred slaves were sacrificed, some were flayed, and their skins were worn in a religious dance by leading devotees, among them being the king. Finally the bodies were sacramentally eaten, and the skins, "filled with cotton-wool, or straw," were "hung in the temple and king's palace for a memorial." [*6] The stuffed skin of the victim, then, was sacrosanct, [*7] and that which had been worn by the king was doubtless specially so, representing as it did at once the deified victim and the monarch. When the king took a captive in war with his own hands, the latter was specially regarded as the representative of the sun, and was clothed with the Sun-God's royal insignia. [*8] As for the red-painting of the messenger sent to the Sun,

[p. 272]

that in turn was presumably a special symbolical identification of the victim with the God, [*1] as in the peculiar Peruvian sacrifice of a shorn sheep "in a red waistcoat" to the Sun-God at Cuzco; [*2] and the final inference is that the dead or slain body of the captive emperor Valerian was made to figure as a sacrificial special Messenger sent by the Persian king to the (messenger) Sun-God, and dedicated to that deity.

That the legendary "crucifixion" of "Manichaeus" was a myth derived from such a sacrifice is the more probable in view of the evolution of the Christian mystery-drama from an analogous rite. [*3] Clemens Alexandrinus, following another authority than Herodotus, tells how "a barbarous nation, not cumbered with philosophy, select, it is said, annually an ambassador to the hero Zamolxis," [*4] choosing one held to be of special virtue. The usage would thus seem to have made headway after the time of Herodotus. Clemens, [*5] too, identifies with Zoroaster that Er son of Armenius who in Plato figures as "the messenger from the other world," [*6] having gone thither in a death-swoon; a suggestion that at least the Persians now connected the doctrine of immortality with some conception or usage resembling that of the Getae; and Zoroaster, in turn, was mythically associated with a cave containing flowers and fountains, the whole symbolical of the world, and further associated with resurrection in the mysteries. [*7] Finally, the Manichaeans' annual celebration of the Bema, their name for the rite commemorative of the death of Manichaeus, carries with it no explanation; and must be taken as the title of some Graeco-Oriental mystery-ritual. The word signifies "platform," referring not to the ordinary Bema of the Christian churches, wherein stood the altar, but to the covered platform of five steps prepared by the Manichaean devotees on the anniversary of the Founder's death; [*8] but it is not accounted for by any item in the legendary biography, where no such platform is mentioned.

Upon the platform described by Augustine something must have been represented or enacted; and as he appears never to have been one of the electi, but only an auditor or catechumen, he would be, as the Manichaeans declared, unacquainted with the special mysteries of the system. [*9] The "five steps" point to a symbol of the proto-Chaldean

[p. 273]

high-place or temple-pyramid and altar of sacrifice, often of five stages; [*1] and the mystery was in all likelihood akin to the early mystery-drama of the Christian crucifixion. The apparent identification of the birthday of Manichaeus, in the late Mohammedan account, with the death-day in the known cultus; [*2] and further the symbolism of his public appearance "with two others," suggest a mystic scene analogous to the triple crucifixion. In any case the graded or terraced pyramid, which was at once the norm of a sacrificial altar [*3] and the norm of the temples of Babylonia, Mexico, and the South Sea Islands, was also the norm of regal tombs, as instanced by that of Cyrus, still extant. [*4]

The critical presumption, then, is that the flayed and stuffed Manichaeus is one more figure Evemerised out of a rite of annual sacrifice; and that the Manichaean cult is no more the creation of a man named Manes than is the Buddhist the creation of one Buddha, or the Christian of one Jesus called the Christ. It is a syncretism on the lines of those other cults, borrowing ideas from at least three theosophic sources; combining a nominal Christism with a modified Mithraism; [*5] and assimilating both, in the doctrine that "Jesus hangs on every tree," to the esoteric side of the cult of Dionysos. [*6] The works ascribed to Mani, so far as known, have every mark of being late concoctions, on Gnostic lines, framed for purposes of proselytism in the Christian sphere, each purporting to be written by "Manichaeus, an apostle of Jesus Christ," [*7] in the manner of the Christian epistles. The "Epistle to the Virgin Menoch," of which fragments are preserved by Augustine in the Opus Imperfectum, suggests anew the special signification of the title Manichaeus. As for the Erteng or Erzeng, specially associated in Persia with the name of Mani, the title, it appears, simply means an illustrated book, [*8] and such a book is no more to be supposed primordial in the cult than the epistles.

The success of the cult, in fine, was attained very much as was that of Christism. Its promoters, early recognising the vital importance of organisation, created a system of twelve chief apostles or magistri, with a leader, representing the Founder, and seventy-two

[p. 274]

bishops, [*1] here copying actual Judaism rather than Christian tradition; [*2] and, despite its discouragement of marriage and procreation, it survived centuries of murderous persecution in the eastern empire; finally passing on to the west, through the later sects affected by its tradition, the germs of a new heresy in the Middle Ages. Like the crucified Christ, as we have seen reason to think, its Founder was an imaginary being; and so it outlasted the tough sects of Marcion and Montanus, of which the latter was "all but victorious" against orthodoxy. Montanus, says one record, claimed to be inspired by the Paraclete; and his movement, being organised on ecclesiastical lines, went far, beginning in Phrygia, where, as in Persia, the doctrine of a Paraclete was probably pre-Christian. [*3]

That Montanus in turn was an imaginary personage is plausibly argued by Schwegler; [*4] but though some of the adherents of the sect seem to have tended to make of him the Paraclete, [*5] it appears to have been a fanatical movement founded on no particular personality, being more commonly named Phrygian than Montanist, from its place of origin, and offering no analogies to Manichaeism save in respect of a general asceticism. Being rather a special development of tendencies already present in the Christian movement than a new creed, it had less lasting power than the other, though its vogue and duration were sufficient to prove how much of what passes for a new religious development special to Christianity was but the exploitation of elements of ecstatic and ascetic fanaticism abundantly present in the old pagan environment, of which Phrygia was a typical part. [*6]

Footnotes

^267:4 Beausobre decides (i, 191-4) that the Christian story of the debate at Carchar or Caschar in Roman Mesopotamia is an error founded on a real debate at Cascar in Turkestan, where there was a Christian church and bishop, whereas there was no Caschar in Roman Mesopotamia, and the only other Cascar was in the heart of the Persian empire. But the whole story is unhistorical.

^268:1 Augustine declares that while he was a Manichaean he found the Christian paschal feast languidly celebrated, with no fasting or special ceremony, while "great honour was paid to the Bema," which was "held during pascha" (De Epist. Fundamenti, c. 8).

^268:2 Annales, T. i, an. 3032, p.m. 82, cited by Beausobre, i, 71. Usher was led to his conjecture by noticing that Sulpicius Severus gives MANE as equivalent to MENAHEM (2 Kings, xv, 14, 16).

^268:3 Bousset, The Antichrist Legend, Eng. tr. p. 108, following Jellinek and Wunsche; Spiegel, Avesta, i (1852), Einleit. p. 35, citing Abqat-Rocel and Bertholdt. Spiegel reads "Nehemia ben Chosiel." Cp. Reichardt, Relation of the Jewish Christians to the Jews, 1884, p. 32.

^268:4 Lightfoot on Matt. i, 2, and ii, 1, ed. 1859, i, 10. Lightfoot interprets Menahem here as = "parakletos, the comforter."

^269:1 John, ii, 1.

^269:2 Bousset, p. 104.

^269:3 Spiegel (as cited) pronounces that "die Eschatologie der spateren Juden hat nun mit der persischen die auffallendsten Aehnlichkeiten," and cites the lore under notice as a parallel to the Persian "lore of the last things." When we note that in the Judaic writings in question the Messiah ben Joseph (= Nehemia ben Uziel) is slain, that his soul is carried to heaven by an angel, and that after a time of trial the Messiah ben David appears in triumph with Elias, we have a fairly decisive light on the doctrine that "the Messiah must needs suffer."

^269:4 Das manichaische Religionssystem, pp. 455-6.

^269:5 Herodotus, iv, 94.

^269:6 Jastrow, Relig. of Bab. and Ass. p. 279.

^269:7 Herod. iv, 95.

^270:1 In Arab tradition, Salih, the pre-Abrahamic "messenger" of Allah, is born in a cave, and later sleeps in one for twenty years. Weil, The Biblical Legends of the Mussulmans, Eng. tr. 1846, pp. 38-40.

^270:2 Herod. iv, 64.

^270:3 See above, p. 110, note, as to this principle in the human sacrifices of the Khonds.

^270:4 Herod. iv, 71-72.

^270:5 Burton, A Mission to Gelele, 1864, ii, 24. The sparing of some would seem to be an attempt to reduce the rite to a conventional form; but Burton estimated an annual slaughter of some 500 "messengers."

^270:6 Herod. iv, 96.

^271:1 Gibbon, ch. 10, Bohn ed. i, 340-1; Pseudo-Lactantius, De mortibus persecutorum, c. 5,

^271:2 Kalisch, Comm. on Leviticus, i, 326, citing Norberg, Lexidion Codicis Nasaraei, p. 107, and Gesenius, Jesaia, II, 345. Among the Maoris, red paint played a part wherever possible in religious usages: "their idols, Pataka, sacred stages for the dead, and for offerings or sacrifices, Urapa graves, chiefs' houses, and war canoes, were all thus painted. The way of rendering anything tapu was by making it red." Rev. R. Taylorr Te Ika a Maui, 1870, p. 209. Cp. p. 210.

^271:3 See below, Part IV,  section 1.

^271:4 Duran, Historia de las Indias de Nueva Espana, cited in Spencer's Descriptive Sociology, ii, 21, col. 1.

^271:5 Clavigero, Hist. of Mexico, Eng. tr. 2nd ed. B. vi. c. 34 (i, 306-7).

^271:6 Gomara, La Historia General de las Indias, ed. in Historiadores primitivos de Indias, vol. i (1852), p. 444, col. 2; Eng. tr. ed. 1596, pp. 393-4. Cp. Bancroft, Native Races of the Pacific States, iii, 359 (following Sahagun, Hist. Gen. t. i, l. 2) for another rite of hanging up a victim's skin in the form of a cross, where stuffing seems to be implied.

^271:7 In Mexico all the skins taken from victims seem to have been so in some degree. The second month was specially named from the "skinning of men," and in the third the skins which had been taken were carried to a smaller temple within the enclosure of the greater, and there solemnly deposited in a cave. Clavigero, as cited, p. 298.

^271:8 J. G. Muller, Amerik. Urrelig. p. 635.

^272:1 See above, pp. 112, 114, as to the practice of the Khonds.

^272:2 Purchas his Pilgrimes (following Acosta), ed. 1906, xv, 329. Compare the curious parallel in the recent practice of the Khonds, noted above, p. 117.

^272:3 Above, Part II, ch. i.

^272:4 Stromata, iv, 8.

^272:5 Stromata, v, 14.

^272:6 Republic, x, p. 619.

^272:7 Porphyry, De antro nympharum, c. 6. See below, Part III,  section 7.

^272:8 Augustine, as before cited.

^272:9 Beausobre, i, 227-8; Neander, ii, 193; Augustine, Contra Fortunatum, lib. i, app.

^273:1 See above, <page 182>, note. Compare the modified "high-place and altar" at Petra, reproduced by Dr. Curtiss, Primitive Semitic Religion To-day, 1902, p. 236; and see below, Part III,  section 4, and again Part IV,  section 1, as to the Mexican and other analogues.

^273:2 The same coincidence occurs in the legendary life of Moses, his birthday and death-day falling alike on the 7th Adar. Hamburger, Real-Encyc. fur Bibel and Talmud, Suppl. Bd. ii to Abth. i and ii, s.v. Adar.

^273:3 See Dr. Frazer's Lectures on the History of the Early Kingship. 1905, p. 295, as to the place of the "three or four terraces" at which was celebrated the great sacrifice of men at Calicut.

^273:4 See woodcut in Smith's Smaller History of Greece.

^273:5 Below, Part III,  section 12.

^273:6 Augustine, Contra Faustum, xx, 1, 11.

^273:7 Id. xiii, 4.

^273:8 Beausobre, i, 190, and note.

^274:1 Augustine, De Haeres. c. 32.

^274:2 Cp. Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. pp 347.

^274:3 "The Paraclete was at this time (Mani's) expected by the Persians as well as by the Christians" (Spiegel, Avesta, Einleit. p. 30).

^274:4 Der Montanismus in die christliche Kirche, 1841; Das nachapostolische Zeitalter, 1846. "All that can be declared with certainty about Montanus is that he existed," says an orthodox investigator (De Soyres, Montanism and the Primitive Church, 1878, p. 31).

^274:5 Augustine, De Haeres. c. 26.

^274:6 As Montanus began to teach about 130, and the movement seems to have been on foot before him, it may even belong to the first century. Cp. De Soyres, pp. 26-27. It certainly existed in the first half of the second.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 16. The Case of Apollonius of Tyana.

As regards the historical argument it may be well, finally, to anticipate an objection which may be grounded on the admission that Apollonius of Tyana, who has been plausibly described as a Pagan Christ, [*7] was really a historic personage, though his life is clothed upon with myth from birth to death. Here, it may be

[p. 275]

argued, was a real man, who had lived in the first century of the Christian era, represented in the third as born under supernatural circumstances, working miracles, making disciples and converts by his teaching in Europe and Asia, and finally ascending to heaven. If these prodigies could be told of an actual man, it may be asked, why may not Jesus be actual, of whom similar prodigies are told?

The answer is, as aforesaid, that the ascription of prodigies to any ancient personage is not in itself a disproof of his historicity; but that the historical evidence in each case is to be taken on its total merits. It is at bottom the same mythopoeic bias that rings with myth the mere name of a phantom God or Demi-God and the slightly known life of a remarkable man; and the task of criticism is to distinguish cases by impartial tests. We hold Charlemagne and Theodoric and Virgil for historical, despite the myths connected with them in the Middle Ages. The case of Apollonius belongs broadly to the same class, as perhaps does that of Solomon.

It is needless here to remark that the abundant attribution of miracles to Apollonius soon after his own day proves the valuelessness of miracle stories as certificates of divinity: these pages are written for students who have put aside the belief in miracles; and when Christian Fathers are found, in the case of Apollonius, attributing to demons the pagan prodigies which they do not deny to have occurred, we have merely to note how absolute was the credulity of the time in regard to any story of strange happenings. They, it is clear, never thought of testing as to whether Apollonius was a real person: they took it for granted that the name of a person said to have existed stood for a real person. Are we, then, entitled to follow their example? The answer is that in the case of Apollonius we have no reason for suspecting invention, [*1] save as regards the details of the biography recast for us by Philostratus in the third century. There even the "credible" data are uncertain. But it is likely enough that he was, as there represented, a devout Pythagorean, a vegetarian, an ascetic, a student of medicine and astrology, universalist in his creed, and a believer in immortality. And he may conceivably have travelled to India, though the details offered us are naught. [*2]

As usual, indeed, there lacks contemporary testimony, apart from that preserved in Philostratus. The Life makes Apollonius die about the reign of Nerva (96-98 C.E.); and our first incidental

[p. 276]

traces of his fame are in Dio Cassius, [*1] where he is mentioned as a miraculous seer, and in Origen's reply to Celsus, [*2] where one Moiragenes (mentioned by Philostratus) is cited as referring to the accounts of magical feats in the memoirs of Apollonius, and observing that some philosophers of note had been convinced by them. These references belong to the very period of the production of the Life by Philostratus, so that there is no trace of any impression previously made by the memoirs of Damis and Maximus of Aegae, declared to be used by him. Still, we have no reason for doubting that there was an Apollonius of Tyana, who made an impression in his own day as a wandering teacher, and perhaps as a sorcerer, and whose memory was preserved by statues in several towns, as well as by one or two memoirs, one of them written by his credulous or mendacious disciple, Damis. Of the large number of letters preserved as his, some of them remarkable for their terse force, it is impossible to be sure that they are genuine, though they may very well be so.

The reasons for not doubting on the main point are (1) that there was no cause to be served by fabrication; and (2) that it was a much easier matter to take a known name as a nucleus for a mass of marvels and teachings than to build it up, as the phrase goes about the cannon, "round a hole." The difference between such a case and those of Jesuism and Buddhism is obvious. In those cases, there was a cultus and an organisation to be accounted for, and a biography of the Founder had to be forthcoming. In the case of Apollonius, despite the string of marvels attached to his name, there was no cultus. Posterity was interested in him as it was in Pythagoras or Plato; and Philostratus undertook the recasting of the Life in literary form at the command of the empress Julia Domna, a great eclectic. Even if, as has been so often argued, from Huet and Cudworth to Baur and A. Reville, [*3] there was an original intention to set-off Apollonius against Jesus, we should not have ground to doubt that a teaching Apollonius had flourished in the first century: rather the presumption would be that the pagans would seek for some famous wonderworker whose life they could manipulate.

But there is really no reason to suppose that Philostratus, much less Damis, had the gospels before him, though he may well have

[p. 277]

heard of their story. A close comparison of the story of the raising of Jairus' daughter with the story in Philostratus, to which it is so closely parallel, gives rather reason to believe that the gospels copied the pagan narrative, the gospel story being left unmentioned by Arnobius and Lactantius in lists in which they ought to have given it had they known and accepted it. [*1] The story, however, was probably told of other thaumaturgs before Apollonius; and in regard to the series of often strained parallels drawn by Baur, as by Huet, it may confidently be said that, instead of their exhibiting any calculated attempt to outdo or cap the gospel narratives, they stand for the general taste of the time in thaumaturgy. Apollonius, like Jesus, casts out devils and heals the sick; and if the Life were a parody of the gospel we should expect him to give sight to the blind. This, however, is not the case; and on the other hand the gospel story of the healing of two blind men is certainly a duplicate of a pagan record. [*2]

To say, as does Baur, that the casting-out of devils in the Apollonian legend is necessarily an echo of the gospels, on the score that the Greek and Roman literatures at that time show no traces of the idea, [*3] is to make the arbitrary assumption that the superstitions of Syria could enter the West only by Judaic or Christian channels. The "Metamorphoses" of Apuleius, to say nothing of those of Ovid, might serve to remind us that the empire imbibed the diablerie of the East at every pore; and the wizardry of Apollonius includes many eastern items of which the gospels show no trace. As for the annunciation of the birth of Apollonius by Proteus, and the manner of its happening, they conform alike to Egyptian myths and to that told concerning the birth of Plato. [*4] It is, in fact, the Christian myth that draws upon the common store of Greek and Syrian myth, not the Apollonian legend that borrows from the Christian. The descent of Apollonius to Hades, again, seems to have been alleged, after common Graeco-Asiatic precedent, before the same myth became part of the Christian dogmatic code; and to say that his final disappearance without dying and his apparition afterwards must have been motived by the story of Christ's appearing to Saul [*5] is once more to ignore the whole lesson of comparative hierology. Baur goes so far as to argue [*6] that when Philostratus says the disciples of Apollonius in Greece were called Apollonians,

[p. 278]

he must be merely framing a parallel to the title of the Christians, because there is now no knowledge of a sect of Apollonians. It was very hard, two generations ago, for even a great scholar to realise the broadest laws of religious evolution. Yet Lardner had shown with reasonable force, in his primitive fashion, nearly a century before, that the model before Philostratus, if there be any, is not Jesus but Pythagoras; [*1] and his friend De la Roche had rightly and tersely summed up the whole case in the words: "Philostratus said nothing more in the Life of Apollonius than he would have said if there had been no Christians in the world." [*2] For once, Baur had not fully grappled with the literature of his subject. [*3] His superiority to his Christian predecessors as a critic of Apollonius comes out chiefly in his gravely candid recognition [*4] of the high moral purpose set forth in all the discourses ascribed to the hero in the Life.

The habit of pitting Apollonius against Jesus really arose about a century after Philostratus, when the pagan intelligence first began to feel itself menaced by the new creed. Hierocles set the fashion in his Philalethes Logos, to which Eusebius and Lactantius [*5] replied in the normal patristic manner. A hundred years later still, in the time of Augustine, the setting of the miracles of Apollonius and Apuleius against those of Jesus was a common line of pagan argument, [*6] met in the usual way, neither side convincing the other. If there was any gain, it was on the pagan side; for while Chrysostom [*7] triumphs over the failure of the Apollonian movement, such a classically cultured Christian bishop as Sidonius Apollinaris [*8] acclaims the personal virtues and philosophic teaching of the pagan sage. The pagans on their part had taken him up all round. In the day of Philostratus, Alexander Severus had eclectically placed a bust of Apollonius, with others of Abraham, Jesus, and Orpheus, in his private chapel or oratory; [*9] and later we find Eunapius, [*10] Ammianus Marcellinus, [*11] Vopiscus, [*12] and Apuleius, [*13] from their different standpoints

[p. 279]

treating the Tyanean as a demigod, or divinely inspired, or a supreme Mage.

It was not, of course, the high ethic and philosophy of the Apollonian discourses that they stressed as against the Christians. Such a saying as "I have found my reward in the amendment of men" [*1] was not a word to conjure with in popular debate. It was the miracles, the prodigies, the fables, that were for ancient readers the warrant of the sage's greatness. To-day we cannot tell any more than they to what extent the remarkable discourses which Philostratus professes to copy from Damis stand for any genuine utterances or writings of Apollonius: [*2] we can be satisfied of the historicity of the man without knowing how far to trust the accounts of his travels and teaching. But we know that if Apollonius had uttered every wise or eloquent teaching put in his mouth by his biographers he could not thereby have founded such a cult as the Christians conducted on the basis of an entirely fictitious biography.

Lactantius, in the patristic style, asks Hierocles: "Why therefore, O mad head, doth none worship Apollonius for a God, unless perchance thou alone, worthy indeed of that God, with whom the true God will punish thee to all eternity?" [*3] We to-day can give the answer of hierology. No man was ever perdurably deified for his wisdom, or even for his supposed miracles: religions grow up around rites offered immemorially to unknown powers, or round ways of life set up by generations of nameless teachers, all of which abstractions alike take form as named Gods or Sons of Gods, who in one age are the givers of civilisation, agriculture, knowledge, crafts, arts, rites, and laws, and in another of oracles, of revelations, of doctrines and discourses, of their own lives as redeemers. But the really slain man, the true human sacrifice, though he be counted by millions, is not deified: not he, but an abstraction shaped out of the mystic drama and sacrament which have followed on ages of sacrifices and sacraments of human flesh; and neither is the true teacher or thinker deified: not he, but a superposed abstraction distilled from many teachings, wise or unwise, put by many generations in the mouth of the mythical one. For it is by such modes alone that men have been able to create the economic bases without which no

[p. 280]

religion can live. Apollonius, credited with many miracles and wondrous wisdom, like Pythagoras long before him, could become a God only by way of a passing figure of speech, precisely because he had really lived and taught.

Given the culture-stage in which many crave the Teaching God, while the multitude still crave the Sacrificed God, a cult which shall combine these in one Deity, still retaining the cosmic Creator God and adding the attractive appeal of the Mother Goddess, has obviously a maximum chance of survival. And such a religion, we have seen reason to conclude, cannot be founded on concrete personages: it must be developed from personalised abstractions. Such a combination is presented in the Christian cultus. But all such success is finally in terms of political and economic adaptations; and the final explanation of non-survivals, accordingly, is to be found in the lack or frustration of such adaptations. It remains to note, then, how systems historically developed from abstractions like the Christian have disappeared in the struggle for existence.

Footnotes

^274:7 A. Reville, Apollonius of Tyana, the Pagan Christ of the Third Century, Eng. tr. 1866.

^275:1 Cp. Jean Reville, La Religion a Rome sous les Severes, pp. 212-213.

^275:2 An excellent summary of Philostratus, with extracts from the letters, is given in Mr. Thomas Whittaker's monograph, in Apollonius of Tyana and Other Essays, 1906.

^276:1 Hist. Rom. lvii, ad. fin.

^276:2 Contra Celsum, vi, 41.

^276:3 Cudworth, Intellectual System, Harrison's ed. i, 437; Huet, Demonstratio Evangelica, Prop. ix, c. 147,  section 3; Baur, Apollonius von Tyana and Christus, 1832, rep. in Drei Abhandlungen zur Geschichte der alten Philosophie and ihres Verhaltnisses zum Christenthum, 1876; A. Reville, Apollonius of Tyana, Eng. tr. pp. 57-69.

^277:1 Cp. Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. pp. 334-5.

^277:2 Id. p. 332.

^277:3 Drei Abhandlungen, p. 139. A. Reville (work cited, pp. 61-2) implicitly follows Baur. J. Reville (La Religion a Rome, pp. 230-4) discusses and dismisses the parody theory. Critics in general now do so likewise.

^277:4 Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. pp. 305-6.

^277:5 Baur, as cited, p. 148.

^277:6 Id. p. 148, note.

^278:1 Works, ed. 1835, vi, 489 sq.

^278:2 Cited by Lardner. Cp. also his citation from De la Roche's New Memoirs of Literature (1725), i, 99. In an Appendix to his 39th chapter (Works, vii, 508), Lardner cites a passage from Bishop Parker, published in 1681, rejecting Huet's thesis that Philostratus had copied the gospels.

^278:3 Zeller notes in his ed. of the Drei Abhandlungen (p. 201, note) that Baur is wrong in his statement that Porphyry and Jamblichus never mention Apollonius. Lardner had cited their references. Dr. A. Reville follows Baur (p. 80).

^278:4 Drei Abhandlungen, p. 45, sq.

^278:5 Eusebius, Contra Hieroclem; Lactantius, Div. Inst. v, 2, 3.

^278:6 Marcellinus, in Ep. Augustin. 136 (Migne, Patrol. Cursus Compl. T. 33).

^278:7 Adv. Judaeos, Orat. v, 3.

^278:8 Epist. 1. viii, c. 3. The bishop writes of him to a correspondent as noster Tyaneus.

^278:9 Lampridius, Vit. Alex. Sev. xxix.

^278:10 Prooemium in Vit. Sophistarum.

^278:11 L. xxi, c. 14, ad init.

^278:12 Vit. Aureliani, xxiv.

^278:13 Apologia, ad fin.

^279:1 Philostratus, Vit. Apollon. viii, 7, 7.

^279:2 Philostratus (viii, 6), in introducing the Apology before Domitian, remarks that it has been criticised for lack of elegance and sublimity of style; but this is no security for its genuineness. "He [Philostratus] puts into the mouth of Apollonius aesthetic theories which he can scarcely have meant us to believe were not his own" (T. Whittaker, Apollonius of Tirana, as cited, p. 2).

^279:3 Div. Inst., v, 3.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 281]

  

PART III.

  

MITHRAISM

  

 section 1. Introductory.

IN the ninth edition of the Encyclopaedia Britannica, supervised by so eminent a scholar and hierologist as the late Professor Robertson Smith, as against some hundreds of pages on the books of the Bible, there was devoted to the subject of the ancient Persian deity Mithra or Mithras, and his cultus, one column. All the while, Mithraism was well known to have been the chief rival to Christianity in the ancient world. Within the past dozen years there has taken place a great improvement in the sense of proportion among the cultivators of hierology; and the study of Mithraism, in particular, has been conducted with a zeal and a competence which leave little opening for new contributions. The present survey, first undertaken over twenty years ago, is an attempt to elucidate, in the light of comparative science, what is likely to remain an obscure problem.

When all is said, we have but a fragmentary knowledge of Mithraism. But we do know that it was during some centuries the most widespread of the religious systems of the Roman empire. That is to say, Mithraism was in point of range the most nearly universal religion of the western world in the early centuries of the Christian era. As to this, students are agreed. [*1] To the early

[p. 282]

[paragraph continues] Fathers, we shall see, Mithraism was a most serious thorn in the flesh; and the monumental remains of the Roman period, in almost all parts of the empire, show its extraordinary extension. In our own country, held by the Romans for three hundred years at a time when Christianity is supposed to have penetrated the whole imperial world, there have been found no signs whatever of any Roman profession of the Christian faith; while there are a number of monuments in honour of Mithra. [*1] There has been found, for instance, a Mithraic cave [*2] at Housesteads, in Northumberland, containing sculptures of Mithra-worship, and an inscription: "To the God, best and greatest, invincible Mithra, Lord of Ages"; [*3] and another at Kichester, with an inscription: "To the God the Sun, the invincible Mithra, the Lord of Ages." Other monuments have been found at Chester, on the line of the Roman wall, at Cambeckfort in Cumberland, at Oxford, at York, [*4] and at London and Manchester. [*5] And "Mithraic bas-reliefs, cut upon the smoothed faces of rocks, or upon tablets of stone, still abound throughout the former western provinces of the Roman Empire; many exist in Germany: still more in France." [*6] According to Mr. King, again, "the famous 'Arthur's Oon' (destroyed in the eighteenth century) upon the Carron, a hemispherical vaulted building of immense blocks of stone, was unmistakeably a Specus Mithraeum, the same in design as Chosroes' magnificent fire-temple at Gazaca." But in other lands the remains of Mithraic shrines are far more numerous: they abound in the Alps, in Southern France, in Eastern Italy, in Dalmatia, in Dacia, in many Mediterranean ports; and though their distribution is unequal, they signify that the cult went wherever went the legions and the Syrian traders who followed them.

And yet, with all this testimony to the vogue of Mithraism in the early Christian centuries, there ensues for a whole era an

[p. 283]

absolute blank in the knowledge of the matter in Christendom--a  thousand years in which the ancient cultus seems a forgotten name in Europe. One modern investigator, M. Lajard, [*1] thinks that since the time of the Fathers the first in European literature to mention Mithra was Pietro Riccio (Petrus Crinitus), [*2] born about 1465, a disciple of Politian; and no other mention occurs till about the middle of the sixteenth century. [*3] Such was the ignorance of most scholars, that of three now well-known Mithraic monuments discovered about that period, not one is attributed to Mithra either by the great antiquarian of the time, Rossi, or by his pupil, Flaminius Vacca. Every one knows the sculptured group of Mithra slaying the bull, so often engraved, of which we have a good example in the British Museum. Rossi declared one of these monuments to represent Jupiter, as the bull, carrying off Europa; and Vacca tells how a lion-headed image, now known to represent Kronos-Zervan or the Time-Spirit in the mysteries of Mithra, but then held to represent the devil, was (probably) burned in a limekiln. [*4] A century later, Leibnitz demonstrated that Ormazd and Ahriman, the Good and Evil Powers of the Persian system to which Mithra belonged, were simply deified heroes; and later still the historian Mosheim, a man not devoid of judgment, elaborately proved that Mithra had simply been at one time, like Nimrod, a famous hunter, [*5] before the Lord or otherwise. Other eighteenth-century scholars discussed the problem more intelligently; [*6] but even in our own day, when all the extant notices and monuments of Mithra have been carefully collected and studied, vigilant scholars [*7] confess that we know very little as to the Mithraic religion. It is somewhat remarkable that this should be so; and though in the terms of the case we cannot look to find much direct knowledge, we may hope at least to find out why the once popular cultus has fallen into such obscurity. To that end we must see what really is known about it.

Footnotes

^281:1 Cp. Tiele, Outlines of the History of the Ancient Religions, Eng. tr. p. 170; Gaston Boissier, La Religion Romaine d'Auguste aux Antonins, i, 395, ii, 417; H. Seel, Die Mithrageheimnisse, Aarau, 1823, p. 214; Sainte-Croix, Recherches sur les Mysteres du Paganisme, 2e. edit. ii, 123; Smith and Cheetham's Dict. of Christ. Antiq., art. PAGANISM; Beugnot, Hist. de la Destruction du Paganisme, 1835, i, 156-8, 336, ii, 225; Windischmann, Mithra, ein Beitrag zur Mythengeschichte des Orients, in Abhandlungen fur die Kunde des Morgenlands, Bd. i, p. 62; E. Meyer, Geschichte des Alterthums, 1884, i, 541; Ozanam, History of Civilisation in the Fifth Century, Eng. tr. i, 77; Creuzer, Das Mithreum von Neuenheim bei Heidelberg, 1838, pp. 10, 19; Lajard, Recherches sur le culte public et les Mysteres de Mithra, 1867, p. 672; Preller, Romische Mythologie, ed. Kohler, pp. 758-63; Dill, Roman Society from Nero to Marcus Aurelius, 1905, Bk. iv, ch. 6; Roscher, Ausfuhrliches Lexikon der griechischen und romischen Mythologie, col. 3067, 11. 20-30; Prof. Cumont, Textes et monuments figures relatifs aux mysteres de Mithra, 1894-6, passim (partly translated by T. J. McCormack, 1903, under title The Mysteries of Mithra, where see pp. 38-84, and in Open Court, May, June, and July, 1902. where see pp. 303, 305, 306, 310, 340, 347, etc.); Quinet, Genie des Religions, 1. iv, sec. 1; Renan, Marc. Aurele, ed. 1882, pp. 576-581; Jean Reville, La Religion a Rome sous les Severes, 1886, pp. 78, 84-5, 102; Hertzberg, Geschichte Griechenlands unter der Herrschaft der Romer, 1866, 3te Th. pp. 120-121; Gardner, Exploratio Evangelica, 1899; p. 333; Hausrath, Hist. of N.T. Times: Time of the Apostles, Eng. tr. 1895, i, 96-7.

^282:1 Wright, The Celt, The Roman, and the Saxon, 4th ed. pp. 327, 353.

^282:2 Such a cave, since discovered at Ostia, is described in the Athenaeum, Oct. 30 and Nov. 6, 1886 (ext. rep. in Ancient Calendars and Constellations, by the Hon. Emmeline E. Plunkett, 1903, p. 62).

^282:3 There are a shrine and two altars. The second altar has on its frieze the simple word DEO, the whole inscription running: "To the Sun-God, Mithra, unconquered, eternal." The first was erected in the year 252. See the Newcastle Society of Antiquarians' Guide to the Black Gate, etc., pp. 11-12.

^282:4 Wright, as cited, p. 327; Wellbeloved, Eburacum, 1842, pp. 75, 84; Stukeley, Palaeographica Britannica, No. 3, London, 1752. See also the inscriptions to Sol and Mithra in Hubner, Inscr. Brit. Lat.

^282:5 See the scholarly and temperate essay of Canon (now Bishop) Hicks, Mithras Worship (rep. from "The Roman Fort at Manchester"), Manch. Univ. Press, 1909.

^282:6 C. W. King, The Gnostics and their Remains, 2nd ed. p. 136. The statement as to France seems inexact. Cp. Prof. Cumont, Textes et Monuments, passim. Prof. Cumont ascribes the largest share of Mithraic monuments to Germany, noting that they are abundant also in Italy, and fairly plentiful in south-eastern Gaul, but rare in central and western France, and very scanty in Greece.

^283:1 Introduction a l'etude du culte de Mithra, 1846, pp. 2-3.

^283:2 De Honesta Disciplina, v, 14, cited by Lajard.

^283:3 By Smet and Pighi.

^283:4 Cp. Cumont, Textes et Monuments, ii, 196; King, pp. 129-130.

^283:5 Mosheim's notes on Cudworth, Intellectual System, Harrison's ed. i, 475.

^283:6 See a list in Fabricius, Bibliographia Antiquaria, ed. 3a. 1760, p. 332; and cp. M. J. C. Wolf, Manichaeismus ante Manichaeos, 1707, pp. 62-7.

^283:7 Havet, Le Christianisme et ses Origines, iii, 402; Cumont, Textes et Monuments, as cited, i, 5-7; J. Reville, La Religion a Rome sous les Severes, p. 88.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 2. Beginnings of Cult.

To trace completely the history of the cultus, however, we should have to make an examination note merely of Mithraism proper, but of at least three older systems. No historical principle

[p. 284]

is better established than this, that all historic religions run into and derive from some other religions, the creeds of all mankind being simply phases of a continuous evolution. So, when we say that Mithraism derives from Persia, we are already implying that it affiliates more distantly to the religions of India and Mesopotamia. Here it must suffice, therefore, to give only the briefest sketch of origins.

We trace the cult specifically in the earliest Aryan documents--in the Vedas, in which the deity Mitra or Mithra is one of the prominent figures. [*1] Seeing that there already he duplicates with other deities, it may be that, to begin with, the name was only a special epithet of the sun, [*2] the central force in later myth as in our planetary system; and that it lay with the priests and their royal patrons to determine which Name should be the most popular God, since the whole evolution was one of words. In any case, it is in Aryan Persia that the name of Mithra makes its fortune: in India it passes into the background of the verbal host.

In the Rig-Veda it is frequently associated with Varuna [*3] and Agni; and in the Atharva-Veda Mitra is so defined as to make his solar character certain. Of a deity who stands in general for the principle of light, it is there said that "In the evening he becomes Varuna Agni; in the morning he becomes Mitra going forth," [*4] an expression which plainly points to the Sun-God. That Mithra was not developed into a pre-eminent Vedic deity is to be proximately explained by the fact that Agni, who as fire-God and light-God had similar attributes, was better suited to the purposes of the highly-specialised priesthood which built up the Vedas. The God of the sacrificial fire was eminently adapted to sacerdotal ends; and it is in that respect that Agni is oftenest presented. It may have been, indeed, that the Aryan invaders of India had thus early assimilated in the case of Agni a popular pre-Aryan (though not Hindu) worship, [*5] as they did later with the Hindu cult of Krishna; while in Persia the Aryan Gods may have had a simpler course of development. On the other hand, it seems probable that the Ahura Mazda

[p. 285]

[paragraph continues] (Ormazd) of the Persians is a variant of the Assyrian God-name Assara Mazas, and at bottom identical with the God Assur or Asshur. [*1] On that view it is more likely that the Aryans were influenced by the ancient Mesopotamian cults than vice versa. [*2] However that may be, though we find the sacramental Vedic beverage the Soma preserved in the Persian cult as the Haoma, that principle did not predominate; and Mithra, in the character of Sun-God and War-God, grew in popular importance. Of Agni, as a special personification of the sacred fire, there is in the Persian system no other trace.

The Iranian documents which present to us what remains of the ancient lore of Mithraism are for the most part contained in the collection called the Zendavesta, a somewhat unfortunate title, since Zend signifies, not, as was formerly supposed, a language, but "a commentary or explanation"; and Avesta (from old Persian abasta, "the law") is the proper name of the original texts, of which the language somewhat resembles the modern Afghan. The collection is divided into two parts, of which the first is the Avesta properly so-called, containing (1) the Vendidad, a compilation of religious laws and mythical tales; (2) the Visperad, a set of litanies for the sacrifice; and (3) the Yasna, consisting of other litanies and five hymns or Gathas written in what appears to be an older dialect than the rest. The second part is called the Khorda (Small) Avesta, and contains short prayers for general use--namely, five Gah, thirty formularies of the Sirozah, three Afrigan, and six Nyayis. It is usual to include in the Khorda, though they do not strictly belong to it, the Yashts, hymns of praise to the several Izads or lesser deities (who, however, here include Mithra) and some fragments.

As to the age of the different portions there is considerable dispute. In the opinion of the late M. James Darmesteter, one of the highest authorities, certain quasi-scientific sections (Nasks) of the Avesta were written as late as the middle of the third century of our era, in imitation of Greek and Sanskrit scientific treatises; [*3] and the same scholar places the important Hom Yasht late in the second century. Much of the Vendidad, however, is reckoned pre-Alexandrian; and while M. Darmesteter held the Gathas to be post-Alexandrian, and very late in spirit albeit the oldest texts in the

[p. 286]

[paragraph continues] Avesta, other students count them among the earliest items of all. [*1] Broadly speaking, the religion of the Avesta, commonly called the Mazdean, from the God-name Ahura Mazda, is a highly composite one; but "there are few instances of foreign elements and concepts so freely borrowed by a religion and so harmoniously blended in the original mould." [*2]

Footnotes

^284:1 "Mitra is greater than the earth and the sky: he supports even all the Gods" (Rig Veda, iii, 59, 7-8; cited by Max Muller, Hibbert Lectures on Religion in India, 2nd ed. p. 275). Two of his doubles, Pushan and Savitri, are all-seeing, and leaders of souls to the abode of the blest. (Id.). Mitra is further the eldest of the eight sons of Aditi (Muir, Sanskrit Texts, iv, 14).

^284:2 "Obwohl Mitra ursprunglich ein Sonnengott ist, wird die Sonne zu Mitra-Varunas Auge" (A. Hillebrandt, Vedische Mythologie, Kl. Ausg. 1910, p. 40).

^284:3 Muir, as cited, p. 219.

^284:4 Oldenberg, Die Religion des Veda, 1894, pp. 190-1, citing Atharva-Veda, xiii, 3, 13; Max Muller, Hibbert Lectures, 2nd ed. p. 297.

^284:5 Cp. Tiele, Outlines, pp. 109-110; Fischer, Heidenthum und Offenbarung, 1878, p. 59; Justi, Gesch. d. oriental. Volker im Altertum, pp. 397-8, where fire-worship is traced to the natural "fire-wells" of the East. Such fire was termed "Son of Ahuramazda."

^285:1 Miss Plunkett, Ancient Calendars and Constellations, 1903, pp. 72 sq., 149 sq.

^285:2 Miss Plunkett argues (p. 75) for Assyrian borrowings from the ancestors of the Medes. May there not have been both an early and a late assimilation?

^285:3 Introduction to the Zendavesta, 2nd ed. p. xlvi.

^286:1 This is the view of Mr. L. H. Mills, as it was that of Haug. The latter, however (Essays on the Parsis, 3rd ed. pp. 257-260, 287), leaves his position somewhat obscure, arguing as he does on the one hand that the Gathas are the oldest parts of the Zendavesta, and on the other that they ignore Mithra and other Zendavestan Gods, the sacrifice of the Homa, etc., because Zoroaster did not believe in them. M. Darmesteter (Introd. to the Zendavesta, vol. iv of "Sacred Books of the East" series, 2nd ed. p. lxv) supposes the Gathas to have been written (in a dead language) between 100 B.C. and 100 C.E., and the Vendidad still later, pronouncing the latter a return to an older form of doctrine, however. Neither view seems satisfactory. M. Darmesteter argues (pp. xlviii-ix), for instance, (a) that one passage in the Hom Yasht can best be understood as referring to Alexander the Great, (b) that the Yasht is a "coherent whole," and (e) that it is therefore as a whole post-Alexandrian. He thus makes no allowance at this point for redactions or interpolations.

^286:2 Darmesteter, p. lxix.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 3. Zoroastrianism.

It is thus difficult to formulate precisely the evolution of Mithraism. If the Gathas are really the oldest parts of the Avesta, the cult of Mithra, though older than the Gathas, was for a time or in one region of Iran rejected or eclipsed, since in those rituals it does not appear. Zoroastrianism and Mithraism were certainly not originally one, neither did one grow out of the other. [*3] And here arises the question whether Zarathustra (Zoroaster), so closely associated with the Mithra-cult in the later portions of the Avesta, was a mythical figure or a real reformer who put a more spiritual or philosophic teaching in place of the simpler naturalism of the Vedic period. Mr. L. H. Mills, the learned translator and commentator of the Gathas, affirms in his introduction the historic reality [*4] and religious originality of Zarathustra, mainly on the ground that whereas in the later Avesta he is lost in myth, in the Gathas he figures quite simply as a real person. [*5]

From the conclusion thus drawn, some of us must respectfully but firmly dissent. The Gathas, critically considered, do not warrant it; on the contrary, the ostensibly earliest so clearly present Zarathustra as either an ideal or an official figure that Mr. Mills is driven to try to explain them by the question, "Can there have been a school, or family, of Zarathustrians, religious poets, similar to the Vedic seers?" [*6] Equally vital is his suggestion that "the

[p. 287]

special eminence of the Governor of Ragha as needing no 'Zarathustra' over him, that is, no imperial chief (Yasna xix, 19), may be attributed to the successors of Zarathustra." [*1] The fact is that the Gathas imply rather an established sacerdotal or quasi-regal functionary than a single notable man when they speak of Zarathustra Spitama. [*2]

Still more unconvincing is the claim made for Zoroastrian doctrine as something primarily abnormal. Mr. Mills first claims that "nowhere at their period had there been a human voice, so far as we have any evidence, which uttered thoughts like these"; but immediately afterwards, doubtless realising the impossibility of founding a cult all of a sudden with entirely new ideas, he admits that Zarathustra "was probably only the last visible link in a far extended chain. His system, like those of his predecessors and successors, was a growth. His main conceptions had been surmised, although not spoken before." [*3] The last clause returns to the arbitrary. There is positively no ground for seeing in the Gathas new ideas by a new man: they have all the air of a gradually evolved ritual.

The abnormal depth which Mr. Mills ascribes to them, finally, appears to be illusory. He affirms [*4] that "the mental heaven and hell with which we are now familiar as the only future states recognised by intelligent people, and thoughts which, in spite of their familiarity, can never lose their importance, are not only used and expressed in the Gathas, but expressed there, so far as we are aware, for the first time." But this claim proceeds on such expressions as, "for the wicked the worst life; for the holy the best mental state"; [*5] and to read in such expressions a negation of places of happiness and of torment is to misread alike the psychology and the language of primitive life. The modern who negates a physical heaven and hell, but still affirms a future-state-of-mind, either evades entirely the fatal problem as to the details of that state or verbally affirms its non-locality. There is no reason whatever to suppose that in ancient Asia men either demurred to the doctrine of places of happiness [*6] and torment, or sought thus intelligibly to modify them. "Worst life" and "best state of mind" could perfectly well connote for early thinkers bodily states and local habitations.

[p. 288]

We must refuse, then, to let the sympathetic illusions even of scholars force upon us an otherwise unsupported belief in the occurrence of a remarkable personality which of its own sheer moral power wrought a sudden and signal innovation in that most conservative of processes; ancient sacerdotal religion. The religious dualism ascribed to Zarathustra is in all likelihood a natural adaptation by priests of a polytheistic process of thought; [*1] and it seems far more likely that Zarathustra is an ancient title for a kind of priest-king [*2]--since both functions appear to go with the name in the early Gathas--than that there was a man so named who invented monotheistic dualism, [*3] even as Abraham is fabled to have discovered monotheism, and somehow succeeded in imposing his doctrine as a system of ritual and worship on his contemporaries. As Mr. Mills and Haug admit, there is not a single biographical detail on Zarathustra to be found.

Footnotes

^286:3 Cp. Justi, Gesell. des alten Persiens, 1878, pp. 68-70; Cumont, Textes et Monuments, i, 4, 11.

^286:4 So also Justi, as last cited. p. 67, and Haug, as above cited.

^286:5 Vol. iii of the Zendavesta trans., "Sacred Books of the East," vol. xxxi, introd. pp. xxii-xxv.

^286:6 Id. p. 21, note on Yasna, xxviii.

^287:1 Introd. p. xxviii. Compare the laboured arguments on p. 168, with regard to Yasna xlix, and on p. 141, under xlvi, 13.

^287:2 Cp. the Bundahish, xxiv, 1; xxix, 2 (S. B. E. v); and the Mihir Yasht (Zendavesta, S. B. E. xxiii), xxix, 115.

^287:3 Introd. cit. pp. xxiii-xxiv.

^287:4 Id. p. xx.

^287:5 Yasna, xxx, 4, p. 30.

^287:6 The heavenly mount, whither all redeemed souls go, is spoken of in the Yasna, xxviii, 5--one of the early Gathas.

^288:1 In Yasna xlvi, 12, Mr. Mills (p. 141) finds proof that the Zarathustrians had early been joined by a Turanian clan. This would introduce Turanian influences.

^288:2 As to the normal approximations of the offices of priest and king in antiquity compare Jewish history and Greek and Roman sacrificial usages with the historic developments in Egypt (Maspero, Hist. ancienne des peuples de l'orient, 4e edit. p. 288) and Phoenicia (Tiele, Hist. comp. des anciennes religions, Fr. tr. 1882, p. 324). See also Frazer, Golden Bough, 2nd ed. i, 7 sq.

^288:3 Haug (Essays on the Parsis, 3rd ed. pp. 300-5) credits him with holding at once by Monotheism and Dualism--one God containing two "principles." This conception might as well be credited to the Vedas. See next section; and cp. Cox, Mythology of the Aryan Nations, p. 562, and Breal and Maury as there cited.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 4. Evolution of Mithra.

Putting aside as otherwise insoluble the problem of "Zoroastrianism," and recognising that that system and the special cult of Mithra were originally separate but probably fused by some conquest, [*4] we proceed to note that the Mithra-cult, both in this connection and later, underwent an evolution in which the God's status slowly fluctuated, or was readjusted, like that of so many other ancient deities. For a time (and this suggests a Zoroastrian influence) he was graded as the subordinate of Ahura-Mazda (Ormazd).

"In the Indo-Iranian religion" [M. Darmesteter writes [*5]] "the Asura of Heaven was often invoked in company with Mithra, the God of the heavenly light; and he let him share with himself the universal sovereignty. In the Veda they are invoked as a pair (Mitra-Varuna) which enjoys the same powers and rights as Varuna alone, as there is nothing more in Mari), Varuna than in Varuna alone, Mitra being the light of heaven, that is, the light of Varuna. But Ahura-Mazda could no longer bear an equal, and Mithra [in the Avesta] became one of his

[p. 289]

creatures: 'This Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, I have created as worthy of sacrifice, as worthy of glorification, as I, Ahura-Mazda, am myself.' [*1] But old formulae, no longer understood, in which Mithra and Ahura, or rather Mithra-Ahura, are invoked in an indivisible unity, dimly remind one that the Creator was formerly a brother to his creature."

"He preserved, however, a high situation, both in the concrete and in the abstract mythology. As the God of the heavenly light, the lord of vast luminous space, of the wide pastures above, he became later the God of the Sun, Deo invicto Soli Mithrae (in Persian Mihr is the Sun). As light and truth were one and the same thing, viewed with the eyes of the body and of the mind, he becomes the God of truth and faith. He punishes the Mithra-Drug, 'him who lies to Mithra' (or 'who lies to the contract,' since Mithra as a neuter noun means 'friendship, agreement, contract' [*2]); he is a judge in hell, in company with Rashnu, 'the true one,' the God of truth, a mere offshoot of Mithra in his moral character." [*3]

The ritual of the Avesta is clear on the subject. "We sacrifice unto Mithra and Ahura, the two great, imperishable, holy Gods; and unto the stars, and the moon, and the sun, with the trees that yield up baresma" [burned on the altar]. "We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of all countries, whom Ahura-Mazda made the most glorious of all the Gods in the world unseen." "So may Mithra and Ahura, the two great Gods, come to us for help. We sacrifice unto the bright, undying, shining, swift-horsed sun." [*4] And in the teaching associated with Zoroaster we find Mithra extolled by Ahura-Mazda as a beneficent and comforting Spirit. "Happy that man, I think"--said Ahura-Mazda--"O Spitama Zarathustra! for whom a holy priest......who is the Word Incarnate, offers up a sacrifice unto Mithra......Straight to that man, I think, will Mithra come, to visit his dwelling. When Mithra's boons will come to him, as he follows God's teaching, and thinks according to God's teaching." [*5] This, though still ancient, was doubtless a relatively late and high form of the cultus in Persia, since in the Avesta we find Mithra repeatedly invoked as a warlike and formidable deity, a God of battles, swift to assail and slay the enemies of truth and justice--which would normally mean, the enemies of his worshippers.

[p. 290]

[paragraph continues] But the evolution of a moral cult on such a basis was in the due course of religious adaptation, since in the Mahabharata Agni combines the same set of characteristics, being at once friendly to warriors and typified by a dove, while as the Mouth of the Gods he fulfils the highest moral functions. [*1]

Thus, then, we have the cultus of Mithra as the Sun-God, the deity of light and truth, created by, and yet co-equal with, the Supreme Deity, [*2] and fighting on the side of the good against the evil power Angra-Mainyu (Ahriman)--this at a period long before the Christian era. So much is certain, whatever we may decide as to the actual period of the writing of the Avesta, as it has come down to us. Of the literature of Mazdeism, of course, a great deal has perished; this appearing, says M. Darmesteter, not only from internal evidence, but from history.

"The Arab conquest proved fatal to the religious literature of the Sassanian ages, a great part of which was either destroyed by the fanaticism of the conquerors and the new converts, or lost during the long exodus of the Parsis The cause that preserved the Avesta is obvious: taken as a whole, it does not profess to be a religious encyclopaedia, but only a liturgical collection: and it bears more likeness to a prayer-book than to the Bible." [*3]

We can therefore only infer the nature of the rest of the system. But we do know that, as time went on, the cultus of Mithra became more and more considerable. It is hardly accurate to say, as does Canon Rawlinson, that "Mithra was originally not held in very high esteem"; but it is the historic fact that

"he ultimately came to occupy a place only a little inferior to that assigned, from the first, to the Ahura-Mazda. Darius, the son of Hystaspes, placed the emblems of Ahura-Mazda and of Mithra in equally conspicuous positions on the sculptured tablet above his tomb [B.C. 485]; and his example was followed by all the later monarchs of his race whose sepulchres are still in existence. Artaxerxes Mnemon [d. B.C. 358] placed an image of Mithra in the temple attached to the royal palace of Suza. He also in his inscriptions unites Mithra with Ahura-Mazda, and

[p. 291]

prays for their conjoint protection. Artaxerxes Ochus [d. B.C. 337] does the same a little later; and the practice is also observed in portions of the Zendavesta composed about this period." [*1]

[paragraph continues] Artaxerxes Mnemon, too, swore by "the light of Mithras," as our William the Conqueror swore by "the splendour of God"; [*2] and in general the importance and range of the Mithraic worship at an early period may be clearly inferred from the mere vogue of the name Mithridates, "the justice of Mithra," which we find in use at least six hundred years before the Christian era. [*3]

It is after the Persian conquest of Babylon (538 B.C.) that Mithraism begins to take the shape it wears in the period of the Roman empire. Though historical details are lacking, we are broadly entitled to say that "the Mazdeism of the Persians, in uniting with the astrolatry of the Chaldeans, produced Mithraism." [*4] It was presumably before this development that Mazdeism entered Armenia under the earlier Achamenidae, [*5] who conquered that region about 625 B.C.; for whereas Ahuramazda, the Supreme God, was in some measure superseded by Mithra in the later Mithraic cult, [*6] in virtue of the same psychological tendency that later gave to the Christian Jesus a nominal equality with and a practical precedence over Yahweh, we find the older Mazdean deity adored as the thundering God in Eastern Iberia as late as the fourth century. [*7] But Mithraism in turn was prepared in Armenia for its cosmopolitan career in the western world; since it was from Armenian Mazdeism that it borrowed its enigmatic "supreme God," Kronos-Zervan, the Time Spirit, a Babylonian conception, represented in the mysteries by the lion-headed or demon-headed and serpent-encircled

[p. 292]

figure which bears the two keys. [*1] And this deity in turn tells of Babylonian influence, since the conception of the two locked doors of exit and entrance in the firmament is of Babylonian origin. [*2]

We must not exclude, however, the possibility that certain features of the Mithraic cult derive equally with those of some Babylonian cults from a common source of great antiquity. Mithra partly equates with Bel or Enlil, who seems to have been originally a War-God of "mighty weapons," and was known as "lord of lands," [*3] even as Mithra is "lord of wide pastures" and "all countries" and a bearer of "glorious weapons"; yet these seem to be early and not late attributes of Mithra. Bel, again, gives place to Merodach (Marduk), who assumes his titles and who becomes the Mediator-God; [*4] but this evolution in Mithra's case may follow older lines; even as his bracketing with Ahura-Mazda, as Bel was bracketed with Anu, [*5] appears to be early and not late. New Year's day is the festival alike of Bel, Merodach, and Mithra: this is an ancient idea. [*6] Yet again, when we find the Babylonian Sun-God and War-God Shamas (the prototype of the Hebrew "judge" Samson) figuring especially as the Judge and the Saviour of men, the destroyer of the wicked and of the enemies of his worshippers, [*7] we need not suppose that Mithra, who has all these attributes, is primarily modelled on Shamas, though he was identified with him: [*8] the underlying concept is prior to both cults. On the other hand, when Mithra absorbs in himself the idea of the Logos--who for the Babylonians is a separate God, Nabu, the rival of Merodach [*9] (as the Logos Hermes for the Greeks is the rival of Apollo), but later bracketed with him as his son [*10]--we may reasonably suppose that the Mithraic adaptation is late.

Of the deity thus shaped through many centuries, by many forces, it seems warrantable to say that his cult was normally in an ethically advanced stage, relatively to contemporary worships. In remote times, doubtless, he was worshipped with human sacrifices, like most other Gods: the Persian practice of sacrificing on a "high place" [*11] tells of early connection with the Asiatic cult of pyramid-altar-temples, which spread to Polynesia, North America, Syria,

[p. 293]

and Greece, always in connection with sacrifices of men and children. Of such sacrifice there is no trustworthy trace in the historic period, however, and at no time do we find any trace in his legend of sexual complications. Unlike Agni, unlike Krishna and Apollo and Adonis and Herakles and Dionysos and Attis, he has no amours; and his conjunction with Anaitis or Anahid, as we shall see, seems to have been rather a mystical blending of sexes than a conjugal union. His mate appears to have been primarily Ardivisura, a Goddess of a sacred well, and of the earth-waters generally, later blended with the Semitic Anahid, a Goddess of fruitfulness. [*1] At times he may have been licentiously worshipped, [*2] as Anaitis was; [*3] but in the Avesta and in the developed cultus so far as we know it he is always shown as making for righteousness. [*4]

Theologically, he exists both in abstract and in symbol. Originally, he is simply the animised sun: later, according to the universal law of religious evolution, he becomes a spirit apart from the sun but symbolised by it, the sun being worshipped in his name, and he being the God who sustains it: nay, an actual subordinate Sun-God takes his place, even in the Rig Veda. [*5] But since in Persian, as we have seen, his name (Mihr) actually means the sun, [*6] he can never be dissociated from it; and as the same word also means "the friend," the light being the friend of man, [*7] and seems to connote love or amity, [*8] a moral distinction inevitably attaches to him in a stage of thought in which words have an incalculable significance. He is not a mere benefactor to be flattered. As the sun in Nature can both succour and slay; as Apollo, called by Pindar [*9] the most friendly to men of all the Gods, is also the Destroyer, so the Persians sang: "Thou, O Mithra, art both bad and good to nations"--and to men, [*10] At length, the dualist theory holding its ground as a theological system, as it always will while

[p. 294]

men personify the energies of the universe, Mithra comes to occupy a singular position as between the two great powers of good and evil, Ormazd and Ahriman (the Ahura-Mazda and Angra-Mainyu of Mazdeism)--being actually named the MEDIATOR, [*1] and figuring to the devout eye as a humane and beneficent God, nearer to man [*2] than the Great Spirit of Good, a Saviour, a Redeemer, eternally young, son of the Most High, [*3] and preserver of mankind from the Evil One. In brief, he is a pagan Christ.

Much has been written as to whether Mithra was worshipped as the sun, or as the creator and sustainer of the sun. There can be no reasonable doubt that the two ideas existed, and were often blended. [*4] We may depend upon it that for the weak and ignorant minds, which could conceive a personal God only under the form of a man or animal, or both combined, the perpetual pageant of the sun was a help and not a hindrance to elevation of thought. We can understand, too, how even to the thinkers, who sought to distinguish between matter and essence, and reckoned the sun only a part of the material universe, the great orb should yet be the very symbol of life and splendour and immortality, as well as the chosen seat of the deity who ruled mankind; and that it should be the viewless spirit of the sun who, in their thought, proclaimed to man the oracle of the Soul of the Universe: "I am the Alpha and the Omega, the first and the last, which is, and which was, and which is to come, the Almighty." [*5]

Footnotes

^288:4 Cp. Prof. Cumont, Textes et Monuments, i, 11; Haug, as cited, pp. 290-2.

^288:5 The Zendavesta, i, Introd. p. lx-lxi.

^289:1 Mihir Yasht, i, in vol. ii of M. Darmesteter's translation of the Zendavesta (vol. 23 of Sacred Books" series). Cp. the Khorshed Nyayis in same vol. p. 351.

^289:2 Cp. West, note to trans. of Dinkard, S. B. E. vol. 37, B. viii, c. 44, 8.

^289:3 On the bearing of early Mithraism on conduct see in particular the Mihir Yasht, xxix, pronounced by M. Darmesteter "one of the most important in the Avesta, as a short account of the social constitution and morals of Zoroastrian Iran" (ii, 149, n).

^289:4 Id. ii, 158, 351.

^289:5 Darmesteter's Zendavesta, ii, 155: Mihir Yasht, xxxii, 137-8.

^290:1 A. Holtzmann, Agni nach den Vorstellungen des Mahabharata, 1878, pp. 7, 28, 30, 35. See also above, p. 219. As to the slow rise of Brahmanic ethic from the primary idea of quid pro quo in the relations of Gods and men, cp. M. Baudry's essay De l'interpretation mythologique in the Revue Germanique. Fev. i, 1868, p. 36; and Tiele, Outlines of the Hist. of Religion, Eng. tr. p. 113. Of course the dove may have been, as in other ancient cults, a symbol of sex instinct. On that view, Agni combined the characters of Mars and Venus.

^290:2 A. Hillebrandt confidently asserts (Vedische Mythologie, Kl. Ausg. 1910, p. 121) that the Ahura who is bracketed with Mithra is another than Ahuramazda. For this arbitrary decision he offers no argument beyond a reference to the fact that in India Mithra was bracketed with Varuna.

^290:3 Darmesteter, Zendavesta, i, Introd, pp. xxxi, xxxii (xxxiii in second ed.).

^291:1 The Religions of the Ancient World, p. 105, citing the same author's Ancient Monarchies, iv, 334; Flandin, Voyage en Perse, pls. 164 bis, 166, 173-6; Loftus, Chaldaea and Susiana, p. 579; and Sir H. Rawlinson's Cuneiform Inscriptions, i, 342. See also Plutarch, Alexander, 30; Quintus Curtius, De gestis Alex., iv, 48, 12; Xenophon, Oeconom. iv, 24; Ed. Meyer, Geschichte des Alterthums, i, 506, 542; and Windischmann, Mithra, ein Beitrag zur Mythengeschichte des Orients, in Abhandlungen fur die Kunde des Morgenlands, Bd. i, p. 55.

^291:2 King, The Gnostics and their Remains, p. 116; Aelian, Var. Hist. i, 33; Xenophon, Cyrop. vii, 5,  section 53; Plutarch, Artaxerxes, 4.

^291:3 See Cumont, Textes et Monuments, ii, 76-82, for a list of all the names combining that of Mithra, from the earliest times down to the Christian era. They include Mitraphernes, Mitrobates, Mithropaustes, Homamithres, Ithamitres, Siromitres, Mitrogathes, Aspamitree, Mitraios, Mitrostes, Rheomithres, Mithrobouzanes, Mithrines, Sisymithres, Mithracenes, etc., and the name Mithres is very common.

^291:4 Id. i, 8, 231. Justi (Geschichte des alten Persiens, 1879, p. 93) sees Egyptian as well as Chaldean elements in the cult.

^291:5 Cumont, pp. 10-11, 17, 231. Justi says no: "not under Darius or the Achamenidae, but first under the Parthians, who here set up an Arsacide dynasty" (p. 95).

^291:6 Meyer, Gesch. des Alterthums, i, 542.

^291:7 Moses of Chorene, l. ii, c. 83 (cited by Ioselian, Hist. of Georgian Ch.). Ahuramazda seems to have been widely worshipped in the Georgian district, and often in connection with another deity whose name is preserved by the old historians as Zaden, probably = Satan = Ahriman. Ioselian, Hist. of the Georgian Church, Eng. tr. pp. 20, 39, 67. Cp. Cumont, i, 16-20.

^292:1 Haug, Essays on the Parsis, 3rd ed. pp. 12-13; Cumont, i, 19, 74 sq.; ii, 196, 212, 215, 216, 238.

^292:2 Cumont, i, 83. citing Jensen, Die Kosmogonie der Babylonier, 1890, p. 9. Cp. Maspero, Hist. anc. des peuples de l'orient, 4e edit, p. 136.

^292:3 Jastrow, Relig. of Bab. and Assyria, pp. 54, 140, 146.

^292:4 Id. pp. 136, 276.

^292:5 Id. p. 147.

^292:6 Jastrow, Relig. of Bab. and Assyria, pp. 127, 631, 678, 681. Cp. the Hon. Emmeline E. Plunkett, Ancient Calendars and Constellations, 1903, pp. 58-59.

^292:7 Jastrow, pp. 71-2. Cp. Code of Hammurabi, Epilogue.

^292:8 Cumont, i, 231.

^292:9 Jastrow, pp. 126-9, 240, 648, 679.

^292:10 Id. pp. 127, 240, 648-9.

^292:11 Strabo, xv, 3,  section 13.

^293:1 Justi, Gesch. der oriental. Volker im Altertum, pp. 398-9.

^293:2 Athenaeus (x, 45), citing Ctesias and Duris, tells that among the Persians the king was permitted to get drunk and dance on one day in the year only, the festival of Mithras (either Christmas-day or one of the days of the New Year festival in spring); no one else being allowed to get drunk or dance on that day.

^293:3 Her worship being assimilated to that of Ishtar. Cumont, i, 231, n. Cp. Strabo, B. xi, end.

^293:4 In a Roman inscription he is sanctus dominas, the holy Lord. Cumont, ii, 235.

^293:5 "Sometimes a poet says that Savatri is Mitra, or that he at least performs the same work as Mitra. This Mitra is most frequently invoked in conjunction with Varuna. Both stand together on the same chariot." Max Muller, Hibbert Lectures, 2nd ed. p. 269.

^293:6 Cp. Darmesteter, Introd. to Zendavesta, pp. liv, lxi; Von Bohlen, Das alte Indien, 1, 258; Sainte-Croix, Recherches, ii, 122, n.

^293:7 Mitra literally means "a friend"; it is the light as friendly to man. Cp. Darmesteter, Ormazd et Ahriman,  section9 59-61; Max Muller. Hibbert Lectures, 2nd ed. p. 268, note.

^293:8 Wait, Jewish, Oriental, and Classical Antiquities. 1823, p. 194, citing the Berhan-i Kattea. The name seems to have been the Persian equivalent of Eros. Hyde, De Vet. Persar. Relig. 1700, c. iv, p. 107.

^293:9 Cp. Donaldson, Theatre of the Greeks, 7th ed. p. 23.

^293:10 Mihir Yasht, viii, 29.

^294:1 Plutarch, Isis and Osiris, c. 46; Julian, In regem solem, cc. 9, 10, 21. Lesser spirits, of course, were also held to exercise mediatorial functions, like the Christian Saints. "The Furuhers of the ancient Persians were intermediate agents between God and man, who presented earthly petitions to the throne of Ormuzd, being connected with the human soul and attendants on it." Wait, Jewish, Oriental, and Classical Antiquities, 1823, p. 88, citing the Berhan-i Kattea. Cp. Spiegel, Avesta, Einleitung, p. 31. For the metaphysical development of the idea of the Sun-God as Mediator see Julian, In regem solem.

^294:2 In the Persian mythology the first man and woman, Mashya and Mashyana, arise on Mithra's day in Mithra's (the seventh) month. (Spiegel, Eranische Alterthumskunde, 1, 503, 511.) In the Persian myth the pair are at first not only sinless but alike sexless (Bundahish, xv).

^294:3 "Like all the Aryan religions, that of the ancient Persians admitted that Ahura Mazda was a husband and father." Cumont, Textes et Monuments, i, 137. M. Cumont need not have limited this characteristic to the Aryan systems; it is equally Semitic. But it is in the later stages of Mithraism that the Sonship of the God is stressed. Id. ii, 4-5.

^294:4 Cp. Tiele, Egyptian Religion, p. 44, as to Osiris, and Hillebrandt, as cited above, p. 290, note, as to Mitra. One of the many proposed corrections of Gibbon by his commentators which are themselves errors is Guizot's note on ch. viii (Bohn ed. i, 255 to the effect that "Mithra was not the sun." Guizot founded on Anquetil, who, though a great pioneer, had not fully mastered the records.

^294:5 Revelation, i, 8; xxi, 6; xxii, 13. A very ancient Pagan formula. See Pausanias, x, 12, as to the chant "Zeus was, Zeus is, Zeus shall be"; and the phrase "God the beginning and the end," in Plato, Laws, iv, 7. Cp., in the Egyptian "Book of the Dead" (ch. lxiv; Budge's trans. pp. 112, 116), the formula, "I am Yesterday, To-day, and To-morrow."

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 5. The Process of Syncretism.

In the great polytheistic era, however, the habit of personifying all the forces of nature led first to a universal recognition of the

[p. 295]

actual existence of the deities of foreign peoples, and later on to the idea that all the deities of the nations are but names of phases of one central and omnipotent power. Even among the philosophers and theologians, of course, this conception never really destroyed the habit of thinking of the alleged phases or manifestations of the deity as being really minor deities; [*1] and much more a matter of course was it that among the multitude the deity or deities should, always be conceived in a quite concrete form. But the synthesizing tendency early resulted in this, that different cults were combined; different God-names identified as pointing to the same God; and different Gods combined into unities of two, three, four, or more members. Egypt is the great theological factory for such combinations; but the law necessarily operated elsewhere. The conception of a Divine Trinity is of unknown antiquity: it flourished in Mesopotamia, in Hindostan, in the Platonic philosophy, in Egypt, long before Christianity. [*2] But the combining process, among other variations, had to take account of the worship of Goddesses as well as of Gods; and in regions where Goddess-worship was deeply rooted it was inevitable that there should occur combinations of sex. This actually took place in the worship of Mithra. From Herodotus, [*3] writing in the fifth century B.C., we learn that in some way the God Mithra was identified with a Goddess. The whole passage, though familiar to students, is worth quoting here:--

"The Persians, according to my own knowledge, observe the following customs. It is not their practice to erect statues, or temples, or altars, but they charge those with folly who do so; because, as I conjecture, they do not think the Gods have human forms, as the Greeks do. They are accustomed to ascend the highest parts of the mountains, and offer sacrifice to Zeus, and they call the whole circle of the heavens by the name of Zeus. They sacrifice to the sun and moon, to the earth, fire, water, and the winds. To these alone they have sacrificed from the earliest times; but they have since learnt from the Arabians and Assyrians to sacrifice to (Aphrodite) Urania, whom the Assyrians call Mylitta, the Arabians Alitta, and the Persians Mitra."

This is one of the seemingly improbable statements in Herodotus

[p. 296]

which research has partly confirmed. [*1] He is accused, indeed, of blundering [*2] in combining Mithra with Mylitta, it being shown from monuments that the Goddess identified with Mithra was Anaitis or Tanat. [*3] But that the Armenian Anaitis and Mylitta were regarded as the same deity seems clear, [*4] and there are other clues.

It has not been commonly observed that Strabo twice explicitly brackets Anaitis with a Persian God Omanus as being worshipped at a common altar. He saw the statue of Omanus carried in procession. [*5] There is reason to suppose that Omanus (or the Persian form of the word) was a name of Mithra, and that it is an adaptation of Vohumano (Bahman)=Good Mind, a divine name with a very fluctuating connotation. In one passage of the Zendavesta, [*6] Vohumano figures as the doorkeeper of heaven; but he was also first of the Ameshaspentas or Amshaspands, of whom Mithra too (making seven) was chief; and he ranks further in the Avesta with Ahura-Mazda as judge of the dead; and again as the first-born son of Ahura-Mazda, as was Mithra later. Yet again, he is identified with the creative power; [*7] and it seems impossible that the conception of the "Good Mind" should have been prevented from coalescing either with that of Ahura-Mazda, who was not represented by a statue, or with that of Mithra, so making him "the Word." In any case, the fact of the combination of Mithra in a double personality with that of a Goddess is made clear, not only by the statement of the Christian controversialist Julius Firmicus, in the fourth century, and later writers, that the Persians make Mithras both two-sexed and threefold or three-formed, [*8] but by innumerable Mithraic monuments

[p. 297]

on which appear the symbols of two deities, male and female, the sun and the moon, or, it may be, male and female principles of the sun or of the earth. And this epicene or double-sexed character is singularly preserved to us in that Mithraic monument of the Graeco-Roman period which we possess in our own British Museum, in which the divine slayer of the bull presents a face of perfect and sexless beauty, feminine in its delicate loveliness of feature, masculine in its association with the male form.

In such a combination there is reason to see a direct influence of the old Akkado-Babylonian system on the later Mazdean. From the old Akkadians the Semites received the conception of a trinity, the "divine father and mother by the side of their son the Sun-God." [*1] But their own ruling tendency was to give every God, up to the highest, a "colourless double or wife"; [*2] and in the final blending of these in a double-sexed deity we have the consummation of the idea. It was not special to Asia; for the Egyptians gave a double sex alike to moon, earth, air, fire, and water, making the earth male as rock, female as arable soil; fire masculine as heat, female as light, and so on; [*3] and the Greeks and Romans accepted the notion; [*4] but it was probably from Chaldaea that it reached the Mithraists. Bel had been represented as both father and mother of Enlil, and Belti as both father and mother of Ninlil; and there are yet other instances of the Babylonian vogue of the idea of a God combining the two sexes. [*5]

There is a further presumption that it was either from Babylonia or through Mithraism as modified after the Persian conquest of Babylon that the idea of a double-sexed deity reached the Greeks. In the Orphic hymns, which probably represent the theosophy of several centuries before our era, it is predicated of four deities, of whom two, the Moon and Nature (Selene and Physeos), are normally female, and two (Adonis and Dionysos) normally male. [*6] Selene is

[p. 298]

further identified with Men, the Moon-God, who, as being double-sexed like Mithra, was finally identified with him in worship and on coins. [*1] As Dionysos and Adonis, originally Vegetation Gods, have at this stage become identified with the Sun, there arises a presumption that a solar cult has been imitated; though at the same time the solar cult may have adopted features from the others. The likelihood is that the notion of a double-sexed deity was the outcome on the one hand of the concrete practice of bracketing a male and a female deity together, and on the other hand of speculation on the essence of "divinity." But the concrete process probably came first, and the conjunction of the symbols or heads of a male and female deity in one monument or sculpture would give the lead to a mystical theory of a twy-sexed being.

Footnotes

^295:1 Compare the Gathas, passim. Mr. Mills (introd. p. xxiv) makes too much of "the wonderful idea that God's attributes are his messengers." The messengers, as he admits, are conceived as Gods or angels. They simply bear the names of attributes, on the analogy of the titles of a king's functionaries. Thus arose the idea of the Logos or Divine Word (Yasna, xxix, 7).

^295:2 See, in the Gathas, Yasna xxx, 7, and Mr. Mills' comments, pp. 14-15, etc., for traces of an early Zoroastrian trinity.

^295:3 B. i, c. 131.

^296:1 Lenormant admits as to the alleged blunder: "Perhaps it was not after all an error, and the divine couple may have been sometimes designated as a double Mithra" (Chaldean Magic, p. 236).

^296:2 Rawlinson's Herodotus, i, 257, 416. Cp. Lenormant, Manual of Anc. Hist. Eng. trans. ii, 46; and Chaldean Magic, as quoted.

^296:3 Cumont, Textes et Monuments, i, 5; ii, 87-88. On the names of this Goddess, see G. Diercks, Entwickelungsgeschichte des Geistes der Menschheit, Berlin, 1881, i, 242. She is held to have been the Goddess of the Oxus. Meyer, Geschichte des Alterthums, i, 542. Cp. Tiele, Outlines, pp. 170-1, where she is derived from the Semites, who in turn took her from the Akkadians. See also Tiele's Egyptian Religion, Eng. tr. p. 135; and Justi, Gesch. des alten. Persiens, pp. 93-5.

^296:4 Creuzer-Guigniaut, Religions de l'Antiquite, t. ii, ptie. i, pp. 76-82 (1829); Bahr, Symbolik des Mosaischen Cultus, ii, 243.

^296:5 B. xi, c. 8,  section 4; B. xv, c. 3,  section 15.

^296:6 Vendidad, Farg. 31 (102).

^296:7 See Max Muller, Psychological Religion, 1893, pp. 184, 186, 203; and the Avesta, Yasna, xxx; and compare Darmesteter's Introd. 2nd ed. p. lvi, as to Vohumano being the Logos. M. Darmesteter thinks the idea came through the Greeks, but does not face the problem as to whence they derived it. In the Bundahish, Vohumano is the first thing created by God--exactly as is the Logos for Philo--and from him then proceeds "the light of the world" (ii, 23, 25). Cp. the Pahlavi Yasna, xxxi, 8 (a). There is considerable obscurity as to the original character of Vohumano. Cp. Muller, as cited, pp. 54, 56, 57; Haug, Essays on the Parsis, 3rd ed. p. 350; and Spiegel, Avesta (1852), i, 247-8 (Fargard xix of Vendidad). Tiele identifies Vohumano with Sraosha, who in turn, however, was joined with Mithra. Outlines, pp. 171, 172, 176; Haug, pp. 307-8. Below,  section 10. Winckler (Altorient. Forschungen, xvi (1901), p. 4) identifies the Omanus of Strabo with Haman; but the existence of a deity so named is far from certain.

^296:8 De Errore Profanarum Religionum, v. Compare Dionysius the pseudo-Areopagite, Foist. vii ad Polycarp., cited in Selden, De Diis Syris, Proleg. c. 3; and in Cudworth, [p. 297] Intellectual System, Harrison's ed. i. 482. In a passage in the Yasna there is mention of "the two divine Mithras" (Lenormant, as quoted, citing Burnout). But cp. Mills' rendering of Yasna, i, 11, which appears to be the passage in view.

^297:1 Sayce, Hibbert Lectures, p. 193.

^297:2 Id. p. 215. Cp. Genesis, i, 27; Donaldson, Theatre of the Greeks, 7th ed. p. 21; and Lenormant, Chaldean Magic, pp. 129-130. In all likelihood, the Hebrew "Holy Spirit" was originally held to be feminine. Cp. Justin Martyr, 1 Apol. c. 64.

^297:3 Plutarch, Isis and Osiris, c. 43; Seneca, Quaest. Nat. iii, 14.

^297:4 See Servius on the Aeneid, ii, 632. Cp. Donaldson, as last cited. It was in this way that Apollo and Dionysos came to be at times represented in feminine robes; while Aphrodite was sometimes (as in Sparta) bearded. Cp. Macrobius. Saturnalia, iii, 8, as to the double sex of Venus, which is abundantly illustrated by Preller, Romische Mythologie, 2nd ed. p. 389, and Griechische Mythologie, 2nd ed. i, 268. On other developments of the Principle cp. Selden, De Diis Syris, Syntag. ii, c. 2; and Spencer, De legibus Hebraeorum, lib. ii, c. xvii,  section 12. It has been discussed with much suggestiveness, if with some fantasy of speculation, by Mr. Gerald Massey in his Natural Genesis, 1883, i, 510-518.

^297:5 Anz, Zur Frage nach dem Ursprung des Gnosticismus, 1897, p. 105, following Jensen, Kosmologie der Babylonier, pp. 142 sq., 272 sq.

^297:6 Orphica, ix, 2, 3; x, 18; xliii, 4; lvi, 4.

^298:1 Cumont, ii, 189-190; i, 235, and notes. As we saw, Mithra was also identified with Shamas, the Babylonian Sun-God. Id. i, 231.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 6. Symbols of Mithra.

To point to these Mithraic monuments, of which there are so many examples, is to point out, further, that the old Persian aversion to images of deity had disappeared with the extension of the Mithraic cultus. [*2] There is no doubt as to the original forbiddal of images, despite the common delusion that the Jews were the first to lay down such a veto. But it was inevitable that, in the artistic countries, [*3] the adoption of Mithraism should involve the representing Mithra by images, like other deities. Nor was this all. One reason for regarding the Zend-Avesta as substantially ancient is the comparative simplicity of the Mithra cultus it sets forth. Just as happened with Christianity later, the spreading faith assimilated all manner of ancient symbolisms, and new complications of ritual; and Mithra is associated with the strange symbolic figures of the lion-headed serpentine God, bearing two keys, but above all is presented in that of the slayer of the bull. Whence came that conception? There are many explanations. It has been variously decided that the bull slain by Mithra is the symbol of the earth, the symbol of the moon, the symbol of the sun, the symbol of lust, the symbol of evil, the symbol of the cloud, the bull of the Zodiac, and the cosmogonic bull of the Magian system. [*4] All of these conceptions

[p. 299]

may be held to connect with the symbolism of the Veda, where Agni is the bull; and it is in a similarly early sense, as the Sun-God among the cows, that Mithra is in the Avesta the bull and the cow-stealer [*1]--which last name he retains in the late Roman period, [*2] when he has the epithet in common with Hermes. On the basis of the primitive nature-myth arose a host of imageries, all interfluent and inseparable, because all fanciful. Any one who has followed the maze of symbolism in Plutarch's Isis and Osiris will be prepared to believe that for the later ancients Mithra as the bull had half-a-dozen significations. [*3] In that famous treatise, Isis and Osiris and Typhon successively represent a number of different Nature-forces--sun, moon, moisture, the Nile, the Earth, generative warmth, injurious heat, and so on--shifting and exchanging their places, till it becomes plain that the old theosophy was but a ceaseless flux of more or less congruous fancies. We may be sure that Mithraism was as hospitable to mystic meanings as Osirianism. It is intelligible and probable that Mithra slaying the bull should have meant for many the rays of the sun penetrating the earth, and so creating life for mundane creatures, [*4] as the dog feeds on the blood [*5] of the slain bull. In the Vendidad, the older (Vedic) God Yima, whose "glory" was secured by Mithra when Yima fell through disobedience, [*6] is represented as "sealing the earth with his golden seal," and thrusting into it with his dagger, [*7] which is perhaps the earliest form of the myth under notice.

But those who adopt this as the whole explanation [*8] overlook a principle perhaps bound up with the origin of Mithraism proper--the significance of the bull as one of those signs of the zodiac through which the sun passed in his annual course. It is nearly certain that the zodiac was the source of very much of the later symbolism and mysticism of those ancient cults which their priesthoods associated

[p. 300]

with the sun, not to speak of those whose priesthoods professedly repudiated sun-worship. And one of the most important facts established by the collection and comparison of ancient monuments [*1] is, that the Mithraic cultus connects symbolically with an Assyrian or Akkadian cultus far older--the cult which produced those common Assyrian monuments in which a divine or kingly personage slays a lion or a bull, thrusting a sword through him. [*2] There can be little doubt that these successive religious representations of the slaying of the lion and the slaying of the bull rest partly on a zodiacal system of sacred symbolism, in which the slaying of a given animal means either the passing of the sun into or out of a particular sign of the zodiac at a particular season of the year, or the slaying of the animal represented as a special sacrifice, or both.

The zodiac, which is of immense antiquity, [*3] has come to be conventionalised--that is to say, it is fixed, so that the signs have long ceased to coincide with the actual constellations whose names they bear. But originally the students of the stars must needs have had regard to the actual constellations. And this carries us very far back indeed. The view that the slaying of the bull originally pointed to the sun's entering the sign of the Bull at either the vernal equinox or the winter solstice [*4] is supported by the circumstance that the bull was at once a symbol of the Sun-God and a symbol of agriculture, the early plough being drawn by bulls or oxen (whence possibly the naming of the constellation); [*5] and is

[p. 301]

strongly suggested further by the hostile function assigned in the monuments to the Scorpion, which is the opposing sign, and would represent the autumnal equinox. [*1] This symbol then dates back, probably, more than 3,000 years before the Christian era--6,000 years if we assume the original zodiacal year to have begun at the winter solstice; while the symbol of the slaying of the lion would signify the sun's entrance into Leo at midsummer in the same periods, and may connect with the worship of Tammuz, after whom the midsummer month was named in Syria--unless the God took his name from the month. In point of fact, astronomy tells us that, by the precession of the equinoxes, the constellation of the Bull had ceased to be the sun's place at the vernal equinox for about 2,100 years before the reign of Augustus, the constellation of the Ram taking its place. Still, just as the symbol of the slaying of the lion had, on this theory, held its ground in religion after the bull played a similar part, so did the sign of the Bull play its part in symbol and ceremony long after the sun had begun to enter the constellation Aries at the sacred season. Nevertheless--and this seems a crowning vindication of the zodiacal theory--while the bull holds its place on the monuments of the Christian era, we find at this very period, in connection with the worship of Mithra as with those of Dionysos [*2] and (more anciently) of Amun, [*3] an actual ceremony of slaying a ram in honour of the Sun-God. In Persia, the sign Aries, the Ram, was known as the Lamb; [*4] and in some of the Mithraic mysteries at the Christian era, it was a lamb that was slain. [*5] That fact, as we shall see, has further bearings; but thus far it surely counts for much as a proof of the zodiacal element in the symbolism of the ancient sophisticated sun worships. The notion of a Fish God is deeply rooted in several of the older eastern religions, [*6] and though it may be explained as arising from the fancy that the sun was a fish, who plunged into the sea in the evening and emerged in the morning--a natural type of immortality for later mystics--it also strongly suggests an ancient connection with zodiacal astrolatry.

[p. 302]

[paragraph continues] In any case, there is no more plausible explanation than the zodiacal one of the early Christian habit of calling Jesus Christ the Fish. The sign of the Fishes comes next the Ram in the zodiac; and that constellation had actually taken the place of the Ram, at the spring equinox, when this symbol came into use. [*1]

We may further infer, when we read of Phrixos, the son of Athamas, who was carried to Colchis by a ram with a golden fleece, [*2] and who in his statue on the Acropolis was represented as having "just sacrificed the ram to some God," [*3] that in some eastern cult [*4] which the Greeks misunderstood, a deity was latterly figured as borne on the zodiacal Ram, in the manner of Mithras "bull-borne," [*5] and as sacrificing the ram in its turn. And that there was a constant astronomical significance in the Mithraic cult in particular, we know from the testimony of Origen, to the effect that its mysteries included an elaborate representation of the movements and relations of the stars and the planets, and the movements of the disembodied human soul among these. [*6]

Every widespread religion, however, is necessarily a complex of many ideas, and in the cult of Mithra this is abundantly seen. In the course of its western evolution it became closely associated, like that of Attis, with the popular worship of Cybele, the Magna Mater, Mother of the Gods; [*7] and in virtue of Roman military tradition it was bracketed with that of many specifically Roman deities. In the Mithraic cave-temples have been found images and names of Juno, Minerva, Apollo, Mars, Bacchus, Mercury, and Venus, "and especially Silvanus, who had taken on the character of a pantheistic God, doubtless because he was the Latin equivalent of the Greek Pan."' This, by the way, is not the sole reason for approximating Mithra to Pan." [*8] A collocation of the Sun-God with the Goat-God occurs constantly in Greek mythology, and can be clearly traced back to the Babylonian system, on which Mithraism had independently drawn. [*9] The image of the slaying of the bull, in particular, whatever its original bearing, came to be associated

[p. 303]

specially with the idea of sacrifice and purification; and the great vogue of the Phrygian institutions of the Taurobolium and Criobolium, [*1] or purification by the blood of bulls and rams, must have reacted on Mithraism, even if it were not of strictly Mithraic origin. Mithra, like Osiris [*2] and Dionysos, [*3] we saw, [*4] was the bull as well as the God to whom the bull was sacrificed, even as Amun, to whom rams were sacrificed, was "the great ram"; [*5] and herein lies one of the germs of the dogma of the death and resurrection of the God; another being the ancient astronomic myth, to which we shall come later, of the Descent of the God to Hades. In the procedure of the Taurobolia and Criobolia, which grew very popular in the Roman world, [*6] we have the literal and original meaning of the phrase "washed in the blood of the lamb"; the doctrine being that resurrection and eternal life were secured by drenching or sprinkling with the actual blood of a sacrificial bull or ram, often doubtless a lamb, that being a common sacrifice from time immemorial, on the ground that for certain purposes the victim must be sexually pure. Thus we have such mortuary inscriptions as Taurobolio criobolioque in aeternum renatus, "By the bull-sacrifice and the ram-sacrifice born again for eternity." [*7] But inasmuch as there was a constant tendency in the mystical systems to substitute symbolism for concrete usages, the Mithraists may be surmised to have ultimately performed their sacrificial rites in a less crude form than that described by Prudentius. [*8]

Footnotes

^298:2 Cumont, i, 10, note; i, 236, note.

^298:3 I do not quite follow Canon Rawlinson's meaning in the statement (Seventh Oriental Monarchy, p. 632), that "the Persian system was further tainted with idolatry in respect of the worship of Mithra." For that matter, however, the "idolatry" of antiquity in general is on all fours with the reverence of images under Christianity.

^298:4 Cp. Hammer-Purgstall, Mithriaca, Caen and Paris, 1833, p. 31; Roscher, Ausfuhrliches Lexikon, col. 3051-3: Creuzer, Das Mithreum von Neuenheim, p. 31; Darmesteter, Ormazd et Ahriman, pp. 144-153; Baur, Das manichaische Religionssystem, 1831, p. 91; Rawlinson, Five Great Monarchies, iii, 361; and Hyde, as there cited. Darmesteter holds that the [p. 299] bull, like the Vedic cow, = the cloud; that its seed is the rain (p. 149); and that its true slayer is the serpent (p. 153). In the zodiac, the bull was domus Veneris. But the idea that the bull or ram symbolised lust could well be primary; and in the Persian myth the ram helps to lead the first man and woman into sin (Spiegel, Eran. Alterthumsk., i, 511-512; Bundahish., xv, 13). For Porphyry, the God (Mithra) who was a stealer of oxen was secretly concerned with generation (De antro, xviii). As to the primeval ox, source of all animals, see the Bundahish, iii, 4-18; iv, 1, etc. (West's Pahlavi Texts, i, 17-20. S.B.E. vol. v).

^299:1 Mihir Yasht, xxii, 86.

^299:2 Firmicus, De errore, v, calls him abactor boum. Cp. Commedianus, Instructiones, i, 13(cited by Windischmann, p. 64, and by Cumont, ii, 9),who speaks of the cows as hidden in a cave; and Porphyry, as last cited.

^299:3 For Porphyry, Mithra is "the Bull Demiourgos" and "lord of genesis" (De antro, xxiv).

^299:4 This interpretation is clearly adopted in one monument which makes ears of corn instead of blood come from the bull's wound. Cumont, ii, 228.

^299:5 For another signification of the dog here, see Mr. King's Gnostics and their Remains, 2nd ed. p. 137. Compare the Osirian theory in Plutarch, Isis and Osiris, c. 44.

^299:6 Zamyad Yasht, vii, 35.

^299:7 Vendidad, Fargard, ii, 10, 14, 18 (32-3).

^299:8 King, pp. 135-6.

^300:1 See the series in Lajard's Atlas. Professor Cumont, while of course rejecting Lajard's theory that Mithraism originated in the Assyrian system, recognises that the planetary and zodiacal elements in Mithraism were certainly borrowed by it from the ancient Chaldean system; and that in general Chaldean elements were early superimposed upon the Iranian when the cults met at Babylon (Textes et Monuments, i, 73, 109).

^300:2 Sometimes in the Persian period a griffin or dragon (pronounced by Justi, Gesch. des alten Persiens, p. 109, to be the Arimanian beast) takes the place of the lion or bull. See the figure from Persepolis in Ancient Calendars and Constellations, by the Hon. Emmeline E. Plunkett, 1903, p. 64. Miss Plunkett points out that this figure is a compound of the four zodiacal figures, the Bull, the Lion, the Scorpion, and the Eagle. The bull and the lion, as well as this composite, appear in Persian sculpture of the age of Xerxes, evidently following the Assyrian models. Reber, History of Ancient Art, Eng. tr. 1883, pp. 123-5. Again, there is a presumption that the design of a lion attacking a bull or an ilcorn, seen on a number of ancient coins in Asia Minor, and even in Macedonia, is a symbol analogous to that of Mithra slaying the bull (see Parker and Ainsworth's Lares and Penates, 1853, p. 187, where the explanation given will not stand). Persia is still the "Land of the Lion and the Sun." Cp. the figures on the palace of Xerxes, reproduced by Justi, p. 106.

^300:3 Cp. Sayce, Hibbert Lectures, pp. 397-8; Narrien, Histor. Account of the Orig. and Prog. of Astronomy, 1850, pp. 79-83, 126-137; Tiele, Hist. comp. des anciennes relig. Fr. tr. 1882, p. 248; Cumont, Textes et Monuments, i,  section 6; Jensen, Kosmologie der Babylonier, 1890, pp. 57-95; Jastrow, The Religion of Babylonia, and Assyria, 1898, pp. 434, 456. The careful argument of Letronne (Melanges d'erudition et de critique historique; Origin des Zodiaques) to show that the zodiac originated with the Greeks is exploded by the discoveries of Assyriology. The ideas of Macrobius and of Dupuis and Volney, which Letronne undertook to overthrow, are thus in large measure rehabilitated. See R. Brown. jun., Eridanus: River and Constellation, 1883; The Phainomena of Aratos, 1885; and Primitive Constellations of the Greeks, Phoenicians, and Babylonians, 1899. The point is newly established in Miss Plunkett's work, above cited, which is an important contribution to astronomical mythology, though not very advanced in Biblical matters.

^300:4 The latter is the hypothesis argued for by Miss Plunkett, work cited, p. 18 sq.

^300:5 Sayce, p. 48. "The title given to Merodach, the Sun-God, when he passed through the twelve zodiacal signs, was Gudi-bir, 'the bull of light.'"--Cp. pp. 290, 292.

^301:1 Lenormant (Chaldean Magic, p. 56) rejects the idea that there was an astronomical significance in the Assyrian bull-slaying; but his arguments do not amount to a refutation. He rests his denial on one fragment of a conjuration, which makes demons bulls.

^301:2 The ram "supplied the favourite Dionysiak sacrifice." R. Brown, The Great Dionysiak Myth, ii, 65. In one version of the Dionysiak myth. Zeus changes Dionysos into a ram to save him from Here. Smith's Dict., art. DIONYSUS, citing Hyginus and Theon. Cp. Herodotus, ii, 42.

^301:3 Herodotus, as cited.

^301:4 Bundahish, ii, 2. In this list of the zodiacal constellations the Lamb comes first, then the Bull.

^301:5 Garucci, Les Mysteres du Syncretisme Phrygien, p. 34. A ram was the first sacrifice offered by the first man and woman in the in the Persian myth; and they, as we saw (p. 294) are specially associated with Mithra.

^301:6 Cp. the illustrations collected in W. Simpson's Jonah, 1899.

^302:1 Cp. Gerald Massey, Natural Genesis, i, 454, ii, 389, sq., and the plate in Simpson's Jonah, p. 263, with the fish on the head of the Horus-bearing Isis. Horus had long been "the Fish."

^302:2 Apollodorus, i, 9,  section 1.

^302:3 Pausanias, i, 24.

^302:4 One of the children of Athamas in the myth is Melicertes = Melkarth. The story being one of child sacrifice by way of averting a drought, it has analogies to the myth of Abraham and Isaac, which is a late sophistication of an earlier legend. See Frazer, G. B. ii, 35, as to the Greek development of the myth.

^302:5 Such a figure is found in Egypt--Harpocrates (Hor-pi-Khrot, "Horus the child") riding on a ram. See Erman, Handbk. of Eg. Relig. Eng. tr. p. 323. This may or may not be the ground of the Greek myth.

^302:6 Against Celsus, vi, 22.

^302:7 Roscher, 3043-4; Cumont, Textes et Monuments, i, 161, 333.

^302:8 Roscher, 3045; Cumont, i, 147-8.

^302:9 See Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. pp. 318-26.

^303:1 Referred to by Firmicus, c. 28.

^303:2 Plutarch, Isis and Osiris, cc. 20, 29, 39.

^303:3 Plutarch, Quaestiones Graecae, 36.

^303:4 Above, <page 299>. So in the Babylonian system "the Sun-God eventually became the monster slain by a solar hero." Sayce, p. 293. Cp. Hubert et Mauss, Essai sur le sacrifice, in L'Annee Sociologique, ii, 129.

^303:5 Tiele, Egyptian Religion, p. 147.

^303:6 Gibbon, Bohn ed. ii, 145, note.

^303:7 Given in note on Firmicus in ed. Hackiana, 1672, p. 56. See it also in Orelli, No. 2352, and in Cumont, Inscr. 17 (ii, 96). See further in Cumont, Nos. 20-24, and in Orelli, Nos. 1899, 1900, 2130, 2199, 2322, 2326, 2328, 2330, 2331, 2351, 2353, 2361. Compare Boeckh, 6012, b, c. Here the taurobolium and criobolium are directly connected with Mithraism; and it would appear from Strabo (xv, 3,  section 14) that the Mazdeans practised something very like it, slaying victims over pits into which the blood dripped. Concerning the taurobolium at Athens, see Dittenberger, Inscr. Atticae aet. Roman. 172. 173. Cp. King, Gnostics, p. 154.

^303:8 De Coronis. Hymn X, 1009-1050. The initiate was placed in a pit over which there was a grating. On this was placed the animal to be slain--young bull or young ram--and the blood dropped on the votary beneath, See Cumont, i, 187, 334, as to the origins and vogue of the Taurobolium (properly Tauropolium).

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 7. The Cultus.

Resembling other cults at various points, the Mithraic was latterly peculiar in others. The great specialty of this worship, as we learn from several writers, is that it was carried on in caves--so far at least as its special mysteries were concerned--the cave being considered so all-important that, where natural caves did not exist,

[p. 304]

the devotees made artificial ones. [*1] Porphyry puts it on record [*2] that the "Persians, mystically signifying the descent of the soul into the sublunary regions, and its regression thence, initiate the mystic in a place which they call a cavern. For, as Euboulos says, Zoroaster was the first who consecrated in the neighbouring mountains of Persia a cave, in which there were flowers and fountains, in honour of Mithra, the Maker and Father of all things--a cave, according to him, being an image of the world, which was made by Mithra. But the things contained in the cavern......were symbols of the mundane elements and climates."

This explanation of the cave was not improbably suggested by a well-known passage in Plato; [*3] and it is obvious that the custom must have had some simpler origin. At an early culture-stage among the Romans, indeed, we find the name mundus given to the sacred cave on the Palatine Hill into which the people threw specimens of all their domestic utensils and a handful of Roman earth. [*4] This is remarkably close to the symbolic idea in Porphyry; but there must have been an earlier form still. [*5] A cave, in fact, seems to have been one of the earliest forms of temple. [*6] It is easy to understand how to half-civilised man caves would have a hundred mysterious significances, as places for dwelling or meeting made by the Deity himself; and fire- or sun-worshippers would have the special motives supplied by finding in caves the remains of the fires of earlier men, and by the not unnatural theory that the sun himself went into some cave when he went below the horizon at night. Indeed, Porphyry admits that caves in the most remote periods of antiquity were consecrated to the Gods, before temples were. Thus the Curetes in Crete dedicated a cavern to Zeus; in Arcadia, a cave was sacred to the moon, and to Lycean Pan; and in Naxos to Dionysos. [*7]

[p. 305]

[paragraph continues] "But," he adds, "wherever Mithra was known, they propitiated the God in a cavern." [*1]

It appears that the greatest sanctity attached to caves in the living rock; and there are many remains of Mithraic altars cut in rocks; [*2] nay more, the rock came to be specially associated with Mithra, [*3] who was named "rock-born"; and the phrase, ''Theos ek petras, God out of the rock," or "Mithras out of the rock," became one of the commonest formulas of the cultus. [*4]

In these rock-caves, then, or in artificial caves, the priests of Mithra celebrated the habitual rites and special mysteries of their religion. The rising sun would be daily hailed with joy, [*5] as among the Jewish Essenes, and sun-worshippers everywhere; and during the night, when the sun was hidden, special prayers would be offered up. The first day of the week, Sunday, was apparently from time immemorial consecrated to Mithra by Mithraists; and as the Sun-God was pre-eminently "the Lord," Sunday was "the Lord's day" long before the Christian era. [*6] On that day there must have been special Mithraic worship. But we have some exact information as to the two chief Mithraic ceremonies or festivals, those of Christmas and Easter, the winter solstice and the vernal equinox, the birthday of the Sun-God and the period of his sacrifice and his triumph. [*7] That Christmas is a solar festival of unknown antiquity, which the early Christians appropriated to their Christ in total ignorance of the real time of his birth, is no longer denied by competent Christian scholars--when they happen to allude to the

[p. 306]

subject. That Easter is also a solar festival [*1] is perhaps not so freely recognised. But we know not only that Mithra and Osiris (and Horus), like so many other solar and vegetal deities, were especially adored at the vernal equinox, [*2] but that in these worships there were special formulas representing, apparently at this date, [*3] the symbolical death of the deity, the search for his body, and the finding of it. The Christian Firmicus wrathfully tells how the priests of Osiris, who have a representation of the God in the most secret part of their temples, mourn for a certain number of days (presumptively forty, [*4] = Lent), while professedly searching for the scattered members of his mangled body, till at length they feign to have found it, when they finish their mourning and rejoice, saying, "We have found him: rejoice we." [*5] And we learn also from Tertullian that Osiris in the mysteries was buried and came to life again. [*6] Some such idea would seem to be implied in the ritual performed by the people of Patrae at the annual festival of Dionysos, when the God, called Asymnetes ("the Judge" or "the King"), represented by his image in a chest, was carried outside of the temple in the night, to be hailed by the worshippers. Of the image in the chest, it was obscurely told that the sight of it had driven Eurypilus mad--a suggestion that it may have been dismembered. [*7]

But as to Mithraism the details (if only we can be sure of one identification) are still more precise. The worshippers, Firmicus tells us, [*8] lay a stone image by night on a bier and liturgically mourn for it, this image representing the dead God. This symbolical corpse is then placed in the tomb, and after a time is withdrawn, whereupon the worshippers rejoice, exhorting one another to be of good hope; lights are brought in; and the priest anoints the throats of the devotees, murmuring slowly: "Be of good courage; ye have been instructed in the mysteries, and ye shall have salvation from your sorrows." As the stone image would be laid in a rock-tomb--the God being pre-eminently "from the rock" and worshipped in a cave--the parallel to a central episode in the Christian legend is sufficiently

[p. 307]

striking; and in view of the duplication of the motive on all hands, in the cults of Osiris, Attis, Adonis, Dionysos, it is impossible to doubt that we are dealing with a universal myth.

To assign the origin of the rite to any known religion would be unwarrantable; nor is it even certain whether it was originally a part of a solar or of a vegetal cult, though there are grounds for ascribing it to the latter. In any case, it was adaptable to both. It is argued by Dr. Frazer, the chief exponent of the lore of the subject, that the God who dies and rises again does so not as Sun-God but as Vegetation-God; and it may be granted that the vegetation principle is either primary or present in the cults of Attis, Adonis, Dionysos, and Osiris. But on the other hand the pre-eminently solar Herakles dies on the funeral pyre, descends to Hades, and reascends to Heaven; the obviously solar Samson of the Semitic myth, who also in its earlier form probably descended to the underworld, [*1] dies ostensibly in his solar capacity (with shorn hair, [*2] blinded, and placed between the "pillars" = Herakles' pillars), and must, as God, have risen again; and even the strictly solar Apollo, as is shown by K. O. Muller, [*3] made his Descent to Hades, as did Orpheus, who is inferribly a Day-God. Now, the Descent into Hades was for mortals simply Death; and since the God as such cannot cease to exist, he may as well be said to die in one way as in another. In all these cases the explanation is more or less clearly astronomical; and it is so in the case of the Descent of Mithra to Hades, noticed later; though, as above remarked, the sacrificial principle, identifying the God with the sacrifice, would so complicate the doctrine as to make the solar cult approximate closely to that of the Vegetation-God.

This, however, was only one of the Mithraic mysteries, presumably celebrated once a year. We have further records of another enacted at the initiation of every new devotee, and probably repeated in some form frequently. Justin Martyr, [*4] after describing the institution of the Christian Lord's Supper, as narrated in the gospels, goes on to say: "Which the wicked devils have imitated in the mysteries of Mithra, commanding the same thing to be done. For, that bread and a cup of water [*5] are placed with certain incantations

[p. 308]

in the mystic rites of one who is being initiated, you either know or can learn." This is borne out by Tertullian, who intimates [*1] that "the devil, by the mysteries of his idols, imitates even the main parts of the divine mysteries. He also baptises his worshippers in water, and makes them believe that this purifies them of their crimes......There Mithra sets his mark on the forehead of his soldiers; he celebrates the oblation of bread; he offers an image of the resurrection, and presents at once the crown and the sword; he limits his chief priest to a single marriage: he even has his virgins and his ascetics (continentes)." Again, [*2] the devil "has gone about to apply to the worship of idols those very things in which consists the administration of Christ's sacraments."

Reference is here made to a certain ceremony of initiation. It strongly suggests the mysteries which are practised in our own time among savage tribes in many parts of the world. [*3] The complete initiation of a worshipper, we know, was an elaborate and even a painful process, involving many austerities, trial by water, trial by fire, by cold, by hunger, by thirst, by scourging, by branding or bleeding, [*4] and the mock menace of death. [*5] Of these austerities different but vague and scanty accounts are given. According to some accounts they lasted fifteen days; according to others, for forty-eight: [*6] one old writer [*7] alleges eighty different kinds of trials. It is more likely that they numbered twelve, seeing that on the Mithraic monuments we find representations of twelve episodes, probably corresponding to the twelve labours in the stories of Herakles, Samson, and other sun-heroes; but probably also connected with the trials of the initiated. [*8] More explicitly we know from Porphyry and from Jerome that the devotees were divided into a number of different degrees, symbolically marked by the

[p. 309]

names of birds and animals, and apparently by wearing, during some of the rites, the skins or heads of these animals. [*1] Porphyry [*2] mentions grades of lions, lionesses, and crows, and higher grades of eagles and hawks; Jerome [*3] speaks of crow, gryphon, soldier, lion, Persian (or Perses), sun, Bromios = roarer (or, the bull), and father. Out of the various notices, partly by hypothesis, M. Lajard has constructed a not quite trustworthy scheme, [*4] representing twelve Mithraic degrees: three terrestrial, the soldier, the lion, [*5] and the bull; three aerial, the vulture, the ostrich, and the raven; three igneous, the gryphon, the horse, and the sun; and three divine, the grade of fathers, named eagle, sparrow-hawk, and father of fathers. [*6] It makes a sufficiently grotesque list, in this or any other form; but it is the old story--all religions are absurd to those who do not believe them; [*7] and it is not well for those who keep a private conservatory, however small, to throw stones.

The "mark on the forehead" of the initiate, finally, was in all likelihood the cross, the universal symbol of life and immortality, and in particular of the Sun-God. Presumably it was not the gammadion or swastika, the most specific symbol of the Sun, for that appears to have been notably absent from Persian art. [*8] That it was one of the normal forms of the "Christian" cross may be inferred from the mode of Tertullian's statement, and from the fact

[p. 310]

that the tau or cross was inferribly a forehead mark in the Judaic cult set forth in the book of Revelation. [*1] We know that the symbol entered into the fire-worship of Persia by way of architecture; [*2] and it could not have been absent from the imagery of an eastern Sun-God of the time.

Footnotes

^304:1 See Justin Martyr, Dial. with Trypho, cc. 70, 78. Caves were made in honour of Mithra, as temples in honour of other Gods. See Orelli, 2340, 2341. There were no other Mithraic temples. Cumont, ii, 57-8.

^304:2 De antro nympharum, vi. Cp. Firmicus, v.

^304:3 Republic, B. vii.

^304:4 Macrobius, Saturnalia, i, 16; Festus, s. v. Mundus.

^304:5 Here I venture to dissent from the view of M. Cumont (i, 6) that the Persian custom of sacrificing in the open air "gave birth" to that of worshipping Mithra in caverns. I cannot follow the supposed causation. Open-air sacrifice was in early times a Greek and a Semitic as well as a Persian usage. The Roman mundus seems to have passed for the entrance to the lower world.

^304:6 See the article "The Mycenean Tree and Pillar Cult and its Mediterranean Relations." by A. J. Evans, in the Journal of Hellenic Studies, vol. xxi (1901), p. 99, as to the multitude of caves containing votive and sacrificial deposits found in Crete. Cp. Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. p. 207, note.

^304:7 The usage was in fact nearly universal in early times. Cp. Wait, Jewish, Oriental, and Classical Antiquities, p. 47. Hermes and Zeus were cave-born (Homerid. Hymn to Hermes; Hesiod, Theogony, 483); and Typhon in turn was born in the Cilician caves (Aeschylus, Prom. 359-60; Pindar, Pythia, i, 32). The resting-places of Apollo and Dionysos were alike caves (Pindar, Olymp. vii, 57; Diod. Sic, iii, 59). Finally, Apollo, Dionysos, Herakles, Cybele, Demeter, Poseidon, and Zeus were all worshipped in caves (Pomponius Mela, i, 5; Pausanias, i, 28; ii, 23; iii, 25; vii, 25; viii, 15, 36, 42; Cicero, De [p. 305] natura deorum, i, 42; Strabo, xvi, 2,  section 38). In Phrygia, Herakles, Hermes, and Apollo were specially called "the cave Gods" (Pausanias, x, 32). But whereas all these deities, starting from the cave, which is the primary temple, acquired loftier fanes, the cult of Mithra in the west reverted and adhered to the cave, natural or artificial. The idea was preserved, apparently, in the worship of the Sun at Hatra in Assyria, where the temple was an entirely dark place (Justi, Geschichte des alten Persiens, 1879, p. 67).

^305:1 De antro, xx. Cp. Statius, Theb. i, 719-20; and Commodianus: "vertebatque boves alienos semper in antris" (Instructiones, i, 13).

^305:2 Cp. the pictures in Jacob Bryant's Analysis of Ancient Mythology, ed. 1774, i, 232, 234, 294; and in Cumont's Textes et Monumentes, passim.

^305:3 As with Apollo, born in rocky Delos, to whom the hymnist sings: "Thou hast had delight in all rocks, in the steep crags of tall mountains, in rivers hurrying seaward, in shingles sloping to the tide, and harbours of the sea" (Homerid. Hymn to the Delian Apollo). The idea seems to be that the mountains and rivers and harbours were all visible from the place of the God's birth on Mount Cynthus (see ll. 25-44); while the rock, which can strike fire, is his earthly symbol, and as it were his source. Johannes Lydus (De mensibus, iii,  section 26) gives as the reason for Mithra being held rock-born that rock is "the central point of fire."

^305:4 Firmicus, De Errore, xxi; Justin Martyr, Dialogue with Trypho, c. 70; Jerome, Adversus Jovinianum, i, 7 (Migne, xxiii, col. 219); Windischmann, pp. 61-2, citing Commodianus and Johannes Lydus.

^305:5 Under the Mazdean system, prayer was offered to Mithra thrice daily; at dawn, at noon, and at sunset. (Rawlinson, Seventh Oriental Monarchy, p. 628, citing Spiegel, Tradit. Schrift. d. Pars. p. 135).

^305:6 Above, <page 180>, note. As to this fact, which has been contemptuously denied by Dr. J. E. Carpenter, see Appendix.

^305:7 Julian, In regem solem, cc. 19, 20; Preller, Rom. Myth. p. 755; von Bohlen, Das alte Indian. i, 258; Creuzer, Das Mithreum von Neuenheim, p. 29. Cp. Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. p. 308.

^306:1 Or rather a luni-solar. It is singular that this movable feast should be celebrated as an anniversary of an event with apparently no orthodox misgivings.

^306:2 Macrobius, Saturnalia, i, 18. Cp. Preller, Rom. Myth., 1865, p. 760.

^306:3 But see Plutarch, On Isis and Osiris, c. 39, which creates a difficulty. There was considerable variance in the dates of the solar festivals in different countries. Cp. Julian, In regem solem, c. 20, and Max Muller, Natural Religion, pp. 529-30.

^306:4 Compare the forty nights' mourning in the mysteries of Proserpine. De Errore, c. xxviii (xxvii, ed. Halm).

^306:5 De Errore, last cit.

^306:6 Against Marcion, i, 13.

^306:7 Pausanias, vii, 19, 20. Cp. ii, 7, where it is told that the Sicyonians have "statues in a secret place, which one night in every year they bring to the temple of Dionysos."

^306:8 De Errore, xxiii (xxii). I have elsewhere (Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. p. 381, note) discussed Dr. Frazer's view that this passage in Firmicus refers to the cult of Attis. The evidence is clearly against it, the stone image belonging distinctly to the cult of Mithra, though similar rites, with wooden images, belonged to the worships of Attis and Osiris. In the Dionysiak cult, however, the image may have been of stone.

^307:1 Steinthal on The Legend of Samson,  section 3.

^307:2 It is true that in some cults this might signify only previous dedication and the preparation for sacrifice. In the practice of the man-sacrificing Khonds, for instance, the victim was kept unshorn till ten or twelve days before the sacrifice, when his hair was cut (Macpherson, Memorials, p. 117). But in the story of Samson the shearing of the hair has clearly also the significance of the weakening of the sun's heat.

^307:3 Introd. to Mythol. pp. 244-6, note. Cp. Preller, Gr. Myth. ii, 317.

^307:4 1 Apol. c. 66.

^307:5 The Ebionite Christians (the earliest), it will be remembered, celebrated the communion rite with bread and water (Epiphanius, Haer. 30). And water was mixed with wine in later usage; see Bingham, Christian Antiquities, B. xv, c. ii,  section 7 (ed. 1855, v. 242).

^308:1 Praescr. c. 40; Cp. De Rapt. c. 5; De Corona, c. 15.

^308:2 Praescr. c. 40.

^308:3 Cp. Cumont, i, 315-316.

^308:4 On this see Mr. King's Gnostics, p. 139, citing Aug. in Johann. i, 7. Mem. Revelation, xiii, 17; also Gregory Nazianzen's First Invective against Julian, c. 70.

^308:5 On this see the details collected by Frazer, Golden Bough, 2nd ed. iii, 422-445, of the primitive cults in which "death at initiation" is a ritual feature. This is one of the origins of the idea of being "born again."

^308:6 Sainte Croix, Recherches, ii, 126, n.

^308:7 Nonnus, cited by Selden, De Diis Syris, Syntag. i. c. 5; and by Windischmann, p. 69. See there also the important citation from Elias of Crete, according to whom the trials were twelve, and were "per ignem, per frigus, per famem, per sitim, per flagra, per itineris molestiam, aliaque id genus." Compare Suidas, as cited p. 314. As to the origin of the trials, see Darmesteter on Mihir Yasht, xxx, 122. Darmesteter suggests that the trials may be traceable to that passage, which runs:--"Ahuramazda answered, Let them wash their bodies three days and three nights; let them undergo thirty strokes for the sacrifice and prayer unto Mithra......Let them wash their bodies two days and two nights; let them undergo twenty strokes for," etc.

^308:8 On the twelve episodes, cp. Sainte-Croix, as cited, with King, Gnostics, p. 128. Compare the "twelve stoles," in the mysteries of Isis, mentioned by Apuleius (Metam, B. xi). There is a remarkable correspondence between the twelve Mithraic trials and twelve forms of Hindoo penance (especially as regards the last), as described by Maurice, Indian Antiquities, 1794, v, 981. These twelve orders of fast include trials lasting fifteen days; and the whole would cover more than eighty days.

^309:1 On this practice cp. Cumont, as last cited, and W. Simpson, Jonah, 1899, pp. 29-33.

^309:2 De Abstinentia, iv, 16.

^309:3 Epistola, cvii (vii), ad Laetam.

^309:4 Recherches sur le Culte Public et Mysteres de Mithra, ed. 1867, p. 132, et seq. The main authority for twelve degrees is Porphyry's citation from Pallas as to the signs of the zodiac; but M. Lajard's list is not zodiacal. The grade of the ostrich is particularly ill made-out (p. 338).

^309:5 Every animal's name used must have had a symbolical meaning. Thus we have it through Tertullian (Against Marcion, i, 13) that "the lions of Mithra are mysteries of arid and scorched nature."

^309:6 Apart from dubieties of detail, it may be taken as certain that the common principle of quadration, or grouping in fours, was distinctly recognised in the Mithraic cult; and likewise the principle of trinities or sets of three. In an old Mithraic monument at Mycelia are figured three rings and four balls. For the Persians, too, as for Greeks and Romans, the Sun's chariot had four horses (Mihir Yasht, xxxi, 125), who stood for the four seasons as well as the "four elements"--earth, air, fire, and water. Heaven, too, was by them represented as quadrate. See Bahr, Symbolik des Mosaischen Cultus, 1837, i, 166; also ii, 147, as to the priestly arrangement of the 12 signs in 4 rows of threes; and Creuzer, as there cited. That four and seven (4 + 3) were numbers always occupying the Persian mystics we may gather from a quatrain of Omar Khayyam (cited by Bahr, p. 167) exhorting a Sufi to give them up and drink wine.

^309:7 There is a curious correspondence between M. Lajard's four grades and the emblems of the four evangelists given by Augustine: Matthew = lion, Mark = man (this order often reversed), Luke = ox, John = eagle. See "Variorum Teachers' Bible," Aids to Students, p. 10. These, however, were introduced into Judaism from Assyrian sources at the exile. Cp. Ezekiel, i, 10; x, 14; and Rev. iv, 7. It is interesting to note in this connection that the four Egyptian amenthes or genii of Hades, the mediators for the dead, had respectively the beads of a man, a hawk, an ape, and a dog (Sharpe, Hist. of Egypt, 7th ed. i, 163), while the Assyrian cherubim were compounded of lion, eagle, and man, with a general approximation to the ox. The Arabs had the same symbols (Wait, as cited, p. 155). The original source of the idea is clearly the zodiac, which figures so largely in the Apocalypse. The four "corner" constellations were the Lion, the Bull, the Waterman, and the Scorpion. But the latter, being an evil and destructive sign, could not be given to an Evangel, so there would naturally be substituted that of the Eagle, which rises before that of the Man, and like that is opposite the Lion.

^309:8 Goblet d'Alviella, The Migration of Symbols, Eng. tr. 1894, pp. 80-82.

^310:1 Cp. Zoeckler, The Cross of Christ, Eng. tr. 1877, pp. 80-81, 105; Rev. vii, 3; xiv, 1; xxii, 4; Ezek. ix, 4; S. Baring Gould, Curious Myths, 1888, pp. 376-7.

^310:2 Justi. Gesch. der oriental. Volker im Altertum, p. 397.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 8. The Creed.

We have thus far briefly examined what may for the most part be termed the skeleton or dry bones of the Mithraic religion, so far as we can trace them, at the period when it seemed to be successfully competing with Christianity. What of the inner life, the spiritual message and attraction which there must have been to give the cult its hold over the Roman Empire? Here it is that our ignorance becomes most sharply felt. So far as Christian zeal could suppress all good report of Mithraism, this was done, when Christianity--I will not say overthrew, but--absorbed the Mithraic movement. There were in antiquity, we know from Porphyry, [*3] several elaborate treatises setting forth the religion of Mithra; and every one of these has been destroyed by the care of the Church. [*4] They doubtless included much narrative as well as much didactic matter, the knowledge of which would colour the whole religious consciousness of Mithra's worshippers. We shall see later that clues still exist, one of which has been overlooked in studies of Mithraism, to some of the myths of the cult; and we may safely decide in general that just as the Brahmanas prove the currency of myths concerning the Vedic Gods which are not mentioned in the Vedic hymns, so there must have existed a Mithraic mythology which is not contained in the Zendavesta, that being, though not a simple collection of hymns, a compilation for purposes of worship. The reconstruction of that mythology, however, is now hopeless. Too little attention, perhaps, has been paid to Creuzer's theory that the name Perseus = Perses, "the Persian," and that the Perseus myth is really an early adaptation of the Mithra myth. [*5] The story of Perseus certainly has an amount of action and colour unusual in Greek myth, and no less suggestive of Oriental origin than is the

[p. 311]

legend of Herakles. But unless new evidence be forthcoming, such a hypothesis can at most stand for a possibility.

And so with the didactic side of Mithraism: we must limit our inferences to our positive data. These include the evidence of the Vendidad ritual that there was associated with the cult a teaching of happy immortality for the righteous, very much on the lines of that of Christianity. An extract [*1] will make the point clear [*2]:--

        27

       (89)

       "(Zarathustra asked) O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Where   are the rewards given? Where does the rewarding take place? Where is the   recompense fulfilled? Whereto do men come to take the reward that, during   their life in the material world, they have won for their souls?

     
      28

       (90)

       "Ahura Mazda answered: When the man is dead, when his time is past,   then the wicked, evil-doing Daevas cut off his eyesight. On the third night,   when the dawn appears and brightens, when Mithra, the God with beautiful   weapons, reaches the all-happy mountains, and the sun is rising:

     
      29

       (94)

       "Then the fiend, named Vizaresha, O Spitama Zarathustra, carries off   in bonds the souls of the wicked Daeva-worshippers who live in sin. The soul   enters the way made by Time, and open both to the wicked and to the righteous.   At the end of the Kinvad bridge, the holy bridge made by the Mazda, they ask   for their spirits and souls the reward for the worldly goods which they gave   away here below.

     
      30

       (98)

       "Then comes the beautiful, well-shapen, strong and graceful maid,   with the dogs at her sides, one who can discern, who has many children, happy   and of high understanding. She makes the soul of the righteous one go up   above the Haraberezaiti; above the Kinvad bridge; she places it in the   presence of the heavenly Gods themselves.

     
      31

       (102)

       "Uprises Vohu-mano from his golden seat; Vohu-mano exclaims: How hast   thou come to us, thou Holy One, from that decaying world into this undecaying   one?

     
      32

       (105)

       "Gladly pass the souls of the righteous to the golden seat of   Ahura-Mazda, to the golden seat of the Amesha-Spentas, to the Garoumanem   [house of songs], the abode of Ahura-Mazda, the abode of the Amesha-Spentas,   the abode of all the other holy beings.

     
      33

       (108)

       "As to the godly man that has been cleansed, the wicked [p. 312]   evil-doing Daevas tremble at the perfume of his soul after death, as doth a   sheep on which a wolf is pouncing.

     
      34 

       (110) 

       "The souls of the righteous are gathered together there:   Nairyo-Sangha is with them: a messenger of Ahura-Mazda is   Nairyo-Sangha."

     
 [paragraph continues] It is noteworthy, further, that in some codices of the Avesta is found this formula: "He has gained nothing who has not gained the soul: He shall gain nothing who shall not gain the soul." The meaning is "gain a place in Paradise," [*1] and the passage looks very like an original form of a well-known Christian text.

For the rest, the Zendavesta, like most other Sacred Books, insists on the normal morals strenuously enough. It has strange special teachings as to the sacro-sanctity of the dog; and its veto alike on the burning and the burying of bodies [*2] is peculiar to Mazdeism; but these beliefs do not seem to have affected later Mithraism; whereas probably its special stress on truthfulness--not paralleled in the Ten Commandments--was maintained. We cannot, indeed, tell how the Mithraic priests dealt with the special problems of the life of the Roman Empire; but we are entitled none the less to protest against the loose revival of unfounded and exploded charges against the cult. To this day we find Christian scholars either saying or hinting that Mithraism was signalised in the Roman period by human sacrifices. For this there is no justification. [*3] The ecclesiastical historian Sokrates [*4] does indeed allege that about the year 360 a temple of Mithra at Alexandria, long empty and neglected, was granted by Constantius to the Christians; that they found in it an adytum of vast depth, containing the skulls of many persons, old and young, who had been sacrificed to Mithra; and that the Christians paraded them through the city, whereupon there was a riot, in which Bishop George and many others were slain. But this narrative is unsupported even in ecclesiastical history, and is full of incredibilities. The "Pagans" in general are represented as taking arms to avenge an attack on the Mithraic sect, though the Mithraic temple is expressly declared to have been long deserted; and the emperor Julian, a Mithraist, is represented as writing a letter denouncing the Alexandrians for their conduct. Yet he merely speaks of the killing of George, where Sokrates alleges a wholesale massacre. The whole story savours of mere odium theologicum, and will not consist with any other accounts of Mithraic worship. We do know that during

[p. 313]

the whole of the first three or four centuries it was charged against the Christians, by Jews or Pagans, that they were wont to sacrifice a child at their mysteries. [*1] That charge was doubtless false, but it was constantly made.

On the other hand, the only kind of record founded-on for the charge against Mithraism is one which rebuts it. Sainte-Croix, accepting the plainly worthless testimony of the ecclesiastical historian, referred [*2] to a passage in the life of Commodus by Lampridius, in the Augustan history, in support of his insinuation that Mithraism involved human sacrifice. But this passage [*3] explicitly says that Commodus "polluted the rites of Mithras by a real homicide, where it is usual for something to be said or done for the purpose of causing terror" (quum illic aliquid ad speciem timoris vel dici vel fingi soleat). The same scholar makes another reference which equally serves to confute him; [*4] yet an English writer later speaks of "the dark and fearful mysteries" of Mithra, repeating the old insinuation. [*5] Selden [*6] quotes from Photius [*7] a statement that men, women, and boys were sacrificed to Mithra; but that assertion also is plainly valueless, coming as it does from a Christian writer of the tenth century, and being absolutely without ancient corroboration. What seems to have happened was a symbolical sacrifice, perhaps followed up by a symbolical eating of the God's image--proceedings which, there is good reason to suppose, occurred in the mysteries of the early Christians. [*8]

But there is far more testimony, such as it is, for the charge of infamous procedure against the Christians than against the Mithraists. The Mithraic mysteries, save for the fact that they involved real austerities and a scenic representation of death, [*9] were no more dark and fearful than the Christian mysteries are known to have been, not to speak of what these are said to have been. There lies against them no such imputation of licence as was constantly brought against

[p. 314]

the midnight meetings of the Christians, or as is specifically brought by Paul against his own converts at Corinth. Their purpose was unquestionably moral as well as consolatory. [*1] In the words of Suidas, the worshipper went through his trials in order that he should become holy and passionless. In the course of the initiation, as we know from the unwilling admiration of Tertullian, [*2] the devotee, called the soldier of Mithra, was offered a crown, which it was his part to refuse, saying that Mithra was his crown. And everything points to the enunciation of a theory of expiation of and purification from sin, in which Mithra figured as Mediator and Saviour, actually undergoing a symbolic sacrifice, and certainly securing to his worshippers eternal life. [*3] As to the doctrine of immortality being pre-Christian, it is now quite unnecessary to speak; and the whole Mithraic symbolism implies such a teaching. On most of the bull monuments, it will be remembered, there stand beside Mithra two figures, one holding a raised and one a lowered torch. These signified primarily sunrise and sunset, or rising spring sun and sinking autumn sun; but, as Lessing [*4] long ago showed, they were also the ancient symbols for life and death, and would further signify the fall and return of the soul. [*5]

Nor was this the only point at which Mithraism is known to have competed with Christianity in what pass for its highest attractions. The doctrine of the Logos, the Incarnate Word or Reason, which Christianity absorbed through the Platonising Jews of Alexandria, was present in Mithraism, and of prior derivation. That Mithra was connected with "the Word" appears from the Avesta. [*6] In the Vendidad, further, [*7] Zarathustra is made to praise successively Mithra "of the most glorious weapons," Sraosha, "the Holy One," and "the Holy Word, the most glorious," thus joining and in part identifying Mithra with the Word as well as joining him with the Holy Spirit. And Emanuel Deutsch [*8] was of opinion that the Metatron [*9] of the Talmud (whom he equates with the Ideas of Plato,

[p. 315]

the Logos of Philo, the "World of Aziluth" of the Kabbalists, the Sophia or Power of the Gnostics and the Nous of Plotinus) [*1] was "most probably nothing but Mithra." [*2] As the Metatron is on the Jewish side identified with the "Angel" promised as leader and commander to the Hebrews in Palestine, [*3] and that angel is quasi-historically represented by Joshua =Jesus, the chain of allusion from Mithra to the Christ is thus curiously complete. In respect of the concept of a Trinity, as we have already seen, the parallel continues. By the admission of a Catholic theologian, the Gods Ahura-Mazda, Sraosha, and Mithra constitute an ostensible trinity closely analogous to that of the later Christists; [*4] and yet again Mithra, himself approaching to supreme status, rides to battle with Sraosha at his right and Rashnu at his left hand; [*5] or else with Rashnu on his right, and Kista, the holy one (female) white-clothed, on his left. [*6]

There seems no good reason for supposing that the doctrines of the Logos and the Trinity reached the Persians through the Greeks: [*7] on the contrary, they probably acquired them from Babylonian sources, on which the Greeks also drew; and it was not improbably their version of the Logos idea that gave the lead to the Philonic and Christian form, in which the Word is explicitly "the light of the world."

Footnotes

^310:3 De Abstinentia, ii, 56; iv, 16.

^310:4 It is remarkable that even the treatise of Firmicus is mutilated at a passage (v) where he seems to be accusing Christians of following Mithraic usages, and at the beginning. where he may have made a similar proposition.

^310:5 See Guigniaut's French ed. of Creuzer's Symbolik, i, 368, ii, 158. Cp. Cox, Myth. of Aryan Nations, p. 303, as to the identity of the Perseus and Herakles myths.

^311:1 Vendidad, Fargard xix. I have put synonyms in the place of one or two reiterated terms, to give the passage some of the literary benefit that is constantly lent in this way by the translators of the Bible.

^311:2 For a recent study on the Mazdean conception of a future state on somewhat pro-Christian lines see the research of M. Nathan, La vie future d'apres le Mazdeisme, a la lumiere des croyances paralleles dans les autres religions. Annales du Musee Guimet. Paris, 1901.

^312:1 Darmesteter's Zendavesta, i, 370, 2nd ed. (Fragments).

^312:2 Darmesteter, Introd. p. lxxvii.

^312:3 Cp. Cumont, i, 69.

^312:4 Eccles. Hist. B. iii, c. 2. Cp. B. v, c. 16.

^313:1 Cp. Origen, Against Celsus, vi, 27; Minucius Felix, Octavius, c. 9; Tertullian, Apol. c. 7.

^313:2 Recherches, ii, 135. This false suggestion is implicitly copied by Milman, Hist. of Chr. B. I, e. 1, note.

^313:3 Cap. 9. Sainte-Croix offers an extraordinary mistranslation of the passage.

^313:4 To Porphyry, De Abstin. ii, 56; a passage which says only that down till the time of Hadrian it was the custom to sacrifice a virgin to Athene at Laodicea. Sainte-Croix seems to have blundered over the context, in which the detail as to the sacrifice at Laodicea is referred to a historian Pallas, who had written so well on the mysteries of Mithra. This may be the basis also of the assertion by Creuzer (Symbolik, i, 363: 3te Ausg. p. 258) that Hadrian's edict was directed against Mithraism. Preller (Romische Mythologie, ed. Kohler, p. 758, note 3) surprisingly echoes Sainte-Croix.

^313:5 Wright, The Celt, the Roman, and the Saxon, 4th ed. p. 328. The insinuation is found also in the encyclopaedias.

^313:6 De Diis Syris, Syntag. i, c. 6.

^313:7 In Athanasii vita, cod. 258.

^313:8 Above, pp. <page 143>-4, <page 206>-9. Cp. Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. pp. 208-12, 355-61 Grant Allen, Evolution of the Idea of God, p. 345. And see below, <page 320>.

^313:9 Even this may have been an early Christian usage. Note the force of Gal. iii, 1; vi, 17.

^314:1 See Origen, Against Celsus, iii, 59; Julian, Caesares, end; Homerid. Hymn to Demeter, end; K. O. Muller, Introd. to Mythology, ch. xii,  section 23. Cp. Preller, Griechische Mythologie. i, 497; and, as to the other Pagan mysteries, the admissions of Mosheim, notes on Cudworth, Harrison's ed. iii. 296-7.

^314:2 De Corona, c. 15. This is corroborated by a scene on one of the monuments (reproduced in Roscher's Lexikon) in which the initiate greets Mithra, and seems to receive from him his solar nimbus. See it in Cumont, ii, 336.

^314:3 See Garucci, Les Mysteres du Syncretisme Phrygien, passim. Cp. Windischmann (p. 53) as to the older cultus; and Roscher, s.v. Mithra, 3055 (20-33), as to the God's being a Saviour-Sacrifice.

^314:4 Wie die Alten den Tod gebildet. See p. 51 in 1869 ed. of Werke, Bd. v, and figures.

^314:5 So Creuzer, Das Mithreum von Neuenheim, pp. 41-2.

^314:6 Mihir Yasht, xxxii, 137 (quoted above, <page 289>). Cp. xxvii. 107.

^314:7 Fargard xix, 14, 15 (48, 54). Cp. Srosh Yasht, exordium, and i, 3; Srosh Vaj; and Frag. of Nasks, ix. 2; xxxiv, 70.

^314:8 Literary Remains, p. 50.

^314:9 As to whom see Hershon, Genesis with a Talmudical Commentary, pp. 23-4.

^315:1 He is further the "Angel of Great Counsel" (Isaiah, ix, 5, Sept.) and heavenly judge, here again equating with Mithra. Cp. Oxlee, Christ. Doct. on the Principles of Judaism, ii, 329. In one of the Jewish forms of excommunication the formula "Mittraton cujus nomen est ut nomen magistri sui" occurs twice. See the translation in Selden, De jure nat. et gent. 1, iv, c. 7, ed. 1679, p. 524.

^315:2 Cp. Darmesteter, Introd. to Zendavesta, 2nd ed. c. 5, as to Jewish and Persian interactions. M. Darmesteter leant unwarrantably to the view that the Persians were the borrowers, but finally pronounces (p. lxviii) Jew and Persian alike to have borrowed from Platonism. See above, Part II, ch. ii,  section 2, for a criticism of this view.

^315:3 Cahen's Bible, note on Exod. xxiii, 21; Hershon, as cited.

^315:4 E. L. Fischer, Heidenthum und Offenbarung, 1878, pp. 121, 130, points to the presence of both Logos and Trinity in the Mithraic system. As to the trinitarian idea, cp. Cumont, i, 298, 331. 6

^315:5 Mihir Yasht, xxv, 100.

^315:6 Id. xxxi, 126.

^315:7 Above, <page 218> sq.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 9. Mithraism and Christianity.

Of course, we are told that the Mithraic rites and mysteries were borrowed and imitated from Christianity. [*8] English scholars of good standing are still found to say that the Mithraic and other mysteries "furnish a strange and hardly accidental parody of the most sacred mysteries of Christianity." [*9] The refutation of this notion, as has been pointed out by M. Havet, [*10] lies in the language of those Christian fathers who spoke of Mithraism. Three of them, as we have seen, speak of the Mithraic resemblances to Christian

[p. 316]

rites as being the work of devils. Now, if the Mithraists had simply imitated the historic Christians, the obvious course for the latter would be simply to say so. But Justin Martyr expressly argues that the demons anticipated the Christian mysteries and prepared parodies of them beforehand. "When I hear," he says, [*1] "that Perseus was begotten of a virgin, I understand that the deceiving serpent counterfeited also this." Nobody now pretends that the Perseus myth, or the Pagan virgin myth in general, is later than Christianity. Justin Martyr, indeed, is perhaps the most foolish of the Christian fathers; but what he says about the anticipatory action of the demon or demons plainly underlies the argumentation also of Tertullian and Julius Firmicus. [*2]

When, again, Justin asserts [*3] that the Mithraists in their initiation imitate not only Daniel's utterance "that a stone without hands was cut out of a great mountain," but "the whole of [Isaiah's] words" (Isa. xxxiii, 13-19), he merely helps us to realise how much older than Christianity is that particular element of Christian symbolism which connects alike Jesus and Peter with the mystic Rock. That Mazdeism or Mithraism borrowed this symbol from Judaism, where it is either an excrescence or a totemistic survival, [*4] is as unlikely as it is likely that the Hebrews borrowed it from Babylonia or Persia. [*5] In Polynesian mythology, where (as also in the rites of human sacrifice) there are so many close coincidences with Asiatic ideas, it was told that the God Taaroa "embraced a rock, the imagined foundation of all things, which afterwards brought forth the earth and sea." [*6] Here again we are in touch with the Graecised but probably Semitic myth of the rock-born Agdestis, son of Jupiter. [*7] Even the remarkable parallel between the myth of Moses striking the rock for water and a scene on one of the Mithraic monuments suggests rather a common source for both myths than a Persian borrowing from the Bible. In the monument,

[p. 317]

[paragraph continues] Mithra shoots an arrow at a rock, and water gushes forth where the arrow strikes. As the story of the babe Moses is found long before in that of Sargon, [*1] so probably does the rock-story come from Central Asia. [*2]

The passage in Isaiah, which strongly suggests the Mithraic initiation, seems to have been tampered with by the Jewish scribes; and corruption is similarly suspected in the passage Gen. xlix, 24, where "the Shepherd, the Stone of Israel," points to some credence latterly thrust out of Judaism. Above all, the so-called Song of Moses [*3] (in which both Israel and his enemies figure as putting their faith in a divine "Rock," and the hostile "Rock" is associated with a wine-sacrament) points to the presence of such a God-symbol in Hebrew religion long before our era. There is a clear Mazdean element, finally, in the allusion to the mystic stone in Zechariah, [*4] the "seven eyes" being certainly connected with the Seven Amesha-Spentas, of whom Mithra on one view, and Ormazd on another, was chief. [*5] And when we find in the epistles [*6] phrases as to Jesus being a "living stone" and a "spiritual rock," and read in the gospels [*7] how Jesus said, "Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church," we turn from the latter utterance, so obviously unhistorical, back to the Mithraic rite, and see in the mystic rock of Mithra, the rock from which the God comes--be it the earth or the cloud--the probable source alike of the Roman legend and the doctrine of the pseudo-Petrine and Pauline epistles.

The Mithraic mysteries, then, of the burial and resurrection of the Lord, the Mediator and Saviour; burial in a rock tomb and resurrection from that tomb; the sacrament of bread and water, the marking on the forehead with a mystic mark--all these were in

[p. 318]

practice, like the Egyptian search for the lost corpse of Osiris, and the representation of his entombment and resurrection, before the publication of the Christian Gospel of a Lord who was buried in a rock tomb, and rose from that tomb on the day of the sun, or of the Christian mystery of Divine communion, with bread and water or bread and wine, which last were before employed also in the mysteries of Dionysos, Sun-God and Wine-God, doubtless as representing his body and blood. [*1] But even the eucharist of bread-and-wine, as well as a bread-and-meat banquet, was inferribly present in the Mithraic cultus, [*2] for the Zoroastrian Hom or Haoma, identical with the Vedic Soma, [*3] was a species of liquor, and figured largely in the old cult as in itself a sacred thing, and ultimately as a deity = the Moon = a king. [*4] Indeed, this deification of a drink is held to be the true origin of the God Dionysos, [*5] even as Agni is a deification of the sacrificial fire. And whereas the Mazdean lore associated the Haoma-Tree with the Tree of Life in Paradise, [*6] so do we find the Catholic theologians making that predication concerning the Christian Eucharist. [*7] The "cup" of Mithra had in itself a mystical significance: in the monuments we see drinking from it the sacred serpent, the symbol of wisdom and healing. [*8] Again, as there is record of an actual eating of a lamb in early Christian mysteries [*9]--a detail still partly preserved in the Italian usage of blessing both a lamb and the baked figure of a lamb at the Easter season, [*10] but officially superseded by the wafer of the Mass--so in the old Persian cult the sacrificed flesh was mixed with bread and baked in a round cake called Myazd or Myazda, [*11] and sacramentally eaten by the worshippers.

Nor was this all. Firmicus [*12] informs us that the devil, in order to leave nothing undone for the destruction of souls, had beforehand resorted to deceptive imitations of the cross of Christ. Not only did they in Phrygia fix the image of a young man to a tree [*13] in the

[p. 319]

worship of the Mother of the Gods, and in other cults imitate the crucifixion [*1] in similar ways, but in one mystery in particular the Pagans were wont to consecrate a tree and, towards midnight, to slay a ram at the foot of it. This cult may or may not have been the Mithraic, [*2] but there is a strong presumption that Mithraism included such a rite. We have seen [*3] that a ram-lamb was sacrificed in the Mithraic mysteries; and not only are there sacred trees on all the typical Mithraic monuments, but the God himself is represented as either re-born of or placed within a tree--here directly assimilating to Osiris and Dionysos and Adonis, [*4] and pointing to the origins of the Christian Holy-Cross myth. The Christian assimilation of Mithraism is, however, still more clearly seen in the familiar Christian symbol in which Christ is represented as a lamb or ram, carrying by one forefoot a cross. We know from Porphyry [*5] that in the mysteries "a place near the equinoctial circle was assigned to Mithra as an appropriate seat; and on this account he bears the sword of the Ram [Aries], which is a sign of Mars [Ares]." [*6] The sword of the Ram, we may take it, was simply figured as the cross, since a sword is a cross. [*7] Again, as we have seen, Porphyry

[p. 320]

explains [*1] that "Mithra is the Bull Demiurgos and lord of generation." Here then would be, as we have already seen, a symbolical slaying, in which the deity is sacrificed by the deity; [*2] and we may fairly infer that the symbolic ram in turn would be sacrificed by the Mithraists on the same principle. Now, it appears to be, as we have said, the historic fact that among the early Christians a ram or lamb was sacrificed in the Paschal mystery. It is disputed between Greeks and Latins whether at one time the slain lamb was offered on the altar, together with the mystical body of Christ; but it is admitted by Catholic writers--and this, by the way, is the origin of a certain dispute about singing the Agnus Dei in church--that in the old Ordo Romanus a lamb was consecrated, slain, and eaten, on Easter Day, by way of a religious rite. [*3] Of this lamb, too, the blood was received in a cup. [*4] Everything thus goes to show not only that the Lamb in the early Christian cultus was a God-symbol from remote antiquity, but that it was regarded in exactly the same way as the symbolical lamb in the Mithraic cult. [*5] In the Apocalypse, one of the earliest quasi-Christian documents, and one that exhibits to us the stage in which Jesuism and the Lamb-God-symbol were still held parts of Judaism, the Gentile differentiation being repudiated, [*6] we have the Slain Lamb-God described as having seven horns and seven eyes, "which are the seven spirits of God, sent forth unto all the earth," and as holding in his right hand seven stars [*7]--that is to say, the seven planetary Mazdean "Amshaspands" or Amesha-Spentas, before mentioned, of which Mithra was the chief and as it were the embodiment.

Footnotes

^315:8 So Sainte-Croix, Recherches, ii, 147; and Beugnot, Hist. de la Destr. du Paganisme, i, 157, 158.

^315:9 G. H. Rendall, The Emperor Julian 1879, Introd. p. 15. Cp. Elton, Origins of English History, 2nd ed. 1890, p. 337.

^315:10 Le Christianisme et ses Origines, iv. 133.

^316:1 Dial. with Trypho, c. 70.

^316:2 Paul, as M. Havet remarks, would be in the way of knowing the cults of Cilicia. Tarsus, indeed, was a Mithraic centre. (Preller, Rom. Mythol. p. 758; Cumont, i, 19, 240.) This connects with the vogue of the cult among the Cilician pirates (below, p. 325). In Asia Minor and Syria it seems to have been confined to the seaports they frequented. It is highly probable that it is Mithra who was represented by several of the figures identified with Apollo and other deities in the Lares and Penates of Messrs. Barker and Ainsworth (1853), which deals with antiquities discovered at Tarsus, and with the cults of Cilicia, without once mentioning Mithra or Mithraism. Cp. Creuzer, Symbolik, 3te Ausg. i, 342. We know that on the coins of Kanerki, an Indo-Scythian king of the first century of our era, the same aureoled figure is alternately represented as Helios and Mithra. Windischmann, p. 60, citing Lassen, Indische Alterthumskunde, ii, 837.

^316:3 Last cit.

^316:4 Cp. Jevons, Introd. to Hist. of Religion, ch. 11.

^316:5 Cp. Cumont, i, 165-6; Haug, Essays, p. 5. Haug rightly suggests that both Jews and Persians may have drawn from a central source.

^316:6 Ellis, Polynesian Researches, 2nd ed. i, 324-5.

^316:7 Arnobius, Adv. Gentes, v, 5. 8 That found at Neuenheim. See Cumont, i, 165.

^317:1 Jastrow, Religion of Babylonia and Assyria, p. 562; Maspero, Hist. ancienne des peuples de l'orient, 4e edit. D. 157; Sayce, Hibbert Lectures, pp. 26-6.

^317:2 Prof. Cumont is satisfied that the rock is here, as in Vedic mythology, the symbol of the cloud, which the Sun-God transfixes with his spear or shaft. Oh this view, the shooting at the rock may be simply a myth-duplicate of the stabbing of the bull. See above, p. 300, note. It is certain that the sky was very commonly conceived in the ancient East as solid. Cp. Yasna, xxx, 5, b, as trans. by Mills (Zendav. iii, p. 31), and by Haug from the Pahlavi (Essays, 3rd ed. p. 346). So also among the Tongans (Mariner, Tonga Islands, ii, 99). There is something to be said also for Dr. Jevons's theory that rude rock-altars came to be regarded as Gods through being drenched with the blood of sacrifices which the Gods were supposed to enter the stone to consume (though it is not clear that he had the "Rock of Israel" in view). But this theory takes a stronger form in the argument of Mr. Grant Allen (Evolution of the Idea of God, ch. v) that the altar-stone was originally a tomb-stone, erected over an ancestor, and that he was the spirit identified with the stone. That all altars, and all temples, are evolved from grave-stones and grave mounds is well proved by Mr. Spencer, Principles of Sociology,  section section 137-9. On this basis, myths of the origination of men and Gods from rocks become newly intelligible. See Mr. Allen again (p. 248, sq., and p. 389) for the suggestion that the divine "corner-stone" may signify a victim slain as foundation-spirit.

^317:3 Deut. xxxii.

^317:4 Zech. iii, 9. Cp. Dan. ii, 34.

^317:5 Windischmann, p. 62; Seel, p. 215; Darmesteter, Ormazd et Ahriman, p. 38.

^317:6 1 Peter ii, 4, 5; 1 Cor. x, 4. In the first case the Greek word is lithos; in the second petra.

^317:7 Matt. xvi, 18.

^318:1 Cp. Frazer, Golden Bough, 2nd ed. i, 359; ii, 366.

^318:2 Cp. Cumont, i, 146, 197, 320.

^318:3 Spiegel, Avesta, i, 8, citing Windischmann, Ueber den Somakultus der Arier; Max Muller, Physical Religion, p. 101; Psychological Religion, p. 65.

^318:4 Max Muller, as cited, and in Psych. Rel. pp. 121, 139-140, 147. Cp. in the Zendavesta, Yasna iii, iv, vii, viii, ix. In Yasna ix, Haoma becomes house-lord, clan-lord, tribe-lord, and chieftain of the land. Cp. Mills on Yasna ix (S. B. E. xxxi, 230) as to the antiquity of the idea; and see Spencer, Principles of Sociology, vol. i, ch. 23, as to its causation. Mr. Spencer makes a striking suggestion in this connection as to the origin of the idea of the tree of knowledge in Genesis.

^318:5 Roscher, Ausfuhrliches Lexikon, 3045; Max Muller, Anthropological Religion, p. 355. As above noted, p. 53, Miss Harrison has newly proved the point, tracing a number of the obscurer epithets of Dionysos to names of grains used to make beer.

^318:6 Cp. Bundahish xviii, 2, 3; xxvii, 4; xxx. 25 (S. B. E. vol. v); Yasna I (S. B. E. xxxi); and Mrs. Philpot's monograph, The Sacred Tree, 1897, pp. 13, 123, 130-1.

^318:7 Fischer, Heidenthum and Offenbarung, p. 150.

^318:8 Creuzer, Das Mithreum von Neuenheim, p. 37.

^318:9 Below, <page 320>.

^318:10 See refs. on <page 143>.

^318:11 Haug, Essays on the Parsis, 3rd ed. pp. 112, 139, 368.

^318:12 De Errore, xxviii.

^318:13 See Julian (In deorum matrem, c. 5) on the tree of Attis, which was "cut down at the moment when the sun arrives at the extreme point of the equinoctial arc."

^319:1 Horos, it should be remembered, was by the Valentinian Gnostics called "The Cross" and the Redeemer (Tertullian, Contra Valentin. c. 9). Suggestions of the crucifix appear in the Mazdean monuments. See the development from the winged figure, in Lajard's "Atlas"; and compare the plates in Bryant, i, 294; R. K. Porter, Travels in Georgia, etc., 1821-2, i, 668; ii, 154; and Texier, Descrip. de l'Armenie, etc., pl. 111--the two latter reproduced by Justi, Geschichte des alten Persiens, pp. 52, 69. See there also, p. 13. the tomb of Midas, covered with ornamentation of crosses. That the "crown of thorns" is a variation on a nimbus has long been surmised. Mithra, of course, had a nimbus, and this appears from the monuments (Cumont, ii, 336) to be the kind of crown given in the mysteries to the initiate. In the older Persian form of the cult, again, the Sun-God rode "with his hands lifted up towards immortality" or heaven (Mihir Yasht, xxxi; in Darmesteter, ii, 152). He would further be associated with some form of the cross which stood for the four-spoked sun-wheel, as in the myth of Ixion. See Bottger's Sonnencult der Indogermanen, 1891, p. 160, citing E. Rapp's essay, Das Labarum and der Sonnencultus; and compare the Assyrian sculpture of the Sun-God with the solar-wheel in presence as his symbol.

^319:2 This tree-cult is assumed by Dr. Frazer (Golden Bough, 2nd ed. ii, 132, note) to have been that of Attis, in which the tree figured so prominently; but that is one of the points at which the cults were likely to converge, both being associated with that of the Magna Mater. Firmicus, in the chapter cited, seems in separate passages to point to two tree cults, mentioning the ram in the second reference only and the simulacrum juvenis in the first. See above (<page 306>) as to Dr. Frazer's similar ascription to the Attisian cult of the rock-tomb, which presumptively belongs to the Mithraic.

^319:3 Above, <page 301>.

^319:4 On the Adonis myth see Frazer, Golden Bough, 2nd ed. ii, 115 sq. And see in Guigniaut's edition of Creuzer (figure 139 b, vol. iv) the representation of Osiris as the Sun-God emerging from a tree. Dionysos was similarly figured. Cp. Frazer, ii, 160, and refs.

^319:5 De Antro, xxiv.

^319:6 The later Persians specially celebrated the entrance of the sun into Aries as the "new day" (Nuruz). "The public Nuruz [as distinguished from that of the nobles] falls on the first day of the month Ferwardin [March], which happens as the sun enters the first point of Aries; and when it arrives at this first point it is the Spring. They say that Almighty God on this day created the world, and that all the seven planets revolved towards the ascending nodes of their orbit, and all these ascending nodes were is the first degree of Aries, on which day it is firmly believed that they enter on their march and circle. He also created on this day Adam (on whom be peace!)--on this account likewise they call it Nuruz." Berhan-i Kattea, cited by Wait, Antiquities, p. 187. The Nuruz of the courtiers was six days later (another parallel to the Christian system); and "the Khosrus every year, from the public Nuruz to that of the courtiers, which was a space of six days, were in the constant habit of relieving the poor, of liberating the prisoners, of granting pardon to the malefactors, and of entirely devoting themselves to mirth and gladness" (ib. p. 190).

^319:7 Note, on this, the astronomical "crossing" of lines at the "first point of Aries" (see [p. 320] English or Chambers' Encyclopaedia, art. Zodiac); and see it imaged in the old figure in Brown's ed. of Aratos.

^320:1 Last cit.

^320:2 Firmicus tells (vi) that the people of Crete destroyed a bull to represent the destruction of Dionysos; and in the Egyptian slaying of the ram for Amun the ram was mourned for by the worshippers, and was put on the image of Amun, an image of "Herakles" (presumably = Khonsu) being then placed beside it (Herodotus, ii, 42). "We may conjecture," says Dr. Frazer (Golden Bough, 2nd ed. ii, 167), "that wherever a God is described as the eater of a particular animal, the animal in question was originally nothing but the God himself." Cp. Lang, Myth, Ritual, and Religion, 2nd ed. ii, 251-4.

^320:3 Bingham, Christian Antiquities, B. xv, c. 2,  section 3; Hatch, Hibbert Lectures, p. 300.

^320:4 Casalius, De Veterib. Christ. Ritib. ii, 4, cited by Dupuis.

^320:5 A sacramental quality attached to the lamb also in the worship of Apollo, whose oracle at Larissa was given by a priestess who once a month tasted of the blood of a sacrificed lamb, and so became possessed by the God. Pausanias, ii, 24.

^320:6 See above, <page 142>.

^320:7 Rev. i, 16; v, 6; iii, 1; v, 6; etc.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 10. Further Christian Parallels.

Still further does the parallel hold. It is well known that whereas in the gospels Jesus is said to have been born in an inn

[p. 321]

stable, early Christian writers, as Justin Martyr [*1] and Origen, [*2] explicitly say he was born in a cave. Now, in the Mithra myth, Mithra is both rock-born and born in a cave; and the monuments show the new-born babe adored by shepherds who offer first-fruits. [*3] And it is remarkable that whereas a cave long was (and I believe is) shown as the birthplace of Jesus at Bethlehem, Saint Jerome actually complained [*4] that in his day the Pagans celebrated the worship of Tammuz (= Adonis), and presumably, therefore, the festival of the birth of the sun, Christmas Day, at that very cave.

Given these identities, it was inevitable that, whether or not Mithra was originally, or in the older Mazdean creed, regarded as born of a Virgin, he should in his western cultus come to be so regarded. [*5] As we saw, there was a primary tendency, Aryan as well as Semitic, to make the young God the son of the Supreme God, like Dionysos, like Apollo, like Herakles; and when Mithra became specially identified, like Dionysos, with the Phrygian God Sabazios, [*6] who was the "child as it were of the [great] Mother," [*7] he necessarily came to hold the same relation to the Mother-Goddess. [*8] But in all likelihood there were ancient Persian forms of the conception to start from. It seems highly probable that the birth-legend of the Persian Cyrus [*9] was akin to or connected with the myth of Mithra, [*10] Cyrus (Koresh) being a name of the sun, [*11] and the legend being obviously solar. Thus it would tend to be told of Mithra that he was born under difficulties, like the other Sun-Gods; [*12] and his being cave-born would make it the more easy.

It was further practically a matter of course that his mother should be styled Virgin, the precedents being uniform. [*13] In Phrygia the God Acdestis or Agdistis, a variant of Attis, associated with Attis and Mithra in the worship of the Great Mother, is rock-born; [*14] like

[p. 322]

[paragraph continues] Mithra he is twy-sexed, figuring in some versions as a female; and the coarse Greek story of the manner of his birth is evidently a myth framed to account for an epithet. Further, the Goddess Anahita or Anaitis, with whom Mithra was anciently paired, was preeminently a Goddess of fruitfulness and nutriency, [*1] and as such would necessarily figure in her cultus as a Mother; and as Mithra never appears (save in worshipful metaphor) as a father, he would perforce rank as her son. Precisely so does Attis in the Orphic theosophy figure as the son of Athene, the Virgin Goddess, [*2] who in turn is possibly a variant of Anaitis and Tanith [*3] Finally, as the preeminent spirit Sraosha (= Vohumano) was connected with Mithra, [*4] so would there be a blending or assimilation of Mithra with Saoshyas or Saoshyant, the Saviour and Raiser of the Dead, who in the Parsee mythology is to be virgin-born, his mother miraculously conceiving him from the seed of Zarathustra. [*5]

As a result of all these myth-motives, we find Mithra figuring in the Christian empire in the fourth and fifth centuries, alongside of the Christ, as supernaturally born of a Virgin-Mother--a mortal maiden or a, Mother-Goddess--and of the Most High God; [*6] and if the Christians made much of some occult thesis that Mithra was his own father, or otherwise the spouse of his mother, they were but keeping record of the fact that in this as in so many ancient cults, and more obscurely in their own, the God had been variously conceived as the Son and as the lover of the Mother-Goddess. [*7] In all probability they took from, or adopted in emulation of, Mithraism the immemorial ritual of the birth of the Child-God; for in the Mithraic monuments we have the figure of the tree overshadowing the new-born child [*8] even as it does in the early Christian sculptures. [*9]

[p. 323]

So long as Mithraism was allowed to subsist, the competition continued. Even as Jesus in the historic creed makes the Descent to Hades, like so many elder Gods, so in the ancient Persian system Mithra was slain and passed to the under-world, this at the time of the autumnal equinox, when the sun enters Libra, the current month bearing Mithra's name (Mihr). The evidence for the myth is peculiarly interesting, inasmuch as it is embodied in a tradition and a custom which have locally survived even the knowledge that there ever was such a deity. It is a Christian archaeologist who writes that "Mihrgan (or Mihrjan) is the name of the sixteenth day of any month, and is the name of the seventh month of the solar year; and during its continuance the sun which enlightens the world is in the sign of Libra, which is the beginning of the autumnal season, and with the Persians ranks next in honour to the feast and holiday of the Nuruz." [*1] Here, too, [*2] the public day is at the beginning and the courtiers' day at the end of a festival week. In the late legend, Mithra being lost sight of, the autumnal festival was explained by a story that "the Persians had a king of the name of Mihr, who was a very great tyrant, and that in the middle of the month he arrived at the regions of torment, for which reason they gave the name of Mihrgan, which signifies the death of a tyrannical king; for Mihr has been allowed to mean to die, and Gan, a tyrannical king." [*3] The etymology is of course nonsense, Mihr being simply, as we have seen, the true Persian form of the God-name Mithra, after whom was named the seventh month of the solar year. And the clear inference is that in the old myth the God went to the underworld at the proper solar date, the autumnal equinox, perhaps to "rise again," fittingly, at the vernal equinox.

Here we should have the proper pair of solar dates, which in the Christian cult are combined by making the God die and rise again at the spring equinox in the manner of Attis and Adonis and the other Gods of Vegetation; though on the other hand Jesus is tempted as the Sun-God by the Goat-God at the beginning of his career (Sun in Capricorn), and rides on two asses like Dionysos at the beginning of his decline (Sun in Cancer). [*4] In the Roman Calendar we find still

[p. 324]

further traces of the old doubling in the setting of the Festival of the Transfiguration and the Festum Nominis Jesu on August 6th and 7th, and of the Assumption of Mary on August 15th; while the day of the Exaltatio Sacrae Crucis is September 14th, and that of St. Michael, the conqueror of the dragon of Hades, is September 29th. When we remember that the myth of the descent of Apollo to Hades was in time completely lost sight of by the Greeks, to the extent even of their forgetting that Admetus had been a name of Hades, [*1] we can readily understand the similar process in the case of Mithra. [*2]

Footnotes

^321:1 Dialogue with Trypho, c. 78.

^321:2 Against Celsus, i, 51. Compare the Apocryphal gospels; Protev. xii, 14; Infancy, i, 6; xii, 14. Note, too, that Dionysos, like Zeus and Hermes, was said to have been nurtured in a cave (Pausanias, iii, 24; Diodorus Siculus, iii, 67).

^321:3 Cumont, i, 162. The birth takes place beside a river or fountain.

^321:4 Epist. 58, ad Paulinum (Migne, Patrologiae Cursus Completus, ser. i, vol. xxii, col. 581).

^321:5 Above, <page 95>.

^321:6 Preller, Romische Mythologie, 1865, p. 761; Cumont, i, 235, 314; Creuzer, Das Mithreum von Neuenheim, pp. 35-6; Gruter, p. 74; Garucci, Mysteres, pp. 14, 18.

^321:7 Strabo, x, 3,  section 15.

^321:8 There were yet other affiliations. Eunapius (cited in edit. note on Hammer-Purgstall, Mithriaca, p. 22) represents the same priest as hierophant of the Eleusinia and father of the initiation of Mithra; and this gives plausibility to the view (rejected, however, by M. Cumont) that the presence of "the priest Mithras" in Apuleius' account of the mysteries of Isis (Metamorphoses, B. xi) implies a similar joining of the Mithraic and Isiac cults.

^321:9 Herodotus, i, 107, sq.

^321:10 In Ezra, i, 8, the treasurer of Cyrus is named Mithredath = Mithradates.

^321:11 Plutarch, Artaxerxes, i.

^321:12 Cp. Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. pp. 184-5.

^321:13 See the same work, pp. 168, 296, as to the bestowal of the title of "Virgin" on all the Mother-Goddesses; and cp. Tiele, Hist. of the Egypt. Rel. p. 193, as to the duality of the Asiatic Goddesses, who were on the one side virgins and on the other mothers.

^321:14 Arnobius, Adv. Gentes, v. 5, 10; cp. Pausanias, vii, 17.

^322:1 Meyer, Geschichte des Alterthums, i, 542.

^322:2 Orphica, Ad Musaeum, 42.

^322:3 Tiele, Egyptian Religion, p. 135. But see above, <page 217>, note.

^322:4 Tiele, Outlines, p. 172. Above, <page 296>, note.

^322:5 Tiele, p. 177: Cumont, 161, 188, 314: Haug, Essays, p. 314; above, <page 206>; Darmesteter, note on Yasht xiii, 62 (Farvardin Yasht).

^322:6 Cumont, ii, 234-5. See the passage in Elisaeus, the Armenian historian (5th c.), History of Vartan, tr. by C. F. Neumann, 1830. pp. 16, 17 (cited by Windischmann, pp. 61, 62, and by Cumont, ii, 5, from Langlois' trad. of the History of Vartan, ii, 193). That "the God Mihrvard was born of a woman" was asserted by the Christian bishops in reply to Zoroastrian priests; and again, "One of your wisest men said that the God Mihr was born of a mortal mother." They do not say she was married. Others fabled that Mithra was born "of the incestuous intercourse of Ahura Mazda with his own mother" (Cumont, as cited; also i, 161). Whatever were the earlier myths, Mithra in the fourth, fifth, and sixth centuries "was held [in Armenia] to be one and the same person with Christ, and whatever the evangelists relate of Christ was transferred to him" (Note by Neumann, as cited. p. 89),

^322:7 See Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. pp. 299-300, as to the cults of Adonis, Attis, Osiris, and Horos, and the problem of the two mourning Maries in the gospel myth; and compare J. G. Muller, Geschichte der Amerikanischen Urreligionen, p. 608, as to the same principle in the myth of Tezcatlipoca, son of the Virgin Goddess Coatlicue.

^322:8 See Cumont, i, 162-3.

^322:9 Cp. Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. pp. 188, 201-2, as to the presence of this myth-motive in other cults. The reason for surmising that Mithraism was the point of contact for the Christists is the Persian aspect of the figures and names of the Magi. Even the [p. 323] "stable" myth has a curious connection with Mithraism. See the Greek formula in Firmicus (c. v (iv)--passage corrupt): "The sacred heifers have lowed, hold we the solemn feast of the most august Father." M. Darmesteter has argued (Ormazd et Ahriman, p. 152, n.) that "the legends of Gods born or reared in stables; among shepherds (Krishna); even that of Mithra as petrogenes, in virtue of the synonymy of stone, mountain, stable--adri-gotra"--all derive from the widespread bull or cow myth. But for an interesting astronomical signification of the stable (= the Augean) see Dupuis, Origine de tous les Cultes, ed. 1835-6, vii, 104.

^323:1 Antiquities, p. 193, citing the Berhan-i-Kattea.

^323:2 See above, <page 319>, note.

^323:3 Wait, as cited. Cp. Creuzer-Guigniaut, as cited, i, 313, note.

^323:4 Cp. Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. pp. 319, 324, 339.

^324:1 K. O. Muller, Introd. to Mythology, Eng. tr. pp. 244-6.

^324:2 In a late legend Zarathustra likewise descends into hell (Malcolm, History of Persia, ed. 1829, i, 495); and as Zarathustra like Mithra is born beside a river (Bundahish, xxiv, 15), and like the Sun-Gods in general is sought to be slain in infancy (West, Pahlavi Texts, i, 187, 317: S. B. E. v), the two legends may be regarded as interfluent.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 11. The Vogue of Mithraism.

In view of this long series of signal parallels between the Mithraic and the Christian cults, it is difficult to doubt that one has imitated the other; and it may now be left to the candid reader to pass his own judgment on the theory that it was Mithraism which copied Christism. The Christian imitation took place, be it observed, because the features imitated were found by experience to be religiously attractive; Mithraism itself having, as we have seen, developed some of them on the lines of other Oriental cults. Its history, as far as we can trace it, is a series of adaptations to its environment. Mithraism in fact had spread in the west with just such rapidity as Christians have been wont to count miraculous in the case of their own creed. And we, looking back on Christian and other religious history with sociological eyes, can perfectly understand how such a cultus, with an elaborate ceremonial and an impressive initiation, with the attraction of august and solemn mysteries and the promise of immortal life, and with official encouragement as regarded the army, could spread throughout the Roman Empire in the age in which the primitive Roman religion crumbled away before the advance of far more highly specialised and complicated systems and a more philosophic thought. [*3] So special was the favour accorded to it in Rome that a Mithraeum was permitted to be dug in the Capitoline Hill under the Capitol, the most venerated spot in the city. [*4] Above all was it popular in the

[p. 325]

army, which, though the type of the social disease, really seems to have been to some extent a school, albeit a savage one, of moral strength and order at a time when an appalling abjection was overtaking the Roman world, men reverencing rank as dogs reverence men. One of the first stages in the initiation, for men, consisted in the devotee's receiving a sword, and being called a soldier of Mithra. [*1] Hence the association of Mithra with Mars, and his virtual absorption of Janus, whose attributes he duplicated. Thus Mithraism was specially the faith of the soldiery; [*2] and in doing honour to the Invincible Sun-God Mithra--Deo Soli Invicto Mithrae, as the monuments have it--the Emperor Constantine vied with the most loyal Mithraists long after his so-called conversion to Christianity. [*3]

The explanation of this phase seems to be that it was through oriental militarism that the cult reached the west. We have it from Plutarch [*4] that Mithraism was first introduced to Rome through the Cilician pirates, whom Pompey put down; and it is known that those pirates were a confederation of soldiers and others formerly employed by Asian rulers (in particular by Mithradates, in whose army Mithraism would be the natural cult) and thrown on their own resources by the Roman conquest. [*5] As such piracy was not reckoned discreditable, and Pompey took many of the defeated pirates under his patronage, [*6] their religion had a good start with the Roman army, in which so many of them entered, and which was for centuries afterwards so largely recruited from the East. It is very likely that the Roman authorities from the first encouraged the cult [*7] as specially fitted for the soldiery. But the cult was not confined to them.

Among the non-military congregations, we learn from the inscriptions, there were both slaves and freedmen, [*8] so that the cult was on that side as receptive as the Christian. But in one other respect it seems to have been less so. Among all the hundreds of recovered inscriptions there is no mention of a priestess or woman initiate, or even of a donatress; though there are dedications pro salute of women, and one inscription telling of a Mithraeum erected by the priest and his family. [*9] It would seem then that, despite the

[p. 326]

allusion of Tertullian to the "virgins" [*1] of Mithra, women held no recognised place in the main body of the membership. [*2] It would seem, indeed, that inasmuch as the cult was conjoined in the West with that of the Great Mother, Cybele, as in the East with that of Anaitis, women must have been thus associated with it; [*3] but if they were apart from the Mithraists proper the latter would be to that extent socially disadvantaged in their competition with Christianity, however appropriate their worship may have been to the life of the army.

Such an attitude of exclusiveness is probably to be set down in part to the spirit of asceticism which, on Tertullian's testimony, marked the Mithraic cultus as it did the Manichaeans [*4] and several of the Christian sects. Of none of the ancients can sexual asceticism be predicated more certainly than of Julian, the most distinguished Mithraist of all; and such facts dispose of the Christian attempt to charge upon the rival religion a cultus of sensuality. On a picture of the "banquet of the seven priests" in the Mithraic catacomb [*5] there are found phrases of the "Eat and drink, for to-morrow we die" order; [*6] and these may stand for an antinomian tendency such as was early associated with Christism; [*7] though it is not at all unlikely that they were inscribed in a hostile spirit by the hands of Christian invaders of the Mithraic retreat. However that may be, there is absolutely no evidence that Mithraism ever developed such disorders as ultimately compelled the abolition of the love-feast among the Christians. The Mithraic standards, in fact, seem to have been the higher; though both cults alike were sustained mainly by the common people, apart from the special military vogue of the older system. A Christian historian has even held it likely that "what won sympathy for the worship of Mithra in Rome was the fundamental ethical thought that the deity is set in constant strife with evil......The pure and chaste God of light, of whom no myth related anything but virtue and strife against evil, won many hearts from sin-stained Olympus Above.....all, the most ideal characters in the history of imperial Rome gave their protection to the Mithra-worship." [*8]

[p. 327]

In all probability it was the poorer cult of the two, lacking as it did the benefactions of rich women. It has been inferred, from the special developments of Mithraism among the soldiers and the Syrian traders who followed the camp, that it was primarily, in the West, a religion of the humble, [*1] like Christianity, and that like Christianity it only slowly attained wealth. But inasmuch as it never imitated the propagandist and financial methods which the Church took over from the later Judaism of the Dispersion, and always maintained a highly esoteric character, it escaped certain of the lowering forces of the Christist movement. One of these was the practice of systematic almsgiving, which attracted a motley mass of both sexes to the Christian churches. Mutual aid there probably was among the Mithraists, who in their capacity of organised groups or sodalitia were able to own their congregational property; [*2] but their different religious outlook and tradition excluded large financial developments.

Footnotes

^324:3 See Pliny, Hist. Nat. ii, 4-5 (6-7) for a passage acclaiming the sun as the true divinity, which is rightly connected by Mr. King with the religion of Mithra.

^324:4 Lajard, Recherches, pp. 564-5. Cp. Beugnot, La Destruction du Paganisme. i, 159; Cumont, Textes et Monuments, ii, 193. It seems possible that the cave utilised was an early mundus. Chapels of the Egyptian deities also, however, had been set up in the temple of the Capitol, towards the end of the Republic. Boissier, Religion Romaine d'Auguste aux Antonins, 3e edit. i, 349, citing Corp. inscr. lat. i, 1034. Cumont (i, 352-4) gives a list of identified Mithraeums in Rome--30 in all. "C'est la minorite."

^325:1 Tertullian, De Corona, c. 15; Garucci, Mysteres du Syncretisme Phrygien, 1854, p. 34.

^325:2 Of old, as we have seen, Mithra was a war-God. The institution of the great quadriennial Mithraic games was the work of the soldierly Aurelian. Lajard notes that the great majority of the monuments found seem to have been at military forts (Recherches, p. 565); and this is amply borne out by Prof. Cumont.

^325:3 See his coins. Cp. Gibbon, cc. xx, xxviii; and Beugnot, i, 92-6.

^325:4 Life of Pompey, c. 241.

^325:5 Finlay, History of Greece, Tozer's ed. i, 29.

^325:6 Id. pp. 30, 31.

^325:7 This is argued by Canon (now Bishop) Hicks (Mithras Worship, as cited, p. 39), following Sir William Ramsay (p. 41).

^325:8 Cumont, i, 327-8.

^325:9 Id. i, 330.

^326:1 M. Cumont recognises this testimony, but does not attempt to meet it save by the negative testimony of the monuments.

^326:2 Jerome's list of the grades of initiates obscurely specifies one which has been variously read as "hyenas" and "lionesses" (cp. De Sacy's note on Sainte-Croix, it, 128); but the passage being corrupt, no inference can be drawn from it.

^326:3 See Cumont, i, 334, note, as to matres sacrorum.

^326:4 Baur (Das manich. Religionssystem, p. 355, note) traces the Manichaean separation between electi and auditores to the Mithraic example.

^326:5 See Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. pp. 225.

^326:6 Garucci, Mysteres, passim.

^326:7 1 Cor. v, 1-2; xi, 21. Cp. Jean Reville, La Religion a Rome sous les Severes, p. 95.

^326:8 Hausrath, History of the New Testament Times: Times of the Apostles, Eng. tr. 1895, [p. 327] i, 95-6--instancing Antoninus Pius, Constantius Chlorus, and Julian, and citing Lampridius. Commod. 8; Himerius, vii, 2. The former reference tells only of Commodus; and it is but fair to add that Elagabalus also was tauroboliatus (Lamprid. Heliogab. 7).

^327:1 Cumont, i, 327-8.

^327:2 Cumont, i, 326.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 12. Absorption in Christianity.

Now, however, arises the great question, How came such a cultus to die out of the Roman and Byzantine empire after making its way so far and holding its ground so long? The answer to that question has never, I think, been fully given, and is for the most part utterly evaded, though part of it has been suggested often enough. The truth is, as aforesaid, that Mithraism was not overthrown; it was merely transformed.

It had gone too far to be overthrown: the question was whether it should continue to rival Christianity or be absorbed by it. While Julian lived, Mithraism had every prospect of increased vogue and prestige; for the Emperor expressly adopted it as his own cultus. "To thee," he makes Hermes say to him, "I have given to know Mithras, thy Father. Be it thine to follow his precepts, so that he may be unto thee, all thy life long, an assured harbour and refuge; and, when thou must needs go hence, full of good hope, thou mayest take this God as a propitious guide." [*3] It is the very tone and spirit of the cult of the Christ; and as we have seen, the Christian Fathers with almost one consent saw in Mithraism the great rival of their own worship. The spirit of exclusiveness which Christianity had inherited from Judaism--a spirit alien to the older paganism but

[p. 328]

essential to the building up of an organised and revenue-raising hierarchy in the later Roman empire--made a struggle between the cults inevitable.

The critical moment in the career alike of Mithraism and of Christianity was the death of Julian, who, though biassed in favour of all the older Gods, gave a special adherence to the War-God Mithra. Had Julian triumphed in the East and reigned thirty years, matters might have gone a good deal differently with Christianity. His death, however, was peculiarly disastrous to Mithra-ism; for he fell at the hands of the Persian foe, the most formidable enemy of the later empire; and Mithra was "the Persian" par excellence, and the very God of the Persian host. There can be little doubt that Jovian's instant choice of Christianity as his State creed was in large measure due to this circumstance; and that at such a juncture the soldiery would be disposed to acquiesce, seeking a better omen. Yet, even apart from this, we are not entitled to suppose that Mithraism could ever have become the general faith, save by very systematic and prolonged action on the part of the State, to the end of assimilating its organisation with that of the Church.

Religions, we say, like organisms and opinions, struggle for survival, and the fittest survive. That is to say, those survive which are fittest for the environment--not fittest from the point of view of another and higher environment. What then was the religion best adapted to the populations of the decaying Roman Empire, in which ignorance and mean subjection were slowly corroding alike intelligence and character, leaving the civilised provinces unable to hold their ground against the barbarians? An unwarlike population, for one . thing, wants a sympathetic and emotional religion; and here, though Mithraism had many attractions, Christianity had more, having sedulously copied every one of its rivals, and developed special features of its own. The beautiful and immortal youth of the older sun-worships, Apollo, Mithras, Dionysos, was always soluble into a mysterious abstraction a in the Christian legend the God was humanised in the most literal way; and for the multitude the concrete deity must needs replace the abstract. The gospels gave a literal story: the Divine Man was a carpenter, and ate and drank with the poorest of the poor. So with the miracles. The priesthoods of the older religions often, if not always, explained to the initiated in the mysteries the mystical purport which was symbolised by the concrete myths; and in some early Christian writers, as notably Origen, we find a constant attempt so to explain away concrete miracle and other stories as allegories.

[p. 329]

[paragraph continues] But gradually the very idea of allegory died out of the Christian intelligence; and priests as well as people came to take everything literally and concretely, till miracles became everyday occurrences. This was the religion for the Dark Ages, for the new northern peoples which had not gone through the Pagan evolution of cults and symbolisms and mysticisms, but whose own traditional faith was too vague and primitive to hold its ground against the elaborate Christian theology and ritual.

We may say indeed that the preference for such a God as Jesus over such a one as Mithra was in full keeping with the evolution of aesthetic taste in the Christian period. Some may to-day even find it hard to conceive how the Invincible God of the Sun could ever call forth the love and devotion given to the suffering Christ. As we have seen, Mithra too was a suffering God, slain and rising again, victorious over death; so that to him went out in due season all the passion of the weeping worship of Adonis; but it is in his supernal and glorious aspect that the monuments persistently present him; and for the decaying ancient world it was still possible to take some joy in the vision of beauty and strength. Many there must still have been who wondered, not at the adoration given to the mystically figured Persian, beautiful as Apollo, triumphant as Ares, but at the giving of any similar devotion to the gibbeted Jew, in whose legend figured tax-gatherers and lepers, epileptics and men blind from birth, domestic traitors and cowardly disciples. Ethical teaching there was in Mithraism; and for the Mithraists it would be none the less moving as coming from an eternal conqueror, the type of dominion. But even as the best Mithraic monuments themselves tell of the decline of the great art of Greece, so the art of Christism tells of a hastening dissolution in which aesthetic sense and craftsmanship alike sink to the levels of barbarism. In the spheres alike of Byzantium and of papal Rome, the sculptured Mithra would yearly meet fewer eyes that looked lovingly on grace and delightedly on beauty; more and more eyes that recoiled pessimistically from comeliness and turned vacantly from allegorical or esoteric symbols.

The more we study the survival of Christianity, the more clearly do we see that, in spite of the stress of ecclesiastical strife over metaphysical dogmas, the hold of the creed over the people was a matter of concrete and narrative appeal to every-day intelligence. Byzantines and barbarians alike were held by literalism, not by the unintelligible: for both alike the symbol had to become a fetish; and for the Dark Ages the symbol of the cross was much

[p. 330]

more plausibly appealing than that of the God slaying the zodiacal bull. Other substitutions followed the same law of psychological economy. Thus it was that Christianity turned the mystic rock, Petra, first into the Christ, [*1] but later into the chief disciple Petros; made an actual tunic of the mystic seamless robe of the Osirian and Mazdean mysteries, the symbol of light and sky; caused to be performed at a wedding-feast, for the convenience of the harder drinkers among the guests, the Dionysiak miracle of turning water into wine; made Jesus walk on the water not merely in poetry and symbol, as did Poseidon, but for the utilitarian purpose of trying Peter's faith and saving him; and put the scourge of Osiris in the Lord's hand for the castigation of those who defiled the temple by unspiritual traffic. [*2] There can be little question as to which plane of doctrine was the more popular. The Christian tales, in a different moral climate, represent exactly the commonplace impulse which built up the bulk of Greek mythology by way of narratives that reduced to an anecdotal basis mystic sculptures and mysterious rites.

But that was not all. The fatal weakness of Mithraism, as pitted against Christianity, was that its very organisation was esoteric. For, though an esoteric grade is a useful attraction, and was so employed by the Church, a wholly esoteric institution can never take hold of the ignorant masses. Mithraism was always a sort of freemasonry, [*3] never a public organisation. [*4] What the Christians did was to start, like Rome herself, from a republican basis, combining the life-elements of the self-supporting religious associations of the Greeks with the connecting organisation of the Jewish synagogues, [*5] and then to proceed to build up a great organisation on the model of that of republican and imperial Rome--an organisation so august for an era of twilight that the very tradition of it could serve the later world to live by for a thousand years. The Christian Church renewed the spell of imperial Rome, and brought actual force to make good intellectual weakness. And so we read that the Mithraic worship was by Christian physical force suppressed in Rome and Alexandria, in the year 376 or 377, [*6] at a time when, as the inscriptions show, it was making much headway. [*7]

[p. 331]

[paragraph continues] At Rome, the deed was done by the order of the Christian prefect Gracchus; but the proceeding was specifically one of ecclesiastical malice, since even so pious an emperor as Gratian dared not yet decree a direct assault upon an esteemed pagan cult. But, once begun, the movement of destruction spread, and the Church which still makes capital of the persecution it suffered at pagan hands, outwardly annihilated the rival it could not spiritually defeat. In an old Armenian history of the reign of Tiridates, [*1] it is told how St. Gregory destroyed in the town of Pakaiaridj the temple of Mihr "called the son of Aramazd," took its treasure "for the poor," and consecrated the ground to the Church.

But such acts of piratical violence, which had been made easy by the earlier check to Mithraism in its special field, the army, only obscured the actual capitulation made by the Church to the Mithraic as to the other cults which it absorbed. Even the usages which it could not conveniently absorb, and therefore repudiated, prevailed within its own fold for centuries, so that in the eighth century we find Church Councils commanding proselytes no more to pay worship to fanes and rocks. [*2] And there were other survivals. [*3] But all that was a trifle as compared with the actual survival of Mithraic symbols and rites in the very worship of Christ. As to the sacrifice of the lamb we have seen; and though at the end of the seventh century a general Council ventured to resist the general usage of picturing Christ as a lamb, [*4] the veto was useless; the symbol survived. Some Mithraic items went, but more remained. The Christian bishop went through a ceremony of espousing the Church, following the old mystery in which occurred the formula, "Hail to thee, new spouse; hail, new light." [*5] His mitre was called a crown, or tiara, which answered to the headdress of Mithra and the Mithraic priests, as to those of the priests of Egypt; he wore red military boots, now said to be "emblematical of that spiritual warfare on which he had entered," in reality borrowed from the military worship of Mithra, perhaps as early as Jovian. And the higher mysteries of communion, divine sacrifice, and resurrection, as we have seen, were as much Mithraic as Christist, so that a Mithraist could turn to the Christian worship and find his main rites unimpaired, lightened only of the burden of initiative austerities, stripped of the old obscure mysticism, and with all things turned to the

[p. 332]

literal and the concrete, in sympathy with the waning of knowledge and philosophy throughout the world. The Mithraic Christians actually continued to celebrate Christmas Day as the birthday of the sun, despite the censures of the Pope; [*1] and their Sunday had been adopted by the supplanting faith. When they listened to the Roman litany of the holy name of Jesus, they knew they were listening to the very epithets of the Sun-God--God of the skies, purity of the eternal light, king of glory, sun of justice, strong God, father of the ages to come, angel of great counsel. In the epistles of Paul they found Christian didactics tuned to the very key of their mystical militarism. Their priests had been wont to say that "he of the cap" was "himself a Christian." [*2] They knew that "the Good Shepherd" was a name of Apollo; [*3] that Mithra, like Hermes and Jesus, carried the lamb [*4] on his shoulders; that both were mediators, both creators, both judges of the dead. Like some of their sacred caves, and so many pagan temples, the Christian churches looked toward the east. Their soli-lunar midnight worship was preserved in midnight services, which carried on the purpose of the midnight meetings of the early Christians, who had simply followed Essenian, Egyptian, Asiatic, and Mithraic usage; there being no basis for the orthodox notion that these secret meetings were due to fear of persecution. [*5] Their myazd or mizd, or sacred cake, was preserved in the mass, which possibly copied the very name. [*6]

Above all, their mystic Rock, Petra, was presented to them in the concrete as the rock Peter, the foundation of the Church. It has been elsewhere shown [*7] that the myth of the traitorous Peter connects with those of Proteus and Janus as well as with that of

[p. 333]

[paragraph continues] Mithra, inasmuch as Janus also had "two faces," led the twelve months as Mithra presided over the zodiacal signs and Peter over the twelve apostles, and, like Proteus and Peter and the Time-God in the Mithraic cult, bore the heavenly keys. Here again the mythic development of Peter probably follows on that of Jesus; at all events Jesus too has constructively several of the attributes of Proteus-Janus: as "I am the door"; [*1] "I stand at the door and knock"; "I am in the Father and the Father in me" (=Janus with the two faces, old and young, seated in the midst of the twelve altars); "I have the keys of death and of Hades." The function of Janus as God of War is also associable with the dictum, "I came not to bring peace, but a sword." Finally, the epiphany is in January. But there is to be noted the further remarkable coincidence that in the Egyptian Book of the Dead [*2] Petra is the name of the divine doorkeeper of heaven--a circumstance which suggests an ancient connection between the Egyptian and Asiatic cults. On the other hand, the early Christian sculptures which represent the story of Jesus and Peter and the cock-crowing suggest that it originated as an interpretation of some such sculpture; and the frequent presence of the cock, as a symbolic bird of the Sun-God, [*3] in Mithraic monuments, raises again a presumption of a Mithraic source. There is even some ground for the view that the legend of St. George is but an adaptation of that of Mithra; [*4] and it is not unlikely that St. Michael, who in the Christian east is the bearer of the heavenly keys, is in this aspect an adaptation from the Persian War-God. [*5] The dragon-slayer clearly derives from Babylon.

From the Mithraists too, apparently, came the doctrine of purgatory, [*6] nowhere set forth in the New Testament save in the spurious epistle of Peter. [*7] And though their supreme symbol of Mithra slaying the bull was perforce set aside, being incapable of assimilation, they knew that the Virgin Mother was but a variant of the Goddess-Mothers whose cults had at various times been combined with those of Mithra, and some of whose very statues served as Madonnas; [*8] even as the doctrines of the Logos and the Holy Spirit and the Trinity were borrowed from their own and older Asiatic cults and those of Egypt alike.

[p. 334]

It has chanced, indeed, that those Christian sects which most fully adopted the theosophies of Paganism have disappeared under the controlling power of the main organisation, which, as we have said, held by a necessity of its existence to a concrete and literal system, and for the same reason to a rigidly fixed set of dogmas. We know that the Gnostics adopted Mithra, making his name into a mystic charm, from which (spelling it Meithras) they got the number 365, as from the mystic name Abraxas. [*1] Manichaeism, too, the greatest and most tenacious of all the Christian schisms, carried on its ascetic front the stamp of the Persian environment in which it arose, and visibly stands for a blending of the ascetic and mystic elements of Mithraism and Christianity. For the celebration of the slain Christ it practically substituted that of the slain Manes, at the paschal season; reducing the crucifixion to a mere allegory of the cult of vegetation, and identifying the power and wisdom of the Saviour-God with the Sun and Moon. [*2] Neither its adherents nor its opponents avowed that it was thus a fresh variant of Mithraism; but the Mithraists cannot have failed to see and signalise alike the heretical and the orthodox adaptation, and it is clear that Mithraism not only entered into Manichaeism but prepared the way for it in the West. [*3] The more reason why Mithras should be tabooed by the organised Church. Thus, then, we can understand why the very name seemed at length to be blotted out. And yet, despite all forcible suppression, not only do the monuments of the faith endure to tell how for centuries it distanced its rival; not only do its rites and ceremonies survive as part of the very kernel of the Christian worship; but its record remains unknowingly graven in the legend on the dome of the great Christian temple of Rome, destined to teach to later times a lesson of human history, and of the unity of human religion, more enduring than the sectarian faith that is proclaimed within.

Footnotes

^327:3 Caesares, end. Cp. In regem solem, end.

^330:1 Cor. x, 4. Jesus, too, bore the keys in the earlier Judaic cult (Rev. i, 18) before the development of the myth of Peter. Cp. Rev. iii, 7, as to "the key of David."

^330:2 On these and other assimilations see Christianity and Mythology, Part III, Div. i.

^330:3 I originally wrote this without knowing that Renan had already said it. Marc-Aurele, p. 577.

^330:4 On the significant smallness of the Mithraic caves, see Cumont, i, 65. Cp. p. 73 as to the esoteric attitude.

^330:5 Cp. A Short History of Christianity, pp. 18, 57-8, 82-4.

^330:6 Jerome, Epist. cvii, ad Laetam (Migne, xxii, col. 869); Socrates, Ec. Hist., B. y, c. 16.

^330:7 Renan, as last cited, pp. 579-80.

^331:1 Langlois, Hist. ancienne de l'Armenie, i, 168, cited by Cumont, ii, 4.

^331:2 "Nullus Christianus ad fana, vel ad Petras votas reddere praesumat." Indic. Paganiarum in Concilio Leptinensi, ad ann. Christ. 743; cited by Bryant, Analysis, i, 294.

^331:3 See note by Mosheim on Cudworth, Harrison's ed. i. 478.

^331:4 Bingham, Christian Antiq. B. viii, c. 8,  section 11.

^331:5 Firmicus, xx.

^332:1 See the sermons of Saint Leo, xxii, 6, cited by Dupuis and Havet, and by Gieseler, Compend. of Ec. Hist. Eng. trans. 1846, ii, 43. Others than Mithraists, of course, would offend, Christmas being an Osirian and Adonisian festival also. Macrobius, Saturnalia, i, 18.

^332:2 Augustine in Joh. i, Dis. 7; cited in King, Gnostics, p. 119. Prof. Cumont (ii, 58) suggests that by "him of the cap" was meant Attis. This seems to me unlikely; but if the priests of Attis could so speak, those of Mithra could well do likewise.

^332:3 Macrobius, Saturnalia, i, 17.

^332:4 Or the bull. See Lajard's Atlas, Pl. xcii; and Garucci, as cited. It is now generally held that the Christian figure of the lamb-bearing Good Shepherd is taken from the statues of Hermes Kriophoros, the Ram-bearer (Pausanias, iv, 33). But see also Jastrow's Talmudic Dict. s.v. 'yyl, for a Jewish parallel; and see Erman, Handbk. of Eg. Rel. Eng. tr. p. 228, for an Egyptian one of doubtful date.

^332:5 Cp. 1 Thess. v.

^332:6 King, Gnostics, p. 124, states that the round cake in the Mithraic Eucharist was called Mizd, giving no authority, but acquiescing in the view of Seel that this term is the origin of Missa, the Mass. As to the ordinary interpretation see A Short History of Christianity, pp. 237-9. The word missa might come, however, from the Greek maza, a name for a barley cake mixed with honey, etc. (Hesiod, Op. et Dies, 588). Cp. Adams's note in. trans. of Hippocrates, 1849, i, 163; and Athenaeus, iv, 31, as to the Phigalean "barley-feasts" in honour of Dionysos, at which barley cakes (maza) were essential, and in which the bread had a talismanic virtue.

^332:7 Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. pp. 347-52.

^333:1 John x, 9.

^333:2 Ch. 68. Budge's trans. p. 123.

^333:3 As to its holiness, see the Bundahish, xix: the Vendidad, Fargard xviii,  section 2; and note to latter (Darmesteter's trans. p. 197).

^333:4 Gutschmidt, cited by Cumont, ii, 72.

^333:5 Lueken, Michael, 1898, p. 46 sq., cited by Cumont. Cp., however, Erman, Handbk. of Eg. Rel., Eng. tr. p. 227, for an apparent Egyptian variant or prototype.

^333:6 Cp. N. Soderblom, La vie future d'apres le Mazdeisme, as cited, p. 126; and west, Pahlavi Texts, ii, 115 (S. B. E. xviii).

^333:7 1 Peter, iii, 19.

^333:8 Cp. Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. pp. 167-9.

^334:1 Jerome, in Amos, c. 2, on vv, 9-10.

^334:2 Augustine, Contra Epist. Manichaei, viii; Contra Faustum, xv, 5; xx, 1-4, 8.

^334:3 Cp. Lea, Hist. of Sacerdotal Celibacy, 2nd ed. pp. 43-4; Baur, Das manichaische Religionssystem, 1831, pp. 91, 208, 241, 407; Neander, Gen. Hist. of the Chr. Relig. Eng. tr. ii, 174-9, 194.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 13. The Point of Junction.

And still we have to note what appears to be the strangest concrete survival of all, cherished where we should least count on finding it. At Rome there is religiously preserved a chair which is alleged to be that of St. Peter. It is significant of the measure of knowledge and judgment with which the Church has been governed that this belief should subsist concerning a chair which ostensibly

[p. 335]

bears representations of the signs of the zodiac, and the twelve labours of the Sun-God. [*1] Peter, we are to suppose, having found his way to Rome, and established a Latin Church with the facility which belonged to inspiration and the gift of tongues, proceeded to commission a sculptor, Pagan or Christian, to carve him an episcopal chair, ornamented with the best-known symbols of the heathenism which Christians were supposed to be bent on overthrowing. Such a legend need not be discussed. [*2]

We have already seen how at a variety of points the myth of Peter is a development of that of Jesus, and how, alike as leader of the twelve, fisherman, "rock," and bearer of the keys of heaven and hell, the first disciple assimilates with Mithra and Janus, who severally or jointly had those attributes, and whose joint cult acquired a special status in the Roman empire as being at once that of the army and (on the side of Janus) that of the immemorial city. And whereas the legendary Peter thus closely conformed in symbol to the "God out of the Rock," the chief priest of the Mithraic cult at Rome compared no less closely with the Christian bishop, ultimately distinguished as Papa = Father. Among the grades of the Mithraists were that of the Patres Sacrorum, or Fathers of the Mysteries, and that of the Pater Patrum, Father of the Fathers, whose seat was at Rome; and while there was a sacred Mithraic cave under the Capitol, we know from monumental remains that Mithraic worship was conducted on the Vatican Mount, where also was a temple of the Mother-Goddess Cybele, and where also dwelt the Archi-Gallus, or arch eunuch, the head of the cult of Cybele and Attis. [*3] As the ruling tendency of the later paganism was to combine or "syndicate" all the leading cults, and as Roman patricians were then wont to hold at once the priesthoods of various Gods, it is not surprising to find that in the year 376, under the emperors Valens and Valentinian, one Sextilius Agesilaus Aedesius was Pater Patrum Dei Solis Invicti Mithrae, "born again for eternity through the taurobolium and the criobolium," and at the same time priest of Hecate and of Bacchus, as well as an adorer of the Mother of the Gods and Attis. [*4] On the Vatican Mount, then, if anywhere, would be the seat of the pagan Pope who looked to the Sun-God as his Saviour, and worshipped the Mother of the Gods.

[p. 336]

It has been unsuspectingly asserted on the Christian side that the pagans raised their later shrines on the Vatican Mount by way of profaning the site of the grave of St. Peter. We are now entitled to conclude that, on the contrary, the grave of St. Peter was located by tradition on the Vatican Mount because that was the Roman site of the pagan cult to which the myth of Peter was specially assimilated. His grave was assigned where his legend was adumbrated, and, it may be, where his chair was found. For there is some reason to suppose that the "chair of St. Peter" is simply the chair of the Pater Patrum, the supreme pontiff of Mithra at Rome.

In reality, the "Chair of St. Peter" is a somewhat nondescript object, of which the ornamentation does not fully exhibit either the twelve signs of the zodiac or the twelve labours of Herakles. It was exhibited to the public in 1867, photographed, and at that time examined by the eminent archaeologist de Rossi, who pronounced it to be in part of old oak much worn, containing a number of inlaid panels of carved ivory in the classic style, representing the labours of Hercules; the whole structure, however, having been renewed by supports and cross-pieces of acacia-wood, of which the ornamentation is medieval. [*1] In Rossi's opinion the older portions probably formed originally the curial chair of a senator; and it may be that the whole thing is thus a fortuitous importation, like so many other ecclesiastical relics. But there is an obvious possibility that it is a relic of a pre-Christian cult; and this is rather more likely than would be the sanctification of a mere senator's chair.

The ivory panels, eighteen in number, and not easy to decipher in a photograph, answer in part to the labours of Herakles; a few have simply the zodiacal signs from which the legend of the twelve labours was originally framed; some suggest rather the labours of Perseus; and some closely resemble episodes in the Mithraic monuments. It is not impossible, then, that the whole is an ancient artist's combination, for a syncretic cult, of a number of the symbols of oriental sun-worship, to which all three legends belong. The myth of Perseus (perhaps = the Persian) is at bottom identical with that of Herakles; and in Rome the Mithraists would be very ready to bracket the later conquering Sun-God with the older, the more so because their monuments presented scenes of the same order, and conjunction of cults was the fashion of the day. The old Roman Hercules, it will be remembered, was a quite different deity from the

[p. 337]

[paragraph continues] Grecian Herakles, who was a variant of the Semitic Melkarth and Samson; and though that Herakles was worshipped under the later pagan emperors by his Latin name, it does not appear that at Rome his cult was latterly flourishing. Tertullian indeed asserts that in his day there has been seen (vidimus) a man burnt alive as Hercules (= Herakles); [*1] but though this was a ritual sacrifice its solitary celebration tells rather of a Roman show than of a cult. There were two shrines of Hercules Victor on the Capitoline Hill, and some three other aedes in other districts; [*2] but the inscriptions of the period show no such interest in his cult as in those of Mithra and other eastern deities. There was in fact no ritualistic worship of Hercules or Herakles at Rome; nothing to account for the use of such a chair; whereas the mysteries of Mithra were among the most elaborate then in existence, and the Mithraic priesthood one of the most august. Finally, we know from Porphyry, and from the monuments, [*3] that Mithra was habitually represented in the midst of the zodiacal circle, so that the pretended Petrine chair is in every way congruous with his worship. The fact that, in the Mithraic monuments, the zodiac begins with Aquarius, who in ancient art is represented somewhat as a fisherman, would of course appeal to the champions of Peter, whose ancient festival at Rome (Jan. 18) coincided with the sun's entering Aquarius in the calendar: and it is the historic fact that the Mithraic order of the zodiac, beginning on the right with Aquarius and ending on the left with Capricorn, was imitated in Christian art. [*4]

If, as we have surmised, an official substitution of Christism for Mithraism began under Jovian when the latter cult was discredited for Roman purposes by the defeat and death of Julian at the hands of the Persians, it is likely enough that an official change of the kind was effected at Rome, the Mithraic Pater being either superseded or simply Christianised. In taking over the status of the Mithraic pontiff, the Christian Papa of Rome would acquire whatever remained of his influence in the army and in the civil service, besides completing the process of uniting in his own person the symbolisms in virtue of which he was head of the visible Church. It was thus in many ways fitting that he should take to himself the actual chair of the Pater Patrum. However that may be, the historical and documentary facts enable us to infer broadly the line

[p. 338]

of adaptation of Mithraism to the Christian cult. It was presumably thus:--

1. Before the gospels were written, Jesus as "Lamb" was assimilated to Mithra in respect (a) of his attributes of "Seven Spirits" and "seven stars"; (b) of his symbol of the Rock; and (e) of the mystic keys borne by the Time-God in his mysteries. In all three cases there seem to have been ancient Judaic myths to proceed upon.

2. The resurrection ritual, with its rock tomb, and the eucharist of bread and wine, may have been equally ancient even in Jewry; but there is reason to suppose that both were consciously assimilated to the Mithraic mysteries.

3. As the Mithraic Pater Patrum assumed the symbols of the God, and the Christian bishop of Rome imitated the Pater Patrum, the tradition came to transfer from Jesus to Peter, the reputed founder of the Roman see, the attributes of the Persian God, and of those with whom he was identified in Rome. Thus whereas Jesus had been key-bearer and Rock before the gospels were current, Peter finally was foisted on the gospel in both capacities, while the more exclusively divine attribute of headship of the Seven Spirits was practically dropped from Christian doctrine; and even the symbol of the lamb was discountenanced. They had done their work, and were finally both incongruous and inconvenient.

Footnotes

^335:1 Bryce, The Holy Roman Empire, 8th ed. p. 49, note.

^335:2 It is now abandoned even by orthodox Catholic scholars (e.g., Orazio Maruchhi, S. Pietro e S. Paolo in Roma, 1900, p. 99), though the chair is still officially cherished.

^335:3 Beugnot, Hist. de la Destr. du Paganisme en Occident, 1835, i, 159.

^335:4 Beugnot, i, 334-5, citing the inscription from Gruter, p. 28, No. 2. Cp. the other, on p. 334, also from Gruter, p. 1087, No. 4; also that on p. 335 from Muratori, p. 387, No. 2; and those cited on pp. 162-4.

^336:1 Guido di Roma e suoi dintorni, ed. 11a, a cura del Prof. F. Porena, Torino, 1894. p. 383. I am indebted for the extract and a photograph of the chair to the good offices of M. W. Lessevitch. See a copy in Marucchi's S. Pietro e S. Paolo, as cited.

^337:1 Tertullian, Apolog. c, 15.

^337:2 Beugnot, i, 259-65.

^337:3 See that found at Housesteads and preserved in the Black Gate at Newcastle--represented in the local guide of the Society of Antiquaries, p. 11, and in Bishop Hicks's Mithras Worship, p. 39; also the London monument. ib. p. 36.

^337:4 See the admissions of Wellbeloved, Eburacum, 1842, p. 86, as to the zodiacal arch of the Church of St. Margaret's in Walmgate, York.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 339]

  

PART IV.

  

THE RELIGIONS OF ANCIENT AMERICA

  

 section 1. American Racial Origins.

IN the study of the native religions of North and South America, there is a special attraction bound up with the special perplexity of the subject. These religions, like the peoples which have held them, seem to stand historically apart from the rest of humanity, unrelated, underived, independent. The first question that occurs to the ethnologist when he looks at the native American races is, How and when did they get there? With which of the other human families are they most nearly connected? In the present state of knowledge, we still infer a "unity" in the human race, and decline to believe that different human species were independently evolved from lower forms in different continents, acquiring the same physical structure under widely varying conditions. [*1] The suggestion to this effect by Waitz [*2] represents the state of speculation before the bearings of the Darwinian theory had been realised. [*3]

It is therefore fitting that ethnologists should try to trace a connection between the native races of America and the races of Asia, which are the nearest to them in geographical position. Until that hypothesis is either established or overthrown, our anthropology and our moral science must remain in large part unsettled. It has been argued that "we may safely leave to ethnologists the task of deciding whether the whole human race descends from one original couple or from many; for, spiritually speaking, humanity in any case is one. It is one same spirit that animates it and is developed in it; and this, the incontestable unity of our race, is likewise the only unity we need care to insist on." [*4] But this defines rather the theological than the scientific attitude: for the very question whether

[p. 340]

an alleged spiritual unity is independent of a biological or genealogical unity is one of the preliminary problems of true "spiritual" science.

As we go into detail, we shall see some remarkable coincidences between American and Asiatic and European and Polynesian religious systems; and our conception of human nature must alter a good deal according as we decide that certain peculiar superstitions and ritual practices were reached alike by various races who grew separately out of pre-human species, and these out of still lower species, in different parts of the world, without intermixture; or decide that the whole of the man-like family developed interconnectedly over one area, and that the different races now existing did not branch off from the central stem till they had already acquired what we call human characteristics--that is, until they had reached the stage of speech, weapons, and fire, at which they probably had "religion."

Suppose, for instance, that the American races came many thousands of years ago from Asia, and that they are kindred to the earlier Asiatic races: they would already have the germs of myths and a certain religious bias in common with peoples whose descendants subsist in Asia; and the coincidences in their religion would have to be pronounced historical, that is, they would represent a sequence of phenomena substantially determined by one original set of conditions within a given area and territory. If, on the other hand, we suppose that evolution proceeded in different parts of the planet and in widely different environments on identical lines from the lowest forms of life through many others, up to the anthropoid and the human, our whole conception of evolutionary law is affected, and that in turn must affect our philosophy. Looking inductively for evidence, we find what appear to be clear traces of the existence of man in the Mississippi valley between fifty and sixty thousand years ago, or perhaps even in the "inter-glacial" period. Without deciding as to times, it would seem certain that palaeolithic man, whether by way of Behring Strait or of Greenland and Labrador, peopled America from Asia or Western Europe; [*1] and there are some grounds for inferring two distinct racial movements. [*2] But to whatever conclusions the palaeologist may come on that head, [*3] the original scientific and logical veto on the hypothesis of

[p. 341]

two or more independent evolutions of the human species must for the present hold good.

However remote be the time of the first migration, then, we are shut up to the assumption that the American races derive from Asia, either directly or by way of Polynesia, [*1] since the alternative is a hypothesis of a human evolution from pre-human forms in the New World, with the result of yielding an identical human species, while the fauna and flora in general are markedly different. As to the possibility of such an evolution in America, Haeckel gives an emphatic negative. Putting the two hypotheses of immigration from north-east Asia and from Polynesia, he adds: "In any case the original inhabitants of America came from the Old World, and are certainly not, as some suppose, evolved from American apes. Catarrhine or small-nosed apes have at no period existed in America." [*2] The fact that men are so much alike in the two hemispheres, while the animals are so widely different, is a proof that the former are not autochthonous in America. [*3]

Nor is there any physical difficulty over the hypothesis that the American races proceeded, by successive waves of emigration, from Asia. [*4] At Behring Strait Asia and America are almost within sight of each other; and at one time they were united. And if we suppose a migration of tribes like the Kamtskadals, who easily bear extreme cold, being but slightly civilised, we dispose of all such difficulties as the suggestion that pastoral Mongols would never have crossed without some of their animals. Prescott, however, remarks that "it would be easy for the inhabitant of Eastern Tartary or Japan to steer his course from islet to islet, quite across to the American shore, without being on the ocean more than two days at a time"; [*5] and this hypothesis is open. [*6] The question is one for the exact solution of which we have not sufficient materials; and it must be admitted that some ethnologists in the past came to their conclusions

[p. 342]

lightly. It has been said of Pickering, for instance, that he set up a connection between the Malay and the Californian because each had an open countenance, one wife, and no tomahawk. [*1] Happily we need not resort to such inductions as these. Nor need we be deterred from the scientific search by the fact that some of the guesses made have been wildly absurd. There is said to be widely current in Peru a legend, fully believed by the natives, that the name of the first Inca, Manco Capac, arose in the actual advent of a shipwrecked Englishman, who got to be known as Ingasman, and who married the daughter of one Cocapac, his son being accordingly called Ingasman Cocapac, whence the name and title Inca Manco Capac. [*2] That is droll enough; but we need not therefore proceed with Dr. Reville dogmatically to decide that "everything shows that the civilisations of Mexico and Peru are autochthonous, springing from the soil itself." [*3] If it be meant merely that the higher forms of those civilisations (for there were many separate processes) may have subsisted for many centuries without foreign influence, there is no dispute; but the statement as it stands is an unwarranted assertion of a separate human evolution from pre-human forms.

In the nature of the case, the primary separation of the American from the Asiatic races being admittedly very remote, there are not many close parallels to be expected. A number of extraordinary correspondences, however, have been traced, which point to migrations posterior to the Stone Ages. Take that, for instance, between the Aztec calendar signs and the Mongolian zodiac. "The symbols in the Mongolian calendar are borrowed from animals. Four of the twelve are the same as the Aztec. Three others are as nearly the same as the different species of animals in the two hemispheres would allow. The remaining five refer to no creature then found in Anahuac. The resemblance went as far as it could." [*4] And no less remarkable is the "analogy between the Mexican system of reckoning years by cycles and that still in use over a great part of Asia," seeing that "this complex arrangement answers no useful purpose, inasmuch

[p. 343]

as mere counting by numbers, or by signs numbered in regular succession, would have been a far better arrangement." [*1] Such a correspondence must be allowed to count for much; and there is also a remarkable, though perhaps not a conclusive, resemblance between the Aztec, pre-Aztec, and Peruvian temple-pyramids and those of Mesopotamia, [*2] which derived from the earlier Akkadians or Sumerians. Ruins of these still subsist in Central America and Peru which can be compared with the records of those of Babylonia and the one example at Saqqara in Egypt. [*3] Those temples or "mountain houses" doubtless began as graves, and grew into great mounds of earth, like those found in the Mississippi valley; [*4] and the Asiatic like the Mexican pyramid was latterly one of several stages or terraces. [*5] Five seems to have been long a common number in Asia, the Babylonian number seven being reached only at a late period; [*6] and five was the number of stages or stories in the great temple of Huitzilopochtli, the Mexican national God. [*7] In the fact that such pyramid temples, or tombs of the same type--the former often carefully covered with masonry, and having likewise in some cases five stages--are found in many of the South Sea Islands, [*8] we have a fresh reason for supposing an ancient distribution of races eastwards from Asia, in repeated waves of migration. [*9] So, too, we are entitled to surmise kinship, when we find that the Mexicans and some Native American tribes [*10] had a fixed usage of throwing the first morsels of their meals into the fire; [*11] that something like this is the practice of the islanders of

[p. 344]

[paragraph continues] Lamotrek in the Carolines [*1] and those of Efate in the New Hebrides; [*2] and that many Tungusian, Mongolian, and Turkish tribes persistently do the same thing to this day; [*3] and it is difficult to believe that the peculiar usages of sacrificing a "messenger" or "ambassador" to the Sun, painting him red, and hanging up his and other victims' skins, stuffed, as possessing a sacred efficacy, [*4] were independently evolved in the two hemispheres. Even the practice of scalping seems to be peculiar to the Native Americans and the kindred Polynesians, and, in a modified form, [*5] to the Mongols; [*6] and, as we shall see, the Mexicans, like the ancient Semites and their Sumer-Akkadian teachers, passed their children "through the fire" to the Fire-God. What is more significant, they had the Semitic usage of making certain of their special sacrificial observances last for five days. [*7]

There are remarkable concrete parallels, also, in the religious practices and symbolisms of Asia and Mexico, apart from those which may be taken as universal. Thus a stone or metal mirror was the symbol, and the source of the name, of the Mexican God Tezcatlipoca; and it is also the outstanding symbol in Japanese Shintoism, [*8] recognisably a very primitive Asiatic cult. It is told, again, of the national God and War-God Huitzilopochtli that, when the people came to Mexico from their home, his wooden image with certain war-emblems was carried by four priests in an ark or chest, called the Seat of God. Here we have a widespread usage; [*9] but it is significant that it is found in some closely similar form among Mongols, Chinese, and Japanese. So with the casting of children's horoscopes. [*10] More specific is the parallel between certain Mexican usages and those of the Buddhist priests of Thibet and Japan--such as red and yellow headdresses and black robes, [*11] which were in all likelihood pre-Buddhistic. Singularly suggestive of Buddhist contacts, however, are a number of Mexican sculptures: many figures of Quetzalcoatl are practically identical with the established type of Buddha; and other carvings show hardly less close parallels. [*12] But

[p. 345]

no less significant of a general Asiatic connection, perhaps, is a circumstance which has not been much considered by the ethnologists, though it has been noted by the anthropologists--the fact, namely, that both in ancient Asia and in ancient America men kept records by means of knots in strings. [*1] The Chinese in old times are known to have done so; [*2] and it is told of he Dravidian Khonds of Orissa that when brought to European knowledge sixty years ago they "kept all accounts by knots on strings," and conceived of their Gods as recording men's faults in the same fashion. [*3] This would seem to be exactly the method of mnemonics used by the Peruvians when they were discovered by the Spaniards, their quipus being described in the same terms; and there is evidence that the same device was used in Central America, and perhaps among the Tlascalans, though it had gone into disuse among the Mexicans, who had attained to the use of "hieroglyphics." [*4]

There remains the question of the source and nature of those hieroglyphics. To examine it in detail is beyond the scope of this survey; and it must suffice to say that as the Mexican hieroglyphic system proper represents an early stage in the evolution of writing from pictures to phonetic symbols, with a phonetic system developed alongside of it, [*5] the phenomena are quite consistent with the hypothesis of culture influences from Asia at a remote period. It is not necessary to identify glyphs in order to infer that the Chinese, Egyptian, and Aztec systems are akin. The Egyptian symbols remained substantially undeveloped for at least two thousand years; [*6] and recent specialists are satisfied that "many of the elements of hieroglyphic writing had been growing upon the banks of the Nile long before the time of the first historic dynasty." [*7] Given such a slow rate of growth, and noting the fact that Mexican and Egyptian hieroglyphics, and Chinese script, are all written in columns, we are provisionally entitled to see in all three the stages of a continuous evolution. [*8]

[p. 346]

It is true that the American languages, while demonstrably akin to each other, like the Indo-European group, show little or no relation to any of the languages of Asia. But though the difficulty of fully proving affinities of language between American and Asiatic races is great, and we seem thus bound to suppose a very remote separation indeed; on the other hand the extraordinary difference between the tongues of American Indians of the same race [*1] and the observed facts as to the rapid changes of language among South Sea islanders, when isolated from each other, go to suggest that very wide deviation may occur in a few thousands of years among people of one stock who have separated at a stage in which they have no literature, and only the material beginnings of a ritual. Beyond this we need not go. It suffices that there is no conceptual obstacle to the assumption that the civilisation of pre-Christian America grew from the central Asiatic roots which fed the beginnings of civilisation as we know it in Mediterranean Asia and Europe; and that from the practical certainty of an original migration of Asiatics to America there follows the probability that there occurred several, at different stages of Asiatic evolution. [*2] The hypothesis which seems best to meet all the facts is that America was first peopled from Asia at an extremely remote period; that there slowly grew up American races with a certain definite type of language; and that later immigrants from Asia or Polynesia, perhaps coming as conquerors in virtue of importing a higher civilisation, were linguistically absorbed in the earlier mass, as conquering invaders have repeatedly been in the known history of Europe. [*3]

Footnotes

^339:1 See the problem discussed in Prof. Keane's Ethnology, 2nd ed. ch. vii.

^339:2 Anthropologie der Naturvolker, iii, 1-2 (1862).

^339:3 It has, however, been persisted in since Waitz. See Simonin, as cited by Nadaillac, L'Amerique prehistorique, 1883, p. 569; and Hovelacque, Science of Language, Eng. trans. 1877, p. 311

^339:4 Prof. A. Reville, Hibbert Lectures, 1884, On the Native Religions of Mexico and Peru, p. 40.

^340:1 A. H. Keane, Ethnology, ed. 1909, p. 362; Man, Past and Present, 1900, p. 352.

^340:2 M., Ethnology, pp. 98, 347; Man, p. 353.

^340:3 See the history of the discussion in Winsor, Narrative and Critical History of America, 1889, i, 336, 367-8, 382-395. Mr. Haynes (id. pp. 367-8) thinks that man evolved from the palaeolithic to the neolithic stage in the region of the Delaware, and that the ancestors of the present Indians are later arrivals.

^341:1 For a history of this discussion see Winsor, as cited, i, 76-81, 369-376.

^341:2 Naturliche Schopfungsgeschichte, 2te Aufl. p. 613. Cp. Keane, Man, p. 361; Ethnology, p. 157.

^341:3 In an article entitled "America the Cradle of Asia," by Stewart Culin, in Harper's Magazine for March, 1903, there is claimed "the same, if not a higher, antiquity for man on the American continent as is revealed by the most remote historical perspective of Egypt or Babylon" (p. 536)--the implication being that civilisation was thus early developed. The grounds offered for this proposition are certain parallels or identities of popular games and accessories found among American and Asiatic races. All of these data are Perfectly compatible with an Asiatic derivation of the former. Mr. Culin's main principle appears to be a "patriotic" desire to prove that "American culture" has not been "sterile."

^341:4 See Keane, Ethnology, pp. 231-2: Nadaillac, L'Amerique prehistorique, pp. 533, 536, 537; Waitz, Anthropologie der Naturvolker, iii, 56 sq.; Oscar Peschel's Races of Man, Eng. tr. p. 400 sq. Cp. A. H. Buckland, Anthropological Studies, 1891, pp. 61-2.

^341:5 Conquest of Mexico, App. Part I. On this cp. Winsor, i, 78; Nadaillac, pp. 547-8; and see the testimonies cited by Buckle, 3-vol. ed. i, 99, note.

^341:6 For yet other hypotheses see Nadaillac, p. 534 sq. And cp. Admiral Lindesay Brine, Travels amongst American Indians, 1894, pp. 410-422.

^342:1 H. H. Bancroft, Native Races of the Pacific States, i, 24.

^342:2 W. B. Stevenson, Twenty Years' Residence in South America, 1825, i, 394-6. Stevenson gives the story as a purely native invention. Mr. A. H. Buckland, who (Anthropological Studies, 1891, pp. 96-7) ingeniously parallels the Peruvian legend of Manco Capac and Mama Ocello with the known case of a group of white men and women wrecked among the Kaffirs on the south-east coast of Africa early in the eighteenth century, presumably does not suppose the "Ingasman" theory to be probable. But the Peruvian story in any case will not square with that of Quma and the Kaffirs, where it is not pretended that a great evolution of culture took place, as in the Peruvian myth.

^342:3 Lectures cited, p. 242. Dr. Reville, singularly enough, mentions all the weak hypotheses, but does not allude to that of a migration by Behring Strait.

^342:4 Prescott, Conquest of Mexico, App. I. It is no refutation of this analogy to say, as does Dr. Brinton (cited by Keane, Ethnology, p. 218), that the American signs "had nothing to do with the signs of the zodiac," even if this negative could be fully proved.

^343:1 Tylor, Researches into the Early History of Mankind, 1865, pp. 92-3.

^343:2 J. G. Muller, Amerikanische Urreligionen, pp. 645-6.

^343:3 See the photographs of the Papantla and other temple pyramids in Encyc. Brit., new ed., art. AMERICA, vol. i, Pl. i, ii, iii; and that of Tepoxtlan in Bulletin 28 of the Amer. Bur. of Ethnol., Mexican and Central American Antiquities, etc., 1904, p. 345. Cp. p. 293. For views of other Central American pyramids see Admiral Lindesay Brine's Travels, as cited, pp. 227, 340, 352. Cp. pp. 304-8, 318, 330, 392. For the Peruvian analogue see the cut in Squier's Primeval Monuments of Peru, p. 9, rep. in Winsor, i, 250.

^343:4 Also like that altar of Lycaean Zeus in Arcadia, where human sacrifices were offered--a Semitic survival. See Pausanias, viii, 2; and above, p. 273.

^343:5 It may be worth noting that in Asia Minor there is a kind of natural model for such structures in a number of stratified mountains of limestone. See Sir Charles Fellows's Travels and Researches in Asia Minor, 1852, pp. 95-96.

^343:6 Jastrow, Religion of Babylonia and Assyria, pp. 613-615.

^343:7 Clavigero, Hist. of Mexico, Eng. tr. ed. 1807, i, 262; Muller, p. 646.

^343:8 See the illustrations in W. Ellis's Polynesian Researches, 2nd ed. i, 341; in T. Williams's Fiji and the Fijian Islands, i, 215, 223; in The Voyage of H.M.S. Blonde to the Sandwich Islands, 1826, p. 124; and in F. W. Christian's The Caroline Islands, 1899, frontisp., pp. 80, 94, 256; cp. pp. 53, 114. B. Seeman (Fiji and its Inhabitants, in F. Galton's Vacation Tourists, and Notes of Travel, 1862, p. 269) states that "all Fijian temples have a pyramidal form, and [they] are often erected on terraced mounds," the same rule holding in Eastern Polynesia. Cp. Moerenhout, Voyage aux Iles du Grand Ocean, 1837, i, 467; Herman Melville, Typee, ed. 1847. p. 172; and Rev. R, Taylor, Te Ika a Maui, 1870, pp. 27-30. Strictly, however, some in Fiji are conical, like some in the Mississippi valley, though still terraced (see Williams, as cited, p. 223; and Rev. J. B. Stair, Old Samoa, 1897, p. 227). Terraces, again, were a feature of the place on which used to be consummated the sacrifice of the King of Calicut. Frazer, Lect. on Early Hist. of Kingship, 1905, p. 295.

^343:9 See also above, <page 154>, as to the resemblances between Polynesian and Khond sacrifices. The Polynesians, too, have the Hindu myth of the eight uncreated Gods, children of one Pair. Ellis, i, 325.

^343:10 H. Youle Hind, Explorations in the Labrador Peninsula, 1863, ii, 17-18.

^343:11 J. G. Muller, as cited, p. 167.

^344:1 F. W. Christian, The Caroline Islands, 1899, p. 238.

^344:2 Rev. D. Macdonald, Oceania, 1889, p. 160.

^344:3 Castren, Vorlesungen uber die Finnische Mythologie, 1853, p. 57.

^344:4 Above, <page 190>, and Part II, ch. ii,  section 15.

^344:5 W. Ellis, Polynesian Researches, iv, 159.

^344:6 J. G. Muller, p. 597.

^344:7 Cp. Exod. xii, 3, 6; Infra, p. 375; Clavigero, Hist. of Mexico, Eng. tr. ed. 1807, B. vi,  section 31, 35 (i, 300), 310, 312; Grant Allen, Evolution of the Idea of God, 1897, pref. p. vi.

^344:8 Religious Systems of the World, p. 106; Thunberg, Voyages au Japon, trad. fr. 1796, iii, 255.

^344:9 J. G. Muller, p. 594.

^344:10 Id. p. 656.

^344:11 Id. p. 648. A line of investigation that might be worth pursuing is suggested by the resemblances of the Mexican use of colour to Chinese and Japanese methods. There's also a curious similarity in the folding of Mexican and Japanese books. Cp. Muller, p. 551.

^344:12 Nadaillac, pp. 275, 540. As to the legends of Buddhist contacts see p. 544 sq.

^345:1 Tylor, Researches into the Early History of Mankind, 1865, pp. 154-8.

^345:2 Lao-Tsze, Tau Teh King, ch. 80 (Chalmers' trans. p. 61); Pauthier, Chine Modern, 1853, P.359.

^345:3 Macpherson, Memorials of Service in India, as before cited, p. 359.

^345:4 J. G. Muller, Amerikanische Urreligionen, p. 549. Cp. Prescott, p. 48, note.

^345:5 Tylor, Researches, 91, 94-9; Champollion, Precis du systeme hieroglyphique, 1824, p. 280; Keane, Man, p. 409.

^345:6 Champollion, p. 281; Tylor, p. 99.

^345:7 A. J. Evans, "Further Discoveries of Cretan and Aegean Script," in Journ. of Hellenic Studies, xvii (1897), 384. Cp. Champollion, p. 280.

^345:8 Cp. Tylor, pp. 99-100. Mr. Culin (as cited above) quotes Dr. Brinton as saying: "The inner stronghold of those who defended the Asiatic origin of Mexican and Central American civilisation is, I am well aware......the Mexican calendar, the game of Patolli, and the presence of Asiatic jade in America" (Paper "On various supposed relations between the American and Asiatic races" read at the International Congress of Anthropology, 1893). It is odd that Dr. Brinton should see no force in the identity of quipus and temple structures (both of which were noted by McCulloh as early as 1816) and horoscopes.

^346:1 Cp. Brine, American Indians, as cited, pp. 149-154; Keane, Ethnology, p. 157; and Hovelacque, as there cited.

^346:2 "There can be no doubt that America was populated in some way by people of an extremely low culture at a period even geologically remote. There is no reason for supposing, however, that immigration ceased with these original people" (Dall, Third Report of U.S. Bureau of Ethnology, p. 146, cited by Winsor, i, 76). Cp. Major J. W. Powell, "Whence came the American Indians?" in The Forum, Feb. 1898, p. 688.

^346:3 Prof. A. H. Keane, from whose generally negative verdict I dissent with due diffidence, seems finally to admit (Ethnology, p. 345) the possibility of arrivals in small number in the period of civilisation before Columbus.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 2. Aztecs and Peruvians.

All this was recognised by the industrious Swiss historian of the American religions fifty years ago, [*4] when the real unity of the human race was still obscure, in that it was affirmed on such fantastic bases as the myth of an originally created pair and the counter-hypothesis of creation "in nations"--either of monkeys or men; [*5] and when congenital theories of a peopling of America by the "ten lost tribes"

[p. 347]

were much in vogue. There need then be no serious dispute over the thesis [*1] that "the origin of the ancient American religions is to be sought for in the nature of their human spirit"--a different thing from saying that they are autochthonous. The true proposition is neither that, as Muller says, the American peoples did not receive their religions from the peoples of the Old World, nor that they did: both formulas are misleading. Inasmuch as their ancestors were distinctly human when they first passed from Asia to America, the germs of religion and of many rites were derivative; but like all other peoples they evolved in terms of universal law. And as their migrations are likely to have occurred in different epochs, and from different stocks, we may look to find in them, scattered as they are over an entire hemisphere, hardly less variations in language, aspects, and civilisation than were to be traced in the races of the old world a few thousand years ago.

Such variation is actually seen when we seek to ascertain the connection of the different peoples of Ancient America with each other. For among these there is fully as much variation as is found among the peoples of Europe. To go no farther, the Aztecs or Mexicans differ noticeably in certain physical characteristics from the Native Americans; and these again show considerable variations of type. A decisive theory of the culture-histories of these peoples cannot yet be constructed, inasmuch as we are still very much in the dark as to the civilisations which existed in Central and South America before those of Mexico and Peru. For the title of this section, "The Religions of Ancient America," is designed only to mark off the religions flourishing so lately as four hundred years ago, and the aboriginal religions still existing, from that Christian religion which was introduced into Mexico and Peru by the Spaniards, and into North America by the English and French. The two religious systems we have chiefly to consider, the Mexican and Peruvian as they existed before the Spanish Conquest, are not very ancient in their developed form; because even the two civilisations were comparatively modern. The Aztecs and the Peruvians, as regards their then situation, professed to date back only a few centuries from the Conquest; and in both Peru and Mexico there were and still are the architectural remains of civilisations, some of which were themselves so ancient [*2] as to be unintelligible to the nations found by the Spaniards. Thus, near Lake Titicaca in Peru [*3] there are wonderful}

[p. 348]

remains of structures which by their size suggested giant builders, the work of a race whom (or whose successors) the Incas overthrew; and yet further there are remains of rude circles of standing stones which belonged to a primitive civilisation far more ancient still. So, in Mexico, there are ancient ruins, such as those at Palanque, which suggest a civilisation higher, on the side of art and architecture, and at the same time much older, than that of the Aztecs. [*1]

All we can say with any safety is that, as it was put by Buckle, the earlier civilisations grew up in those regions where there were combined the conditions of a regular, easy, and abundant food supply--namely, heat and moisture, without an overwhelming proportion of the latter, such as occurs in Brazil. [*2] Now, from the point of view of the needs of an early civilisation, the golden mean occurs, in South America, only in the territories which were covered by the empire of the Incas, and farther north, from the Isthmus of Panama to Mexico. We surmise then a long-continued movement of population southwards, one wave pushing on another before it, till some reached Patagonia. After a time, however, there might be refluxes. It is admitted that Mexican tradition points to early developments of civilisation about the Isthmus and Central America, and then waves of migration and conquest northwards. And it may have been that the people called the Toltecs, who flourished in Mexico before the Aztecs, and were in several respects more highly civilised than they, [*3] represented yet again a backflow of one of these peoples from the north, according to the tradition. [*4] Their alleged silent disappearance, after four centuries of national life, is the standing puzzle of Mexican history. [*5] All that we know is, that Mexico remained the seat of the most flourishing empires, mainly because it could best yield an abundant and regular supply of vegetable food, as maize; and that when Cortes invaded it, the civilisation of the Aztecs, who constituted the most powerful of the several Mexican States then existing, was among the most remarkable. [*6]

And herein lies the instructiveness of these civilisations, with

[p. 349]

their religions, that they supply us with a set of results practically independent of all the known history of Europe and Asia. It has been remarked that the great drawback of most of the moral or human sciences is that they do not admit of experiments as do the physical sciences. You must take the phenomena you get and try to account for them, with no aid from planned repetitions of cases. But, on the other hand, the human sciences as latterly organised have an enormous wealth of data lying ready to hand, and some collocations of data have for us the effect of new revelations in human affairs. After men became absorbed in the conception of European civilisation, with its beginnings, on the one hand in Aryan barbarism, on the other in the Eastern and Egypto-Semitic culture, they seemed to be shut up to a certain body of conclusions about human nature and its tendencies of thought and action. What was worse, the conclusions were presented ready made in terms of the reigning religion. But when we go to the records of the cultures and creeds of Mexico and Peru, records wonderfully preserved in the teeth of the fanaticism which would have destroyed them all if it could, we stand clear of the prejudices alike of Jew and Christian; we are in a measure spared the old contrast between pretended monotheism and polytheism, the eternal suggestion of the possible diffusion of revealed truth, [*1] the perpetual comparison between Christendom and Paganism. We are faced by a civilisation and a religion that reached wealth and complexity by normal evolution from the stages of early savagery and barbarism without ever coming in contact with those of Europe till the moment of collision and destruction. And to study these American civilisations aright is to learn with clearness lessons in sociology, or human science in general, which otherwise could have been acquired only imperfectly and with hesitation. The culture-histories of the two hemispheres, put side by side, illuminate each other as do the facts of comparative anatomy.

Footnotes

^346:4 J. G. Muller, pp. 7-8.

^346:5 Cp. Nott and Gliddon, Types of Mankind, 1854, p. 283; Indigenous Races of the Earth, 1857, p. 648.

^347:1 Muller, p. 9.

^347:2 Cp. Kirk's note on Prescott, p. 1, and Dr. Tylor, Anahuac, p. 189, as to the pre-Toltec civilisation of Mexico.

^347:3 Squier, Peru, 1877, ch. 20; J. G. Muller, pp. 334-5; Keane, Ethnology, p. 138 sq.

^348:1 Bancroft, iv, 289-346. Cp. Keane, Man, p. 406 sq.

^348:2 Introd. to the Hist. of Civilisation in England, 3-vol. ed. i, 101-8.

^348:3 Clavigero, History of Mexico, Eng. tr. ed. 1807, i, 86 (B. ii,  section 2); Keane, as last cited.

^348:4 Compare ch. i of Prescott's Conquest of Mexico, and J. F. Kirk's notes on it (Sonnenschein's ed.) with Reville, Lect. i. But the tradition may also derive from the general movement of population southwards. Clavigero's chronology, c. 8, is to the effect that the Toltecs arrived from the north about 648, the Chichemecs in 1170, the "Acolhuans" about 1200, and the Aztecs in 1296.

^348:5 Kirk's note on Prescott, p. 7.

^348:6 The Acolhuan or Tezcucan civilisation, however, seems to have been more advanced than that of Mexico proper. See Prescott, B. i, c. 6, end; and below,  section 5. And see Lindesay Brine, American Indians, chs. xv and xvii, as to the advanced architecture at Palanque, and at Uxmal in Yucatan. A good account, with excellent illustrations of the architectural and art remains at Mitla, is given by Edward Seler, in Bulletin 28 of the Bureau of American Ethnology, before cited, pp. 243-324.

^349:1 That is, now. Lord Kingsborough wrought hard in the last generation to prove that the Biblical system was known to the Mexicans; and there was an early theory that St. Thomas, that ubiquitous missionary, had given them Christianity. Prescott, pp. 233, 641; Clavigero, B. vi,  section 4.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 3. Primitive Religion and Human Sacrifice.

Whatever may have been the variety of the stocks that immigrated from Asia, it holds good that we may look in the less advanced American races for traces of the steps in the religious and social evolution of Mexico and Peru. The non-Aztec peoples of Central America, to begin with, had developed religious systems which in their main features recall the Goddess-worships of Semitic and

[p. 350]

[paragraph continues] Hellenistic antiquity; the most marked difference, as regards the historic period of the latter, being the American proclivity to human sacrifice. The summary given of some of them by Mr. H. H. Bancroft will serve to illustrate the old process by which the human mind reached the same essential results out of a superficial variety of materials:--

"The most prominent personage in the Isthmian Pantheon was Dabaiba, a goddess who controlled the thunder and lightning, and with their aid devastated the lands of those who displeased her. In South America, thunder and lightning were held to be the instruments used by the sun to inflict punishment upon its enemies, which makes it probable that Dabaiba was a transformed sun-goddess. Pilgrims resorted from afar to her temple at Uraba, bringing costly presents and human victims, who were first killed and then burned, [*1] that the savoury odours of roasting flesh might be grateful in the nostrils of the goddess. Some describe her as a native princess, whose reign was marked by great wisdom and many miracles, and who was apotheosized after death. She was also honoured as the mother of the Creator, the maker of the sun, the moon, and all invisible things, and the sender of blessings, who seems to have acted as mediator between the people and his mother, for their prayers for rain were addressed to him, although she is described as controlling the showers; and once, when her worship was neglected, she inflicted a severe drought upon the country. When the needs of the people were very urgent, the chiefs and priests remained in the temple, fasting and praying with uplifted hands; the people meanwhile observed a four-days' fast, lacerating their bodies and washing their faces, which were at other times covered with paint. So strict was this fast, that no meat or drink was to be touched until the fourth day, and then only a soup made from maize-flour. The priests themselves were sworn to perpetual chastity and abstinence, and those who went astray in these matters were burned or stoned to death. Their temples were encompassed with walls, and kept scrupulously clean; golden trumpets, and bells with stone clappers, summoned the people to worship." [*2]

At a lower stage of civilisation we find human sacrifice already well established, on historic lines, where temples and priesthoods are still insignificant. Thus among the Tupinambos of north-eastern Brazil there was practised a form of sacrifice which recalls at once the rite among the Indian Khonds and the better known one in Mexico, so often described. Among the lower tribes the human

[p. 351]

sacrifice here figures as primarily an act either of propitiation of their own dead slain in war or of providing them with food in the other world, they having become Gods in virtue of falling in battle; [*1] and, secondarily, as an act of sacrament. [*2] The Tupinambos and their congeners sought in battle not to slay but to capture enemies; and when they had a captive he was taken to their village in triumph and received with fife-music, supplied by the bones of previous prisoners. For a whole year he was carefully treated, well fed, and supplied with a well-favoured maiden as wife and servant. At length, on the day of the feast, he was adorned with feathers, and festally led to sacrifice, his body being immediately cut in pieces and distributed among the heads of houses or minor chiefs; or, otherwise, eaten in a general feast. [*3] If he had a child by his wife, it was brought up, as among the Khonds, for the same fate. [*4]

Of the more general usage of sacrificing children, which we have seen to be primordial in Central Asia, there are many traces among the North-American Indians. Thus those of Florida at the time of the Spanish conquest are recorded to have sacrificed first-born children to the sun; [*5] and in Virginia there was at times offered up the sacrifice of the "only begotten son." More general seems to have been the simple usage of sacrificing boys to the God Oki and other deities. [*6] Oki was held to "suck the blood from the left breast"; and the theory of the sacrifice seems to have been that it secured good fortune in war. But there was practised in addition an annual spring sacrifice--an instance of which is known to have occurred as late as 1837 or 1838--on the Khond principle of ensuring a good harvest, the propitiated deity in this case being the "great star" Venus. Prisoners were the usual victims; and the last and best-known case is that of the sacrifice of a Sioux maiden, who was bound to a stake and slain with arrows. Before she died, pieces of her flesh were cut off in the horrible fashion of the Khonds, and the blood made to fall on the young seed-corn. [*7]

Next to a human sacrifice seems to have ranked, among some tribes, that of a white dog, the dog being for the Native American a valuable

[p. 352]

possession, [*1] and whiteness being held by them, as among the Greeks and Romans, a mark of purity and distinction in animals. Always it was something important or typically desirable that must be offered to the God. And in all cases the act of sacrifice seems to have lain near the act of sacrament, in which we know the identification of the God with the victim, whether as totem or otherwise, to have been a normal conception. The white dog, like the victim in the ancient Dionysiak sacrifice among the Greeks, seems at times to have been torn to pieces and so eaten. [*2] But there is an overwhelming amount of testimony to prove that among the Native Americans at the time of the Spanish conquest religious cannibalism was common. [*3] It was as a rule, perhaps, prisoners of war who were eaten; and it is recorded that when in the Florida war of 1528 famishing Spaniards were driven to eat the corpses of their own comrades, the Floridan natives, who were wont to eat their captives, were horrorstruck [*4]--this though they had no agriculture, and fared precariously at all times. [*5] But though certain tribes were anthropophagous only on a war footing, there is only too much evidence in others that cannibalism occurred on other religious pretexts; [*6] and as all primitive feasts were more or less sacramental, and the sacramental eating of human flesh is seen to have subsisted among the Aztecs long after simple cannibalism had disappeared, there can be little doubt that originally the human sacrifice was eaten among the American peoples.

Even in the "savage" stage, however, there can be traced the beginnings of the recoil not only from the sacrifice but from the cannibal sacrament. The letting of blood seems to have been in certain rites substituted for slaying; [*7] and in the story of Hiawatha the Heaven-God, who lived as a man among the Onondagas and had a mortal daughter, we find a parallel to the modified legends of Iphigeneia and Jephthah's daughter. Heaven ordered that the maiden should be sacrificed, and her father sadly brought her forth; but there came a mighty sound as of a wind, and the people, looking on high, saw a dark object approaching with terrific speed, whereupon they all fled. The father and daughter stayed resignedly, and lo! the coming thing was an enormous bird, which hurled itself with such force on the maiden that she disappeared, and the bird

[p. 353]

was buried up to the neck in the earth. [*1] Late or early, the legend was framed with a purpose.

In the tribal stage, necessarily, there was little development of the priesthood. Its beginnings were represented by the "medicine-men" or sorcerers, who set up secret religious societies or orders, to at least one of which, in the historic period, sorcerers of various types and tongues could belong. [*2] Of the temple, too, the beginning is seen in the sacred hut, to which in certain tribes only the king or the medicine-man has entrance, and in which begin to be stored idols and sacred objects. [*3] As we go southward, towards the region of the higher civilisation, we find an increasing development of the priestly function, sometimes in combination with the kingly, as among the Natchez of Florida, among whom in the seventeenth century was found the worship of the sun, symbolised in the hut-temple by an ever-burning fire. [*4] There the king-priest was "brother of the Sun," and the royal family constituted an aristocracy with special privileges, though bound to marry outside their caste. [*5]

In the midway civilisations of Central America, this development has gone far towards the state of things seen in the kingdom of the Aztecs. In Yucatan, for instance, there was a hierarchy of priests, with a head; and the order seems to have had extensive judicial powers. [*6] The temples, too, had become considerable buildings, to which the leading men made roads from their houses. [*7] Alongside of the priests, all the while, remained the sorcerers or "medicine-men," also an official class with different types or orders, members of which, however, were privately employed by the nobles, [*8] after the manner of "Levites" among the early Hebrews; and these private priests competed with the hierarchy in the matter of receiving formal confessions from penitents and patients. [*9] Convents existed for virgins, and of those who spent their whole lives in them the statues were after death worshipped as Goddesses, while the king's daughter ranked as the "Fire Virgin," and to her others were sacrificed. [*10] Idols of all kinds abounded; and wooden ones, like the Hebrew teraphim, were accounted precious family heirlooms. [*11] Human sacrifices, of course, were frequent, children being made

[p. 354]

victims in great numbers when captives were lacking, and legitimate sons when the sons of slave women ran short, [*1] "not even the only son being spared." [*2] Surrogate sacrifices in the form of blood-letting were normal; but the cannibal sacrament does not seem to have been so; though it took place in Guatemala, where the king and priests and nobles partook of the victims slain to "the highest God" at the time of Lent, the high-priest and the king getting the hands and feet. [*3]

In the case of this particular sacrifice, the chosen victims, who were slaves, were each allowed for a week the peculiar privileges accorded to similar victims in the Old World, [*4] down to the detail of dining with the king; and for this sacrifice, it is recorded, the victims were "brought together in a particular house near the temple, and there got to eat and drink until they were drunk," apparently on the principles of the Khonds and Rhodians. [*5] It seems now difficult to doubt that the religion of ancient America is of Asiatic derivation; and that the pyramidal altar-temples of Mexico and Babylon are alike developments from simpler mounds or "high places" shaped by the prehistoric peoples of Asia, who first carried the practice with them to the New World. It is now reasonably established that the "Mound-Builders" of the Mississippi valley were simply North-American Indians, living very much at the culture-stage of those found by the first whites, though there as elsewhere there may have been partial retrogression in certain tribes and territories under stress of war. [*6]

From the tribal state, civilisation had risen to a stage at which, in Central America, even outside the Aztec State, as in Yucatan, there were schools in the temples where the children of the priests and nobles were taught such science as the priests possessed, from books [*7] in which had been evolved a hieratic script on the basis of hieroglyphics, [*8] as in ancient Egypt. They had advanced far in agriculture, cultivating many plants and fruits; had numerous stone buildings, and excellent stone-paved roads; and had made some little progress in sculpture. But there had been no transcending of

[p. 355]

the primeval concepts of religion; and human blood flowed for the Gods far more freely than in the state of savagery. The savage's "happy hunting ground" had been specialised into a heaven and a hell; [*1] the medicine-man into a great priestly order; from his primitive symbolism had been evolved the sacrament of baptism; his simple sun-worship had become a vast ceremonial; and in many territories the "heathen" had so far anticipated Christian civilisation as to have established the practice of confession. But the stamp of primeval savagery, conserved by the spirit of religion, is clear through it all: there is no gainsaying the fundamental relationship of the lower and the higher cults. Around the civilisations of Peru and Mexico, at the time of the Spanish conquest, there stretched north and south a barbarism in which we know to have existed the germs of universal historic religion--human sacrifices constituting sacraments; beliefs in deities and spirits beneficent and maleficent; practices of prayer and witchcraft, ritual and worship, festival and ordinance, the whole in part conducted by the community as a whole, but guided by the soothsayers and sorcerers who are the beginnings of priesthoods. From such antecedents everywhere has all "higher" religion been evolved.

Footnotes

^350:1 Note the same usage among the Pawnees. Brine, American Indians, p. 132.

^350:2 Bancroft, The Native Races of the Pacific Coast, iii, 498-9, citing Peter Martyr, dec. vii, lib. x; Irving's Columbus, iii, 173-4; Muller, Amerikanische Urreligionen, p. 421.

^351:1 Muller, p. 282.

^351:2 It is noteworthy that an experienced South-Sea missionary, Dr. George Brown, is emphatic in giving these explanations of cannibalism among Melanesians (Melanesians and Polynesians, 1910, p. 110 sq.). "Many cannibals," he declares, "are very nice people." George Chalmers gave a similar testimony.

^351:3 Robertson, Hist. of America, B. iv, and Note xx (Works, ed. 1821. viii, 45, 416).

^351:4 Muller, p. 283.

^351:5 Waits, Anthropologie der Naturvolker, iii, 207, citing Garcilasso, Hist. de la Conquete de Floride, 1737, ii, 3, 11.

^351:6 Waits, iii, 207, citing Strachey, History of Travaile into Virginia, ed. 1849, pp. 82, 93 sq.; A. Young, Chronicles of the Pilgrim Fathers, 1841, p. 358, and others.

^351:7 Waits, citing J. Irving, Indian Sketches, 1835, ii, 136, and Schoolcraft, iv, 50, v, 77; Brine, as last cited.

^352:1 Waitz, citing Kohl, Kitschi-Gami, Bremen, 1859, i, 86.

^352:2 Waitz, p. 208, citing Nuttall, Journal of Travels into the Arkansas Territory, Philadelphia, 1821.

^352:3 J. G. Muller, pp. 141-8 and refs. Cp. Robertson, B. iv (Works, ed. 1821, viii, 43) and refs.

^352:4 Robertson, as cited, vol. viii, Note XIX, citing Torquemada.

^352:5 Id. ib. Note III.

^352:6 Cases have occurred down to the middle of the nineteenth century. Muller, as cited.

^352:7 Muller, p. 143.

^353:1 Id. p. 144, citing Schoolcraft. Cp. the story cited from Stober.

^353:2 Waitz, iii, 215.

^353:3 Id. p. 203.

^353:4 This seems to have been a common institution among the Native Americans before the advent of the whites. Cp. L. Carr, The Mounds of the Mississippi Valley, in Smithsonian Report for 1891, pp. 535-7.

^353:5 Waitz, iii, 217-220.

^353:6 Spencer's Descriptive Sociology, No. II, p. 21, col. 2, citing Licana and Landa.

^353:7 Id. ib. col. 3, citing Peter Martyr.

^353:8 Id. ib., citing Landa.

^353:9 Id. p. 22, col. 1, citing Herrera and Licana.

^353:10 Id. p. 21, col. 3, and p. 40, col. 2, citing Collogudo.

^353:11 Id. p. 21, col. 3, citing Landa.

^354:1 Id. p. 21, col. 3, citing Licana, Landa, and Herrera.

^354:2 This is told of the people of Vera Paz. Id. p. 22, col. 4, citing Ximenez.

^354:3 Id. p. 22. col. 2, citing Fr. Roman, in Ximenez. The idea in appropriating those parts seems to have been that of minimising the eating done.

^354:4 Above, pp. <page 114>, <page 116>, <page 119>, <page 125>, <page 137>, <page 154>.

^354:5 Above, pp. <page 116>, <page 119>, <page 137>, <page 140>, note.

^354:6 See the whole problem thoroughly discussed by Mr. Lucien Carr in his treatise on The Mounds of the Mississippi Valley, in the Smithsonian Report for 1891. Cp. Winsor, as before cited, i, 397-410. "That many Indian tribes built mounds and earth-works is beyond doubt; but that all the mounds and earth-works of North America are by these same tribes and their immediate ancestors is not thereby proved." Professor Putnam. cited by Winsor, i, 402, note. The Toltec theory of the mounds, once common (e.g., J. D. Baldwin, Ancient America, 1872, pp. 200-205, and his authorities), is practically exploded.

^354:7 Spencer, as cited, p. 21, col. 2, citing Landa.

^354:8 Id. p. 51, col. 3, citing Wilson, Prehistoric Man, 2nd ed. ii, 133 sq.

^355:1 Id. p. 40, col. 1, citing Landa.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 4. The Mexican Cultus.

When we turn from this stage of religious history to that of Aztec Mexico, the first and most memorable difference that faces us is the immense expansion of the power of the priests. If we can trust the Spanish writers, [*2] five thousand priests were connected with the principal temple in the city of Mexico alone, where there were in all some 600 temples, and where the total population was perhaps about 300,000; [*3] and all the cities were divided into districts placed under the charge of parochial clergy, who regulated all acts of religion. In this enormous strength of the priestly class we have the secret of that frightful development of religious delusion and its attendant atrocity which marks off Mexico from the rest of the world. The system was, of course, polytheistic, and, equally of course, it exhibits the usual tendency towards pantheism or monotheism; but the overwhelming priesthood necessarily perpetuated the separate cults. There were at least thirteen principal deities, and more than two hundred inferior. [*4] Indeed, some reckon as high as three thousand

[p. 356]

the number of the minor spirits, [*1] who would answer to the genii and patron saints of Europe; and it is obvious that in Mexico as in Christendom there must have been many varieties of religious temper and attitude. [*2] In many of the forms of prayer and admonition which have been preserved, [*3] we see a habit of alluding reverently to "God" (Teotl) or "our Lord," without any specification of any one deity, and with a general assumption that the Lord loves right conduct. This universal God was in origin apparently the Sun, who was worshipped in the temples of all the Gods alike, being prayed to four times each day and four times each night. [*4]

At the first glance it is plain that the Mexican pantheon represented the myths of many tribes, myths which overlapped each other, as in the case of the ancient and widely worshipped God of Rain and his wife the Goddess of Water, and which survived separately by being adapted to the different usages of life. In connection with the rite of infant baptism, which the Mexicans practised most scrupulously, the officiating women prayed to "Our Merciful Lady," Chalchiuhtlicue or Cioacoatl, the Goddess of Water. [*5] At the season when rain was wanted for the harvest, again, prayer was made to the God or Gods named Tlaloc [*6]--for both the singular and plural forms are used--who controlled the rain; and whereas the Goddess of Water invoked at baptism was held merciful, the Tlaloc had to be propitiated by the regular sacrifice of a number of sucking infants, bought from poor parents or extorted from superstitious ones. [*7] There is no more awful illustration of the capacity of the human mind for religious delusion than the record of how the merciful people, believing in the efficacy of the sacrifice, would yet keep out of the way of the sacred procession which carried the doomed babes, because they could not bear to see them weep and think of their fate; while others, weeping themselves, would take comfort if the children wept freely, because that prognosticated plenteous rains. [*8]

[p. 357]

[paragraph continues] But even under the spell of religion men could not sacrifice infants to the very deity invoked at baptism: so the benign Water-Goddess was sundered from the child-devouring Water-God. And by the same law of adaptation to social function it came about that the most prominent of the worships of Mexico, a state periodically at war, was that of the War-God Huitzilopochtli, who figured as the patron God of the nation.

In Huitzilopochtli we have a very interesting case of mythological evolution. [*1] It has been argued that he was originally a simple bird-God, the humming-bird, his early name being the diminutive Huitziton, "the little humming-bird." [*2] An old legend tells that while the Aztecs still dwelt in Aztlan, a man among them named Huitziton chirped like a bird, "Tihui" = "Let us go," and that he thus persuaded them to migrate and conquer for themselves a new country. As the later God actually bears the symbol of a hummingbird on his left foot, and his name Huitzilopochtli means "hummingbird on the left," there has evidently occurred some process of assimilation; but it is not quite certain that it was in this wise. If the humming-bird were originally a totem-God, the hypothesis would seem sound; but this, I think, has not been shown; and there remains open the possibility that the symbol was not primary but secondary.

The singular fact that, even as the Mexican War-God has a humming-bird for his symbol, so Mars, the Roman War-God, has a wood-pecker for his, is in this regard worth a moment's attention. We can draw no certain conclusion in the matter; but it seems likely that the evolution in the two cases may have been similar. Now, there is no clear evidence that the wood-pecker was a totem-God; and the whole question of Mars's name Picumnus, which he was held to have from Picus, the wood-pecker, is obscure. [*3] Oddly enough, the Sabines had a legend that the wood-pecker led them to their settling-place, which they consequently called Picenum. When we note that a number of ancient communities similarly had legends of birds or animals who guided them to their settling-place, [*4] and that the name of the place sometimes accords with the name of the guide and sometimes does not, we seem obliged to recognise three possibilities.

1. The animal or bird was in some cases very likely a totem-God,

[p. 358]

the legend of guidance being a late way of explaining its association with the community.

2. A place, however, might easily be named by newcomers because of the number of birds or animals of a given kind seen there; and the explanatory legend on that view is naught.

3. A symbolic animal, connected with the worship or image of a God, would also give rise to explanatory legends. One would prompt another.

If then the Sabines put the wood-pecker on their standard, the question arises whether it may not have been because it was the symbol of the War-God. It is noted concerning the humming-bird that he is extraordinarily brave and pugnacious; [*1] and the same might readily be said of the wood-pecker, who is as it were always attacking. Supposing the symbol to be secondary, there is no difficulty in the matter: all the legends would be intelligible on the usual lines of myth-making. In regard to Huitzilopochtli, again, there is a symbolic source for his curious epithet "on the left." In one legend he sits after death at the left hand of his brother Tezcatlipoca, [*2] the Creator and Supreme God; and whether or not this is the earliest form of the idea, it suggests that the placing of the symbol on the left foot of the War-God may have arisen from the previous currency of the phrase "Huitzlin on the left" in another signification, though on this view the God had been already named after his symbol.

Leaving open the problem of origins on this side, we come upon another in the fact that neither Huitzilopochtli nor Mars was primarily a War-God. The former, who was practically the national God of Mexico, was also called Mexitli; [*3] and it seems likelier that this should have been his original name, and Huitzilopochtli a sobriquet, than vice versa. And so with the function. A War-God, specially known as such, is not a primary conception: what happens is that a particular God comes to be the God of War. Among the Native Americans, the "Great God" or Creator and Ruler, or else the Heaven-or Sun-God, was the War-God; [*4] and we know that Mars was originally a sylvan deity, [*5] concerned with vegetation and flocks and herds. How came he to preside over war? Simply because, we may take it, he was the God of the season at which war was usually 

[p. 359]

made. Campaigns were begun in spring; and so the God of the Spring season, who was specially invoked, became War-God. Mars was just Martius, March; and he lent himself the better to the conception, because March is a stormy and blusterous month. Mars strictly retains these characteristics, being a blusterous rather than a great or dignified God in both the Greek and Roman mythologies. But here suggests itself another possible source for the symbol of the War-God. Picus means speckled, [*1] coloured; and the speckled wood-pecker might figure the coming of speckled spring, as the humming-bird would do the colour-time in Mexico. Perhaps there may be a similar natural explanation for the further striking coincidence that Huitzilopochtli is born of a virgin mother, Coatlicue, who is abnormally impregnated by being touched by a ball of bright-coloured feathers, [*2] while Juno bears Mars also virginally, being impregnated by the touch of a flower. [*3]

In both cases, certainly, we have a sufficiently marked primary type for the myth of the Virgin-Birth, the idea in each being simply the birth of vegetation in spring. Though the mythical Coatlicue, like Mary, is a God-fearing woman, who frequents the temple and lives in a specified village, Coatepec, near Tula, the Virgin Mother is simply the ancient Mother of all, the Earth; and the concept of virginity is a verbally made one, in virtue of the mere fact that the whole is a metaphor. But if Huitzilopochtli be thus admittedly in origin a God of Vegetation, [*4] there arises a stronger presumption that he too was originally symbolised by his bird because of its seasonal relation to his worship. It is denied that in his case the seasonal explanation of the choice of Mars as War-God can hold good, [*5] because the spring in Mexico is a time of heavy rains, when campaigns are impossible. In his case then the selection of the War-God is presumably a result on the one hand of his symbol, which further seems to have been spontaneously made a symbol of the sun, [*6] and on the other hand of his special popularity--a constant feature in the cult of the Vegetation-Gods. And when we note further that the chief God of the Caribs, Yuluca, was represented with a headdress of humming-bird feathers, and that the Toltec

[p. 360]

[paragraph continues] God Quetzalcoatl, also a God of fruitfulness, was figured with the head of a sparrow, which was the hieroglyph of the air, [*1] we are led to surmise, not that all of these Gods were originally Bird-Gods, but that they were all originally Spring-Gods or other Nature-Gods to whom the birds were given as symbols, though the sparrow may have been originally a totem-God. Throughout the whole of Polynesia, the red feather of one small bird, and the tail feathers of the man-of-war bird, are "the ordinary medium of extending or communicating supernatural power," and are regarded as specially pleasing to the Gods. [*2]

Footnotes

^355:2 Clavigero, History of Mexico, B. vi,  section 14 (vol. i, p. 270).

^355:3 Prescott, at cited, pp. 32, 283-4. Torquemada thought there might be 40,000 temples in all Mexico, and Clavigero held there were many more. B, vi,  section 12 (p. 269).

^355:4 Prescott, B. i, c. 3, p. 27. Cp. Spencer, as cited, p. 37.

^356:1 J. G. Muller, as cited, p. 572.

^356:2 Cp. J. G. Muller, p. 564.

^356:3 Sahagun, Hist. of the Affairs of New Spain, French trans. 1880, passim.

^356:4 Clavigero, B. vi,  section 15 (i, 272-3); J. G. Muller, as cited, pp. 473-4; Reville, as cited, p. 46. There is reason to infer that sun-worship is the oldest and most general cult of the American races, and that it came with them from Asia. Special deities of vegetation seem in their case to be a later evolution.

^356:5 Sahagun, as cited, p. 441 (l. ii, c. 32).

^356:6 Possibly "the Tlalocs" were the clouds--children of the Rain-God. Cp. Reville. p. 72. But they were Gods of mountains, like the chief Tlaloc, whose throne was a mountain so named, though he had also a mountain-seat in heaven, called Tlalocan. Tlaloc was one of the oldest deities. Muller, Amerik. Urrelig. p. 500; Prescott, p. 41, n., citing Ramirez. On another view, the Tlalocs may have stood for the four quarters. Among the Mayan Zapotecs, there were four Chacs or Rain-Gods; and again five. Seler, in Bulletin 28 of Amer. Bur. of Ethn. pp. 267-8.

^356:7 Sahagun, as cited, p. 84 (l. ii, c. 20), speaks of purchase only. There seem, however, to have been special dedications. In Carthage, we know, the aristocracy came to substitute bought children for their own. Diodorus, xx, 14. The same process would take place anywhere. See above, <page 353>-4.

^356:8 Sahagun, p. 58 (1. ii, c. 1), and pp. 84-7.

^357:1 J. G. Muller, p. 591 sq.

^357:2 This seems a very debatable point. "Huitzlin," the full name, seems as much of a diminutive as "Huitziton."

^357:3 Preller, Romische Mythologie, ed. 1865, pp. 297-8; Cox, Mythology of the Aryan Nations, ed. 1882, pp. 523-4.

^357:4 Cp. J. G. Muller, p. 595; K. O. Muller, Introd. to Mythology, Eng. trans. pp. 109, 172.

^358:1 J. G. Muller, p. 592, and refs.

^358:2 Id. p. 593.

^358:3 Prescott, p. 9; Muller, p. 574, citing Acosta and Humboldt; Gomara, in Historiadores Primitivos de Indias, i (1852), p. 347, col. 2.

^358:4 J. G. Muller, p. 141.

^358:5 Cato, De re rustica, 141 (142); Virgil, Aeneid, iii, 35. Mars, too, was identified with the sun. Macrobius, Saturnalia, i, 19. So was Ares, according to Preller (Griech. Myth. ed. 1860, i, 257), who, however, only cites the Homeridian hymn, which does not bear him out. That identifies Ares with the planet Mars.

^359:1 So White. Breal derives it from a root meaning to strike. Cox, as cited.

^359:2 Clavigero, B. vi,  section 6 (p. 254).

^359:3 Ovid, Fasti, v, 231-256.

^359:4 J. G. Muller, pp. 602, 607, 608, recognises that the God is himself symbolised by the bunch of feathers. Like so many of the Egyptian and other Gods, he is thus 'the husband of his mother."

^359:5 Muller (pp. 609-610) denies the explanation even for Mars, arguing that early wars were made in harvest, for plunder. For this he gives no evidence; nor does he meet the obvious answer that those plundered at harvest would want to seek revenge as soon as winter was over. Spring campaigns have in point of fact been normal in Europe; and the chief plunder sought by the early Romans was not grain but cattle.

^359:6 Muller, p. 592. It was called "sun's hair" = sunbeam.

^360:1 Id. pp. 583-4, 592, 594.

^360:2 Ellis. Polynesian Researches, 2nd ed. i, 338; Moerenhout, Voyage aux Iles du Grand Ocean, 1837, i, 472-3.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 5. Mexican Sacrifices and Cannibal Sacraments.

Of deeper interest is the moral aspect of the worship of Mexican Gods, especially the most memorable feature of all, human sacrifice. Though this, as we have seen, is primordial in religion, there can be no question that its enormous development was the work of the organised priesthood, and of the cultivated religious sentiment. The Roman War-God remained subordinate, warlike though the Romans were; the Mexican became one of the two leading deities, and received the more assiduous worship. Whence the divergence? Mainly, we must conclude, from the multiplication of the Mexican priesthood, which was primarily due to the absorption of the priest-hoods of the conquered races; and from the prior development of the rite of human sacrifice in the cult of the Gods or Goddesses of Vegetation. Among the Aztecs the tradition went that human sacrifices were of late introduction; [*3] and this view would no doubt be favoured by the priests, who would represent that the latter-day power of the State was due to the sacrifices. But we have seen that they were practised on a smaller scale by the American peoples at much earlier stages of social evolution; and in the midway stages they were also common. In northern South America, the chief God of the Muyscas, Fomagata, was worshipped with many human sacrifices, as he was also under the name Fomagazdad, with his wife Zipaltonal, in Nicaragua, where he and she were held the progenitors of the human race; [*4] and similar usages, often in connection with the Sun-God, sometimes with the God of Rain, were common in Yucatan, Chiapa, Tobasco, Honduras, and elsewhere. [*5] The Mexican Otimias, also, who were not conquered by the Aztecs, sacrificed children and ate their flesh, carrying it with them, roasted, on their campaigns. [*6]

[p. 361]

[paragraph continues] Such sacrifices then were well-established in Mexico before the Aztecs came, being found in some degree even among the relatively peaceful Toltecs. [*1] What the Aztec priesthood did was to multiply them to a frightful extent. [*2]

The causes of expansion and restriction in such cases are no doubt complex; but when we compare those of the Aztecs and the Greeks, Egyptians, and Romans, we can trace certain decisive conditions. Firstly, human sacrifices tend to multiply among peoples much given to war, by way of offerings to the Gods; but where there is only a limited priesthood the natural force of compassion leads men in time, as they grow more civilised, to abandon such sacrifices; while a priesthood tends to maintain them. Thus among the civilised peoples of the old world they lasted longest with the priest-ridden Carthaginians; and the reason that they did not continue late among the Jews was probably that these did not possess a numerous priesthood till after the Captivity, when their religion was recast in terms of the more civilised Oriental systems. On the other hand, an expanding or expanded empire, powerfully ruled by a warrior autocrat, like those of Babylon and Egypt, is led in various ways to abandon human sacrifice even if the priesthoods be numerous. Alien cults are absorbed for political reasons, and it is no part of the ruler's policy to be habitually at war with small neighbours, he having absorbed most of them: hence an irregular supply of captives. The priesthoods, too, can be conveniently provided for through other forms of sacrifice; and on those other lines they are less powerful relatively to the king. Thus in the empire of the Incas the practice of human sacrifice was well restrained. But where a warlike and priest-ridden State is established among well-armed neighbours, with cults of human sacrifice already well-established all round, the sacrificing of captives is apt to serve as a motive to war, and the priests tend to enforce it. The process is perfectly intelligible. The stronghold of all priesthoods is the principle of intercession; whether it be in the form of simple prayer and propitiatory worship, or a mixture of that with a doctrine of mystic sacrifice, as among Protestants; or in the constant repetition of a ceremony of mystic sacrifice, as among Catholics; or in actual animal sacrifice, as among ancient Jews and Pagans. In these cases we see that, the more stress is laid on the act of sacrifice, the stronger is the priesthood--or we may put it conversely. Strongest of all then must be the hold of the priesthood whose

[p. 362]

sacrifices are most terrible. And terrible was the prestige of the priesthood of Mexico. The greater the State grew, the larger were the hecatombs of human victims. Almost every God had to be propitiated in the same way; but above all must the War-God be for ever glutted with the smoking hearts of slain captives. Scarcely any historian, says Prescott, [*1] estimates the number of human beings sacrificed yearly throughout the empire at less than 20,000, and some make it 50,000. [*2] Of this doomed host, Huitzilopochtli had the lion's share; and it is recorded that at the dedication of his great new temple in 1486 there were slain in his honour 70,000 prisoners of war, who had been reserved for the purpose for years throughout the empire. They formed a train two miles long, and the work of priestly butchery went on for several days.

At every festival of the God there was a new hecatomb of victims; and we may conceive how the chronic spectacle burnt itself in on the imagination of the people. The Mexican temples, as we have seen, were great pointless pyramids, sometimes of four or five stories, and the sacrifices were offered on the top. The stair was so made that it mounted successively all four sides of the pyramid, and when the train of torch-bearing priests wound their way up in the darkness, as was the rule for certain sacrifices, [*3] to the topmost platform, with its ever-burning fires and its stone of sacrifice, the whole city looked on. And then the horror of the sacrificial act! In the great majority of the sacrifices the victim was laid living on the convex stone and held by the limbs, while the slayer cut open his breast with the sacred flint [*4] knife--the ancient knife, used before men had the use of metals, and therefore most truly religious--and tore out the palpitating heart, which was held on high to the absent but all-seeing sun, before being set to burn in incense in front of the idol, whose lips, and the walls of whose shrines, were devoutly daubed with blood. [*5]

Apart from the resort to holocausts, the religious principle underlying many, if not all, of the American human sacrifices was that the victim represented the God; and on this score slaves or children were as readily sacrificed as captives. Among the Guatemalans, we are told, captives or devoted slaves were regarded as becoming

[p. 363]

divine beings in the home of the Sun; [*1] and the general principle that the victim represented the God involved such a conception. [*2] And while this principle probably originates in early rites, such as those so long preserved by the Khonds, which aimed at the annual renewal of vegetation by propitiation and "sympathetic magic," the practice became fixed in the general rituals as a sacred thing in itself.

In connection with one annual festival of Tezcatlipoca, the Creator and "soul of the world," who combined the attributes of perpetual youthful beauty with the function of the God of justice and retribution, as Winter Sun, there was selected for immolation a young male captive of especial beauty, who was treated with great reverence for a whole year before being sacrificed--almost exactly like the doomed captive among the South American Tupinambos above described. He was gorgeously attired; flowers were strewn before him; he went about followed by a retinue of the king's pages; and the people prostrated themselves before him and worshipped him as a God. He was in fact, according to rule, the God's representative, and was described as his image. [*3] A month before the fatal day new indulgences were heaped upon him. Four beautiful maidens, bearing the names of the principal Goddesses, were given him as concubines. At length came his death day. His honours and his joys were ended, and his fine raiment taken away. Carried on a royal barge across the lake to a particular temple, about a league from the city, whither all the people thronged, he was led up the pyramid in procession, he taking part in the ritual by throwing away his chaplets of flowers and breaking his guitar. Then, at the top, the six black-robed slayers, the sacrificial stone, and the horror of the end. And when all was over the priests piously improved the occasion, preaching that all this had been typical of human destiny, [*4] while the aristocracy sacramentally ate the victim's roasted limbs.

Along with the victim for Tezcatlipoca there was one for Huitzilopochtli; and they roamed together all the year. The latter victim was not adored: but he had the privilege of choosing the hour for

[p. 364]

his sacrifice, though not the day. He was called the "Wise Lord of Heaven," and he was slain, not on the altar, but in the arms of the priests. [*1]

The Goddesses, too, had their victims--women victims; and a maiden was regularly prepared for one sacrifice to the Maize-Goddess Centeotl, the Mexican Ceres, somewhat as was the representative of Tezcatlipoca. Centeotl was the Mother-Goddess par excellence, being named Toucoyohua, "the nourisher of men," and represented, like Demeter and so many Goddesses of the same type, with a child in her arms. [*2] A tradition prevailed, too, that in her cult there were anciently no human sacrifices. But this is doubtful; and the explanation is as before, that anciently single victims were sacrificed, while among the Aztecs there were many. The woman who personated the Goddess was sacrificed with other victims, [*3] and the slaying was followed by a ceremonial of an indescribably revolting character, the slayers flaying the victims and donning their skins. [*4] This hideous act is in all likelihood one of the oldest devices of religious symbolism; and it is a distinguished theologian who suggests to us that it is lineally connected, through the totemistic or other wearing of animal-skins, with the Biblical conception of "the robe of righteousness." [*5] It is certainly akin to the practice of the Babylonian priests, who wore imitation fish-skins as identifying them with the Fish-God, [*6] and to that of the Egyptian and other priests who wore the dappled skins of leopards or fawns as symbolising the starry heavens, or robes without seam as symbolising the cosmos. [*7] At bottom all ritualism is the same thing, a reduction of righteousness, in all sincerity, to make-believe.

But the special and habitual atrocity of the Mexican cultus was the act of ritual cannibalism. This was strictly a matter of religion. After a captive had been sacrificially slain in ordinary course, his body was delivered to the warrior who captured him, and was by him made the special dish at a formal and decorous public banquet to his friends. It was part of the prescribed worship of the Gods. That the Mexicans were not in the least cannibals by taste is shown by the fact that in the great siege by Cortes they died of starvation by thousands. They never ate fellow-citizens; [*8] only the sacrificially

[p. 365]

slain captive. But only a great priesthood could have maintained even that usage. We have seen that such ritual cannibalism has existed at one time in all races; and obviously it must have originated in simple cannibalism, for men would never have begun to offer to the Gods food that was primordially abominable to themselves. [*1] On the other hand, however, we know that cannibalism everywhere dies out naturally even among savages, apart from religion, as soon as they reach some degree of peaceful life, and even sooner. Among the native tribes of Lower California, though they are among the most degraded savages in the world, and given to various disgusting practices, the eating not only of human flesh but of that of monkeys, as resembling men, is held abominable. [*2] The Tahitians, who in warfare were murderous to the last degree, and practised hideous barbarities, had yet evolved beyond the stage of public cannibal banquets, even the sacrifice of a man to the God being followed only by the pretended eating of his eye by the chief; [*3] and it was the priests who instigated what human sacrifices there were. So among the similarly cruel Tongans, cannibal feasts were rare, occurring only after battles, and being execrated by the women; child sacrifices were also rare and special, and were being superseded by surrogates of amputated fingers. [*4] In each of these cases the priesthoods were little organised: [*5] hence the upward evolution. Among the Fijians, the Marquesans, and the Maoris, on the contrary, we find highly organised and cannibalistic priesthoods; [*6] and

[p. 366]

there we likewise find cannibalism and human sacrifices alike common. So, among the Khonds, a specially "instructed" priest was essential to the meriah sacrifice; and in China, where human scapegoat sacrifices were discredited and abolished between the third and second centuries B.C., we hear of them as being prescribed by priests and put down by wise rulers. [*1] And as in Peru we shall see reason to regard the Incas as putting some check on human sacrifice, so in the whole of Central America the only case of any attempt at such reform, apart from the Toltec priesthood of Quetzalcoatl, occurs in the history of the great Acolhuan king of Tezcuco, Netzahualcoyotl, who died in 1472. Of him it is told that he was the best poet of his country, which was the most highly civilised of the New World; [*2] and that he worshipped, on a great altar-pyramid of nine stages, an "unknown God" who had no image, and to whom he offered only perfume and incense, [*3] resisting the priests who pressed for human sacrifice. But his example seems never to have affected his Aztec allies, who gradually won supremacy over the Tezcucans; and even in his own realm he could never suppress the human sacrifices which had there been revived before his time under Aztec influence, and multiplied under it later.

The Aztec religion, in fine, was working the ruin of the civilisation of Central America, as similar religions may have done for the far older civilisations that have left only ruins behind them. Sacerdotalism, it is clear, tended as an institution to check the progress of humanity, which even among slaughterous savages elsewhere brought anthropophagy into discredit. No amount of passion for war could have kept the civilised Aztecs complacently practising ritual cannibalism if an austere and all-powerful priesthood had not fanatically enforced it. [*4] The great sanction for human sacrifice, with the Mexicans as with the Semites, was the doctrine which identified the God with the victim, and as it were sacrificed him to himself. The principle was thus in a peculiar degree priest-made and priest-preserved. [*5]

Footnotes

^360:3 J. G. Muller, pp. 502, 597, 600.

^360:4 Id. p. 437.

^360:5 Id. pp. 476-7, 492, 502, and see above, <page 350>.

^360:6 Id. pp. 502-3.

^361:1 Prescott, p. 41, n.; Muller, p. 664.

^361:2 Muller, pp. 492, 502.

^362:1 As cited, B. i, c. 3, p. 38.

^362:2 The Franciscan monks computed that 2,500 victims were annually sacrificed in the town and district of Mexico alone. Bernal Diaz, Memoirs, Eng. tr. ch. 208, cited in Spencer's Descriptive Sociology, No. II, p. 20, col. 2. Cp. Herrera, as there cited; and J. H. Muller, pp. 637-9.

^362:3 Bancroft, ii, 334.

^362:4 Or rather, obsidian, a volcanic mineral.

^362:5 This was usual in the human sacrifices of the other Central-American peoples.

^363:1 J. G. Muller, p. 476.

^363:2 As to the customariness of this identification, see Bancroft, iii, 342; J. G. Muller, pp. 477, 493, 501, 570, 599, 600, 604, 606, 636, 690; Gomara, as before cited, p. 444, col. 2; and cp. Spencer's Descriptive Sociology, No. II, p. 20, cols. 2 and 3, citing Duran, Herrera, and Sahagun. "Of the human sacrifices of rude peoples, those of the Mexicans are perhaps the most instructive, for in them the theanthropic character of the victim comes out most clearly" (Prof. Robertson Smith, Religion of the Semites, p. 347).

^363:3 Sahagun, p. 97 (B. ii, c. 24). Cp. the old accounts cited by Dr. Frazer, Golden Bough, and Herrera, cited by Spencer, D.S. ii, 20, col. 3.

^363:4 Sahagun, as last cited.

^364:1 Clavigero, vi,  section 32 (i, 302-3).

^364:2 J. G. Muller, p. 493.

^364:3 Id. p. 492.

^364:4 Cp. Bancroft, iii, 354-7; Sahagun, pp. 134-5 (b. ii, c. 30); Spencer, D. S. ii, 21, col. 3; Muller, p. 599.

^364:5 Smith, Religion of the Semites, pp. 416-18. Thus Dionysos' robe of fawnskin is "holy." Euripides, Bacchae, 138.

^364:6 See the illustrations in W. Simpson's Jonah Legend, 1899.

^364:7 Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. pp. 379-81.

^364:8 It would perhaps be accurate to say that the eating of a slain enemy was originally part of a process of triumphing over him and appeasing one's own slain dead; and that [p. 365] early abstention from the flesh of fellow-citizens meant not primary distaste for human flesh (which is negatived by the ritual practice), but obedience to a moral veto on domestic cannibalism, such as must have been set up early in all civilisations. Cp. Bancroft, ii, 358.

^365:1 Reville, p. 87. See above, <page 134>, note, as to the counter theory that cannibalism originated in the belief that the Gods ate men, and that men should do likewise to commune with them. This theory is of old standing. See it cited from an Italian essayist by Virey, Hist. Naturelle du genre humain, 1801, ii, 53.

^365:2 Bancroft, i. 560. But it is not certain whether this veto applies to enemies. Professor Robertson Smith thinks the horror of human flesh arose in superstition as to its "sacrosanct character," but does not fully explain. Religion of the Semites, p. 348.

^365:3 W. Ellis, Polynesian Researches, 2nd ed. i, 309, 357; iv, 150-2; Moerenhout, Voyage aux Iles du Grand Ocean, 1837, i, 512.

^365:4 Mariner, Account of the Tonga Islands, ed. 1827, i, 190. 300, ii, 22.

^365:5 In Tahiti. the sorcerers were as powerful as the priests; and in the case of the great national oracle no one was specially appointed to consult the God. Priests, too, had a precarious prestige. (Ellis, i, 366, 371, 377, 379.) Of the Tonga Islands Mariner relates that "the priests live indiscriminately with the rest of the natives; are not respected on the score of their being priests, unless when actually inspired; and hold no known conferences together as an allied body" (ii, 129).

^365:6 Cp. J. White, The Ancient History of the Maori, Wellington, 1887, i, 1, 2, 8-16, 17; W. Ellis, Polynesian Researches, iii, 317-318; Moerenhout, Voyage cited, i, 475; T. Williams, Fiji and the Fijians, i, 221, 223, 227. "Cannibalism is part of Fijian religion; and the Gods are described as delighting in human flesh" (last cit. p. 231). Mariner says that when Cook visited the Tonga Islands "cannibalism was scarcely thought of among them; but the Fiji people soon taught them this, as well as the art of war; and a famine, which happened some time afterwards, rendered the expedient for a time almost necessary" (ii. 108-9. Cp. 107). Yet, as we have seen, human sacrifice was not making progress. King Finow, albeit for personal reasons, was strongly against it, though the priests stood for it (Mariner, ii, 178). So, in Fiji, where "at one time Ndengei [the Supreme God] would constantly have human bodies for sacrifices," a disgusted chief stopped them, and ordered that pigs be substituted (T. Williams, p. 231). In Tahiti, again, human sacrifices had either become [p. 366] obsolete, and so forgotten, and been then revived, or else were originated, by a priest. (Ellis, i, 106. Cp. J. Williams, Narrative of Missionary Enterprises in the South Seas, 1837, pp. 550, 553). The high priest in each district was practically the sovereign sacrificer (Moerenhout, i, 477). See above, p. 112, as to the Khonds.

^366:1 Above, <page 61>.

^366:2 Cp. Prescott, p. 81, sq., and p. 97.

^366:3 Bancroft, v, 427-9; Clavigero, B. iv,  section section 4, 15; vii,  section 42; Prescott, pp. 91-3.

^366:4 "Cannibalism in general declined before human sacrifice: in heathenism, humanity. where it triumphed, did so often against religion: humanity came into religion, not out of it: religion withstood the benign change." J. G. Muller, p. 632.

^366:5 Cp. Th. Parker, Discourse of Matters pertaining to Religion, ed, 1877, pp. 34, 44, 93, note.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 6. Mexican Ethics.

The recital of these facts may load some to conclude that the

[p. 367]

[paragraph continues] Mexican priesthood must have been the most atrocious multitude of miscreants the world ever saw. But that would be a complete misconception: they were as conscientious a priesthood as history bears record of. The strangest thing of all is that their frightful system of sacrifice was bound up not only with a strict and ascetic sexual morality, but with an emphatic humanitarian doctrine. If asceticism be virtue, they cultivated virtue zealously. There was a Mexican Goddess of Love, and there was of course plenty of vice; but nowhere could men win a higher reputation for sanctity by living in celibacy. Their saints were numerous. They had nearly all the formulas of Christian morality, so-called. The priests themselves mostly lived in strict celibacy; [*1] and they educated children with the greatest vigilance in their temple schools and higher colleges. [*2] They taught the people to be peaceful; to bear injuries with meekness; to rely on God's mercy and not on their own merits: they taught, like Jesus and the Pagans, that adultery could be committed by the eyes and the heart; and above all they exhorted men to feed the poor. The public hospitals were carefully attended to, at a time when some Christian countries had none. They had the practice of confession and absolution; and in the regular exhortation of the confessor there was this formula: "Clothe the naked and feed the hungry, whatever privations it may cost thee; for remember, their flesh is like thine, and they are men like thee; cherish the sick, for they are the image of God." And in that very same exhortation there was further urged on the penitent the special duty of instantly procuring a slave for sacrifice to the deity. [*3]

Such phenomena carry far the challenge to conventional sociology. These men, judged by religious standards, compare closely with our European typical priesthood. They doubtless had the same temperamental qualities: a strong irrational sense of duty; a hysterical habit of mind; a certain spirit of self-sacrifice; at times a passion for asceticism; and a feeling that sensuous indulgence was revolting. Devoid of moral science, they had plenty of the blind instinct to do right. They devoutly did what their religion told them; even as Catholic priests have devoutly served the Inquisition. That is one of the central sociological lessons of our subject. The religious element in man, being predominantly emotional and traditional, may ally itself with either good or evil; and no thanks are due to religion, properly speaking, if it is ever in any degree identified with good.

[p. 368]

[paragraph continues] How comes it that Christianity is not associated with human sacrifice while the Mexican cultus was? Simply by reason of the different civilisations that went before. It is civilisation that determines the tone of religion, and not the other way. Christianity starts with a doctrine of one act of human sacrifice; and Christians are specially invited each year at the sacred season to fasten their minds on the details of that act. Their ritual keeps up the mystic pretence of the act of ritual cannibalism which of old went with the human sacrifice: they harp on the very words, "body and blood." They mystically eat the body of the slain God. Now this very act was performed by the Mexicans not only literally, as we have seen, but in the symbolic way also; and they connected their sacraments with the symbol of the cross.

Of the Tlascalans it is told that at one festival they fixed a prisoner to a high cross and shot arrows at him; and that at another time they fastened one to a low cross and killed him by bastinado. [*1] In the sacrifice of a maiden to the Maize-Goddess Centeotl above mentioned, the priest who wore the slain victim's skin stood with his arms stretched out, cross-wise, before the image of Huitzilopochtli, so representing the Goddess; and the skin (presumably stuffed) [*2] was hung up with the arms spread in the same attitude, and facing the street. [*3] The Mexicans, finally, had a festival in honour of Xiuhteuctli, the God of Fire, [*4] the crowning act of which was the making a dough image of the God (as was also done in the worship of Huitzilopochtli at the festival called "Eating the God") and raising it on a cross, [*5] the image being then climbed for and thrown down, and the fragments eagerly eaten by the crowd as possessing a sacred efficacy. [*6] They felt they were brought into union with the God in that fashion. As has been above noted, there is some evidence that among the first Christians the Eucharist was sometimes a baked dough image of a child: [*7] and on any view the irresistible

[p. 369]

presumption is that in all cases alike the symbolical usage grew out of a more ancient practice of ritual cannibalism. Christianity coming among a set of civilised peoples, the symbol became more and more mystical, though the priesthood adhered tenaciously to the doctrine of daily mystical sacrifice. In Mexico, certain cults had similarly substituted symbolism for actual sacrifice; among the modifying practices being the drawing of a little blood from the ears and other parts of the children of the aristocracy. [*1] But the thin end of the wedge was in, so to speak, in the survival of actual human sacrifices; and the Aztec priesthood drove the wedge deeper and deeper, in virtue of their collective economic interest as well as of what we may term the master tendency of all religions--the fixation of ideas and usages. The more piety the more priests; the more priests the more sacrifices; and the constant wars of the Aztecs supplied an unfailing stream of captives for immolation. [*2] Many wars were made for the sole purpose of obtaining captives: [*3] in fact, the Aztec kings made a treaty with the neighbouring republic of Tlascala and its confederates, a treaty which was faithfully kept, to the effect that their armies should fight on a given ground at stated seasons, in order that both sides should be able to supply themselves with sacrificial victims. At all other times they were quite friendly; and the Aztec kings avowedly kept up the relation purely in order to have captives for sacrifice. [*4] An arrangement like that, once set up, would flourish more and more up to the point of national exhaustion, especially as death in battle was reckoned a sure passport to Paradise; and the priesthood would at the same time grow ever more and more numerous, the only limit being the people's power of endurance. There can be little doubt that the Aztec empire would ultimately have broken down under its monstrous burden if the Spaniards had not destroyed it; for the taxation necessary to support the military and aristocratic system alongside of the allocation of enormous untaxed domains [*5] to the ever-multiplying myriads of priests was becoming more insupportable year by year, so that the deep disaffection of the common people was one of the chief supports to the campaign of Cortes. [*6] It may well be that some of the previous civilisations [*7] had succumbed in the same way, literally destroyed by religion, to the extent, that is, of inviting conquest by less "civilised" tribes. Among some of the Maya peoples, who preceded the Aztecs,

[p. 370]

the office of sacrificer had come to be regarded as degraded; [*1] but even there the sacrifices never ceased; and the Maya civilisation failed to hold its ground before the others.

Strangely enough, there was current among the Aztecs themselves a belief that their State was doomed to be overthrown. [*2] Here, doubtless, we have a clue to the existence of civilising forces, and of a spirit of hostility to the religion of bloodshed which, however, felt driven to express itself in terms of despair. To this spirit of betterment, then, we turn with the doubled interest of sympathy.

Footnotes

^367:1 Clavigero, B. vi,  section section 15, 17, 22; vol. i, 274, 277, 286.

^367:2 Spencer, D. S. ii, 20, col. 1, citing Torquemada.

^367:3 Sahagun, 1, vi, c. 7; French trans. pp. 342-3; Prescott, as cited, p. 33. The overplus of grain belonging to the priests was given to the poor. Clavigero, vi, 13 (i, 270).

^368:1 Clavigero, B. vi,  section 20 (i, 283); Gomara. as cited, p. 446, col. 1 (end). Cp. Pl. ii of art. AMERICA in Encyc. Brit. 11th ed., i, 809.

^368:2 Above, Part II, <page 270>.

^368:3 Bancroft, iii, 355-9.

^368:4 See above, Part II, <page 271>, as to the details of one sacrifice to this God in which the victim was painted red.

^368:5 There can be no question as to the pre-Christian antiquity of the symbol of the cross in Mexico as elsewhere. See Muller. pp. 496-500. The cross figured in Mexico as a sacred symbol also in connection with the Rain-God, and was expressly known as the "Tree of our life." Yet Dr. Brinton has confidently decided (Myths of the New World, p. 96; American Hero Myths, p. 155) that it simply signified, with its four points, the cardinal points and the four winds. This explanation, which is a fair guess, has been dogmatically put forward by several writers, including Dr. Reville (Lectures, p. 38). But why should the cardinal points be represented by an upright cross? And why should it be called "Tree of our life" and specially associated with Tlaloc and other Gods of rain? Were all four winds alike "rain-bringers"? Quetzalcoatl, as we shall see, was God of one rain-bringing wind, and his mantle was marked with crosses (Muller, p. 581. Cp. p. 500). Certainly the number four figured in Tlaloc's worship (Bancroft, iii, 348), but so did the image of the snake. Is not the more plausible hypothesis this, that in such a connection the primary significance of the cross was phallic?

^368:6 Sahagun, pp. 128, 133 (1, ii, ch. 29); Bancroft, iii, 329-331.

^368:7 See Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. pp. 205, and above, pp. <page 207>.

^369:1 Herrera, General History, iii, 216, cited in Spencer's Descriptive Sociology. Cp. Bulletin 28 of Amer. Bureau of Ethnol. as cited, pp. 277, 282.

^369:2 The priests actually went into battle to help in securing captives, and were conspicuous for their fury. Prescott, p. 39.

^369:3 Muller, p. 638.

^369:4 Id. ib.

^369:5 Prescott, B. i, c. 3.

^369:6 Ib. B. ii, c. 6.

^369:7 Cp. Nadaillac, p. 267.

^370:1 Herrera, Hist. Gen. dec. iv, 1. x, c. 4, cited by Nadaillac.

^370:2 J. G. Muller, p. 657.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 7. The Mexican White Christ.

Two sets of phenomena tell of the presence among the Aztecs of that instinct of humanity or spirit of reason which elsewhere gradually delivered men from the demoralisation of human sacrifice. One was the practice, already noted, of substituting a symbol for the sacrificed victim; the other was the cultus of the relatively benign deity Quetzalcoatl, a God of the Toltecs whom the Aztecs had subdued. There is no more striking figure in American mythology.

The name appears to have meant "the feathered [or coloured] serpent," and this was one of his symbols; but he was normally represented by the red-billed sparrow-head, which in Mexican hieroglyphics stands for the air; and his third symbol, the Firestone, had the same significance. [*3] As God of the Air, accordingly, he ranks in the pantheon. [*4] But his mythus has a uniquely ethical stamp, and a certain wistful pathos. [*5] It tells that he was once high-priest at Tula, in Anahuac, where, ever clothed in white, he founded a cultus, and gave beneficent laws to men, teaching them also the arts of agriculture, metal-work, stone-cutting, and civil government; the while a king named Huemac held with him the secular rule, and framed the law book of the nation. But the God Tezcatlipoca came to earth in the guise of a young merchant, who deceived the king's daughter, and again in the guise of an old man, who persuaded Quetzalcoatl to drink a mystic drink, whereupon he was seized with an irresistible impulse to wander away. And so he went south-eastwards, setting up his institutions in place after place, but always going further, till at length he disappeared in the east, with a promise to return. For that return his worshippers ever looked longingly, and the Aztec kings with fear, till when

[p. 371]

[paragraph continues] Cortes came all thought that he was the God, and at Cholula the people sacrificed a man to him, and daubed him with the blood in the regulation way. [*1]

But in the myth of Quetzalcoatl it is told that at Tula he had preached against human sacrifices, telling men to offer to the Gods only fruits and flowers; and that he could not endure the thought of war, closing his ears when men spoke of it. A similar doctrine is associated with the traditionary worship of the rival God Votan, the legendary founder of the Maya civilisation; [*2] and it may be that in both cases there is a reversion to the memory of simpler and kindlier cults. In any case, this humane legend figures for us a late product of Toltec feeling, representing at once the aspiration for a better religion and the memory of the Toltec people, whose polity had been step by step driven to the south-east by the stronger power of the Aztecs. [*3] It may have been some of the Toltec priests who remained under Aztec rule that framed the gentle mythus, [*4] and so dreamed for themselves a Messiah, as so many conquered races had done before. On analysis, it appears that Huemac was really the old Toltec name of the God, and that he took that of Quetzalcoatl in one of his more southerly resting-places, when he became symbolised as the serpent. [*5] Of old he had had human sacrifices like other Gods; and in the Aztec lands he had them still. [*6] But some of his white-robed priests, left victimless till they recoiled from the bloody rites of their conquerors, felt that their God must have a different nature from that of the Gods of the black-robed priests of Tezcatlipoca and Huitzilopochtli, and so framed for his cult a new gospel. [*7]

Recognising this, Dr. Muller and Dr. Brinton and Dr. Reville agree that Quetzalcoatl is properly the God of the beneficent rain-bringing east-wind, identified with the vanquished Toltec people, so that like them he is driven away by the enmity of other deities, but, like the vanishing or slain Sun-God of all mythologies, he is to return again in power and great glory. By such a myth Christians are set vaguely surmising a debt to their own legend; but there is no such thing in the case. As Mr. Bancroft observes, following

[p. 372]

[paragraph continues] Dr. Muller, [*1] the process is one which has occurred in many mythologies:--"It is everywhere the case among savages, with their national God, that the latter is a nature-deity, who becomes gradually transformed into a national God, then into a national King, high-priest, founder of a religion, and at last ends in being considered a human being. The older and purer the civilisation of a people is, the easier it is to recognise the original essence of its national God, in spite of all transformations and disguises. So it is here. Behind the human form of the God glimmers the nature-shape, and the national God is known by, perhaps, all his worshippers as also a nature-deity. From his powerful influence upon nature, he might also be held as creator. The pure human form of this God [Quetzalcoatl] as it appears in the fable, as well as in the image, is not the original, but the youngest. His oldest concrete forms are taken from nature, to which he originally belongs, and have maintained themselves in many attributes. All these symbolise him as the God of fertility, chiefly......by means of the beneficial influence of the air." [*2]

What is specially interesting is that, despite the inner hostility of the Quetzalcoatl cult to those of the Mexican Gods, his stood in high honour; [*3] and while some of his devotees sacrificed and ate his representative once a year in the usual manner, some of his priests, of whom the chief also bore his name as representing him, [*4] did as little sacrificing as they could, evidently finding some support in that course. [*5] We are moved to ask, then, whether there was here a culture-force that could have countervailed the host of the priests of slaughter had the Aztecs been left to work out their own salvation. The more the problem is pondered, however, the less probable will it seem that the humaner teaching could have so triumphed. Conquest by some other American people might have served to restrain the religion of blood; but there is no sign that the humaner cult was as such making serious headway. The Aztec priesthood like every other had an economic basis; its higher offices were the perquisites of certain aristocratic families; and the habit of perpetual bloodshed had atrophied the feelings of the priestly army on that}

[p. 373]

side. Beyond a certain point, priesthoods are incapable of intellectual regeneration from within, even if reformative ideas be present.

Footnotes

^370:3 Id. pp. 583-4.

^370:4 Clavigero, B. vi,  section 4 (p. 248).

^370:5 See Dr. Tylor's Researches into the Early History of Mankind, 1865, pp. 151-4, for the various forms of the myth.

^371:1 Prescott, B. ii, c. 6; B. iv, c. 5. 

^371:2 Nadaillac, p. 268.

^371:3 Muller, p. 581.

^371:4 Had they been sacrificers before, they would be partly deprived of victims by the conquest. For another case of a God who refused human sacrifices, see T. Williams, Fiji and the Fijians, i, 231. He is supposed to have been shrined or incarnated in a man, which for his priests made human flesh taboo.

^371:5 Mahler, p. 587.

^371:6 Id. pp. 589-90.

^371:7 It was one of his priests, bearing his name, who shot the arrow into the dough image of Huitzilopochtli--the humanest sacrificial rite in that God's worship. Bancroft, iii, 299-300.

^372:1 Id. pp. 329, 337, 583.

^372:2 Native Races, iii, 279. Dr. Tylor once wrote: "I am inclined to consider Quetzalcoatl a real personage, and not a mythical one" (Anahuac, p. 278), and Mr. A. H. Buckland (Anthropological Studies, p. 90) takes the same view; but neither argues the point; and in his Researches into the Early History of Mankind (1865, pp. 151-4), Dr. Tylor treats the matter as pure myth. It was this deity who was long ago identified with St. Thomas (Clavigero, B. vi,  section 4, p. 250). For the myth see Dr. Brinton, American Hero Myths, pp. 73-142. In the ritual of the confessional he is called "the father and mother" of the penitent (Sahagun, p. 341; 1. vi, c. 7). He, too, is born of a virgin mother (Brinton, p. 90).

^372:3 His temple at Cholula was the greatest in New Spain. Gomara, as before cited, p. 448, col. 2.

^372:4 Bancroft, iii, 267.

^372:5 Muller, p. 582.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 8. The Fatality of the Priesthood.

The main hope of the humaner thinkers would probably lie in the substitution of a symbolic for an anthropophagous sacrament: if baked effigies could be eaten, effigies might be sacrificed. But in some even of the symbolic sacraments blood was a constituent. Thus in the cult of Huitzilopochtli, for the baked image made of seeds for the winter festival of the solstice--Christmas--the blood of slain children was the cementing moisture. [*1] Here again we have the primitive "sympathetic magic": the image, which was transfixed with an arrow before being eaten, represented the potentialities of new vegetable life at the time of year when vegetation was dead, and the blood of children was the deadly symbol of the moisture that was the life of all things, besides being a means of as it were vitalising the image. [*2] Such a cult was indeed far from reducing anthropophagy to a mere symbol.

So with the cult of Xiuhteuctli, the Fire-God. Alongside, apparently, of the remarkable symbolic sacrament above mentioned there were anthropophagous sacraments to the same God. He was one of the most widely honoured of all, the first drink at every meal in every household being taken in his name--a correlation which again suggests derivation from an Asiatic fire-cult such as is seen blended in that of Agni in the Vedas. In his name, too, every child was passed through the fire at birth--another notable parallel to ancient Asiatic usages; [*3] and from his six hundred temples burned as many perpetual fires. Every four years a great feast was held in his honour at Quauhtitlan, not far from the city of Mexico; the first act being to plant six high trees before the temple on the day previous, and to sacrifice two slaves, who were flayed. On the feast day, two priests appeared clad in those victims' skins, hailed with the cry, "See, there come our Gods"; and all day they danced to wild music, the while many thousands of quails were sacrificed to the God. Finally the priests took six prisoners and bound or hanged them to the tops of the six trees, where they were shot through with arrows. When dead they were taken down and their hearts cut out

[p. 374]

in the usual way, the priests and nobility finally eating the flesh of both the men and the quails as a sacrament. [*1]

It is not clear at what place and period the symbolical sacrifice in this cult arose; but the essential problem is, whether it could have ousted the other. And the answer must be that inasmuch as the human sacrifice was specially associated with the power of the priests, and was obviously to the tastes of the mass of the people of all grades, nothing short of an overthrow of the existing polity by another could have effected the transformation, there being no native culture in the surrounding States that could give the requisite moral lead on a large scale. Such violent subversion, it will be remembered, was a common condition of religious evolution in the Old World in antiquity; and the history of the great) priestly systems of Egypt, India, and Babylon points to the conclusion that not otherwise than by the fiat of powerful autocrats, or forcible overthrow at the hands of neighbouring and kindred races, in the absence of peaceful culture-contacts of a higher kind, could such systems be made to loosen their grasp on social and intellectual life.

It will be observed that in the cult under notice the priest represents the God even as does the victim. The same phenomenon occurs, sometimes, though not always, with the same procedure of donning the victim's skin, in many of the American sacrificial cults, Aztec and other. [*2] A recent hierologist has argued, in view of the various instances in which priest-kings and sacrificial priests have been themselves annually sacrificed, that "it was as the shedder of divine [victim's] blood that the king-priest's blood was shed," and that he was originally distinguished from his fellow-worshippers" only by his greater readiness to sacrifice himself for their religious needs." [*3] We need not dwell here on the fallacy of thus imputing a calculated and reasoned self-devotion in the case of an act which, among savage men, would stand just as much for lack of imagination or forethought. Assuming the theory to be true, however, we must recognise that in the case of the historic Mexican priesthood any ancient liability of the kind had long disappeared. According to Herrera, the private chaplains of the nobles were slain at the death of their masters; but this was as slaves or attendants, not as public priests, and not as true sacrifices. [*4] In not a single case do we learn

[p. 375]

that the victim was furnished by the priestly class. [*1] That class indeed practised in some measure, as we have seen, the asceticisms common to most ancient priesthoods, but it had long made an end of any serious penalties attaching to its profession. [*2] The priests, in short, were the dominant force in the Mexican society; and under them it was on the one hand being economically ruined in the manner of most ancient empires, and on the other being anchylosed in its moral and intellectual life. To say this is of course not to select the priests for blame as being the sole or primary causes of the fatal development: their order was but the organised expression of the general religious tendency. But they dramatically exhibit, once for all, the capacity of "religion" in general to darken life and blight civilisation.

The mere number of the priests was so great as to constitute a force of fixation such as has never been countervailed in modern European countries, where forces relatively less powerful have only slowly been undermined by culture influences from more advanced neighbouring communities. When we note that the temple of the Mexican Wine-God alone had four hundred priests, [*3] we realise that we are in presence of social conditions which mere humanism could not avail to transform, even if it found a hearing among the priest-hoods. A fortiori, no philosophic developments on the sacerdotal side could have availed. The growth of a pantheistic philosophy among the priesthoods of ancient India and Babylonia and Egypt, and the growth of a monotheistic doctrine among those of Jewry, were equally without effect on the sacerdotal practices as a whole, these remaining in all cases alike primitively sacrificial, though, for extra-sacerdotal reasons already noted, they ceased to include human sacrifice. And in Mexico, of course, the philosophic developments were slight at best. The figuring of Tezcatlipoca as "the soul of the world" [*4] does not appear to have stood for any methodically

[p. 376]

pantheistic thought, being apparently an expression of henotheism common in solar worships. The entire Mexican civilisation, in short, was being arrested at a stage below that attained in the Mesopotamian empires long before the Christian era.

Footnotes

^373:1 Bancroft, iii, 297-300.

^373:2 Muller, pp. 605-6. See above, <page 144>.

^373:3 Dr. Muller remarks (p. 569) in this connection that the entire Aztec religion has many resemblances to the fire-worship of Siva. But the primary fire-worship traced among the Sumer-Akkadians is to be looked to as the possible source of that and the later Semitic as well as of the American forms.

^374:1 Muller, pp. 568-9; Clavigero, B. vi,  section 21 (i, 283-4); Humboldt, Monuments, 186, 206, 213.

^374:2 Muller, pp. 77, 493, 570, 577, 581, 591, 599, 600, 604, 606, 635, 640.

^374:3 Jevons, Introd. to the Hist. of Religion, pp. 294, 296.

^374:4 Herrera, General History, Eng. tr. 1725-6, iii, 220, cited in Spencer's Descriptive Sociology, No. II, p. 20, col. 1.

^375:1 Thus Dr. Jevons's remark (p. 283) that "in Mexico the priest was allowed to evade the violent death which attached to his office on condition that he found a substitute (a war captive)," is apt to mislead; though it may be the true explanation of the origin of the priestly habit of joining in the fighting.

^375:2 We even find that among the Native Americans boys spared from sacrifice were made priests, being thus safe. Waltz, iii, 207, citing Strachey, Hist. of Travaile into Virginia, ed. 1849, p. 93.

^375:3 Muller, p. 570.

^375:4 It is remarkable that the doctrine of the Logos is here adumbrated in connection with the Winter Sun, who would presumably be born at the winter solstice (when the reign of Huitzilopochtli ended) and pass away at the vernal equinox. As God of Drought, however, he was further God of Death, of the Underworld, and of Judgment (Muller, pp. 614, 618-9, 621)--a combination out of the common line of evolution, the God of Souls and of Wisdom being usually one of the Beloved Gods. The special evolution seems to be due to the fact that he was originally the God of the Tlailotlaks, turned by the Aztecs to special account. Tezcatlipoca was nominally the "greatest God" (Clavigero, B. vi,  section 2, p. 244), though Huitzilopochtli got more attention. "Tezcatlipoca was the most sublime figure in the Aztec Pantheon" (Dr. Brinton, American Hero Myths, 1882, p. 69). See his titles (Id. p. 70). He was the Night God (p. 71); and Clavigero notes that his statue was of black stone.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 9. The Religion of Peru.

While in Mexico we see a society being ruined by religion, in Peru we find one suffering economically a similar ruin from the principle of empire. In Peru, the religious tendencies are seen at work in a much modified degree. There the rapid multiplication of the priesthood was hindered by the peculiar standing of the king and his family. In Mexico the king was elected by the nobles: in Peru he reigned by divine right of the strongest description; the doctrine being that the original Inca was the Sun-God, who married his sister; and that all succeeding Incas did the same, thus keeping the succession strictly divine. As they extended their dominions by conquest, they astutely provided that the religions of the conquered peoples should subsist, but in a state of recognised subjection to the Inca, the divine high-priest, as the priesthood generally ranked below the sacred caste of the Inca nobles; so that the old cults had not the chance of growing as those of Mexico did, though they remained popular and venerable. The two leading deities were Pachacamac and Viracocha, who in virtue of similarity were often identified. Each figured in myth as a Creator, and they were doubtless originally the Gods of different peoples or tribes, though their cults tended to unity under the politic despotism of the Incas. Pachacamac signifies "life-giver of the earth," [*1] and Viracocha--who here assimilates to Aphrodite--"foam of the sea"; and they seem accordingly to have been respectively associated, to some extent, with the principles of heat and moisture; but, as so many other ancient systems show, these principles readily lend themselves to combination. Both belonged to the pre-Incarial civilisation, but were adopted and blended by the Incas, though their status as creators of all things, including the sun, was inconsistent with the Incarial religion, in which the sun was the Creator. [*2] The omission to build new temples, however, [*3] was probably undermining this cult; and the popular religion was becoming more and more one of worship of the minor deities, with the Inca figuring as the representative of the chief natural God, the Sun. The Thunder and Lightning were worshipped

[p. 377]

as the Sun's ministers; the Rainbow as his symbol or emanation; and the Moon and Stars, and in particular the planet Venus, as separate divinities; and Creator, Thunder, and Sun were sacrificed to as if very much on a level in dignity. [*1]

From such developments we may infer that the Peruvian popular culture was nearly stationary or decaying; and it becomes easy to understand how, after the Conquest, the Christian deities took the place of the old without any difficulty; these being so many religious conventions, while the real beliefs of the people remained attached, as they are now, to the genii or sprites of their own lore. For an unprogressing and unlettered people--as many of those in Europe have been at different times--religion is mostly a matter of festivals and hand-to-mouth superstitions; and the Peruvian common people are, under Christianity, what they were under their Incas. European life gives abundant evidence of how the usages of an ancient creed may survive the creed itself. In Peru, as in Mexico, there was a solemn religious ceremony of renewing at stated periods, by special generation, the fire used in the temples, and even in the households. In Mexico it was done over a human sacrifice, by means of the friction of two sticks, at the end of each cycle of fifty-two years. [*2] In Peru it was done yearly by means of a concave mirror. [*3] So did men do in ancient Rome, and similarly have northern European peasants done in Germany, in Scotland, in Ireland, at intervals till our own time, regarding the "need fire" or "forced fire" as a means of averting evil. [*4] It is one of the oldest rites of the human race, and it has survived under all religions alike down to the other day, when perhaps it received its death-blow from the lucifer match. Equally universal is that ceremony of annually driving out the evil spirits, [*5] which was undertaken in Peru by the Incas in person, and which is supposed to have survived in Scotland to this day in the burghal ceremony of "riding the marches." Customary usages and minor superstitions outlast faiths and philosophies; and in Peru they defy the Church. Sun-worship is gone; but the ideas of the Incarial times remain. And, indeed, there existed in some districts eighty years ago, and probably survives even to-day, a devout celebration of the memory of the ancient theocracy, in the shape of an annual dramatic representation, which the rulers vainly sought

[p. 378]

to suppress, of the death of the last Inca at the hands of the Spaniards. [*1]

It was about as ill-founded a devotion as any ever shown to a royal line in our own hemisphere; for under the Incas the people were heavily oppressed by minutely tyrannous laws and by taxes, they alone bearing all burdens, and the priests and nobles going free. [*2] But were it not for the mistake of the last Inca before Pizarro in recognising one of his sons by a foreign queen, and dividing the empire between him and the heir apparent, the Inca empire, despite the disaffection of some of its subjects by conquest, might have subsisted long. As its priesthood was necessarily less powerful, so its sacrificial system was less burdensome and less terrible. Human sacrifices also were much less general than in Mexico; but they existed; [*3] and there is reason to reject the claim of Garcilasso, who was biassed by his Incarial descent, that the Incas had wholly abolished them. Peoples at that culture-stage could not readily be forced to give up their ancient rites. It is in fact on record that when an Inca was dangerously ill, one of his sons was sacrificed for him to the Sun-God in the immemorial fashion; [*4] and it was in keeping with such a usage that at least one tribe in Quito should regularly sacrifice its first-born. [*5] If it be a sheer fable that at the accession of a new Inca there were sacrificed some hundreds of children, [*6] no trust can be put in any of the Spanish testimonies. It is however established by the "Fables and Rites of the Yncas" [*7] that the great festival of Capacocha or Cachalmaca, instituted by one Inca at the beginning of his reign, was celebrated with sacrifices of boys and girls, one from each tribe or lineage, both at Cuzco and at the chief town of each province. Further, after every victory certain captives were sent to the capital to be sacrificed to the sun. It is thus only too likely that among some of the coast peoples children were sacrificed to the Gods every month. [*8] What seems to be certain is that, save perhaps among some of the more savage tribes, the Peruvians under the later Incas had abolished cannibal sacraments--a proof of the natural movement

[p. 379]

of humanity in that direction where the direct interest of a powerful priesthood did not too potently conserve religious savagery.

For the rest, they sacrificed their llamas, small birds, rabbits, sheep, and dogs; and while they alone of the American races had burnt-offerings of animals, [*1] they ate their unburnt sacrifices raw, [*2] here again showing the tendency of religion to preserve, wherever possible, the most ancient usages of all. They had, indeed, the custom of Suttee, like the Hindus and the Mexican Chichimecs; good widows, especially those of the Incas, being at one time expected to bury themselves alive when their husbands died, [*3] so as to be wives to them in the spirit world; but this custom was dying out, being replaced by the symbolism of placing statuettes in a man's tomb to represent his wives and servants. [*4] In the same way, human sacrifice was being replaced by the surrogate of blood-letting. [*5] Above all, the blood sacrament had become conventionalised in a quasi-Christian form. The Peruvians had the institution of a Holy Communion, in which they ate of a sacred bread, sancu, sprinkled with the blood of a sacrificed sheep, the priest pronouncing this formula: "Take heed how ye eat this sancu; for he who eats it in sin, and with a double will and heart, is seen by our Father, the Sun, who will punish him with grievous troubles. But he who, with a single heart, partakes of it, to him the Sun and the Thunderer will show favour, and will grant children and happy years, and abundance of all that he requires." All then made a solemn vow of piety and loyalty before eating. [*6]

To say, as some do, that there was nothing essentially "moral" in such rites, because they had in view temporal well-being, [*7] is merely to set up one more one-sided discrimination between Christianity and Paganism; for it is certain that the early Christians regarded their eucharist as possessing miraculous medicinal virtues. Equally unjudicial is the comment on the rites of infant baptism and confession of sins (which the Peruvians also practised) that "even where the Peruvian religion seems to undertake the

[p. 380]

elevation and protection of morals, it does so rather with a utilitarian and selfish view than with any real purpose of sanctifying the heart and will." [*1] It is hardly necessary to reply that the Mexicans and Peruvians had just the same kind of moral feeling in any given stage of civilisation as Christians have had in a similar culture-stage, and that the desire for future salvation, appealed to in all Christian evangelical teaching, is only utilitarianism and selfishness sub specie aeternitatis. The Spaniards themselves recognised that the Mexicans ate the mystical body of the God with every sign of devotion and contrition; [*2] and they were so far from depreciating the Peruvian communion that they supposed St. Bartholomew had established it. [*3] The Mexican wise-woman who prayed the Merciful Goddess to cleanse the babe from the sin of its parents will compare fairly well with the practisers of infant baptism among ourselves; and it cannot be shown that the Mexican and Peruvian confessors stood as a rule any lower morally than those of Christendom at the same culture-stage. The casting of horoscopes for infants was practised in Europe just as in Mexico at the time of the Conquest. The Mexican priests gave indulgences; but they never went to the lengths of the Renaissance Papacy in that direction.

Footnotes

^376:1 Muller, p. 318.

^376:2 Id. pp. 314-319.

^376:3 See Mr. Kirk's note in his ed. of Prescott, p. 44.

^377:1 Rites and Laws of the Yncas, trans. by C. R. Markham, Hakluyt Society, 1873, p. 27.

^377:2 Prescott, Mexico, c. iv, end; J. G. Muller, p. 520.

^377:3 Prescott, Conquest of Peru, Kirk's ed. in 1 vol. c. iii, p. 51. "In cloudy weather they had recourse to the means of friction." Reville, p. 196.

^377:4 Max Muller, Physical Religion, pp. 286-9.

^377:5 On this usage, see Dr. Frazer's Golden Bough, vol. iii, c. iii,  section 14-15.

^378:1 Stevenson, Twenty Years' Residence in South America, 1825, i, 401; ii, 70-3.

^378:2 Prescott, Peru, B. i, c. 2, citing Garcilasso.

^378:3 See Kirk's note to Prescott, p. 51, in reply to the claim of Sir C. Markham on behalf of the Incas. Cp. Muller, pp. 377-8. Sir C. Markham's case is stated by him in Winsor's Narrative History, as above cited, i, 238-9. He does not appear to recognise the bearing of his own assertion that the Incas made a law prohibiting human sacrifice. Such a law is evidence of the practice. The conflict of Spanish authorities is at once solved by allowing that the survivals were local, not general.

^378:4 Muller, p. 378, citing Montesimos.

^378:5 Id. p. 377, citing Velasco.

^378:6 Id. p. 378, citing five authorities.

^378:7 Translated from the MS. of Molina by Sir C. Markham, who had denied the occurrence of human sacrifices in Incarial Peru.

^378:8 Muller, pp. 378-9, citing Xeres and Rottencamp.

^379:1 Prescott, p. 44, citing McCulloch.

^379:2 Reville, p. 220. Sir C. Markham's assertion, that the Peruvian sacrifices were with one exception thank-offerings and not expiations, omits to define the sacramental species.

^379:3 In this usage we probably have the origin of the practice of burying alive the unfaithful "Virgins of the Sun" in Peru, and Vestals in Rome. Dr. Wyllie explains the practice in both cases by the idea of devoting to darkness the unfaithful spouse of the Sun (Lectures cited, p. 207). But the Roman Vestal was dedicated to the Goddess Vesta, who is identified with the earth, as hearth-fire and as female principle. To the same d ancient practice of burying wives alive may be ascribed the long retained practice of putting some female criminals to death in that fashion. Michelet (Guerres de religion, 1856. p. 88) gives the absurd explanation that burying alive was resorted to as being more decent than burning alive, because in the latter case the flames soon left the victim naked.

^379:4 Still, it survived the Conquest. Prescott, p. 43, n. citing Ondegardo.

^379:5 Muller, p. 379.

^379:6 Rites and Laws of the Incas, p. 27.

^379:7 Reville, pp. 227, 233-5.

^380:1 Ib. p. 233.

^380:2 Prescott, Mexico, app. p. 641.

^380:3 Prescott, Peru, p. 52.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

 section 10. Conclusion.

On the other hand, the promotion of material well-being is precisely what is oftenest claimed for Christianity; and the argument is presumably changed in the case of Peru and Mexico only because there it would break down. For the great fact about these heathen civilisations is that they did attain material well-being, as apart from humane feeling, in a considerable degree; though, as we have seen, they were suffering much from sacerdotalism and autocracy. If we do not say with Dr. Draper that the Spaniards destroyed a higher civilisation than their own, we may at least say that the one they destroyed was in many ways superior to that which they put in its place. What they did was completely to destroy the civilisations they found, without replacing them at all in large measure. In the matters of road-making, agriculture, and the administration of law, the new civilisation was not to be compared with the old, which, indeed, was on these points ahead of anything in Europe since the fall of the Roman Empire. [*4] The Aztecs had clean streets, and lighted streets, when Europe had not. Dr. Reville,

[p. 381]

indeed, lays undue stress on the lighting of the streets, which was not done by lamps, but by fires; [*1] but even that was an improvement on the European state of things two hundred years ago. Peru to-day is in large part a desolation compared with what it was under the Incas; and under the new religion the native races seem to be positively lower than under the old. By the testimony of Catholic priests, the conquerors nearly exterminated the Aztec races, the numbers destroyed by their cruelties being reckoned at twelve millions. And on the side of morality and humanity, who shall say what the gain was in Mexico when the Christian conquerors, after execrating the practice of human sacrifice, set up their own Holy Inquisition to claim its victims for the propitiation of the three new Gods, harrying still further the people they had already decimated by atrocious tyranny and cruelty?

It is little to the purpose to urge, as was done by Joseph de Maistre, [*2] that "the immense charity of the Catholic priesthood" sought to protect the natives in every way from the cruelty and avarice of the conquerors. It is in the nature of all priesthoods in close connection with the people to seek or wish its good in some way: [*3] the Mexican priests, as we have seen, enjoined beneficence, and they treated their own vassals well. [*4] But when the Christian apologist declares that he has "no knowledge of a single act of violence laid to the charge of the priests," save in the one case of Valverde in Peru, [*5] he goes far indeed beyond his brief. There were certainly humane priests, as Las Casas and Sahagun; but what but "acts of violence" were the whole efforts of the priesthood to destroy the ancient monuments and records, to say nothing of the operations of the Inquisition? It is not, however, in mere "acts of violence" that the fatality of Christian junction with non-Christian civilisation lies: it belongs to the nature of the case; and religious principle, which encouraged the original act of conquest, is worse than powerless to avert the consequences. If the more forward races will not leave the more backward alone, and cannot blend with them in a common stock, they must do one of three things: exercise a mere supervision, good or bad, as Englishmen do in India, where they cannot breed; or crowd the weaker out, as is being done in North America and Australia; or strangle the lower civilisation

[p. 382]

without developing the higher, as has been done in Mexico and Peru by Christians, and in Egypt by Saracens. Whether a race fusion can take place in Mexico, Peru, and Brazil remains to be seen. If it be attained, those countries will have solved a problem which in the United States, in a worse form, seems far from solution.

In that case, a relative success may finally be claimed for the Catholic as against the Protestant evolution. But it will be due to other causes than religion. It may, indeed, be charged against the Catholic Church that its unchangeable hostility to the spread of knowledge has been the means of paralysing progress in countries where, as in Mexico and Peru, it has been able to attain absolute dominion over minds and bodies. "It seems hard," says Dr. Tylor, [*1] "to be always attacking the Catholic clergy; but of one thing we cannot remain in doubt--that their influence has had more to do than anything else with the doleful ignorance which reigns supreme in Mexico." But it is not Catholicism that is the explanation. "The only difference," avows Dr. Brinton, [*2] "in the results of the two great divisions of the Christian world," in the matter of conquests, "seems to be that on Catholic missions has followed the debasement, on Protestant missions the destruction, of the race." It may be added that in Protestant Natal to-day there is a general determination among the white population to keep the natives uneducated, lest knowledge should give them power. In fine, the claim that there is an inherent civilising virtue in Christianity is here, as elsewhere, turned to confusion. "Christianity," as the same writer declares, [*3] "has shown itself incapable of controlling its inevitable adjuncts; and it would have been better, morally and socially, for the American race never to have known Christianity at all than to have received it on the only terms on which it has been possible to offer it."

What Christendom could best have done for the American civilisations, after putting down human sacrifice, was to leave them to grow, like those of China and Japan, under the influence of superior example at certain points. Progress might then conceivably have come about. [*4] There is little use in speculating over the

[p. 383]

it might-have-been; but at least we should not overlook the fact that in Peru there are distinct records of rationalism among the theocratic Incas themselves. Several of these remarkable rulers [*1] are recorded to have expressed the conviction that the Sun, for ever moving in his allotted course, could not be the Supreme Deity he was said to be--that there must be another Deity who ruled him. [*2] Netzahualcoyotl, we saw, thought similarly. This reminds us that in all ages and under all religions there have been Freethinkers; men who knew that the Gods were myths while the Vedic hymns were being made; Sadducees among the Jews; Mu'tazilites among the Mohammedans. For the history of mental evolution has not been that of a simple process from delusion to rationalism, but of a constant war between the two tendencies in the human mind; and what has happened s hitherto is just that inasmuch as the majority have thought little they have been credulous. To measure the position of any nation in this regard, we have for the most part simply to consider the status and expansive power of its priesthood. And for us to-day there is one special lesson to be drawn from the case of the unbelieving Incas, who never modified their theocratic practice as regarded the multitude, whatever they might deem among themselves. Their principle evidently was that the masses must be deluded. Well, we know that when the royal line fell, those masses were wholly unable to act for themselves, and fell abjectly under the sway of a mere handful of conquerors. Unless the masses also rationalise, they will never attain a worthy humanity. So that the Freethinkers had need be more righteous than the Scribes and Pharisees.

It is the more necessary to insist on this, the final lesson of all comparative hierology, because in the face of all the facts some students contrive, with the best intentions, to invert it. Because supernaturalism has always been associated with ethics in religious history, it is fallaciously inferred that there can be no ethic without supernaturalism; and in order to shield from rational criticism the

[p. 384]

prevailing creed, emphasis is laid on every point at which in its evolution it has chanced to be associated with the principle of betterment. This was the point of view of one of the first scientific investigators on the comparative principle, Benjamin Constant, whose treatise De la Religion, consideree dans sa source, ses formes, ses developpements, published in 1824-34, is still worth attention. Developing the principles of Fontenelle and Des Brosses, he set forth, clearly and insistently, two generations before Mr. Lang, the presence of savage survivals in the religions of civilised antiquity; [*1] and while accepting Hume's demonstration of the priority of polytheism [*2] he anticipated Mr. Lang's theorem about the good Supreme Being who "could not be squared," [*3] even as he framed a number of the theses employed by Dr. Jevons for the vindication of religious intuitionism, such as the utility of taboo and the opposition between religion and magic. [*4] Long before it was fashionable to do so, he adopted and developed Lessing's thesis of the progressive development of all religion; [*5] Comte's law of the three stages he anticipated by one of four stages, which is perhaps better grounded; [*6] and some of his solutions are both ingenious and just, more just than some of those of his successors who follow similar lines. Yet by reason of his desire to glorify "the religious sentiment" in the abstract and in the present time, apart from all the "forms" of religion, he repeatedly lapses into crude sophistry. After insisting that the religious sentiment is "universal" he speaks of "irreligious peoples"; [*7] and wherever he has to admit that religion has wrought tyranny and evil he alleges that just there the religious sentiment has left it, that it has become merely interest, egoism, calculation. [*8] On this very principle, religion is beneficent only momentarily, when it is taking shape as a reform of old religion by innovators; each innovation in turn becoming a matter of form, interest, egoism, calculation; so that "the religious sentiment," so far from being universal, turns out to be the sentiment only of innovators, freethinkers, enemies of traditionalism. After being represented as "sweet and consoling" for the mass of men, "the spirit of religion" turns out to be precisely what the mass of men never at any one moment entertain. All the while, it is pretended on a priori grounds that rationalism must always lend itself to

[p. 385]

fatalistic submission, as if religious reform were not relative rationalism; and the colossal historical facts of religious fatalism, religious tyranny, religious cruelty, religious licence, are glosed as phenomena of irreligion.

From this long-drawn contradiction there is only one way of escape--the recognition that the sole rational test of any religious credence or usage at any moment is its truth, relatively to the intelligence of the moment. Mechanically repeating that religion is a fundamental "sentiment," men lose sight and hold of the truth that veracity is also a sentiment, with inalienable rights. The men who, in terms of religious credences, have reformed religion in the past, have done so in the conviction that the credences they discarded were not true. To argue that, because their credences were associated for a time with moral or material improvement, we must cherish those credences even when we know them to be untrue, is to be false not only to their ideal but to the very principle of development. Such an acceptance is in itself corruption, the negation of betterment; and to turn the historic fact of the relativity of religious beliefs into a general vindication of religion is to read the law of evolution backwards. Bad or mistaken morals are relatively "fit," even as is false belief. It has been argued that cannibalism once saved the human race; and the proposition may be perfectly true; but so far from being an argument for reversion to cannibalism, it does not even cancel the fact that cannibalism has again and again gone far to destroy low civilisations.

Religious belief has been historically associated with both the progress and the paralysis of civilisation; and the just inference is that, so far from its being the principle of betterment, it is simply a form of fallacious mental activity, which may either be countervailed by truer forms or may countervail them. And the beliefs which have the worst concomitants are precisely those certified by the special pleaders as "truly" religious. The belief in immortality, so often extolled as a great source of consolation, has been the motive for the slaughter of unnumbered millions of human beings, religiously doomed to accompany others to "another world"; the conception of sacrificial salvation, another source of "blessed comfort," has incited to the slaughter of uncounted millions more, with every circumstance of heart-searing atrocity; the doctrine of sacramental communion with deity, as we have seen, has been the means of conserving and sanctifying systematic cannibalism at the hands of priesthoods, where without priesthoods it must have died out; and in every age and stage of human growth the religious

[p. 386]

sentiment, of which the most essential and constant characteristic is to cling to "forms," is seen on the intellectual side damning new thought, strangling science, sanctifying injustice, and haloing war, as well as endorsing what measure of moral principle had been evolved in a lower stage of thought. There is never the slightest security that the spirit of justice and reason and sympathy will coincide with "the spirit of religion"; and there is no known religious system which is not habitually turned to the frustration of some of the best of the precepts it professes to inculcate. There is thus no reason to doubt that in savage as in civilised times the forces of organised religion have been arrayed against the forces of betterment, social as well as intellectual, with but a dubious record on the side of moralisation.

Certain hierologists on religious grounds make much of the fact that some of the "lowest" races appear to have the "highest" notions of a Supreme Being, as if that were not a specially plain proof of the futility of theistic notions as civilising forces. "Fijian religion," we are told, draws "an impassable line between ghosts and eternal gods." [*1] And the apparent effect of that discrimination was to keep the Fijians the most revolting set of cannibals on the face of the earth, [*2] habitually eating their own species because the Eternal Gods preferred so to feed; while in the mysteries of their Supreme Being there were scenes of "almost incredible indecency." Precisely where men drew the least clear distinction between ghosts and Eternal Gods, that is to say among the Tongans, cannibalism was abandoned till Fijian influence revived it; and the position of women was immensely better. [*3] And all the while, the more brutal the religion, the more complacent were the worshippers. The unconscious testimony of a missionary may help to make the point clearer

The religious system of the Samoans differs essentially from that which obtained at the Tahitian, Society, and other islands with which we are acquainted. They have neither maraes nor temples nor offerings; and, consequently, none of the barbarian and sanguinary rites observed at the other groups. In consequence of this, the Samoans were considered an impious race, and their impiety became proverbial with the people of Raratonga [one of the Hervey Islands]; for when upbraiding a person who neglected the worship of the gods,

[p. 387]

they would call him 'a godless Samoan.' But......this people had 'lords many and gods many';" [*1]

and the belief in these, by the missionary's account, was associated with vice and absurdity.

As between the Samoan and the Fijian, our sole test is the critical reason. It is by the same test that we pronounce given religious doctrines incredible or inconsistent, apart from any question of their effects. Let that criticism be honestly met on its own ground, instead of by way of paralogisms concerning the utility of false beliefs in the past, and hierology will be freed from an element of disturbance and distortion, becoming as nearly as possible a department of pure history. It is the tactic of the special pleader for religion that has introduced that element: it lies with him to let it vanish. Doubtless it will reappear in sociology; but there it will be for the time a quickening force, giving vitality to a science that is slow to be vivified by actual interests.

Footnotes

^380:4 As to the excellence of the Peruvians' architecture, see Markham, in Winsor, i, 246-7, and Squier, as there cited; and as to their admirable system of irrigation see pp. 252-3.

^381:1 Robertson, History of America, B. vii (Works, ed. 1821, ix, 22).

^381:2 Soirees de Saint Petersbourg, ed. 1821, i, 109.

^381:3 Cp. Muller, p. 144, on the efforts of missionaries in general to burke the facts as to cannibalism among the aborigines.

^381:4 Prescott, p. 34.

^381:5 Even this he seeks to cast doubt upon. But even Valverde might intelligibly have sought to protect the Indians, as he is said to have done, after helping to massacre them in conquest. They had become his tithe-payers.

^382:1 Anahuac, p. 126. Since Dr. Tylor wrote, there has been much progress in Mexico, due to the rationalistic ideas which are there as elsewhere confronting the Church.

^382:2 American Hero Myths, p. 206.

^382:3 Id. p. 207.

^382:4 The Mexican language, in particular, shows great capabilities. "Of all the languages spoken on the American continent, the Aztec is the most perfect and finished, approaching in this respect the tongues of Europe and Asia, and actually surpassing many of them by its elegance and expression. Although wanting the six consonants, b, d, f, r, g, s, it may still be called full and rich. Of its copiousness, the Natural History of Dr. Hermandez gives evidence, in which are described twelve hundred different species of Mexican plants, two hundred or more species of birds, and a large number of quadrupeds, reptiles, insects, and metals, each of which is given its proper name in the Mexican language. Mendieta [p. 383] says that it is not excelled in beauty by the Latin, displaying even more art in its construction, and abounding in tropes and metaphors. Camargo calls it the richest of the whole land, and the purest, being mixed with no foreign barbaric element; Gomara says it is the best, most copious, and most extended in all New Spain; Davila Padilla, that it is very elegant and graceful, although it contains many metaphors which make it difficult; Loreozana, that it is very elegant, sweet, and complete; Clavigero, that it is copious, Polite, and expressive; Brasseur de Bourbourg, that from the most sublime heights it descends to common things with a sonorousness and richness of expression peculiar to itself. The missionaries found it ample for their purpose, as in it, and without the aid of foreign words, they could express all the shades of their dogmas" (Bancroft, iii, 727-8).

^383:1 According to Prescott, the crania of the Incas show great superiority to those of the people, which may well be believed; but the data are called in question. See Kirk's ed, 13.18.

^383:2 Reville, pp. 162-5. Cp. Markham, The Incas of Peru, 1910, pp. 97-103 (prayers to the Supreme Being), and in Winsor's History, i, 233.

^384:1 Vol. i, pref. p. ii.

^384:2 Vol. i. pt. ii, ch. v.

^384:3 Id. pp. 15, 78-79, note.

^384:4 Compare the citations from Dr. Jevons, above, pp. 6, 20-24, etc., with Constant, vol. i, pt. i, 13; pt. ii, 48-50, 71, 83.

^384:5 Vol. i, pt. i, 104.

^384:6 Id. 107-8.

^384:7 Cp. i, pt. i, 2-6, 20; pt. 2, 45.

^384:8 Cp. v, 157. where it is insisted that the spirit of dogma is directly opposed to the sentiment of religion. Elsewhere (i, pt. i, p. 99) he admits that religion has bad "tendencies."

^386:1 Lang, Making of Religion, p. 218, following T. Williams, Fiji, p. 218. Cp. Ellis, Polynesian Researches, i, 333-4, as to the distinction throughout Polynesia generally.

^386:2 T. Williams, as cited, pp. 204-214.

^386:3 Cp. Mariner, i, 107-108; ii, 103-4; Seemann, Fiji and its Inhabitants, in Galton's Vacation Tourists, 1862, p. 280.

^387:1 J. Williams, Narrative of Missionary Enterprises in the South Sea Islands, ed. 1837, pp. 540-1.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 388] [p. 389]

  

APPENDIX A

  

THE EATING OF THE CRUCIFIED HUMAN SACRIFICE.

ON page <page 136> I have suggested that the cannibalism of the Bataks of Sumatra would seem to be a survival of an anthropophagous sacrament; and on <page 132> I have put the original eating of the "crucified" human sacrifice as an inference supported by other cases of sacramental cannibalism, by the abundant evidence from Africa, and by the special case of the Dravidian Gonds in India. I had overlooked a decisive testimony, preserved by Pickering, [*1] which exhibits the Bataks as practising human sacrifice under the aspect of crucifixion, in the way of the Khonds, and as eating the fragments of the victim, as late as 1814. The testimony is that of Major Canning, [*2] who in his residence among the Bataks at Tappanooly in that year "omitted no opportunity of making the most minute inquiries" on the subject of their cannibalism. It was previously known that they ate criminals, prisoners of war, and aged relatives, "not so much to gratify their appetite as to perform a pious ceremony." Major Canning further elicited a native account of the manner of the ritual sacrifice:--

"Three posts are fixed in the ground: to the middle one the body of the prisoner or criminal is made fast, while his arms and legs are extended to the two others. (The narrator and other chiefs present here simultaneously made with their arms and legs the figure of St. Andrew's cross.) On a signal being given everyone entitled to a share in the feast rushes on him with hatchets and knives, and many with no other instruments than their teeth and nails. He is thus in a few minutes entirely cut or torn to pieces, and I have seen the guests so keen.....as severely to wound each other's hands and fingers. A mixture of lime-juice, salt, and chillies, prepared in the shell of a cocoanut, is always at hand on these occasions, in which many dip the flesh previous to eating it." Questioned further as to the mode of killing, the native witness answers: "The first wounds he receives are from the hatchets, knives, and teeth of his assailants, but these are so numerous and simultaneous as to cause almost immediate death."

Major Canning's testimony is open to no doubt, for he here describes a procedure closely similar to that of the Khonds, which when he wrote had not been reduced to published narrative. His witness, a native chief, he tells us, was frequently corroborated

[p. 390]

by others present. We are left to speculate as to whether the beverage "always at hand on these occasions" had ever had any analogy to the stupefying potion of the Khonds, or was simply a thirst-quencher for the victim before the hour of his slaying. It may be noted, however, that the St. Andrew's cross seems a deviation from the Khond practice, and is an approximation to that of Benin, and to the method observed in the sacrifice of crucified victims of the Mexican God Xipe. (See figure in Encyc. Brit. new ed. art. AMERICA, Pl. ii, p. 809.)

Footnotes

^389:1 The Races of Man, by Charles Pickering, M.D., Bohn ed. 1863, pp. 303-4.

^389:2 Published in the Malacca Observer, 1827, and cited thence in Moore's Papers on the Indian Archipelago, cited in turn by Pickering.

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 391]

  

APPENDIX B

  

DRAMATIC AND RITUAL SURVIVALS.

WHILE the first edition of this volume was passing through the press in 1903, there reached me a cutting from an American newspaper, describing the survival or revival of a quasi-sacrificial Passion Play among the Christianised descendants of the Aztecs. As an illustration of the psychology of human sacrifice, it is worth reprinting without note or comment:--

"NEW MEXICO'S PASSION PLAY.

"THE PENITENTES AND THEIR SELF-INFLICTED TORTURES.

"Santa Fe, N.M. (March 27).--Among the Americans who flock once in ten years to see the Passion play at Oberammergau, there are few who know of the more realistic performance given yearly by the Penitentes of New Mexico. This performance was first adequately described by Adolphe Bandelier in a report issued by the Smithsonian Institution about ten years ago.

"The full title of the Penitentes is Los Hermanos Penitentes, meaning The Penitent Brothers. The order was established in New Mexico at the time of the Spanish conquest under Coronado, about 1540. The purpose of the priests who accompanied the Spaniards was to form a society for religious zeal among the natives. They taught the natives that sin might be expiated by flagellation and other personal suffering. As time passed, the Indian and half-breed zealots sought to improve their enthusiasm by fiercer self-imposed ordeals of suffering. The idea of enacting the travail of the Master on Calvary was evolved. Hence the Passion Play of the Penitentes on each Good Friday.

"Mr. Bandelier learned from the Spanish archives that as early as 1594 a crucifixion, in which twenty-seven men were actually nailed to crosses for a half-hour, took place on Good Friday, 'after several weeks of pious mortification of the flesh with knives and cactus thorns.' The Penitentes numbered some 6,000 at the time of the American-Mexican War in 1848. The Catholic Church has long laboured to abolish their practices. So have the civil authorities. Fifty years ago there were branches of the Penitentes in seventeen localities in the territory, and crucifixions took place in each of the branches. The organisation has since gradually died away. Nowadays the sole remnant of the order is in the valley of San Mateo, seventy-five miles north-east from Santa Fe. There is no railroad nearer than sixty miles.

[p. 392]

"Some 300 Mexicans still cling to the doctrine that one's misdeeds are to be squared by physical pain during forty days of each year, finally closing with a crucifixion. Most of the Penitentes live at Taos, a very old adobe pueblo. They are sheep and cattle herders. Not one in a dozen of them can read and write in Spanish, and they have as little knowledge of English as if they lived in the heart of Mexico. The Penitentes keep their membership a secret nowadays. They meet in their primitive adobe council chambers (moradas) at night, and they conduct their flagellations and crucifixions as secretly as possible. Charles F. Lummis, of Los Angeles, Cal., was nearly shot to death by an assassin for photographing a Penitente crucifixion a few years ago. The Penitentes have several night meetings during the year, but it is only in Lent that they are active. They have a head, the Hermano Mayor, whose mandates are strictly followed on pain of death. Adolphe Bandelier has written that up to a half century ago there were instances of disobedient and treacherous brother Penitentes having been buried alive.

"In Lent the Penitentes have night meetings several times a week at the morada. One day they will whip one another, on another day they go to El Calvario (the Calvary), a little hill away from the town, where they coat their bodies with ashes, and all the time call in lamentations for a witness to their sense of sinfulness. For several days at a time they go without food, and they spend whole nights in tearful prayer. When Holy Week comes the intensity of the fanaticism increases. They have been seen to thrust cactus spines into one another's naked backs until the flesh swelled owing to the torture caused by thousands of nettles under the skin. They have been known to crawl on all fours like lizards over hill and vale for miles at a time to prove their humility. Self-lashing with short whips similar to cats-o'-nine-tails is common, and young men have died from exhaustion and loss of blood during too zealous flagellations.

"On Good Friday the Hermann Mayor names the ones who have been chosen to be the Jesus Christ, the Peter, the Pontius Pilate, Mary, the Martha, and so on, for the play. Notwithstanding the torture involved in the impersonation, many Penitentes are annually most desirous of being the Christ. The play is given on El Calvario. While the pipero blows a sharp air on a flute the man who is acting the part of the Saviour comes forth. His only garment is a quantity of cotton sheeting or muslin that hangs flowing from his shoulders and waist. About his forehead is bound a wreath of cactus thorns. The thorns have been pressed deep into the flesh, from which tiny streams of blood trickle down his bronzed face and over his black beard. In a moment a cross of huge timbers that would break the back of many men is laid upon his shoulders. He grapples it tight, and, bending low under the crushing weight, starts on.

"On the way a path of broken stones has been made, and the

[p. 393]

most devout Penitentes walk over these with bare feet and never flinch. The counterfeit Christ is spit upon by the spectators. Little boys and girls run ahead of the chief actor that they may spit in his face and throw stones upon his bending form. When El Calvario is reached, the great clumsy cross is laid upon the ground. The actor of Christ is seized and thrown upon it. The assemblage joins in a chorus of song, while several Penitentes lash the man's hands, arms, and legs to the timbers with cords of cowhide. The bonds are made as tight as the big muscular vaqueros can draw them. The ligaments sink into the flesh and even cut so that the blood runs out. The arms and legs become blue and then black under the binding, but not so much as a sigh escapes the lips of the actor. He repeats in a mixed dialect of Spanish and Indian the words uttered by Christ at the true Calvary, and bids his brothers spare him not. When all is ready a dozen men erect the cross. The women weep and the children look on dumbfounded. Some of the men mock and jeer the man on the cross; others throw clods of sunbaked earth at him, and still others, feeling that they must have some part in the physical agony of the afternoon, call upon the multitude to lash and beat them.

"In several localities in Colorado and New Mexico it was once the practice literally to nail the hands of the acting Christ to the timbers of the cross, but the Catholic priest of this generation put a stop to that. There is no doubt that people have died from the tortures of the Passion Play. Only two years ago the Government Indian agent in the San Riga Mountains reported several deaths among the Penitentes, because of poisoning by the cactus thorns and the lashing the men had endured. The Penitentes believe that no death is so desirable as that caused by participation in the acting of the travail of the Lord.

"After the first half hour of noise and flagellation about the cross at El Calvario the excitement dies away. The crucified man, whose arms and legs are now black under the bonds, must be suffering indescribable pain, but he only exclaims occasionally in Spanish, 'Peace, peace, peace,' while the Penitentes who have had no part in the punishment prostrate themselves silently about the cross. As the sun slowly descends behind the mountain peaks the pipero rises to his feet, and, blowing a long, harsh air upon his flute, leads a procession of the people back to the village. Some of the leading Penitentes remain behind and lower the man from the cross. Then, following the narrative of the scenes on Calvary, his body is wrapped about with a mass of white fabric, and is carried to a dug-out cave in the hillside near at hand. In the cave the bleeding and tortured body of the chief actor is nursed to strength. If the man is of great endurance and rugged physical strength he will probably be ready to go home to his family in the evening, conscious of having made ample atonement for long years of sin, and having earned a reputation that many men in Taos have coveted.

[p. 394]

"Until a score of years ago women joined in the balancing of the Penitentes' accounts with Heaven by self-imposed bodily suffering. No longer ago than when Gen. Wallace was Governor of the territory hundreds of women scourged themselves until their backs and shoulders were raw."

______________________

The following extract from a New York journal, referring to an incident at Easter, 1903, is noteworthy in the same connection, illustrating as it does, with the Oberammergau play, the persistence of the dramatic appeal of the Passion Play in the gospels:--

"THE CRUCIFIXION IN DRAMA.

"LAMBS CLUB ACTORS PERFORM A PASSION PLAY ON SUNDAY.

"The Lambs Club is composed to a considerable extent of actors. Its house backs up against the Garrick Theatre, and its monthly Sunday gambols' have of late been given on that stage. These affairs have consisted of farces and burlesques, and the audiences have been composed of members and their invited guests. But last night merriment gave place to decorum. A 'passion play' was performed in all seriousness. No tickets were on sale, and so there was no chance of interference by the police, either on the ground that the Sunday law was broken or that the subject of the piece was illegal.

"This drama of the Crucifixion was the work of Clay M. Greene, the playwright and formerly 'shepherd' of the Lambs. He had written it for the Jesuit College at Santa Clara, Cal., of which he is a graduate, and it was acted there last year by priests and students under his direction. In the Lambs cast Judas Iscariot was impersonated by Joseph Grismer, Pontius Pilate by Al. Lipman, Peter by R. A. Roberts, John by Ernest Hastings, and Matthew by Henry Woodruff. Other roles were taken by Nathaniel Hartwig, Enos Welles, Fritz Williams, De Wolf Hopper, and Sam Reed. A stageful of Lambs represented the assemblages. The mounting was the same that had been used in California, and was excellent. The acting was careful, dignified, and, in the main, impressive.

"Mr. Greene's play begins on the plains of Bethlehem with the quest of Christ's birthplace by the wise men of the East and Herod's emissaries, and passes quickly to Herod's palace, when the news of the new-born King of the Jews incites him to order the massacre of the infants. Then a lapse of years carries us to the representation of Christ's entry into Jerusalem, His arraignment before the Council, the betrayal of Judas, the trial before Pilate, the delivery by Herod to the Jews, the march to Calvary, and the convulsions of nature following the Crucifixion.

"Christ is not a visible character, but his presence is indicated in three scenes. In the trial a bright light is thrown from the side, as

[p. 395]

though he were there, and to that point Pilate addresses his exhortation to the Master to refute the accusations of his enemies. On the way to Calvary the top of a cross moves across the background, as though carried by Christ, who is hidden by the multitude, and an effulgence marks his movement. Nor is he actually exhibited on the cross, but shadows thrown on a transparent curtain make a picture of the Crucifixion.

"This performance of 'Nazareth' is preliminary to its possible, use in a regular theatrical way. William A. Brady has acquired the rights in it and stands ready to produce it publicly. It is understood that he will request Archbishop Corrigan to sanction the enterprise, and that representatives of his reverence saw the play last evening. In the meanwhile, Oscar Hammerstein has an option on 'The Passion Play,' a version of the Christian tragedy now current in Montreal, with the tacit approval of the Roman Catholic clergy of that city, and with no obstructive action by the Protestants. Mr. Hammerstein says he will introduce it at the opening of the big theatre which he is going to build in West Thirty-fourth Street, if the acquiescence of church and municipal authorities can be secured. Christ is a visible and audible personage in the Montreal performance, which is in French, but here an English translation would be used.

"It is inevitable that, in case either of these 'passion plays' becomes a feasible venture, the famous Oberammergau representation will be imported. It is said that it would be located in Madison Square Garden, and could be placed there early next autumn if a certainty of non-interference were attainable. It is nearly twenty years since Salmi Morse brought his 'passion play' to New York from San Francisco. This was a fine production, directed by David Belasco, and costing $40,000. James O'Neill impersonated Christ, and in the cast were Lewis Morrison, James Herne, and others since conspicuous. During three weeks large audiences were drawn, but the leading actors were arrested every day and fined $50 each. At last the Governor of California took prohibitive action.

"Mr. Morse was almost a monomaniac about his play; and Mr. O'Neill, who had been educated for the priesthood, seemed sincerely religious in his personification of Christ. Henry E. Abbey brought the company and the outfit to this city, intending to place them at Booth's; but the Mayor threatened to cancel the theatre's license. The next move by Mr. Morse was to lease an old church on the site of the present Proctor Theatre in West Twenty-third Street, and put in a stage, on which a single performance was given to an invited audience. Mr. O'Neill had withdrawn, and the late Henry C. De Mille, as the Christ, headed a cast of generally inefficient amateurs. So the venture ended in a fiasco. The present attitude of city and church authorities is not yet ascertainable."

      
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 396]

  

APPENDIX C

  

REPLIES TO CRITICISMS

  

 section 1. General Opposition: The Hibbert Journal.

As has been remarked in the preface, the most notable aspect of the body of criticism passed upon the first edition of the foregoing work is the almost complete abstention from challenge of the theses upon which challenge was specially invited by the writer--"that the Gospel story of the Last Supper, Passion, Betrayal, Trial, Crucifixion, and Resurrection, is visibly a transcript of a Mystery-Drama, and not originally a narrative; and that that drama is demonstrably (as historic demonstration goes) a symbolic modification of an original rite of human sacrifice, of which it preserves certain verifiable details." The only attempt I have seen to counter these positions--an attempt made only incidentally by Dr. J. E. Carpenter--was, as I have elsewhere shown, cancelled by the critic himself. For the rest, critic after critic has impugned this or that analogy between Christian and pagan systems, this or that item of historic assertion; and many have broadly flouted the general thesis of the non-historicity of Jesus; but no one, so far as I am aware, has attempted to gainsay the central argument upon which attack was specially invited. I am therefore entitled to infer, so far, that that argument has some validity; though, for sheer lack of debate, I cannot yet count it inexpugnable.

That there should be found no flaws of statement or obscurities of argument in a treatise covering so many fields, I was never foolish enough to expect; and to one or two hostile critics I am indebted for corrections of errors of detail. It is to be regretted that critics capable of discovering such errors should put themselves in the wrong by gratuitous misstatements of their own concerning the case they dealt with. Dr. Margoliouth, for instance, pointed out that the legend which makes Joshua the son of Miriam, ascribed by me to the Arabic chronicle of Tabari, occurs only in the Persian version--a correction of some importance. Dr. Margoliouth, however, saw fit to allege that my long argument for the existence of a pre-Christian cult of Joshua (Jesus) son of Miriam turned wholly on the reference of the Moslem legend to Tabari, whereas it was only after putting my main case on other grounds that I wrote: "Finally, we have to note (a) the remarkable Arab tradition which makes Joshua the Son of Miriam."

This want of critical rectitude marks nearly the whole of the polemic directed against Pagan Christs, and even where some sense of critical principle has been exhibited, theological animus usually deflects the reasoning in an unprofitable fashion. A lady reviewer

[p. 397]

in the Hibbert Journal, who certainly showed more concern for argument than most of the other critics of the book, embodied her case in such propositions as these:--

1. "Mr. Robertson, as we have seen, proceeds on the assumption that the historicity of Christ is a myth."

2. "His reasons......practically reduce themselves to this......that Paul......shows total ignorance of the teachings and miracles ascribed to Jesus in the Gospels."

3. "He admits what they [the Epistles] imply--the hostility, for instance, to their writer of the Jews throughout the Mediterranean. But if this is granted, the historicity of Christ must necessarily follow. We can hardly believe that the Jews would have been hostile to a myth: they would have retorted that Jesus never even existed."

4. "Our author, indeed, refuses to admit the historicity of the disciples: he is clearly inconsistent in so doing, for the Epistles imply it, and he admits the Epistles."

5. "He explains away the reference to the Eucharist in 1 Cor. xi by assuming that the passage is interpolated. For the rest, he assures us that Paul or the 'forger' believed in a crucified Jesus as to whom he had no biographical record, and he finds him (!) in the person of a certain Jesus ben Pandira......We shall scarcely be guilty of scepticism if we refuse to accept this solution."

6. "His [the author's] theological position requires that he should deny the historicity of the Crucifixion."

The "assumptions" in this debate are wholly on the side of the critic. So far from being led by my "theological position" to deny the historicity of Jesus or the Crucifixion, I had come to my present theological conclusions long before doubting the historicity of either; and only after striving for many years, on the normal assumptions, to construct a tenable historical conception of the rise of Christianity, did I find myself reluctantly driven, by purely historical considerations, to give them up.

I had in the same way taken for granted the historicity of the twelve apostles; and in abandoning that after an analysis made in the light of the Didache I still held by the historicity of the Founder. Even that I only abandoned after an attempt to construct a theorem of a succession of Jesuses.

So far, again, from "finding" Paul's Jesus in the Talmudic Jesus ben Pandira, I have expressly shown that, while bound as historical students to take full account of the apparent possibilities in that direction, we can finally find there no standing-ground. I had in fact anticipated the now common conclusion that the Talmudic Jesus, if not in the main mythical, is little more than a name, historically speaking; and I finally "found" Paul's Jesus in the abstraction of the human sacrifice, named by the name of the ancient Jesus-God.

There, I should have supposed, was the likely point of attack for

[p. 398]

negative criticism. But the attacks made at that point, so far as I have seen, take the shape of mere rejection of the thesis. The Hibbert Journal reviewer indeed contended that there is "no trace of such a rite" as human sacrifice "among Palestinian Jews of the later period." I leave the reader to decide for himself, after noting the fuller exposition in the present edition, whether that statement can hold. For the rest, my thesis of the Pre-Christian Jesus-God has received a remarkable and quite independent corroboration in the work of Professor W. Benjamin Smith, Der Vorchristliche Jesus (1906); and in the recent discussions in Germany over Professor Arthur Drews's Die Christusmythe, that problem has naturally come in for much discussion. So far, I have seen no rebuttal of my own position.

The other positions taken up by the Hibbert Journal reviewer are only too easily turned. My "reasons" certainly do not "practically reduce themselves" to the silence of "Paul." That is indeed a fatal crux, of which the orthodox defence has vainly striven to dispose. But the bulk of the cumulative argument of the examination of "The Gospel Myths" in Christianity and Mythology remains to be dealt with even if the problem of the Pauline Epistles be put aside; and the further argument in Pagan Christs as to the non-historicity of the whole matter of the mystery-drama is independent of the Pauline problem. Even if we accept "the four" epistles as genuine, and pass the passages which I challenged as interpolations, my central theses are in no way invalidated. The acceptance of the tradition by "Paul" would not establish the historicity of the tradition.

As regards the whole problem of the epistles, the Hibbert Journal reviewer proceeds upon untenable premises. Her assertion that the epistles imply the historicity of the disciples is an error which comes of failure to realise the issue. The epistles never speak of disciples: they speak of apostles, never alleging or suggesting that those apostles were taught by "the Lord." They tell only of a going cultus. And other errors follow. To say that I "accept the epistles," and at the same time to admit that I charge upon them capital interpolations, is to break down at the start. The question of the general genuineness of "the four" epistles I have left open, while leaning more and more, though always with some reserves, to Van Manen's conclusions. But my case was and is that, whether the epistles to the Corinthians be genuine or spurious, they betray a general ignorance of the purport of the gospel narratives. As thus: (a) the passage 1 Cor. xv, 3-9, cannot well have been current as it stands before the gospels, else they would surely have given the "five hundred" story; though (b) verse 5 must have been written before the Judas story was added to the gospels, since it speaks of Jesus as appearing to the whole "twelve," where the synoptics say "the eleven"; (c) the non-mention of the women also infers ignorance of the gospel story; (d) the specification of "all the apostles" tells of an

[p. 399]

interpolation either of that phrase or of "the twelve"; and (e) the specification of James is again independent of the gospel story. Now, some of these items clearly tell in favour of an early and independent narrative; but others as clearly tell of interpolation; and all, taken together, impeach either the gospel narrative or themselves. The two sets are irreconcilable.

If the writer of the epistle knew the facts, and if the gospels give the facts, how came he to ignore the central episode of Judas? If he drew on a current report concerning the "five hundred," how came the gospels to ignore that? Assume the bulk of the passage to antedate the gospels, what is to be inferred as to their composition? On the other hand, of what evidential value is a series of assertions of supernatural appearances, which further diverge markedly from the assertions in the gospels? Be the epistle genuine or spurious, how can it be held to show knowledge of the gospel story?

When, again, we turn to the passage 1 Cor. xi, 23 sq., we find the formula "For I delivered unto you......that which also I received" developed into "For I received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto you"; and here, under profession of supernatural knowledge, we have an express allusion to the betrayal, of which the other passage shows no knowledge--nay, excludes any inference of knowledge. That this passage is an interpolation is no "assumption," but an irresistible inference from (a) the context and (b) the whole purport of that in ch. xv. It ruptures the context; and it tells of what the writer of the other chapter knew nothing. So far from being an arbitrary step on my part, the inference of interpolation has been latterly made by a series of German critics who probably had no knowledge of my argument, first penned more than twenty years ago.

What then is left of "the apostles" in the Pauline Epistles? A plainly valueless allusion to the twelve and one to "all the apostles"--allusions which form part of a set of incredible assertions--the mention of "the brethren of the Lord" (1 Cor. ix, 5), and the further allusions to "the apostles" in Galatians, where the exordium has plain reference to the claims of the Judaic apostles of the High-Priest or the Patriarch. If this epistle be "genuine," it tells only of "apostles" of the Jesuist cult, naming "James and Cephas and John," with a separate mention of "Peter," and a description of James as "the brother of the Lord." This, with 1 Cor. ix, 5, is of course one of the holdfasts of the orthodox defence, being in fact the sole quasi-biographical detail as to Jesus in the epistles. But (1) neither this nor any other epistle tells of the parents of Jesus; and (2) in Acts xii, 2, we have "James, the brother of John," killed by Herod before Paul joins the new sect. So that if "James the brother of the Lord" were a brother of the Gospel Jesus and a "pillar," he was so in supersession of the claims of the survivors of "the twelve," since the two Jameses in the gospel list are sons of

[p. 400]

[paragraph continues] Zebedee and Alphaeus; and there is no gospel mention of any discipleship on the part of James the son of Joseph and Mary, any more than of the other brothers named and sisters mentioned in Matthew xiii and Mark vi. Among these are James and Joses; and in Matt. xxvii, 56, we have mention of "Mary the mother of James and Joses," without specification of her or their relationship to Jesus. Of what historical value, then, is the reference to "James the brother of the Lord" in the epistle to the Galatians, even supposing it to be genuine? In epistles so often interpolated--by the admission of the revisers who have excised so many later interpolations--such a phrase as "the brother of the Lord" was the easiest of insertions; and even were the phrase primordial, the inference that "brethren of the Lord" in 1 Cor. ix, 5, was a late group-name is far more tenable than the exorbitant assumption that an actual brother of the Gospel Jesus, who never figures as his supporter in the records, had suddenly become a "pillar" of the cult; and that other brothers had also become propagandists. If these were actual brothers of Jesus, so acting in Paul's day, how comes it that there is no hint of them in the Acts? The whole apostolic list of names and the list of the "holy family" are alike hopeless imbroglios for any reader concerned about historical truth. And if Galatians be not genuine--as even many theologians are fain to surmise, in view of its pretensions to supernaturally acquired knowledge of the Christian doctrine and its wide divergence from the narrative of the Acts--it may still be interpolated at any point. The separate allusions to "Cephas" and "Petros" are a stumbling-block for any exegesis. Finally, as I have shown in the Preface, the passage in which "brethren of the Lord" are mentioned in 1 Cor. ix is utterly incompatible with the passage on marriage in ch. vii, so that the main mention of the "brethren" in the epistles must go by the board.

It is hardly necessary to argue, in conclusion, against the assumption that the Jews could not be "hostile to a myth." Does the reviewer believe that the Gods of the heathen were not myths? When the Jews denounced such Gods as daimons, did they deny the existence of daimons? Were not the Christians hostile to Mithra? If Jesuist Jews could start a circumstantial Jesus myth in an age of universal credulity, the Jews as a matter of course would in the end take the line of denying, not the existence of the alleged Founder, but the genuineness of his mission and his claims. On Van Manen's theory, the epistles belong to the second century. But, on any view of their date, they offered no point of contact to historical criticism. Their Jesus is dateless, speechless, homeless, without a biography. They locate neither his death nor his birth, assign to him no period, quote from him no teaching, specify no miracle. They do but name a crucified Jesus; and there may have been many crucified Jesuses in Jewish history. The Talmudic Jesus would fit that case, to say nothing of the presumptive sacrificial

[p. 401]

victim called "Jesus Barabbas." The very interpolation which tells of the betrayal and the Last Supper names no place and suggests no date. Supposing even the string of assertions concerning the reappearances after the resurrection to have been current in the first century, it names neither place nor time; and it cites mainly unnamed Christian witnesses. Even if the "five hundred" story were not a late interpolation, it was open to no refutation. A number of Christians could doubtless be got to say they had seen the Lord after his death; and the "twelve," Cephas, and James were mere partisans, whether dead or alleged to be alive. They too are dateless: the epistles never say whether or not they survive.

And while orthodoxy dwells on such valueless "evidence," the Unitarian defenders of the historicity of Jesus do not believe in the event so evidenced. For them, there is nothing in the epistles that admits of either proof or disproof in a debate between Paulinists and Jews. Had the Jews, in terms of the argument of the Hibbert Journal reviewer, said that Paul's Jesus "never existed," there could be no debate, for there was no historical proposition for them to contest. A Jesus without date, home, parents, doctrine, or named disciples, a Jesus merely alleged to have been crucified, without mention of place or time, and to have "risen again" at no specified place or time, was not a subject for historical discussion. And if both Christian and non-Christian scholars, in our own day, in an age of historical criticism, are still in large numbers unable to see that the very absence of historical data from the epistles puts them outside of historical discussion, the Jews of the Pauline period could hardly be capable of so arguing.

To this, then, the case for the defence "reduces itself." The sole quasi-historical datum in the epistles which makes for the historicity of Jesus is the hopeless item concerning James and other "brethren of the Lord." The sole "events" historically posited concerning Jesus are that he was crucified and rose again, which last "event" the Unitarians admit to be myth. As to the crucifixion, their belief turns on the gospel narrative, the dramatic character of which they have not ventured to deny in detail. But the writer or writers of the first epistle to the Corinthians show in one passage vital ignorance of the gospel story of the betrayal, and give absolutely no historic data for the crucifixion; while the passage in which the betrayal is mentioned is on the face of the case an interpolation, since it imports knowledge which the other passage negates. Solvuntur tabulae.

The Unitarian case is in fact only the orthodox case minus the supernatural. But even the orthodox case is a compromise. If the early Christians believed anything, they believed in the ascension. No educated Christian now believes in the ascension. Yet educated Christians believe in the resurrection on the testimony of an age which believed in the ascension, and call the legend "evidence."

[p. 402]

  

 section 2. The Rev. Alfred Ernest Crawley.

The work entitled The Tree of Life, by the Rev. A. E. Crawley, [*1] author of The Mystic Rose, is an interesting development of modern Christian apologetics. As an anthropologist, Mr. Crawley is sufficiently familiar with the facts of comparative hierology to know that all the main features of the Christian creed and cultus--Divine Sonship, Virgin-birth, crucifixion, resurrection, salvation, baptism, and eucharist--are common features of pagan religion; and he takes the somewhat bold course of positing the facts in question. He is indeed somewhat imprudent in putting in the forefront of his exposition what he calls "The Rationalist Attack" and "The Anthropological Attack," admitting that so far as they go they are unanswerable. As to Biblical cosmology, he confesses (p. 141) that "the arguments of Huxley and Laing in this matter can no longer be resisted"; and he in effect says the same thing of the supernaturalism of the gospels. It is in the latter part of his book that he proffers his vindication of the faith, in the form of the theorem (1) that religion in general, howsoever mythical be its basis and content, is necessary to "human nature"--that is, to the nature of those who "need" it; (2) that it is the true bulwark of society against "Radicals and Socialists"; and (3) that the Church of England is the best Church because she keeps "to a via media which does more than represent the essence of Christian doctrine, for it also preserves the best elements of primitive religion." [*2] Of this avowed compound of savagery and "progress," the essential value is declared to consist neither in truth or reasonableness nor in any inculcation of altruism, but in the "feeling of life" which it conveys, its substitution of egoism for altruism, its consecration of "individualism." I give his own words (italics mine):--

"Kidd is profoundly mistaken when he speaks of the intense altruism of the early Christians, and of the flood of altruistic emotion which Puritanism and the Reformation let loose upon the world. Gibbon rightly noted the intense egoism of the Christians; their altruism was confined to their own family, as it were; and Wakeman rightly speaks of the stern, uncompromising individualism of the Puritans. This increase of vitality is illustrated by the martyrs, both of the early Christian and Reformation times" (p. 275).

'Even the cruelties of the Inquisition, the tortures and the burnings, were really another expression of the same access of strength. The lesson of religious cruelty, like the lesson of martyrdom, is that if religion, the permanent expression of vitality, can show such invincible strength of cruelty on the one hand, and of endurance on the other, the fact is due to an increase of vitality. We inherit, to our inestimable gain, the spirit and strength of persecutor and

[p. 403]

martyr alike: the resource, the endurance, the zeal, and the power of our best men are due to that spirit and the human force which it revealed" (p. 277).

Our Anglican sophist, it will be seen, has determined to take the wind out of the sails of Nietzsche, whose doctrine he gravely pronounces to be a "paradox." Before we pass to his specific defence of the Christ myth, it would seem to be necessary to point out to his possible dupes the sociological implications of his thesis, to say nothing of its ethic. (For it is to be presumed that he makes converts, like his congeners, Mr. Kidd, Mr. Drummond, and Mr. Balfour.) The "invincible strength of cruelty" which he so devoutly admires was after all rather more fully evidenced by the American Native Americans than even by the Puritans who did their best to exterminate them; and, religion for religion, the Choctaw religion would seem on his own principles to be superior even to the Christian. As for the "vitality" imparted to the Native Americans by their late conversion to Christianity, the concept is one which must entertain the American Bureau of Ethnology. Of course, the Choctaws cannot pretend to have done much in the way of religious persecution--that is indeed a Jewish and Christian specialty; and it must be admitted that when the Boxers have attempted something in that line the Christians have certainly been able to outdo them in massacre. But then on Mr. Crawley's principles it must surely have been a great "increase of vitality" that enabled the Moslems to overrun all the early centres of Christianity, and the Turks later to conquer Christian Greece. Which makes a difficulty for the Neo-Christian.

As regards the services rendered by Christianity to States, again, the would-be believer would do well to note (1) the "vitalising" effect of the spirit of religious cruelty on Spain, which had so many more persecutors and so many more martyrs than England; (2) the operation of the same saving virtue in imperial Rome, where Christians are wont to point to the abolition of the gladiatorial combats as the beneficent work of their creed, but have not yet succeeded in demonstrating any access of vitality to the empire from the first century onwards. It is only fair to admit that the Spaniards contrived to destroy the civilisations of Mexico and Peru. But then the religion of Mexico was marked by an indurated and bloodthirsty cruelty which, on Mr. Crawley's principles, should have meant an adequate amount of "vitality." As for our own Anglo-Saxon ancestors, it remains for Mr. Crawley to demonstrate wherein they showed increase of "vitality" between their pagan conquest of Britain and their own conquest by their Norman fellow-Christians.

The nature of the thinking faculty which sustains Mr. Crawley in his social philosophy may be gathered from a few samples. 1. "It is one of the most noticeable of the discrepancies in the gospel narratives that Christ consistently refused to give a 'sign,' while his reporters tell us of so many" (p. 141). 2. "If ever a conviction seemed to be mortised in adamant, it is perhaps the belief

[p. 404]

that religion is essentially altruistic. But the facts unmistakably point to the exact opposite" (p. 273). 3. "Even the most self-sufficient of rationalists prays to something without knowing it" (p. 257). (In which case Mr. Crawley knows the fact without any testimony.)

The reader is now substantially prepared to understand and appraise Mr. Crawley's operations in Christian apologetics. He has a certain cynical candour, which is not without its charm; but with his natural gift for paralogism and his happy freedom from intellectual scruple, he yields some flights of ethic and of logic which will not readily be matched in modern controversy. On p. 125 he speaks of a "reaction against the scientific attack......to be seen in an altered Agnosticism, which is really religious, and is practically the old Christianity with all dogma and ritual omitted, and the supernatural element excluded." On p. 131 we learn that "the scientific Agnostic" is "ready to return by some rational path to the main beliefs of Christianity. This tendency was seen in Comte and Haeckel; and the inference is legitimate that, even where the cleavage between religion and science is apparently most marked, yet man cannot do without religion." Then on pp. 290-1 we have the assurance that in "the Ethical and Socialistic societies of to-day" "morality takes the place of religion. The failure of these systems to satisfy human nature is perhaps unexampled for completeness in the history of practical ethics. Positivism, as has been said, is Christianity with the Catholicism left out" [what was "said," as it happens, was the converse: "Catholicism with the Christianity left out"]: "the Ethical movement leaves out everything."

In Mr. Crawley's psychosis, moral, logical, and intellectual incoherence combined yield a rare range of tergiversation. On p. 243 he informs us that "Religious monism at once removes all false dualism from our metaphysics." On p. 295 he delightedly chimes with Bishop Gore to the effect that "It is common to all the anti-Christian views of sin that at the last resort they make sin natural, a part of nature. It is characteristic of Christ's view of sin--of the scriptural view of it--that it makes it unnatural."

[One cannot but linger in this connection over the further joint achievement of Bishop Gore and Mr. Crawley in the way of falsifying doctrinal history. "It is characteristic, again," says the Bishop, "of the non-Christian view that it makes the body, the material, the seat of sin. It is essential to the Christian view to find its seat and only source in the will." "Now," adds Mr. Crawley, "this account applies exactly to the primitive conception: the savage, like the Essene, regards sin as a transgression of nature. Sin breaks taboo......"It must be confessed that on the whole the Bishop contrives to get furthest from the truth. If there is one doctrine that stands out from the whole Christian and "scriptural" tradition, it is that sin entered the entire human race by Adam's fall; and if there is one moral assumption that dominates that tradition in the early, "dark,"

[p. 405]

and middle ages, it is that the body is by nature prone to evil. The simple doctrine, "if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out," might serve to decide the question for any save a Christian sophist. But Mr. Crawley's summary of the savage theory of "nature" runs the Bishop's formula close. The conception "transgression of nature" is simply not possible to a true savage, and was never formulated by one. Taboo is made and unmade by a word or a ceremony. Does the savage call either "nature"?]

I have spent some time over the main body of Mr. Crawley's doctrine, thinking it useful to exhibit the moral and mental cast of a writer who lays it down that "irreligion means deterioration," and who, knowing the substantial truth of the results of modern anthropology and hierology, professes to vindicate Christianity as "revelation." "The ordinary believer," he writes, "naively but justly, requires that Christianity shall be literally true, and its Founder both God and Man" (p. 144). So Mr. Crawley goes about to accommodate the ordinary believer. The critical argument of Pagan Christs he introduces to his readers in this summary (p. 148): "Dionysus and Apollo also have their religions, and precisely the same stories are told about founders as about the gods they served. Therefore Buddha, Zoroaster, Confucius, Laou-tze, Moses, and Christ must be mythical." Dr. J. E. Carpenter, I admit, could not have done the "therefore" better. My only wonder is that Mr. Crawley did not add Mohammed and Mrs. Eddy: the extras would have made still better reading, and Mr. Crawley's ethic could easily afford them. But there is no lack of completeness in his further proposition that "Dionysus and Apollo are never represented as founders of religions any more than is Jehovah." I leave comment to every adult who has read the Bacchae and the Pentateuch. Wondering why Mr. Crawley did not say "any more than Jesus," I proceed to transcribe his assertion (p. 149) that "Thus the evidence for the historicity of founders like Buddha and Zoroaster" [Quetzalcoatl, for instance?] "is as strong as for any historical fact, and this is admitted by the best students of the respective systems." The proposition and the proof of it I hope to help to preserve by this transcription, to which I add no comment.

I may be excused for adding this from the same page:--"Robertson, indeed, while arguing against the historicity of Jesus, stultifies his case by admitting the historicity of 'another person of the same name,' the Jesus ben Pandora of the Talmud." I ought here, perhaps, to make clear for Mr. Crawley's "naive" readers the full force and scope of his argument. It means that if I deny the historicity of Moses, but admit that of Moses of Chorene, I have stultified myself; and that if I dispute the historicity of John Barleycorn I stultify my own signature. It is a trifle, but it may be worth adding, that I did not admit the historicity of Jesus ben Pandira, about which I expressed serious doubts. But it is true that I admit the more or less clear historicity of a number of the

[p. 406]

[paragraph continues] Jesuses mentioned by Josephus, even as I admit the historicity of Mr. Crawley while disputing that of his namesakes in Vanity Fair. Further, I have postulated the probable historicity of an annual human sacrifice of a victim ritually named Jesus Barabbas.

With that crushing syllogism ready to launch, Mr. Crawley had just before advanced the proposition that the beginning of the Christian era was a "period too late for the free formation either of divine or of historical personalities by the mythopoeic imagination"--an inexpensive petitio principii which had often been put forward before. I might leave him to reckon with those Christian hierologists who affirm the post-Christian appearance of such deities as Balder and Krishna; but it may suffice, even for a "naive" believer of moderate intelligence, to ask himself when and how or how "freely" were formed the "personalities" of King Arthur and his Knights, Prester John, William Tell, the Wandering Jew, Lohengrin, Tannhauser, the Seven Sleepers, Saint George, Faustus, and Saint Christopher.

If Mr. Crawley believed in the worthless argument he has hero used, he obviously needed no other. If Jesus cannot be non-historical, the case is at an end. He shows his sense of the futility of his own plea by using a number of others--the argument from the Chrestus of Suetonius, which clearly tells in favour of a Christ myth; the argument from Tacitus, who, if he wrote the passage in his History, only repeated what Christians said; and the argument from the passage in Josephus, given up as spurious by most Christian scholars. Then, in utter disregard of the Pauline epistles, he affirms that the Christian tradition itself "mentions the humanity of Christ first"; and proceeds to found on the hostile Jewish tradition of the "Sepher Toldoth Jeschu," concerning which he expressly argues that it is plainly framed by way of countering the gospel story. Then it has no evidential value whatever, and his case for the historicity of Jesus is at an end. The assertion that the story of the Talmudic Jesus ben Pandira is "of supreme value" as "tending to prove the historicity of Christ" could come only from the writer who asserts that the Gospel Jesus consistently refuses to work wonders while the same gospels tell that he worked many.

Mr. Crawley has nothing more to say beyond accusing non-sacramentalist Christians of "stultifying the Incarnation"--the Incarnation in which he himself does not believe, since he insists on the historicity of Jesus and the lateness of the Incarnation story. Against the thesis of Pagan Christs that the gospel tragedy is a mystery-drama he offers no argument whatever. He is content to say in a footnote that Dupuis's derivation of the legend of St. Peter from the Janus myth "is worth noting as a type of the extravagant inferences which are so conspicuous in the work of G. W. Cox and J. M. Robertson." Of the charge of extravagance he does not offer a hint of proof.

I do not propose to make a counter charge of "extravagance." The scientific charge against Mr. Crawley, in its most charitable

[p. 407]

form, would be that of intellectual antinomianism. He has simply no intellectual ethic whatever, and he is evidently satisfied that religion needs none, since he declares that religion in general, and Christianity in particular, deals only with "the elemental" (pp. 209, 265). Which means that if you feel you like to believe religion, and you think that it is socially useful, you do well to profess it in disregard of all argument (p. 296). He proceeds to explain in this connection (p. 265) that "In the elemental view of life, every scientific error of the Bible may be regarded as a truth. It is true, for instance, that the sun rises; and not even the most pedantic rationalist will employ a more scientific phrase." Observe the logical morality of the phrase "for instance," which is made to cover every myth and every forgery in the Bible.

Mr. Crawley, like most latter-day Christian priests, scouts the doctrine of the "French deists" that religion in general has been a matter of priestly imposture; thoughtfully omitting to tell the "naive but just" Christian reader that this was the verdict habitually pronounced by the Christian priesthood upon all non-Christian religions during many centuries. The deists, finding as much priest-craft in Christianity as anywhere else, made a fairly reasonable extension of the doctrine. It certainly needs qualification; though Mr. Crawley, with his usual logical incoherence, offers a hopelessly fallacious argument against it. Among the Australian Aruntas, as Messrs. Spencer and Gillen have shown, certain myths propounded to the boys and women are perfectly well known by the adult men to be frauds. This, in Mr. Crawley's opinion (pp. 195-6), proves that religious beliefs can never have been set up by fraud. It is really a rather strong argument for the priestcraft theory. For the Aruntas have no priests; and the old argument was that priests were able to carry off impostures which among laymen without priests would have been treated as such by adults.

Whatever may be the final verdict of hierology on that score, no careful student will dispute the actuality of priestcraft among either savages or civilised men. Of its existence among savages the proofs are innumerable. Of its existence among educated Christians the latest proof is Mr. Crawley's book. He helps us to understand the spirit and the procedure of priestcraft in all ages. In the course of one of his professional appeals to pious and other prejudice he writes:--"Theistic and Christian prepossessions are often derided by rationalists; but there is sound human nature behind the instinct, as we may properly call it, which leads men to distrust an 'atheist'" (p. 297). "Human nature," from the point of view of Mr. Crawley's tribe, is notoriously a monopoly of those who hold the beliefs which he inculcates; but, in spite of that naive claim, rationalists contrive to possess some. And after they read Mr. Crawley it will probably reinforce their instinct, if we may dare so to call it, that there is something profoundly untrustworthy about a temporising priest who champions primitive superstition.'

[p. 408]

  

 section 3. The Rev. Dr. St. Clair Tisdall.

Dr. Tisdall illustrates at once the difficulty for orthodox theologians of keeping their tempers when their faith is challenged, and the havoc which passion can work in an argument, not to say in the reasoning faculty itself. His animus disorders his enterprise from the start. In the opening chapter of his work on Mythic Christs and the True, [*1] dealing with the question of Mithraism, he refers to me as "a modern writer on the subject, who tells us that his book 'challenges criticism above all by its thesis.'" Pausing at that word, he goes on to charge me with first asserting that we know very little of Mithraism, and then proceeding, "as do others, to afford a complete account of the legends and the inmost theology of the Mithraists, together with details of its origin."

It will be seen that the phrase first quoted by him is from the introduction to this work (preface in first edition), where the phrasing is not "its thesis," but "its theses," the reference being not to any general thesis, but to two immediately specified propositions concerning the Christian mystery-play. Having quoted "its thesis," Dr. Tisdall burkes the rest of the passage, thus either wilfully garbling the whole or failing in his anger to understand what he reads. To the "theses" specified he makes not even an attempt to reply. The attack which he goes on to make on me concerning Mithraism is, as the reader will see from its statement, nugatory. Upon that subject neither I nor any one else can give "a complete account of the legends and the inmost theology." "If we know all this about Mithra," says Dr. Tisdall, quoting some details from another writer and from me, "we know a great deal." And he goes on to propound the crushing counter-thesis, "There are no Mithraic Scriptures extant," as if that settled the question. It is idle to discuss with such a writer what constitutes "a great deal." It may suffice, however, to point out that what contemporary documentary evidence we have concerning Mithraism, apart from the Zendavesta, comes from Plutarch, Strabo, Athenaeus, Herodotus, Porphyry, Commodianus, Macrobius, and Julian; the Fathers Julius Firmicus Maternus, Tertullian, Jerome, Justin Martyr, and Gregory Nazianzen; and the historian Elisaeus of Armenia. Whether we call their information little or much, there it is. When he proceeds to charge me with eliciting from my "fancy" statements which I quote from the Fathers of his own Church, he merely raises the question whether it is his scholarship or his ethic that is at fault.

Accusing me further (p. 7) of dishonestly "reading Christian doctrines into Mithraism," Dr. Tisdall begins by vilifying that creed as "debased." He then sets about proving his charge against me (1) by citing from me a reference to the Khorda Avesta, xxvi, 107, whereafter he declares in italics, "There is no such chapter in 

[p. 409]

existence......But possibly this is merely a printer's error, though an unfortunate one." If Dr. Tisdall knows the texts as he professes to do, he must be perfectly well aware that xxvi--with the alternative "(10)"--is Spiegel's chapter-number for the Mihir Yasht in the Khorda Avesta. To say that "there is no such chapter in existence" is again to raise questions not only of scholarship, but of intellectual ethic. True, I have usually cited the Mihir Yasht by that title, and from Darmesteter: the "error" consisted solely in not giving Spiegel's name, with his rendering: "as the heavenly understanding allies itself to the heavenly Mithra." All errors of reference, printers' or writers', doubtless, are unfortunate, though for candid readers they are usually soluble; but doubly unfortunate is the arrogance of a writer who, making an attack such as the above, thrice prints "Fargand" for "Fargard" in his own text; twice prints "Principal" for "Principle"; prints "Iride" for "Iside"; prints "Pyramids" as a French word; and cites Jerome's "Contra Jovinianum" as "Contra Jovianum." A writer who grounds his attacks upon supposed printer's errors should be more careful about his own proofs.

On the real issue, Dr. Tisdall is careful not to mention that in the Mihir Yasht (= Khorda Avesta, xxvi, 107: Spiegel) the "heavenly understanding" is declared to be allied with Mithra. He goes on professedly to cite from Geldner's text of the Zendavesta a passage which is not that referred to by me, laboriously and uselessly proving that it does not speak of the "Word"; and then, turning to Vendidad, Fargard xix, 14, 15 (48, 54), stakes his credit on his own declaration that I "may have been misled" by a translation "impossible for a person at all acquainted with the original language." I fancy that most readers will prefer to the smatterings of Dr. Tisdall the expert scholarship of Darmesteter, who reads "the Word Incarnate" in Mihir Yasht xxxii, 137 (where Spiegel has simply "the Manthra"), or even that of Spiegel, who reads "the holy Word" where Dr. Tisdall says no scholar could.

F'. Dr. Tisdall's case on this head substantially amounts to denying that "sacred text" has any possible community of meaning with the idea of the Logos. He thereby shows his general ignorance of the evolution of the idea in question. (Both in Islam and in Brahmanism the Sacred Book is theologically abstracted to an eternal and untreated existence; and the psychic process is fundamentally the same as in the Hindu hypostatising of Speech, which is the type of the Graecised doctrine. "Speech is the Rig Veda," and "the 'word' is Brahma.")

Offering such proofs as that above noticed for his charge of dishonesty against me, Dr. Tisdall (2) represents me (p. 12) as giving the Mithraic case in proof of my allegation that the Christian doctrine of the Logos comes from a pagan source. To realise the dishonesty of that assertion, the reader need but peruse  section section 2, 3 of Ch. ii of Part II of the foregoing volume, where the Logos idea is

[p. 410]

traced to a probable Babylonian source. I have expressly represented the idea of the Logos as late in Mithraism.

When, further, my reverend critic in this connection zealously contends that even to prove that Mithra was "associated with" the Word would not be to identify him with it, he raises the question whether he is aware of the history of his own creed. If he knew that in early Christian literature "it is common to find the titles of the Holy Ghost assigned to the Logos," and if he could realise the fact that in ordinary Christian conception the Logos performs the function of the Holy Spirit, even he would hardly have flouted the suggestion that association of that kind can easily lead to assimilation in a fluid system. For the rest, he makes no attempt to deny that Sraosha, who was latterly bracketed with Mithra, was "the Word"; and he does not even mention my reasons for inferring that in one worship Mithra was practically identified with Vohumano--Sraosha, the latter being worshipped, like Mithra, along with Anaitis.

The gist of Dr. Tisdall's claim appears to be that no Eastern creed save the Christian had either a Logos or a Mediator or a Virgin Mother, and that Mithraism could have had no moral value. On all three heads he writes as the merest Christian partisan. He is aware (p. 18) that in Armenia the Christians professed to quote from Persians the statement that "the God Mithra was born of a woman"; and still he professes to see no trace of the idea of a virgin-birth. Yet in his own creed the God-Man is declared to be born of a woman; and he does not for a moment pretend that the Persians declared Mithra to be the son of a mortal father. Confusing another text, he makes it assert that Mithra was "incestuously born of a mortal mother," when the assertion really was (see above, <page 322>, note) that the God was born of the incest of Ahura Mazda with his mother. Any candid scholar would admit that on the face of such references Mithra was reputed supernaturally born of God and a mortal mother. When Dr. Tisdall argues further that the conception of the Petra Genetrix, the Rock from which Mithra was born, excludes the idea of any mother, he merely sets us asking whether he is unaware that in ancient mythology the Earth, constantly personified, is the mother par excellence.

On the general mythological topic of virgin-birth, Dr. Tisdall writes in the childish strain of Canon McCulloch. Where a supernaturally impregnated mother is not expressly called a virgin, he protests, there is no analogy to the Christian story. Both reverend gentlemen seem to be unaware that the title of "Virgin" was categorically given in antiquity to Mother-Goddesses and Goddesses of many amours. They cannot see that the essence of the idea under challenge lies in the item of supernatural birth--birth without male congress, which is asserted by Hesiod in the case of Here. In the heat of his partisanship, Dr. Tisdall angrily attacks Dr. Frazer for accepting the overwhelmingly strong testimony of Messrs. Spencer and Gillen as to the belief of certain Australian tribes that all births

[p. 411]

are caused by the entrance of ancestral spirits, and that male congress is not the cause of conception. On this head he advances the futile argument that the tribes in question have strict marriage laws--as if these were not intelligible in terms of mere sex instinct and property; and he has the hardihood to affirm (p. 89) that "there is no proof that savages hold or have ever held" the doctrine of spiritual conception. After this, it matters little that, without an attempt at proof, he declares me (p. 87) to have confounded

f Saoshyant with Sraosha in the Zoroastrian lore; and further flatly denies that in that lore Saoshyant is virgin-born. Knowing nothing of the life of Australian Aborigines, he insolently negates the whole profound research of Messrs. Spencer and Gillen; and on the strength of his private definition he overrules the verdict of Tiele, Cumont, Haug, and Darmesteter concerning Saoshyant. When, however, a Sayce, turned champion of orthodoxy, argues that the human race has not evolved from savagery at all, that ineptitude is for Dr. Tisdall a sufficient ground for refusing to admit that "men were originally savages"; and the youthful folly of Renan's deliverance on the same subject--a deliverance never repeated, in a book never completed--serves equally, with him, to outweigh the whole mass of modern biological science. It does not occur to Dr. Tisdall to ask whether even in 1854 Renan believed in the Virgin-birth.

The reader will be able to realise Dr. Tisdall's philosophic standpoint and logical faculty from his concluding deliverance (p. 91) that "if we suppose that popular fancy, quite independently and with no apparent reason (!), evolved the idea of supernatural--nay, even, of Virgin--birth, then we must conclude one of two things: either (1) that it is an unmeaning delusion, or (2) that it was developed under Divine guidance." Deciding as a matter of course on the latter verdict, Dr. Tisdall proceeds to explain that through all religion "'one unceasing (sic) purpose runs' a Divine plan for the education of the human race." On his own view, then, Mithraism was divinely superintended; and the fatigued reader is moved to ask why the reverend critic took all his previous pains to prove that the Mithraists cannot have had a notion of Virgin-birth, or of a Logos, and must have been a licentious crew? Given a Divine plan through all, are we not invited to credit Deity with all the religious misconduct of all paganism?

Putting Dr. Tisdall's philosophic puerilities aside, I have to point out, further, the bad faith of a citation by him (p. 21) from me (Pagan Christs, 1st ed. p. 345: this ed. p. 326) as to the inscription on a picture in a Mithraic catacomb of "phrases of the 'Eat and drink for to-morrow we die' order." Dr. Tisdall is careful not to mention (a) my remark that, if original, such phrases might stand for an antinomian tendency such as Paul imputed to his Corinthian converts; or (b) my further suggestion that they may very well have been inscribed by Christian hands after the fall of Mithraism; or (c) my further comment that there is no evidence whatever that

[p. 412]

[paragraph continues] Mithraism ever developed such disorders as compelled the suppression of the Christian agapae. Needless to add, he does not tell that some declare the picture to represent the Christian "Banquet of Seven." With his professed faith in the Divine plan running through all religion, he is determined at any cost to prove that the Deity led Mithraists by wholly evil paths. Where Hausrath ascribes to their cult a purity which "won many hearts from sin-stained Olympus" and attracted some of the best emperors, Dr. Tisdall affirms that it won "generally the worst of them" (p. 17), naming "Aurelian, Diocletian, Galerius, and Licinius, as well as Julian the Apostate." Hausrath names Antoninus Pius, Constantius Chlorus, and Julian--without thinking it necessary to add "the Apostate." Such are the differences of method and result as between the sectarian and the historian. If one were to comment on the charges brought by Paul the Apostate against his Corinthian converts, or on the characters of the common run of the Christian Emperors from Constantine the Apostate onwards, Dr. Tisdall would presumably fall back either on his candid theorem (p. 70, note) that Christian precept is not responsible for Christian practice--a principle reserved by him for Christian use--or his equally flexible doctrine that all religious history is under divine supervision.

At that point we may leave the moral question save in so far as we are forced still to question the moral spirit of the Christian champion. He does not scruple to repel the assertion that Mithra was a Mediator by declaring that it is founded solely on Plutarch's statement that "Mithra was called mesites because he stood midway between the Good Principal [sic] Ormazd, and the Evil Principal [!] Ahriman." The assertion that he was a Mediator between man and God is accordingly declared not to be "scholarly, or even honest." The suggestion here is that mesites does not really mean Mediator; whereas that is the normal and standing force of the term. The honest critic would have us believe that the regular Greek word for "intercessor" could have no such connotation for Mithraists when applied to Mithra, because Plutarch said he got the name from being midway between Ormazd and Ahriman; and that whereas Christians by his own account felt the need of a Mediator, Zoroastrians and Mithraists would not. He does not scruple to write:--"If his worshippers really held him [Mithra] to be a middle-man between Ormazd and Ahriman, we can the better understand Mithra's undoubted association with Cybele, Baal, and such immoral deities." Thus can hierology be written by a Christian priest. If a heretic should ask whether Christ is not practically a mid-way Power between God and Devil, saving his worshippers from both, he would be a good deal nearer the truth; but we can imagine the epithets with which Dr. Tisdall would greet him. The reader will not be surprised to learn that, perverting to his purpose a passage of Darmesteter, he represents ancient society (albeit under the Divine Plan) in the last years B.C. to have attained merely to

[p. 413]

[paragraph continues] "the unbridling of the human brute," adding that "so it is in France now."

It is on a basis of such sociology and psychology as this that Dr. Tisdall reaches the conclusion that the belief of pagans in supernatural births proves the reality of the gospel story. "The false coin," he sums up, in the manner and on the plane of Justin Martyr, "pre-supposes the genuine......The very existence of so many varied forms of legends of births of this kind shows that such a thing is not 'unthinkable.'" So that the currency of a multitude of narratives declared to be false (but divinely inspired) proves the inherent credibility of one other narrative of the same order. Such is the logic of official Christian theology in England in 1909.

I have not taken the trouble to answer all of Dr. Tisdall's minor criticisms. It may suffice to cite one more, as a sample of their validity. On p. 24 he writes (italics mine):--"Though Mr. Robertson says, 'Mithraism was, in point of range, the most nearly universal religion of the Western world, in the early centuries of the Christian era,' yet this statement requires modification. Cumont informs us that, at first at least, 'The influence of this small band of sectaries on the great mass of the Roman population was virtually as infinitesimal as is to-day the influence of Buddhist societies in modern Europe." That is to say, my statement must be modified because it does not apply to the period before that to which I specifically applied it. I spoke of Mithraism "in the early centuries of the Christian era." Professor Cumont's phrase refers expressly to the time of the beginnings, "towards the end of the Republic." Dr. Tisdall has penned sheer nullity.

An excuse is perhaps needed for dealing at any length with a writer capable of such dialectic. Mine is, that it is necessary at least to let laymen know the nature of the minds which now seek to impose faith upon them.

  

 section 4. The Rev. Father Martindale.

In the Roman Catholic periodical The Month, for December, 1908, there appeared an article by the Rev. Father Martindale under the title "The Religion of Mithra: Third Article: VI. A Modern Apostle." It was devoted to an attack on Part III of Pagan Christs; and as the title appears to convey the belief that I am a Mithraist, it might seem negligible in a serious discussion. The reverend author, however, has made so many charges of bad faith, with so much revelation of bad faith on his own part, that I have thought it advisable to deal with them in detail, putting succinctly his misrepresentations, errors, and aspersions, and my rebuttals.

1. In his first paragraph, the rev. critic ascribes to me the thesis that "the dwindling intelligence of the earlier Christian generations misinterpreted a kind of mystery-play--such as were those of the 'death and restoring to life' of Attis and Adonis and Osiris--as the

[p. 414]

representation of actual events, and, by a coarse realism, transformed the libretto of this play into the Gospels." Having posited this falsification, he goes on: "We have no intention of touching even lightly on Mr. Robertson's general theory."

Comment.--My thesis was that the mystery-play was closely transcribed, and added to the gospels--an extremely different statement. The refusal to face the theory was to be expected. It is normal among defenders of the faith.

2. Before dealing even with Mithraism, the rev. critic seeks to inflame his fellow-Catholics by describing me as having made an "attack upon that which is the spiritual life of so many millions, and from which they draw comfort in sorrow and strength in moral stress."

Comment.--The critic ought really to have added that my "attack" endangered his own income. In that way, the question of the truth or untruth of the statements under discussion might have been still further obscured. A picture of the happy state of human life under the Inquisition might further have helped his polemic.

3. Dealing with my section on Mithraism, the Rev. Father proclaims that "the list of Mr. Robertson's authorities astonishes us." He goes on: "After the respectable names of Tiele and Boissier we find cited, without discrimination, H. Seel's Mithrasgeheimnisse (1823), of the first part of which work M. Cumont says that it has but the remotest connection with the cult of Mithra," etc. "Sainte-Croix's Recherches, etc., are next cited," he continues, and Sainte-Croix also is little valued by M. Cumont. "Sainte-Croix makes no use of the monuments, nor does Windischmann, an author of far higher merit, however, whom Mr. Robertson also quotes. Creuzer and Lajard constantly recur as authorities"; and M. Cumont dismisses these likewise as valueless.

Comment.--Any reader of this paragraph, not having seen my essay on Mithraism, would be nearly sure to take it for granted--unless he knew something of the controversial methods of Father Martindale--that the disparaged authors in question were cited by me as authorities for my facts and theories. True, the underlined passage about Lajard and Creuzer might puzzle him; for why should the critic now say "constantly," after asserting generally that I cited the authors as my "authorities"? But he concludes the passage by asserting that "Mr. Robertson's imposing list of authorities is singularly diminished in impressiveness when we see that it includes names like these." A careful student, of course, might detect in the "includes" a sign of consciousness that the critic had been playing fast and loose with his readers, but the general impression conveyed to most readers of The Month would be that I relied on exploded "authorities."

It is my disagreeable duty to point out that Father Martindale knew he was deceiving his readers. The list of "authorities" of

[p. 415]

which he speaks is not truthfully to be described as a list of authorities at all. It is given as a footnote in support of one sentence: "As to this, students are agreed"--''this" being the proposition that "Mithraism was in point of range the most nearly universal religion of the Western world in the early centuries of the Christian era." The list of references from which he cites a few names is compiled solely to bear out this assertion. I call Seel and Sainte-Croix and Creuzer and Lajard "students," whatever be their shortcomings; if they are not so describable, what, I wonder, is Father Martindale? Besides those named I cite Beugnot, Ozanam, E. Meyer, Roscher, Quinet, Renan, Jean Reville, Hertzberg, Gardner, Hausrath, and Smith and Chatham's Dictionary--all which "authorities" he is careful not to name; but I cite them only to show how well founded was my general historic assertion concerning the vogue of Mithraism.

Even after categorically representing me as resting my case upon untrustworthy "authorities," the Rev. Father writes: "Yet, even when he quotes these authorities only to deny their worth, we are often left with the curious impression that, be they right or wrong, the quoting of them should be held to have somehow damaged the Christian tradition." That is to say, the Rev. Father knew that the "imposing list of authorities" was not a list of authorities at all. He knew that I did not rely for my conclusions on the writers he disparaged; he knew that I repeatedly dissented from their views, and that more than once I censured their misstatements. And still he elected to leave standing the original untruth.

If the Rev. Father had censured me for putting together such a list of references at all, on the score that the assertion they are offered to prove is one which probably no competent scholar would now dispute, I should have admitted that his blame had some colour, and merely replied that my essay was first written twenty years ago, when, so far as I knew, there was no treatise on the subject in English, and I had to acquire my information from many sources. Had M. Cumont's great work been then in existence, I should probably never have planned my sketch. Even when it was republished in Pagan Christs, so far as I knew, no English study of the subject had appeared. I wrote for an uninformed public. But at least my list has served to elicit a not unmemorable exhibition of what a Christian priest will stoop to in the way of prevarication against one whom he ostensibly supposes to be an "apostle" of a non-Christian cult.

4. After recounting his "curious impression" as above cited, the Rev. Father proceeds as follows:--

"Thus, on p. 322 seq., the degrees of Mithraic initiation are discussed. Mr. Robertson believes them to have numbered twelve. He relies for proof upon a mutilated and incomprehensible text of Porphyry, who is quoting Pallas; and upon an 'important citation' from Elias of Crete, who, with Nicetas, asserts the degrees to have

[p. 416]

been twelve. But Mr. Robertson does not notice that Elias and Nicetas (whom, indeed, he does not mention) (!) are both of them using Nonnus, a fantastic mythographer of the sixth or seventh century, whose witness Mr. Robertson has himself, just above, abandoned."

Comment.--The Rev. Father makes "more mistakes than the thing admits of." He puts Nonnus in the sixth or seventh century, when he would have been impossible. The universal voice of history assigns him to the fifth. With his customary good sense, further, the Rev. Father censures me for not noting the inutility of an authority whom, as he admits, I did not even name. Then he represents me as citing Porphyry for a list of twelve "degrees of initiation," when I do not cite him for twelve of anything. But these are trifles compared with the dimensions of the mare's nest which is the chief content of the paragraph under notice. The sentences which the Rev. Father attacks in my essay have nothing to do with the Mithraic "degrees." They refer to the trials of initiation--a totally different thing. A glance at the context might have saved him had he been concerned for anything better than aspersing a heretic: I refer twice over to the "austerities," the "elaborate and painful process," which a Mithraic initiate had to undergo. I need not therefore take the trouble to inquire whether his assertions as to Elias of Crete and Nicetas are any more accurate than his dating of Nonnus. The residual fact is that he has made a ridiculous mistake. His very phrase "degrees of initiation" is a triumph of confusion.

5. All the before-mentioned exploits occur within the space of two pages of The Month. And still the exhibition continues. After confusing the trials with the degrees of Mithraism, the rev. critic goes on:--

"M. Cumont, however, makes it quite clear that we may trust St. Jerome's formal evidence that the degrees of initiation" [italics mine] "numbered seven. Monuments and inscriptions amply bear this out. Assuming, however, that they were twelve, Mr. Robertson thus proceeds: 'Out of the various notices [i.e., the contradictory data of Jerome, Porphyry, and irresponsible medieval writers], partly by hypothesis, M. Lajard has constructed a not quite trustworthy scheme, representing twelve Mithraic degrees.'"

Comment.--That is to say, I assumed the degrees were twelve, though I represent as not quite trustworthy the only list which gives that number! I do not know whether the Rev. Father can yet realise that I never did "assume" that the degrees were twelve, though I thought the trials were probably of that number. The fact remains that Jerome's list of seven lay before him in my essay, and that he suppresses the fact of my having given it, suppressing also the fact that in a footnote I have remarked as to one of Lajard's degrees being "particularly ill made out." Having thus, by suppression and confusion, reduced the matter to chaos, the Rev. Father

[p. 417]

proceeds to assert that I make out the "hypothetical and untrustworthy" Mithraic scheme "somehow responsible for Christian emblems." This is a sample of what his state of mind can produce in the way of blundering. My footnote, to which he furiously refers, speaks of a "curious correspondence" between Lajard's four grades (which, in his usual way, the critic confuses with his twelve degrees) and the emblems of the four evangelists, adding, "these, however, were introduced into Judaism from Assyrian sources at the exile." These words, expressly inserted to guard against the notion that the emblems in question were taken from Mithraism, the Rev. Father represents as setting up one of his "impressions" to the exact contrary.

Those "curious impressions" I am content to leave to the psychologists as data; but I will take the opportunity to explain to other readers that the purport of the note in question is to suggest a widespread use, dating back very far in religious history, of either the four gospel-emblems or four emblems of a similar character. Apparently the Rev. Father is exasperated by the suggestion that those emblems were not originated as such by Christians, though he does not overtly dispute my assertion that they existed in Judaism. The point as to Lajard's grades is that they resolve his list of degrees into four--terrestrial, aerial, igneous (or, rather, solar), and divine; while the Judaeo-Christian gospel-emblems of ox, eagle, lion, and man (and similar uses of emblems among Assyrians and Arabs) seem to imply a similar symbolical division. It is a matter of small importance; and, if I could have foreseen such readers and critics as Father Martindale, I might have made the note more elaborate. Such prevision, however, was beyond me. He calls the list of degrees in Lajard "preposterous." I had already called it "grotesque." But it is not more grotesque than his blunders, his "curious impressions," and his misrepresentations.

6. And still the Rev. Father contrives to continue blundering. Up to his fourth page he has not once deviated into accuracy, and in the paragraph following on that last quoted he asserts that on pp. 302-3 I "wrongly identify Kronos-Zervan with Mithra."

Comment.--Knowing that I never for one moment did any such thing, I re-read in blank astonishment the pages to which he refers. Only on the first is Kronos-Zervan referred to; and the statement is that from Armenian Mazdeism Mithraism borrowed "its enigmatic 'Supreme God,' Kronos-Zervan, the Time Spirit, a Babylonian conception, represented in the mysteries by the lion-headed or demon-headed and serpent-encircled figure which bears the two keys. And this deity, in turn, tells of Babylonian influence......"

With a sense of moral relief, I surmise that the critic actually did get his idea from the elliptical beginning of the next paragraph, which runs: "Of the deity thus shaped through many centuries, by many forces, it seems warrantable to say that his cult was normally in an ethically advanced stage "I suppose his intelligence could infer that by this deity was meant the "enigmatic" Kronos-Zervan;

[p. 418]

but I fancy I need not explain to any other reader that, as the whole sequel shows, the reference is just to Mithra. Any reader not primed by malice would realise this in a moment, even if for a moment he had been misled.

7. In the next paragraph the Rev. Father asserts that in my essay monuments are declared to "prove the identification" of Mithra with Anahita in a twy-sexed personality.

Comment.--Once more he has blundered. What I have said is that Herodotus is "accused of blundering in combining Mithra with Mylitta, it being shown" [that is, by M. Cumont] "from monuments that the goddess identified with Mithra was Anaitis or Tanat." "But," I add, "that the Armenian Anaitis and Mylitta were regarded as the same deity seems clear." As usual, the Rev. Father has misunderstood the argument. And when he goes on to say that "Mr. Robertson next identifies Mithra with Strabo's Omanos" [ = Vohu Mano, = Good Thought], he as usual distorts my words. What I have written is that "there is reason to suppose that Omanus (or the Persian form of the word) was a name of Mithra, and that it is an adaptation of Vohumano (Bahman) = Good Mind--a divine name with a very fluctuating connotation." I am not concerned to discuss the problem of the sexual duality of Mithra, as to which the Rev. Father, as usual, is careful to conceal from his readers the relevant data--such as the case of Men, the Moon-god, and the parallels in the Babylonian pantheon. It is a matter on which his opinion counts for nothing; and he seems never to have reflected upon the phenomena upon which the issue turns.

8. After significantly aspersing the Christian Father Julius Firmicus Maternus because even the anti-pagan testimony of that writer does not suit him, Father Martindale continues:--

"The other author quoted as 'making Mithra two-sexed and threefold, or three formed,' is Dionysius.' The pseudo-Areopagite really says: 'This incident [i.e., the miraculous tripling of a certain day] is especially inserted into the Persian sacerdotal traditions, and the Magi still commemorate the "triple Mithra" [ = the tripled length of Day-light].' There is here no mention of sex nor of form."

Comment.--There is here a preliminary falsification, followed by a memorable revelation of credulity. By writing in quotation marks "Dionysius," and proceeding to cite "the pseudo-Areopagite" on his own account, the Rev. Father deliberately suggests to his readers that I cited "Dionysius" without any characterisation. My reference is actually to "Dionysius the pseudo-Areopagite"--the usual way of referring to the writer in question. Not content with such a perversion, he adds another. He explicitly asserts that I quoted "Dionysius" as "making Mithra two-sexed and threefold or three-formed." I did no such thing. I expressly speak of the statement of Julius Firmicus (i.e., Maternus) "and later writers, that the Persians make Mithra both two-sexed and threefold or three-formed"; and, giving a reference specifically to Maternus, add

[p. 419]

[paragraph continues] "Compare Dionysius the pseudo-Areopagite," etc. The Rev. Father professes to be correcting me when he had to falsify my words in order to make them seem to need correction.

As for the use he makes of Dionysius' testimony, I could not have believed, until I read him, that even in his Church there could be found at the present day such medieval credulity. Not for two hundred years, I should think, has any English scholar been found to attach the slightest credit to the absurd proposition that Mithra's epithet of triplasios referred to the miracle-story of the turning back of the shadow on the dial for Hezekiah, whereby the day was "almost triplicated." Over two hundred years ago, Cudworth could write that "learned men [Vossius and Selden to wit] have already shown the foolery of this conceit." It has been reserved for Father Martindale to reincarnate the credulity of the pseudo-Areopagite and his scholiasts. He evidently takes the Hezekiah legend as a historical fact, recorded by the Persians; though the very text he accepts tells how Apollophanes the sophist denied all such assertions. Selden, after quoting the comment of Georgius Pachymerius about the triple extension of the day, adds: Ita et Maximus Scholiastes; and for himself, Nec in Graeculorum verba juravi. But such verba seems to be Father Martindale's "authorities."

The Rev. Father had set out with a flourish against me as one who might be expected, in an "attack" on the Christian religion, "whether from respect for his adversary or from fears for himself," to be "very careful in his choice of weapons." He is truly a precious authority upon choice of weapons. But his textual escapades are hardly more amazing than his hierological ideas. I have still a difficulty in conceiving that any man who pretends to write upon Mithraism could seriously assert that triplasios means triple-lengthed, thereby making the Magi identify Mithra with one case of protracted daylight; or could allege that the word tells nothing of "form." I suppose it is in all seriousness possible to him; though even among Christian priests and scholars, and in his own Church, there have been many with more insight into the symbolism of alien faiths. Such scholars as Vossius, Selden, Schedius, Huet, and Cudworth could all see that "the triple Mithra" meant something more than three-days-on-end! Huet, a Catholic bishop, could avow that "The triple Mithras of the Persians, spoken of by Dionysius, seems to be a certain image of the Trinity." Mosheim, balking at such speculation, despite Julian's phrase on "the triple function of the God," prefers reasonably to say with Macrobius that "the three faces of the sun and moon denoted the threefold relation of time, present, past, and future." That simple conception, had Father Martindale considered it, might have withheld him from translating triplasios as triple-lengthed, and from his added nonsense to the effect that the phrase "may indeed have applied to the twin torchbearers who flank Mithra Tauroktonos." But enough of his interpretations: it is sufficient to deal with his textual exploits.

[p. 420]

9. Coming at last to some central issues, he says, concerning my thesis that Mithra was virgin-born:--

"Mr. Robertson would prefer to assert, in view of a 'primary tendency,' that such a myth must have developed. He recurs, however, to positive argument. Mithra, he says, is identical with Sabazios; Strabo says Sabazios is as it were the child of the mother; Mithra must therefore have had the same relation to a mother. But Anahita (as Goddess of Fertilising Waters) would 'necessarily figure in her cultus as a mother,' and as Mithra (who was 'paired' with her) never appears (save in worshipful metaphor) as a father, he would perforce rank as her son."

Comment.--To the words, "primary tendency," in quotation marks, he appends the reference "P. 96." No such words occur on p. 96 of my book; they occur on p. 338. [I here refer, of course, to the first edition.] For the closing words in the above-cited passage, again, he refers to p. 337, whereas they occur on p. 339. I should not have dreamt of noting such slips were it not that, finding in one place a wrong figure in one of my references--a 7 turned by the printer into a 9--the Rev. Father says that "such correction is too often necessary in reading this book." Felicitous and scrupulous to the last, he attempts to fasten discredit upon me for a kind of error that occurs twice upon one of his own pages.

Turning to more serious matters, I have to note that his reference to my thesis of a "primary tendency" is one more misrepresentation: the tendency in question is explicitly indicated both on p. 96 and on p. 338 as that to "make the young God the son of the Supreme God." Then I add that "when Mithra became specially identified, like Dionysos, with the Phrygian God Sabazios, who was [for Strabo] the 'child as it were of the [great] mother,' he necessarily came to hold the same relation to the Mother-Goddess." There is nothing "primary" here: the process is specifically secondary. Only thereafter do I argue that in all likelihood--judging from the legend of the birth of Cyrus--there were ancient Persian forms of the Virgin-birth myth. Having duly obscured the argument here, the Rev. Father proceeds to allege that I "identify" the miraculously born Saoshyant with Mithra, which is one more falsification. My statement is that as "Sraosha (= Vohumano) came to be identified with Mithra, so would there be a blending or assimilation of Mithra with Saoshyas or Saoshyant, the Saviour and Raiser of the Dead." This he calls "identifying." And then where I wrote: "As a result of all these myth motives we find," etc., he drops out the words I have italicised, and quotes me as saying "As a result.....we find," etc., thus sedulously garbling and perverting still.

10. I shall not occupy myself in discussing with such a critic the question of the Virgin-birth in the legend of Mithra. With M. Cumont I might argue it--with due diffidence: with a cultist who cannot get into a scientific relation with such a problem, it were trifling to reason upon it. I have simply to note that when

[p. 421]

[paragraph continues] Father Martindale devotes a paragraph to explaining that "some parthenos divinities were anything but virgin" he is again throwing dust in the eyes of his readers, inasmuch as he implies that my argument does not recognise all this. I have repeatedly pointed to the duality of the Asiatic and other Goddesses, "who were on the one side virgins and on the other mothers." The Rev. Father garbles to no purpose; he simply does not understand the problem he is discussing.

11. It remains to notice the Rev. Father's characteristic handling of my thesis concerning a "Descent into Hell" in Mithraism:--

"With equal pluck Mr. Robertson determines to show that Mithra died, descended into Hell, and rose again. He has but one piece of evidence. It is a long passage from Firmicus Maternus, which relates a mystic representation of a divine death, followed by an exultant return to life."

Comment.--The unfailing inaccuracy of Father Martindale might almost suggest among his fellow-believers a theory of obsession. To the first sentence in this passage he appends a reference, "Pp. 319 sq." That section is a discussion of the ceremonial death and resurrection of Mithra; and when, on p. 321, I have remarked upon the Descent into Hades of Herakles and Apollo, I go on to allude to the astronomical explanation in these cases "and in the case of the Descent of Mithra to Hades, noticed later." If he had taken the slightest pains to do anything worthier than raise reckless cavils, he would have found on pp. 340-1 the full account of the Persian legend upon which--without the slightest reference to Firmicus Maternus, who knows nothing of it--I found my thesis. As usual, he has blundered hopelessly.

At the close of the paragraph under notice he proclaims that he is "left wondering at the conclusions to which the 'will to disbelieve' can guide an argument." Any reader of these pages, I fancy, will be left wondering more profoundly at the tissue of error, absurdity, and prevarication through which the passion to defend the faith can conduct a Christian priest. In a footnote to the sentence last quoted he contrives to insert yet another falsity.

12. On the question as to Justin's view of the Mithraic Eucharist, the Rev. Father writes, referring first to Justin's passage (Tryph. 70) as to the devils imitating the prophecy of Daniel in the Mithraic doctrine:--

"Notice, first, that Justin does not say this diabolic travesty of prophecy was pre-Christian in date; and that he does positively say (Apol. i., 66) that the devils imitate the Eucharist itself in the Mithraic mysteries. Mr. Robertson should have quoted that passage. 'If the Mithraists had simply imitated the historic Christians,' he argues, 'the obvious course for the latter would be simply to say so.' And that, indeed, is simply what Justin, in this passage, does say."

Comment.--Then "devils," in Justin, means for the Rev. Father Martindale just Mithraists! If he could only understand things

[p. 422]

occasionally, my task would have been lighter. The passage he says I ought to have quoted I had quoted, textually, on pp. 321-2, giving the reference, and adding similar passages from Tertullian about the devil's doings. The Rev. Father has not even read through the essay he seeks to discredit. Not once can he contrive to pass an accurate censure. But on p. 331, from which he quotes, I explain my contention by quoting from Justin the further passage: "When I hear that Perseus was begotten of a virgin, I understand that the deceiving serpent counterfeited also this." And I add: "Nobody now pretends that the Perseus myth, or the Pagan virgin myth in general, is later than Christianity." Does the learned Father suggest that Justin thought it was? Had he read this passage? If so, why did he not at least try to meet the argument?

13. In the next paragraph he avows that in Justin's days "the historical sense was practically dormant"; and in the same breath he affirms that "the divergent pedigrees of the historic Mithraic and Christian meals are so well known as to render quite unnecessary and, in our day, perverse, any theory of borrowing on either side." "So well known"! Known, that is, in an age without the historic sense, as the Rev. Father "knows" the dogmas he has assimilated, with about as much "historical sense," relatively to the problems of his day, as Justin had for his. But though I have called Justin perhaps the most foolish of the Christian fathers," I never thought him so inane as to say "the devils have counterfeited" when in his own opinion he could truthfully say: "These tales and usages have all come into existence since the propagation of the religion of Christ."

Comment.--As usual, Father Martindale entirely misses the point of my estimate of Justin, which is that, foolish as he was, his line of argument is followed by Tertullian. That is to say, it may pass as common and typical. Upon my characterisation of Justin, Father Martindale makes an exquisitely pointless retort; but he thinks fit to abuse Maternus as "notoriously and constantly unreliable," and guilty of "grotesque" misdescription--this because he does not avail for the Rev. Father's polemic purposes.

14. I have but reached the tenth page of his essay, and still I am occupied with his misstatements. He represents me, in a hopelessly incoherent passage, as saying that "much of the Song of Moses and Zechariah's mystic stone prove the irremediably Mazdean character of ancient Judaism." Another falsity. On p. 382 I argued that the parallel between the arrow scene on the monuments and the story of Moses striking the rock "suggests rather a common source for both myths than a Persian borrowing from the Bible"; and that, "as the story of the babe Moses is found long before in that of Sargon, so, probably, does the rock story come from Central Asia." That is the implication on p. 333, when I speak of "the presence of such a God-symbol in Hebrew religion long before our era." Apparently, the Rev. Father puts the Song of

[p. 423]

[paragraph continues] Moses and the Book of Zechariah in one category, as belonging alike to "ancient Judaism." I can believe it of him; but I ascribe a Mazdean element only to the latter, not to the former.

15. The Rev. Father next ascribes to me the thesis of "the identity"--his favourite word--"of St. Peter with Mithra, and also with Janus," when I had spoken of "assimilation with."

Comment.--I suppose he knows nothing of the general phenomena of assimilation of deities in old cults--the addition of solar characteristics to Gods of Vegetation--and of the modes of worship of the latter in Sun-Cults, and so on. I will merely indicate to any of his readers who may see this reply that they must not suppose they gather from him any idea of my case.

16. Nor shall I spend more time over the rest of his garbled quotations--his citing me as saying "entitled to assume" when I wrote "conclude"; his dropping out of an "even" when it qualified the context, and so on. I must say a word, however, on one of his later futilities--his laboriously facetious attempt to demonstrate that my remarks on the probability of the "Chair of St. Peter" being a Mithraic relic amount to a self-contradiction. The Rev. Father writes that my argument amounts to this: "There is strong reason to suppose it is X. It may well be, however, Y. There is at least a possibility that it is Z."

Comment.--What the Rev. Father, with his strange gift of fallacy, calls Z, as any other reader will see, is just X; and the argument runs: "There is strong reason to suppose that it is X. It may well, however, be Y." Any reader but himself, or one of his type, would see that "a relic of a pre-Christian cult" means simply a relic of Mithraism. And he blunders even worse than usual when he argues that my phrase, "it may well be that the whole thing is a fortuitous importation, like so many other ecclesiastical relics," amounts to saying, "I may be quite wrong, but the Church shall have her slap." I need hardly point out to any other reader that, whether the chair be Mithraic or not, the Church stands convicted of a legendary imposture, not only by the verdict of every archaeologist, but by the simplest application of common-sense. With his customary strategy, he evades making the acknowledgment which every honest inquirer has made--that, whatever it may have been, the chair can never have been constructed as the episcopal chair of St. Pester, or of any early Christian bishop.

17. Upon one point at least the Rev. Father might be expected to be right when he accused me of erring on it--the question of the wording of the litanies of his own Church. I stated that, in listening to the Roman litany of the Holy Name of Jesus, Mithraists who joined the Christian Church knew they were listening to the very epithets of the Sun-God, and I cited six--God of the Skies, Purity of the eternal light, King of glory, Sun of justice, Strong God, Father of the Ages to come, Angel of great counsel. Upon this the Rev. Father asserts first that the litany in question did not exist at

[p. 424]

that period. If this were true, it would be a valid rebuttal; but the Rev. Father offers no evidence whatever, and I will merely say that I believe the epithets cited by me, which are in the opening portion, are as old as the fourth century in Christian worship. Having made his historical assertion, however, the Rev. Father goes on to declare that the epithets cited are "not Mithraic," and that "some of them are not in the litany." That point may be easily settled. I have before me a Catholic Eucologe, in Latin and French, apparently published in the first half of last century. It gives the litany of the Holy Name of Jesus, beginning with Kyrie eleison--a pretty good sign of antiquity in a Roman litany--and among the earlier epithets are these:--Pater de coelis, Deus; Candor lucis aeternae; Rex gloriae; Sol Justitiae, Deus fortis, Pater futuri seculi; Magni consilii Angele. I leave it to Catholic authorities to state whether they repudiate the manual of devotion from which I quote, or whether Father Martindale is here wrong as usual. On the significance of the epithets, my readers can judge for themselves.

18. I am willing now to leave Father Martindale's readers and mine to judge which of us has been guilty of the "mortal sins against history and good-sense "with which he so pretentiously charges me. If any of my errors approximate to some of his, they are grave indeed. He speaks of my work as a compilation of facts "tending to the destruction of the hated system." If I thought myself capable of hating any opinion in his fashion, I should indeed reconsider my work with concern. But he is of the tribe who, hating Galileo for presenting an unwelcome truth, accused him of hating Ptolemy and the Holy Ghost. Inspired always by either hate or hysteria, they can imagine no other kind of motive for scientific work. To the last, Father Martindale strives to envenom his readers by quoting me as disparaging the early Christians when I write that "an unwarlike population, for one thing, wants a sympathetic and emotional religion; and here, though Mithraism had many attractions, Christianity had more, having sedulously copied every one of its rivals, and developed special features of its own." This he calls malevolent disparagement. He simply cannot understand the mental processes of anyone who studies the history of his faith in a scientific spirit: his one thought is to cast aspersions at whatever conflicts with his fanaticism. A dozen ecclesiastical historians have avowed the wholesale adoption of pagan rites, symbols, and conceptions by the early Christian Church: he makes it his task to try to discredit, by bluster and misrepresentation, any rationalist who draws scientific inferences from the fact.

19. In that spirit he pens this passage:--

"'For the Dark Ages,' says Mr. Robertson, pityingly, 'the symbol of the Cross was much more plausibly appealing than that of the god slaying the Zodiacal bull.' Alas, poor Dark Ages! No more the 'mystically-figured Persian, beautiful as Apollo, triumphant as Ares, but.....the gibbeted Jew, in whose legend figured tax-gatherers

[p. 425]

and lepers, epileptics, and men blind from birth, domestic traitors and cowardly disciples'--that was all they could appreciate."

Then he quotes Isaiah about the despised and rejected of men--a passage which, with his ripe "historic sense," he evidently believes to have been written in anticipation of the coming of the Jesus of the Gospels--and adds:--

"With those despisers stand the critics of the Dark Ages; we with St. Bernard, who said, Tanto mihi carior, quanto pro me vilior! We are content to share the pessimism and barbarism of that great poet and Crusader."

Comment.--Thus, on his last page and his first, the Rev. Father falsifies the book he professes to criticise. He does, I suppose, seriously regard me as taking moral satisfaction in the symbol of a God knifing a bull. But whatever hallucinations he may harbour, he knew, unless he was beside himself, that he had grossly garbled, by an elision, the passage he professed to quote, wholly altering its application so as to suggest that I was expressing my own predilections when I sketched those of many pagans of the average pagan type. He knew also that I had expressly spoken of the Mithraists in question as ultimately going over in large numbers to Christianity. It would never do to let the readers of The Month get a glimpse of a scientific view of the process of transition.

20. As if all that were not enough, Father Martindale ends his essay, as he began it, with an explicit untruth. In the last sentence he speaks of "the derivation proposed by Mr. Robertson for the Mass."

Comment.--I have proposed no derivation. The sole derivations for "Mass" that are mentioned in my essay are indicated in the passage: "Their [the Mithraists'] mizd, or sacred cake, was preserved in the mass, which possibly copied the very name"; and in the footnote, after referring to King and Seel as the sources of the suggestion, I add that the word missa "might come, however, from the Greek maza, a name for barley cake." Thus I did not give my assent to the mizd derivation, and merely suggested a similar possibility for maza--doing this because, like many other people not gifted with his credulity, I have never been able to see plausibility in the traditional etymology of missa.

21. My critic speaks of some "eminent professor whose courtesy and erudition enabled us to speak with such conviction on the derivation proposed by Mr. Robertson for Mass," and who, he states, wrote of me: "I think that his books were calculated to strengthen the belief in revealed religion."

Comment.--I know not who the "eminent professor" is, nor where my critic discussed the derivation which he misrepresents me as proposing. I cannot find any discussion on the subject in his articles on Mithraism. If he misinformed the eminent professor as successfully upon my books in general as he has done on the point under notice, I doubt not he could elicit from him plenty of

[p. 426]

disparagement, especially if he be of Father Martindale's own creed and cast of mind. If, indeed, they both believe what the Rev. Father quotes him as saying, it is not clear why he is so anxious to denounce me. By adding, however, a footnote to the clause last cited, he contrives to suggest to his readers that the eminent professor is M. Cumont. The footnote runs: "We may be allowed to add that since this article was in print Professor Cumont has with great kindness written to us at some length, assuring us that the conclusions we have reached in it are fully justified." As most of the Rev. Father's article consists in perversions of my words and aspersions upon me, he here suggests that Professor Cumont backed him up in these. I therefore take the opportunity to inform any of his readers who may see this that Professor Cumont has not endorsed any of his attacks upon me, and wrote nothing whatever to him concerning the derivation he says I proposed for the word Missa. Thus he ends as he began in mystification.

____________________________

I have no doubt that the Rev. Father will remain well content with his work, which he will justify to himself as a blow struck for his creed and its founder. He avowedly feels himself to be of the tribe of St. Bernard, "that great Crusader"; and of a surety he is. Like St. Bernard, he lashes himself into a passion against all the supposed enemies of a deity whom he represents as having taught him to love his enemies; like the Saint, he sees in a vast movement of hate, massacre, and destruction a fit expression of his devotion to a sacrificially slain God, of whom he says, truly enough, Tanto mihi carior, quanto pro me vilior. "Pro ME vilior": the confession is memorable: the priest's very hysteria of devotion is rooted in egoism, like his antipathy.

The spectacle he presents is apt to cure any rationalist of the tendency to suppose that organised religion is a greater force for moralisation, in virtue of its ethical elements, than for demoralisation by reason of its stimulus to fanaticism and its intellectual misguidance. Those Hellenists and Jews who, long before Christianity took its historic shape, arrived at the doctrine of forgiveness for injuries, and preached love of enemies--those men, one often feels, had undergone a profound spiritual experience; and it was shared, presumably, by those who inserted the doctrine in the gospels. But how many of those who, in the past eighteen centuries, have hysterically professed to draw their "spiritual life" from those gospels--how many of them all have ever been turned from their primitive passions of resentment by the commandment they call divine?

So far from "forgiving" a mere scientific opponent, who no more hates them or their creed than he hates the Ptolemaic system or the foes of his ancestors, they set out in a passion of resentment, not to get at the truth, but to get at the enemy. In a nobler temper,

[p. 427]

[paragraph continues] Father Martindale might have compassed something towards critical correction. In my essay, I am practically certain, a priori, there must be errors of theory or fact, or of both. I have never met with any similar treatise in which, after close study, I have not found something in the nature of error; and I would fain have my errors rectified, as I have already been able to do at some points for myself. But I do not find that my Catholic critic has ever come nearer exposing error in my case than to find a minor inexactitude of phraseology; and in the pursuit he has himself committed blunders beyond belief, and falsifications that for number and perversity outgo anything I have personally met with in controversy. In the hope of achieving a pious triumph he has selected some score of propositions from an essay containing hundreds; and, withal, what a fiasco he has achieved!

  

 section 5. Dr. J. Estlin, Carpenter.

In the Unitarian journal The Inquirer, about the end of 1903, there appeared a criticism of Pagan Christs over the initials "J. E. C." Shortly afterwards I criticised it on the assumption that the initials stood for the signature of Dr. J. E. Carpenter; and as this inference was not challenged, and the criticism in question was entirely in keeping with signed comments by Dr. Carpenter on this book and on Christianity and Mythology, to which I have replied in the Appendix to the second edition of the latter work, I here embody my rejoinder to the attack first mentioned.

It may be well to repeat one or two points from the other reply referred to. I there instanced (1), as an illustration of Dr. Carpenter's historical judgment, his proposition that Krishna is a historical character, arising within the Christian era; and (2), as illustrating his controversial methods, his dismissal of my thesis concerning the mystery-play added to the gospels with the decision that the "desolate cry," "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?", could not be put in the dying God's mouth in a mystery-play; after which contention he obliviously decided, in another connection, that the cry was not "desolate" at all, but a reference to the final note of triumph in the Psalm from which it was quoted.

It is this critic--the affirmer of the historicity of Krishna--who introduces a polemic against the present treatise with these sentences:--"The author is of course entitled to his opinions. But he is not entitled to claim support for them by constant inaccuracy, or by suppression of evidence, or by treating the wildest conjectures as historical facts." Dr. Carpenter's tone relieves me of any special concern for amenity in dealing with him; and the present rejoinder may thus be the more concise.

1. At the outset, after charging me with "treating the wildest conjectures as historical facts," my Unitarian critic asserts, by way of opening illustration, that my thesis of the pre-Christian Jesus-cult

[p. 428]

and ritual of human sacrifice is "justified" by me in a passage of three sentences (Pagan Christs, 1st ed. pp. 153-4; present ed. <page 162>), which he quotes. Then he writes:--"Well may the author look on his work and find it very good; for he concludes, 'As a hypothesis the present solution must for the present stand.""

Thus by his own showing the "wild conjecture" is put, not as a proved historic fact, but as a hypothesis. Further on, I remarked (p. 158): "Beyond conjectures we cannot at present go." Dr. Carpenter has not taken the trouble to follow the argument he asperses. The three sentences which he represents as my sole "justification" of it are simply the broad preliminary indications of the nature of the hypothesis; and after the clause last quoted my text goes on: "But the grounds for surmising a pre-Christian cult of a Jesus or Joshua may here be noted." And here again the critic confusedly confesses that "the next step is to prove that there was a pre-Christian cult," etc. He appears to have written in a state of mind which precluded even the semblance of accuracy or consistency.

2. Of the eight paragraphs which constitute the alleged "step," the critic refers to two only, which he thus discusses:--

"This is done by identifying the successor of Moses with the 'Angel' of Exodus xxiii, 20, who is again identified in the Talmud with the mystic Metatron, who is in turn identifiable with the Logos; and the triumphant conclusion follows: 'Thus the name Joshua =Jesus is already in the Pentateuch associated with the conceptions of Logos, Son of God, and Messiah' (p. 155).

"No historical student needs to be warned against these preposterous assertions. But the unwary reader may easily be dazzled by the wide array of references (many of which are useful to the collector of critical curiosities), the legitimate product of extensive reading. The mischief is that Mr. Robertson does not understand what evidence is, and is the easy prey, therefore, of Talmudic vagaries."

The latter paragraph is truly interesting as a sample of logical chaos. In his passion, the critic, with his self-certified sense of "evidence," has lost all hold of the issue. He describes as a "preposterous assertion" (1) my statement that the Angel-leader is "in the Talmud identified with the mystic Metatron, who is in turn identifiable with the Logos." For this proposition I give references to Cahen and Hershon. As the critic offers for his angry language no excuse beyond the passage I have cited, it will be seen that, through sheer excitement of temper, he supposes himself to be convicting me of absurdity when he merely describes as a "Talmudic vagary" what I have represented as a Talmudic proposition. Unless the learned Professor supposes me to have considered the Angel-leader and Joshua historical characters, as he considers Krishna, his outbreak thus far does not even amount to a proposition. It is sheer verbal incoherence.

The other "assertion" specified as preposterous is my contention that the mythical successor of the mythical Moses is identified in the Pentateuch with the mythical Angel-leader. In "justification"

[p. 429]

of that statement I point to the parallelism of the texts, Exodus xx, 20-23, and Joshua xxiv, 11. In the former text it is promised that an Angel, in or on whom is the "name" of Yahweh, shall lead Israel to triumph against the hostile tribes. As Joshua in the other text claims to do this, he is pseudo-historically identified with the Angel. I should indeed have said "Hexateuch" instead of "Pentateuch"; but I cited the texts. Non-theological minds will probably see some plausibility in an argument so borne out; but the readers of The Inquirer will not gather from the article of Dr. Carpenter that any such justification was put forward. It is by such instinctive economies that he establishes his epithet "preposterous."

3. After this I may perhaps be pardoned if I meet with a simple rejection the critic's charge that in my estimate of the age of the bulk of Buddha-lore I am "flying in the face of the evidence gathered in recent years from inscriptions in different parts of India." I am content to say that, when he asserts the inscriptions of the third century B.C. to contain "the titles of the collections in which the teaching was grouped" (making no qualification), he shows himself unqualified to speak on the subject.

4. There is somewhat more semblance of scholarly circumspection in the critic's attack on my remark that "the first day of the week, Sunday, was apparently from time immemorial consecrated to Mithra by Mithraists; and as the Sun-God was pre-eminently 'the Lord,' Sunday was 'the Lord's day 'long before the Christian era." He contends that "Mr. Robertson's statements require him to show (1) that Mithra was called Kurios, [*1] and (2) that his worshippers gave the name Kuriake to the first day of the week before the Christian era." The first statement, he observes, I do not attempt to prove; and there is, he contends, no record of the application of the epithet Kurios to Mithra. In regard to the second statement, he alleges that I have misunderstood Deissmann's exposition as to the pre-Christian use of the word Kuriakos, since I cite him, though he

[paragraph continues] "cites no instance of its application to designate a day. That [continues my critic] is the unwarranted inference of our author, who ascribes its use to the Mithra-worshippers 'long before the Christian era,' without a shadow of justification. It is painful to write thus of a student who is undoubtedly in earnest. The general impression which his work produces is that his mythological combinations applied to Christianity are worthless and misleading, and that no single statement can be trusted without verification."

[paragraph continues] I confess to being astonished that even an angry theologian, making pretension to a competent knowledge of this question, should thus exhibit a complete ignorance of the decisive fact that the expression Kuriaken Kuriou, "Lord's-day of the Lord," in the Teaching of the Twelve Apostles, proves the term Kuriake to have had a pre-Christian application to a day. Either the reviewer knew this detail or he did not. I am not concerned to point the alternative inferences.

[p. 430]

It is true that I had not thought it necessary to cite this fact (long ago discussed by me) in my notes in Pagan Christs; I had in fact taken it for granted that the point was no longer contested--which was clearly a miscalculation on my part. But even Deissmann's demonstration of the normal use of the word is quite sufficient to show that it cannot have been spontaneously applied by Christians for the first time to their holy-day.

As to the epithets of Mithra, the reader will observe that I did not say that the title Kurios was applied to him on the monuments; the critic's own quotation shows as much. That "the Sun-God" was "the Lord" in the Roman Empire is admitted even by my critic. Cumont gives only three Greek inscriptions--there are no more to give. The War-God of the Persians was not likely to have shrines and devotees in Greece. But my study on Mithraism showed (1) that Mithra was in Latin inscriptions called Sanctus dominus, besides being separately styled Dominus; (2) that in the Zendavesta he is "Lord of all countries"; (3) that he was associated with Adonis and with Attis and with Dionysos, all of whom were called Kurios; (4) that, like them, he was called Father; (5) that in the Persian period he already had his "day"; (6) that his birthday was Christmas-day, associated with "Lord" Adonis and the Sun-Gods in general. Thus in such a syncretic cult, in such a syncretic age, when the first day of the week was habitually named "the day of the Sun," the popular ascription to Mithra of the title of Lord in the Greek-speaking places where he was worshipped would be a matter of course, even if it did not figure as one of his monumental titles in Greek. The title of Lord for the Sun-God was primarily Semitic in the Eastern world--e.g., Baal, Adon, and Marnas, all meaning "Lord"--and the Mithraic cult in the East might possibly abstain from an official adoption of Semitic usage, though we find Mithra called despotes in Porphyry. But popular usage could not be so restricted.

The view of my academic critic appears to be that while Jesus, described as among other things the son of a carpenter, was naturally and normally styled Kurios, the "Unconquered Sun-God" would not be; and that, while Latin-speaking worshippers called him Dominus, Greek-speaking worshippers never called him Kurios. I leave such "curiosities" of scholarship to "collectors." It may be worth while to inform lay readers, in passing, that Kurios is the normal New Testament word for "master," and is to-day the ordinary Greek equivalent for "Mr."

But the essential point is that, as I asserted, "Sun-day was 'the Lord's Day' long before the Christian era"; and that Sun-day had also been Mithra's day long before the Christian era, Mithra being chief of the seven planetary spirits associated with the days of the week. Where the term Kuriake was current for the chief day of the week, it would be used by the Mithraists as by others. Cumont again and again affirms that "the dies Solis was evidently the most

[p. 431]

sacred of the week for the devotees of Mithra." But I did not assert that the term Kuriake was used by them long before the Christian era. "That is the unwarranted inference of our" critic, proceeding "without a shadow of justification." The pain which he gave himself in discrediting me was thus quite pathetically gratuitous. And he himself commits another gross blunder "without a shadow of justification." In asserting that "the Sun-God (without Mithra's name) is called Dominus" he either suppresses or proves himself ignorant of the fact that one inscription reads "Sancto domino invicto Mithrae" (Cumont, ii, No. 60). This from an expert who "understands what evidence means."

 

And now I have to ask the reader to note that these blundering strictures, which come to absolutely nothing on examination, are the sole proofs offered by my Unitarian critic for his account of me as "claiming support" for my opinions "by constant inaccuracy, or by suppression of evidence, or by treating the wildest conjectures as historical facts." The great mass of my argument he has not even attempted to indicate, much less to answer. It would really not pain me particularly to say what I think of such criticism; but I forego the indulgence. What is worth noting is that Unitarianism should thus once more be exhibited as making a worse show in its criticism of new views of Christian origins than is made by almost any Trinitarian critics. The ill-supported pretension to comprehensive knowledge, the startling deficit of candour, the substitution of mere bluster and invective for argument, would almost seem out-of-date in the Rock. After all, there is something painful in this; and I regret it. In a book such as Pagan Christs, travelling over many obscure fields and raising many difficult issues, there must needs be oversights, inadequacies, and errors; and I take it as a matter of course that its central thesis in regard to the Christian cult should be regarded at first sight as extravagant. Any argument to that effect I should cheerfully examine; and when, as sometimes happens, a fellow-student sends me a note of questionable passages or errors of reference, I am sincerely grateful. It is a pity that the Unitarian Professor, for his part, should proffer hardly anything beyond mere futile aspersion.

I must not, however, omit to note one correction by Dr. Carpenter of a statistical statement of mine. At the beginning of my essay on Mithraism I had stated that the late Professor Robertson Smith wrote in the Encyclopaedia Britannica "some hundreds of pages on certain books of the Bible." I did not possess a copy of the Encyclopaedia; and I had written on the strength of recollection of early reading in libraries. My Unitarian critic has taken the trouble to count the pages of Professor Smith's articles, and finds that they amount only to forty-eight. I shall here take his word without checking him; and acknowledge that the passage should have run to the effect that the last edition of the Encyclopaedia

[p. 432]

contained some hundreds of pages (about 300) on Biblical matters, as against the one half-page given to Mithraism. This statistical correction is almost the only one I have thus far received from any theological critic of my book, which counters the whole historical doctrine of the current religion. My Unitarian critic pronounces the error in question "a characteristic inaccuracy." I fear I must pronounce that a characteristic assertion. If he had done nothing worse, I should not have had to pen two exposures of his critical methods.

They have certainly had no corrective influence so far as he is concerned, for in two recent reviews of the translation of the German work of Professor Arthur Drews on "The Christ Myth" Dr. Carpenter exhibits the old temper, the old unscrupulousness, the old incapacity for a broad view of a great problem. He has evidently sat down to the book with the sole object of finding errors of detail which may enable him to seem to discredit the whole, never once seeking to meet the main line of argument, or even to indicate it. No one could gather from his reviews the drift of the reasoning he professes to confute. He can never see the wood for the trees; and in hacking blindly at particular trees he oftentimes wounds himself. Where there is the faintest opening for a verbal misinterpretation, he ascribes the most irrational meaning the words could suggest. Where, for instance, Drews in the translation (p. 241) remarks that all the details in the Passion are mythologically "given"--from the derision and flagellation to the rock tomb and the women at the place of execution--and the sentence ends, "in just the same form in the worship of Adonis, Attis, Mithras, and Osiris," Professor Carpenter asks, in a review in the Christian Commonwealth: "Who has ever heard of the 'execution' of Adonis, or of the grave in a rock (in the Egyptian Delta!) of Osiris?" adding: "Page after page in this book are disfigured by these reckless assertions." Even an ordinary reader might, after one perusal of his criticism, be able to suggest to the infuriated Unitarian Professor that the passage in Drews must have meant, not that all the four cults and myths mentioned were exactly the same--a suggestion impossible to the most ignorant tyro--but that in one or other were to be found all the details in the Christian narrative. The critic himself indicated a suspicion that something had gone wrong in the translation; but he let his censure stand.

In a later review by Dr. Carpenter in the Unitarian Inquirer the same passage is thus handled in a footnote:--

"The reader may be directed to the amazing statement, p. 241: 'The derision, the flagellation, both the thieves, the crying out on the cross, the sponge with vinegar, the soldiers casting dice for the dead man's garments, also the women at the place of execution at the grave, the grave in a rock, are found in just the same form in the worship of Adonis, Attis, Mithras, and Osiris' (italics mine). Which of these deities was crucified?"

In this passage Dr. Carpenter has joined serious garbling of his

[p. 433]

own with an error on the part of the translator. The passage he cites from Drews is preceded in the text and translation by the words "Everything was given" (which he suppresses); and references are given to the Old Testament as regards three of the details. Any candid and competent reader would see at a glance that something was wrong with an interpretation which assigned to the Gentile cults named a series of details well known to be items of Jewish tradition and symbolism, and actually indicated as such by the references. Even without reference to the original, such a reader would divine the misconstruction on the part of the translator. Where he has written, after a comma, "also the women at the place of execution,......are found," the translation should have run, after a semi-colon, "further, the women,......who are found." Drews wrote "ferner, die Weiber,......die." The whole passage means, and can only mean, that in addition to the other "given" items in the crucifixion and burial scenes, most of which are Judaic, the mourning women are found in the pagan cults mentioned.

And the case against Dr. Carpenter is clear. He has mentioned in a footnote that he possesses only the first German edition of the Christusmythe, not the expanded third, from which the translation is made. But the first, had he examined it, would at once have enlightened him, had he wished to be enlightened. There the context is different: the Judaic items are not mentioned in the same sentence, and we have this: "ferner das 'Felsengrab' des Heilands, die Weiber am Grabe, die sich ganz ebenso auch im Kultus des Mithra and Adonis finden, usw." Even here he would doubtless exclaim that both rock-tomb and women are not found in both cults: that is his critical way. But between the first edition and the translation he could not fail to see that Drews was not asserting a fourfold crucifixion-myth, of which each form contained all the details specified. For the rest, he shows his own ignorance of hierology by scouting the "execution" of Adonis (concerning whom he might learn from Dr. Frazer that the Adonisian ritual originally centred round an annual human sacrifice to the Vegetation-God) and by denying all connection between the cross-myth and Osiris, who actually figures in a quasi-crucified form. But the essential point is his utterly disingenuous way of covering the real issue by mere Old Bailey cavils and misrepresentations, to the end of keeping it out of sight. In all his columns of splenetic cavilling there is not one argument which really affects the fundamental question.

Doubtless a reviewer can protest that he is not responsible for the slips of a translator. But the business of an honest reviewer, and surely of a theological teacher in the position of Dr. Carpenter, is, first and foremost, to bring out the main positions and arguments of a work which he professes to discuss and dismiss as a whole; and a reviewer who pretends to dispose of an elaborate theorem, supported on many historical lines, by alleging merely error of detail at subsidiary points, is not morally fitted to be a public teacher.

[p. 434]

[paragraph continues] Our Unitarian Professor, however, has done worse than this. In his first review, Dr. Carpenter showed that even in his malice he surmised at least an error of punctuation in the translation: in his second review, instead of clearing up the point, he suppresses not only his own surmise, but an essential part of the text, deliberately reducing it to a different syntactical construction, to make it carry an impossible assertion. If I, in a review of Dr. Carpenter's First Three Gospels, had simply cited his astonishing self-contradiction in regard to the cry on the cross, with some other self-contradictions only less flagrant, and had thereupon pronounced the whole book the work of a man who either did not believe what he said or chronically forgot what he had written, his more careful readers would certainly have pronounced the verdict grossly unfair as a general judgment. But Dr. Carpenter has himself gone further than this. He has taken a plainly involved passage of a translation, where the very references showed him that the meaning could not be that which seemed to lie on the surface, and, confessedly suspecting an error of construction on the translator's part, has in a second article positively aggravated the translator's slip by leaving out, in quotation, an essential clause.

Political debate notoriously abounds in misrepresentation and in unfair criticism. But I do not believe that such a process of perversion as Dr. Carpenter has indulged in would be successful on a political platform or in the House of Commons. Such trickery, once perceived, would there discredit the performer once for all. And, trickery apart, the spirit in which the theological defence is conducted by Dr. Carpenter and his friends would be felt to be scandalous in a serious debate among truth-seeking laymen. In the Christian Commonwealth, to which he contributed his first review, there appeared an editorial on Drews's book, in which the sole rebutting arguments, as distinguished from blank declamation, were a pair of protests against (1) a passage in the translation in which the disciples of Jesus were spoken of as having known him through "many years of wandering," and (2) a passage which overstated the force of a proposition by Dr. Cheyne concerning Nazareth. Now, the first item in this case also turned on a slip of the translator. Drews had written "mehrjahrig," which means "of several years," not "many." The critic, of course, was entitled to his cavil; but here again an honest critic would have dealt with the force of the argument as apart from the mere detail of the number of years. No such attempt was made: the theological journalist never hinted to his readers that Drews was putting a consideration which, with a mere substitution of "several" for "many," told very strongly in support of Drews's case, and against the received tradition. In fine, an indictment of Drews's treatise in a popular yet pretentious Christian journal offered no further confutation of his case than an outcry against a phrase which happened to be a mistranslation, and against one overstatement of another critic's opinion. A short letter

[p. 435]

by me to the journal in question, pointing out the facts and suggesting the moral, was suppressed, and a bare summary given, from which the moral was carefully excluded. These dialecticians do not want truth, do not want full and fair discussion, do not want elucidation. Their ideal is to discredit those who assail their beliefs, and there an end.

Thus the defence of tradition goes on. Neo-Unitarian theologians and journalists handle disturbing theses with as little concern for candour or for patient comprehension, as much reliance on aspersion and vituperation, as was ever shown by Trinitarian critics of Unitarianism. And the Unitarian Inquirer, I observe, indignantly resents any return of censure, apparently claiming for its own chief pundit a monopoly of that. I regret to be unable to comply with the requirement.

  

 section 6. Professor Carl Clemen.

The Religionsgeschichtliche Erklarung des Neuen Testaments of Professor Lic. Dr. Carl Clemen (Giessen, 1909) would probably not be certified as orthodox by theologians claiming to be such, inasmuch as it admits the non-historicity of the Virgin-Birth and the pagan derivation of a certain number of Christian doctrines. It strives, however, to do all that can be done without avowed renunciation of scholarly critical principles to minimise "die Abhangigkeit des altesten Christentums von nicht judischen Religionen and philosophischen Systemen." The reader will note the "altesten." Claiming to examine thoroughly the measure of dependence of the oldest Christianity upon non-Jewish religions and philosophic systems, Professor Clemen implicitly admits later pagan influences. His treatment of the data as to the primary influences, however, invites drastic criticism.

Undertaking to deal with Gentile influences not only upon the dogmas but upon the narratives of the gospels, Professor Clemen leaves absolutely unmentioned a whole series of explicitly posited precedents for gospel narratives, while dealing, often laboriously, with others, often of less importance. In his opening chapter he thinks fit to dismiss my volume on Christianity and Mythology with an extract from a querulous account of it given by Professor A. Reville. In the preface to the second edition of that work I have shown that Professor Reville cannot have given even a cursory attention to the bulk of it, else he would be open to a charge of simple false witness. And now Professor Clemen, not having seen the book himself, [*1] disposes of it by a citation from another Professor who had not read it. He has thus by a wise economy of research taken no account of a score of the asserted parallelisms which it is the professed object of his book to deal with. At the

[p. 436]

same time, and on the same principles, he dismisses as exhibitions of Parallelomanie English writings which he admits he has not before him.

To the first edition of the present work he has, however, given some little attention. Inaccurately enough, he cites as the Grundgedanke of the book the two theses as to the mystery-drama on which criticism was specially challenged. They do not constitute the Grundgedanke. The Grundgedanke is the naturalness and interconnectedness of all religion: the two theses in question represent the central result of the investigation as regards Christian origins. But the real issue, of course, is as to whether they will stand scrutiny. At this point, again, Professor Clemen practises economy of effort. He takes some trouble, indeed (p. 143 sq.), to affirm in detail that the Asiatic and other analogies to the crucifixion are non-significant; but on the central thesis as to the mystery-drama he is satisfied to offer the single proposition: "That the Passion-story was originally composed as a mystery-play does not follow from its dramatic character: it is in essence certainly historical." The reader of the foregoing pages is aware that the contention thus ingenuously evaded is not merely that dramatic origin is to be inferred from a vaguely "dramatic character," but that the main story is historically incredible, and that a variety of details, material and literary, can be explained only on the drama hypothesis, their presence being unintelligible on any other. Upon this argument Professor Clemen has not a word to say: he simply falls back on a petitio principii, not even explaining what it is that he is denying.

This is of course in the ordinary way of orthodox and semi-orthodox apologetics; and I dwell on it here because Professor Clemen, in his Introduction ( section 2), professes to observe scrupulously a critical "method." As he states it, it is simply an adherence to the ordinary principles of historical argument and evidence. But we now see what such a profession of principle is worth. In the first place, Professor Clemen ignores a multitude of the data with which he ought to grapple. That is to say, he disparages a book which he has not read, but of which not only the title suggests but a cited description tells him that it affirms many myth-parallels between Christianity and other systems. After making that citation, in proceeding to describe his method, he remarks (p. 10) that it would be superfluous to disprove propositions which are seen to be "untenable," or to deal with "popular" works which do not once make the attempt to establish their astounding propositions. Either these two rules of exclusion are meant to include Christianity and Mythology or they are not. If not, he makes no excuse for evading its examination. If they are meant to exclude it, he has been unscrupulous enough to asperse and dismiss a book which he has not seen, and whereof he cites only one splenetic hostile description, which I have elsewhere shown to be written without perusal. Such are the ethic and character of Professor Clemen's real

[p. 437]

[paragraph continues] "method." When, finally, he does profess to deal with a capital thesis with which he is avowedly bound to reckon, he burkes the entire argument, assumes without discussion the point in dispute, and passes on to other issues. His profession of method is either a dialectical sham or an exhibition of failure to understand the nature of argument.

I have limited my criticism to Professor Clemen's handling of my own books; but anyone who follows up his handling of the positions (among others) of Gunkel and Jensen will there find a similar tactic of begging the question wherever that course is the most convenient. If this is the best that the professional theologian in Germany can do to meet the anthropological and hierological analysis of Christian origins--and I understand it is thought to be adequate by those who share its positions--there is nothing more to be said. The entire tactic is one of making small concessions (though even these are significantly numerous, compared with the general denials of a few years ago) and evading or suppressing vital issues. What Professor Clemen surrenders are the points already surrendered by many "liberal" theologians: his ostensible defence of other positions is mere asseveration.

Footnotes

^402:1 The Tree of Life, by Ernest Crawley. Hutchinson and Co., 1905. Mr. Crawley does not put "Rev." on his title-page.

^402:2 Pp. 263, 278.

^408:1 Published by the North London Christian Evidence Society, 11 and 12 High Street, Hampstead, N.W. 1909.

^429:1 The normal transliteration is Kyrios, but I here follow that of my critic.

^435:1 This course is strangely common among even distinguished German theologians. I am surprised to note it in Dr. A. Schweitzer as well as in the late Professor Pfleiderer. See App. to Christianity and Mythology, 2nd ed. pp. 449, 456.

     
Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 438] [p. 439]

  

INDEX

AARON, <page 175>

Abammon, <page 16>

Abipones, the, <page 49> n.

Abraham, <page 48>, <page 51> n., <page 175>, and Isaac, <page 64>, <page 65>, <page 124>, <page 153>, <page 162>, <page 302> n.

Abraxas, <page 334>

Abtinas, <page 159>

Achan, <page 149> n.

Achilles, <page 106> n., <page 107> n.

Acolhuan civilisation, <page 348> n., <page 366>

Acts of Pilate, <page 202>

Addison, L., quoted, <page 169>

Admetus, <page 324>

Adonai, <page 49>

Adonis, Vegetation-God, <page 307>; cult of, <page 99>, <page 181>, <page 195>, <page 319>, <page 433>; resurrection of, <page 145>, <page 190>, <page 206>, <page 307>

Adulterers, eaten, <page 136> n.

Adversary, doctrine of, <page 86>

Aeschylus, <page 172>

Aesculapius, <page 206>

African religion, <page 41>; sacrifices, <page 106>, <page 117> n., <page 122>; absence of interest in heavenly bodies, <page 171>

Agapae, Christian, <page 314>, <page 326>, <page 412>

Agdestis, <page 316>, <page 321>

Agesilaus, <page 127> n.

Agni, gives Gods immortality, <page 51>; origin of, <page 53>, <page 100>, <page 318>; as messenger of the Gods, <page 216>, <page 221>; as Logos, <page 221>, <page 290>; in Vedas, <page 284>; as dove, <page 290>; as bull, <page 299>

Agnostics and atheists, religious by definition, <page 19> n.; the term "agnostic," <page 233>

Ahriman, <page 16>, <page 86>, <page 166>, <page 290>

Ahura Mazda, origin of, <page 284>-5; relation of to Mithra, <page 288> ff., <page 294>, <page 296>, <page 311>, <page 315>, <page 410>; a husband and father, <page 294> n.; in Avesta, <page 288> ff., <page 308> n., <page 311>; in trinity, <page 315>; and Ameshaspentas, <page 317>

Ai, <page 150>

Ainu, the, <page 30>

Ajatasatru, <page 252>, <page 254>

Akatuira, <page 43>

Akhunaton, <page 60>, <page 75>, <page 82>, <page 84> n.

Akkadian civilisation, <page 78>-9, <page 128>, <page 343>

Albanians, human sacrifices by, <page 125>

Alexander Severus, <page 278>

Alexandria, human sacrifice at, <page 126>

Algonkins, human sacrifice by, <page 156>

Allegory in religion, <page 328>-9

Allen, Grant, on Christian origins, <page xxiii>-v; on human sacrifices, <page 210> n., <page 317> n.

Alpha and Omega, <page 142>, <page 164>, <page 294>

Altars, <page 317> n.

Ambassador, sacrificial, <page 159>, <page 190>

Amenthes, Egyptian, <page 309> n.

America, religions of ancient, <page 339> ff.; races of, <page 339> ff.; civilisations of, <page 345> ff., <page 347>, <page 380>

Ameshaspentas, <page 296>, <page 311>, <page 317>, <page 320>

Amhaaretz, sacrifice of, <page 160>

Amosis, <page 61>

Amun, <page 92>, <page 95>, <page 205> n.; sacrifice of ram to, <page 131>, <page 301>, <page 303>, <page 320> n.

Anahid, <page 293>

Anahuac, <page 342>

Anaitis, <page 217> n., <page 293>, <page 296>, <page 322>, <page 326>

Anathema, <page 138>

Ancestor-worship, <page 31>-2, <page 40> ff., <page 47> ff., <page 103>

Andhras, the, <page 247> n.

Androphagoi, <page 128>

Angels, belief in, <page 86>, <page 105>; the angel in the Pentateuch, <page 163>, <page 218>, <page 220>, <page 315>, <page 428>

Animals, sacred, <page 184>

Animism, <page 9>, <page 24>, <page 33>, <page 220>, <page 226>

Anna, <page 97>

Anointing, in sacrifice, <page 112>, <page 125>; of priests, <page 158>; of Jesus, <page 201>

Anquetil, <page 294> n.

Anthropology, <page 98>

Anthropophagy. See Cannibalism

Antigonus, <page 181>, <page 193>

Antiochus Epiphanes, <page 88>, <page 173>

Anu, <page 221>

Aphrodite, <page 295>; as masculine, <page 297> n.

Apocalypse, Jesus in, <page 142>, <page 164>; Lamb in, <page 142>, <page 164>, <page 208>, <page 330>; Judaic character of, <page 164>; elders in, <page 179>; Mithraic details in, <page 205>, <page 208>; tau in, <page 310>; Mazdean elements in, <page 142>, <page 164>, <page 330>

Apollo, evolution of, <page 95>, <page 96>, <page 176> n., <page 322>; cult of, <page 320> n.; descent to Hades of, <page 307>; human sacrifice to, <page 124>; and Thargelia, <page 148>; titles of, <page 332>; as Teaching-God, <page 214>, <page 217>, <page 222>; Destroyer and helper, <page 293>; as

[p. 440]

feminine, <page 297> n.; Cave-God, <page 304> n.; God of Rocks, <page 305> n.

Apollonius of Tyana, <page 57>, <page 274>-80; and Jesus, <page 277>; birth-story of, <page 277>

Aquarius, <page 337>

Arabs, life of, <page 53> n.; use of cross by, <page 157>; treatment of camels by, <page 184> n.; human sacrifices by, <page 126>, <page 131>-2, <page 134> n., <page 137> n.

Arahatship, in Buddhism, <page 248>

Arbitrary, meaning of word, <page 5>

Archelaus, <page 264>-5

Ardivisura, <page 293>

Arianism, <page 96>

Aries, <page 207>, <page 301>, <page 319>

Arishtanemi, <page 252>

Aristobula, <page 188>

Aristodemus, <page 64>, <page 123>, <page 127>

Aristophanes, cited, <page 127>

Aristotle, <page 198>

Armenia, Mazdeism in, <page 291>

Arminius, <page 57>

Arnold, <page 77> n.

Art, Greek, <page 329>; Assyrian and Persian, <page 300>; Mexican, <page 344>

Artaxerxes Mnemon, <page 290>-1

Artemis, human sacrifices to, <page 60>, <page 188>; a saviour, <page 206>

Arthur's Oon, <page 282>

Aruntas, the, <page 19>, <page 99> n., <page 407>

Aryans, religion of early, <page 53>, <page 71> n.

Ascension, the, <page 401>

Asia, and Oceanic peoples, <page 153>; and America, <page xxiii>, <page 156>, <page 340> ff.

Asoka, <page 247>, <page 253> ff.

Asses, the two, <page 185>, <page 323>

Assur, <page 71> n., <page 75>, <page 285>

Assyrian religion, <page 68>, <page 75>, <page 285>; empire, <page 79>; temples, <page 182> n.

Asuras, <page 51>

Asvamedha sacrifice, <page 183>

Athamas, <page 123>, <page 302>

Atheism in Brahmanism and Buddhism, <page 250>

Athenaeus, cited, <page 293> n.

Athene, evolution of, <page 95>; and Parthenos, <page 135>; epithets of, <page 167> n.; as teacher, <page 215>, <page 217>; origin of, <page 217> n.; a virgin mother, <page 322>

Athenians, human sacrifices by, <page 127>

Atman, doctrine of the, <page 251>

Atonement, Jewish Day of, <page 158>, <page 160>, <page 165>, <page 168>

Attis, evolution of, <page 95>; cult of, <page 99>, <page 181>, <page 195>, <page 196>; resurrection of, <page 206>, <page 307>; Vegetation-God, <page 307>: tree of, <page 318> n.; in Orphicism, <page 322>; epithets of, <page 332> n.

Augustine, as cult founder, <page 57>; cited, <page 268> n., <page 272>

Augustus, sacrifices to, <page 129>

Aurelian, <page 325> n.

Australians, aboriginal, <page 41> n., <page 44> n., <page 71>, <page 104>, <page 209> n., <page 410>-1; Frazer and Lang on, <page 12>; ancestor-worship among, <page 41>, <page 43>, <page 48>; ethics of, <page 71>, <page 72>; names of, <page 100> n., <page 103>; food supply of, <page 104> and note

Avebury, Lord, <page 102> n.

Azazel, <page 106>, <page 160> n.

Aziluth, <page 315>

Aztecs, religion of, <page 346> ff.; human sacrifices of, <page 137>, <page 360> ff., <page 369> ff., <page 373>; civilisation of, <page 342>, <page 369>, <page 380> ff.

 

BaBISM, <page xvi>-xviii

Babylonian creation myth, <page 130>; taboo of God-names, <page 49>; deluge epic, <page 51>; civilisation, <page 78>-9; religion, <page 51>, <page 303> n., <page 364>; higher aspects, <page 97>; influence on Judaism, <page 74> ff., <page 80> ff., <page 86>, <page 167>; on Mithraism, <page 291>-2, <page 300>, <page 315>; human sacrifices, <page 128>; Logos, <page 218> ff.; hymns and priestly schools, <page 222> n.; Messianism, <page 166>

Bachichi, the, <page 134> n.

Baentsch, <page 84> n.

Bah, the God, <page 142>

Bahram, <page 266>

Bancroft, H. H., cited, <page 350>, <page 371>

Bandelier, <page 391> ff.

Baptism, Mithraic, <page 380>; Mexican, <page 356>, <page 379>

Barabbas, meaning of name, <page 146>; annual sacrifice of, <page 162>, <page 182>, <page 185>, <page 186>, <page 198>, <page 400>

Barbary, Jewish sacrifices in, <page 169>

Barth, <page 261>

Bataks, religion of, <page 2> n., <page 31>-2, <page 42>-3; taboo of names among, <page 49>; human sacrifices by, <page 116>, <page 126>; animal sacrifices by, <page 126>, <page 184>; symbolic sacrifices by, <page 139>; ritual cannibalism of, <page 135>, <page 389>

Batchelor, <page 30>

Baur, cited, <page 244>, <page 259>, <page 326> n.; on Manichaeus, <page 267>; on Apollonius of Tyana, <page 276> ff.

Beatitudes, the, <page 219> n.

Beausobre, <page 264> n., <page 265>, <page 267> n.

Bechuanaland, magic in, <page 18>; names in, <page 103>

Behnya, <page 117> n.

Bel, <page 179> n., <page 292>, <page 297>

Belief, nature of, <page 25>

Belisama, <page 215>

Belloguet, cited, <page 137>

Bellona, <page 129>

Beloved Gods, origin of, <page 3>, <page 263>; as Christs, <page 4>; sacramentally eaten, <page 144>;

[p. 441]

in Judaism, <page 163>, <page 166>-7, <page 268>; in Greece, <page 167>; in Manichaeism, <page 268>; their relation to history, <page 279>; in Mazdeism, <page 294>; survival values of, <page 328>-9; in America, <page 370> ff.; attributes of, <page 375> n.

Belti, <page 297>

Bema, the, <page 268>, <page 272>

Bentley, <page 143> n.

Bernard, St., <page 426>

Berosus, <page 145>, <page 146>

Bhagava, <page 244>

Bibliolatry, <page 66>

Bimbisara, <page 252>

Birds, sacred, <page 92> n., <page 357> ff.

Bishops, Christian, their rites and robes, <page 331>

Black in sacrifice, <page 171>

Blavatsky, Mme., as cult-founder, <page 58>

Bleek, discussed, <page 159> n.

Blood, religious use of, <page 111>, <page 115>, <page 128>, <page 129>, <page 130>, <page 141>, <page 189>, <page 213> n., <page 320> and note, <page 362>, <page 373>

Bodhisatvas, <page 257>

Boeckh and Burckhardt, cited, <page 94>

Bonny, sacrifices at, <page 133>, <page 183>

Book of the Great Decease, <page 245>

Boora Pennu, <page 64> n., <page 109> ff., <page 215>

Boughs, symbolic meanings of, <page 191> n.

Bouphonia, <page 130>-1

Bousset, <page xiv>

Brahma, <page 218>, <page 219>

Brahmanas, the, <page 219>, <page 221>

Brahmanism and magic, <page 13>, <page 21>; and pantheism, <page 76>; Logos in, <page 218>-9; creation doctrine of, <page 221>; and Babylonia, <page 221>; and Buddhism, <page 250>, <page 254> ff., <page 260>, <page 263>

Brahmans deified, <page 138> n.

Brazil, civilisation of, <page 348>

Bread, sacramental, medicinal virtue of, <page 144>; evolution of, <page 207> n.

"Brethren of the Lord," <page xix>, <page 399> ff.

Brinton, cited and discussed, <page 345> n., <page 368> n., <page 375> n., <page 382>

Brown, Dr. G., <page 351> n.

Brugsch, cited, <page 77> n.

Bryant, <page 223>

Buckland, A. H., cited, <page 342> n.

Buckle, <page 348>

Buddas, <page 264>, <page 267>

Buddha, <page 4>, <page 57>, <page 238>; legend of, <page 239> ff.; sayings attributed to, <page 240> ff.; alleged essential teachings of, <page 241>; alleged founding of society by, <page 242> ff.; meaning of name, <page 243>; multiplicity of, <page 243> ff., <page 262>; cruces of record of, <page 246> ff.; details concerning, <page 250>-2; and Asoka, <page 253> ff.; unhistorical, <page 256> ff.; Senart on, <page 258> ff.; alleged tomb remains of, <page 260>-1; inscriptions relating to, <page 429>

Buddhaghosa, <page 243>

Buddhavansa, the, <page 243>

Buddhism, <page 56>; history of, <page 239> ff.; derivative character of, <page 247> ff., <page 256>, <page 260>; failure of, <page 263>; in Thibet and Japan, <page 344>

Buddhist Councils, <page 245>, <page 246>

Budini, the, <page 267>

Buffalo, sacred, sacrifice of, <page 110>, <page 114>, <page 116>, <page 126>, <page 183> n.

Bull, sacred, <page 184>; sacrament of, <page 140>; symbolical meaning of, <page 298> ff., <page 320>

Burckhardt, cited, <page 94>

Burning and burying of bodies, <page 312>

Burton, cited, <page 61>, <page 62>, <page 155>

Burying alive, <page 379> n.

Byron, Constant on, <page 58> n.

 

CAIAPHAS, <page 122>

Calendar, the Jewish, <page 145>-6; the Mexican and Mongolian, <page 342>

Calf, sacrifice of, as God, <page 130>

Callatians, <page 128>

Calvin, as cult-founder, <page 57>

Camel, white, sacrifice of, <page 131>

Campbell, cited, <page 113>, <page 116> n.

Cancer and Capricorn, <page 323>, <page 337>

Cannibalism, <page 47> n., <page 65>, <page 104> n., <page 106>; ritual, <page 106>, <page 132>-3, <page 134>, <page 140> ff., <page 173>, <page 351>, <page 354>, <page 364> ff., <page 389>; and civilisation, <page 385>

Canning, Major, cited, <page 389>

Capacocha, <page 378>

Carabbas, <page 146>, <page 172>

Carpenter, J. E., <page 194> n., <page 305> n., <page 396>; criticised, <page 427>-35; on Prof. Drews, <page 432> ff.

Carthage, human sacrifices in, <page 61>, <page 124>, <page 126>, <page 189>, <page 356> n.

Caste in India, <page 249>, <page 254>, <page 255>

Catacombs, religion in, <page 208>, <page 326>, <page 411>

Catholicism and the backward races, <page 381> ff.

Catiline, <page 65>, <page 125>

Cave, myths of, <page 266>, <page 272>, <page 304> ff., <page 321> ff.; temples, <page 107> n., <page 303> ff.

Cecrops, <page 60>

Centeotl, <page 364>, <page 368>

Chair of Peter, <page 334> ff., <page 423>

Chaldean religion. See Babylonia

Chambers, E. K., <page 196> n., <page 198> n.

Chance in nature, <page 14> n.

Chandragupta, <page 253> ff.

Chastity, in pagan cults, <page 326>, <page 350>, <page 366>

Cheetham, <page 143> n.

Cherubim, the, <page 309> n.

Cheyne, <page 177> n., <page 434>

Child-God, <page 322>

[p. 442]

Child-sacrifice, Hebrew, <page 64>, <page 152>, <page 158>; Carthaginian, <page 65>, <page 124>, <page 126>; American, <page 124>, <page 351>, <page 353>; Semitic, <page 124>, <page 161>, <page 344>; Zulu, <page 124>; Arab, <page 124>; Mexican, <page 124>, <page 344>, <page 356>, <page 373>; Polynesian, <page 154> n.; symbolic, among Christians, <page 207>, <page 368>; Peruvian, <page 378>

Chinese religion, <page 51> n., <page 53> n.; human sacrifices, <page 61> and note; civilisation, <page 345>; Spring Festival, <page 139>-40

Chosroes, fire-temple of, <page 282>

Chrestus, xiv, <page 406>

Christ, the Jewish, <page 2>, <page 89>, <page 91>, <page 95>, <page 175>, <page 179>

Christianity, and magic, <page 31>; and monotheism, <page 93>; anthropophagy in, <page 141>; foundation of, <page 190>; causes of success of, <page 328>-9, <page 330>

Christmas, <page 293> n., <page 305>, <page 332>, <page 373>

Christs, pagan, <page 4>, <page 206>, <page 212>, <page 263>, <page 328>-9, <page 370> ff.

Chrysostom, <page 278>

Chuenaten = Akhunaton, <page 60>, <page 75>, <page 84> n.

Cilician pirates, the, <page 316> n., <page 325>

Cimbri, human sacrifice among, <page 123> n., <page 191> n.

Cioacoatl, <page 322> n., <page 356>

Circumcision, <page 153>, <page 163>

Civilisation, development of, <page 37> ff.

Claudius, <page 129>

Clavigero, cited, <page 348> n., <page 355> n.

Clemen, Prof., criticised, xv, <page 435>-7

Clemens Alexandrinus, cited, <page 174>n., <page 272>

Coatlicue, <page 359>

Cock, sacrifice of, <page 118> n.; Jewish sacrifice of, <page 168> ff.; African sacrifice of, <page 170>-1; Greek sacrifice of, <page 171>; Ghasiya sacrifice of, <page 172>; Chinese sacrifice of, <page 171> n.; in legend of Peter, <page 333>

Codooloos, the, <page 114>

Colenso, <page xv>

Commodus, <page 313>, <page 326> n.

Communion, Christian, <page 212>; theories of, <page 143>. See Eucharist and Sacrament

Comte, cited, <page 15>; on law of three stages, <page 384>; as cult-founder, <page 58>

Confucius, <page 239>

Congo, sacrifices in, <page 170>

Conquest and civilisation, <page 36>, <page 79>

Consciousness, religious, <page 24>, <page 25>, <page 27>, <page 34>, <page 60>, <page 62>

Constant, B., cited and discussed, <page 58> n., <page 384>

Constantine, <page 325>

Convents, pagan, <page 353>

Cortes, <page 371>

Cosmic emotion, <page 58>

Couperie, <page 61> n.

Cow, the sacred, <page 130>

Crawley, Rev. E., criticised, xiv, <page 402> ff.

Creuzer, cited, <page 310>, <page 313> n.

Criminals, sacrificed, <page 125>, <page 127>, <page 134> ff., <page 182>

Criobolium, the, <page 208>, <page 303>, <page 335>

Crocodile, sacrifices to, <page 155>

Cross, the, in human sacrifice, <page 112>-13, <page 118>, <page 151>, <page 154>, <page 157>; Judaic symbol, <page 157>, <page 158>; meanings of, <page 190>; in Osirian cult, <page 190> n., <page 196>; in other cults, <page 319>, <page 368>; Arab symbol, <page 157>; Hindu symbol, <page 157> n.; Mithraic symbol, <page 309>

Crowns, in sacrifice, <page 112>, <page 114> n., <page 178>, <page 191>; in Mithraism, <page 314>, <page 319> n. Crucifixion, the Christian, <page 118> ff., <page 144> ff.; Roman resort to, <page 120> n., <page 126>; mode of, <page 152>; of Prometheus, <page 167>; of Cyrus, <page 167>; of Manichaeus, <page 266>; mystical, <page 196>; in pagan cults, <page 319>, <page 389>, <page 433>

Crux Ansata, the, <page 189>

Cubricus. See Manichaeus

Cudworth, cited, <page 419>

Culin, S., cited, <page 341> n.

Culture-history, difficulties of, <page 349>; value of American civilisations for, <page 349>

Cumont, services of to hierology, <page xxii>; on distribution of Mithraic monuments, <page 282> n.; on Gods as fathers, <page 294> n.; on Chaldean elements in Mithraism, <page 300> n.; on cave-worship, <page 304> n.; on Apuleius, <page 321> n.; on Roman Mithraeums, <page 324> n.; on women in Mithraism, <page 326> n.; and Fr. Martindale, <page 426>

Cunningham, J. F., <page 107>

Cup, the mystic, <page 318>

Custom, dissolution of, <page 37>

Cybele, <page 206>, <page 302>, <page 326>, <page 335>

Cyprus, human sacrifices in, <page 61>

Cyrus, debt of Judaism to, <page 67>, <page 83>; and Sacaea, <page 148> n.; crucifixion of, <page 167>; and history, <page 232>; tomb of, <page 273>; birth of, <page 321>

 

DABAIBA, <page 350>

Dagon, <page 208>

Dahomey, human sacrifices in, <page 61>, <page 136>; cannibalism in, <page 141>

Dall, cited, <page 346> n.

Damascius, <page 220>

Damis, <page 276>

Daniel, <page 316>

Dapper, <page 109> n.

Darius, <page 290>

Darmesteter, on age of Avesta, <page 285>; on Ormazd and Mithra, <page 288>-9; on Mazdean literature, <page 290>; on Logos in Mazdeism, <page 296> n.; on Mithraic bull, <page 298> n.; on Mithraic trials, <page 308> n.; on

[p. 443]

[paragraph continues] Judaism and Persia, <page 315> n.; on stable-birth, <page 322>-3 n.

Daumer, <page xxv>

David, <page 85>, <page 167>

Davids, Prof. Rhys, services of to hierology, <page xxvi>; on Buddhism, <page 240> ff.

Davies, Prof. T. W., on magic and religion, <page 12>-13

Death, savage views of, <page 1>, <page 48>; in ritual, <page 308>

Decle, cited, <page 2> n., <page 36> n.

Deformed persons sacrificed, <page 139>

Deissmann, <page 429>-30

De la Roche, cited, <page 278>

Delitzsch, <page 75> n.

Demeter, epithets of, <page 167> n.; cult of, <page 142>, <page 176> n., <page 191>, <page 195>; as teacher, <page 215>

Demiourgos, <page 223>, <page 299> n., <page 319>

Descent to Hades, of Apollonius of Tyana, <page 277>; an astronomic myth, <page 303>; of Herakles, <page 307>; of Mithra, <page 307>, <page 323>, <page 421>; of Apollo, <page 307>

De Soyres, <page 274> n.

Despotism and civilisation, <page 36>, <page 38>

Deutsch, cited, <page 314>

Devil, notion of, <page 86>

Dewadatta, <page 252>

Dhammapada, the, <page 241>, <page 244>, <page 257>

Dinga, <page 109>

Dio Cassius, cited, <page 125> n.

Dionysius the pseudo-Areopagite, <page 418>

Dionysos, origin of, <page 53> and note, <page 100>; evolution of, <page 96>, <page 97>, <page 321>; Omestes, <page 123>; cult of, <page 97>, <page 99>, <page 130>, <page 132>, <page 144>, <page 167>, <page 176> n., <page 181>, <page 195>, <page 330>; sacrifices to, <page 123>, <page 130>, <page 140>, <page 301>; the Liberator, <page 167>; two-formed, <page 180>; myths of, <page 64> n., <page 185>, <page 206>, <page 321> and note, <page 323>; Eucharist of, <page 142>, <page 195>, <page 207>, <page 318>; as teacher, <page 214>-15; as feminine, <page 297> n.; epithets of, <page 167>, <page 206>; vegetation-God, <page 307>

Dioscuri, the, <page 206>

Diphilus, <page 61>

Disease, savage views of, <page 1>

Dissent, scientific aspect of, <page 96>

Dobrizhoffer, <page 49> n., <page 213>

Dods, Dr. M., cited, <page 265>

Dog, sacramentally sacrificed, <page 140>, <page 352>; sanctity of, <page 312>; the symbolic, <page 299>

Dove, sacred symbol, <page 92> n., <page 223>, <page 290>

Drama, conditions of, <page 197>, <page 198>; Peruvian, <page 377>-8. See Mystery-Drama

Draper, cited, <page 380> n.

Dreams, belief in, <page 44>

Drews, Prof. A., xi, xii, <page 398>, <page 432>

Drugging in sacrifice, <page 113>, <page 114>, <page 116>, <page 119>, <page 140> n., <page 155>

Druids, human sacrifices of, <page 128>, <page 129>

Drummond, <page 226>

Drunkenness, religious, <page 293> n.

Dualism, <page 86>, <page 293>

Durkheim, cited, <page 19>

 

EA, <page 214>, <page 216>, <page 221>

Easter, lamb sacrificed at, <page 143>, <page 318>, <page 320>; image of child eaten at, <page 207>; a solar festival, <page 306>

"Eating the God," <page 136>, <page 141>, <page 368>. See Eucharist and Sacraments

Ebionites, <page 178>, <page 307> n.

Ebritum, sacrifices at, <page 132>

Economics of religion, <page 79>, <page 88>, <page 92>, <page 280>, <page 324>, <page 327>, <page 369>, <page 372>

Eddy, Mrs., as cult-founder, <page 58>

Efatese, the, <page 102>, <page 344>

Egeria, <page 217>

Egg, the Easter--a cosmic symbol, <page 208>, <page 221>; blessing of, <page 143>

Egyptian religion, <page 15>, <page 21> n., <page 23>, <page 44>, <page 60>, <page 67>, <page 68>, <page 75>, <page 76>, <page 77>, <page 87> n., <page 92> n., <page 105>; human sacrifices, <page 61>; sacraments, <page 142>; hieroglyphics, <page 190> n., <page 345>; deification of kings, <page 47>; taboo of God names, <page 49>; influence on Hebrews, <page 67>; monotheism, <page 77>; ethics, <page 77>; cross, <page 189>; Teaching-Gods, <page 214>; symbols, <page 309> n.

Elagabalus, <page 125>, <page 129> n., <page 326> n.

Eleezer, Rabbi, <page 178> n.

El Elyon, <page 175>

Eleusinia, the, <page 28>, <page 144>, <page 195>

Elias of Crete, <page 308> n.

Elijah, as magician, <page 16>, <page 30>

Ellis, A. B., cited, on Gods of fear, <page 2>; on thank offerings, <page 105> n.; on slain messengers, <page 108> n.; on African sacrifices, <page 117> n.; on white in sacrifice, <page 151> n.

Ellis, W., cited, <page 17> n., <page 215>

El Shaddai, <page 67> n.

Enemies, sacrificed, <page 135> n., <page 351>, <page 364>

Enlil, <page 292>, <page 297>

Enoch, book of, <page 89>, <page 164>, <page 226>

Epimenides, <page 149>

Epiphanius, <page 204> n.

Er, <page 272>

Erua, <page 221>

Eskimo religion, <page 14> n.

Esoteric religion, <page 330>

Esther, <page 145>

Ethical Societies, Crawley on, <page 404>

Ethics, Christian and pagan, <page 32>, <page 426>; and early law, <page 54>-5; and religion, <page 40>, <page 55>, <page 56>, <page 58>, <page 72>, <page 76> ff.; Hebrew, <page 68> ff.; sacrificial, <page 32>, <page 72>; Mithraic, <page 288>-9, <page 311>, <page 326>; Mazdean, <page 288>-9, <page 312>; Ancient American, <page 366> ff.; Brahmanic, <page 290> n.; of Apollonius of Tyana, <page 279>; and supernaturalism, <page 383> ff.

[p. 444]

Euboulos, <page 304>

Eucharists, Egyptian, <page 142>; heredity of, <page 31>, <page 90>; Jewish, <page 164>, <page 168> ff.; Dionysiak, <page 142>, <page 195>, <page 207>, <page 318>; Mithraic, <page 142>-3, <page 174>, <page 207>, <page 307> ff., <page 318>, <page 332> n.; other pagan, <page 207> n.; Christian, <page 141>, <page 206>-7; total evolution of, <page 209>-13; ancient American, <page 144>, <page 351>, <page 352>, <page 364> ff., <page 368>, <page 373>

Euripides, <page 97>

Eurynomos, <page 94> n.

Eurypilus, <page 60>, <page 306>

Eusebius, <page 129>, <page 264>, <page 278>

Evangelists, emblems of, <page 309> n.

Evans, A. J., cited, <page 304> n., <page 345>

Evemerism, <page 81>, <page 163>, <page 217>

Ewald, <page 67>

Executions, sacrificial, <page 135> ff.

Exorcism, <page 31>

Ezekiel, <page 157>

Ezra, book of, <page 83>

 

FABRICIUS, V., cited, <page 15> n.

Family and religion, <page 45>, <page 52>, <page 54>

Farrar, A. S., cited, <page 75>

Fasts, pagan, <page 350>

Fate as ruling the Gods, <page 15>

Fawckner, <page 138> n.

Fear, Gods of, <page 1>-3; religion of, <page 11>, <page 27>, <page 40>, <page 41>

Feathers as sacred symbols, <page 359>, <page 360>

Feeling and religion, <page xv>, <page 29>, <page 33>

Feridun, <page 232>

Festivals, dates of, <page 324>

Fichte, <page 56>

Fiji, priest-kings in, <page 36>; religion in, <page 343> n., <page 386>; cannibalism in, <page 133>, <page 134> n., <page 365>

Finow, King, <page 61>, <page 365> n.

Fire, symbolic, <page 206>; cult of, <page 373>, <page 377>

Fire-God, sacrifices to, <page 119>, <page 271>, <page 344>, <page 373>; as Logos, <page 221>; Babylonian, <page 269>; American, <page 119>, <page 271>, <page 368>, <page 373>; origin of, <page 285>, <page 318>; festival of, <page 368>; sacrament of, <page 368>, <page 373>

Firmicus, <page 296>, <page 306>, <page 310> n., <page 318>

First-born, <page 296>; sacrifices of, <page 123>, <page 128>, <page 152>; name of Logos, <page 218>, <page 222>, <page 224>, <page 296>

First fruits, <page 148>, <page 178>

Fish, the divine, <page 207>, <page 301>-2, <page 364>

Fison, Mr., cited, <page 41>

Five, sacred number, <page 181>, <page 343>

Flaubert, <page 82>

Flaying, in human sacrifice, <page 137>, <page 190>, <page 266>, <page 270>, <page 344>, <page 364>, <page 373>

Fleet, Dr., <page 261>

Florus, cited, <page 125> n.

Fohsu, <page 117> n.

Folklore, <page xxii>

Fomagata, <page 360>

Founder, place of in religion, <page 57>-8

Four, sacred number and symbols, <page 309> n.

Francis Island, cannibalism in, <page 135>

Francis, Saint, <page 57>

Fraud, religious, <page 63>

Frazer, J. G., services of, to hierology, xxiii; theory of, as to Christian sacra, <page 118>, <page 144> ff.; on magic and religion, <page 11> ff., <page 20>, <page 24>, <page 36>; on the Christian crucifixion, <page 118>; on Athenian human sacrifices, <page 127>; on Barabbas, <page 162>; on Purim, <page 143>, <page 145>, <page 168>; on Firmicus, <page 306> n., <page 319> n.; on Vegetation-Gods, <page 307>; on magic and progress, <page 35> ff.; on magic and art, <page 35> n.; on Adonis, <page 433>; on Godhood of kings, <page 47> n.; on primitive idea of duration, <page 47>; on totemism, <page 99> n., <page 102> n.; on Porphyry, <page 137> n.; on Gods and animals, <page 320> n.; on entry into Jerusalem, <page 185>; on sacrificial scourging, <page 189> n.

Freethinkers, duty of, <page 383>

Funeral sacrifices, <page 107>, <page 136>

Furuhers, <page 294> n.

Fustel de Coulanges, discussed, <page 54>

 

GAD, <page 176>, <page 177> n.

Gall in the mysteries, <page 191>

Gallwey, quoted, <page 154>

Gammadion, the, <page 309>

Ganesa, <page 157> n.

Garcilasso, <page 378>

Gathas, the, <page 285>, <page 286> ff.

Gauls, human sacrifices by, <page 137>

Gebelezeis, <page 269>

Gelele, King, <page 61>

Gelon, <page 61>

Genius, moral, and religious reform, <page 60>, <page 72>, <page 78>

George, St., <page 333>

Gezo, King, <page 61>

Ghasiyas, sacrifice by, <page 172>

Ghillany, <page xxiv>, <page xxv>, <page 150> n., <page 173>

Ghosts, savage ideas of, <page 41> ff., <page 54>

Gibbon, <page 294> n., <page 402>

Gibil-Nusku, <page 221>, <page 269>

Gill, cited, <page 43>

Girard, discussed and cited, <page 50> n., <page 94>

Gladstone, cited, <page 68> n.

Glass, as cult-founder, <page 57>

Gnosticism, and ancestor Gods, <page 47>; and Judaism, <page 95>; and the early Church, <page 96>; and mystery dramas, <page 204> n.; and fish symbol, <page 208>; and Babylonian theosophy, <page 222>, <page 267>; and Mithra, <page 334>

Goat-God, the, <page 85>, <page 106>, <page 302>, <page 323>; sacrifice of, <page 106>, <page 151>

[p. 445]

Goddesses evemerised, <page 166> n.

Gods, origins of, <page 1>-2, <page 3>, <page 41> ff., <page 47> ff., <page 53>; names tabooed, <page 49>; as eaters of human flesh, <page 47> n.; evolution of, <page 50> ff.; relation of, to men, <page 1>, <page 8>, <page 12>, <page 13>, <page 15>, <page 20>, <page 22>, <page 28>, <page 40>, <page 42> ff., <page 52>, <page 71>, <page 79>; supreme, <page 24>, <page 71>, <page 86>, <page 87>, <page 96>, <page 358>; secondary, <page 89>, <page 95> ff., <page 99> ff.; creative, <page 43>, <page 87>, <page 96>, <page 350>, <page 358>, <page 363>, <page 376>; Saviour, <page 99>, <page 294>; sacrificed, <page 99> ff., <page 130> ff., <page 362>, <page 363>; teaching, <page 214> ff.; as children, <page 322>

Gold Coast, sacrifices on, <page 117> n.

Golden Rule, in Lao Tsze, <page 219> n.

Goldziher, discussed, <page 70> n.

Gonds, cannibal sacrament of, <page 132>; symbolism of, <page 139>

Gore, Bishop, <page 404>

Gospels, the, crucifixion details in, <page 119> ff., <page 192>, <page 193>; theophagy in, <page 141>; text of mystery drama in, <page 197> ff.; their value as history, <page 228> ff., <page 234>-6; brethren of the Lord in, <page 399>-400; the Primitive, <page 201>

Gotama, <page 240>, <page 244>. See Buddha

Gracchus, <page 331>

Granger, cited, <page 2> n.

Grannos, <page 215>

Gratian, <page 331>

Gratitude in religion, <page 3>, <page 8>, <page 29>, <page 40>

Graves, evolution of, <page 317> n.

Greek religious thought, <page 15>, <page 52>, <page 94>; influence on Judaism, <page 88>, <page 90>; influence on Semitic culture, <page 218> n.; influence on Islam, <page 93>; influence on Rome, <page 45>-6; science, <page 38>; human sacrifices, <page 60>, <page 64>, <page 135>; animal sacrifices, <page 171>; ethics and Jewish, <page 68> n.; culture, value of, <page 76>

Gregorie, <page 176> n.

Gregory, St., <page 331>

Grey, Sir G., <page 209> n., <page 212>

Griffin, <page 300> n.

Grote, on human sacrifice, <page 127>; on historical evidence, <page 231> ff.

Guatemala, human sacrifice in, <page 354>, <page 362>-3

Gubernatis, <page xxvi>

Guerinot, <page 252> n.

Guiana, sorcery in, <page 23> n.

Guizot, <page 294> n.

Gunkel, <page 437>

 

HADES, <page 53>

Hadrian, <page 125>

Haeckel, cited, <page 341>

Haidas, sacrifices of, <page 171> n.

Haigh, on Dionysus, <page 97> n.

Hair, cutting of, for sacrifice, <page 111>, <page 307>

Haman, <page 145>, <page 296> n.

Hamilcar, <page 126>, <page 161> n.

Hammurabi, <page 78>-9, <page 166>, <page 214>

Hanging as mode of sacrifice, <page 149>-50, <page 151>

Haoma, the, <page 100>, <page 285>, <page 318>

Harnack, <page xii>

Harrison, Miss, on the religion of fear, <page 3> n.; on origin of Dionysus, <page 53> n.; on sacrifice, <page 106> n., <page 171>

Harvest, sacrifices at, <page 149>

Hathor, <page 53>

Haug, cited and discussed, <page 286> n., <page 288>

Hausrath, cited, <page 326>, <page 412>

Havet, cited, <page 315>

Hawaii, Teaching-Gods of, <page 215>

Haynes, cited, <page 340> n.

Hebrew religion, <page 16>, <page 42>, <page 47> n., <page 48>, <page 49>, <page 51>, <page 64>, <page 80> ff., <page 180>; monotheism, <page 66> ff., <page 74>, <page 76> ff., <page 80> ff., <page 87>; ethics, <page 68> ff., <page 75> ff., <page 81>, <page 93>; polytheism, <page 67> ff., <page 86>, <page 91>; effects on, of Exile, <page 65>; aspects of, at Return, <page 72>-3, <page 82>, <page 83>, <page 85> ff.; overvaluation of, <page 74> ff., <page 76> ff., <page 84>; literature, <page 72>, <page 74> ff., <page 84>, <page 85>; culture and commerce, <page 88>; temple finance, <page 88>; expansion, <page 89>; fraudulent history, <page 80> ff.; festivals, <page 145> ff.; human sacrifices, <page 64>, <page 135> n., <page 149>-50, <page 158> ff., <page 189>; taboo of names, <page 49>; dualism, <page 86>; prophets as cult-founders, <page 57>; high-priests, <page 88>; cosmology, <page 75>; superstition, <page 86>-7, <page 93>; eucharists, <page 168> ff.; obsession of blood, <page 189>

Heifer, sacrifice of, <page 158>

Heinrici, xiii

Hell, the Christian, <page 205>

Herakleitos, Logos of, <page 218> n., <page 222>

Herakles, in Homer, <page 81> n.; labours of, <page 308>, <page 336>; cult of, <page 99>, <page 131>, <page 167>, <page 195>, <page 337>; sacrifices to, <page 130>, <page 195>, <page 337>; crown of, <page 191>; cave God, <page 304> n.; resurrection of, <page 195> n., <page 307>; a Saviour, <page 206>; and history, <page 234>

Hercules, <page 337>

Heresy, <page 96>

Hermes, as teacher of Apollo, <page 214>; rival and son of Apollo, <page 292>; Logos, <page 217>, <page 222>; epithets of, <page 299>; birth of, <page 304> n., <page 321> n.; as lamb bearer, <page 332>

Herod the Great, character of, <page 90>; and Antigonus, <page 181>; theatres built by, <page 204>

---- Antipas, in Gospels, <page 193>, <page 199>

Herodotus, cited, on Egyptian sacrifices, <page 123>, <page 131>; on Scythians, <page 127>-8; on Herakles in Egypt, <page 191>; on Osirian mysteries, <page 194>; on the Budini, <page 267>; on Zalmoxis, <page 269>; on Persian religion, <page 295>

Hershon, <page 168>

[p. 446]

Hervey Islands, religion in <page 43>, <page 181>

Hesiod, <page 47>, <page 50> n., <page 51>

Hexateuch, <page 84>, <page 159> n.

Hiawatha, <page 352>

Hibbert Journal, review in criticised, xii, <page 396> ff.

Hiel, <page 64> n., <page 161> n.

Hierocles, <page 278>

Hieroglyphics, <page 345>, <page 354>

Hierology, purpose and principles of, <page xxii>, <page 98>, <page 387>

High-places, Assyrian, <page 182> n.; vogue of sacrifices on, <page 292>-3; Asiatic and American compared, <page 343>, <page 354>; Polynesian, <page 343>; Mexican sacrifices on, <page 362>; in legend of Quetzalcoatl, <page 366>

Hillebrandt, <page 290> n.

Hillel, <page 179>

Hindus, religion of early, <page 41>, <page 47> n.

History, critical method in, <page 231> ff.

Hobbes, <page 29>

Holden, <page 124> n.

Holy Spirit, sex of, <page 92>, <page 220>, <page 297> n.; in Judaism and Jesuism, <page 92>; the Christian, <page 96>-7; in paganism, <page 206>; evolution of, <page 220>; in Philo, <page 227>-8

Homer, <page 51>, <page 221>

Hommel, discussed, <page 74> n.

Horace, <page 129>

Hormisdas, <page 266>

Horos, <page 131> n., <page 206>, <page 306>, <page 319> n.; as fish, <page 208>, <page 302> n.

Horoscopes, <page 345>, <page 380>

Horse, sacrifice of, <page 183>-4

Hubert et Mauss, cited, <page 134> n.

Huemac, <page 216> n., <page 370>, <page 371>

Huet, <page 276>, <page 419>

Huitzilopochtli, <page 144>; as teacher, <page 214>; symbols of, <page 357>; temples of, <page 343>; evolution of, <page 357> ff.; sacrifices to, <page 362>, <page 363>; eucharist of, <page 373>

Human origins, <page 340> ff.

Hume, <page 384>

Huxley, services of, to hierology, <page xxvi>; on Hebrew development, <page 65> n.; on Hebrew monotheism, <page 76>, <page 77> n.; on the Bible, <page 77> n.; on agnosticism, <page 233>; on witch of Endor, <page 233>; Crawley on, <page 402>

Hyde, cited, <page 265> n.

 

IBSEN, <page 197>

Ibus, the, sacrifice among, <page 136> n.

Idolatry, resistance to, <page 70>, <page 82>, <page 85>, <page 298>

Idols, Mexican, <page 353>

Ieoud, <page 137>, <page 161>, <page 186>

Ifa, <page 217>

Ihering, von, <page 53>-4

Ihne, <page 45>

Immortality, idea of, <page 47> ff.; acquired by Gods, <page 51>; doctrine of, in Mithraism, <page 311>, <page 314>; Gnostic, <page 222>; baneful effect of, <page 385>

Imperialism, ancient, <page 79>, <page 324>-5, <page 328>; and human sacrifice, <page 361>

Incas, <page 366>, <page 376> ff.; rationalism among, <page 383>

Incense, <page 210>, <page 366>

India, sacred animals in, <page 184>

Indian religion, <page 44>, <page 47> n., <page 51>, <page 72>, <page 218>-9 (see also Buddhism); human sacrifices, <page 122>, <page 212>; use of cross, <page 157> n. Indra, evolution of, <page 95>

Indulgences, <page 380>

Infanticide, <page 53> n., <page 212>

Initiation, rites of, <page 308>; grades of, <page 309> Inquisition, in Mexico, <page 381>, <page 402>

Iphicrates, <page 61>

Iphigeneia, <page 135>, <page 172>, <page 352>

Irrational, meaning of word, <page 4> ff.

Isaac, <page 51> n., <page 64>, <page 65>, <page 124>, <page 153>, <page 162>

Isaacs, Hyam, <page 168>

Isaiah, and suffering Messiah, <page 166>-7; and the mystic rock, <page 316>-7

Ishmael, <page 162>

Ishtar, <page 145>, <page 189>, <page 293> n.

Isis, <page 16>; as magic-worker, <page 21> n.; cows sacred to, <page 159> n.; and Nephthys, <page 195>; in Plutarch, <page 299>; mysteries of, <page 204> n., <page 308> n., <page 321> n.; as teacher, <page 215>

Islam, <page 66>, <page 87>, <page 93>, <page 238>-9

Israel (Kronos), <page 161>, <page 162> n., <page 186>

Issedones, <page 128>

Ixion, <page 318> n.

 

JACOB, <page 48>, <page 51> n.

Jacobi, cited and discussed, <page 250>, <page 251> ff.

Jainas, the, <page 250> ff., <page 257>

Jainism, <page 243>

Jairus' daughter, story of, <page 277>

Jakri, the, <page 110>

Jamblichus, cited, <page 16>

James "brother of the Lord," <page xviii>, <page xix>, <page 399> ff.

Jansen, <page 57>

Jansenism, <page 196> n.

Janus, Jevons on, <page 45>; evolution of, <page 46>; as teacher, <page 214>; and Mithra, <page 325>; and Peter, <page 332>-3, <page 406>

Japan, ancestor-worship in, <page 43>; human sacrifices in, <page 61>, <page 138>, <page 183>

Jastrow, cited, <page 76> n.

Jenkery, <page 113> n., <page 114>

Jensen, <page 437>

Jephthah, <page 64>, <page 124>, <page 352>

Jeremiah, <page 67>, <page 68>, <page 176>

Jerome, on Gospel According to Hebrews, <page 192> n.; on Archelaus, <page 264>; on Mithraic initiation, <page 308>-9, <page 416>; on Bethlehem cave, <page 321>

[p. 447]

Jerusalem, siege of, <page 191>

Jesus (= Joshua), cult of, <page 57>, <page 90> ff., <page 95>; crucifixion legend of, <page 118> ff., <page 144> ff., <page 192>; the Apocalyptic, <page 142>, <page 164>, <page 205> n., <page 208>; a pre-Christian God, <page 162> ff., <page 398>; a demi-god in the "Teaching of the Twelve Apostles," <page 164>, <page 188>; unhistorical, <page xvii> ff., <page 228> ff., <page 396> ff.; as Fish, <page 207>, <page 302>; in Pauline epistles, <page 237>, <page 400>; in Manichaeism, <page 273>; as Rock, <page 317>; litany of name of, <page 332>, <page 423>-4; pagan attributes of, <page 332>

-- high-priest of the Return, <page 86> n., <page 91>, <page 166>

-- son of Ananus, <page 193>

-- the Talmudic, <page 91>, <page 194>, <page 205>, <page 237>, <page 397>, <page 405>

Jevons, F. B., discussed, <page xxvi>, <page 4> ff., <page 20> ff., <page 52>, <page 59>, <page 62>, <page 65> n., <page 67> n., <page 70>, <page 74> n., <page 94>, <page 384>; on earliest Gods, <page 1>, <page 22>, <page 23>, <page 41>; on taboos, <page 4>-7, <page 25>, <page 384>; on rise of idea of duty, <page 6>, <page 55>; on superstition, <page 8>; on magic and religion, <page 9>-11, <page 14>, <page 20>, <page 22>, <page 46>; definitions of religion by, <page 20> ff., <page 24>, <page 34>, <page 60> n.; on the sacramental meal, <page 22>, <page 59>; on Egyptian religion, <page 23>; on Supreme Gods, <page 24>; on Pantheism, <page 24>; on animism, <page 24>; on belief, <page 25>; on mythology, <page 26>; on religious evolution, <page 27>, <page 59>-65 n.; on the Eleusinian mysteries, <page 28>; on totemism, <page 27>, <page 44>, <page 99> n., <page 100> n., <page 102> n.; on ancestor worship, <page 41>, <page 44>, <page 52>; on human sacrifices, <page 154> n., <page 209> n.; on sacred stones, <page 317> n.; on king-priests, <page 374>; on Mexican priests, <page 375> n.; on Roman religion, <page 45>; on religious reformers, <page 62>; on Monotheism, <page 65> n., <page 69> n.

Jews, contemporary, rites of, <page 152>. See Hebrews

Job, book of, <page 77>, <page 85>, <page 86>

Johnston, Sir H., on negro religion, <page 40>, <page 170>-1

Jolley, A. J., cited, <page 201>

Jonah, book of, <page 85>

Joseph, <page 163>, <page 167>

-- of Arimathea, <page 201>, <page 203>

Josephus, on siege of Jerusalem, <page 120> n.; on Jewish human sacrifice, <page 173>; on temple miracle, <page 191>; on Herod's theatres, <page 204>

Joshua (= Jesus) the high-priest, <page 86> n., <page 91>, <page 166>; myths of, <page 64>, <page 72>, <page 163>, <page 396>, <page 428>; sacrifices to, <page 64> n.; the hero, <page 91>; sacrificial acts of, <page 150>, <page 181>; an Evemerised deity, <page 163> ff.

Josiah, <page 82>

Jovian, <page 328>

Judas, <page 121>-2, <page 197>, <page 198>, <page 199>, <page 398>, <page 401>

Judges as Gods, <page 42>, <page 47> n.

Julian, <page 312>, <page 326>, <page 327>-8

Julius Caesar, sacrifices by and to, <page 129>; cited, <page 137>

Juno, <page 359>

Jupiter, human sacrifices to, <page 128>, <page 129>

Justi, cited, <page 291> n.

Justin Martyr, on the paschal lamb, <page 157> n.; on Mithraic eucharist, <page 307>, <page 421>; on Mithraic rock, <page 316>

Juvenal, <page 129>, <page 231>

 

Ka, the Egyptian, <page 44>

Kaang, <page 41> n., <page 43>

Kafirs of Hindu-Kush, sacrifices by, <page 184>

Kalisch, <page 150> n., <page 153> n.

Kalmucks, the, <page 134> n.

Kalthoff, A., <page xiv>

Kanerki, <page 316> n.

Kant, <page 56>

Kapparoth, the, <page 168> ff.

Karabbas, <page 146>, <page 172>

Karaboodi, <page 111>

Karhada Brahmans, human sacrifice by, <page 119>

Karma, <page 248>

Kasyapa, <page 244>

Keane, A. H., <page 346> n.

Kepler, <page 93> n.

Kern, <page 261>

Keys, the divine, <page 206>, <page 292>, <page 298>, <page 330> n., <page 333>

Khonds, ancestral Gods of, <page 47> n., <page 108>; human sacrifices of, <page 64> n., <page 72>, <page 108> ff., <page 118>, <page 130>, <page 183> n.; and images, <page 71> n., <page 108>, <page 109> n.; ethics of, <page 72>; religion of, <page 108>-9; of Maliahs, <page 109>, <page 110> n., <page 111> n., <page 113>; myths, <page 111>; ritual, <page 111> ff., <page 182>, <page 193>, <page 307> n.; liberty of victim among, <page 185>; Teaching-Gods of, <page 215>; mnemonics of, <page 345>; priests of, <page 366>

Khonsu, evolution of, <page 95>; and Amun, <page 131>, <page 320> n.; attributes of, <page 206>

Khorda Avesta, <page 285>

Khosrus, religion of, <page 319> n. See Chosroes

Kidd, <page 402>

Kin eating, <page 136>

King, C. W., cited, <page 282>, <page 332> n.

Kings as Gods, <page 47> n.; sacrifices of, <page 137>, <page 145>, <page 148> ff., <page 161>, <page 181>, <page 182>, <page 186>; and priests, <page 288> n., <page 353>; and progress, <page 35>-6, <page 75>, <page 361>; abolition of human sacrifice by, <page 60> ff., <page 361>

Kingsborough, Lord, <page 349> n.

Kingsley, Miss, <page 41>

Kinvad bridge, <page 311>

Kista, <page 315>

Kitimba, <page 155>

Koeppen, <page 242> n.

[p. 448]

Kollmann, P., cited, <page 30>

Koreamoku, <page 215>

Koyis, the, <page 114> n., <page 117>

Krishna, evolution of, <page 95>; and Buddha, <page 239>, <page 252>, <page 262>; cult of, <page 284>; and Jainism, <page 252>

Kronos, human sacrifices to, <page 126>, <page 137>, <page 161>, <page 162> n., <page 186>; cult of, as Zervan, in Mithraism, <page 283>, <page 291>, <page 417> Kuenen, cited, <page 67> n., <page 68> n., <page 260> Kulischer, <page xxiv>

Kyriake, <page 180> n. <page 429>

 

LACTANTIUS, <page 278>; cited and discussed, <page 121> n., <page 129>, <page 279>

Laing, S., <page 402>

Lajard, services of, to hierology, xxii; on Riccio, <page 283>; on Mithraic origins, <page 300> n.; on Mithraic degrees, <page 309>, <page 417>; on Mithraic monuments, <page 325> n.

Lake of fire, the, <page 205>

Lamb, the divine, <page 142>, <page 208>; the God, in the Apocalypse, <page 142>, <page 164>, <page 205> n., <page 320>; substituted for children in sacrifice, <page 153>, <page 213> n.; sacrificed by Christians, <page 143>, <page 207>, <page 318>, <page 320>; as crucified, <page 157> n.

Lampridius, <page 313>

Lang, A., cited: on taboo, <page 4>; on Dr. Frazer's definition of religion, <page 12> n.; on ancestor-worship and name-taboo, <page 48>, <page 49>; on Zulu religion, <page 50> n.; on Supreme Gods, <page 71>, <page 384>, <page 386>; on Dr. Frazer's theory, <page 146>, <page 148> n., <page 149>; on the paschal massacre, <page 152> n.; on scourging of victims, <page 188>; on the Golden Bough, <page 191> n.; on sacrifices, <page 209> n.; on savage survivals, <page 384>; on Australian religion, <page 12>; on primitive idea of immortality, <page 47>; on totemism, <page 100> n., <page 102> n.

Language, evolution of, <page 346>

Lao-Tsze, <page 219> and note

Lardner, cited, <page 278>

Lares Praestites, the, <page 46>

Las Casas, <page 381>

Law, early, and religion, <page 55> ff.

Lectisternia, <page 178> n., <page 196> n.

Leibnitz, <page 283>

Lenormant, cited, <page 296> n.

Lent, <page 306>

Leonard, Major, <page 133> n., <page 134> n.

Lessing, xiv, <page 314>, <page 384>

Letourneau, cited, <page 209> n.

Letronne, <page 300> n.

Leucadia, sacrifice at, <page 139>

Levites, <page 80>, <page 152>, <page 353>

Libra, <page 323>

Light-Gods, <page 284>, <page 326>, <page 331>

Lillie, cited and discussed, <page 254> n.

Limb-breaking, in sacrifice, <page 113>, <page 119>, <page 153>, <page 155>, <page 156>

Lion-headed God, <page 283>, <page 291>, <page 298>

Literatures, ancient, <page 78>

Livingstone, <page 18>, <page 103>

Livy, cited, <page 129> n.

Logoi, <page 226>

Logos, doctrine of, in Jewry, <page 86>, <page 90>, <page 163>-4, <page 178>, <page 218>, <page 222>, <page 226>; in the Apocalypse, <page 205> n.; in Egypt, <page 217>; in Mazdeism, <page 218>, <page 289>; in Mithraism, <page 292>, <page 296>, <page 314> ff., <page 409>; evolution of, <page 218> ff.; in Brahmanism, <page 218>-9; in China, <page 219>; in Plato, <page 220>; in Babylonia, <page 220> ff.; in Philo, <page 220>, <page 223>-8; in Mexico, <page 375> n.; in Clem. Alex., <page 174> n.; in Greece, <page 217>, <page 218> n.

Lord's Day, <page 175>, <page 180>, <page 305>, <page 429>

Lubbock, Sir J., <page 102> n.

Lucian, <page 73>

Lunus, <page 177>

Luther, as cult-founder, <page 57>

Lyall, Sir A. C., on magic and religion, <page 11>; on origins of Gods, <page 231> ff. Lycaon, <page 123>

Lycurgus, <page 238>

Lydus, Johannes, <page 305> n.

 

MAAT, <page 177> n., <page 216>

Mabon, <page 215>

Maccabees, the, <page 89>

Macdonald, Rev. D., <page 43> and note, <page 102> n. 

Macpherson, <page 108>

Macrobius, <page 419>

Madagascar, taboo in, <page 50> n.

Magi, the, <page 322>-3 n.

Magic, origin of, <page 10>, <page 15>, <page 23>, <page 28>; and religion, <page 7>, <page 9> ff., <page 28> ff., <page 99>; in Brahmanism, <page 13>; in Egypt, <page 13>; in Chaldea, <page 14>; primitive, <page 13> ff., <page 21>; among Jews, <page 16>, <page 21> n., <page 30>; "sympathetic" and "art," <page 16>, <page 28>, <page 29>, <page 182>; and progress, <page 35> ff.; and art, <page 35> n.; private and public, <page 29>

Mahaffy, cited and discussed, <page 127>

Mahavira, <page 251>, <page 252>

Maimonides, <page 179>

Maistre, Joseph de, cited, <page 381>

Maitreya, <page 257>

Malabar, human sacrifice in, <page 138>

Malachi, <page 87>

Malagasy, taboo of names by, <page 50> n.

Malayan human sacrifices, <page 122>; animal sacrifices, <page 170>-1

Malcolm, cited, <page 119>

Maleus, <page 161>

Mamili, <page 117>

Manah, <page 177> n.

Manco Capac and Mama Ocello, <page 215>, <page 342>

Manes, the, <page 46>

[p. 449]

Mangaia, <page 152> n.

Manichaeism, <page 96>, <page 273>; and Mithraism <page 334>

Manichaeus, legend and problem of <page 264> ff.; flaying and crucifixion of <page 266>; name of, <page 268>; story of, and cave, <page 269>; mystery-drama of, <page 272> writings of, <page 273>

Manna, <page 177> n.

Manu, Queen, <page 61>

Manyema, the, <page 155>

Maoris, magic and religion among, <page 13> <page 14>; and images, <page 71> n.; cannibalism of, <page 104> n., <page 365>; human sacrifices by <page 122>, <page 161> n., <page 209> n.; and colour red <page 271> n.

March, <page 359>

Marcion, <page 274>

Marduk. See Merodach

Margoliouth, Dr., discussed, <page 396>

Maries, the two, <page 200>, <page 205>

Mariner, cited, <page 116> n., <page 365> n.

Mark, gospel of, <page 229> n.

Markham, C., discussed, <page 378> n.

Mark on the forehead, the mystic, <page 309>.

Marquesans, <page 133>, <page 365>

Mars, human sacrifices to, <page 129>; symbol of, <page 319>, <page 357>; names of, <page 357>; and Mithra, <page 325>; origin and evolution of, <page 358>-9; the star, worship of and sacrifices to, <page 271>

Marti, <page 84> n.

Martindale, Fr., criticised, <page 413> ff.

Marucchi, <page 335> n.

Mary, <page 21> n., <page 97>, <page 228>, <page 322> n.

-- Magdalene, <page 185>

Masai, the, <page 36> n.; taboo of names among, <page 50>

Mashya and Mashyana, <page 294> n.

Maspero, cited, <page 13>

Mass, the, origin of name, <page 425>

Massagetae, <page 128>, <page 160> n.

Massey, G., cited, <page 297> n.

Massilia, human sacrifice at, <page 139> n.

Matarisvan, <page 221> n.

Mathew. cited, <page 44> n., <page 100> n.

Maui, <page 43>

Maury, <page 136> n.

Maya, the, <page 369>-70, <page 371>

Mazdeism, origins of, <page 288> ff., <page 291>; prayer in, <page 305> n.; and Judaism, <page 83>, <page 85>-6, <page 166>, <page 218> ff., <page 320>, <page 422>-3

Mead, G. R. S., <page 204> n.

Mediatorial Gods, <page 206>, <page 222>, <page 294> and note, <page 314>, <page 412>

Medicine, from the Gods, <page 215>

Meir, Rabbi, <page 165> n.

Meis, <page 266>

Melchizedek, <page 175>-6

Melkarth, human sacrifice to, <page 126>; and Athamas, <page 302> n.

Men = Meni, <page 176>-7, <page 298>

Menahems, <page 268>

Menelaus, <page 123>

Menu, <page 238>

Meredith, G., quoted, <page 229>

Meriah, <page 110> ff.

Merodach, and Ea, <page 95>, <page 216>; in creation myth, <page 130>; and book of Esther, <page 145>; as mediator, <page 206>, <page 222> n.; as Logos, <page 216>; as Saviour, <page 222> n.; festival of, <page 292>; and Nabu, <page 292>

Mesi, King, <page 62> n.

Mesopotamian culture, <page 69>, <page 74>, <page 75>, <page 78>-80

Messenger, sacrificed, <page 105> ff., <page 190>; of the Gods, <page 216>, <page 217>, <page 269>, <page 270>, <page 344>

Messiah, rise of doctrine of, <page 79>, <page 89>, <page 166>, <page 180>; as priest, <page 158>, <page 175>, <page 179>; in Book of Enoch, <page 89>, <page 167>; the two Messiahs, <page 167>, <page 268>-9; the suffering Messiah, <page 120>, <page 166>-7, <page 269> n.; Mexican, <page 370> ff.

Metatron, the, <page 163>, <page 220> n., <page 314>-5

Methana, sacrifices at, <page 171>

Metis, <page 217>, <page 222>

Mexico, religion of ancient, <page 355> ff.; human sacrifices in, <page 132>, <page 151>, <page 271>, <page 360> ff.; ethics of ancient, <page 366> ff.; eucharist in, <page 144>; Teaching-Gods of, <page 216>; language of, <page 382> n.; modern civilisation of, <page 382>

Mexitli, <page 358>

Meyer, E., cited, <page 51> n., <page 217> n.

Michael, <page 324>, <page 333>

Michelet, cited, <page 379> n.

Mihr, <page 289>, <page 293>, <page 322> n., <page 323>

Mihrgan, <page 323>

Mihrvard, <page 322> n.

Milinda, King, <page 249>

Mills, L. H., cited and discussed, <page 286> ff., <page 295> n.

Minayeff, <page 260>

Minos, <page 217>

Minucius Felix, <page 129>

Miriam, <page 165>-6

Mirror as symbol, <page 344>

Missa, <page 332> n.

Mithra, symbols of, <page 142>, <page 298> ff., <page 309>; sacrament of, <page 143>, <page 174>-5, <page 207>, <page 307>, <page 318>, <page 332> n.; two-formed, <page 180>, <page 296>; three-formed, <page 296>; resurrection of, <page 195>, <page 306>, <page 317>; cult of, <page 181>, <page 205>. <page 208>, <page 281> ff., <page 303> ff., <page 310> ff.; attributes of, <page 206>, <page 288> ff.; sacrifice of, <page 299>, <page 300>, <page 303>, <page 320>; festivals of, <page 293> n.; mysteries of, <page 195>, <page 302>, <page 305>, <page 306> ff., <page 314>, <page 317> ff., <page 415> ff.; as tree-God, <page 319>; and Lunus, <page 177>; titles of, <page 429>-30; evolution of, <page 95>, <page 288> ff.; human sacrifice

[p. 450]

to, <page 126>, <page 292>, <page 312>-3; names containing name of, <page 291> n.; a Pagan Christ, <page 294>; name of month, <page 323>; descent of, into Hades, <page 323>

Mithradates, <page 325>

Mithraism, <page 281> ff.; vogue of, <page 281>, <page 324>, <page 413>; monumental remains of, <page 282> ff.; derivation of, <page 283> ff.; absorption of, in Christianity, <page 310> ff., <page 327> ff., <page 424>; organisation of, <page 330>; didactic side of, <page 310> ff.; ethics of, <page 288>-9, <page 311>, <page 326>; Tisdall on, <page 408> ff.; Martindale on, <page 413> ff.

Mitra, <page 284>, <page 293> n.

Moabites, human sacrifice among, <page 161>

Mockler-Ferryman, <page 134> n.

Mohammed, <page 64>, <page 65>, <page 238>-9. See Islam

Mokoiro, <page 43>

Moloch, <page 70> n., <page 186>

Monarchy and monotheism, <page 69>, <page 76>, <page 86>

Mongols, <page 341>, <page 344>

Monkey sacrificed, <page 117>

Monotheism, evolution of, <page 66> ff., <page 76>, <page 82> ff., <page 84> n., <page 87>

Montanus, <page xxii>, <page 274>

Moon-worship, <page 159>, <page 170>-1, <page 177>. See Men

Morals and taboo, <page 6>, <page 25>, <page 55>

Mordecai, <page 145>

Moses, <page 57>; and Mithra, <page 16>; as God, <page 17>; myth of, <page 67>, <page 80>, <page 175>, <page 190>, <page 217>, <page 238>, <page 239>, <page 273> n., <page 316>-7; in Philo, <page 226>-7

Mosheim, <page 283>, <page 419>

Mother-Goddess, Babylonian, <page 220>; in Christianity, <page 228>, <page 333>; in Paganism, <page 321>-2, <page 333>; Mexican, <page 364>

Mounds, the Mississippi, <page 343>, <page 354>

Mount, the heavenly, <page 287> n.

Mourning, ritual, <page 306>

Moymis, <page 220>

Muggleton, <page 58>

Muir, <page 218>-9

Muller, J. G., cited and discussed, on monotheism and polytheism, <page 69> n.; on theophagy, <page 144>; on Asia and America, <page 347>; on feather symbol, <page 359> n.; on humanity in religion, <page 366> n.

-- K. O., on Dionysus, <page 97> n.; on Apollo, <page 307>

-- Max, his teaching, <page 71> n.; on the Logos doctrine, <page 218>; on Brahmanism and Buddhism, <page 253> n.; on Mitra, <page 293> n.

Mundus, <page 304>

Murray, Gilbert, quoted, <page 97>

Musaeus, <page 238>

Myazd, <page 318>, <page 332>

Mylitta, <page 295>-6

Mystery-drama, the Eleusinian, <page 28>, <page 195>; the Christian, <page xi>, <page xxi>, <page xxv>, <page 187>, <page 188>, <page 193>, <page 194>-204, <page 212>, <page 396> ff., <page 436>; first Christian production of, <page 204>; the Rhodian, <page 187>; in the pagan cults, <page 181>, <page 194>, <page 205>, <page 308>-14; survivals of, <page 391> ff.; the Manichaean, <page 272>

Mythology, significance of, <page xxii>; arbitrary treatment of, <page 41>; definitions of, <page 26>

Myths, origin of, <page 52>; and history, <page 231> ff.

 

NABU, <page 216>, <page 220>, <page 292>

Nagasena, <page 249>

Nairyo-sangha, <page 312>

Names, magical virtue of, <page 21> n., <page 49>, <page 163>, <page 220>; origin of, <page 100> ff.

Narcotics in human sacrifice, <page 113>, <page 114>, <page 116>, <page 119>, <page 138>, <page 140> n., <page 153>, <page 155>, <page 390>

Narrinyeri, taboo of names among, <page 49>; ngaitye of, <page 103>; Teaching-Gods of, <page 214>

Natchez, religion of, <page 353>

Nature, idea of law in, <page 16>

Nazarite, Jesus as, <page 186>

Ndengei, <page 365> n.

Neander, <page 267>

Nebo. See Nabu

Nehemiah, book of, Persian influence on, <page 83>, <page 86>

Nergal, <page 172> n.

Nero, <page 129> n.

Netzahualcoyotl, <page 366>, <page 383>

Neumann, cited, <page 322> n.

New Hebrides, religion in, <page 43>

Newman, J. H., <page 60>, <page 87> n.

-- F. W., <page 65> n.

New-Year days, <page 146>, <page 160>-1, <page 292>

Nietzsche, <page 403>

Nigeria, human sacrifices in, <page 132>, <page 135>; cross in, <page 154>; animal sacrifices in, <page 170>; cattle sacred in, <page 184>; Teaching-Gods of, <page 217>; trinity in, <page 223>; creation in, <page 221>

Nile, sacrifice to, <page 135>

Nilus, <page 137> n., <page 183> n.

Nine, sacrifice of, <page 107> and note

Ninlil, <page 297>

Nonnus, <page 416>

Nous, <page 315>

Nubia, cannibalism in, <page 133>

Numa, <page 217>, <page 238>

Numina and Gods, <page 45>

Nurundere, <page 214>

Nuruz, <page 319> n.

 

OANNES, <page 208>, <page 214>

Obubura sacrifices, <page 151>

Occult, idea of, <page 15>

Oceanic peoples, Asiatic origin of, <page 153>

[p. 451]

Oddes, the, <page 125> n.

Odin, cult of, <page 151>; as teacher, <page 215>

Odyssey, the, <page 81> n.

Oki, <page 351>

Oldenberg, cited, <page 13>; on Buddhism, <page 245>, <page 247>, <page 255>, <page 259>

Olympic Gods, <page 86>

Omanus, <page 296>, <page 418>

Omar Khayyam, cited, <page 309> n.

Only-begotten, sacrifice of, <page 137>, <page 162>, <page 187>, <page 351>; name of the Logos, <page 218>, <page 222>; saviours, <page 167>

Onophrius, <page 190> n.

Origen, <page 21> n., <page 92>, <page 162>, <page 302>, <page 328>

Ormuzd, <page 283>. See Ahura Mazda

Orpheus, descent of, to Hades, <page 191> n., <page 307>; as teacher, <page 217>; and the bough, <page 191> n.; a day God, <page 307>; and history, <page 238>

Orphicism, egg in, <page 208>; Attis in, <page 322>

Osiris, <page 16>, <page 53>; resurrection of, <page 92> n., <page 144>, <page 189>, <page 306>, <page 318>; cult of, <page 99>, <page 181>, <page 306>; as child, <page 131> and note; evolution of, <page 53>, <page 95>; mysteries of, <page 194>-5, <page 196>, <page 205>, <page 217>, <page 306>, <page 319>, <page 433>; names of, <page 190> n.; attributes of, <page 206>, <page 330>; as Teaching-God, <page 214>; in Plutarch, <page 299>

Ostiaks, sacrifice by, <page 115> n.

Ouranos, <page 217>

 

PACHACAMAC, <page 215>, <page 376>

Padaeans, <page 128>

Palanque, ruins of, <page 348>

Pallas, <page 313> n.

Pan, <page 214>, <page 302>

Pantheism, <page 24>; rise of, <page 76>, <page 84>, <page 87>

Papa = Pope, <page 335>

Papuan religion, <page 14> n.; cannibalism, <page 134> n.

Paraclete, <page 268>, <page 274>

Parnapishtim, <page 51>

Parsees, the, <page 89>

Partridge, C., <page 150>-1

Passion plays, <page 391> ff.

Passover, date of, <page 145>-6; and crucifixion, <page 149>; rite of, <page 152>, <page 157>, <page 163>, <page 213> n.

Pater Patrum, <page 336> ff.

Patroclus, <page 107> n.

Paul, as cult-founder, <page 57>; and Jesus, <page xiii>, <page xviii>, <page 121>, <page 234>-5, <page 236>, <page 237>, <page 397> ff.; on the crucifixion, <page 196>; and his converts, <page 314>

Pausanias, <page 123>, <page 127>, <page 171>

Peacock, symbol, <page 109>

Pelopidas, <page 127> n.

Penitentes, <page 391> ff.

Persephone, <page 167> n., <page 191> n., <page 195>, <page 306> n.

Perseus, <page 64> n., <page 310>, <page 316>, <page 336>

Persian religion, influence of on Jewish, <page 83>, <page 84>, <page 85>-6, <page 315> n.; human sacrifices, <page 123>

Peru, ancient religion of, <page 215>-6, <page 272>, <page 376> ff.; civilisation of, <page 347>, <page 380>; drama in, <page 193>, <page 377>

Peter, and cock, <page 199>, <page 333>; treason of, <page 199>, <page 202>; and rock, <page 202>, <page 317>, <page 330>; and Proteus, <page 332>-3; and Janus, <page 332>-3; chair of, <page 334> ff.

Petra, the God, <page 330>, <page 333>

Petronius, cited, <page 1>

Pfleiderer, xiii, <page 435> n.

Pharmakoi, <page 148>, <page 171>

Philo, Logos doctrine of, <page 220>, <page 223>-8; relation of, to Hebrew sacred books, <page 227> n.; his conception of sacrifice, <page 177>-8, <page 227> and note

Philostratus, <page 275> ff.

Phoenician human sacrifices, <page 61>, <page 64>, <page 124>, <page 126>

Photius, <page 264>, <page 313>

Phrixos, <page 302>

Phrygia, religion in, <page 274>, <page 318>

Pickering, <page 342>, cited, <page 103> n.

Pidyen haben, <page 152>

Pig, sacred, sacrifice of, <page 154>

Pilate, <page 199>, <page 203>

-- "Acts of," <page 202>

Plato, Logos of, <page 220>, <page 222>; birth story of, <page 239>, <page 277>

Pliny, cited, <page 126>, <page 128>

Plunkett, Miss, <page 285> n., <page 300> n.

Plutarch, cited, <page 125> n.; his Isis and Osiris, <page 299>; on Mithra, <page 412>

Polixena, <page 106> n., <page 172>

Polynesia, intoxicants in, <page 116>; mystic rock in, <page 316>; human sacrifice in, <page 122>, <page 154>, <page 209> n.; symbolic use of boughs in, <page 191> n.; pyramid-temples in, <page 343> n.

Polytheism, <page 66> ff.; ethics of, <page 69>, <page 70>, <page 71> ff., <page 77> ff.

Pompey, <page 325>

Pomponius Mela, cited, <page 128>

Porphyry, and Abammon, <page 16>; on human sacrifices, <page 129>, <page 137>; on the Rhodian sacrifice, <page 137>, <page 187>; on Mithra, <page 299> n., <page 319>, <page 320>, <page 337>, <page 430>; on sacred caves, <page 304>; on Mithraic initiation, <page 308>-9

Poseidon, <page 330>

Positivism, <page 57>, <page 404>

Prajapati, <page 219>

Prah, <page 117> n.

Pratt, A. E., cited, <page 14> n., <page 134> n.

Prayer, logic of, <page 19>, <page 21>, <page 32>; psychology of, <page 35>

Preller, <page 180> n.

Prescott, cited, <page 341>, <page 383> n.

[p. 452]

Priestcraft, <page 6>, <page 30>, <page 62>, <page 407>

Priests, as taboo-makers, <page 6>; and religion, <page 6>, <page 13>, <page 17>; inspired by the God, <page 216>; and Kings, <page 62>, <page 288> n., <page 374>; as promoters of human sacrifice, <page 361>, <page 364>-5, <page 366>, <page 374> ff.; hostility of to magic, <page 30>; reduction of status of Gods by, <page 51>; and reform of religion, <page 60>, <page 62>; psychology of, <page 367>

Privileges of victims, among Codooloos, <page 114>; among Khonds, <page 111>, <page 116>; at Bombay, <page 119>; among Albanians, <page 125>; at Rhodes, <page 137>; in Polynesia, <page 154>; in America, <page 354>, <page 363>; at Bonny, <page 183>; among Native Americans, <page 183>; among Hindus, <page 183>-4

Prometheus, crucifixion of, <page 167>

Prophets, sincerity of, <page 62>-3

Protestantism and the backward races, <page 382>

Proteus, <page 277>, <page 332>

Psychology of religion, <page 34>-5, <page 39>

Punjab, religion in ancient, <page 253> ff.

Purgatory, doctrine of, <page 333>

Purim, <page 143>, <page 145> ff.

Purity of sacrificial victims, <page 135>, <page 151>, <page 153>, <page 161>, <page 352>

Pushan, <page 284> n.

Pyramid-temples, Assyrian, <page 182> n.; vogue of, <page 273>, <page 292>; Asiatic and American, <page 343>, <page 354>; Polynesian, <page 343>; Mexican, <page 362>, <page 366>

Pythagoreanism, <page 220>, <page 275>, <page 280>

 

QUEEN of Heaven, <page 176>, <page 177>

Quetzalcoatl, <page 216> n., <page 360>, <page 368> n., <page 370> ff.

Quipus, <page 345>

Quma, <page 342> n.

 

RA, <page 216>

Rain, God of, women sacrificed to, <page 135>, <page 151>; Hebrew sacrifices to, <page 150>; in Mexico, <page 356>, <page 368> n.

Ram, sacrificed, <page 117>, <page 131>, <page 319>, <page 320>; the mystic, <page 298> n., <page 301>-2, <page 319>, <page 320>

Rama, <page 259>

Rangi, <page 43>

Ransom in sacrifice, <page 170>

Rashnu, <page 289>, <page 315>

Rasmussen, cited, <page 14> n.

Rawlinson, cited and discussed, <page 290>, <page 298> n.

Reason and religion, <page 39>

Reclus, Elie, cited and discussed, <page 111> n., <page 114>, <page 115>

Red, colour, in human sacrifice, <page 112>, <page 114>, <page 119>, <page 158>, <page 270>-1, <page 272>, <page 344>

Redemption, Jewish rites of, <page 152>

Native Americans, religion of, <page 15>, <page 343>; cannibalism among, <page 133>; taboo of names among, <page 49> n.; crucifixion among, <page 151> n.; sacrifices of, <page 106>, <page 122>, <page 124>, <page 133>, <page 151>, <page 152> n., <page 183>

Reinach, S., on religion, <page 58> n.; on totemism, <page 99> n., <page 100> n.

Religion, meaning of, <page 7>, <page 8>, <page 11>, <page 12>, <page 28>, <page 32>; definition of, <page 57>-8; and taboo, <page 6>, <page 7>, <page 25>, <page 33>-4; and philosophy, <page 32> ff., <page 39>, <page 56>; and magic, <page 9> ff., <page 12> ff., <page 28> ff.; and totems, <page 19>, <page 44>; and law, <page 54>-6; scientific view of, <page 20>, <page 28> ff., <page 52>, <page 56>, <page 57>-8, <page 385>; evolution of, <page 66>, <page 94> ff.; and reform, <page 60> ff.; fixation in, <page 66>; retrogression in, <page 41> n., <page 140>; and ethics, <page 367>-8; Constant on, <page 58> n., <page 384>; Reinach on, <page 58> n.; Reville on, <page 58> n.; Crawley on, <page 402> ff.

Renaissance, culture of, <page 39>

Renan, <page 66>; on the Jews, <page 94>; on the Greeks, <page 94>; on night in the East, <page 198>; on Mithraism, <page 330> n.; on Babism, <page xvii>

Renouf, Le Page, cited, <page 77> n., <page 87> n. 

Resurrection, idea of, <page 144>, <page 189>; of the saints, <page 192>, <page 200>. See Immortality, and Osiris, Mithra, Dionysos, Herakles, etc.

Reville, A., on religion, <page 58> n.; on burying alive, <page 379> n.; on polytheism, <page 71> n.; on Apollonius of Tyana, <page 276>, <page 277> n.; on Judaic science, <page 93> n.; on American civilisations, <page 342>; on Jansenism, <page 196> n.; on cross-symbol, <page 368> n.; on Christianity and Mythology, <page 435>

-- J., <page 277> n.

Rhodes, human sacrifices at, <page 65> n., <page 137>, <page 186>, <page 187>

Riccio, <page 283>

Ritter, <page 267>

Rix, Herbert, <page xvi>

Robe, the Buddhist, <page 242> n., <page 344>; the seamless, <page 330>; of righteousness, <page 364>

Rock, of Israel, <page 175>, <page 316>, <page 317>; in Jesuism, <page 202>, <page 316>, <page 330>, <page 331>, <page 335>; in Mithraism, <page 305>, <page 316> ff., <page 410>; in other cults, <page 316>

Roman symbolism, <page 139>; human sacrifice, <page 128>-9, <page 135> n.; religion, <page 2> n., <page 32>, <page 45> ff., <page 51> n., <page 53>, <page 68>; law, <page 53> n.; imperialism, <page 80>; civilisation, <page 39>; taboo of God names, <page 49>

Romulus, <page 238>

Rongo, <page 43>

Roscher, xxii

Roskoff, cited, <page 57> n.

Rossi, <page 283>

-- de, <page 336>

Russia, human sacrifice in, <page 122>

Ruth, book of, <page 85>

[p. 453]

SABAZIOS, <page 322>, <page 420>

Sabbath, institution of, <page 82>, <page 175>

Sacaea, <page 118>, <page 143>, <page 145> ff., <page 188>

Sacraments, nature of, <page 28>; and totemism, <page 99>; cannibal, <page 22>, <page 65>, <page 124>, <page 128>, <page 141> ff.; Polynesian, <page 154>; of Native Americans, <page 156>; Hebrew, <page 168> ff.; Dionysiak, <page 195>; Mithraic, <page 142>-3, <page 174>, <page 207>; Pagan, <page 207> n.; Christian, <page 143>, <page 207>; total genealogy of, <page 211>; American, <page 351>, <page 352>; Mexican, <page 364> ff., <page 373>; Peruvian, <page 378>-9; Scythian, <page 128>

Sacrifices, ethic of, <page 32>; Hebrew, <page 106>, <page 168> ff.

-- human, disused in prosperity, <page 64>; revived in disaster, <page 65>, <page 140>; forms of, <page 105> ff.; in Greece, <page 60>-1, <page 123>, <page 129>, <page 135>, <page 139>; in Egypt, <page 61>, <page 123>, <page 129>, <page 135>; Phoenician, <page 61>, <page 64>, <page 124>, <page 126>, <page 129>; Polynesian, <page 61>, <page 122>, <page 150> n., <page 151>, <page 154>, <page 156>, <page 189>; Japanese, <page 61>. <page 127>, <page 183>; in Dahomey, <page 61>, <page 136>, <page 270>; Chinese, <page 61>, <page 366>; Hebrew, <page 64>, <page 65>, <page 107> n., <page 124>, <page 149>-50, <page 158> ff., <page 168> ff., <page 186>, <page 189>; Athenian, <page 106>, <page 127>; in Uganda, <page 107>, <page 125> n., <page 155>; at Benin, <page 107>-8, <page 135>, <page 138> n., <page 151>, <page 154>; in Sumatra, <page 116>, <page 126>; in Nigeria, <page 132>, <page 134>, <page 136> n., <page 150>; to the Rain God, <page 135>; to the Nile, <page 135>; in Malabar, <page 138>; in Brazil, <page 350>-1; American, <page 106>, <page 122>, <page 183>, <page 350> ff.; Mexican, <page 119>, <page 151>, <page 271>, <page 360> ff.; Peruvian, <page 366>, <page 378>; Khond, <page 108> ff.; universal, <page 122> ff.; Albanian, <page 125>; to Zeus, <page 123>, <page 125>; to Jupiter, <page 128>, <page 129>; ancient Mesopotamian, <page 128>; Persian, <page 123>; Roman, <page 128>-9; Arab, <page 126>, <page 129>; Rhodian, <page 137>; analogous to executions, <page 135>; evolution of theory and practice of, <page 138> ff., <page 156>, <page 186> ff., <page 209>-13, <page 361>; Teutonic, <page 151>; to Dionysos, <page 123>; to Kronos, <page 126>, <page 137>; to Melkarth, <page 126>; to Mithra, <page 126>, <page 312>; Scythian, <page 127>-8, <page 269>, <page 270>; to the sea, <page 129> n., <page 183>; in Bombay, <page 119>; African, <page 122>, <page 132>-3, <page 151>; Malay, <page 122>; Indian, <page 122>, <page 127>; Russian, <page 122>; Maori, <page 122>, <page 365>; Aryan, <page 122>; Slavonic, <page 123>; in modern Greece, <page 125>; by Catalinarian conspirators, <page 125>; in Gaul, <page 137>

Sagan, the, <page 159>

Sahagun, <page 381>

Sainte-Croix, <page 313>, <page 414>

Salamis, human sacrifices at, <page 125>, <page 127>

Salih, <page 270> n.

Sallust, cited, <page 125> n.

Samaritan religion, <page 85>, <page 86>, <page 92>, <page 163>, <page 213> n.

Samoans, taboo of names by, <page 50> n.; human sacrifices by, <page 61>, <page 150> n.; religion of, <page 103>, <page 386>

Samson, an Evemerised god, <page 81>, <page 292>; a deliverer, <page 167>; only begotten, <page 167>; as Nazarite, <page 186>; Sun-God, <page 186>, <page 307>; and Mithra, <page 292>; death of, <page 307>; labours of, <page 308>

Samuel, <page 17>; a God, <page 81>

Sancu, <page 379>

Sandeman, <page 57>

Sandwich Islands, human sacrifice in, <page 156>

Saoshyant, and Jewish Messianism, <page 166>; characteristics of, <page 206>, <page 322>; and Mithra, <page 322>, <page 420>; Tisdall on, <page 411>

Saracen culture, <page 39>

Sarasvati, <page 218>-219, <page 221>

Sargon, <page 317>

Sarpanitum, <page 221>

Satapatha Brahmana, <page 117>

Saturn, sacrifices to, <page 126>; as Teaching-God, <page 214>. See Kronos

Saturnalia, <page 186>

Saul, <page 233>; sons of, sacrificed, <page 149>, <page 161>, <page 181>, <page 189>

Saussaye, C. de la, <page 45>

Savages, progress among, <page 35> ff.; forward races and, <page 381> ff.; psychology of, <page 42>

Saviour-Gods, <page 99> ff., <page 206>, <page 222>

Savitri, <page 284> n., <page 293> n.

Sayce, cited, <page 14>, <page 220>; discussed, <page 74> n., <page 411>

Scalping, <page 344>

Scapegoat, <page 184>; sacrifice of, <page 105> ff., <page 138>, <page 158>-9, <page 189>

Schmiedel, <page xi>, <page 229> ff.; his nine trustworthy texts, <page xix>, <page 230> ff.

Schurer, cited, <page 92> n., <page 160> n., <page 174> Schwab, cited, <page 159> n.

Schwegler, <page xxii>, <page 45>, <page 274>

Schweitzer, Dr. A., <page xiv>, <page 435> n.

Science and magic, <page 14> ff., <page 22>

Scourging, sacrificial, <page 188>-9

Scythians, cannibalism among, <page 127>; human sacrifices by, <page 127>-8, <page 269>, <page 270>

Seel, H., <page 414>

Seeman, B., <page 343> n.

Selden, <page 313>, <page 419>

"Self-made" Gods, <page 175>

Semites, ethics of, <page 53> n.; sacrifices of, <page 64>, <page 65>, <page 124>, <page 135>; modern, <page 152>, <page 157>; sun-and-moon-worship of, <page 171>. See also Hebrew and Phoenician

Senart, cited and discussed, <page 252> n.; <page 258> ff.

Sepher Toledoth Jeschu, the, <page 220>, <page 406>

Serapis, <page 95>

Sermon on the Mount, <page 229>, <page 236>

Seven, sacred number, <page 164>, <page 181>, <page 205> n. <page 309> n., <page 317>

Sex, ethic of, <page 77>-8

[p. 454]

Sexes, union of in deity, <page 293>, <page 296>-8, <page 418>

Sexual liberty of sacrificial victim, among Khonds, <page 111>, <page 185>; among Codooloos, <page 114>; among Native Americans, <page 183>; in Mexico, <page 363>

Shakespeare, <page 197>

Shamai, <page 179>

Shamas, <page 214>, <page 292>

Sheep, sacrifice of, <page 131>, <page 272>, <page 379>; sacred, <page 184>

Shekinah, <page 86>

Shema, <page 49>

Shew-bread, <page 178>-9

Shintoism, <page 344>

Siddartha, <page 244> n., <page 252>

Sidonius Apollinaris, cited, <page 278>

Silenus, <page 215>

Simon of Cyrene, <page 199>

-- Magus, <page 252>

Sin, theory of, <page 404>

Sin-offerings, <page 189>

Sioux, human sacrifice by, <page 351>

Siun, <page 61> n.

Skeat, W. W., <page 171> n.

Skins, sacrosanct, in Mexico, <page 137>, <page 271>, <page 344>, <page 364>, <page 368>, <page 373>; in Scythia, <page 190>, <page 270>

Smith, Prof. Robertson, cited and discussed, on origin of Gods <page 1> n.; on origins of religion, <page 52>; on Mohammed, <page 65> n.; on Jewish monotheism, <page 69>; on animal sacrifice, <page 131>: on Arab sacrifices, <page 132> n., <page 134> n.; on executions and sacrifice, <page 150> n.; on Jewish mystery revivals, <page 173>; as editor, <page 281>, <page 431>; on Mexican sacrifices, <page 363> n.; on sacred skins, <page 364>; on decay of cannibalism, <page 365> n.

-- Adam, cited, <page 15>

-- Prof. W. B., xi, <page 398>

Sokrates (Ecclesiastical Historian), on Mithraic sacrifices, <page 126>, <page 313>; on Manichaeus, <page 264>

Solomon, <page 85>

Soma, the, gives Gods immortality, <page 51>; feast of, <page 175>; origin of, <page 53>; in Persia, <page 285>; deification of, <page 100>, <page 318>

Son of God, notion of, <page 95> ff., <page 322>; sacrifice of, <page 161>-2

Sophia, doctrine of, in Judaism, <page 90>, <page 92>, <page 221>, <page 222>; evolution of, <page 219>, <page 221>, <page 222>; in Philo, <page 223>, <page 227>; in Christianity, <page 228>; in Gnosticism, <page 315>

Sophocles, <page 195>

Soterism, <page 72>, <page 92>

Spartans, sacrifices of, <page 135> n.

Spencer, H., <page 71> n.; cited, <page 40>, <page 50> n.; on origin of Gods, <page 42>; services of, xxiii, xxvi; on origin of totem, <page 100>-1; on funeral sacrifices, <page 209>; on tree of knowledge, <page 318> n.; on evolution of altars, <page 317> n.

Spiegel, cited, <page 269>, <page 274> n., <page 409>

"Spirits," <page 15>, <page 42>, <page 46>, <page 51>, <page 86>

Spitta, F., xii, xiii

Sraosha, <page 296> n., <page 314>, <page 315>, <page 322>, <page 410>

Stable, the sacred, <page 322>-3 n.

Stade, cited, <page 87> n., <page 163> n.

Steinthal, cited, <page 17> n.

Stevenson, W. B., cited, <page 342> n.

Strabo, on Leucadian sacrifice, <page 124>; on Albanian sacrifice, <page 125>; on Sacaea, <page 148> n.; on Omanus, <page 296>

Strack, H. L., <page 160> n.

Substitution in sacrifice, among Greeks, <page 60>, <page 131>; in Japan, <page 61>; by kings, <page 60>, <page 61>; among Koyis, <page 117>; among Brahmans, <page 117>; in India, <page 118> n.; in Polynesia, <page 118> n., <page 154>; among Arabs, <page 131>; in Egypt, <page 131>; reason of, <page 134>; among Malays, <page 171> n.; in Fiji, <page 365> n.; in Mexico, <page 369>

Suetonius, cited, xiv, <page 129>, <page 406>

Suidas, quoted, <page 314>

Sunday, <page 175>, <page 305>, <page 332>, <page 429>

Sun-Gods, <page 293>-4, <page 299> ff., <page 305>; titles of, <page 175>; symbols of, <page 190>; births of, <page 321>; Hebrew sacrifices to, <page 150>; sacrifice of horse to, <page 184>; and Goat-Gods, <page 302>

Sun-worship, <page 172>, <page 350>, <page 356>, <page 363>, <page 376>-7

Supernatural, meaning of word, <page 1>, <page 20>; idea of, <page 9>, <page 20>

Superstition, meaning of, <page 8>-9; Hebrew, <page 86>-7, <page 93>; in times of crisis, <page 140> ff.

Supper, Holy, <page 143>, <page 174>, <page 176>, <page 196>. See Eucharists

Survival, laws of, in religion, <page 27>, <page 280>, <page 328>

Suttee, <page 61> n.; Peruvian, <page 379>

Swastika, the, <page 309>

Sword = cross, <page 319>

Symbolism, in sacrifice, <page 139>, <page 144>; in Mithraism, <page 298> ff.; in Plutarch, <page 299>; in ancient religions, <page 328>

Synagogues of dispersion, <page 168>

Syncretism in religion, <page 294> n.

 

TAAROA, <page 316>

Taboo, origin of, <page 5>-6; effects of, <page 7>; and religion, <page 6>, <page 7>, <page 49>, <page 55>, <page 57>, <page 404>; and social obligation, <page 6>, <page 55>; of names, <page 49> ff.; among Hebrews, <page 49>; force of, <page 100>

Tacitus, on the Christians, <page 406>

Tahiti, sacrificial usages at, <page 151>, <page 152> n., <page 365>; cannibalism in, <page 133>

Talmud, <page 78> n., <page 119> n., <page 158>, <page 268>, <page 428>

Tammuz, resurrection of, <page 145>, <page 189>; name of, <page 162>, <page 301>; cult of, <page 162>, <page 185>, <page 321>

Tangaloa, <page 216>

[p. 455]

Tanith, <page 217> n., <page 296>, <page 322>

Tannese, the, <page 109> n.

Tao or Tau, <page 219>

Taplin, Rev. G., <page 103>, <page 214>

Tari Pennu, <page 72>, <page 109> ff., <page 215>

Tarsus, religions of, <page 195>, <page 316> n.

Tau, the, <page 157>, <page 310>

Taurobolium, the, <page 208>, <page 303>, <page 335>

Tauthe, <page 220>

Taylor, Rev. R., on Maori magic, <page 131><page 4>; on Godhood of chiefs, <page 41>; on Maori images, <page 71> n.

Teaching-God, notion of, <page 56>; primary, <page 214>-8; Mexican, <page 370>

Teaching of the Twelve Apostles, <page 164>, <page 188>

Tears, in Jewish ritual, <page 159>; sacrificial value of, <page 115>, <page 189>

Tell, William, <page 239>

Temple, Jewish legends of, <page 191>-2

Temptation-myth, modern criticism of, <page xii>, <page xiii>

Ten commandments, <page 238>, <page 312>

Teraphim, <page 353>

Terebinthus, <page 264>

Tertullian, cited, on child sacrifice, <page 126>; on sacred blood, <page 129>; on willingness of victim, <page 121> n.; on Mithraism, <page 308>; on cult of Herakles, <page 337>; on mysteries of Osiris, <page 306>

Tezcatlipoca, as son and lover, <page 322> n.; symbol of, <page 344>; attributes of, <page 358>, <page 363>, <page 375>; festival of, <page 363>; and Quetzalcoatl, myth of, <page 370>

Tezcucans, civilisation of, <page 348> n., <page 366>

Thadda Pennu, <page 109>

Thargelia, <page 106>, <page 127>, <page 139>, <page 148>, <page 188>

Thartaboodi, <page 111>

Theism, <page 12>, <page 19>, <page 33>; and kingship, <page 55>

Themistocles, <page 127>

Theodosius, <page 95> n.

Thieves, sacrificed, <page 135>, <page 137>

Thomas, St., <page 349> n.

Thomson, B., <page 134> n.

Thoth, and magic, <page 21> n.; and seven, <page 205> n.; as teacher, <page 214>, <page 216>; moon-god, <page 217>, <page 221>; influence of, on Judaism, <page 221>

Thrace, human sacrifice in, <page 129>

Three, sacrifice of, <page 115>, <page 181> ff.

Thunder-God, sacrifices to, <page 141>

Thurston, <page 114> n.; cited, <page 118>

Tiberius, <page 126>, <page 128>

Tibet, <page 136>

Tiele, on Hebrew religion, <page 76> n.; on Hermes, <page 217> n.; on magic of names, <page 220>; on Anaitis, <page 296> n.

Tisdall, Dr., criticised, <page 408> ff.

Tlaloc, <page 356>, <page 368> n.

Tlascalans, civilisation of, <page 345>, <page 368>

Toleration, ancient, <page 75>

Toltecs, <page 348>, <page 361>; religion of, <page 370> ff.

Tonga Islands, human sacrifice in, <page 61>, <page 151>; enemies eaten in, <page 133>; child sacrifice in, <page 154> n., <page 365>; religion in, <page 216>

Torquemada, cited, <page 355> n.

Torture in human sacrifice, <page 115>, <page 119>, <page 133>

Totem, deification of, <page 44>, <page 100>; eating of, <page 99>, <page 104>

Totemism, <page 19>, <page 27>, <page 44>, <page 99>; and civilisation, <page 37> n.; origin of, <page 100> ff.; sacrifices relating to, <page 110> n., <page 210>

Transfiguration, the, <page 203>, <page 204>

Tree, the sacred, <page 118>, <page 318>, <page 319>; Mithra in, <page 319>. See Cross

Trinity, doctrine of, <page 87>, <page 295>; in Egypt, <page 206>, <page 295>; in China, <page 219>; in Judaism, <page 228>; in Mazdeism, <page 309> n., <page 315>; in Akkad, <page 297>; in Babylonia, <page 206>, <page 297>; in Hinduism, <page 295>; in Nigeria, <page 220>; in Christianity, <page 228>

Trumbull, cited, <page 213>

Tu, <page 215>

Tupinambos, human sacrifice by, <page 350>-1

Turner, quoted, <page 103>

Twelve, eucharist of, <page 175>, <page 179>; apostles, <page 164>, <page 180>, <page 399>; labours, <page 308>, <page 335>, <page 336>; tables, <page 238>; sacrifice of, <page 107> n.

Twenty-four elders, <page 164>, <page 179>

Two-sexed deities, <page 297> n., <page 322>

Tylor, cited, <page 342>-3, <page 372> n., <page 382>

Typhon, <page 16>, <page 159> n., <page 299>

Tyre, human sacrifice in, <page 126>

 

UGANDA, limb-breaking in, <page 155>; cannibalism in, <page 136>; human sacrifice in, <page 107>, <page 125> n.

Ui, <page 61>

Unas, King, <page 47> n.

Unitarianism and Christian origins, <page 431>

Upavasatha, the, <page 175>

Uranus, myth of, <page 53> n.

Usher, <page 268>

Usury among Hebrews, <page 87>

 

VACCA, <page 283>

Vach, <page 218>-9, <page 221>

Vaggians, tribe of, <page 245>

Valerian, <page 129> n., <page 270>, <page 272>

Valverde, <page 381>

Van Manen, <page xviii>, <page 237> n., <page 259> n., <page 398>, <page 400>

Varro, <page 134> n.

Varuna, <page 284>, <page 288>

Vasishtha, <page 251>

Vatea, <page 43>

Vatican Mount, the, <page 335> ff.

Veda, first created thing, <page 219>; second created, <page 219>; Agni's mouth, <page 219>

Vedantism, <page 219>

[p. 456]

Vegetation-Gods, <page 191> n., <page 195>, <page 307>, <page 358>, <page 433>

Vendidad, <page 285>, <page 311>, <page 314>

Venus, <page 53>; double sex of, <page 297> n.; the star, <page 351>

Vestals, <page 379> n.

Vinet, <page xxv>

Viracocha, <page 376>

Virgil, <page 191> n.

Virgin-birth, myths of, <page 316>, <page 321>-2, <page 359>, <page 410>, <page 420>

Virgins, sacrificed, <page 135>; Pagan, <page 353>

Vishnu, <page 262>

Visions, psychology of, <page 34>

Visperad, <page 285>

Vitality in religion, <page 402> ff.

Vizaresha, <page 311>

Vohumano, influence of on Judaism, <page 222>; in Mazdeism, <page 226>; character and attributes of, <page 296>; in Vendidad, <page 311>; = Sraosha, <page 322>, <page 410>; and Mithra, <page 332>, <page 410>, <page 418>

Voltaire, <page xv>

Votan, <page 371>

 

WAFER, the sacred, <page 207> n., <page 208>

Wakamba, the, <page 2> n.

Wakeman, <page 402>

Wamyamwezi, the, <page 2> n.

Ward, Lester, <page 33> n.

War-Gods, evolution of, <page 358>-9

Warneck, cited, <page 2> n., <page 32> n., <page 42>-3, <page 136>

Water, sacrament of, <page 143>; and the Spirit, <page 221>; Goddess of, <page 356>

Weber, cited, <page 221> n.; discussed, <page 250> ff.

Week of the Son, the, <page 166>

Wellhausen, cited, xii, <page 67>

White in sacrifice, <page 151>, <page 168>, <page 170>, <page 172>, <page 184>, <page 352>

Whittaker, T., <page 275> n., <page 279> n.

Whydah, sacrifices at, <page 133>

Wiedemann, <page 47> n.

Williams, T., cited, <page 386>

Winckler, cited, <page 296> n.

Windischmann, <page xxii>

Winds, sacrifices to, <page 171>

Wine, sacrament of, <page 142> ff., <page 175> ff.; given to victims, <page 119> ff., <page 137>, <page 354>; God of, in Mexico, <page 375>. See Dionysos, Soma, and Haoma

Wisdom, Book of, <page 227>

Wisdom. See Sophia

Witchcraft, effects of, <page 31>

Witch of Endor, <page 233>

Women, position of in ancient world, <page 78>; in Mithraism, <page 325>-6; in Polynesia, <page 365>; sacrifices of, <page 135>, <page 364>; pregnant, in Jewish ritual, <page 158>; Christian Messiah and, <page 185>; and Buddhism, <page 249>

Word. See Logos

Writing, art of, <page 81>

 

XERXES, <page 231>

Xipe, human sacrifices to, <page 137>, <page 390>

Xiuhteuctli, <page 119>, <page 271>, <page 368>, <page 373>

 

YAHWEH, name of, <page 220>; sacraments of, <page 174>, <page 175>, <page 177>; name tabooed, <page 49>; priestly theory of, <page 68>; as bull, <page 70> n.; frauds upon, <page 72>, <page 87>; nature of, <page 73>; worship of, <page 67>, <page 70> n., <page 78>, <page 152>; rise of, <page 81> ff., <page 95>; as rain-giver, <page 73>, <page 82>, <page 178>; as Saviour, <page 206>

Yakuts, the, of Siberia, <page 184>

Yama, <page 41>

Yashts, the, <page 285>

Yasna, <page 285>

Yasoda, <page 252>

Yeschu, <page 162>

Yima, <page 299>

Yoke, the mystic, <page 206>

Yom Kippur. See Atonement, day of

Yucatan, religion of, <page 353>; civilisation of, <page 354>

Yuluca, <page 359>

 

ZADEN, <page 291> n.

Zahn, Prof., xii

Zakmuk, <page 143>, <page 145>

Zalmoxis, <page 160> n., <page 269>

Zapotecs, the, religion of, <page 356> n.

Zarathustra, as cult founder, <page 57>; and Saoshyant, <page 166>, <page 322>; unhistorical, <page 238>, <page 286>; and Er, <page 272>; and cave, <page 272>, <page 304>; Mills on, <page 286> ff.; cult of, <page 286> ff.; in Vendidad, <page 311>, <page 314>; his descent to Hades, <page 324> n.; his birth story, <page 324> n. 

Zechariah, cited, <page 73>, <page 317>; and Mazdeism, <page 422>-3

Zendavesta, <page 285>, <page 312>

Zervan, <page 283>

Zeus, <page 64> n., <page 96>, <page 294> n.; Lycaeus, <page 60>, <page 127>; human sacrifice to, <page 125>, <page 127>; rain-giver, <page 177>; a Saviour, <page 206>; reason of, <page 217>; lawgiver, <page 217>; cave-born, <page 321> n.

Zipaltonal, <page 360>

Zodiac, and lamb sacrifice, <page 142>; in Judaism, <page 179> n.; in Christism, <page 185>; in Mithraism, <page 299>, <page 337>; bull in, <page 298> n.; origin and antiquity of, <page 300> and note; and evangelist symbols, <page 309> n.; and cults of antiquity, <page 299> ff.; and chair of Peter, <page 336>

Zoganes, the, <page 160>

Zoroaster, <page 57>, <page 272>. See Zarathustra

Zulus, human sacrifice by, <page 124>

 

 

PRINTED BY WATTS AND CO., JOHNSON'S COURT, FLEET STREET, LONDON, E.C.

 

 

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: pell.txt =====


    
Pellucidar, by Edgar Rice Burroughs, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

PELLUCIDAR

  

by Edgar Rice Burroughs

  

Chicago: A.C. McClurg

  

[1915]

Formatted, with additional proofing, at sacred-texts.com, May 2008. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

     
Pellucidar, by Edgar Rice Burroughs, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

PROLOGUE

Several years had elapsed since I had found the opportunity to do any big-game hunting; for at last I had my plans almost perfected for a return to my old stamping-grounds in northern Africa, where in other days I had had excellent sport in pursuit of the king of beasts.

The date of my departure had been set; I was to leave in two weeks. No schoolboy counting the lagging hours that must pass before the beginning of "long vacation" released him to the delirious joys of the summer camp could have been filled with greater impatience or keener anticipation.

And then came a letter that started me for Africa twelve days ahead of my schedule.

Often am I in receipt of letters from strangers who have found something in a story of mine to commend or to condemn. My interest in this department of my correspondence is ever fresh. I opened this particular letter with all the zest of pleasurable anticipation with which I had opened so many others. The postmark (Algiers) had aroused my interest and curiosity, especially at this time, since it was Algiers that was presently to witness the termination of my coming sea voyage in search of sport and adventure.

Before the reading of that letter was completed lions and lion-hunting had fled my thoughts, and I was in a state of excitement bordering upon frenzy.

It--well, read it yourself, and see if you, too, do not find food for frantic conjecture, for tantalizing doubts, and for a great hope.

Here it is:

  DEAR SIR: I think that I have run across one of the most remarkable coincidences in modern literature. But let me start at the beginning:

I am, by profession, a wanderer upon the face of the earth. I have no trade--nor any other occupation.

My father bequeathed me a competency; some remoter ancestors lust to roam. I have combined the two and invested them carefully and without extravagance.

I became interested in your story, At the Earth's Core, not so much because of the probability of the tale as of a great and abiding wonder that people should be paid real money for writing such impossible trash. You will pardon my candor, but it is necessary that you understand my mental attitude toward this particular story--that you may credit that which follows.

Shortly thereafter I started for the Sahara in search of a rather rare species of antelope that is to be found only occasionally within a limited area at a certain season of the year. My chase led me far from the haunts of man.

It was a fruitless search, however, in so far as antelope is concerned; but one night as I lay courting sleep at the edge of a little cluster of date-palms that surround an ancient well in the midst of the arid, shifting sands, I suddenly became conscious of a strange sound coming apparently from the earth beneath my head.

It was an intermittent ticking!

No reptile or insect with which I am familiar reproduces any such notes. I lay for an hour--listening intently.

At last my curiosity got the better of me. I arose, lighted my lamp and commenced to investigate.

My bedding lay upon a rug stretched directly upon the warm sand. The noise appeared to be coming from beneath the rug. I raised it, but found nothing--yet, at intervals, the sound continued.

I dug into the sand with the point of my hunting-knife. A few inches below the surface of the sand I encountered a solid substance that had the feel of wood beneath the sharp steel.

Excavating about it, I unearthed a small wooden box. From this receptacle issued the strange sound that I had heard.

How had it come here?

What did it contain?

In attempting to lift it from its burying place I discovered that it seemed to be held fast by means of a very small insulated cable running farther into the sand beneath it.

My first impulse was to drag the thing loose by main strength; but fortunately I thought better of this and fell to examining the box. I soon saw that it was covered by a hinged lid, which was held closed by a simple screwhook and eye.

It took but a moment to loosen this and raise the cover, when, to my utter astonishment, I discovered an ordinary telegraph instrument clicking away within.

"What in the world," thought I, "is this thing doing here?"

That it was a French military instrument was my first guess; but really there didn't seem much likelihood that this was the correct explanation, when one took into account the loneliness and remoteness of the spot.

As I sat gazing at my remarkable find, which was ticking and clicking away there in the silence of the desert night, trying to convey some message which I was unable to interpret, my eyes fell upon a bit of paper lying in the bottom of the box beside the instrument. I picked it up and examined it. Upon it were written but two letters:

  D.I.

  They meant nothing to me then. I was baffled.

Once, in an interval of silence upon the part of the receiving instrument, I moved the sending-key up and down a few times. Instantly the receiving mechanism commenced to work frantically.

I tried to recall something of the Morse Code, with which I had played as a little boy--but time had obliterated it from my memory. I became almost frantic as I let my imagination run riot among the possibilities for which this clicking instrument might stand.

Some poor devil at the unknown other end might be in dire need of succor. The very franticness of the instrument's wild clashing betokened something of the kind.

And there sat I, powerless to interpret, and so powerless to help!

It was then that the inspiration came to me. In a flash there leaped to my mind the closing paragraphs of the story I had read in the club at Algiers:

Does the answer lie somewhere upon the bosom of the broad Sahara, at the ends of two tiny wires, hidden beneath a lost cairn?

The idea seemed preposterous. Experience and intelligence combined to assure me that there could be no slightest grain of truth or possibility in your wild tale--it was fiction pure and simple.

And yet where WERE the other ends of those wires?

What was this instrument--ticking away here in the great Sahara--but a travesty upon the possible!

Would I have believed in it had I not seen it with my own eyes?

And the initials--D.I.--upon the slip of paper!

David's initials were these--David Innes.

I smiled at my imaginings. I ridiculed the assumption that there was an inner world and that these wires led downward through the earth's crust to the surface of Pellucidar. And yet--

Well, I sat there all night, listening to that tantalizing clicking, now and then moving the sending-key just to let the other end know that the instrument had been discovered. In the morning, after carefully returning the box to its hole and covering it over with sand, I called my servants about me, snatched a hurried breakfast, mounted my horse, and started upon a forced march for Algiers.

I arrived here today. In writing you this letter I feel that I am making a fool of myself.

There is no David Innes.

There is no Dian the Beautiful.

There is no world within a world.

Pellucidar is but a realm of your imagination--nothing more.

BUT--

The incident of the finding of that buried telegraph instrument upon the lonely Sahara is little short of uncanny, in view of your story of the adventures of David Innes.

I have called it one of the most remarkable coincidences in modern fiction. I called it literature before, but--again pardon my candor--your story is not.

And now--why am I writing you?

Heaven knows, unless it is that the persistent clicking of that unfathomable enigma out there in the vast silences of the Sahara has so wrought upon my nerves that reason refuses longer to function sanely.

I cannot hear it now, yet I know that far away to the south, all alone beneath the sands, it is still pounding out its vain, frantic appeal.

It is maddening

It is your fault--I want you to release me from it.

Cable me at once, at my expense, that there was no basis of fact for your story, At the Earth's Core.

Very respectfully yours,

  COGDON NESTOR,
 and Club,
 Algiers.
 June 1st,--.

    Ten minutes after reading this letter I had cabled Mr. Nestor as follows:

  Story true. Await me Algiers.

  As fast as train and boat would carry me, I sped toward my destination. For all those dragging days my mind was a whirl of mad conjecture, of frantic hope, of numbing fear.

The finding of the telegraph-instrument practically assured me that David Innes had driven Perry's iron mole back through the earth's crust to the buried world of Pellucidar; but what adventures had befallen him since his return?

Had he found Dian the Beautiful, his half-savage mate, safe among his friends, or had Hooja the Sly One succeeded in his nefarious schemes to abduct her?

Did Abner Perry, the lovable old inventor and paleontologist, still live?

Had the federated tribes of Pellucidar succeeded in overthrowing the mighty Mahars, the dominant race of reptilian monsters, and their fierce, gorilla-like soldiery, the savage Sagoths?

I must admit that I was in a state bordering upon nervous prostration when I entered the -and-Club, in Algiers, and inquired for Mr. Nestor. A moment later I was ushered into his presence, to find myself clasping hands with the sort of chap that the world holds only too few of.

He was a tall, smooth-faced man of about thirty, clean-cut, straight, and strong, and weather-tanned to the hue of a desert Arab. I liked him immensely from the first, and I hope that after our three months together in the desert country--three months not entirely lacking in adventure--he found that a man may be a writer of "impossible trash" and yet have some redeeming qualities.

The day following my arrival at Algiers we left for the south, Nestor having made all arrangements in advance, guessing, as he naturally did, that I could be coming to Africa for but a single purpose--to hasten at once to the buried telegraph-instrument and wrest its secret from it.

In addition to our native servants, we took along an English telegraph-operator named Frank Downes. Nothing of interest enlivened our journey by rail and caravan till we came to the cluster of date-palms about the ancient well upon the rim of the Sahara.

It was the very spot at which I first had seen David Innes. If he had ever raised a cairn above the telegraph instrument no sign of it remained now. Had it not been for the chance that caused Cogdon Nestor to throw down his sleeping rug directly over the hidden instrument, it might still be clicking there unheard--and this story still unwritten.

When we reached the spot and unearthed the little box the instrument was quiet, nor did repeated attempts upon the part of our telegrapher succeed in winning a response from the other end of the line. After several days of futile endeavor to raise Pellucidar, we had begun to despair. I was as positive that the other end of that little cable protruded through the surface of the inner world as I am that I sit here today in my study--when about midnight of the fourth day I was awakened by the sound of the instrument.

Leaping to my feet I grasped Downes roughly by the neck and dragged him out of his blankets. He didn't need to be told what caused my excitement, for the instant he was awake he, too, heard the long-hoped for click, and with a whoop of delight pounced upon the instrument.

Nestor was on his feet almost as soon as I. The three of us huddled about that little box as if our lives depended upon the message it had for us.

Downes interrupted the clicking with his sending-key. The noise of the receiver stopped instantly.

"Ask who it is, Downes," I directed.

He did so, and while we awaited the Englishman's translation of the reply, I doubt if either Nestor or I breathed.

"He says he's David Innes," said Downes. "He wants to know who we are."

"Tell him," said I; "and that we want to know how he is--and all that has befallen him since I last saw him."

For two months I talked with David Innes almost every day, and as Downes translated, either Nestor or I took notes. From these, arranged in chronological order, I have set down the following account of the further adventures of David Innes at the earth's core, practically in his own words.

     
Pellucidar, by Edgar Rice Burroughs, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER I

  

LOST ON PELLUCIDAR

The Arabs, of whom I wrote you at the end of my last letter (Innes began), and whom I thought to be enemies intent only upon murdering me, proved to be exceedingly friendly--they were searching for the very band of marauders that had threatened my existence. The huge rhamphorhynchus-like reptile that I had brought back with me from the inner world--the ugly Mahar that Hooja the Sly One had substituted for my dear Dian at the moment of my departure--filled them with wonder and with awe.

Nor less so did the mighty subterranean prospector which had carried me to Pellucidar and back again, and which lay out in the desert about two miles from my camp.

With their help I managed to get the unwieldy tons of its great bulk into a vertical position--the nose deep in a hole we had dug in the sand and the rest of it supported by the trunks of date-palms cut for the purpose.

It was a mighty engineering job with only wild Arabs and their wilder mounts to do the work of an electric crane--but finally it was completed, and I was ready for departure.

For some time I hesitated to take the Mahar back with me. She had been docile and quiet ever since she had discovered herself virtually a prisoner aboard the "iron mole." It had been, of course, impossible for me to communicate with her since she had no auditory organs and I no knowledge of her fourth-dimension, sixth-sense method of communication.

Naturally I am kind-hearted, and so I found it beyond me to leave even this hateful and repulsive thing alone in a strange and hostile world. The result was that when I entered the iron mole I took her with me.

That she knew that we were about to return to Pellucidar was evident, for immediately her manner changed from that of habitual gloom that had pervaded her, to an almost human expression of contentment and delight.

Our trip through the earth's crust was but a repetition of my two former journeys between the inner and the outer worlds. This time, however, I imagine that we must have maintained a more nearly perpendicular course, for we accomplished the journey in a few minutes' less time than upon the occasion of my first journey through the five-hundred-mile crust. just a trifle less than seventy-two hours after our departure into the sands of the Sahara, we broke through the surface of Pellucidar.

Fortune once again favored me by the slightest of margins, for when I opened the door in the prospector's outer jacket I saw that we had missed coming up through the bottom of an ocean by but a few hundred yards.

The aspect of the surrounding country was entirely unfamiliar to me--I had no conception of precisely where I was upon the one hundred and twenty-four million square miles of Pellucidar's vast land surface.

The perpetual midday sun poured down its torrid rays from zenith, as it had done since the beginning of Pellucidarian time--as it would continue to do to the end of it. Before me, across the wide sea, the weird, horizonless seascape folded gently upward to meet the sky until it lost itself to view in the azure depths of distance far above the level of my eyes.

How strange it looked! How vastly different from the flat and puny area of the circumscribed vision of the dweller upon the outer crust!

I was lost. Though I wandered ceaselessly throughout a lifetime, I might never discover the whereabouts of my former friends of this strange and savage world. Never again might I see dear old Perry, nor Ghak the Hairy One, nor Dacor the Strong One, nor that other infinitely precious one--my sweet and noble mate, Dian the Beautiful!

But even so I was glad to tread once more the surface of Pellucidar. Mysterious and terrible, grotesque and savage though she is in many of her aspects, I can not but love her. Her very savagery appealed to me, for it is the savagery of unspoiled Nature.

The magnificence of her tropic beauties enthralled me. Her mighty land areas breathed unfettered freedom.

Her untracked oceans, whispering of virgin wonders unsullied by the eye of man, beckoned me out upon their restless bosoms.

Not for an instant did I regret the world of my nativity. I was in Pellucidar. I was home. And I was content.

As I stood dreaming beside the giant thing that had brought me safely through the earth's crust, my traveling companion, the hideous Mahar, emerged from the interior of the prospector and stood beside me. For a long time she remained motionless.

What thoughts were passing through the convolutions of her reptilian brain?

I do not know.

She was a member of the dominant race of Pellucidar. By a strange freak of evolution her kind had first developed the power of reason in that world of anomalies.

To her, creatures such as I were of a lower order. As Perry had discovered among the writings of her kind in the buried city of Phutra, it was still an open question among the Mahars as to whether man possessed means of intelligent communication or the power of reason.

Her kind believed that in the center of all-pervading solidity there was a single, vast, spherical cavity, which was Pellucidar. This cavity had been left there for the sole purpose of providing a place for the creation and propagation of the Mahar race. Everything within it had been put there for the uses of the Mahar.

I wondered what this particular Mahar might think now. I found pleasure in speculating upon just what the effect had been upon her of passing through the earth's crust, and coming out into a world that one of even less intelligence than the great Mahars could easily see was a different world from her own Pellucidar.

What had she thought of the outer world's tiny sun?

What had been the effect upon her of the moon and myriad stars of the clear African nights?

How had she explained them?

With what sensations of awe must she first have watched the sun moving slowly across the heavens to disappear at last beneath the western horizon, leaving in his wake that which the Mahar had never before witnessed--the darkness of night? For upon Pellucidar there is no night. The stationary sun hangs forever in the center of the Pellucidarian sky--directly overhead.

Then, too, she must have been impressed by the wondrous mechanism of the prospector which had bored its way from world to world and back again. And that it had been driven by a rational being must also have occurred to her.

Too, she bad seen me conversing with other men upon the earth's surface. She had seen the arrival of the caravan of books and arms, and ammunition, and the balance of the heterogeneous collection which I had crammed into the cabin of the iron mole for transportation to Pellucidar.

She had seen all these evidences of a civilization and brain-power transcending in scientific achievement anything that her race had produced; nor once had she seen a creature of her own kind.

There could have been but a single deduction in the mind of the Mahar--there were other worlds than Pellucidar, and the gilak was a rational being.

Now the creature at my side was creeping slowly toward the nearby sea. At my hip hung a long-barreled six-shooter--somehow I had been unable to find the same sensation of security in the newfangled automatics that had been perfected since my first departure from the outer world--and in my hand was a heavy express rifle.

I could have shot the Mahar with ease, for I knew intuitively that she was escaping--but I did not.

I felt that if she could return to her own kind with the story of her adventures, the position of the human race within Pellucidar would be advanced immensely at a single stride, for at once man would take his proper place in the considerations of the reptilia.

At the edge of the sea the creature paused and looked back at me. Then she slid sinuously into the surf.

For several minutes I saw no more of her as she luxuriated in the cool depths.

Then a hundred yards from shore she rose and there for another short while she floated upon the surface.

Finally she spread her giant wings, flapped them vigorously a score of times and rose above the blue sea. A single time she circled far aloft--and then straight as an arrow she sped away.

I watched her until the distant haze enveloped her and she had disappeared. I was alone.

My first concern was to discover where within Pellucidar I might be--and in what direction lay the land of the Sarians where Ghak the Hairy One ruled.

But how was I to guess in which direction lay Sari?

And if I set out to search--what then?

Could I find my way back to the prospector with its priceless freight of books, firearms, ammunition, scientific instruments, and still more books--its great library of reference works upon every conceivable branch of applied sciences?

And if I could not, of what value was all this vast storehouse of potential civilization and progress to be to the world of my adoption?

Upon the other hand, if I remained here alone with it, what could I accomplish single-handed?

Nothing.

But where there was no east, no west, no north, no south, no stars, no moon, and only a stationary midday sun, how was I to find my way back to this spot should ever I get out of sight of it?

I didn't know.

For a long time I stood buried in deep thought, when it occurred to me to try out one of the compasses I had brought and ascertain if it remained steadily fixed upon an unvarying pole. I reentered the prospector and fetched a compass without.

Moving a considerable distance from the prospector that the needle might not be influenced by its great bulk of iron and steel I turned the delicate instrument about in every direction.

Always and steadily the needle remained rigidly fixed upon a point straight out to sea, apparently pointing toward a large island some ten or twenty miles distant. This then should be north.

I drew my notebook from my pocket and made a careful topographical sketch of the locality within the range of my vision. Due north lay the island, far out upon the shimmering sea.

The spot I had chosen for my observations was the top of a large, flat boulder which rose six or eight feet above the turf. This spot I called Greenwich. The boulder was the "Royal Observatory."

I had made a start! I cannot tell you what a sense of relief was imparted to me by the simple fact that there was at least one spot within Pellucidar with a familiar name and a place upon a map.

It was with almost childish joy that I made a little circle in my notebook and traced the word Greenwich beside it.

Now I felt I might start out upon my search with some assurance of finding my way back again to the prospector.

I decided that at first I would travel directly south in the hope that I might in that direction find some familiar landmark. It was as good a direction as any. This much at least might be said of it.

Among the many other things I had brought from the outer world were a number of pedometers. I slipped three of these into my pockets with the idea that I might arrive at a more or less accurate mean from the registrations of them all.

On my map I would register so many paces south, so many east, so many west, and so on. When I was ready to return I would then do so by any route that I might choose.

I also strapped a considerable quantity of ammunition across my shoulders, pocketed some matches, and hooked an aluminum frypan and a small stew-kettle of the same metal to my belt.

I was ready--ready to go forth and explore a world!

Ready to search a land area of 124,110,000 square miles for my friends, my incomparable mate, and good old Perry!

And so, after locking the door in the outer shell of the prospector, I set out upon my quest. Due south I traveled, across lovely valleys thick-dotted with grazing herds.

Through dense primeval forests I forced my way and up the slopes of mighty mountains searching for a pass to their farther sides.

Ibex and musk-sheep fell before my good old revolver, so that I lacked not for food in the higher altitudes. The forests and the plains gave plentifully of fruits and wild birds, antelope, aurochsen, and elk.

Occasionally, for the larger game animals and the gigantic beasts of prey, I used my express rifle, but for the most part the revolver filled all my needs.

There were times, too, when faced by a mighty cave bear, a saber-toothed tiger, or huge felis spelaea, black-maned and terrible, even my powerful rifle seemed pitifully inadequate--but fortune favored me so that I passed unscathed through adventures that even the recollection of causes the short hairs to bristle at the nape of my neck.

How long I wandered toward the south I do not know, for shortly after I left the prospector something went wrong with my watch, and I was again at the mercy of the baffling timelessness of Pellucidar, forging steadily ahead beneath the great, motionless sun which hangs eternally at noon.

I ate many times, however, so that days must have elapsed, possibly months with no familiar landscape rewarding my eager eyes.

I saw no men nor signs of men. Nor is this strange, for Pellucidar, in its land area, is immense, while the human race there is very young and consequently far from numerous.

Doubtless upon that long search mine was the first human foot to touch the soil in many places--mine the first human eye to rest upon the gorgeous wonders of the landscape.

It was a staggering thought. I could not but dwell upon it often as I made my lonely way through this virgin world. Then, quite suddenly, one day I stepped out of the peace of manless primality into the presence of man--and peace was gone.

It happened thus:

I had been following a ravine downward out of a chain of lofty hills and had paused at its mouth to view the lovely little valley that lay before me. At one side was tangled wood, while straight ahead a river wound peacefully along parallel to the cliffs in which the hills terminated at the valley's edge.

Presently, as I stood enjoying the lovely scene, as insatiate for Nature's wonders as if I had not looked upon similar landscapes countless times, a sound of shouting broke from the direction of the woods. That the harsh, discordant notes rose from the throats of men I could not doubt.

I slipped behind a large boulder near the mouth of the ravine and waited. I could hear the crashing of underbrush in the forest, and I guessed that whoever came came quickly--pursued and pursuers, doubtless.

In a short time some hunted animal would break into view, and a moment later a score of half-naked savages would come leaping after with spears or club or great stone-knives.

I had seen the thing so many times during my life within Pellucidar that I felt that I could anticipate to a nicety precisely what I was about to witness. I hoped that the hunters would prove friendly and be able to direct me toward Sari.

Even as I was thinking these thoughts the quarry emerged from the forest. But it was no terrified four-footed beast. Instead, what I saw was an old man--a terrified old man!

Staggering feebly and hopelessly from what must have been some very terrible fate, if one could judge from the horrified expressions he continually cast behind him toward the wood, he came stumbling on in my direction.

He had covered but a short distance from the forest when I beheld the first of his pursuers--a Sagoth, one of those grim and terrible gorilla-men who guard the mighty Mahars in their buried cities, faring forth from time to time upon slave-raiding or punitive expeditions against the human race of Pellucidar, of whom the dominant race of the inner world think as we think of the bison or the wild sheep of our own world.

Close behind the foremost Sagoth came others until a full dozen raced, shouting after the terror-stricken old man. They would be upon him shortly, that was plain.

One of them was rapidly overhauling him, his back-thrown spear-arm testifying to his purpose.

And then, quite with the suddenness of an unexpected blow, I realized a past familiarity with the gait and carriage of the fugitive.

Simultaneously there swept over me the staggering fact that the old man was--PERRY! That he was about to die before my very eyes with no hope that I could reach him in time to avert the awful catastrophe--for to me it meant a real catastrophe!

Perry was my best friend.

Dian, of course, I looked upon as more than friend. She was my mate--a part of me.

I had entirely forgotten the rifle in my hand and the revolvers at my belt; one does not readily synchronize his thoughts with the stone age and the twentieth century simultaneously.

Now from past habit I still thought in the stone age, and in my thoughts of the stone age there were no thoughts of firearms.

The fellow was almost upon Perry when the feel of the gun in my hand awoke me from the lethargy of terror that had gripped me. From behind my boulder I threw up the heavy express rifle--a mighty engine of destruction that might bring down a cave bear or a mammoth at a single shot--and let drive at the Sagoth's broad, hairy breast.

At the sound of the shot he stopped stock-still. His spear dropped from his hand.

Then he lunged forward upon his face.

The effect upon the others was little less remarkable. Perry alone could have possibly guessed the meaning of the loud report or explained its connection with the sudden collapse of the Sagoth. The other gorilla-men halted for but an instant. Then with renewed shrieks of rage they sprang forward to finish Perry.

At the same time I stepped from behind my boulder, drawing one of my revolvers that I might conserve the more precious ammunition of the express rifle. Quickly I fired again with the lesser weapon.

Then it was that all eyes were directed toward me. Another Sagoth fell to the bullet from the revolver; but it did not stop his companions. They were out for revenge as well as blood now, and they meant to have both.

As I ran forward toward Perry I fired four more shots, dropping three of our antagonists. Then at last the remaining seven wavered. It was too much for them, this roaring death that leaped, invisible, upon them from a great distance.

As they hesitated I reached Perry's side. I have never seen such an expression upon any man's face as that upon Perry's when he recognized me. I have no words wherewith to describe it. There was not time to talk then--scarce for a greeting. I thrust the full, loaded revolver into his hand, fired the last shot in my own, and reloaded. There were but six Sagoths left then.

They started toward us once more, though I could see that they were terrified probably as much by the noise of the guns as by their effects. They never reached us. Halfway the three that remained turned and fled, and we let them go.

The last we saw of them they were disappearing into the tangled undergrowth of the forest. And then Perry turned and threw his arms about my neck and, burying his old face upon my shoulder, wept like a child.

     
Pellucidar, by Edgar Rice Burroughs, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER II

  

TRAVELING WITH TERROR

We made camp there beside the peaceful river. There Perry told me all that had befallen him since I had departed for the outer crust.

It seemed that Hooja had made it appear that I had intentionally left Dian behind, and that I did not purpose ever returning to Pellucidar. He told them that I was of another world and that I had tired of this and of its inhabitants.

To Dian he had explained that I had a mate in the world to which I was returning; that I had never intended taking Dian the Beautiful back with me; and that she had seen the last of me.

Shortly afterward Dian had disappeared from the camp, nor had Perry seen or heard aught of her since.

He had no conception of the time that had elapsed since I had departed, but guessed that many years had dragged their slow way into the past.

Hooja, too, had disappeared very soon after Dian had left. The Sarians, under Ghak the Hairy One, and the Amozites under Dacor the Strong One, Dian's brother, had fallen out over my supposed defection, for Ghak would not believe that I had thus treacherously deceived and deserted them.

The result had been that these two powerful tribes had fallen upon one another with the new weapons that Perry and I had taught them to make and to use. Other tribes of the new federation took sides with the original disputants or set up petty revolutions of their own.

The result was the total demolition of the work we had so well started.

Taking advantage of the tribal war, the Mahars had gathered their Sagoths in force and fallen upon one tribe after another in rapid succession, wreaking awful havoc among them and reducing them for the most part to as pitiable a state of terror as that from which we had raised them.

Alone of all the once-mighty federation the Sarians and the Amozites with a few other tribes continued to maintain their defiance of the Mahars; but these tribes were still divided among themselves, nor had it seemed at all probable to Perry when he had last been among them that any attempt at reamalgamation would be made.

"And thus, your majesty," he concluded, "has faded back into the oblivion of the Stone Age our wondrous dream and with it has gone the First Empire of Pellucidar."

We both had to smile at the use of my royal title, yet I was indeed still "Emperor of Pellucidar," and some day I meant to rebuild what the vile act of the treacherous Hooja had torn down.

But first I would find my empress. To me she was worth forty empires.

"Have you no clue as to the whereabouts of Dian?" I asked.

"None whatever," replied Perry. "It was in search of her that I came to the pretty pass in which you discovered me, and from which, David, you saved me.

"I knew perfectly well that you had not intentionally deserted either Dian or Pellucidar. I guessed that in some way Hooja the Sly One was at the bottom of the matter, and I determined to go to Amoz, where I guessed that Dian might come to the protection of her brother, and do my utmost to convince her, and through her Dacor the Strong One, that we had all been victims of a treacherous plot to which you were no party.

"I came to Amoz after a most trying and terrible journey, only to find that Dian was not among her brother's people and that they knew naught of her whereabouts.

"Dacor, I am sure, wanted to be fair and just, but so great were his grief and anger over the disappearance of his sister that he could not listen to reason, but kept repeating time and again that only your return to Pellucidar could prove the honesty of your intentions.

"Then came a stranger from another tribe, sent I am sure at the instigation of Hooja. He so turned the Amozites against me that I was forced to flee their country to escape assassination.

"In attempting to return to Sari I became lost, and then the Sagoths discovered me. For a long time I eluded them, hiding in caves and wading in rivers to throw them off my trail.

"I lived on nuts and fruits and the edible roots that chance threw in my way.

"I traveled on and on, in what directions I could not even guess; and at last I could elude them no longer and the end came as I had long foreseen that it would come, except that I had not foreseen that you would be there to save me."

We rested in our camp until Perry had regained sufficient strength to travel again. We planned much, rebuilding all our shattered air-castles; but above all we planned most to find Dian.

I could not believe that she was dead, yet where she might be in this savage world, and under what frightful conditions she might be living, I could not guess.

When Perry was rested we returned to the prospector, where he fitted himself out fully like a civilized human being--under-clothing, socks, shoes, khaki jacket and breeches and good, substantial puttees.

When I had come upon him he was clothed in rough sadak sandals, a gee-string and a tunic fashioned from the shaggy hide of a thag. Now he wore real clothing again for the first time since the ape-folk had stripped us of our apparel that long-gone day that had witnessed our advent within Pellucidar.

With a bandoleer of cartridges across his shoulder, two six-shooters at his hips, and a rifle in his hand he was a much rejuvenated Perry.

Indeed he was quite a different person altogether from the rather shaky old man who had entered the prospector with me ten or eleven years before, for the trial trip that had plunged us into such wondrous adventures and into such a strange and hitherto undreamed-of-world.

Now he was straight and active. His muscles, almost atrophied from disuse in his former life, had filled out.

He was still an old man of course, but instead of appearing ten years older than he really was, as he had when we left the outer world, he now appeared about ten years younger. The wild, free life of Pellucidar had worked wonders for him.

Well, it must need have done so or killed him, for a man of Perry's former physical condition could not long have survived the dangers and rigors of the primitive life of the inner world.

Perry had been greatly interested in my map and in the "royal observatory" at Greenwich. By use of the pedometers we had retraced our way to the prospector with ease and accuracy.

Now that we were ready to set out again we decided to follow a different route on the chance that it might lead us into more familiar territory.

I shall not weary you with a repetition of the countless adventures of our long search. Encounters with wild beasts of gigantic size were of almost daily occurrence; but with our deadly express rifles we ran comparatively little risk when one recalls that previously we had both traversed this world of frightful dangers inadequately armed with crude, primitive weapons and all but naked.

We ate and slept many times--so many that we lost count--and so I do not know how long we roamed, though our map shows the distances and directions quite accurately. We must have covered a great many thousand square miles of territory, and yet we had seen nothing in the way of a familiar landmark, when from the heights of a mountain-range we were crossing I descried far in the distance great masses of billowing clouds.

Now clouds are practically unknown in the skies of Pellucidar. The moment that my eyes rested upon them my heart leaped. I seized Perry's arm and, pointing toward the horizonless distance, shouted:

"The Mountains of the Clouds!"

"They lie close to Phutra, and the country of our worst enemies, the Mahars," Perry remonstrated.

"I know it," I replied, "but they give us a starting-point from which to prosecute our search intelligently. They are at least a familiar landmark.

"They tell us that we are upon the right trail and not wandering far in the wrong direction.

"Furthermore, close to the Mountains of the Clouds dwells a good friend, Ja the Mezop. You did not know him, but you know all that he did for me and all that he will gladly do to aid me.

"At least he can direct us upon the right direction toward Sari."

"The Mountains of the Clouds constitute a mighty range," replied Perry. "They must cover an enormous territory. How are you to find your friend in all the great country that is visible from their rugged flanks?"

"Easily," I answered him, "for Ja gave me minute directions. I recall almost his exact words:

"'You need merely come to the foot of the highest peak of the Mountains of the Clouds. There you will find a river that flows into the Lural Az.

"'Directly opposite the mouth of the river you will see three large islands far out--so far that they are barely discernible. The one to the extreme left as you face them from the mouth of the river is Anoroc, where I rule the tribe of Anoroc.'"

And so we hastened onward toward the great cloud-mass that was to be our guide for several weary marches. At last we came close to the towering crags, Alp-like in their grandeur.

Rising nobly among its noble fellows, one stupendous peak reared its giant head thousands of feet above the others. It was he whom we sought; but at its foot no river wound down toward any sea.

"It must rise from the opposite side," suggested Perry, casting a rueful glance at the forbidding heights that barred our further progress. "We cannot endure the arctic cold of those high flung passes, and to traverse the endless miles about this interminable range might require a year or more. The land we seek must lie upon the opposite side of the mountains."

"Then we must cross them," I insisted.

Perry shrugged.

"We can't do it, David," he repeated, "We are dressed for the tropics. We should freeze to death among the snows and glaciers long before we had discovered a pass to the opposite side."

"We must cross them," I reiterated. "We will cross them."

I had a plan, and that plan we carried out. It took some time.

First we made a permanent camp part way up the slopes where there was good water. Then we set out in search of the great, shaggy cave bear of the higher altitudes.

He is a mighty animal--a terrible animal. He is but little larger than his cousin of the lesser, lower hills; but he makes up for it in the awfulness of his ferocity and in the length and thickness of his shaggy coat. It was his coat that we were after.

We came upon him quite unexpectedly. I was trudging in advance along a rocky trail worn smooth by the padded feet of countless ages of wild beasts. At a shoulder of the mountain around which the path ran I came face to face with the Titan.

I was going up for a fur coat. He was coming down for breakfast. Each realized that here was the very thing he sought.

With a horrid roar the beast charged me.

At my right the cliff rose straight upward for thousands of feet.

At my left it dropped into a dim, abysmal canon.

In front of me was the bear.

Behind me was Perry.

I shouted to him in warning, and then I raised my rifle and fired into the broad breast of the creature. There was no time to take aim; the thing was too close upon me.

But that my bullet took effect was evident from the howl of rage and pain that broke from the frothing jowls. It didn't stop him, though.

I fired again, and then he was upon me. Down I went beneath his ton of maddened, clawing flesh and bone and sinew.

I thought my time had come. I remember feeling sorry for poor old Perry, left all alone in this inhospitable, savage world.

And then of a sudden I realized that the bear was gone and that I was quite unharmed. I leaped to my feet, my rifle still clutched in my hand, and looked about for my antagonist.

I thought that I should find him farther down the trail, probably finishing Perry, and so I leaped in the direction I supposed him to be, to find Perry perched upon a projecting rock several feet above the trail. My cry of warning had given him time to reach this point of safety.

There he squatted, his eyes wide and his mouth ajar, the picture of abject terror and consternation.

"Where is he?" he cried when he saw me. "Where is he?"

"Didn't he come this way?" I asked.

"Nothing came this way," replied the old man. "But I heard his roars--he must have been as large as an elephant."

"He was," I admitted; "but where in the world do you suppose he disappeared to?"

Then came a possible explanation to my mind. I returned to the point at which the bear had hurled me down and peered over the edge of the cliff into the abyss below.

Far, far down I saw a small brown blotch near the bottom of the canon. It was the bear.

My second shot must have killed him, and so his dead body, after hurling me to the path, had toppled over into the abyss. I shivered at the thought of how close I, too, must have been to going over with him.

It took us a long time to reach the carcass, and arduous labor to remove the great pelt. But at last the thing was accomplished, and we returned to camp dragging the heavy trophy behind us.

Here we devoted another considerable period to scraping and curing it. When this was done to our satisfaction we made heavy boots, trousers, and coats of the shaggy skin, turning the fur in.

From the scraps we fashioned caps that came down around our ears, with flaps that fell about our shoulders and breasts. We were now fairly well equipped for our search for a pass to the opposite side of the Mountains of the Clouds.

Our first step now was to move our camp upward to the very edge of the perpetual snows which cap this lofty range. Here we built a snug, secure little hut, which we provisioned and stored with fuel for its diminutive fireplace.

With our hut as a base we sallied forth in search of a pass across the range.

Our every move was carefully noted upon our maps which we now kept in duplicate. By this means we were saved tedious and unnecessary retracing of ways already explored.

Systematically we worked upward in both directions from our base, and when we had at last discovered what seemed might prove a feasible pass we moved our belongings to a new hut farther up.

It was hard work--cold, bitter, cruel work. Not a step did we take in advance but the grim reaper strode silently in our tracks.

There were the great cave bears in the timber, and gaunt, lean wolves--huge creatures twice the size of our Canadian timber-wolves. Farther up we were assailed by enormous white bears--hungry, devilish fellows, who came roaring across the rough glacier tops at the first glimpse of us, or stalked us stealthily by scent when they had not yet seen us.

It is one of the peculiarities of life within Pellucidar that man is more often the hunted than the hunter. Myriad are the huge-bellied carnivora of this primitive world. Never, from birth to death, are those great bellies sufficiently filled, so always are their mighty owners prowling about in search of meat.

Terribly armed for battle as they are, man presents to them in his primal state an easy prey, slow of foot, puny of strength, ill-equipped by nature with natural weapons of defense.

The bears looked upon us as easy meat. Only our heavy rifles saved us from prompt extinction. Poor Perry never was a raging lion at heart, and I am convinced that the terrors of that awful period must have caused him poignant mental anguish.

When we were abroad pushing our trail farther and farther toward the distant break which, we assumed, marked a feasible way across the range, we never knew at what second some great engine of clawed and fanged destruction might rush upon us from behind, or lie in wait for us beyond an ice-hummock or a jutting shoulder of the craggy steeps.

The roar of our rifles was constantly shattering the world-old silence of stupendous canons upon which the eye of man had never before gazed. And when in the comparative safety of our hut we lay down to sleep the great beasts roared and fought without the walls, clawed and battered at the door, or rushed their colossal frames headlong against the hut's sides until it rocked and trembled to the impact.

Yes, it was a gay life.

Perry had got to taking stock of our ammunition each time we returned to the hut. It became something of an obsession with him.

He'd count our cartridges one by one and then try to figure how long it would be before the last was expended and we must either remain in the hut until we starved to death or venture forth, empty, to fill the belly of some hungry bear.

I must admit that I, too, felt worried, for our progress was indeed snail-like, and our ammunition could not last forever. In discussing the problem, finally we came to the decision to burn our bridges behind us and make one last supreme effort to cross the divide.

It would mean that we must go without sleep for a long period, and with the further chance that when the time came that sleep could no longer be denied we might still be high in the frozen regions of perpetual snow and ice, where sleep would mean certain death, exposed as we would be to the attacks of wild beasts and without shelter from the hideous cold.

But we decided that we must take these chances and so at last we set forth from our hut for the last time, carrying such necessities as we felt we could least afford to do without. The bears seemed unusually troublesome and determined that time, and as we clambered slowly upward beyond the highest point to which we had previously attained, the cold became infinitely more intense.

Presently, with two great bears dogging our footsteps we entered a dense fog,

We had reached the heights that are so often cloud-wrapped for long periods. We could see nothing a few paces beyond our noses.

We dared not turn back into the teeth of the bears which we could hear grunting behind us. To meet them in this bewildering fog would have been to court instant death.

Perry was almost overcome by the hopelessness of our situation. He flopped down on his knees and began to pray.

It was the first time I had heard him at his old habit since my return to Pellucidar, and I had thought that he had given up his little idiosyncrasy; but he hadn't. Far from it.

I let him pray for a short time undisturbed, and then as I was about to suggest that we had better be pushing along one of the bears in our rear let out a roar that made the earth fairly tremble beneath our feet.

It brought Perry to his feet as if he had been stung by a wasp, and sent him racing ahead through the blinding fog at a gait that I knew must soon end in disaster were it not checked.

Crevasses in the glacier-ice were far too frequent to permit of reckless speed even in a clear atmosphere, and then there were hideous precipices along the edges of which our way often led us. I shivered as I thought of the poor old fellow's peril.

At the top of my lungs I called to him to stop, but he did not answer me. And then I hurried on in the direction he had gone, faster by far than safety dictated.

For a while I thought I heard him ahead of me, but at last, though I paused often to listen and to call to him, I heard nothing more, not even the grunting of the bears that had been behind us. All was deathly silence--the silence of the tomb. About me lay the thick, impenetrable fog.

I was alone. Perry was gone--gone forever, I had not the slightest doubt.

Somewhere near by lay the mouth of a treacherous fissure, and far down at its icy bottom lay all that was mortal of my old friend, Abner Perry. There would his body he preserved in its icy sepulcher for countless ages, until on some far distant day the slow-moving river of ice had wound its snail-like way down to the warmer level, there to disgorge its grisly evidence of grim tragedy, and what in that far future age, might mean baffling mystery.

     
Pellucidar, by Edgar Rice Burroughs, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER III

  

SHOOTING THE CHUTES--AND AFTER

Through the fog I felt my way along by means of my compass. I no longer heard the bears, nor did I encounter one within the fog.

Experience has since taught me that these great beasts are as terror-stricken by this phenomenon as a landsman by a fog at sea, and that no sooner does a fog envelop them than they make the best of their way to lower levels and a clear atmosphere. It was well for me that this was true.

I felt very sad and lonely as I crawled along the difficult footing. My own predicament weighed less heavily upon me than the loss of Perry, for I loved the old fellow.

That I should ever win the opposite slopes of the range I began to doubt, for though I am naturally sanguine, I imagine that the bereavement which had befallen me had cast such a gloom over my spirits that I could see no slightest ray of hope for the future.

Then, too, the blighting, gray oblivion of the cold, damp clouds through which I wandered was distressing. Hope thrives best in sunlight, and I am sure that it does not thrive at all in a fog.

But the instinct of self-preservation is stronger than hope. It thrives, fortunately, upon nothing. It takes root upon the brink of the grave, and blossoms in the jaws of death. Now it flourished bravely upon the breast of dead hope, and urged me onward and upward in a stern endeavor to justify its existence.

As I advanced the fog became denser. I could see nothing beyond my nose. Even the snow and ice I trod were invisible.

I could not see below the breast of my bearskin coat. I seemed to be floating in a sea of vapor.

To go forward over a dangerous glacier under such conditions was little short of madness; but I could not have stopped going had I known positively that death lay two paces before my nose. In the first place, it was too cold to stop, and in the second, I should have gone mad but for the excitement of the perils that beset each forward step.

For some time the ground had been rougher and steeper, until I had been forced to scale a considerable height that had carried me from the glacier entirely. I was sure from my compass that I was following the right general direction, and so I kept on.

Once more the ground was level. From the wind that blew about me I guessed that I must be upon some exposed peak of ridge.

And then quite suddenly I stepped out into space. Wildly I turned and clutched at the ground that had slipped from beneath my feet.

Only a smooth, icy surface was there. I found nothing to clutch or stay my fall, and a moment later so great was my speed that nothing could have stayed me.

As suddenly as I had pitched into space, with equal suddenness did I emerge from the fog, out of which I shot like a projectile from a cannon into clear daylight. My speed was so great that I could see nothing about me but a blurred and indistinct sheet of smooth and frozen snow, that rushed past me with express-train velocity.

I must have slid downward thousands of feet before the steep incline curved gently on to a broad, smooth, snow-covered plateau. Across this I hurtled with slowly diminishing velocity, until at last objects about me began to take definite shape.

Far ahead, miles and miles away, I saw a great valley and mighty woods, and beyond these a broad expanse of water. In the nearer foreground I discerned a small, dark blob of color upon the shimmering whiteness of the snow.

"A bear," thought I, and thanked the instinct that had impelled me to cling tenaciously to my rifle during the moments of my awful tumble.

At the rate I was going it would be but a moment before I should be quite abreast the thing; nor was it long before I came to a sudden stop in soft snow, upon which the sun was shining, not twenty paces from the object of my most immediate apprehension.

It was standing upon its hind legs waiting for me. As I scrambled to my feet to meet it, I dropped my gun in the snow and doubled up with laughter.

It was Perry.

The expression upon his face, combined with the relief I felt at seeing him again safe and sound, was too much for my overwrought nerves.

"David!" he cried. "David, my boy! God has been good to an old man. He has answered my prayer."

It seems that Perry in his mad flight had plunged over the brink at about the same point as that at which I had stepped over it a short time later. Chance had done for us what long periods of rational labor had failed to accomplish.

We had crossed the divide. We were upon the side of the Mountains of the Clouds that we had for so long been attempting to reach.

We looked about. Below us were green trees and warm jungles. In the distance was a great sea.

"The Lural Az," I said, pointing toward its blue-green surface.

Somehow--the gods alone can explain it--Perry, too, had clung to his rifle during his mad descent of the icy slope. For that there was cause for great rejoicing.

Neither of us was worse for his experience, so after shaking the snow from our clothing, we set off at a great rate down toward the warmth and comfort of the forest and the jungle.

The going was easy by comparison with the awful obstacles we had had to encounter upon the opposite side of the divide. There were beasts, of course, but we came through safely.

Before we halted to eat or rest, we stood beside a little mountain brook beneath the wondrous trees of the primeval forest in an atmosphere of warmth and comfort. It reminded me of an early June day in the Maine Woods.

We fell to work with our short axes and cut enough small trees to build a rude protection from the fiercer beasts. Then we lay down to sleep.

How long we slept I do not know. Perry says that inasmuch as there is no means of measuring time within Pellucidar, there can be no such thing as time here, and that we may have slept an outer earthly year, or we may have slept but a second.

But this I know. We had stuck the ends of some of the saplings into the ground in the building of our shelter, first stripping the leaves and branches from them, and when we awoke we found that many of them had thrust forth sprouts.

Personally, I think that we slept at least a month; but who may say? The sun marked midday when we closed our eyes; it was still in the same position when we opened them; nor had it varied a hair's breadth in the interim.

It is most baffling, this question of elapsed time within Pellucidar.

Anyhow, I was famished when we awoke. I think that it was the pangs of hunger that awoke me. Ptarmigan and wild boar fell before my revolver within a dozen moments of my awakening. Perry soon had a roaring fire blazing by the brink of the little stream.

It was a good and delicious meal we made. Though we did not eat the entire boar, we made a very large hole in him, while the ptarmigan was but a mouthful.

Having satisfied our hunger, we determined to set forth at once in search of Anoroc and my old friend, Ja the Mezop. We each thought that by following the little stream downward, we should come upon the large river which Ja had told me emptied into the Lural Az opposite his island.

We did so; nor were we disappointed, for at last after a pleasant journey--and what journey would not be pleasant after the hardships we had endured among the peaks of the Mountains of the Clouds--we came upon a broad flood that rushed majestically onward in the direction of the great sea we had seen from the snowy slopes of the mountains.

For three long marches we followed the left bank of the growing river, until at last we saw it roll its mighty volume into the vast waters of the sea. Far out across the rippling ocean we described three islands. The one to the left must be Anoroc.

At last we had come close to a solution of our problem--the road to Sari.

But how to reach the islands was now the foremost question in our minds. We must build a canoe.

Perry is a most resourceful man. He has an axiom which carries the thought-kernel that what man has done, man can do, and it doesn't cut any figure with Perry whether a fellow knows how to do it or not.

He set out to make gunpowder once, shortly after our escape from Phutra and at the beginning of the confederation of the wild tribes of Pellucidar. He said that some one, without any knowledge of the fact that such a thing might be concocted, had once stumbled upon it by accident, and so he couldn't see why a fellow who knew all about powder except how to make it couldn't do as well.

He worked mighty hard mixing all sorts of things together, until finally he evolved a substance that looked like powder. He had been very proud of the stuff, and had gone about the village of the Sarians exhibiting it to every one who would listen to him, and explaining what its purpose was and what terrific havoc it would work, until finally the natives became so terrified at the stuff that they wouldn't come within a rod of Perry and his invention.

Finally, I suggested that we experiment with it and see what it would do, so Perry built a fire, after placing the powder at a safe distance, and then touched a glowing ember to a minute particle of the deadly explosive. It extinguished the ember.

Repeated experiments with it determined me that in searching for a high explosive, Perry had stumbled upon a fire-extinguisher that would have made his fortune for him back in our own world.

So now he set himself to work to build a scientific canoe. I had suggested that we construct a dugout, but Perry convinced me that we must build something more in keeping with our positions of supermen in this world of the Stone Age.

"We must impress these natives with our superiority," he explained. "You must not forget, David, that you are emperor of Pellucidar. As such you may not with dignity approach the shores of a foreign power in so crude a vessel as a dugout."

I pointed out to Perry that it wasn't much more incongruous for the emperor to cruise in a canoe, than it was for the prime minister to attempt to build one with his own hands.

He had to smile at that; but in extenuation of his act he assured me that it was quite customary for prime ministers to give their personal attention to the building of imperial navies; "and this," he said, "is the imperial navy of his Serene Highness, David I, Emperor of the Federated Kingdoms of Pellucidar."

I grinned; but Perry was quite serious about it. It had always seemed rather more or less of a joke to me that I should be addressed as majesty and all the rest of it. Yet my imperial power and dignity had been a very real thing during my brief reign.

Twenty tribes had joined the federation, and their chiefs had sworn eternal fealty to one another and to me. Among them were many powerful though savage nations. Their chiefs we had made kings; their tribal lands kingdoms.

We had armed them with bows and arrows and swords, in addition to their own more primitive weapons. I had trained them in military discipline and in so much of the art of war as I had gleaned from extensive reading of the campaigns of Napoleon, Von Moltke, Grant, and the ancients.

We had marked out as best we could natural boundaries dividing the various kingdoms. We had warned tribes beyond these boundaries that they must not trespass, and we had marched against and severely punished those who had.

We had met and defeated the Mahars and the Sagoths. In short, we had demonstrated our rights to empire, and very rapidly were we being recognized and heralded abroad when my departure for the outer world and Hooja's treachery had set us back.

But now I had returned. The work that fate had undone must be done again, and though I must need smile at my imperial honors, I none the less felt the weight of duty and obligation that rested upon my shoulders.

Slowly the imperial navy progressed toward completion. She was a wondrous craft, but I had my doubts about her. When I voiced them to Perry, he reminded me gently that my people for many generations had been mine-owners, not ship-builders, and consequently I couldn't be expected to know much about the matter.

I was minded to inquire into his hereditary fitness to design battleships; but inasmuch as I already knew that his father had been a minister in a backwoods village far from the coast, I hesitated lest I offend the dear old fellow.

He was immensely serious about his work, and I must admit that in so far as appearances went he did extremely well with the meager tools and assistance at his command. We had only two short axes and our hunting-knives; yet with these we hewed trees, split them into planks, surfaced and fitted them.

The "navy" was some forty feet in length by ten feet beam. Her sides were quite straight and fully ten feet high--"for the purpose," explained Perry, "of adding dignity to her appearance and rendering it less easy for an enemy to board her."

As a matter of fact, I knew that he had had in mind the safety of her crew under javelin-fire--the lofty sides made an admirable shelter. Inside she reminded me of nothing so much as a floating trench. There was also some slight analogy to a huge coffin.

Her prow sloped sharply backward from the water-line--quite like a line of battleship. Perry had designed her more for moral effect upon an enemy, I think, than for any real harm she might inflict, and so those parts which were to show were the most imposing.

Below the water-line she was practically non-existent. She should have had considerable draft; but, as the enemy couldn't have seen it, Perry decided to do away with it, and so made her flat-bottomed. It was this that caused my doubts about her.

There was another little idiosyncrasy of design that escaped us both until she was about ready to launch--there was no method of propulsion. Her sides were far too high to permit the use of sweeps, and when Perry suggested that we pole her, I remonstrated on the grounds that it would be a most undignified and awkward manner of sweeping down upon the foe, even if we could find or wield poles that would reach to the bottom of the ocean.

Finally I suggested that we convert her into a sailing vessel. When once the idea took hold Perry was most enthusiastic about it, and nothing would do but a four-masted, full-rigged ship.

Again I tried to dissuade him, but he was simply crazy over the psychological effect which the appearance of this strange and mighty craft would have upon the natives of Pellucidar. So we rigged her with thin hides for sails and dried gut for rope.

Neither of us knew much about sailing a full-rigged ship; but that didn't worry me a great deal, for I was confident that we should never be called upon to do so, and as the day of launching approached I was positive of it.

We had built her upon a low bank of the river close to where it emptied into the sea, and just above high tide. Her keel we had laid upon several rollers cut from small trees, the ends of the rollers in turn resting upon parallel tracks of long saplings. Her stern was toward the water.

A few hours before we were ready to launch her she made quite an imposing picture, for Perry had insisted upon setting every shred of "canvas." I told him that I didn't know much about it, but I was sure that at launching the hull only should have been completed, everything else being completed after she had floated safely.

At the last minute there was some delay while we sought a name for her. I wanted her christened the Perry in honor both of her designer and that other great naval genius of another world, Captain Oliver Hazard Perry, of the United States Navy. But Perry was too modest; he wouldn't hear of it.

We finally decided to establish a system in the naming of the fleet. Battleships of the first-class should bear the names of kingdoms of the federation; armored cruisers the names of kings; cruisers the names of cities, and so on down the line. Therefore, we decided to name the first battleship Sari, after the first of the federated kingdoms.

The launching of the Sari proved easier than I contemplated. Perry wanted me to get in and break something over the bow as she floated out upon the bosom of the river, but I told him that I should feel safer on dry land until I saw which side up the Sari would float.

I could see by the expression of the old man's face that my words had hurt him; but I noticed that he didn't offer to get in himself, and so I felt less contrition than I might otherwise.

When we cut the ropes and removed the blocks that held the Sari in place she started for the water with a lunge. Before she hit it she was going at a reckless speed, for we had laid our tracks quite down to the water, greased them, and at intervals placed rollers all ready to receive the ship as she moved forward with stately dignity. But there was no dignity in the Sari.

When she touched the surface of the river she must have been going twenty or thirty miles an hour. Her momentum carried her well out into the stream, until she came to a sudden halt at the end of the long line which we had had the foresight to attach to her bow and fasten to a large tree upon the bank.

The moment her progress was checked she promptly capsized. Perry was overwhelmed. I didn't upbraid him, nor remind him that I had "told him so."

His grief was so genuine and so apparent that I didn't have the heart to reproach him, even were I inclined to that particular sort of meanness.

"Come, come, old man!" I cried. "It's not as bad as it looks. Give me a hand with this rope, and we'll drag her up as far as we can; and then when the tide goes out we'll try another scheme. I think we can make a go of her yet."

Well, we managed to get her up into shallow water. When the tide receded she lay there on her side in the mud, quite a pitiable object for the premier battleship of a world--"the terror of the seas" was the way Perry had occasionally described her.

We had to work fast; but before the tide came in again we had stripped her of her sails and masts, righted her, and filled her about a quarter full of rock ballast. If she didn't stick too fast in the mud I was sure that she would float this time right side up.

I can tell you that it was with palpitating hearts that we sat upon the riverbank and watched that tide come slowly in. The tides of Pellucidar don't amount to much by comparison with our higher tides of the outer world, but I knew that it ought to prove ample to float the Sari.

Nor was I mistaken. Finally we had the satisfaction of seeing the vessel rise out of the mud and float slowly upstream with the tide. As the water rose we pulled her in quite close to the bank and clambered aboard.

She rested safely now upon an even keel; nor did she leak, for she was well calked with fiber and tarry pitch. We rigged up a single short mast and light sail, fastened planking down over the ballast to form a deck, worked her out into midstream with a couple of sweeps, and dropped our primitive stone anchor to await the turn of the tide that would bear us out to sea.

While we waited we devoted the time to the construction of an upper deck, since the one immediately above the ballast was some seven feet from the gunwale. The second deck was four feet above this. In it was a large, commodious hatch, leading to the lower deck. The sides of the ship rose three feet above the upper deck, forming an excellent breastwork, which we loopholed at intervals that we might lie prone and fire upon an enemy.

Though we were sailing out upon a peaceful mission in search of my friend Ja, we knew that we might meet with people of some other island who would prove unfriendly.

At last the tide turned. We weighed anchor. Slowly we drifted down the great river toward the sea.

About us swarmed the mighty denizens of the primeval deep--plesiosauri and ichthyosauria with all their horrid, slimy cousins whose names were as the names of aunts and uncles to Perry, but which I have never been able to recall an hour after having heard them.

At last we were safely launched upon the journey to which we had looked forward for so long, and the results of which meant so much to me.

     
Pellucidar, by Edgar Rice Burroughs, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER IV

  

FRIENDSHIP AND TREACHERY

The Sari proved a most erratic craft. She might have done well enough upon a park lagoon if safely anchored, but upon the bosom of a mighty ocean she left much to be desired.

Sailing with the wind she did her best; but in quartering or when close-hauled she drifted terribly, as a nautical man might have guessed she would. We couldn't keep within miles of our course, and our progress was pitifully slow.

Instead of making for the island of Anoroc, we bore far to the right, until it became evident that we should have to pass between the two right-hand islands and attempt to return toward Anoroc from the opposite side.

As we neared the islands Perry was quite overcome by their beauty. When we were directly between two of them he fairly went into raptures; nor could I blame him.

The tropical luxuriance of the foliage that dripped almost to the water's edge and the vivid colors of the blooms that shot the green made a most gorgeous spectacle.

Perry was right in the midst of a flowery panegyric on the wonders of the peaceful beauty of the scene when a canoe shot out from the nearest island. There were a dozen warriors in it; it was quickly followed by a second and third.

Of course we couldn't know the intentions of the strangers, but we could pretty well guess them.

Perry wanted to man the sweeps and try to get away from them, but I soon convinced him that any speed of which the Sari was capable would be far too slow to outdistance the swift, though awkward, dugouts of the Mezops.

I waited until they were quite close enough to hear me, and then I hailed them. I told them that we were friends of the Mezops, and that we were upon a visit to Ja of Anoroc, to which they replied that they were at war with Ja, and that if we would wait a minute they'd board us and throw our corpses to the azdyryths.

I warned them that they would get the worst of it if they didn't leave us alone, but they only shouted in derision and paddled swiftly toward us. It was evident that they were considerably impressed by the appearance and dimensions of our craft, but as these fellows know no fear they were not at all awed.

Seeing that they were determined to give battle, I leaned over the rail of the Sari and brought the imperial battle-squadron of the Emperor of Pellucidar into action for the first time in the history of a world. In other and simpler words, I fired my revolver at the nearest canoe.

The effect was magical. A warrior rose from his knees, threw his paddle aloft, stiffened into rigidity for an instant, and then toppled overboard.

The others ceased paddling, and, with wide eyes, looked first at me and then at the battling sea-things which fought for the corpse of their comrade. To them it must have seemed a miracle that I should be able to stand at thrice the range of the most powerful javelin-thrower and with a loud noise and a smudge of smoke slay one of their number with an invisible missile.

But only for an instant were they paralyzed with wonder. Then, with savage shouts, they fell once more to their paddles and forged rapidly toward us.

Again and again I fired. At each shot a warrior sank to the bottom of the canoe or tumbled overboard.

When the prow of the first craft touched the side of the Sari it contained only dead and dying men. The other two dugouts were approaching rapidly, so I turned my attention toward them.

I think that they must have been commencing to have some doubts--those wild, naked, red warriors--for when the first man fell in the second boat, the others stopped paddling and commenced to jabber among themselves.

The third boat pulled up alongside the second and its crews joined in the conference. Taking advantage of the lull in the battle, I called out to the survivors to return to their shore.

"I have no fight with you," I cried, and then I told them who I was and added that if they would live in peace they must sooner or later join forces with me.

"Go back now to your people," I counseled them, "and tell them that you have seen David I, Emperor of the Federated Kingdoms of Pellucidar, and that single-handed he has overcome you, just as be intends overcoming the Mahars and the Sagoths and any other peoples of Pellucidar who threaten the peace and welfare of his empire."

Slowly they turned the noses of their canoes toward land. It was evident that they were impressed; yet that they were loath to give up without further contesting my claim to naval supremacy was also apparent, for some of their number seemed to be exhorting the others to a renewal of the conflict.

However, at last they drew slowly away, and the Sari, which had not decreased her snail-like speed during this, her first engagement, continued upon her slow, uneven way.

Presently Perry stuck his head up through the hatch and hailed me.

"Have the scoundrels departed?" he asked. "Have you killed them all?"

"Those whom I failed to kill have departed, Perry," I replied.

He came out on deck and, peering over the side, descried the lone canoe floating a short distance astern with its grim and grisly freight. Farther his eyes wandered to the retreating boats.

"David," said he at last, "this is a notable occasion. It is a great day in the annals of Pellucidar. We have won a glorious victory.

"Your majesty's navy has routed a fleet of the enemy thrice its own size, manned by ten times as many men. Let us give thanks."

I could scarce restrain a smile at Perry's use of the pronoun "we," yet I was glad to share the rejoicing with him as I shall always be glad to share everything with the dear old fellow.

Perry is the only male coward I have ever known whom I could respect and love. He was not created for fighting; but I think that if the occasion should ever arise where it became necessary he would give his life cheerfully for me--yes, I KNOW it.

It took us a long time to work around the islands and draw in close to Anoroc. In the leisure afforded we took turns working on our map, and by means of the compass and a little guesswork we set down the shoreline we had left and the three islands with fair accuracy.

Crossed sabers marked the spot where the first great naval engagement of a world had taken place. In a notebook we jotted down, as had been our custom, details that would be of historical value later.

Opposite Anoroc we came to anchor quite close to shore. I knew from my previous experience with the tortuous trails of the island that I could never find my way inland to the hidden tree-village of the Mezop chieftain, Ja; so we remained aboard the Sari, firing our express rifles at intervals to attract the attention of the natives.

After some ten shots had been fired at considerable intervals a body of copper-colored warriors appeared upon the shore. They watched us for a moment and then I hailed them, asking the whereabouts of my old friend Ja.

They did not reply at once, but stood with their heads together in serious and animated discussion. Continually they turned their eyes toward our strange craft. It was evident that they were greatly puzzled by our appearance as well as unable to explain the source of the loud noises that had attracted their attention to us. At last one of the warriors addressed us.

"Who are you who seek Ja?" he asked. "What would you of our chief?"

"We are friends," I replied. "I am David. Tell Ja that David, whose life be once saved from a sithic, has come again to visit him.

"If you will send out a canoe we will come ashore. We cannot bring our great warship closer in."

Again they talked for a considerable time. Then two of them entered a canoe that several dragged from its hiding-place in the jungle and paddled swiftly toward us.

They were magnificent specimens of manhood. Perry had never seen a member of this red race close to before. In fact, the dead men in the canoe we had left astern after the battle and the survivors who were paddling rapidly toward their shore were the first he ever had seen. He had been greatly impressed by their physical beauty and the promise of superior intelligence which their well-shaped skulls gave.

The two who now paddled out received us into their canoe with dignified courtesy. To my inquiries relative to Ja they explained that he had not been in the village when our signals were heard, but that runners had been sent out after him and that doubtless he was already upon his way to the coast.

One of the men remembered me from the occasion of my former visit to the island; he was extremely agreeable the moment that he came close enough to recognize me. He said that Ja would be delighted to welcome me, and that all the tribe of Anoroc knew of me by repute, and had received explicit instructions from their chieftain that if any of them should ever come upon me to show me every kindness and attention.

Upon shore we were received with equal honor. While we stood conversing with our bronze friends a tall warrior leaped suddenly from the jungle.

It was Ja. As his eyes fell upon me his face lighted with pleasure. He came quickly forward to greet me after the manner of his tribe.

Toward Perry he was equally hospitable. The old man fell in love with the savage giant as completely as had I. Ja conducted us along the maze-like trail to his strange village, where he gave over one of the tree-houses for our exclusive use.

Perry was much interested in the unique habitation, which resembled nothing so much as a huge wasp's nest built around the bole of a tree well above the ground.

After we had eaten and rested Ja came to see us with a number of his head men. They listened attentively to my story, which included a narrative of the events leading to the formation of the federated kingdoms, the battle with the Mahars, my journey to the outer world, and my return to Pellucidar and search for Sari and my mate.

Ja told me that the Mezops had heard something of the federation and had been much interested in it. He had even gone so far as to send a party of warriors toward Sari to investigate the reports, and to arrange for the entrance of Anoroc into the empire in case it appeared that there was any truth in the rumors that one of the aims of the federation was the overthrow of the Mahars.

The delegation had met with a party of Sagoths. As there had been a truce between the Mahars and the Mezops for many generations, they camped with these warriors of the reptiles, from whom they learned that the federation had gone to pieces. So the party returned to Anoroc.

When I showed Ja our map and explained its purpose to him, he was much interested. The location of Anoroc, the Mountains of the Clouds, the river, and the strip of seacoast were all familiar to him.

He quickly indicated the position of the inland sea and close beside it, the city of Phutra, where one of the powerful Mahar nations had its seat. He likewise showed us where Sari should be and carried his own coastline as far north and south as it was known to him.

His additions to the map convinced us that Greenwich lay upon the verge of this same sea, and that it might be reached by water more easily than by the arduous crossing of the mountains or the dangerous approach through Phutra, which lay almost directly in line between Anoroc and Greenwich to the northwest.

If Sari lay upon the same water then the shoreline must bend far back toward the southwest of Greenwich--an assumption which, by the way, we found later to be true. Also, Sari was upon a lofty plateau at the southern end of a mighty gulf of the Great Ocean.

The location which Ja gave to distant Amoz puzzled us, for it placed it due north of Greenwich, apparently in mid-ocean. As Ja had never been so far and knew only of Amoz through hearsay, we thought that he must be mistaken; but he was not. Amoz lies directly north of Greenwich across the mouth of the same gulf as that upon which Sari is.

The sense of direction and location of these primitive Pellucidarians is little short of uncanny, as I have had occasion to remark in the past. You may take one of them to the uttermost ends of his world, to places of which he has never even heard, yet without sun or moon or stars to guide him, without map or compass, he will travel straight for home in the shortest direction.

Mountains, rivers, and seas may have to be gone around. but never once does his sense of direction fail him--the homing instinct is supreme.

In the same remarkable way they never forget the location of any place to which they have ever been, and know that of many of which they have only heard from others who have visited them.

In short, each Pellucidarian is a walking geography of his own district and of much of the country contiguous thereto. It always proved of the greatest aid to Perry and me; nevertheless we were anxious to enlarge our map, for we at least were not endowed with the homing instinct.

After several long councils it was decided that, in order to expedite matters, Perry should return to the prospector with a strong party of Mezops and fetch the freight I had brought from the outer world. Ja and his warriors were much impressed by our firearms, and were also anxious to build boats with sails.

As we had arms at the prospector and also books on boat-building we thought that it might prove an excellent idea to start these naturally maritime people upon the construction of a well built navy of staunch sailing-vessels. I was sure that with definite plans to go by Perry could oversee the construction of an adequate flotilla.

I warned him, however, not to be too ambitious, and to forget about dreadnoughts and armored cruisers for a while and build instead a few small sailing-boats that could be manned by four or five men.

I was to proceed to Sari, and while prosecuting my search for Dian attempt at the same time the rehabilitation of the federation. Perry was going as far as possible by water, with the chances that the entire trip might be made in that manner, which proved to be the fact.

With a couple of Mezops as companions I started for Sari. In order to avoid crossing the principal range of the Mountains of the Clouds we took a route that passed a little way south of Phutra. We had eaten four times and slept once, and were, as my companions told me, not far from the great Mahar city, when we were suddenly confronted by a considerable band of Sagoths.

They did not attack us, owing to the peace which exists between the Mahars and the Mezops, but I could see that they looked upon me with considerable suspicion. My friends told them that I was a stranger from a remote country, and as we had previously planned against such a contingency I pretended ignorance of the language which the human beings of Pellucidar employ in conversing with the gorilla-like soldiery of the Mahars.

I noticed, and not without misgivings, that the leader of the Sagoths eyed me with an expression that betokened partial recognition. I was sure that he had seen me before during the period of my incarceration in Phutra and that he was trying to recall my identity.

It worried me not a little. I was extremely thankful when we bade them adieu and continued upon our journey.

Several times during the next few marches I became acutely conscious of the sensation of being watched by unseen eyes, but I did not speak of my suspicions to my companions. Later I had reason to regret my reticence, for--

Well, this is how it happened:

We had killed an antelope and after eating our fill I had lain down to sleep. The Pellucidarians, who seem seldom if ever to require sleep, joined me in this instance, for we had had a very trying march along the northern foothills of the Mountains of the Clouds, and now with their bellies filled with meat they seemed ready for slumber.

When I awoke it was with a start to find a couple of huge Sagoths astride me. They pinioned my arms and legs, and later chained my wrists behind my back. Then they let me up.

I saw my companions; the brave fellows lay dead where they had slept, javelined to death without a chance at self-defense.

I was furious. I threatened the Sagoth leader with all sorts of dire reprisals; but when he heard me speak the hybrid language that is the medium of communication between his kind and the human race of the inner world he only grinned, as much as to say, "I thought so!"

They had not taken my revolvers or ammunition away from me because they did not know what they were; but my heavy rifle I had lost. They simply left it where it had lain beside me.

So low in the scale of intelligence are they, that they had not sufficient interest in this strange object even to fetch it along with them.

I knew from the direction of our march that they were taking me to Phutra. Once there I did not need much of an imagination to picture what my fate would be. It was the arena and a wild thag or fierce tarag for me--unless the Mahars elected to take me to the pits.

In that case my end would be no more certain, though infinitely more horrible and painful, for in the pits I should be subjected to cruel vivisection. From what I had once seen of their methods in the pits of Phutra I knew them to be the opposite of merciful, whereas in the arena I should be quickly despatched by some savage beast.

Arrived at the underground city, I was taken immediately before a slimy Mahar. When the creature had received the report of the Sagoth its cold eyes glistened with malice and hatred as they were turned balefully upon me.

I knew then that my identity had been guessed. With a show of excitement that I had never before seen evinced by a member of the dominant race of Pellucidar, the Mahar hustled me away, heavily guarded, through the main avenue of the city to one of the principal buildings.

Here we were ushered into a great hall where presently many Mahars gathered.

In utter silence they conversed, for they have no oral speech since they are without auditory nerves. Their method of communication Perry has likened to the projection of a sixth sense into a fourth dimension, where it becomes cognizable to the sixth sense of their audience.

Be that as it may, however, it was evident that I was the subject of discussion, and from the hateful looks bestowed upon me not a particularly pleasant subject.

How long I waited for their decision I do not know, but it must have been a very long time. Finally one of the Sagoths addressed me. He was acting as interpreter for his masters.

"The Mahars will spare your life," he said, "and release you on one condition."

"And what is that condition?" I asked, though I could guess its terms.

"That you return to them that which you stole from the pits of Phutra when you killed the four Mahars and escaped," he replied.

I had thought that that would be it. The great secret upon which depended the continuance of the Mahar race was safely hid where only Dian and I knew.

I ventured to imagine that they would have given me much more than my liberty to have it safely in their keeping again; but after that--what?

Would they keep their promises?

I doubted it. With the secret of artificial propagation once more in their hands their numbers would soon be made so to overrun the world of Pellucidar that there could be no hope for the eventual supremacy of the human race, the cause for which I so devoutly hoped, for which I had consecrated my life, and for which I was not willing to give my life.

Yes! In that moment as I stood before the heartless tribunal I felt that my life would be a very little thing to give could it save to the human race of Pellucidar the chance to come into its own by insuring the eventual extinction of the hated, powerful Mahars.

"Come!" exclaimed the Sagoths. "The mighty Mahars await your reply."

"You may say to them," I answered, "that I shall not tell them where the great secret is hid."

When this had been translated to them there was a great beating of reptilian wings, gaping of sharp-fanged jaws, and hideous hissing. I thought that they were about to fall upon me on the spot, and so I laid my hands upon my revolvers; but at length they became more quiet and presently transmitted some command to my Sagoth guard, the chief of which laid a heavy hand upon my arm and pushed me roughly before him from the audience-chamber.

They took me to the pits, where I lay carefully guarded. I was sure that I was to be taken to the vivisection laboratory, and it required all my courage to fortify myself against the terrors of so fearful a death. In Pellucidar, where there is no time, death-agonies may endure for eternities.

Accordingly, I had to steel myself against an endless doom, which now stared me in the face!

     
Pellucidar, by Edgar Rice Burroughs, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER V

  

SURPRISES

But at last the allotted moment arrived--the moment for which I had been trying to prepare myself, for how long I could not even guess. A great Sagoth came and spoke some words of command to those who watched over me. I was jerked roughly to my feet and with little consideration hustled upward toward the higher levels.

Out into the broad avenue they conducted me, where, amid huge throngs of Mahars, Sagoths, and heavily guarded slaves, I was led, or, rather, pushed and shoved roughly, along in the same direction that the mob moved. I had seen such a concourse of people once before in the buried city of Phutra; I guessed, and rightly, that we were bound for the great arena where slaves who are condemned to death meet their end.

Into the vast amphitheater they took me, stationing me at the extreme end of the arena. The queen came, with her slimy, sickening retinue. The seats were filled. The show was about to commence.

Then, from a little doorway in the opposite end of the structure, a girl was led into the arena. She was at a considerable distance from me. I could not see her features.

I wondered what fate awaited this other poor victim and myself, and why they had chosen to have us die together. My own fate, or rather, my thought of it, was submerged in the natural pity I felt for this lone girl, doomed to die horribly beneath the cold, cruel eyes of her awful captors. Of what crime could she be guilty that she must expiate it in the dreaded arena?

As I stood thus thinking, another door, this time at one of the long sides of the arena, was thrown open, and into the theater of death slunk a mighty tarag, the huge cave tiger of the Stone Age. At my sides were my revolvers. My captors had not taken them from me, because they did not yet realize their nature. Doubtless they thought them some strange manner of war-club, and as those who are condemned to the arena are permitted weapons of defense, they let me keep them.

The girl they had armed with a javelin. A brass pin would have been almost as effective against the ferocious monster they had loosed upon her.

The tarag stood for a moment looking about him--first up at the vast audience and then about the arena. He did not seem to see me at all, but his eyes fell presently upon the girl. A hideous roar broke from his titanic lungs--a roar which ended in a long-drawn scream that is more human than the death-cry of a tortured woman--more human but more awesome. I could scarce restrain a shudder.

Slowly the beast turned and moved toward the girl. Then it was that I came to myself and to a realization of my duty. Quickly and as noiselessly as possible I ran down the arena in pursuit of the grim creature. As I ran I drew one of my pitifully futile weapons. Ah! Could I but have had my lost express-gun in my hands at that moment! A single well-placed shot would have crumbled even this great monster. The best I could hope to accomplish was to divert the thing from the girl to myself and then to place as many bullets as possible in it before it reached and mauled me into insensibility and death.

There is a certain unwritten law of the arena that vouchsafes freedom and immunity to the victor, be he beast or human being--both of whom, by the way, are all the same to the Mahar. That is, they were accustomed to look upon man as a lower animal before Perry and I broke through the Pellucidarian crust, but I imagine that they were beginning to alter their views a trifle and to realize that in the gilak--their word for human being--they had a highly organized, reasoning being to contend with.

Be that as it may, the chances were that the tarag alone would profit by the law of the arena. A few more of his long strides, a prodigious leap, and he would be upon the girl. I raised a revolver and fired. The bullet struck him in the left hind leg. It couldn't have damaged him much; but the report of the shot brought him around, facing me.

I think the snarling visage of a huge, enraged, saber-toothed tiger is one of the most terrible sights in the world. Especially if he be snarling at you and there be nothing between the two of you but bare sand.

Even as he faced me a little cry from the girl carried my eyes beyond the brute to her face. Hers was fastened upon me with an expression of incredulity that baffles description. There was both hope and horror in them, too.

"Dian!" I cried. "My Heavens, Dian!"

I saw her lips form the name David, as with raised javelin she rushed forward upon the tarag. She was a tigress then--a primitive savage female defending her loved one. Before she could reach the beast with her puny weapon, I fired again at the point where the tarag's neck met his left shoulder. If I could get a bullet through there it might reach his heart. The bullet didn't reach his heart, but it stopped him for an instant.

It was then that a strange thing happened. I heard a great hissing from the stands occupied by the Mahars, and as I glanced toward them I saw three mighty thipdars--the winged dragons that guard the queen, or, as Perry calls them, pterodactyls--rise swiftly from their rocks and dart lightning-like, toward the center of the arena. They are huge, powerful reptiles. One of them, with the advantage which his wings might give him, would easily be a match for a cave bear or a tarag.

These three, to my consternation, swooped down upon the tarag as he was gathering himself for a final charge upon me. They buried their talons in his back and lifted him bodily from the arena as if he had been a chicken in the clutches of a hawk.

What could it mean?

I was baffled for an explanation; but with the tarag gone I lost no time in hastening to Dian's side. With a little cry of delight she threw herself into my arms. So lost were we in the ecstasy of reunion that neither of us--to this day--can tell what became of the tarag.

The first thing we were aware of was the presence of a body of Sagoths about us. Gruffly they commanded us to follow them. They led us from the arena and back through the streets of Phutra to the audience chamber in which I had been tried and sentenced. Here we found ourselves facing the same cold, cruel tribunal.

Again a Sagoth acted as interpreter. He explained that our lives bad been spared because at the last moment Tu-al-sa had returned to Phutra, and seeing me in the arena had prevailed upon the queen to spare my life.

"Who is Tu-al-sa?" I asked.

"A Mahar whose last male ancestor was--ages ago--the last of the male rulers among the Mahars," he replied.

"Why should she wish to have my life spared?"

He shrugged his shoulders and then repeated my question to the Mahar spokesman. When the latter had explained in the strange sign-language that passes for speech between the Mahars and their fighting men the Sagoth turned again to me:

"For a long time you had Tu-al-sa in your power," he explained. "You might easily have killed her or abandoned her in a strange world--but you did neither. You did not harm her, and you brought her back with you to Pellucidar and set her free to return to Phutra. This is your reward."

Now I understood. The Mahar who had been my involuntary companion upon my return to the outer world was Tu-al-sa. This was the first time that I had learned the lady's name. I thanked fate that I had not left her upon the sands of the Sahara--or put a bullet in her, as I had been tempted to do. I was surprised to discover that gratitude was a characteristic of the dominant race of Pellucidar. I could never think of them as aught but cold-blooded, brainless reptiles, though Perry had devoted much time in explaining to me that owing to a strange freak of evolution among all the genera of the inner world, this species of the reptilia had advanced to a position quite analogous to that which man holds upon the outer crust.

He had often told me that there was every reason to believe from their writings, which he had learned to read while we were incarcerated in Phutra, that they were a just race, and that in certain branches of science and arts they were quite well advanced, especially in genetics and metaphysics, engineering and architecture.

While it had always been difficult for me to look upon these things as other than slimy, winged crocodiles--which, by the way, they do not at all resemble--I was now forced to a realization of the fact that I was in the hands of enlightened creatures--for justice and gratitude are certain hallmarks of rationality and culture.

But what they purposed for us further was of most imminent interest to me. They might save us from the tarag and yet not free us. They looked upon us yet, to some extent, I knew, as creatures of a lower order, and so as we are unable to place ourselves in the position of the brutes we enslave--thinking that they are happier in bondage than in the free fulfilment of the purposes for which nature intended them--the Mahars, too, might consider our welfare better conserved in captivity than among the dangers of the savage freedom we craved. Naturally, I was next impelled to inquire their further intent.

To my question, put through the Sagoth interpreter, I received the reply that having spared my life they considered that Tu-al-sa's debt of gratitude was canceled. They still had against me, however, the crime of which I had been guilty--the unforgivable crime of stealing the great secret. They, therefore, intended holding Dian and me prisoners until the manuscript was returned to them.

They would, they said, send an escort of Sagoths with me to fetch the precious document from its hiding-place, keeping Dian at Phutra as a hostage and releasing us both the moment that the document was safely restored to their queen.

There was no doubt but that they had the upper hand. However, there was so much more at stake than the liberty or even the lives of Dian and myself, that I did not deem it expedient to accept their offer without giving the matter careful thought.

Without the great secret this maleless race must eventually become extinct. For ages they had fertilized their eggs by an artificial process, the secret of which lay hidden in the little cave of a far-off valley where Dian and I had spent our honeymoon. I was none too sure that I could find the valley again, nor that I cared to. So long as the powerful reptilian race of Pellucidar continued to propagate, just so long would the position of man within the inner world be jeopardized. There could not be two dominant races.

I said as much to Dian.

"You used to tell me," she replied, "of the wonderful things you could accomplish with the inventions of your own world. Now you have returned with all that is necessary to place this great power in the hands of the men of Pellucidar.

"You told me of great engines of destruction which would cast a bursting ball of metal among our enemies, killing hundreds of them at one time.

"You told me of mighty fortresses of stone which a thousand men armed with big and little engines such as these could hold forever against a million Sagoths.

"You told me of great canoes which moved across the water without paddles, and which spat death from holes in their sides.

"All these may now belong to the men of Pellucidar. Why should we fear the Mahars?

"Let them breed! Let their numbers increase by thousands. They will be helpless before the power of the Emperor of Pellucidar.

"But if you remain a prisoner in Phutra, what may we accomplish?

"What could the men of Pellucidar do without you to lead them?

"They would fight among themselves, and while they fought the Mahars would fall upon them, and even though the Mahar race should die out, of what value would the emancipation of the human race be to them without the knowledge, which you alone may wield, to guide them toward the wonderful civilization of which you have told me so much that I long for its comforts and luxuries as I never before longed for anything.

"No, David; the Mahars cannot harm us if you are at liberty. Let them have their secret that you and I may return to our people, and lead them to the conquest of all Pellucidar."

It was plain that Dian was ambitious, and that her ambition had not dulled her reasoning faculties. She was right. Nothing could be gained by remaining bottled up in Phutra for the rest of our lives.

It was true that Perry might do much with the contents of the prospector, or iron mole, in which I had brought down the implements of outer-world civilization; but Perry was a man of peace. He could never weld the warring factions of the disrupted federation. He could never win new tribes to the empire. He would fiddle around manufacturing gun-powder and trying to improve upon it until some one blew him up with his own invention. He wasn't practical. He never would get anywhere without a balance-wheel--without some one to direct his energies.

Perry needed me and I needed him. If we were going to do anything for Pellucidar we must be free to do it together.

The outcome of it all was that I agreed to the Mahars' proposition. They promised that Dian would be well treated and protected from every indignity during my absence. So I set out with a hundred Sagoths in search of the little valley which I had stumbled upon by accident, and which I might and might not find again.

We traveled directly toward Sari. Stopping at the camp where I had been captured I recovered my express rifle, for which I was very thankful. I found it lying where I had left it when I had been overpowered in my sleep by the Sagoths who bad captured me and slain my Mezop companions.

On the way I added materially to my map, an occupation which did not elicit from the Sagoths even a shadow of interest. I felt that the human race of Pellucidar had little to fear from these gorilla-men. They were fighters--that was all. We might even use them later ourselves in this same capacity. They had not sufficient brain power to constitute a menace to the advancement of the human race.

As we neared the spot where I hoped to find the little valley I became more and more confident of success. Every landmark was familiar to me, and I was sure now that I knew the exact location of the cave.

It was at about this time that I sighted a number of the half-naked warriors of the human race of Pellucidar. They were marching across our front. At sight of us they halted; that there would be a fight I could not doubt. These Sagoths would never permit an opportunity for the capture of slaves for their Mahar masters to escape them.

I saw that the men were armed with bows and arrows, long lances and swords, so I guessed that they must have been members of the federation, for only my people had been thus equipped. Before Perry and I came the men of Pellucidar had only the crudest weapons wherewith to slay one another.

The Sagoths, too, were evidently expecting battle. With savage shouts they rushed forward toward the human warriors.

Then a strange thing happened. The leader of the human beings stepped forward with upraised hands. The Sagoths ceased their war-cries and advanced slowly to meet him. There was a long parley during which I could see that I was often the subject of their discourse. The Sagoths' leader pointed in the direction in which I had told him the valley lay. Evidently he was explaining the nature of our expedition to the leader of the warriors. It was all a puzzle to me.

What human being could be upon such excellent terms with the gorilla-men?

I couldn't imagine. I tried to get a good look at the fellow, but the Sagoths had left me in the rear with a guard when they had advanced to battle, and the distance was too great for me to recognize the features of any of the human beings.

Finally the parley was concluded and the men continued on their way while the Sagoths returned to where I stood with my guard. It was time for eating, so we stopped where we were and made our meal. The Sagoths didn't tell me who it was they had met, and I did not ask, though I must confess that I was quite curious.

They permitted me to sleep at this halt. Afterward we took up the last leg of our journey. I found the valley without difficulty and led my guard directly to the cave. At its mouth the Sagoths halted and I entered alone.

I noticed as I felt about the floor in the dim light that there was a pile of fresh-turned rubble there. Presently my hands came to the spot where the great secret had been buried. There was a cavity where I had carefully smoothed the earth over the hiding-place of the document--the manuscript was gone!

Frantically I searched the whole interior of the cave several times over, but without other result than a complete confirmation of my worst fears. Someone had been here ahead of me and stolen the great secret.

The one thing within Pellucidar which might free Dian and me was gone, nor was it likely that I should ever learn its whereabouts. If a Mahar had found it, which was quite improbable, the chances were that the dominant race would never divulge the fact that they had recovered the precious document. If a cave man had happened upon it he would have no conception of its meaning or value, and as a consequence it would be lost or destroyed in short order.

With bowed head and broken hopes I came out of the cave and told the Sagoth chieftain what I had discovered. It didn't mean much to the fellow, who doubtless had but little better idea of the contents of the document I had been sent to fetch to his masters than would the cave man who in all probability had discovered it.

The Sagoth knew only that I had failed in my mission, so he took advantage of the fact to make the return journey to Phutra as disagreeable as possible. I did not rebel, though I had with me the means to destroy them all. I did not dare rebel because of the consequences to Dian. I intended demanding her release on the grounds that she was in no way guilty of the theft, and that my failure to recover the document had not lessened the value of the good faith I had had in offering to do so. The Mahars might keep me in slavery if they chose, but Dian should be returned safely to her people.

I was full of my scheme when we entered Phutra and I was conducted directly to the great audience-chamber. The Mahars listened to the report of the Sagoth chieftain, and so difficult is it to judge their emotions from their almost expressionless countenance, that I was at a loss to know how terrible might be their wrath as they learned that their great secret, upon which rested the fate of their race, might now be irretrievably lost.

Presently I could see that she who presided was communicating something to the Sagoth interpreter--doubtless something to be transmitted to me which might give me a forewarning of the fate which lay in store for me. One thing I had decided definitely: If they would not free Dian I should turn loose upon Phutra with my little arsenal. Alone I might even win to freedom, and if I could learn where Dian was imprisoned it would be worth the attempt to free her. My thoughts were interrupted by the interpreter.

"The mighty Mahars," he said, "are unable to reconcile your statement that the document is lost with your action in sending it to them by a special messenger. They wish to know if you have so soon forgotten the truth or if you are merely ignoring it."

"I sent them no document," I cried. "Ask them what they mean."

"They say," he went on after conversing with the Mahar for a moment, "that just before your return to Phutra, Hooja the Sly One came, bringing the great secret with him. He said that you had sent him ahead with it, asking him to deliver it and return to Sari where you would await him, bringing the girl with him."

"Dian?" I gasped. "The Mahars have given over Dian into the keeping of Hooja."

"Surely," he replied. "What of it? She is only a gilak," as you or I would say, "She is only a cow."

     
Pellucidar, by Edgar Rice Burroughs, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER VI

  

A PENDENT WORLD

The Mahars set me free as they had promised, but with strict injunctions never to approach Phutra or any other Mahar city. They also made it perfectly plain that they considered me a dangerous creature, and that having wiped the slate clean in so far as they were under obligations to me, they now considered me fair prey. Should I again fall into their hands, they intimated it would go ill with me.

They would not tell me in which direction Hooja had set forth with Dian, so I departed from Phutra, filled with bitterness against the Mahars, and rage toward the Sly One who had once again robbed me of my greatest treasure.

At first I was minded to go directly back to Anoroc; but upon second thought turned my face toward Sari, as I felt that somewhere in that direction Hooja would travel, his own country lying in that general direction.

Of my journey to Sari it is only necessary to say that it was fraught with the usual excitement and adventure, incident to all travel across the face of savage Pellucidar. The dangers, however, were greatly reduced through the medium of my armament. I often wondered how it had happened that I had ever survived the first ten years of my life within the inner world, when, naked and primitively armed, I had traversed great areas of her beast-ridden surface.

With the aid of my map, which I had kept with great care during my march with the Sagoths in search of the great secret, I arrived at Sari at last. As I topped the lofty plateau in whose rocky cliffs the principal tribe of Sarians find their cave-homes, a great hue and cry arose from those who first discovered me.

Like wasps from their nests the hairy warriors poured from their caves. The bows with their poison-tipped arrows, which I had taught them to fashion and to use, were raised against me. Swords of hammered iron--another of my innovations--menaced me, as with lusty shouts the horde charged down.

It was a critical moment. Before I should be recognized I might be dead. It was evident that all semblance of intertribal relationship had ceased with my going, and that my people had reverted to their former savage, suspicious hatred of all strangers. My garb must have puzzled them, too, for never before of course had they seen a man clothed in khaki and puttees.

Leaning my express rifle against my body I raised both hands aloft. It was the peace-sign that is recognized everywhere upon the surface of Pellucidar. The charging warriors paused and surveyed me. I looked for my friend Ghak, the Hairy One, king of Sari, and presently I saw him coming from a distance. Ah, but it was good to see his mighty, hairy form once more! A friend was Ghak--a friend well worth the having; and it had been some time since I had seen a friend.

Shouldering his way through the throng of warriors, the mighty chieftain advanced toward me. There was an expression of puzzlement upon his fine features. He crossed the space between the warriors and myself, halting before me.

I did not speak. I did not even smile. I wanted to see if Ghak, my principal lieutenant, would recognize me. For some time he stood there looking me over carefully. His eyes took in my large pith helmet, my khaki jacket, and bandoleers of cartridges, the two revolvers swinging at my hips, the large rifle resting against my body. Still I stood with my hands above my head. He examined my puttees and my strong tan shoes--a little the worse for wear now. Then he glanced up once more to my face. As his gaze rested there quite steadily for some moments I saw recognition tinged with awe creep across his countenance.

Presently without a word he took one of my hands in his and dropping to one knee raised my fingers to his lips. Perry had taught them this trick, nor ever did the most polished courtier of all the grand courts of Europe perform the little act of homage with greater grace and dignity.

Quickly I raised Ghak to his feet, clasping both his hands in mine. I think there must have been tears in my eyes then--I know I felt too full for words. The king of Sari turned toward his warriors.

"Our emperor has come back," he announced. "Come hither and--"

But he got no further, for the shouts that broke from those savage throats would have drowned the voice of heaven itself. I had never guessed how much they thought of me. As they clustered around, almost fighting for the chance to kiss my hand, I saw again the vision of empire which I had thought faded forever.

With such as these I could conquer a world. With such as these I WOULD conquer one! If the Sarians had remained loyal, so too would the Amozites be loyal still, and the Kalians, and the Suvians, and all the great tribes who had formed the federation that was to emancipate the human race of Pellucidar.

Perry was safe with the Mezops; I was safe with the Sarians; now if Dian were but safe with me the future would look bright indeed.

It did not take long to outline to Ghak all that had befallen me since I had departed from Pellucidar, and to get down to the business of finding Dian, which to me at that moment was of even greater importance than the very empire itself.

When I told him that Hooja had stolen her, he stamped his foot in rage.

"It is always the Sly One!" he cried. "It was Hooja who caused the first trouble between you and the Beautiful One.

"It was Hooja who betrayed our trust, and all but caused our recapture by the Sagoths that time we escaped from Phutra.

"It was Hooja who tricked you and substituted a Mahar for Dian when you started upon your return journey to your own world.

"It was Hooja who schemed and lied until he had turned the kingdoms one against another and destroyed the federation.

"When we had him in our power we were foolish to let him live. Next time--"

Ghak did not need to finish his sentence.

"He has become a very powerful enemy now," I replied. "That he is allied in some way with the Mahars is evidenced by the familiarity of his relations with the Sagoths who were accompanying me in search of the great secret, for it must have been Hooja whom I saw conversing with them just before we reached the valley. Doubtless they told him of our quest and he hastened on ahead of us, discovered the cave and stole the document. Well does he deserve his appellation of the Sly One."

With Ghak and his head men I held a number of consultations. The upshot of them was a decision to combine our search for Dian with an attempt to rebuild the crumbled federation. To this end twenty warriors were despatched in pairs to ten of the leading kingdoms, with instructions to make every effort to discover the whereabouts of Hooja and Dian, while prosecuting their missions to the chieftains to whom they were sent.

Ghak was to remain at home to receive the various delegations which we invited to come to Sari on the business of the federation. Four hundred warriors were started for Anoroc to fetch Perry and the contents of the prospector, to the capitol of the empire, which was also the principal settlements of the Sarians.

At first it was intended that I remain at Sari, that I might be in readiness to hasten forth at the first report of the discovery of Dian; but I found the inaction in the face of my deep solicitude for the welfare of my mate so galling that scarce had the several units departed upon their missions before I, too, chafed to be actively engaged upon the search.

It was after my second sleep, subsequent to the departure of the warriors, as I recall that I at last went to Ghak with the admission that I could no longer support the intolerable longing to be personally upon the trail of my lost love.

Ghak tried to dissuade me, though I could tell that his heart was with me in my wish to be away and really doing something. It was while we were arguing upon the subject that a stranger, with hands above his head, entered the village. He was immediately surrounded by warriors and conducted to Ghak's presence.

The fellow was a typical cave man--squat muscular, and hairy, and of a type I had not seen before. His features, like those of all the primeval men of Pellucidar, were regular and fine. His weapons consisted of a stone ax and knife and a heavy knobbed bludgeon of wood. His skin was very white.

"Who are you?" asked Ghak. "And whence come you?"

"I am Kolk, son of Goork, who is chief of the Thurians," replied the stranger. "From Thuria I have come in search of the land of Amoz, where dwells Dacor, the Strong One, who stole my sister, Canda, the Graceful One, to be his mate.

"We of Thuria had heard of a great chieftain who has bound together many tribes, and my father has sent me to Dacor to learn if there be truth in these stories, and if so to offer the services of Thuria to him whom we have heard called emperor."

"The stories are true," replied Ghak, "and here is the emperor of whom you have heard. You need travel no farther."

Kolk was delighted. He told us much of the wonderful resources of Thuria, the Land of Awful Shadow, and of his long journey in search of Amoz.

"And why," I asked, "does Goork, your father, desire to join his kingdom to the empire?"

"There are two reasons," replied the young man. "Forever have the Mahars, who dwell beyond the Lidi Plains which lie at the farther rim of the Land of Awful Shadow, taken heavy toll of our people, whom they either force into lifelong slavery or fatten for their feasts. We have heard that the great emperor makes successful war upon the Mahars, against whom we should be glad to fight.

"Recently has another reason come. Upon a great island which lies in the Sojar Az, but a short distance from our shores, a wicked man has collected a great band of outcast warriors of all tribes. Even are there many Sagoths among them, sent by the Mahars to aid the Wicked One.

"This band makes raids upon our villages, and it is constantly growing in size and strength, for the Mahars give liberty to any of their male prisoners who will promise to fight with this band against the enemies of the Mahars. It is the purpose of the Mahars thus to raise a force of our own kind to combat the growth and menace of the new empire of which I have come to seek information. All this we learned from one of our own warriors who had pretended to sympathize with this band and had then escaped at the first opportunity."

"Who could this man be," I asked Ghak, "who leads so vile a movement against his own kind?"

"His name is Hooja," spoke up Kolk, answering my question.

Ghak and I looked at each other. Relief was written upon his countenance and I know that it was beating strongly in my heart. At last we had discovered a tangible clue to the whereabouts of Hooja--and with the clue a guide!

But when I broached the subject to Kolk he demurred. He had come a long way, he explained, to see his sister and to confer with Dacor. Moreover, he had instructions from his father which he could not ignore lightly. But even so he would return with me and show me the way to the island of the Thurian shore if by doing so we might accomplish anything.

"But we cannot," he urged. "Hooja is powerful. He has thousands of warriors. He has only to call upon his Mahar allies to receive a countless horde of Sagoths to do his bidding against his human enemies.

"Let us wait until you may gather an equal horde from the kingdoms of your empire. Then we may march against Hooja with some show of success.

"But first must you lure him to the mainland, for who among you knows how to construct the strange things that carry Hooja and his band back and forth across the water?

"We are not island people. We do not go upon the water. We know nothing of such things."

I couldn't persuade him to do more than direct me upon the way. I showed him my map, which now included a great area of country extending from Anoroc upon the east to Sari upon the west, and from the river south of the Mountains of the Clouds north to Amoz. As soon as I had explained it to him he drew a line with his finger, showing a seacoast far to the west and south of Sari, and a great circle which he said marked the extent of the Land of Awful Shadow in which lay Thuria.

The shadow extended southeast of the coast out into the sea halfway to a large island, which he said was the seat of Hooja's traitorous government. The island itself lay in the light of the noonday sun. Northwest of the coast and embracing a part of Thuria lay the Lidi Plains, upon the northwestern verge of which was situated the Mahar city which took such heavy toll of the Thurians.

Thus were the unhappy people now between two fires, with Hooja upon one side and the Mahars upon the other. I did not wonder that they sent out an appeal for succor.

Though Ghak and Kolk both attempted to dissuade me, I was determined to set out at once, nor did I delay longer than to make a copy of my map to be given to Perry that he might add to his that which I had set down since we parted. I left a letter for him as well, in which among other things I advanced the theory that the Sojar Az, or Great Sea, which Kolk mentioned as stretching eastward from Thuria, might indeed be the same mighty ocean as that which, swinging around the southern end of a continent ran northward along the shore opposite Phutra, mingling its waters with the huge gulf upon which lay Sari, Amoz, and Greenwich.

Against this possibility I urged him to hasten the building of a fleet of small sailing-vessels, which we might utilize should I find it impossible to entice Hooja's horde to the mainland.

I told Ghak what I had written, and suggested that as soon as he could he should make new treaties with the various kingdoms of the empire, collect an army and march toward Thuria--this of course against the possibility of my detention through some cause or other.

Kolk gave me a sign to his father--a lidi, or beast of burden, crudely scratched upon a bit of bone, and beneath the lidi a man and a flower; all very rudely done perhaps, but none the less effective as I well knew from my long years among the primitive men of Pellucidar.

The lidi is the tribal beast of the Thurians; the man and the flower in the combination in which they appeared bore a double significance, as they constituted not only a message to the effect that the bearer came in peace, but were also Kolk's signature.

And so, armed with my credentials and my small arsenal, I set out alone upon my quest for the dearest girl in this world or yours.

Kolk gave me explicit directions, though with my map I do not believe that I could have gone wrong. As a matter of fact I did not need the map at all, since the principal landmark of the first half of my journey, a gigantic mountainpeak, was plainly visible from Sari, though a good hundred miles away.

At the southern base of this mountain a river rose and ran in a westerly direction, finally turning south and emptying into the Sojar Az some forty miles northeast of Thuria. All that I had to do was follow this river to the sea and then follow the coast to Thuria.

Two hundred and forty miles of wild mountain and primeval jungle, of untracked plain, of nameless rivers, of deadly swamps and savage forests lay ahead of me, yet never had I been more eager for an adventure than now, for never had more depended upon haste and success.

I do not know how long a time that journey required, and only half did I appreciate the varied wonders that each new march unfolded before me, for my mind and heart were filled with but a single image--that of a perfect girl whose great, dark eyes looked bravely forth from a frame of raven hair.

It was not until I had passed the high peak and found the river that my eyes first discovered the pendent world, the tiny satellite which hangs low over the surface of Pellucidar casting its perpetual shadow always upon the same spot--the area that is known here as the Land of Awful Shadow, in which dwells the tribe of Thuria.

From the distance and the elevation of the highlands where I stood the Pellucidarian noonday moon showed half in sunshine and half in shadow, while directly beneath it was plainly visible the round dark spot upon the surface of Pellucidar where the sun has never shone. From where I stood the moon appeared to hang so low above the ground as almost to touch it; but later I was to learn that it floats a mile above the surface--which seems indeed quite close for a moon.

Following the river downward I soon lost sight of the tiny planet as I entered the mazes of a lofty forest. Nor did I catch another glimpse of it for some time--several marches at least. However, when the river led me to the sea, or rather just before it reached the sea, of a sudden the sky became overcast and the size and luxuriance of the vegetation diminished as by magic--as if an omnipotent hand had drawn a line upon the earth, and said:

"Upon this side shall the trees and the shrubs, the grasses and the flowers, riot in profusion of rich colors, gigantic size and bewildering abundance; and upon that side shall they be dwarfed and pale and scant."

Instantly I looked above, for clouds are so uncommon in the skies of Pellucidar--they are practically unknown except above the mightiest mountain ranges--that it had given me something of a start to discover the sun obliterated. But I was not long in coming to a realization of the cause of the shadow.

Above me hung another world. I could see its mountains and valleys, oceans, lakes, and rivers, its broad, grassy plains and dense forests. But too great was the distance and too deep the shadow of its under side for me to distinguish any movement as of animal life.

Instantly a great curiosity was awakened within me. The questions which the sight of this planet, so tantalizingly close, raised in my mind were numerous and unanswerable.

Was it inhabited?

If so, by what manner and form of creature?

Were its people as relatively diminutive as their little world, or were they as disproportionately huge as the lesser attraction of gravity upon the surface of their globe would permit of their being?

As I watched it, I saw that it was revolving upon an axis that lay parallel to the surface of Pellucidar, so that during each revolution its entire surface was once exposed to the world below and once bathed in the heat of the great sun above. The little world had that which Pellucidar could not have--a day and night, and--greatest of boons to one outer-earthly born--time.

Here I saw a chance to give time to Pellucidar, using this mighty clock, revolving perpetually in the heavens, to record the passage of the hours for the earth below. Here should be located an observatory, from which might be flashed by wireless to every corner of the empire the correct time once each day. That this time would be easily measured I had no doubt, since so plain were the landmarks upon the under surface of the satellite that it would be but necessary to erect a simple instrument and mark the instant of passage of a given landmark across the instrument.

But then was not the time for dreaming; I must devote my mind to the purpose of my journey. So I hastened onward beneath the great shadow. As I advanced I could not but note the changing nature of the vegetation and the paling of its hues.

The river led me a short distance within the shadow before it emptied into the Sojar Az. Then I continued in a southerly direction along the coast toward the village of Thuria, where I hoped to find Goork and deliver to him my credentials.

I had progressed no great distance from the mouth of the river when I discerned, lying some distance at sea, a great island. This I assumed to be the stronghold of Hooja, nor did I doubt that upon it even now was Dian.

The way was most difficult, since shortly after leaving the river I encountered lofty cliffs split by numerous long, narrow fiords, each of which necessitated a considerable detour. As the crow flies it is about twenty miles from the mouth of the river to Thuria, but before I had covered half of it I was fagged. There was no familiar fruit or vegetable growing upon the rocky soil of the cliff-tops, and I would have fared ill for food had not a hare broken cover almost beneath my nose.

I carried bow and arrows to conserve my ammunition-supply, but so quick was the little animal that I had no time to draw and fit a shaft. In fact my dinner was a hundred yards away and going like the proverbial bat when I dropped my six-shooter on it. It was a pretty shot and when coupled with a good dinner made me quite contented with myself.

After eating I lay down and slept. When I awoke I was scarcely so self-satisfied, for I had not more than opened my eyes before I became aware of the presence, barely a hundred yards from me, of a pack of some twenty huge wolf-dogs--the things which Perry insisted upon calling hyaenodons--and almost simultaneously I discovered that while I slept my revolvers, rifle, bow, arrows, and knife had been stolen from me.

And the wolf-dog pack was preparing to rush me.

     
Pellucidar, by Edgar Rice Burroughs, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER VII

  

FROM PLIGHT TO PLIGHT

I have never been much of a runner; I hate running. But if ever a sprinter broke into smithereens all world's records it was I that day when I fled before those hideous beasts along the narrow spit of rocky cliff between two narrow fiords toward the Sojar Az. Just as I reached the verge of the cliff the foremost of the brutes was upon me. He leaped and closed his massive jaws upon my shoulder.

The momentum of his flying body, added to that of my own, carried the two of us over the cliff. It was a hideous fall. The cliff was almost perpendicular. At its foot broke the sea against a solid wall of rock.

We struck the cliff-face once in our descent and then plunged into the salt sea. With the impact with the water the hyaenodon released his hold upon my shoulder.

As I came sputtering to the surface I looked about for some tiny foot- or hand-hold where I might cling for a moment of rest and recuperation. The cliff itself offered me nothing, so I swam toward the mouth of the fiord.

At the far end I could see that erosion from above had washed down sufficient rubble to form a narrow ribbon of beach. Toward this I swam with all my strength. Not once did I look behind me, since every unnecessary movement in swimming detracts so much from one's endurance speed. Not until I had drawn myself safely out upon the beach did I turn my eyes back toward the sea for the hyaenodon. He was swimming slowly and apparently painfully toward the beach upon where I stood.

I watched him for a long time, wondering, why it was that such a doglike animal was not a better swimmer. As he neared me I realized that he was weakening rapidly. I had gathered a handful of stones to be ready for his assault when he landed, but in a moment I let them fall from my hands. It was evident that the brute either was no swimmer or else was severely injured, for by now he was making practically no headway. Indeed, it was with quite apparent difficulty that he kept his nose above the surface of the sea.

He was not more than fifty yards from shore when he went under. I watched the spot where he had disappeared, and in a moment I saw his head reappear. The look of dumb misery in his eyes struck a chord in my breast, for I love dogs. I forgot that he was a vicious, primordial wolf-thing--a man-eater, a scourge, and a terror. I saw only the sad eyes that looked like the eyes of Raja, my dead collie of the outer world.

I did not stop to weigh and consider. In other words, I did not stop to think, which I believe must be the way of men who do things--in contradistinction to those who think much and do nothing. Instead, I leaped back into the water and swam out toward the drowning beast. At first he showed his teeth at my approach, but just before I reached him he went under for the second time, so that I had to dive to get him.

I grabbed him by the scruff of the neck, and though he weighed as much as a Shetland pony, I managed to drag him to shore and well up upon the beach. Here I found that one of his forelegs was broken--the crash against the cliff-face must have done it.

By this time all the fight was out of him, so that when I had gathered a few tiny branches from some of the stunted trees that grew in the crevices of the cliff, and returned to him he permitted me to set his broken leg and bind it in splints. I had to tear part of my shirt into bits to obtain a bandage, but at last the job was done. Then I sat stroking the savage head and talking to the beast in the man-dog talk with which you are familiar, if you ever owned and loved a dog.

When he is well, I thought, he probably will turn upon me and attempt to devour me, and against that eventuality I gathered together a pile of rocks and set to work to fashion a stone-knife. We were bottled up at the head of the fiord as completely as if we had been behind prison bars. Before us spread the Sojar Az, and elsewhere about us rose unscalable cliffs.

Fortunately a little rivulet trickled down the side of the rocky wall, giving us ample supply of fresh water--some of which I kept constantly beside the hyaenodon in a huge, bowl-shaped shell, of which there were countless numbers among the rubble of the beach.

For food we subsisted upon shellfish and an occasional bird that I succeeded in knocking over with a rock, for long practice as a pitcher on prep-school and varsity nines had made me an excellent shot with a hand-thrown missile.

It was not long before the hyaenodon's leg was sufficiently mended to permit him to rise and hobble about on three legs. I shall never forget with what intent interest I watched his first attempt. Close at my hand lay my pile of rocks. Slowly the beast came to his three good feet. He stretched himself, lowered his head, and lapped water from the drinking-shell at his side, turned and looked at me, and then hobbled off toward the cliffs.

Thrice he traversed the entire extent of our prison, seeking, I imagine, a loop-hole for escape, but finding none he returned in my direction. Slowly he came quite close to me, sniffed at my shoes, my puttees, my hands, and then limped off a few feet and lay down again.

Now that he was able to get around, I was a little uncertain as to the wisdom of my impulsive mercy.

How could I sleep with that ferocious thing prowling about the narrow confines of our prison?

Should I close my eyes it might be to open them again to the feel of those mighty jaws at my throat. To say the least, I was uncomfortable.

I have had too much experience with dumb animals to bank very strongly on any sense of gratitude which may be attributed to them by inexperienced sentimentalists. I believe that some animals love their masters, but I doubt very much if their affection is the outcome of gratitude--a characteristic that is so rare as to be only occasionally traceable in the seemingly unselfish acts of man himself.

But finally I was forced to sleep. Tired nature would be put off no longer. I simply fell asleep, willy nilly, as I sat looking out to sea. I had been very uncomfortable since my ducking in the ocean, for though I could see the sunlight on the water halfway toward the island and upon the island itself, no ray of it fell upon us. We were well within the Land of Awful Shadow. A perpetual half-warmth pervaded the atmosphere, but clothing was slow in drying, and so from loss of sleep and great physical discomfort, I at last gave way to nature's demands and sank into profound slumber.

When I awoke it was with a start, for a heavy body was upon me. My first thought was that the hyaenodon had at last attacked me, but as my eyes opened and I struggled to rise, I saw that a man was astride me and three others bending close above him.

I am no weakling--and never have been. My experience in the hard life of the inner world has turned my thews to steel. Even such giants as Ghak the Hairy One have praised my strength; but to it is added another quality which they lack--science.

The man upon me held me down awkwardly, leaving me many openings--one of which I was not slow in taking advantage of, so that almost before the fellow knew that I was awake I was upon my feet with my arms over his shoulders and about his waist and had hurled him heavily over my head to the hard rubble of the beach, where he lay quite still.

In the instant that I arose I had seen the hyaenodon lying asleep beside a boulder a few yards away. So nearly was he the color of the rock that he was scarcely discernible. Evidently the newcomers had not seen him.

I had not more than freed myself from one of my antagonists before the other three were upon me. They did not work silently now, but charged me with savage cries--a mistake upon their part. The fact that they did not draw their weapons against me convinced me that they desired to take me alive; but I fought as desperately as if death loomed immediate and sure.

The battle was short, for scarce had their first wild whoop reverberated through the rocky fiord, and they had closed upon me, than a hairy mass of demoniacal rage hurtled among us.

It was the hyaenodon!

In an instant he had pulled down one of the men, and with a single shake, terrier-like, had broken his neck. Then he was upon another. In their efforts to vanquish the wolf-dog the savages forgot all about me, thus giving me an instant in which to snatch a knife from the loin-string of him who had first fallen and account for another of them. Almost simultaneously the hyaenodon pulled down the remaining enemy, crushing his skull with a single bite of those fearsome jaws.

The battle was over--unless the beast considered me fair prey, too. I waited, ready for him with knife and bludgeon--also filched from a dead foeman; but he paid no attention to me, falling to work instead to devour one of the corpses.

The beast had been handicapped but little by his splinted leg; but having eaten he lay down and commenced to gnaw at the bandage. I was sitting some little distance away devouring shellfish, of which, by the way, I was becoming exceedingly tired.

Presently, the hyaenodon arose and came toward me. I did not move. He stopped in front of me and deliberately raised his bandaged leg and pawed my knee. His act was as intelligible as words--he wished the bandage removed.

I took the great paw in one hand and with the other hand untied and unwound the bandage, removed the splints and felt of the injured member. As far as I could judge the bone was completely knit. The joint was stiff; when I bent it a little the brute winced--but he neither growled nor tried to pull away. Very slowly and gently I rubbed the joint and applied pressure to it for a few moments.

Then I set it down upon the ground. The hyaenodon walked around me a few times, and then lay down at my side, his body touching mine. I laid my hand upon his head. He did not move. Slowly, I scratched about his ears and neck and down beneath the fierce jaws. The only sign he gave was to raise his chin a trifle that I might better caress him.

That was enough! From that moment I have never again felt suspicion of Raja, as I immediately named him. Somehow all sense of loneliness vanished, too--I had a dog! I had never guessed precisely what it was that was lacking to life in Pellucidar, but now I knew it was the total absence of domestic animals.

Man here had not yet reached the point where he might take the time from slaughter and escaping slaughter to make friends with any of the brute creation. I must qualify this statement a trifle and say that this was true of those tribes with which I was most familiar. The Thurians do domesticate the colossal lidi, traversing the great Lidi Plains upon the backs of these grotesque and stupendous monsters, and possibly there may also be other, far-distant peoples within the great world, who have tamed others of the wild things of jungle, plain or mountain.

The Thurians practice agriculture in a crude sort of way. It is my opinion that this is one of the earliest steps from savagery to civilization. The taming of wild beasts and their domestication follows.

Perry argues that wild dogs were first domesticated for hunting purposes; but I do not agree with him. I believe that if their domestication were not purely the result of an accident, as, for example, my taming of the hyaenodon, it came about through the desire of tribes who had previously domesticated flocks and herds to have some strong, ferocious beast to guard their roaming property. However, I lean rather more strongly to the theory of accident.

As I sat there upon the beach of the little fiord eating my unpalatable shell-fish, I commenced to wonder how it had been that the four savages had been able to reach me, though I had been unable to escape from my natural prison. I glanced about in all directions, searching for an explanation. At last my eyes fell upon the bow of a small dugout protruding scarce a foot from behind a large boulder lying half in the water at the edge of the beach.

At my discovery I leaped to my feet so suddenly that it brought Raja, growling and bristling, upon all fours in an instant. For the moment I had forgotten him. But his savage rumbling did not cause me any uneasiness. He glanced quickly about in all directions as if searching for the cause of my excitement. Then, as I walked rapidly down toward the dugout, he slunk silently after me.

The dugout was similar in many respects to those which I had seen in use by the Mezops. In it were four paddles. I was much delighted, as it promptly offered me the escape I had been craving.

I pushed it out into water that would float it, stepped in and called to Raja to enter. At first he did not seem to understand what I wished of him, but after I had paddled out a few yards he plunged through the surf and swam after me. When he had come alongside I grasped the scruff of his neck, and after a considerable struggle, in which I several times came near to overturning the canoe, I managed to drag him aboard, where he shook himself vigorously and squatted down before me.

After emerging from the fiord, I paddled southward along the coast, where presently the lofty cliffs gave way to lower and more level country. It was here somewhere that I should come upon the principal village of the Thurians. When, after a time, I saw in the distance what I took to be huts in a clearing near the shore, I drew quickly into land, for though I had been furnished credentials by Kolk, I was not sufficiently familiar with the tribal characteristics of these people to know whether I should receive a friendly welcome or not; and in case I should not, I wanted to be sure of having a canoe hidden safely away so that I might undertake the trip to the island, in any event--provided, of course, that I escaped the Thurians should they prove belligerent.

At the point where I landed the shore was quite low. A forest of pale, scrubby ferns ran down almost to the beach. Here I dragged up the dugout, hiding it well within the vegetation, and with some loose rocks built a cairn upon the beach to mark my cache. Then I turned my steps toward the Thurian village.

As I proceeded I began to speculate upon the possible actions of Raja when we should enter the presence of other men than myself. The brute was padding softly at my side, his sensitive nose constantly atwitch and his fierce eyes moving restlessly from side to side--nothing would ever take Raja unawares!

The more I thought upon the matter the greater became my perturbation. I did not want Raja to attack any of the people upon whose friendship I so greatly depended, nor did I want him injured or slain by them.

I wondered if Raja would stand for a leash. His head as he paced beside me was level with my hip. I laid my hand upon it caressingly. As I did so he turned and looked up into my face, his jaws parting and his red tongue lolling as you have seen your own dog's beneath a love pat.

"Just been waiting all your life to be tamed and loved, haven't you, old man?" I asked. "You're nothing but a good pup, and the man who put the hyaeno in your name ought to be sued for libel."

Raja bared his mighty fangs with upcurled, snarling lips and licked my hand.

"You're grinning, you old fraud, you!" I cried. "If you're not, I'll eat you. I'll bet a doughnut you're nothing but some kid's poor old Fido, masquerading around as a real, live man-eater."

Raja whined. And so we walked on together toward Thuria--I talking to the beast at my side, and he seeming to enjoy my company no less than I enjoyed his. If you don't think it's lonesome wandering all by yourself through savage, unknown Pellucidar, why, just try it, and you will not wonder that I was glad of the company of this first dog--this living replica of the fierce and now extinct hyaenodon of the outer crust that hunted in savage packs the great elk across the snows of southern France, in the days when the mastodon roamed at will over the broad continent of which the British Isles were then a part, and perchance left his footprints and his bones in the sands of Atlantis as well.

Thus I dreamed as we moved on toward Thuria. My dreaming was rudely shattered by a savage growl from Raja. I looked down at him. He had stopped in his tracks as one turned to stone. A thin ridge of stiff hair bristled along the entire length of his spine. His yellow green eyes were fastened upon the scrubby jungle at our right.

I fastened my fingers in the bristles at his neck and turned my eyes in the direction that his pointed. At first I saw nothing. Then a slight movement of the bushes riveted my attention. I thought it must be some wild beast, and was glad of the primitive weapons I had taken from the bodies of the warriors who had attacked me.

Presently I distinguished two eyes peering at us from the vegetation. I took a step in their direction, and as I did so a youth arose and fled precipitately in the direction we had been going. Raja struggled to be after him, but I held tightly to his neck, an act which he did not seem to relish, for he turned on me with bared fangs.

I determined that now was as good a time as any to discover just how deep was Raja's affection for me. One of us could be master, and logically I was the one. He growled at me. I cuffed him sharply across the nose. He looked it me for a moment in surprised bewilderment, and then he growled again. I made another feint at him, expecting that it would bring him at my throat; but instead he winced and crouched down.

Raja was subdued!

I stooped and patted him. Then I took a piece of the rope that constituted a part of my equipment and made a leash for him.

Thus we resumed our journey toward Thuria. The youth who had seen us was evidently of the Thurians. That he had lost no time in racing homeward and spreading the word of my coming was evidenced when we had come within sight of the clearing, and the village--the first real village, by the way, that I had ever seen constructed by human Pellucidarians. There was a rude rectangle walled with logs and boulders, in which were a hundred or more thatched huts of similar construction. There was no gate. Ladders that could be removed by night led over the palisade.

Before the village were assembled a great concourse of warriors. Inside I could see the heads of women and children peering over the top of the wall; and also, farther back, the long necks of lidi, topped by their tiny heads. Lidi, by the way, is both the singular and plural form of the noun that describes the huge beasts of burden of the Thurians. They are enormous quadrupeds, eighty or a hundred feet long, with very small heads perched at the top of very long, slender necks. Their heads are quite forty feet from the ground. Their gait is slow and deliberate, but so enormous are their strides that, as a matter of fact, they cover the ground quite rapidly.

Perry has told me that they are almost identical with the fossilized remains of the diplodocus of the outer crust's Jurassic age. I have to take his word for it--and I guess you will, unless you know more of such matters than I.

As we came in sight of the warriors the men set up a great jabbering. Their eyes were wide in astonishment--only, I presume, because of my strange garmenture, but as well from the fact that I came in company with a jalok, which is the Pellucidarian name of the hyaenodon.

Raja tugged at his leash, growling and showing his long white fangs. He would have liked nothing better than to be at the throats of the whole aggregation; but I held him in with the leash, though it took all my strength to do it. My free hand I held above my head, palm out, in token of the peacefulness of my mission.

In the foreground I saw the youth who had discovered us, and I could tell from the way he carried himself that he was quite overcome by his own importance. The warriors about him were all fine looking fellows, though shorter and squatter than the Sarians or the Amozites. Their color, too, was a bit lighter, owing, no doubt, to the fact that much of their lives is spent within the shadow of the world that hangs forever above their country.

A little in advance of the others was a bearded fellow tricked out in many ornaments. I didn't need to ask to know that he was the chieftain--doubtless Goork, father of Kolk. Now to him I addressed myself.

"I am David," I said, "Emperor of the Federated Kingdoms of Pellucidar. Doubtless you have heard of me?"

He nodded his head affirmatively.

"I come from Sari," I continued, "where I just met Kolk, the son of Goork. I bear a token from Kolk to his father, which will prove that I am a friend."

Again the warrior nodded. "I am Goork," he said. "Where is the token?"

"Here," I replied, and fished into the game-bag where I had placed it.

Goork and his people waited in silence. My hand searched the inside of the bag.

It was empty!

The token had been stolen with my arms!

     
Pellucidar, by Edgar Rice Burroughs, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER VIII

  

CAPTIVE

When Goork and his people saw that I had no token they commenced to taunt me.

"You do not come from Kolk, but from the Sly One!" they cried. "He has sent you from the island to spy upon us. Go away, or we will set upon you and kill you."

I explained that all my belongings had been stolen from me, and that the robber must have taken the token too; but they didn't believe me. As proof that I was one of Hooja's people, they pointed to my weapons, which they said were ornamented like those of the island clan. Further, they said that no good man went in company with a jalok--and that by this line of reasoning I certainly was a bad man.

I saw that they were not naturally a war-like tribe, for they preferred that I leave in peace rather than force them to attack me, whereas the Sarians would have killed a suspicious stranger first and inquired into his purposes later.

I think Raja sensed their antagonism, for he kept tugging at his leash and growling ominously. They were a bit in awe of him, and kept at a safe distance. It was evident that they could not comprehend why it was that this savage brute did not turn upon me and rend me.

I wasted a long time there trying to persuade Goork to accept me at my own valuation, but he was too canny. The best he would do was to give us food, which he did, and direct me as to the safest portion of the island upon which to attempt a landing, though even as he told me I am sure that he thought my request for information but a blind to deceive him as to my true knowledge of the insular stronghold.

At last I turned away from them--rather disheartened, for I had hoped to be able to enlist a considerable force of them in an attempt to rush Hooja's horde and rescue Dian. Back along the beach toward the hidden canoe we made our way.

By the time we came to the cairn I was dog-tired. Throwing myself upon the sand I soon slept, and with Raja stretched out beside me I felt a far greater security than I had enjoyed for a long time.

I awoke much refreshed to find Raja's eyes glued upon me. The moment I opened mine he rose, stretched himself, and without a backward glance plunged into the jungle. For several minutes I could hear him crashing through the brush. Then all was silent.

I wondered if he had left me to return to his fierce pack. A feeling of loneliness overwhelmed me. With a sigh I turned to the work of dragging the canoe down to the sea. As I entered the jungle where the dugout lay a hare darted from beneath the boat's side, and a well-aimed cast of my javelin brought it down. I was hungry--I had not realized it before--so I sat upon the edge of the canoe and devoured my repast. The last remnants gone, I again busied myself with preparations for my expedition to the island.

I did not know for certain that Dian was there; but I surmised as much. Nor could I guess what obstacles might confront me in an effort to rescue her. For a time I loitered about after I had the canoe at the water's edge, hoping against hope that Raja would return; but be did not, so I shoved the awkward craft through the surf and leaped into it.

I was still a little downcast by the desertion of my newfound friend, though I tried to assure myself that it was nothing but what I might have expected.

The savage brute had served me well in the short time that we had been together, and had repaid his debt of gratitude to me, since he had saved my life, or at least my liberty, no less certainly than I had saved his life when he was injured and drowning.

The trip across the water to the island was uneventful. I was mighty glad to be in the sunshine again when I passed out of the shadow of the dead world about halfway between the mainland and the island. The hot rays of the noonday sun did a great deal toward raising my spirits, and dispelling the mental gloom in which I had been shrouded almost continually since entering the Land of Awful Shadow. There is nothing more dispiriting to me than absence of sunshine.

I had paddled to the southwestern point, which Goork said he believed to be the least frequented portion of the island, as he had never seen boats put off from there. I found a shallow reef running far out into the sea and rather precipitous cliffs running almost to the surf. It was a nasty place to land, and I realized now why it was not used by the natives; but at last I managed, after a good wetting, to beach my canoe and scale the cliffs.

The country beyond them appeared more open and park-like than I had anticipated, since from the mainland the entire coast that is visible seems densely clothed with tropical jungle. This jungle, as I could see from the vantage-point of the cliff-top, formed but a relatively narrow strip between the sea and the more open forest and meadow of the interior. Farther back there was a range of low but apparently very rocky hills, and here and there all about were visible flat-topped masses of rock--small mountains, in fact--which reminded me of pictures I had seen of landscapes in New Mexico. Altogether, the country was very much broken and very beautiful. From where I stood I counted no less than a dozen streams winding down from among the table-buttes and emptying into a pretty river which flowed away in a northeasterly direction toward the opposite end of the island.

As I let my eyes roam over the scene I suddenly became aware of figures moving upon the flat top of a far-distant butte. Whether they were beast or human, though, I could not make out; but at least they were alive, so I determined to prosecute my search for Hooja's stronghold in the general direction of this butte.

To descend to the valley required no great effort. As I swung along through the lush grass and the fragrant flowers, my cudgel swinging in my hand and my javelin looped across my shoulders with its aurochs-hide strap, I felt equal to any emergency, ready for any danger.

I had covered quite a little distance, and I was passing through a strip of wood which lay at the foot of one of the flat-topped hills, when I became conscious of the sensation of being watched. My life within Pellucidar has rather quickened my senses of sight, hearing, and smell, and, too, certain primitive intuitive or instinctive qualities that seem blunted in civilized man. But, though I was positive that eyes were upon me, I could see no sign of any living thing within the wood other than the many, gay-plumaged birds and little monkeys which filled the trees with life, color, and action.

To you it may seem that my conviction was the result of an overwrought imagination, or to the actual reality of the prying eyes of the little monkeys or the curious ones of the birds; but there is a difference which I cannot explain between the sensation of casual observation and studied espionage. A sheep might gaze at you without transmitting a warning through your subjective mind, because you are in no danger from a sheep. But let a tiger gaze fixedly at you from ambush, and unless your primitive instincts are completely calloused you will presently commence to glance furtively about and be filled with vague, unreasoning terror.

Thus was it with me then. I grasped my cudgel more firmly and unslung my javelin, carrying it in my left hand. I peered to left and right, but I saw nothing. Then, all quite suddenly, there fell about my neck and shoulders, around my arms and body, a number of pliant fiber ropes.

In a jiffy I was trussed up as neatly as you might wish. One of the nooses dropped to my ankles and was jerked up with a suddenness that brought me to my face upon the ground. Then something heavy and hairy sprang upon my back. I fought to draw my knife, but hairy hands grasped my wrists and, dragging them behind my back, bound them securely.

Next my feet were bound. Then I was turned over upon my back to look up into the faces of my captors.

And what faces! Imagine if you can a cross between a sheep and a gorilla, and you will have some conception of the physiognomy of the creature that bent close above me, and of those of the half-dozen others that clustered about. There was the facial length and great eyes of the sheep, and the bullneck and hideous fangs of the gorilla. The bodies and limbs were both man and gorilla-like.

As they bent over me they conversed in a monosyllabic tongue that was perfectly intelligible to me. It was something of a simplified language that had no need for aught but nouns and verbs, but such words as it included were the same as those of the human beings of Pellucidar. It was amplified by many gestures which filled in the speech-gaps.

I asked them what they intended doing with me; but, like our own North American Indians when questioned by a white man, they pretended not to understand me. One of them swung me to his shoulder as lightly as if I had been a shoat. He was a huge creature, as were his fellows, standing fully seven feet upon his short legs and weighing considerably more than a quarter of a ton.

Two went ahead of my bearer and three behind. In this order we cut to the right through the forest to the foot of the hill where precipitous cliffs appeared to bar our farther progress in this direction. But my escort never paused. Like ants upon a wall, they scaled that seemingly unscalable barrier, clinging, Heaven knows how, to its ragged perpendicular face. During most of the short journey to the summit I must admit that my hair stood on end. Presently, however, we topped the thing and stood upon the level mesa which crowned it.

Immediately from all about, out of burrows and rough, rocky lairs, poured a perfect torrent of beasts similar to my captors. They clustered about, jabbering at my guards and attempting to get their hands upon me, whether from curiosity or a desire to do me bodily harm I did not know, since my escort with bared fangs and heavy blows kept them off.

Across the mesa we went, to stop at last before a large pile of rocks in which an opening appeared. Here my guards set me upon my feet and called out a word which sounded like "Gr-gr-gr!" and which I later learned was the name of their king.

Presently there emerged from the cavernous depths of the lair a monstrous creature, scarred from a hundred battles, almost hairless and with an empty socket where one eye had been. The other eye, sheeplike in its mildness, gave the most startling appearance to the beast, which but for that single timid orb was the most fearsome thing that one could imagine.

I had encountered the black, hairless, long-tailed ape--things of the mainland--the creatures which Perry thought might constitute the link between the higher orders of apes and man--but these brute-men of Gr-gr-gr seemed to set that theory back to zero, for there was less similarity between the black ape-men and these creatures than there was between the latter and man, while both had many human attributes, some of which were better developed in one species and some in the other.

The black apes were hairless and built thatched huts in their arboreal retreats; they kept domesticated dogs and ruminants, in which respect they were farther advanced than the human beings of Pellucidar; but they appeared to have only a meager language, and sported long, apelike tails.

On the other hand, Gr-gr-gr's people were, for the most part, quite hairy, but they were tailless and had a language similar to that of the human race of Pellucidar; nor were they arboreal. Their skins, where skin showed, were white.

From the foregoing facts and others that I have noted during my long life within Pellucidar, which is now passing through an age analogous to some pre-glacial age of the outer crust, I am constrained to the belief that evolution is not so much a gradual transition from one form to another as it is an accident of breeding, either by crossing or the hazards of birth. In other words, it is my belief that the first man was a freak of nature--nor would one have to draw over-strongly upon his credulity to be convinced that Gr-gr-gr and his tribe were also freaks.

The great man-brute seated himself upon a flat rock--his throne, I imagine--just before the entrance to his lair. With elbows on knees and chin in palms he regarded me intently through his lone sheep-eye while one of my captors told of my taking.

When all had been related Gr-gr-gr questioned me. I shall not attempt to quote these people in their own abbreviated tongue--you would have even greater difficulty in interpreting them than did I. Instead, I shall put the words into their mouths which will carry to you the ideas which they intended to convey.

"You are an enemy," was Gr-gr-gr's initial declaration. "You belong to the tribe of Hooja."

Ah! So they knew Hooja and he was their enemy! Good!

"I am an enemy of Hooja," I replied. "He has stolen my mate and I have come here to take her away from him and punish Hooja."

"How could you do that alone?"

"I do not know," I answered, "but I should have tried had you not captured me. What do you intend to do with me?"

"You shall work for us."

"You will not kill me?" I asked.

"We do not kill except in self-defense," he replied; "self-defense and punishment. Those who would kill us and those who do wrong we kill. If we knew you were one of Hooja's people we might kill you, for all Hooja's people are bad people; but you say you are an enemy of Hooja. You may not speak the truth, but until we learn that you have lied we shall not kill you. You shall work."

"If you hate Hooja," I suggested, "why not let me, who hate him, too, go and punish him?"

For some time Gr-gr-gr sat in thought. Then he raised his head and addressed my guard.

"Take him to his work," he ordered.

His tone was final. As if to emphasize it he turned and entered his burrow. My guard conducted me farther into the mesa, where we came presently to a tiny depression or valley, at one end of which gushed a warm spring.

The view that opened before me was the most surprising that I have ever seen. In the hollow, which must have covered several hundred acres, were numerous fields of growing things, and working all about with crude implements or with no implements at all other than their bare hands were many of the brute-men engaged in the first agriculture that I had seen within Pellucidar.

They put me to work cultivating in a patch of melons.

I never was a farmer nor particularly keen for this sort of work, and I am free to confess that time never had dragged so heavily as it did during the hour or the year I spent there at that work. How long it really was I do not know, of course; but it was all too long.

The creatures that worked about me were quite simple and friendly. One of them proved to be a son of Gr-gr-gr. He had broken some minor tribal law, and was working out his sentence in the fields. He told me that his tribe had lived upon this hilltop always, and that there were other tribes like them dwelling upon other hilltops. They had no wars and had always lived in peace and harmony, menaced only by the larger carnivora of the island, until my kind had come under a creature called Hooja, and attacked and killed them when they chanced to descend from their natural fortresses to visit their fellows upon other lofty mesas.

Now they were afraid; but some day they would go in a body and fall upon Hooja and his people and slay them all. I explained to him that I was Hooja's enemy, and asked, when they were ready to go, that I be allowed to go with them, or, better still, that they let me go ahead and learn all that I could about the village where Hooja dwelt so that they might attack it with the best chance of success.

Gr-gr-gr's son seemed much impressed by my suggestion. He said that when he was through in the fields he would speak to his father about the matter.

Some time after this Gr-gr-gr came through the fields where we were, and his son spoke to him upon the subject, but the old gentleman was evidently in anything but a good humor, for he cuffed the youngster and, turning upon me, informed me that he was convinced that I had lied to him, and that I was one of Hooja's people.

"Wherefore," he concluded, "we shall slay you as soon as the melons are cultivated. Hasten, therefore."

And hasten I did. I hastened to cultivate the weeds which grew among the melon-vines. Where there had been one sickly weed before, I nourished two healthy ones. When I found a particularly promising variety of weed growing elsewhere than among my melons, I forthwith dug it up and transplanted it among my charges.

My masters did not seem to realize my perfidy. They saw me always laboring diligently in the melon-patch, and as time enters not into the reckoning of Pellucidarians--even of human beings and much less of brutes and half brutes--I might have lived on indefinitely through this subterfuge had not that occurred which took me out of the melon-patch for good and all.

     
Pellucidar, by Edgar Rice Burroughs, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER IX

  

HOOJA'S CUTTHROATS APPEAR

I had built a little shelter of rocks and brush where I might crawl in and sleep out of the perpetual light and heat of the noonday sun. When I was tired or hungry I retired to my humble cot.

My masters never interposed the slightest objection. As a matter of fact, they were very good to me, nor did I see aught while I was among them to indicate that they are ever else than a simple, kindly folk when left to themselves. Their awe-inspiring size, terrific strength, mighty fighting-fangs, and hideous appearance are but the attributes necessary to the successful waging of their constant battle for survival, and well do they employ them when the need arises. The only flesh they eat is that of herbivorous animals and birds. When they hunt the mighty thag, the prehistoric bos of the outer crust, a single male, with his fiber rope, will catch and kill the greatest of the bulls.

Well, as I was about to say, I had this little shelter at the edge of my melon-patch. Here I was resting from my labors on a certain occasion when I heard a great hub-bub in the village, which lay about a quarter of a mile away.

Presently a male came racing toward the field, shouting excitedly. As he approached I came from my shelter to learn what all the commotion might be about, for the monotony of my existence in the melon-patch must have fostered that trait of my curiosity from which it had always been my secret boast I am peculiarly free.

The other workers also ran forward to meet the messenger, who quickly unburdened himself of his information, and as quickly turned and scampered back toward the village. When running these beast-men often go upon all fours. Thus they leap over obstacles that would slow up a human being, and upon the level attain a speed that would make a thoroughbred look to his laurels. The result in this instance was that before I had more than assimilated the gist of the word which had been brought to the fields, I was alone, watching my co-workers speeding villageward.

I was alone! It was the first time since my capture that no beast-man had been within sight of me. I was alone! And all my captors were in the village at the opposite edge of the mesa repelling an attack of Hooja's horde!

It seemed from the messenger's tale that two of Gr-gr-gr's great males had been set upon by a half-dozen of Hooja's cutthroats while the former were peaceably returning from the thag hunt. The two had returned to the village unscratched, while but a single one of Hooja's half-dozen had escaped to report the outcome of the battle to their leader. Now Hooja was coming to punish Gr-gr-gr's people. With his large force, armed with the bows and arrows that Hooja had learned from me to make, with long lances and sharp knives, I feared that even the mighty strength of the beastmen could avail them but little.

At last had come the opportunity for which I waited! I was free to make for the far end of the mesa, find my way to the valley below, and while the two forces were engaged in their struggle, continue my search for Hooja's village, which I had learned from the beast-men lay farther on down the river that I had been following when taken prisoner.

As I turned to make for the mesa's rim the sounds of battle came plainly to my ears--the hoarse shouts of men mingled with the half-beastly roars and growls of the brute-folk.

Did I take advantage of my opportunity?

I did not. Instead, lured by the din of strife and by the desire to deliver a stroke, however feeble, against hated Hooja, I wheeled and ran directly toward the village.

When I reached the edge of the plateau such a scene met my astonished gaze as never before had startled it, for the unique battle-methods of the half-brutes were rather the most remarkable I had ever witnessed. Along the very edge of the cliff-top stood a thin line of mighty males--the best rope-throwers of the tribe. A few feet behind these the rest of the males, with the exception of about twenty, formed a second line. Still farther in the rear all the women and young children were clustered into a single group under the protection of the remaining twenty fighting males and all the old males.

But it was the work of the first two lines that interested me. The forces of Hooja--a great horde of savage Sagoths and primeval cave men--were working their way up the steep cliff-face, their agility but slightly less than that of my captors who had clambered so nimbly aloft--even he who was burdened by my weight.

As the attackers came on they paused occasionally wherever a projection gave them sufficient foothold and launched arrows and spears at the defenders above them. During the entire battle both sides hurled taunts and insults at one another--the human beings naturally excelling the brutes in the coarseness and vileness of their vilification and invective.

The "firing-line" of the brute-men wielded no weapon other than their long fiber nooses. When a foeman came within range of them a noose would settle unerringly about him and be would be dragged, fighting and yelling, to the cliff-top, unless, as occasionally occurred, he was quick enough to draw his knife and cut the rope above him, in which event he usually plunged downward to a no less certain death than that which awaited him above.

Those who were hauled up within reach of the powerful clutches of the defenders had the nooses snatched from them and were catapulted back through the first line to the second, where they were seized and killed by the simple expedient of a single powerful closing of mighty fangs upon the backs of their necks.

But the arrows of the invaders were taking a much heavier toll than the nooses of the defenders and I foresaw that it was but a matter of time before Hooja's forces must conquer unless the brute-men changed their tactics, or the cave men tired of the battle.

Gr-gr-gr was standing in the center of the first line. All about him were boulders and large fragments of broken rock. I approached him and without a word toppled a large mass of rock over the edge of the cliff. It fell directly upon the head of an archer, crushing him to instant death and carrying his mangled corpse with it to the bottom of the declivity, and on its way brushing three more of the attackers into the hereafter.

Gr-gr-gr turned toward me in surprise. For an instant he appeared to doubt the sincerity of my motives. I felt that perhaps my time had come when he reached for me with one of his giant paws; but I dodged him, and running a few paces to the right hurled down another missile. It, too, did its allotted work of destruction. Then I picked up smaller fragments and with all the control and accuracy for which I had earned justly deserved fame in my collegiate days I rained down a hail of death upon those beneath me.

Gr-gr-gr was coming toward me again. I pointed to the litter of rubble upon the cliff-top.

"Hurl these down upon the enemy!" I cried to him. "Tell your warriors to throw rocks down upon them!"

At my words the others of the first line, who had been interested spectators of my tactics, seized upon great boulders or bits of rock, whichever came first to their hands, and, without, waiting for a command from Gr-gr-gr, deluged the terrified cave men with a perfect avalanche of stone. In less than no time the cliff-face was stripped of enemies and the village of Gr-gr-gr was saved.

Gr-gr-gr was standing beside me when the last of the cave men disappeared in rapid flight down the valley. He was looking at me intently.

"Those were your people," he said. "Why did you kill them?"

"They were not my people," I returned. "I have told you that before, but you would not believe me. Will you believe me now when I tell you that I hate Hooja and his tribe as much as you do? Will you believe me when I tell you that I wish to be the friend of Gr-gr-gr?"

For some time he stood there beside me, scratching his head. Evidently it was no less difficult for him to readjust his preconceived conclusions than it is for most human beings; but finally the idea percolated--which it might never have done had he been a man, or I might qualify that statement by saying had he been some men. Finally he spoke.

"Gilak," he said, "you have made Gr-gr-gr ashamed. He would have killed you. How can he reward you?"

"Set me free," I replied quickly.

"You are free," he said. "You may go down when you wish, or you may stay with us. If you go you may always return. We are your friends."

Naturally, I elected to go. I explained all over again to Gr-gr-gr the nature of my mission. He listened attentively; after I had done he offered to send some of his people with me to guide me to Hooja's village. I was not slow in accepting his offer.

First, however, we must eat. The hunters upon whom Hooja's men had fallen had brought back the meat of a great thag. There would be a feast to commemorate the victory--a feast and dancing.

I had never witnessed a tribal function of the brute-folk, though I had often heard strange sounds coming from the village, where I had not been allowed since my capture. Now I took part in one of their orgies.

It will live forever in my memory. The combination of bestiality and humanity was oftentimes pathetic, and again grotesque or horrible. Beneath the glaring noonday sun, in the sweltering heat of the mesa-top, the huge, hairy creatures leaped in a great circle. They coiled and threw their fiber-ropes; they hurled taunts and insults at an imaginary foe; they fell upon the carcass of the thag and literally tore it to pieces; and they ceased only when, gorged, they could no longer move.

I had to wait until the processes of digestion had released my escort from its torpor. Some had eaten until their abdomens were so distended that I thought they must burst, for beside the thag there had been fully a hundred antelopes of various sizes and varied degrees of decomposition, which they had unearthed from burial beneath the floors of their lairs to grace the banquet-board.

But at last we were started--six great males and myself. Gr-gr-gr had returned my weapons to me, and at last I was once more upon my oft-interrupted way toward my goal. Whether I should find Dian at the end of my journey or no I could not even surmise; but I was none the less impatient to be off, for if only the worst lay in store for me I wished to know even the worst at once.

I could scarce believe that my proud mate would still be alive in the power of Hooja; but time upon Pellucidar is so strange a thing that I realized that to her or to him only a few minutes might have elapsed since his subtle trickery had enabled him to steal her away from Phutra. Or she might have found the means either to repel his advances or escape him.

As we descended the cliff we disturbed a great pack of large hyena-like beasts--hyaena spelaeus, Perry calls them--who were busy among the corpses of the cave men fallen in battle. The ugly creatures were far from the cowardly things that our own hyenas are reputed to be; they stood their ground with bared fangs as we approached them. But, as I was later to learn, so formidable are the brute-folk that there are few even of the larger carnivora that will not make way for them when they go abroad. So the hyenas moved a little from our line of march, closing in again upon their feasts when we had passed.

We made our way steadily down the rim of the beautiful river which flows the length of the island, coming at last to a wood rather denser than any that I had before encountered in this country. Well within this forest my escort halted.

"There!" they said, and pointed ahead. "We are to go no farther."

Thus having guided me to my destination they left me. Ahead of me, through the trees, I could see what appeared to be the foot of a steep hill. Toward this I made my way. The forest ran to the very base of a cliff, in the face of which were the mouths of many caves. They appeared untenanted; but I decided to watch for a while before venturing farther. A large tree, densely foliaged, offered a splendid vantage-point from which to spy upon the cliff, so I clambered among its branches where, securely hidden, I could watch what transpired about the caves.

It seemed that I had scarcely settled myself in a comfortable position before a party of cave men emerged from one of the smaller apertures in the cliff-face, about fifty feet from the base. They descended into the forest and disappeared. Soon after came several others from the same cave, and after them, at a short interval, a score of women and children, who came into the wood to gather fruit. There were several warriors with them--a guard, I presume.

After this came other parties, and two or three groups who passed out of the forest and up the cliff-face to enter the same cave. I could not understand it. All who came out had emerged from the same cave. All who returned reentered it. No other cave gave evidence of habitation, and no cave but one of extraordinary size could have accommodated all the people whom I had seen pass in and out of its mouth.

For a long time I sat and watched the coming and going of great numbers of the cave-folk. Not once did one leave the cliff by any other opening save that from which I had seen the first party come, nor did any re-enter the cliff through another aperture.

What a cave it must be, I thought, that houses an entire tribe! But dissatisfied of the truth of my surmise, I climbed higher among the branches of the tree that I might get a better view of other portions of the cliff. High above the ground I reached a point whence I could see the summit of the hill. Evidently it was a flat-topped butte similar to that on which dwelt the tribe of Gr-gr-gr.

As I sat gazing at it a figure appeared at the very edge. It was that of a young girl in whose hair was a gorgeous bloom plucked from some flowering tree of the forest. I had seen her pass beneath me but a short while before and enter the small cave that had swallowed all of the returning tribesmen.

The mystery was solved. The cave was but the mouth of a passage that led upward through the cliff to the summit of the hill. It served merely as an avenue from their lofty citadel to the valley below.

No sooner had the truth flashed upon me than the realization came that I must seek some other means of reaching the village, for to pass unobserved through this well-traveled thoroughfare would be impossible. At the moment there was no one in sight below me, so I slid quickly from my arboreal watchtower to the ground and moved rapidly away to the right with the intention of circling the hill if necessary until I had found an unwatched spot where I might have some slight chance of scaling the heights and reaching the top unseen.

I kept close to the edge of the forest, in the very midst of which the hill seemed to rise. Though I carefully scanned the cliff as I traversed its base, I saw no sign of any other entrance than that to which my guides had led me.

After some little time the roar of the sea broke upon my ears. Shortly after I came upon the broad ocean which breaks at this point at the very foot of the great hill where Hooja had found safe refuge for himself and his villains.

I was just about to clamber along the jagged rocks which lie at the base of the cliff next to the sea, in search of some foothold to the top, when I chanced to see a canoe rounding the end of the island. I threw myself down behind a large boulder where I could watch the dugout and its occupants without myself being seen.

They paddled toward me for a while and then, about a hundred yards from me, they turned straight in toward the foot of the frowning cliffs. From where I was it seemed that they were bent upon self-destruction, since the roar of the breakers beating upon the perpendicular rock-face appeared to offer only death to any one who might venture within their relentless clutch.

A mass of rock would soon hide them from my view; but so keen was the excitement of the instant that I could not refrain from crawling forward to a point whence I could watch the dashing of the small craft to pieces on the jagged rocks that loomed before her, although I risked discovery from above to accomplish my design.

When I had reached a point where I could again see the dugout, I was just in time to see it glide unharmed between two needle-pointed sentinels of granite and float quietly upon the unruffled bosom of a tiny cove.

Again I crouched behind a boulder to observe what would next transpire; nor did I have long to wait. The dugout, which contained but two men, was drawn close to the rocky wall. A fiber rope, one end of which was tied to the boat, was made fast about a projection of the cliff face.

Then the two men commenced the ascent of the almost perpendicular wall toward the summit several hundred feet above. I looked on in amazement, for, splendid climbers though the cave men of Pellucidar are, I never before had seen so remarkable a feat performed. Upwardly they moved without a pause, to disappear at last over the summit.

When I felt reasonably sure that they had gone for a while at least I crawled from my hiding-place and at the risk of a broken neck leaped and scrambled to the spot where their canoe was moored.

If they had scaled that cliff I could, and if I couldn't I should die in the attempt.

But when I turned to the accomplishment of the task I found it easier than I had imagined it would be, since I immediately discovered that shallow hand and foot-holds had been scooped in the cliff's rocky face, forming a crude ladder from the base to the summit.

At last I reached the top, and very glad I was, too. Cautiously I raised my head until my eyes were above the cliff-crest. Before me spread a rough mesa, liberally sprinkled with large boulders. There was no village in sight nor any living creature.

I drew myself to level ground and stood erect. A few trees grew among the boulders. Very carefully I advanced from tree to tree and boulder to boulder toward the inland end of the mesa. I stopped often to listen and look cautiously about me in every direction.

How I wished that I had my revolvers and rifle! I would not have to worm my way like a scared cat toward Hooja's village, nor did I relish doing so now; but Dian's life might hinge upon the success of my venture, and so I could not afford to take chances. To have met suddenly with discovery and had a score or more of armed warriors upon me might have been very grand and heroic; but it would have immediately put an end to all my earthly activities, nor have accomplished aught in the service of Dian.

Well, I must have traveled nearly a mile across that mesa without seeing a sign of anyone, when all of a sudden, as I crept around the edge of a boulder, I ran plump into a man, down on all fours like myself, crawling toward me.

     
Pellucidar, by Edgar Rice Burroughs, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER X

  

THE RAID ON THE CAVE-PRISON

His head was turned over his shoulder as I first saw him--he was looking back toward the village. As I leaped for him his eyes fell upon me. Never in my life have I seen a more surprised mortal than this poor cave man. Before he could utter a single scream of warning or alarm I had my fingers on his throat and had dragged him behind the boulder, where I proceeded to sit upon him, while I figured out what I had best do with him.

He struggled a little at first, but finally lay still, and so I released the pressure of my fingers at his windpipe, for which I imagine he was quite thankful--I know that I should have been.

I hated to kill him in cold blood; but what else I was to do with him I could not see, for to turn him loose would have been merely to have the entire village aroused and down upon me in a moment. The fellow lay looking up at me with the surprise still deeply written on his countenance. At last, all of a sudden, a look of recognition entered his eyes.

"I have seen you before," he said. "I saw you in the arena at the Mahars' city of Phutra when the thipdars dragged the tarag from you and your mate. I never understood that. Afterward they put me in the arena with two warriors from Gombul."

He smiled in recollection.

"It would have been the same had there been ten warriors from Gombul. I slew them, winning my freedom. Look!"

He half turned his left shoulder toward me, exhibiting the newly healed scar of the Mahars' branded mark.

"Then," he continued, "as I was returning to my people I met some of them fleeing. They told me that one called Hooja the Sly One had come and seized our village, putting our people into slavery. So I hurried hither to learn the truth, and, sure enough, here I found Hooja and his wicked men living in my village, and my father's people but slaves among them.

"I was discovered and captured, but Hooja did not kill me. I am the chief's son, and through me he hoped to win my father's warriors back to the village to help him in a great war he says that he will soon commence.

"Among his prisoners is Dian the Beautiful One, whose brother, Dacor the Strong One, chief of Amoz, once saved my life when he came to Thuria to steal a mate. I helped him capture her, and we are good friends. So when I learned that Dian the Beautiful One was Hooja's prisoner, I told him that I would not aid him if he harmed her.

"Recently one of Hooja's warriors overheard me talking with another prisoner. We were planning to combine all the prisoners, seize weapons, and when most of Hooja's warriors were away, slay the rest and retake our hilltop. Had we done so we could have held it, for there are only two entrances--the narrow tunnel at one end and the steep path up the cliffs at the other.

"But when Hooja heard what we had planned he was very angry, and ordered that I die. They bound me hand and foot and placed me in a cave until all the warriors should return to witness my death; but while they were away I heard someone calling me in a muffled voice which seemed to come from the wall of the cave. When I replied the voice, which was a woman's, told me that she had overheard all that had passed between me and those who had brought me thither, and that she was Dacor's sister and would find a way to help me.

"Presently a little hole appeared in the wall at the point from which the voice had come. After a time I saw a woman's hand digging with a bit of stone. Dacor's sister made a hole in the wall between the cave where I lay bound and that in which she had been confined, and soon she was by my side and had cut my bonds.

"We talked then, and I offered to make the attempt to take her away and back to the land of Sari, where she told me she would be able to learn the whereabouts of her mate. Just now I was going to the other end of the island to see if a boat lay there, and if the way was clear for our escape. Most of the boats are always away now, for a great many of Hooja's men and nearly all the slaves are upon the Island of Trees, where Hooja is having many boats built to carry his warriors across the water to the mouth of a great river which he discovered while he was returning from Phutra--a vast river that empties into the sea there."

The speaker pointed toward the northeast. "It is wide and smooth and slow-running almost to the land of Sari," he added.

"And where is Dian the Beautiful One now?" I asked.

I had released my prisoner as soon as I found that he was Hooja's enemy, and now the pair of us were squatting beside the boulder while he told his story.

"She returned to the cave where she had been imprisoned," he replied, "and is awaiting me there."

"There is no danger that Hooja will come while you are away?"

"Hooja is upon the Island of Trees," he replied.

"Can you direct me to the cave so that I can find it alone?" I asked.

He said he could, and in the strange yet explicit fashion of the Pellucidarians he explained minutely how I might reach the cave where he had been imprisoned, and through the hole in its wall reach Dian.

I thought it best for but one of us to return, since two could accomplish but little more than one and would double the risk of discovery. In the meantime he could make his way to the sea and guard the boat, which I told him lay there at the foot of the cliff.

I told him to await us at the cliff-top, and if Dian came alone to do his best to get away with her and take her to Sari, as I thought it quite possible that, in case of detection and pursuit, it might be necessary for me to hold off Hooja's people while Dian made her way alone to where my new friend was to await her. I impressed upon him the fact that he might have to resort to trickery or even to force to get Dian to leave me; but I made him promise that he would sacrifice everything, even his life, in an attempt to rescue Dacor's sister.

Then we parted--he to take up his position where he could watch the boat and await Dian, I to crawl cautiously on toward the caves. I had no difficulty in following the directions given me by Juag, the name by which Dacor's friend said he was called. There was the leaning tree, my first point he told me to look for after rounding the boulder where we had met. After that I crawled to the balanced rock, a huge boulder resting upon a tiny base no larger than the palm of your hand.

From here I had my first view of the village of caves. A low bluff ran diagonally across one end of the mesa, and in the face of this bluff were the mouths of many caves. Zig-zag trails led up to them, and narrow ledges scooped from the face of the soft rock connected those upon the same level.

The cave in which Juag had been confined was at the extreme end of the cliff nearest me. By taking advantage of the bluff itself, I could approach within a few feet of the aperture without being visible from any other cave. There were few people about at the time; most of these were congregated at the foot of the far end of the bluff, where they were so engrossed in excited conversation that I felt but little fear of detection. However I exercised the greatest care in approaching the cliff. After watching for a while until I caught an instant when every head was turned away from me, I darted, rabbitlike, into the cave.

Like many of the man-made caves of Pellucidar, this one consisted of three chambers, one behind another, and all unlit except for what sunlight filtered in through the external opening. The result was gradually increasing darkness as one passed into each succeeding chamber.

In the last of the three I could just distinguish objects, and that was all. As I was groping around the walls for the hole that should lead into the cave where Dian was imprisoned, I heard a man's voice quite close to me.

The speaker had evidently but just entered, for he spoke in a loud tone, demanding the whereabouts of one whom he had come in search of.

"Where are you, woman?" he cried. "Hooja has sent for you."

And then a woman's voice answered him:

"And what does Hooja want of me?"

The voice was Dian's. I groped in the direction of the sounds, feeling for the hole.

"He wishes you brought to the Island of Trees," replied the man; "for he is ready to take you as his mate."

"I will not go," said Dian. "I will die first."

"I am sent to bring you, and bring you I shall."

I could hear him crossing the cave toward her.

Frantically I clawed the wall of the cave in which I was in an effort to find the elusive aperture that would lead me to Dian's side.

I heard the sound of a scuffle in the next cave. Then my fingers sank into loose rock and earth in the side of the cave. In an instant I realized why I had been unable to find the opening while I had been lightly feeling the surface of the walls--Dian had blocked up the hole she had made lest it arouse suspicion and lead to an early discovery of Juag's escape.

Plunging my weight against the crumbling mass, I sent it crashing into the adjoining cavern. With it came I, David, Emperor of Pellucidar. I doubt if any other potentate in a world's history ever made a more undignified entrance. I landed head first on all fours, but I came quickly and was on my feet before the man in the dark guessed what had happened.

He saw me, though, when I arose and, sensing that no friend came thus precipitately, turned to meet me even as I charged him. I had my stone knife in my hand, and he had his. In the darkness of the cave there was little opportunity for a display of science, though even at that I venture to say that we fought a very pretty duel.

Before I came to Pellucidar I do not recall that I ever had seen a stone knife, and I am sure that I never fought with a knife of any description; but now I do not have to take my hat off to any of them when it comes to wielding that primitive yet wicked weapon.

I could just see Dian in the darkness, but I knew that she could not see my features or recognize me; and I enjoyed in anticipation, even while I was fighting for her life and mine, her dear joy when she should discover that it was I who was her deliverer.

My opponent was large, but he also was active and no mean knife-man. He caught me once fairly in the shoulder--I carry the scar yet, and shall carry it to the grave. And then he did a foolish thing, for as I leaped back to gain a second in which to calm the shock of the wound he rushed after me and tried to clinch. He rather neglected his knife for the moment in his greater desire to get his hands on me. Seeing the opening, I swung my left fist fairly to the point of his jaw.

Down he went. Before ever he could scramble up again I was on him and had buried my knife in his heart. Then I stood up--and there was Dian facing me and peering at me through the dense gloom.

"You are not Juag!" she exclaimed. "Who are you?"

I took a step toward her, my arms outstretched.

"It is I, Dian," I said. "It is David."

At the sound of my voice she gave a little cry in which tears were mingled--a pathetic little cry that told me all without words how far hope had gone from her--and then she ran forward and threw herself in my arms. I covered her perfect lips and her beautiful face with kisses, and stroked her thick black hair, and told her again and again what she already knew--what she had known for years--that I loved her better than all else which two worlds had to offer. We couldn't devote much time, though, to the happiness of lovemaking, for we were in the midst of enemies who might discover us at any moment.

I drew her into the adjoining cave. Thence we made our way to the mouth of the cave that had given me entrance to the cliff. Here I reconnoitered for a moment, and seeing the coast clear, ran swiftly forth with Dian at my side. We dodged around the cliff-end, then paused for an instant, listening. No sound reached our ears to indicate that any had seen us, and we moved cautiously onward along the way by which I had come.

As we went Dian told me that her captors had informed her how close I had come in search of her--even to the Land of Awful Shadow--and how one of Hooja's men who knew me had discovered me asleep and robbed me of all my possessions. And then how Hooja had sent four others to find me and take me prisoner. But these men, she said, had not yet returned, or at least she had not heard of their return.

"Nor will you ever," I responded, "for they have gone to that place whence none ever returns." I then related my adventure with these four.

We had come almost to the cliff-edge where Juag should be awaiting us when we saw two men walking rapidly toward the same spot from another direction. They did not see us, nor did they see Juag, whom I now discovered hiding behind a low bush close to the verge of the precipice which drops into the sea at this point. As quickly as possible, without exposing ourselves too much to the enemy, we hastened forward that we might reach Juag as quickly as they.

But they noticed him first and immediately charged him, for one of them had been his guard, and they had both been sent to search for him, his escape having been discovered between the time he left the cave and the time when I reached it. Evidently they had wasted precious moments looking for him in other portions of the mesa.

When I saw that the two of them were rushing him, I called out to attract their attention to the fact that they had more than a single man to cope with. They paused at the sound of my voice and looked about.

When they discovered Dian and me they exchanged a few words, and one of them continued toward Juag while the other turned upon us. As he came nearer I saw that he carried in his hand one of my six-shooters, but he was holding it by the barrel, evidently mistaking it for some sort of warclub or tomahawk.

I could scarce refrain a grin when I thought of the wasted possibilities of that deadly revolver in the hands of an untutored warrior of the stone age. Had he but reversed it and pulled the trigger he might still be alive; maybe he is for all I know, since I did not kill him then. When he was about twenty feet from me I flung my javelin with a quick movement that I had learned from Ghak. He ducked to avoid it, and instead of receiving it in his heart, for which it was intended, he got it on the side of the head.

Down he went all in a heap. Then I glanced toward Juag. He was having a most exciting time. The fellow pitted against Juag was a veritable giant; he was hacking and hewing away at the poor slave with a villainous-looking knife that might have been designed for butchering mastodons. Step by step, he was forcing Juag back toward the edge of the cliff with a fiendish cunning that permitted his adversary no chance to side-step the terrible consequences of retreat in this direction. I saw quickly that in another moment Juag must deliberately hurl himself to death over the precipice or be pushed over by his foeman.

And as I saw Juag's predicament I saw, too, in the same instant, a way to relieve him. Leaping quickly to the side of the fellow I had just felled, I snatched up my fallen revolver. It was a desperate chance to take, and I realized it in the instant that I threw the gun up from my hip and pulled the trigger. There was no time to aim. Juag was upon the very brink of the chasm. His relentless foe was pushing him hard, beating at him furiously with the heavy knife.

And then the revolver spoke--loud and sharp. The giant threw his hands above his head, whirled about like a huge top, and lunged forward over the precipice.

And Juag?

He cast a single affrighted glance in my direction--never before, of course, had he heard the report of a firearm--and with a howl of dismay he, too, turned and plunged headforemost from sight. Horror-struck, I hastened to the brink of the abyss just in time to see two splashes upon the surface of the little cove below.

For an instant I stood there watching with Dian at my side. Then, to my utter amazement, I saw Juag rise to the surface and swim strongly toward the boat.

The fellow had dived that incredible distance and come up unharmed!

I called to him to await us below, assuring him that he need have no fear of my weapon, since it would harm only my enemies. He shook his head and muttered something which I could not hear at so great a distance; but when I pushed him he promised to wait for us. At the same instant Dian caught my arm and pointed toward the village. My shot had brought a crowd of natives on the run toward us.

The fellow whom I had stunned with my javelin had regained consciousness and scrambled to his feet. He was now racing as fast as he could go back toward his people. It looked mighty dark for Dian and me with that ghastly descent between us and even the beginnings of liberty, and a horde of savage enemies advancing at a rapid run.

There was but one hope. That was to get Dian started for the bottom without delay. I took her in my arms just for an instant--I felt, somehow, that it might be for the last time. For the life of me I couldn't see how both of us could escape.

I asked her if she could make the descent alone--if she were not afraid. She smiled up at me bravely and shrugged her shoulders. She afraid! So beautiful is she that I am always having difficulty in remembering that she is a primitive, half-savage cave girl of the stone age, and often find myself mentally limiting her capacities to those of the effete and overcivilized beauties of the outer crust.

"And you?" she asked as she swung over the edge of the cliff.

"I shall follow you after I take a shot or two at our friends," I replied. "I just want to give them a taste of this new medicine which is going to cure Pellucidar of all its ills. That will stop them long enough for me to join you. Now hurry, and tell Juag to be ready to shove off the moment I reach the boat, or the instant that it becomes apparent that I cannot reach it.

"You, Dian, must return to Sari if anything happens to me, that you may devote your life to carrying out with Perry the hopes and plans for Pellucidar that are so dear to my heart. Promise me, dear."

She hated to promise to desert me, nor would she; only shaking her head and making no move to descend. The tribesmen were nearing us. Juag was shouting up to us from below. It was evident that he realized from my actions that I was attempting to persuade Dian to descend, and that grave danger threatened us from above.

"Dive!" he cried. "Dive!"

I looked at Dian and then down at the abyss below us. The cove appeared no larger than a saucer. How Juag ever had hit it I could not guess.

"Dive!" cried Juag. "It is the only way--there is no time to climb down."

     
Pellucidar, by Edgar Rice Burroughs, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XI

  

ESCAPE

Dian glanced downward and shuddered. Her tribe were hill people--they were not accustomed to swimming other than in quiet rivers and placid lakelets. It was not the steep that appalled her. It was the ocean--vast, mysterious, terrible.

To dive into it from this great height was beyond her. I couldn't wonder, either. To have attempted it myself seemed too preposterous even for thought. Only one consideration could have prompted me to leap headforemost from that giddy height--suicide; or at least so I thought at the moment.

"Quick!" I urged Dian. "You cannot dive; but I can hold them until you reach safety."

"And you?" she asked once more. "Can you dive when they come too close? Otherwise you could not escape if you waited here until I reached the bottom."

I saw that she would not leave me unless she thought that I could make that frightful dive as we had seen Juag make it. I glanced once downward; then with a mental shrug I assured her that I would dive the moment that she reached the boat. Satisfied, she began the descent carefully, yet swiftly. I watched her for a moment, my heart in my mouth lest some slight mis-step or the slipping of a finger-hold should pitch her to a frightful death upon the rocks below.

Then I turned toward the advancing Hoojans--"Hoosiers," Perry dubbed them--even going so far as to christen this island where Hooja held sway Indiana; it is so marked now upon our maps. They were coming on at a great rate. I raised my revolver, took deliberate aim at the foremost warrior, and pulled the trigger. With the bark of the gun the fellow lunged forward. His head doubled beneath him. He rolled over and over two or three times before he came to a stop, to lie very quietly in the thick grass among the brilliant wild flowers.

Those behind him halted. One of them hurled a javelin toward me, but it fell short--they were just beyond javelin-range. There were two armed with bows and arrows; these I kept my eyes on. All of them appeared awe-struck and frightened by the sound and effect of the firearm. They kept looking from the corpse to me and jabbering among themselves.

I took advantage of the lull in hostilities to throw a quick glance over the edge toward Dian. She was halfway down the cliff and progressing finely. Then I turned back toward the enemy. One of the bowmen was fitting an arrow to his bow. I raised my hand.

"Stop!" I cried. "Whoever shoots at me or advances toward me I shall kill as I killed him!"

I pointed at the dead man. The fellow lowered his bow. Again there was animated discussion. I could see that those who were not armed with bows were urging something upon the two who were.

At last the majority appeared to prevail, for simultaneously the two archers raised their weapons. At the same instant I fired at one of them, dropping him in his tracks. The other, however, launched his missile, but the report of my gun had given him such a start that the arrow flew wild above my head. A second after and he, too, was sprawled upon the sward with a round hole between his eyes. It had been a rather good shot.

I glanced over the edge again. Dian was almost at the bottom. I could see Juag standing just beneath her with his hands upstretched to assist her.

A sullen roar from the warriors recalled my attention toward them. They stood shaking their fists at me and yelling insults. From the direction of the village I saw a single warrior coming to join them. He was a huge fellow, and when he strode among them I could tell by his bearing and their deference toward him that he was a chieftain. He listened to all they had to tell of the happenings of the last few minutes; then with a command and a roar he started for me with the whole pack at his heels. All they had needed had arrived--namely, a brave leader.

I had two unfired cartridges in the chambers of my gun. I let the big warrior have one of them, thinking that his death would stop them all. But I guess they were worked up to such a frenzy of rage by this time that nothing would have stopped them. At any rate, they only yelled the louder as he fell and increased their speed toward me. I dropped another with my remaining cartridge.

Then they were upon me--or almost. I thought of my promise to Dian--the awful abyss was behind me--a big devil with a huge bludgeon in front of me. I grasped my six-shooter by the barrel and hurled it squarely in his face with all my strength.

Then, without waiting to learn the effect of my throw, I wheeled, ran the few steps to the edge, and leaped as far out over that frightful chasm as I could. I know something of diving, and all that I know I put into that dive, which I was positive would be my last.

For a couple of hundred feet I fell in horizontal position. The momentum I gained was terrific. I could feel the air almost as a solid body, so swiftly I hurtled through it. Then my position gradually changed to the vertical, and with hands outstretched I slipped through the air, cleaving it like a flying arrow. Just before I struck the water a perfect shower of javelins fell all about. My enemies bad rushed to the brink and hurled their weapons after me. By a miracle I was untouched.

In the final instant I saw that I had cleared the rocks and was going to strike the water fairly. Then I was in and plumbing the depths. I suppose I didn't really go very far down, but it seemed to me that I should never stop. When at last I dared curve my hands upward and divert my progress toward the surface, I thought that I should explode for air before I ever saw the sun again except through a swirl of water. But at last my bead popped above the waves, and I filled my lungs with air.

Before me was the boat, from which Juag and Dian were clambering. I couldn't understand why they were deserting it now, when we were about to set out for the mainland in it; but when I reached its side I understood. Two heavy javelins, missing Dian and Juag by but a hair's breadth, had sunk deep into the bottom of the dugout in a straight line with the grain of the wood, and split her almost in two from stem to stern. She was useless.

Juag was leaning over a nearby rock, his hand outstretched to aid me in clambering to his side; nor did I lose any time in availing myself of his proffered assistance. An occasional javelin was still dropping perilously close to us, so we hastened to draw as close as possible to the cliffside, where we were comparatively safe from the missiles.

Here we held a brief conference, in which it was decided that our only hope now lay in making for the opposite end of the island as quickly as we could, and utilizing the boat that I had hidden there, to continue our journey to the mainland.

Gathering up three of the least damaged javelins that had fallen about us, we set out upon our journey, keeping well toward the south side of the island, which Juag said was less frequented by the Hoojans than the central portion where the river ran. I think that this ruse must have thrown our pursuers off our track, since we saw nothing of them nor heard any sound of pursuit during the greater portion of our march the length of the island.

But the way Juag had chosen was rough and roundabout, so that we consumed one or two more marches in covering the distance than if we had followed the river. This it was which proved our undoing.

Those who sought us must have sent a party up the river immediately after we escaped; for when we came at last onto the river-trail not far from our destination, there can be no doubt but that we were seen by Hoojans who were just ahead of us on the stream. The result was that as we were passing through a clump of bush a score of warriors leaped out upon us, and before we could scarce strike a blow in defense, had disarmed and bound us.

For a time thereafter I seemed to be entirely bereft of hope. I could see no ray of promise in the future--only immediate death for Juag and me, which didn't concern me much in the face of what lay in store for Dian.

Poor child! What an awful life she had led! From the moment that I had first seen her chained in the slave caravan of the Mahars until now, a prisoner of a no less cruel creature, I could recall but a few brief intervals of peace and quiet in her tempestuous existence. Before I had known her, Jubal the Ugly One had pursued her across a savage world to make her his mate. She had eluded him, and finally I had slain him; but terror and privations, and exposure to fierce beasts had haunted her footsteps during all her lonely flight from him. And when I had returned to the outer world the old trials had recommenced with Hooja in Jubal's role. I could almost have wished for death to vouchsafe her that peace which fate seemed to deny her in this life.

I spoke to her on the subject, suggesting that we expire together.

"Do not fear, David," she replied. "I shall end my life before ever Hooja can harm me; but first I shall see that Hooja dies."

She drew from her breast a little leathern thong, to the end of which was fastened a tiny pouch.

"What have you there?" I asked.

"Do you recall that time you stepped upon the thing you call viper in your world?" she asked.

I nodded.

"The accident gave you the idea for the poisoned arrows with which we fitted the warriors of the empire," she continued. "And, too, it gave me an idea. For a long time I have carried a viper's fang in my bosom. It has given me strength to endure many dangers, for it has always assured me immunity from the ultimate insult. I am not ready to die yet. First let Hooja embrace the viper's fang."

So we did not die together, and I am glad now that we did not. It is always a foolish thing to contemplate suicide; for no matter how dark the future may appear today, tomorrow may hold for us that which will alter our whole life in an instant, revealing to us nothing but sunshine and happiness. So, for my part, I shall always wait for tomorrow.

In Pellucidar, where it is always today, the wait may not be so long, and so it proved for us. As we were passing a lofty, flat-topped hill through a park-like wood a perfect network of fiber ropes fell suddenly about our guard, enmeshing them. A moment later a horde of our friends, the hairy gorilla-men, with the mild eyes and long faces of sheep leaped among them.

It was a very interesting fight. I was sorry that my bonds prevented me from taking part in it, but I urged on the brutemen with my voice, and cheered old Gr-gr-gr, their chief, each time that his mighty jaws crunched out the life of a Hoojan. When the battle was over we found that a few of our captors had escaped, but the majority of them lay dead about us. The gorilla-men paid no further attention to them. Gr-gr-gr turned to me.

"Gr-gr-gr and all his people are your friends," he said. "One saw the warriors of the Sly One and followed them. He saw them capture you, and then he flew to the village as fast as he could go and told me all that he had seen. The rest you know. You did much for Gr-gr-gr and Gr-gr-gr's people. We shall always do much for you."

I thanked him; and when I had told him of our escape and our destination, he insisted on accompanying us to the sea with a great number of his fierce males. Nor were we at all loath to accept his escort. We found the canoe where I had hidden it, and bidding Gr-gr-gr and his warriors farewell, the three of us embarked for the mainland.

I questioned Juag upon the feasibility of attempting to cross to the mouth of the great river of which he had told me, and up which he said we might paddle almost to Sari; but he urged me not to attempt it, since we had but a single paddle and no water or food. I had to admit the wisdom of his advice, but the desire to explore this great waterway was strong upon me, arousing in me at last a determination to make the attempt after first gaining the mainland and rectifying our deficiencies.

We landed several miles north of Thuria in a little cove that seemed to offer protection from the heavier seas which sometimes run, even upon these usually pacific oceans of Pellucidar. Here I outlined to Dian and Juag the plans I had in mind. They were to fit the canoe with a small sail, the purposes of which I had to explain to them both--since neither had ever seen or heard of such a contrivance before. Then they were to hunt for food which we could transport with us, and prepare a receptacle for water.

These two latter items were more in Juag's line, but he kept muttering about the sail and the wind for a long time. I could see that he was not even half convinced that any such ridiculous contraption could make a canoe move through the water.

We hunted near the coast for a while, but were pot rewarded with any particular luck. Finally we decided to hide the canoe and strike inland in search of game. At Juag's suggestion we dug a hole in the sand at the upper edge of the beach and buried the craft, smoothing the surface over nicely and throwing aside the excess material we had excavated. Then we set out away from the sea. Traveling in Thuria is less arduous than under the midday sun which perpetually glares down on the rest of Pellucidar's surface; but it has its drawbacks, one of which is the depressing influence exerted by the everlasting shade of the Land of Awful Shadow.

The farther inland we went the darker it became, until we were moving at last through an endless twilight. The vegetation here was sparse and of a weird, colorless nature, though what did grow was wondrous in shape and form. Often we saw huge lidi, or beasts of burden, striding across the dim landscape, browsing upon the grotesque vegetation or drinking from the slow and sullen rivers that run down from the Lidi Plains to empty into the sea in Thuria.

What we sought was either a thag--a sort of gigantic elk--or one of the larger species of antelope, the flesh of either of which dries nicely in the sun. The bladder of the thag would make a fine water-bottle, and its skin, I figured, would be a good sail. We traveled a considerable distance inland, entirely crossing the Land of Awful Shadow and emerging at last upon that portion of the Lidi Plains which lies in the pleasant sunlight. Above us the pendent world revolved upon its axis, filling me especially--and Dian to an almost equal state--with wonder and insatiable curiosity as to what strange forms of life existed among the hills and valleys and along the seas and rivers, which we could plainly see.

Before us stretched the horizonless expanses of vast Pellucidar, the Lidi Plains rolling up about us, while hanging high in the heavens to the northwest of us I thought I discerned the many towers which marked the entrances to the distant Mahar city, whose inhabitants preyed upon the Thurians.

Juag suggested that we travel to the northeast, where, he said, upon the verge of the plain we would find a wooded country in which game should be plentiful. Acting upon his advice, we came at last to a forest-jungle, through which wound innumerable game-paths. In the depths of this forbidding wood we came upon the fresh spoor of thag.

Shortly after, by careful stalking, we came within javelin-range of a small herd. Selecting a great bull, Juag and I hurled our weapons simultaneously, Dian reserving hers for an emergency. The beast staggered to his feet, bellowing. The rest of the herd was up and away in an instant, only the wounded bull remaining, with lowered head and roving eyes searching for the foe.

Then Juag exposed himself to the view of the bull--it is a part of the tactics of the hunt--while I stepped to one side behind a bush. The moment that the savage beast saw Juag he charged him. Juag ran straight away, that the bull might be lured past my hiding-place. On he came--tons of mighty bestial strength and rage.

Dian had slipped behind me. She, too, could fight a thag should emergency require. Ah, such a girl! A rightful empress of a stone age by every standard which two worlds might bring to measure her!

Crashing down toward us came the bull thag, bellowing and snorting, with the power of a hundred outer-earthly bulls. When he was opposite me I sprang for the heavy mane that covered his huge neck. To tangle my fingers in it was the work of but an instant. Then I was running along at the beast's shoulder.

Now, the theory upon which this hunting custom is based is one long ago discovered by experience, and that is that a thag cannot be turned from his charge once he has started toward the object of his wrath, so long as he can still see the thing he charges. He evidently believes that the man clinging to his mane is attempting to restrain him from overtaking his prey, and so he pays no attention to this enemy, who, of course, does not retard the mighty charge in the least.

Once in the gait of the plunging bull, it was but a slight matter to vault to his back, as cavalrymen mount their chargers upon the run. Juag was still running in plain sight ahead of the bull. His speed was but a trifle less than that of the monster that pursued him. These Pellucidarians are almost as fleet as deer; because I am not is one reason that I am always chosen for the close-in work of the thag-hunt. I could not keep in front of a charging thag long enough to give the killer time to do his work. I learned that the first--and last--time I tried it.

Once astride the bull's neck, I drew my long stone knife and, setting the point carefully over the brute's spine, drove it home with both hands. At the same instant I leaped clear of the stumbling animal. Now, no vertebrate can progress far with a knife through his spine, and the thag is no exception to the rule.

The fellow was down instantly. As he wallowed Juag returned, and the two of us leaped in when an opening afforded the opportunity and snatched our javelins from his side. Then we danced about him, more like two savages than anything else, until we got the opening we were looking for, when simultaneously, our javelins pierced his wild heart, stilling it forever.

The thag had covered considerable ground from the point at which I had leaped upon him. When, after despatching him, I looked back for Dian, I could see nothing of her. I called aloud, but receiving no reply, set out at a brisk trot to where I had left her. I had no difficulty in finding the self-same bush behind which we had hidden, but Dian was not there. Again and again I called, to be rewarded only by silence. Where could she be? What could have become of her in the brief interval since I had seen her standing just behind me?

     
Pellucidar, by Edgar Rice Burroughs, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XII

  

KIDNAPPED!

I searched about the spot carefully. At last I was rewarded by the discovery of her javelin, a few yards from the bush that had concealed us from the charging thag--her javelin and the indications of a struggle revealed by the trampled vegetation and the overlapping footprints of a woman and a man. Filled with consternation and dismay, I followed these latter to where they suddenly disappeared a hundred yards from where the struggle had occurred. There I saw the huge imprints of a lidi's feet.

The story of the tragedy was all too plain. A Thurian had either been following us, or had accidentally espied Dian and taken a fancy to her. While Juag and I had been engaged with the thag, he had abducted her. I ran swiftly back to where Juag was working over the kill. As I approached him I saw that something was wrong in this quarter as well, for the islander was standing upon the carcass of the thag, his javelin poised for a throw.

When I had come nearer I saw the cause of his belligerent attitude. Just beyond him stood two large jaloks, or wolf-dogs, regarding him intently--a male and a female. Their behavior was rather peculiar, for they did not seem preparing to charge him. Rather, they were contemplating him in an attitude of questioning.

Juag heard me coming and turned toward me with a grin. These fellows love excitement. I could see by his expression that he was enjoying in anticipation the battle that seemed imminent. But he never hurled his javelin. A shout of warning from me stopped him, for I had seen the remnants of a rope dangling from the neck of the male jalok.

Juag again turned toward me, but this time in surprise. I was abreast him in a moment and, passing him, walked straight toward the two beasts. As I did so the female crouched with bared fangs. The male, however, leaped forward to meet me, not in deadly charge, but with every expression of delight and joy which the poor animal could exhibit.

It was Raja--the jalok whose life I had saved, and whom I then had tamed! There was no doubt that he was glad to see me. I now think that his seeming desertion of me had been but due to a desire to search out his ferocious mate and bring her, too, to live with me.

When Juag saw me fondling the great beast he was filled with consternation, but I did not have much time to spare to Raja while my mind was filled with the grief of my new loss. I was glad to see the brute, and I lost no time in taking him to Juag and making him understand that Juag, too, was to be Raja's friend. With the female the matter was more difficult, but Raja helped us out by growling savagely at her whenever she bared her fangs against us.

I told Juag of the disappearance of Dian, and of my suspicions as to the explanation of the catastrophe. He wanted to start right out after her, but I suggested that with Raja to help me it might be as well were he to remain and skin the thag, remove its bladder, and then return to where we had hidden the canoe on the beach. And so it was arranged that he was to do this and await me there for a reasonable time. I pointed to a great lake upon the surface of the pendent world above us, telling him that if after this lake had appeared four times I had not returned to go either by water or land to Sari and fetch Ghak with an army. Then, calling Raja after me, I set out after Dian and her abductor. First I took the wolf dog to the spot where the man had fought with Dian. A few paces behind us followed Raja's fierce mate. I pointed to the ground where the evidences of the struggle were plainest and where the scent must have been strong to Raja's nostrils.

Then I grasped the remnant of leash that hung about his neck and urged him forward upon the trail. He seemed to understand. With nose to ground he set out upon his task. Dragging me after him, he trotted straight out upon the Lidi Plains, turning his steps in the direction of the Thurian village. I could have guessed as much!

Behind us trailed the female. After a while she closed upon us, until she ran quite close to me and at Raja's side. It was not long before she seemed as easy in my company as did her lord and master.

We must have covered considerable distance at a very rapid pace, for we had re-entered the great shadow, when we saw a huge lidi ahead of us, moving leisurely across the level plain. Upon its back were two human figures. If I could have known that the jaloks would not harm Dian I might have turned them loose upon the lidi and its master; but I could not know, and so dared take no chances.

However, the matter was taken out of my hands presently when Raja raised his head and caught sight of his quarry. With a lunge that hurled me flat and jerked the leash from my hand, he was gone with the speed of the wind after the giant lidi and its riders. At his side raced his shaggy mate, only a trifle smaller than he and no whit less savage.

They did not give tongue until the lidi itself discovered them and broke into a lumbering, awkward, but none the less rapid gallop. Then the two hound-beasts commenced to bay, starting with a low, plaintive note that rose, weird and hideous, to terminate in a series of short, sharp yelps. I feared that it might be the hunting-call of the pack; and if this were true, there would be slight chance for either Dian or her abductor--or myself, either, as far as that was concerned. So I redoubled my efforts to keep pace with the hunt; but I might as well have attempted to distance the bird upon the wing; as I have often reminded you, I am no runner. In that instance it was just as well that I am not, for my very slowness of foot played into my hands; while had I been fleeter, I might have lost Dian that time forever.

The lidi, with the hounds running close on either side, had almost disappeared in the darkness that enveloped the surrounding landscape, when I noted that it was bearing toward the right. This was accounted for by the fact that Raja ran upon his left side, and unlike his mate, kept leaping for the great beast's shoulder. The man on the lidi's back was prodding at the hyaenodon with his long spear, but still Raja kept springing up and snapping.

The effect of this was to turn the lidi toward the right, and the longer I watched the procedure the more convinced I became that Raja and his mate were working together with some end in view, for the she-dog merely galloped steadily at the lidi's right about opposite his rump.

I had seen jaloks hunting in packs, and I recalled now what for the time I had not thought of--the several that ran ahead and turned the quarry back toward the main body. This was precisely what Raja and his mate were doing--they were turning the lidi back toward me, or at least Raja was. Just why the female was keeping out of it I did not understand, unless it was that she was not entirely clear in her own mind as to precisely what her mate was attempting.

At any rate, I was sufficiently convinced to stop where I was and await developments, for I could readily realize two things. One was that I could never overhaul them before the damage was done if they should pull the lidi down now. The other thing was that if they did not pull it down for a few minutes it would have completed its circle and returned close to where I stood.

And this is just what happened. The lot of them were almost, swallowed up in the twilight for a moment. Then they reappeared again, but this time far to the right and circling back in my general direction. I waited until I could get some clear idea of the right spot to gain that I might intercept the lidi; but even as I waited I saw the beast attempt to turn still more to the right--a move that would have carried him far to my left in a much more circumscribed circle than the hyaenodons had mapped out for him. Then I saw the female leap forward and head him; and when he would have gone too far to the left, Raja sprang, snapping at his shoulder and held him straight.

Straight for me the two savage beasts were driving their quarry! It was wonderful.

It was something else, too, as I realized while the monstrous beast neared me. It was like standing in the middle of the tracks in front of an approaching express-train. But I didn't dare waver; too much depended upon my meeting that hurtling mass of terrified flesh with a well-placed javelin. So I stood there, waiting to be run down and crushed by those gigantic feet, but determined to drive home my weapon in the broad breast before I fell.

The lidi was only about a hundred yards from me when Raja gave a few barks in a tone that differed materially from his hunting-cry. Instantly both he and his mate leaped for the long neck of the ruminant.

Neither missed. Swinging in mid-air, they hung tenaciously, their weight dragging down the creature's head and so retarding its speed that before it had reached me it was almost stopped and devoting all its energies to attempting to scrape off its attackers with its forefeet.

Dian had seen and recognized me, and was trying to extricate herself from the grasp of her captor, who, handicapped by his strong and agile prisoner, was unable to wield his lance effectively upon the two jaloks. At the same time I was running swiftly toward them.

When the man discovered me he released his hold upon Dian and sprang to the ground, ready with his lance to meet me. My javelin was no match for his longer weapon, which was used more for stabbing than as a missile. Should I miss him at my first cast, as was quite probable, since he was prepared for me, I would have to face his formidable lance with nothing more than a stone knife. The outlook was scarcely entrancing. Evidently I was soon to be absolutely at his mercy.

Seeing my predicament, he ran toward me to get rid of one antagonist before he had to deal with the other two. He could not guess, of course, that the two jaloks were hunting with me; but he doubtless thought that after they had finished the lidi they would make after the human prey--the beasts are notorious killers, often slaying wantonly.

But as the Thurian came Raja loosened his hold upon the lidi and dashed for him, with the female close after. When the man saw them he yelled to me to help him, protesting that we should both be killed if we did not fight together. But I only laughed at him and ran toward Dian.

Both the fierce beasts were upon the Thurian simultaneously--he must have died almost before his body tumbled to the ground. Then the female wheeled toward Dian. I was standing by her side as the thing charged her, my javelin ready to receive her.

But again Raja was too quick for me. I imagined he thought she was making for me, for he couldn't have known anything of my relations toward Dian. At any rate he leaped full upon her back and dragged her down. There ensued forthwith as terrible a battle as one would wish to see if battles were gaged by volume of noise and riotousness of action. I thought that both the beasts would be torn to shreds.

When finally the female ceased to struggle and rolled over on her back, her forepaws limply folded, I was sure that she was dead. Raja stood over her, growling, his jaws close to her throat. Then I saw that neither of them bore a scratch. The male had simply administered a severe drubbing to his mate. It was his way of teaching her that I was sacred.

After a moment he moved away and let her rise, when she set about smoothing down her rumpled coat, while he came stalking toward Dian and me. I had an arm about Dian now. As Raja came close I caught him by the neck and pulled him up to me. There I stroked him and talked to him, bidding Dian do the same, until I think he pretty well understood that if I was his friend, so was Dian.

For a long time he was inclined to be shy of her, often baring his teeth at her approach, and it was a much longer time before the female made friends with us. But by careful kindness, by never eating without sharing our meat with them, and by feeding them from our hands, we finally won the confidence of both animals. However, that was a long time after.

With the two beasts trotting after us, we returned to where we had left Juag. Here I had the dickens' own time keeping the female from Juag's throat. Of all the venomous, wicked, cruel-hearted beasts on two worlds, I think a female hyaenodon takes the palm.

But eventually she tolerated Juag as she had Dian and me, and the five of us set out toward the coast, for Juag had just completed his labors on the thag when we arrived. We ate some of the meat before starting, and gave the hounds some. All that we could we carried upon our backs.

On the way to the canoe we met with no mishaps. Dian told me that the fellow who had stolen her had come upon her from behind while the roaring of the thag had drowned all other noises, and that the first she had known he had disarmed her and thrown her to the back of his lidi, which had been lying down close by waiting for him. By the time the thag had ceased bellowing the fellow had got well away upon his swift mount. By holding one palm over her mouth he had prevented her calling for help.

"I thought," she concluded, "that I should have to use the viper's tooth, after all."

We reached the beach at last and unearthed the canoe. Then we busied ourselves stepping a mast and rigging a small sail--Juag and I, that is--while Dian cut the thag meat into long strips for drying when we should be out in the sunlight once more.

At last all was done. We were ready to embark. I had no difficulty in getting Raja aboard the dugout; but Ranee--as we christened her after I had explained to Dian the meaning of Raja and its feminine equivalent--positively refused for a time to follow her mate aboard. In fact, we had to shove off without her. After a moment, however, she plunged into the water and swam after us.

I let her come alongside, and then Juag and I pulled her in, she snapping and snarling at us as we did so; but, strange to relate, she didn't offer to attack us after we had ensconced her safely in the bottom alongside Raja.

The canoe behaved much better under sail than I had hoped--infinitely better than the battleship Sari had--and we made good progress almost due west across the gulf, upon the opposite side of which I hoped to find the mouth of the river of which Juag had told me.

The islander was much interested and impressed by the sail and its results. He had not been able to understand exactly what I hoped to accomplish with it while we were fitting up the boat; but when he saw the clumsy dugout move steadily through the water without paddles, he was as delighted as a child. We made splendid headway on the trip, coming into sight of land at last.

Juag had been terror-stricken when he had learned that I intended crossing the ocean, and when we passed out of sight of land be was in a blue funk. He said that he had never heard of such a thing before in his life, and that always he had understood that those who ventured far from land never returned; for how could they find their way when they could see no land to steer for?

I tried to explain the compass to him; and though he never really grasped the scientific explanation of it, yet he did learn to steer by it quite as well as I. We passed several islands on the journey--islands which Juag told me were entirely unknown to his own island folk. Indeed, our eyes may have been the first ever to rest upon them. I should have liked to stop off and explore them, but the business of empire would brook no unnecessary delays.

I asked Juag how Hooja expected to reach the mouth of the river which we were in search of if he didn't cross the gulf, and the islander explained that Hooja would undoubtedly follow the coast around. For some time we sailed up the coast searching for the river, and at last we found it. So great was it that I thought it must be a mighty gulf until the mass of driftwood that came out upon the first ebb tide convinced me that it was the mouth of a river. There were the trunks of trees uprooted by the undermining of the river banks, giant creepers, flowers, grasses, and now and then the body of some land animal or bird.

I was all excitement to commence our upward journey when there occurred that which I had never before seen within Pellucidar--a really terrific windstorm. It blew down the river upon us with a ferocity and suddenness that took our breaths away, and before we could get a chance to make the shore it became too late. The best that we could do was to hold the scudding craft before the wind and race along in a smother of white spume. Juag was terrified. If Dian was, she hid it; for was she not the daughter of a once great chief, the sister of a king, and the mate of an emperor?

Raja and Ranee were frightened. The former crawled close to my side and buried his nose against me. Finally even fierce Ranee was moved to seek sympathy from a human being. She slunk to Dian, pressing close against her and whimpering, while Dian stroked her shaggy neck and talked to her as I talked to Raja.

There was nothing for us to do but try to keep the canoe right side up and straight before the wind. For what seemed an eternity the tempest neither increased nor abated. I judged that we must have blown a hundred miles before the wind and straight out into an unknown sea!

As suddenly as the wind rose it died again, and when it died it veered to blow at right angles to its former course in a gentle breeze. I asked Juag then what our course was, for he had had the compass last. It had been on a leather thong about his neck. When he felt for it, the expression that came into his eyes told me as plainly as words what had happened--the compass was lost! The compass was lost!

And we were out of sight of land without a single celestial body to guide us! Even the pendent world was not visible from our position!

Our plight seemed hopeless to me, but I dared not let Dian and Juag guess how utterly dismayed I was; though, as I soon discovered, there was nothing to be gained by trying to keep the worst from Juag--he knew it quite as well as I. He had always known, from the legends of his people, the dangers of the open sea beyond the sight of land. The compass, since he had learned its uses from me, had been all that he had to buoy his hope of eventual salvation from the watery deep. He had seen how it had guided me across the water to the very coast that I desired to reach, and so he had implicit confidence in it. Now that it was gone, his confidence had departed, also.

There seemed but one thing to do; that was to keep on sailing straight before the wind--since we could travel most rapidly along that course--until we sighted land of some description. If it chanced to be the mainland, well and good; if an island--well, we might live upon an island. We certainly could not live long in this little boat, with only a few strips of dried thag and a few quarts of water left.

Quite suddenly a thought occurred to me. I was surprised that it had not come before as a solution to our problem. I turned toward Juag.

"You Pellucidarians are endowed with a wonderful instinct," I reminded him, "an instinct that points the way straight to your homes, no matter in what strange land you may find yourself. Now all we have to do is let Dian guide us toward Amoz, and we shall come in a short time to the same coast whence we just were blown."

As I spoke I looked at them with a smile of renewed hope; but there was no answering smile in their eyes. It was Dian who enlightened me.

"We could do all this upon land," she said. "But upon the water that power is denied us. I do not know why; but I have always heard that this is true--that only upon the water may a Pellucidarian be lost. This is, I think, why we all fear the great ocean so--even those who go upon its surface in canoes. Juag has told us that they never go beyond the sight of land."

We had lowered the sail after the blow while we were discussing the best course to pursue. Our little craft had been drifting idly, rising and falling with the great waves that were now diminishing. Sometimes we were upon the crest--again in the hollow. As Dian ceased speaking she let her eyes range across the limitless expanse of billowing waters. We rose to a great height upon the crest of a mighty wave. As we topped it Dian gave an exclamation and pointed astern.

"Boats!" she cried. "Boats! Many, many boats!"

Juag and I leaped to our feet; but our little craft had now dropped to the trough, and we could see nothing but walls of water close upon either hand. We waited for the next wave to lift us, and when it did we strained our eyes in the direction that Dian had indicated. Sure enough, scarce half a mile away were several boats, and scattered far and wide behind us as far as we could see were many others! We could not make them out in the distance or in the brief glimpse that we caught of them before we were plunged again into the next wave canon; but they were boats.

And in them must be human beings like ourselves.

     
Pellucidar, by Edgar Rice Burroughs, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XIII

  

RACING FOR LIFE

At last the sea subsided, and we were able to get a better view of the armada of small boats in our wake. There must have been two hundred of them. Juag said that he had never seen so many boats before in all his life. Where had they come from? Juag was first to hazard a guess.

"Hooja," he said, "was building many boats to carry his warriors to the great river and up it toward Sari. He was building them with almost all his warriors and many slaves upon the Island of Trees. No one else in all the history of Pellucidar has ever built so many boats as they told me Hooja was building. These must be Hooja's boats."

"And they were blown out to sea by the great storm just as we were," suggested Dian.

"There can be no better explanation of them," I agreed.

"What shall we do?" asked Juag.

"Suppose we make sure that they are really Hooja's people," suggested Dian. "It may be that they are not, and that if we run away from them before we learn definitely who they are, we shall be running away from a chance to live and find the mainland. They may be a people of whom we have never even heard, and if so we can ask them to help us--if they know the way to the mainland."

"Which they will not,' interposed Juag.

"Well," I said, "it can't make our predicament any more trying to wait until we find out who they are. They are heading for us now. Evidently they have spied our sail, and guess that we do not belong to their fleet."

"They probably want to ask the way to the mainland themselves," said Juag, who was nothing if not a pessimist.

"If they want to catch us, they can do it if they can paddle faster than we can sail," I said. "If we let them come close enough to discover their identity, and can then sail faster than they can paddle, we can get away from them anyway, so we might as well wait."

And wait we did.

The sea calmed rapidly, so that by the time the foremost canoe had come within five hundred yards of us we could see them all plainly. Every one was headed for us. The dugouts, which were of unusual length, were manned by twenty paddlers, ten to a side. Besides the paddlers there were twenty-five or more warriors in each boat.

When the leader was a hundred yards from us Dian called our attention to the fact that several of her crew were Sagoths. That convinced us that the flotilla was indeed Hooja's. I told Juag to hail them and get what information he could, while I remained in the bottom of our canoe as much out of sight as possible. Dian lay down at full length in the bottom; I did not want them to see and recognize her if they were in truth Hooja's people.

"Who are you?" shouted Juag, standing up in the boat and making a megaphone of his palms.

A figure arose in the bow of the leading canoe--a figure that I was sure I recognized even before he spoke.

"I am Hooja!" cried the man, in answer to Juag.

For some reason he did not recognize his former prisoner and slave--possibly because he had so many of them.

"I come from the Island of Trees," he continued. "A hundred of my boats were lost in the great storm and all their crews drowned. Where is the land? What are you, and what strange thing is that which flutters from the little tree in the front of your canoe?"

He referred to our sail, flapping idly in the wind.

"We, too, are lost," replied Juag. "We know not where the land is. We are going back to look for it now."

So saying he commenced to scull the canoe's nose before the wind, while I made fast the primitive sheets that held our crude sail. We thought it time to be going.

There wasn't much wind at the time, and the heavy, lumbering dugout was slow in getting under way. I thought it never would gain any momentum. And all the while Hooja's canoe was drawing rapidly nearer, propelled by the strong arms of his twenty paddlers. Of course, their dugout was much larger than ours, and, consequently, infinitely heavier and more cumbersome; nevertheless, it was coming along at quite a clip, and ours was yet but barely moving. Dian and I remained out of sight as much as possible, for the two craft were now well within bow-shot of one another, and I knew that Hooja had archers.

Hooja called to Juag to stop when he saw that our craft was moving. He was much interested in the sail, and not a little awed, as I could tell by his shouted remarks and questions. Raising my head, I saw him plainly. He would have made an excellent target for one of my guns, and I had never been sorrier that I had lost them.

We were now picking up speed a trifle, and he was not gaining upon us so fast as at first. In consequence, his requests that we stop suddenly changed to commands as he became aware that we were trying to escape him.

"Come back!" he shouted. "Come back, or I'll fire!"

I use the word fire because it more nearly translates into English the Pellucidarian word trag, which covers the launching of any deadly missile.

But Juag only seized his paddle more tightly--the paddle that answered the purpose of rudder, and commenced to assist the wind by vigorous strokes. Then Hooja gave the command to some of his archers to fire upon us. I couldn't lie hidden in the bottom of the boat, leaving Juag alone exposed to the deadly shafts, so I arose and, seizing another paddle, set to work to help him. Dian joined me, though I did my best to persuade her to remain sheltered; but being a woman, she must have her own way.

The instant that Hooja saw us he recognized us. The whoop of triumph he raised indicated how certain he was that we were about to fall into his hands. A shower of arrows fell about us. Then Hooja caused his men to cease firing--he wanted us alive. None of the missiles struck us, for Hooja's archers were not nearly the marksmen that are my Sarians and Amozites.

We had now gained sufficient headway to hold our own on about even terms with Hooja's paddlers. We did not seem to be gaining, though; and neither did they. How long this nerve-racking experience lasted I cannot guess, though we had pretty nearly finished our meager supply of provisions when the wind picked up a bit and we commenced to draw away.

Not once yet had we sighted land, nor could I understand it, since so many of the seas I had seen before were thickly dotted with islands. Our plight was anything but pleasant, yet I think that Hooja and his forces were even worse off than we, for they had no food nor water at all.

Far out behind us in a long line that curved upward in the distance, to be lost in the haze, strung Hooja's two hundred boats. But one would have been enough to have taken us could it have come alongside. We had drawn some fifty yards ahead of Hooja--there had been times when we were scarce ten yards in advance and were feeling considerably safer from capture. Hooja's men, working in relays, were commencing to show the effects of the strain under which they had been forced to work without food or water, and I think their weakening aided us almost as much as the slight freshening of the wind.

Hooja must have commenced to realize that he was going to lose us, for he again gave orders that we be fired upon. Volley after volley of arrows struck about us. The distance was so great by this time that most of the arrows fell short, while those that reached us were sufficiently spent to allow us to ward them off with our paddles. However, it was a most exciting ordeal.

Hooja stood in the bow of his boat, alternately urging his men to greater speed and shouting epithets at me. But we continued to draw away from him. At last the wind rose to a fair gale, and we simply raced away from our pursuers as if they were standing still. Juag was so tickled that he forgot all about his hunger and thirst. I think that he had never been entirely reconciled to the heathenish invention which I called a sail, and that down in the bottom of his heart he believed that the paddlers would eventually overhaul us; but now he couldn't praise it enough.

We had a strong gale for a considerable time, and eventually dropped Hooja's fleet so far astern that we could no longer discern them. And then--ah, I shall never forget that moment--Dian sprang to her feet with a cry of "Land!"

Sure enough, dead ahead, a long, low coast stretched across our bow. It was still a long way off, and we couldn't make out whether it was island or mainland; but at least it was land. If ever shipwrecked mariners were grateful, we were then. Raja and Ranee were commencing to suffer for lack of food, and I could swear that the latter often cast hungry glances upon us, though I am equally sure that no such hideous thoughts ever entered the head of her mate. We watched them both most closely, however. Once while stroking Ranee I managed to get a rope around her neck and make her fast to the side of the boat. Then I felt a bit safer for Dian. It was pretty close quarters in that little dugout for three human beings and two practically wild, man-eating dogs; but we had to make the best of it, since I would not listen to Juag's suggestion that we kill and eat Raja and Ranee.

We made good time to within a few miles of the shore. Then the wind died suddenly out. We were all of us keyed up to such a pitch of anticipation that the blow was doubly hard to bear. And it was a blow, too, since we could not tell in what quarter the wind might rise again; but Juag and I set to work to paddle the remaining distance.

Almost immediately the wind rose again from precisely the opposite direction from which it had formerly blown, so that it was mighty hard work making progress against it. Next it veered again so that we had to turn and run with it parallel to the coast to keep from being swamped in the trough of the seas.

And while we were suffering all these disappointments Hooja's fleet appeared in the distance!

They evidently had gone far to the left of our course, for they were now almost behind us as we ran parallel to the coast; but we were not much afraid of being overtaken in the wind that was blowing. The gale kept on increasing, but it was fitful, swooping down upon us in great gusts and then going almost calm for an instant. It was after one of these momentary calms that the catastrophe occurred. Our sail hung limp and our momentum decreased when of a sudden a particularly vicious squall caught us. Before I could cut the sheets the mast had snapped at the thwart in which it was stepped.

The worst had happened; Juag and I seized paddles and kept the canoe with the wind; but that squall was the parting shot of the gale, which died out immediately after, leaving us free to make for the shore, which we lost no time in attempting. But Hooja had drawn closer in toward shore than we, so it looked as if he might head us off before we could land. However, we did our best to distance him, Dian taking a paddle with us.

We were in a fair way to succeed when there appeared, pouring from among the trees beyond the beach, a horde of yelling, painted savages, brandishing all sorts of devilish-looking primitive weapons. So menacing was their attitude that we realized at once the folly of attempting to land among them.

Hooja was drawing closer to us. There was no wind. We could not hope to outpaddle him. And with our sail gone, no wind would help us, though, as if in derision at our plight, a steady breeze was now blowing. But we had no intention of sitting idle while our fate overtook us, so we bent to our paddles and, keeping parallel with the coast, did our best to pull away from our pursuers.

It was a grueling experience. We were weakened by lack of food. We were suffering the pangs of thirst. Capture and death were close at hand. Yet I think that we gave a good account of ourselves in our final effort to escape. Our boat was so much smaller and lighter than any of Hooja's that the three of us forced it ahead almost as rapidly as his larger craft could go under their twenty paddles.

As we raced along the coast for one of those seemingly interminable periods that may draw hours into eternities where the labor is soul-searing and there is no way to measure time, I saw what I took for the opening to a bay or the mouth of a great river a short distance ahead of us. I wished that we might make for it; but with the menace of Hooja close behind and the screaming natives who raced along the shore parallel to us, I dared not attempt it.

We were not far from shore in that mad flight from death. Even as I paddled I found opportunity to glance occasionally toward the natives. They were white, but hideously painted. From their gestures and weapons I took them to be a most ferocious race. I was rather glad that we had not succeeded in landing among them.

Hooja's fleet had been in much more compact formation when we sighted them this time than on the occasion following the tempest. Now they were moving rapidly in pursuit of us, all well within the radius of a mile. Five of them were leading, all abreast, and were scarce two hundred yards from us. When I glanced over my shoulder I could see that the archers had already fitted arrows to their bows in readiness to fire upon us the moment that they should draw within range.

Hope was low in my breast. I could not see the slightest chance of escaping them, for they were over-hauling us rapidly now, since they were able to work their paddles in relays, while we three were rapidly wearying beneath the constant strain that had been put upon us.

It was then that Juag called my attention to the rift in the shoreline which I had thought either a bay or the mouth of a great river. There I saw moving slowly out into the sea that which filled my soul with wonder.

     
Pellucidar, by Edgar Rice Burroughs, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XIV

  

GORE AND DREAMS

It was a two-masted felucca with lateen sails! The craft was long and low. In it were more than fifty men, twenty or thirty of whom were at oars with which the craft was being propelled from the lee of the land. I was dumbfounded.

Could it be that the savage, painted natives I had seen on shore had so perfected the art of navigation that they were masters of such advanced building and rigging as this craft proclaimed? It seemed impossible! And as I looked I saw another of the same type swing into view and follow its sister through the narrow strait out into the ocean.

Nor were these all. One after another, following closely upon one another's heels, came fifty of the trim, graceful vessels. They were cutting in between Hooja's fleet and our little dugout,

When they came a bit closer my eyes fairly popped from my head at what I saw, for in the eye of the leading felucca stood a man with a sea-glass leveled upon us. Who could they be? Was there a civilization within Pellucidar of such wondrous advancement as this? Were there far-distant lands of which none of my people had ever heard, where a race had so greatly outstripped all other races of this inner world?

The man with the glass had lowered it and was shouting to us. I could not make out his words, but presently I saw that he was pointing aloft. When I looked I saw a pennant fluttering from the peak of the forward lateen yard--a red, white, and blue pennant, with a single great white star in a field of blue.

Then I knew. My eyes went even wider than they had before. It was the navy! It was the navy of the empire of Pellucidar which I had instructed Perry to build in my absence. It was MY navy!

I dropped my paddle and stood up and shouted and waved my hand. Juag and Dian looked at me as if I had gone suddenly mad. When I could stop shouting I told them, and they shared my joy and shouted with me.

But still Hooja was coming nearer, nor could the leading felucca overhaul him before he would be alongside or at least within bow-shot.

Hooja must have been as much mystified as we were as to the identity of the strange fleet; but when he saw me waving to them he evidently guessed that they were friendly to us, so he urged his men to redouble their efforts to reach us before the felucca cut him off.

He shouted word back to others of his fleet--word that was passed back until it had reached them all--directing them to run alongside the strangers and board them, for with his two hundred craft and his eight or ten thousand warriors he evidently felt equal to overcoming the fifty vessels of the enemy, which did not seem to carry over three thousand men all told.

His own personal energies he bent to reaching Dian and me first, leaving the rest of the work to his other boats. I thought that there could be little doubt that he would be successful in so far as we were concerned, and I feared for the revenge that he might take upon us should the battle go against his force, as I was sure it would; for I knew that Perry and his Mezops must have brought with them all the arms and ammunition that had been contained in the prospector. But I was not prepared for what happened next.

As Hooja's canoe reached a point some twenty yards from us a great puff of smoke broke from the bow of the leading felucca, followed almost simultaneously by a terrific explosion, and a solid shot screamed close over the heads of the men in Hooja's craft, raising a great splash where it clove the water just beyond them.

Perry had perfected gunpowder and built cannon! It was marvelous! Dian and Juag, as much surprised as Hooja, turned wondering eyes toward me. Again the cannon spoke. I suppose that by comparison with the great guns of modern naval vessels of the outer world it was a pitifully small and inadequate thing; but here in Pellucidar, where it was the first of its kind, it was about as awe-inspiring as anything you might imagine.

With the report an iron cannonball about five inches in diameter struck Hooja's dugout just above the waterline, tore a great splintering hole in its side, turned it over, and dumped its occupants into the sea.

The four dugouts that had been abreast of Hooja had turned to intercept the leading felucca. Even now, in the face of what must have been a withering catastrophe to them, they kept bravely on toward the strange and terrible craft.

In them were fully two hundred men, while but fifty lined the gunwale of the felucca to repel them. The commander of the felucca, who proved to be Ja, let them come quite close and then turned loose upon them a volley of shots from small-arms.

The cave men and Sagoths in the dugouts seemed to wither before that blast of death like dry grass before a prairie fire. Those who were not hit dropped their bows and javelins and, seizing upon paddles, attempted to escape. But the felucca pursued them relentlessly, her crew firing at will.

At last I heard Ja shouting to the survivors in the dugouts--they were all quite close to us now--offering them their lives if they would surrender. Perry was standing close behind Ja, and I knew that this merciful action was prompted, perhaps commanded, by the old man; for no Pellucidarian would have thought of showing leniency to a defeated foe.

As there was no alternative save death, the survivors surrendered and a moment later were taken aboard the Amoz, the name that I could now see printed in large letters upon the felucca's bow, and which no one in that whole world could read except Perry and I.

When the prisoners were aboard, Ja brought the felucca alongside our dugout. Many were the willing hands that reached down to lift us to her decks. The bronze faces of the Mezops were broad with smiles, and Perry was fairly beside himself with joy.

Dian went aboard first and then Juag, as I wished to help Raja and Ranee aboard myself, well knowing that it would fare ill with any Mezop who touched them. We got them aboard at last, and a great commotion they caused among the crew, who had never seen a wild beast thus handled by man before.

Perry and Dian and I were so full of questions that we fairly burst, but we had to contain ourselves for a while, since the battle with the rest of Hooja's fleet had scarce commenced. From the small forward decks of the feluccas Perry's crude cannon were belching smoke, flame, thunder, and death. The air trembled to the roar of them. Hooja's horde, intrepid, savage fighters that they were, were closing in to grapple in a last death-struggle with the Mezops who manned our vessels.

The handling of our fleet by the red island warriors of Ja's clan was far from perfect. I could see that Perry had lost no time after the completion of the boats in setting out upon this cruise. What little the captains and crews had learned of handling feluccas they must have learned principally since they embarked upon this voyage, and while experience is an excellent teacher and had done much for them, they still had a great deal to learn. In maneuvering for position they were continually fouling one another, and on two occasions shots from our batteries came near to striking our own ships.

No sooner, however, was I aboard the flagship than I attempted to rectify this trouble to some extent. By passing commands by word of mouth from one ship to another I managed to get the fifty feluccas into some sort of line, with the flag-ship in the lead. In this formation we commenced slowly to circle the position of the enemy. The dugouts came for us right along in an attempt to board us, but by keeping on the move in one direction and circling, we managed to avoid getting in each other's way, and were enabled to fire our cannon and our small arms with less danger to our own comrades.

When I had a moment to look about me, I took in the felucca on which I was. I am free to confess that I marveled at the excellent construction and stanch yet speedy lines of the little craft. That Perry had chosen this type of vessel seemed rather remarkable, for though I had warned him against turreted battleships, armor, and like useless show, I had fully expected that when I beheld his navy I should find considerable attempt at grim and terrible magnificence, for it was always Perry's idea to overawe these ignorant cave men when we had to contend with them in battle. But I had soon learned that while one might easily astonish them with some new engine of war, it was an utter impossibility to frighten them into surrender.

I learned later that Ja had gone carefully over the plans of various craft with Perry. The old man had explained in detail all that the text told him of them. The two had measured out dimensions upon the ground, that Ja might see the sizes of different boats. Perry had built models, and Ja had had him read carefully and explain all that they could find relative to the handling of sailing vessels. The result of this was that Ja was the one who had chosen the felucca. It was well that Perry had had so excellent a balance wheel, for he had been wild to build a huge frigate of the Nelsonian era--he told me so himself.

One thing that had inclined Ja particularly to the felucca was the fact that it included oars in its equipment. He realized the limitations of his people in the matter of sails, and while they had never used oars, the implement was so similar to a paddle that he was sure they quickly could master the art--and they did. As soon as one hull was completed Ja kept it on the water constantly, first with one crew and then with another, until two thousand red warriors had learned to row. Then they stepped their masts and a crew was told off for the first ship.

While the others were building they learned to handle theirs. As each succeeding boat was launched its crew took it out and practiced with it under the tutorage of those who had graduated from the first ship, and so on until a full complement of men had been trained for every boat.

Well, to get back to the battle: The Hoojans kept on coming at us, and as fast as they came we mowed them down. It was little else than slaughter. Time and time again I cried to them to surrender, promising them their lives if they would do so. At last there were but ten boatloads left. These turned in flight. They thought they could paddle away from us--it was pitiful! I passed the word from boat to boat to cease firing--not to kill another Hoojan unless they fired on us. Then we set out after them. There was a nice little breeze blowing and we bowled along after our quarry as gracefully and as lightly as swans upon a park lagoon. As we approached them I could see not only wonder but admiration in their eyes. I hailed the nearest dugout.

"Throw down your arms and come aboard us," I cried, "and you shall not be harmed. We will feed you and return you to the mainland. Then you shall go free upon your promise never to bear arms against the Emperor of Pellucidar again!"

I think it was the promise of food that interested them most. They could scarce believe that we would not kill them. But when I exhibited the prisoners we already had taken, and showed them that they were alive and unharmed, a great Sagoth in one of the boats asked me what guarantee I could give that I would keep my word.

"None other than my word," I replied. "That I do not break."

The Pellucidarians themselves are rather punctilious about this same matter, so the Sagoth could understand that I might possibly be speaking the truth. But he could not understand why we should not kill them unless we meant to enslave them, which I had as much as denied already when I had promised to set them free. Ja couldn't exactly see the wisdom of my plan, either. He thought that we ought to follow up the ten remaining dugouts and sink them all; but I insisted that we must free as many as possible of our enemies upon the mainland.

"You see," I explained, "these men will return at once to Hooja's Island, to the Mahar cities from which they come, or to the countries from which they were stolen by the Mahars. They are men of two races and of many countries. They will spread the story of our victory far and wide, and while they are with us, we will let them see and hear many other wonderful things which they may carry back to their friends and their chiefs. It's the finest chance for free publicity, Perry," I added to the old man, "that you or I have seen in many a day."

Perry agreed with me. As a matter of fact, he would have agreed to anything that would have restrained us from killing the poor devils who fell into our hands. He was a great fellow to invent gunpowder and fire-arms and cannon; but when it came to using these things to kill people, he was as tender-hearted as a chicken.

The Sagoth who had spoken was talking to other Sagoths in his boat. Evidently they were holding a council over the question of the wisdom of surrendering.

"What will become of you if you don't surrender to us?" I asked. "If we do not open up our batteries on you again and kill you all, you will simply drift about the sea helplessly until you die of thirst and starvation. You cannot return to the islands, for you have seen as well as we that the natives there are very numerous and warlike. They would kill you the moment you landed."

The upshot of it was that the boat of which the Sagoth speaker was in charge surrendered. The Sagoths threw down their weapons, and we took them aboard the ship next in line behind the Amoz. First Ja had to impress upon the captain and crew of the ship that the prisoners were not to be abused or killed. After that the remaining dugouts paddled up and surrendered. We distributed them among the entire fleet lest there be too many upon any one vessel. Thus ended the first real naval engagement that the Pellucidarian seas had ever witnessed--though Perry still insists that the action in which the Sari took part was a battle of the first magnitude.

The battle over and the prisoners disposed of and fed--and do not imagine that Dian, Juag, and I, as well as the two hounds were not fed also--I turned my attention to the fleet. We had the feluccas close in about the flag-ship, and with all the ceremony of a medieval potentate on parade I received the commanders of the forty-nine feluccas that accompanied the flag-ship--Dian and I together--the empress and the emperor of Pellucidar.

It was a great occasion. The savage, bronze warriors entered into the spirit of it, for as I learned later dear old Perry had left no opportunity neglected for impressing upon them that David was emperor of Pellucidar, and that all that they were accomplishing and all that he was accomplishing was due to the power, and redounded to the glory of David. The old man must have rubbed it in pretty strong, for those fierce warriors nearly came to blows in their efforts to be among the first of those to kneel before me and kiss my hand. When it came to kissing Dian's I think they enjoyed it more; I know I should have.

A happy thought occurred to me as I stood upon the little deck of the Amoz with the first of Perry's primitive cannon behind me. When Ja kneeled at my feet, and first to do me homage, I drew from its scabbard at his side the sword of hammered iron that Perry had taught him to fashion. Striking him lightly on the shoulder I created him king of Anoroc. Each captain of the forty-nine other feluccas I made a duke. I left it to Perry to enlighten them as to the value of the honors I had bestowed upon them.

During these ceremonies Raja and Ranee had stood beside Dian and me. Their bellies had been well filled, but still they had difficulty in permitting so much edible humanity to pass unchallenged. It was a good education for them though, and never after did they find it difficult to associate with the human race without arousing their appetites.

After the ceremonies were over we had a chance to talk with Perry and Ja. The former told me that Ghak, king of Sari, had sent my letter and map to him by a runner, and that he and Ja had at once decided to set out on the completion of the fleet to ascertain the correctness of my theory that the Lural Az, in which the Anoroc Islands lay, was in reality the same ocean as that which lapped the shores of Thuria under the name of Sojar Az, or Great Sea.

Their destination had been the island retreat of Hooja, and they had sent word to Ghak of their plans that we might work in harmony with them. The tempest that had blown us off the coast of the continent had blown them far to the south also. Shortly before discovering us they had come into a great group of islands, from between the largest two of which they were sailing when they saw Hooja's fleet pursuing our dugout.

I asked Perry if he had any idea as to where we were, or in what direction lay Hooja's island or the continent. He replied by producing his map, on which he had carefully marked the newly discovered islands--there described as the Unfriendly Isles--which showed Hooja's island northwest of us about two points West.

He then explained that with compass, chronometer, log and reel, they had kept a fairly accurate record of their course from the time they had set out. Four of the feluccas were equipped with these instruments, and all of the captains had been instructed in their use.

I was very greatly surprised at the ease with which these savages had mastered the rather intricate detail of this unusual work, but Perry assured me that they were a wonderfully intelligent race, and had been quick to grasp all that he had tried to teach them.

Another thing that surprised me was the fact that so much had been accomplished in so short a time, for I could not believe that I had been gone from Anoroc for a sufficient period to permit of building a fleet of fifty feluccas and mining iron ore for the cannon and balls, to say nothing of manufacturing these guns and the crude muzzle-loading rifles with which every Mezop was armed, as well as the gunpowder and ammunition they had in such ample quantities.

"Time!" exclaimed Perry. "Well, how long were you gone from Anoroc before we picked you up in the Sojar Az?"

That was a puzzler, and I had to admit it. I didn't know how much time had elapsed and neither did Perry, for time is nonexistent in Pellucidar.

"Then, you see, David," he continued, "I had almost unbelievable resources at my disposal. The Mezops inhabiting the Anoroc Islands, which stretch far out to sea beyond the three principal isles with which you are familiar, number well into the millions, and by far the greater part of them are friendly to Ja. Men, women, and children turned to and worked the moment Ja explained the nature of our enterprise.

"And not only were they anxious to do all in their power to hasten the day when the Mahars should be overthrown, but--and this counted for most of all--they are simply ravenous for greater knowledge and for better ways of doing things.

"The contents of the prospector set their imaginations to working overtime, so that they craved to own, themselves, the knowledge which had made it possible for other men to create and build the things which you brought back from the outer world.

"And then," continued the old man, "the element of time, or, rather, lack of time, operated to my advantage. There being no nights, there was no laying off from work--they labored incessantly stopping only to eat and, on rare occasions, to sleep. Once we had discovered iron ore we had enough mined in an incredibly short time to build a thousand cannon. I had only to show them once how a thing should be done, and they would fall to work by thousands to do it.

"Why, no sooner had we fashioned the first muzzle-loader and they had seen it work successfully, than fully three thousand Mezops fell to work to make rifles. Of course there was much confusion and lost motion at first, but eventually Ja got them in hand, detailing squads of them under competent chiefs to certain work.

"We now have a hundred expert gun-makers. On a little isolated isle we have a great powder-factory. Near the iron-mine, which is on the mainland, is a smelter, and on the eastern shore of Anoroc, a well equipped ship-yard. All these industries are guarded by forts in which several cannon are mounted and where warriors are always on guard.

"You would be surprised now, David, at the aspect of Anoroc. I am surprised myself; it seems always to me as I compare it with the day that I first set foot upon it from the deck of the Sari that only a miracle could have worked the change that has taken place."

"It is a miracle," I said; it is nothing short of a miracle to transplant all the wondrous possibilities of the twentieth century back to the Stone Age. It is a miracle to think that only five hundred miles of earth separate two epochs that are really ages and ages apart.

"It is stupendous, Perry! But still more stupendous is the power that you and I wield in this great world. These people look upon us as little less than supermen. We must show them that we are all of that.

"We must give them the best that we have, Perry."

"Yes," he agreed; "we must. I have been thinking a great deal lately that some kind of shrapnel shell or explosive bomb would be a most splendid innovation in their warfare. Then there are breech-loading rifles and those with magazines that I must hasten to study out and learn to reproduce as soon as we get settled down again; and--"

"Hold on, Perry!" I cried. "I didn't mean these sorts of things at all. I said that we must give them the best we have. What we have given them so far has been the worst. We have given them war and the munitions of war. In a single day we have made their wars infinitely more terrible and bloody than in all their past ages they have been able to make them with their crude, primitive weapons.

"In a period that could scarcely have exceeded two outer earthly hours, our fleet practically annihilated the largest armada of native canoes that the Pellucidarians ever before had gathered together. We butchered some eight thousand warriors with the twentieth-century gifts we brought. Why, they wouldn't have killed that many warriors in the entire duration of a dozen of their wars with their own weapons! No, Perry; we've got to give them something better than scientific methods of killing one another."

The old man looked at me in amazement. There was reproach in his eyes, too.

"Why, David!" he said sorrowfully. "I thought that you would be pleased with what I had done. We planned these things together, and I am sure that it was you who suggested practically all of it. I have done only what I thought you wished done and I have done it the best that I know how."

I laid my hand on the old man's shoulder.

"Bless your heart, Perry!" I cried. "You've accomplished miracles. You have done precisely what I should have done, only you've done it better. I'm not finding fault; but I don't wish to lose sight myself, or let you lose sight, of the greater work which must grow out of this preliminary and necessary carnage. First we must place the empire upon a secure footing, and we can do so only by putting the fear of us in the hearts of our enemies; but after that--

"Ah, Perry! That is the day I look forward to! When you and I can build sewing-machines instead of battleships, harvesters of crops instead of harvesters of men, plow-shares and telephones, schools and colleges, printing-presses and paper! When our merchant marine shall ply the great Pellucidarian seas, and cargoes of silks and typewriters and books shall forge their ways where only hideous saurians have held sway since time began!"

"Amen!" said Perry.

And Dian, who was standing at my side, pressed my hand.

    
Pellucidar, by Edgar Rice Burroughs, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XV

  

CONQUEST AND PEACE

The fleet sailed directly for Hooja's island, coming to anchor at its northeastern extremity before the flat-topped hill that had been Hooja's stronghold. I sent one of the prisoners ashore to demand an immediate surrender; but as he told me afterward they wouldn't believe all that he told them, so they congregated on the cliff-top and shot futile arrows at us.

In reply I had five of the feluccas cannonade them. When they scampered away at the sound of the terrific explosions, and at sight of the smoke and the iron balls I landed a couple of hundred red warriors and led them to the opposite end of the hill into the tunnel that ran to its summit. Here we met a little resistance; but a volley from the muzzle-loaders turned back those who disputed our right of way, and presently we gained the mesa. Here again we met resistance, but at last the remnant of Hooja's horde surrendered.

Juag was with me, and I lost no time in returning to him and his tribe the hilltop that had been their ancestral home for ages until they were robbed of it by Hooja. I created a kingdom of the island, making Juag king there. Before we sailed I went to Gr-gr-gr, chief of the beast-men, taking Juag with me. There the three of us arranged a code of laws that would permit the brute-folk and the human beings of the island to live in peace and harmony. Gr-gr-gr sent his son with me back to Sari, capital of my empire, that he might learn the ways of the human beings. I have hopes of turning this race into the greatest agriculturists of Pellucidar. When I returned to the fleet I found that one of the islanders of Juag's tribe, who had been absent when we arrived, had just returned from the mainland with the news that a great army was encamped in the Land of Awful Shadow, and that they were threatening Thuria. I lost no time in weighing anchors and setting out for the continent, which we reached after a short and easy voyage.

From the deck of the Amoz I scanned the shore through the glasses that Perry had brought with him. When we were close enough for the glasses to be of value I saw that there was indeed a vast concourse of warriors entirely encircling the walled-village of Goork, chief of the Thurians. As we approached smaller objects became distinguishable. It was then that I discovered numerous flags and pennants floating above the army of the besiegers.

I called Perry and passed the glasses to him.

"Ghak of Sari," I said.

Perry looked through the lenses of a moment, and then turned to me with a smile.

"The red, white, and blue of the empire," he said. "It is indeed your majesty's army."

It soon became apparent that we had been sighted by those on shore, for a great multitude of warriors had congregated along the beach watching us. We came to anchor as close in as we dared, which with our light feluccas was within easy speaking-distance of the shore. Ghak was there and his eyes were mighty wide, too; for, as he told us later, though he knew this must be Perry's fleet it was so wonderful to him that he could not believe the testimony of his own eyes even while he was watching it approach.

To give the proper effect to our meeting I commanded that each felucca fire twenty-one guns as a salute to His Majesty Ghak, King of Sari. Some of the gunners, in the exuberance of their enthusiasm, fired solid shot; but fortunately they had sufficient good judgment to train their pieces on the open sea, so no harm was done. After this we landed--an arduous task since each felucca carried but a single light dugout.

I learned from Ghak that the Thurian chieftain, Goork, had been inclined to haughtiness, and had told Ghak, the Hairy One, that he knew nothing of me and cared less; but I imagine that the sight of the fleet and the sound of the guns brought him to his senses, for it was not long before he sent a deputation to me, inviting me to visit him in his village. Here he apologized for the treatment he had accorded me, very gladly swore allegiance to the empire, and received in return the title of king.

We remained in Thuria only long enough to arrange the treaty with Goork, among the other details of which was his promise to furnish the imperial army with a thousand lidi, or Thurian beasts of burden, and drivers for them. These were to accompany Ghak's army back to Sari by land, while the fleet sailed to the mouth of the great river from which Dian, Juag, and I had been blown.

The voyage was uneventful. We found the river easily, and sailed up it for many miles through as rich and wonderful a plain as I have ever seen. At the head of navigation we disembarked, leaving a sufficient guard for the feluccas, and marched the remaining distance to Sari.

Ghak's army, which was composed of warriors of all the original tribes of the federation, showing how successful had been his efforts to rehabilitate the empire, marched into Sari some time after we arrived. With them were the thousand lidi from Thuria.

At a council of the kings it was decided that we should at once commence the great war against the Mahars, for these haughty reptiles presented the greatest obstacle to human progress within Pellucidar. I laid out a plan of campaign which met with the enthusiastic indorsement of the kings. Pursuant to it, I at once despatched fifty lidi to the fleet with orders to fetch fifty cannon to Sari. I also ordered the fleet to proceed at once to Anoroc, where they were to take aboard all the rifles and ammunition that had been completed since their departure, and with a full complement of men to sail along the coast in an attempt to find a passage to the inland sea near which lay the Mahars' buried city of Phutra.

Ja was sure that a large and navigable river connected the sea of Phutra with the Lural Az, and that, barring accident, the fleet would be before Phutra as soon as the land forces were.

At last the great army started upon its march. There were warriors from every one of the federated kingdoms. All were armed either with bow and arrows or muzzle-loaders, for nearly the entire Mezop contingent had been enlisted for this march, only sufficient having been left aboard the feluccas to man them properly. I divided the forces into divisions, regiments, battalions, companies, and even to platoons and sections, appointing the full complement of officers and noncommissioned officers. On the long march I schooled them in their duties, and as fast as one learned I sent him among the others as a teacher.

Each regiment was made up of about a thousand bowmen, and to each was temporarily attached a company of Mezop musketeers and a battery of artillery--the latter, our naval guns, mounted upon the broad backs of the mighty lidi. There was also one full regiment of Mezop musketeers and a regiment of primitive spearmen. The rest of the lidi that we brought with us were used for baggage animals and to transport our women and children, for we had brought them with us, as it was our intention to march from one Mahar city to another until we had subdued every Mahar nation that menaced the safety of any kingdom of the empire.

Before we reached the plain of Phutra we were discovered by a company of Sagoths, who at first stood to give battle; but upon seeing the vast numbers of our army they turned and fled toward Phutra. The result of this was that when we came in sight of the hundred towers which mark the entrances to the buried city we found a great army of Sagoths and Mahars lined up to give us battle.

At a thousand yards we halted, and, placing our artillery upon a slight eminence at either flank, we commenced to drop solid shot among them. Ja, who was chief artillery officer, was in command of this branch of the service, and he did some excellent work, for his Mezop gunners had become rather proficient by this time. The Sagoths couldn't stand much of this sort of warfare, so they charged us, yelling like fiends. We let them come quite close, and then the musketeers who formed the first line opened up on them.

The slaughter was something frightful, but still the remnants of them kept on coming until it was a matter of hand-to-hand fighting. Here our spearmen were of value, as were also the crude iron swords with which most of the imperial warriors were armed.

We lost heavily in the encounter after the Sagoths reached us; but they were absolutely exterminated--not one remained even as a prisoner. The Mahars, seeing how the battle was going, had hastened to the safety of their buried city. When we had overcome their gorilla-men we followed after them.

But here we were doomed to defeat, at least temporarily; for no sooner had the first of our troops descended into the subterranean avenues than many of them came stumbling and fighting their way back to the surface, half-choked by the fumes of some deadly gas that the reptiles had liberated upon them. We lost a number of men here. Then I sent for Perry, who had remained discreetly in the rear, and had him construct a little affair that I had had in my mind against the possibility of our meeting with a check at the entrances to the underground city.

Under my direction he stuffed one of his cannon full of powder, small bullets, and pieces of stone, almost to the muzzle. Then he plugged the muzzle tight with a cone-shaped block of wood, hammered and jammed in as tight as it could be. Next he inserted a long fuse. A dozen men rolled the cannon to the top of the stairs leading down into the city, first removing it from its carriage. One of them then lit the fuse and the whole thing was given a shove down the stairway, while the detachment turned and scampered to a safe distance.

For what seemed a very long time nothing happened. We had commenced to think that the fuse had been put out while the piece was rolling down the stairway, or that the Mahars had guessed its purpose and extinguished it themselves, when the ground about the entrance rose suddenly into the air, to be followed by a terrific explosion and a burst of smoke and flame that shot high in company with dirt, stone, and fragments of cannon.

Perry had been working on two more of these giant bombs as soon as the first was completed. Presently we launched these into two of the other entrances. They were all that were required, for almost immediately after the third explosion a stream of Mahars broke from the exits furthest from us, rose upon their wings, and soared northward. A hundred men on lidi were despatched in pursuit, each lidi carrying two riflemen in addition to its driver. Guessing that the inland sea, which lay not far north of Phutra, was their destination, I took a couple of regiments and followed.

A low ridge intervenes between the Phutra plain where the city lies, and the inland sea where the Mahars were wont to disport themselves in the cool waters. Not until we had topped this ridge did we get a view of the sea.

Then we beheld a scene that I shall never forget so long as I may live.

Along the beach were lined up the troop of lidi, while a hundred yards from shore the surface of the water was black with the long snouts and cold, reptilian eyes of the Mahars. Our savage Mezop riflemen, and the shorter, squatter, white-skinned Thurian drivers, shading their eyes with their hands, were gazing seaward beyond the Mahars, whose eyes were fastened upon the same spot. My heart leaped when I discovered that which was chaining the attention of them all. Twenty graceful feluccas were moving smoothly across the waters of the sea toward the reptilian horde!

The sight must have filled the Mahars with awe and consternation, for never had they seen the like of these craft before. For a time they seemed unable to do aught but gaze at the approaching fleet; but when the Mezops opened on them with their muskets the reptiles swam rapidly in the direction of the feluccas, evidently thinking that these would prove the easier to overcome. The commander of the fleet permitted them to approach within a hundred yards. Then he opened on them with all the cannon that could be brought to bear, as well as with the small arms of the sailors.

A great many of the reptiles were killed at the first volley. They wavered for a moment, then dived; nor did we see them again for a long time.

But finally they rose far out beyond the fleet, and when the feluccas came about and pursued them they left the water and flew away toward the north.

Following the fall of Phutra I visited Anoroc, where I found the people busy in the shipyards and the factories that Perry had established. I discovered something, too, that he had not told me of--something that seemed infinitely more promising than the powder-factory or the arsenal. It was a young man poring over one of the books I had brought back from the outer world! He was sitting in the log cabin that Perry had had built to serve as his sleeping quarters and office. So absorbed was he that he did not notice our entrance. Perry saw the look of astonishment in my eyes and smiled.

"I started teaching him the alphabet when we first reached the prospector, and were taking out its contents," he explained. "He was much mystified by the books and anxious to know of what use they were. When I explained he asked me to teach him to read, and so I worked with him whenever I could. He is very intelligent and learns quickly. Before I left he had made great progress, and as soon as he is qualified he is going to teach others to read. It was mighty hard work getting started, though, for everything had to be translated into Pellucidarian.

"It will take a long time to solve this problem, but I think that by teaching a number of them to read and write English we shall then be able more quickly to give them a written language of their own."

And this was the nucleus about which we were to build our great system of schools and colleges--this almost naked red warrior, sitting in Perry's little cabin upon the island of Anoroc, picking out words letter by letter from a work on intensive farming. Now we have--

But I'll get to all that before I finish.

While we were at Anoroc I accompanied Ja in an expedition to South Island, the southernmost of the three largest which form the Anoroc group--Perry had given it its name--where we made peace with the tribe there that had for long been hostile toward Ja. They were now glad enough to make friends with him and come into the federation. From there we sailed with sixty-five feluccas for distant Luana, the main island of the group where dwell the hereditary enemies of Anoroc.

Twenty-five of the feluccas were of a new and larger type than those with which Ja and Perry had sailed on the occasion when they chanced to find and rescue Dian and me. They were longer, carried much larger sails, and were considerably swifter. Each carried four guns instead of two, and these were so arranged that one or more of them could be brought into action no matter where the enemy lay.

The Luana group lies just beyond the range of vision from the mainland. The largest island of it alone is visible from Anoroc; but when we neared it we found that it comprised many beautiful islands, and that they were thickly populated. The Luanians had not, of course, been ignorant of all that had been going on in the domains of their nearest and dearest enemies. They knew of our feluccas and our guns, for several of their riding-parties had had a taste of both. But their principal chief, an old man, had never seen either. So, when he sighted us, he put out to overwhelm us, bringing with him a fleet of about a hundred large war-canoes, loaded to capacity with javelin-armed warriors. It was pitiful, and I told Ja as much. It seemed a shame to massacre these poor fellows if there was any way out of it.

To my surprise Ja felt much as I did. He said he had always hated to war with other Mezops when there were so many alien races to fight against. I suggested that we hail the chief and request a parley; but when Ja did so the old fool thought that we were afraid, and with loud cries of exultation urged his warriors upon us.

So we opened up on them, but at my suggestion centered our fire upon the chief's canoe. The result was that in about thirty seconds there was nothing left of that war dugout but a handful of splinters, while its crew--those who were not killed--were struggling in the water, battling with the myriad terrible creatures that had risen to devour them.

We saved some of them, but the majority died just as had Hooja and the crew of his canoe that time our second shot capsized them.

Again we called to the remaining warriors to enter into a parley with us; but the chief's son was there and he would not, now that he had seen his father killed. He was all for revenge. So we had to open up on the brave fellows with all our guns; but it didn't last long at that, for there chanced to be wiser heads among the Luanians than their chief or his son had possessed. Presently, an old warrior who commanded one of the dugouts surrendered. After that they came in one by one until all had laid their weapons upon our decks.

Then we called together upon the flagship all our captains, to give the affair greater weight and dignity, and all the principal men of Luana. We had conquered them, and they expected either death or slavery; but they deserved neither, and I told them so. It is always my habit here in Pellucidar to impress upon these savage people that mercy is as noble a quality as physical bravery, and that next to the men who fight shoulder to shoulder with one, we should honor the brave men who fight against us, and if we are victorious, award them both the mercy and honor that are their due.

By adhering to this policy I have won to the federation many great and noble peoples, who under the ancient traditions of the inner world would have been massacred or enslaved after we had conquered them; and thus I won the Luanians. I gave them their freedom, and returned their weapons to them after they had sworn loyalty to me and friendship and peace with Ja, and I made the old fellow, who had had the good sense to surrender, king of Luana, for both the old chief and his only son had died in the battle.

When I sailed away from Luana she was included among the kingdoms of the empire, whose boundaries were thus pushed eastward several hundred miles.

We now returned to Anoroc and thence to the mainland, where I again took up the campaign against the Mahars, marching from one great buried city to another until we had passed far north of Amoz into a country where I had never been. At each city we were victorious, killing or capturing the Sagoths and driving the Mahars further away.

I noticed that they always fled toward the north. The Sagoth prisoners we usually found quite ready to transfer their allegiance to us, for they are little more than brutes, and when they found that we could fill their stomachs and give them plenty of fighting, they were nothing loath to march with us against the next Mahar city and battle with men of their own race.

Thus we proceeded, swinging in a great half-circle north and west and south again until we had come back to the edge of the Lidi Plains north of Thuria. Here we overcame the Mahar city that had ravaged the Land of Awful Shadow for so many ages. When we marched on to Thuria, Goork and his people went mad with joy at the tidings we brought them.

During this long march of conquest we had passed through seven countries, peopled by primitive human tribes who had not yet heard of the federation, and succeeded in joining them all to the empire. It was noticeable that each of these peoples had a Mahar city situated near by, which had drawn upon them for slaves and human food for so many ages that not even in legend had the population any folk-tale which did not in some degree reflect an inherent terror of the reptilians.

In each of these countries I left an officer and warriors to train them in military discipline, and prepare them to receive the arms that I intended furnishing them as rapidly as Perry's arsenal could turn them out, for we felt that it would be a long, long time before we should see the last of the Mahars. That they had flown north but temporarily until we should be gone with our great army and terrifying guns I was positive, and equally sure was I that they would presently return.

The task of ridding Pellucidar of these hideous creatures is one which in all probability will never be entirely completed, for their great cities must abound by the hundreds and thousands of the far-distant lands that no subject of the empire has ever laid eyes upon.

But within the present boundaries of my domain there are now none left that I know of, for I am sure we should have heard indirectly of any great Mahar city that had escaped us, although of course the imperial army has by no means covered the vast area which I now rule.

After leaving Thuria we returned to Sari, where the seat of government is located. Here, upon a vast, fertile plateau, overlooking the great gulf that runs into the continent from the Lural Az, we are building the great city of Sari. Here we are erecting mills and factories. Here we are teaching men and women the rudiments of agriculture. Here Perry has built the first printing-press, and a dozen young Sarians are teaching their fellows to read and write the language of Pellucidar.

We have just laws and only a few of them. Our people are happy because they are always working at something which they enjoy. There is no money, nor is any money value placed upon any commodity. Perry and I were as one in resolving that the root of all evil should not be introduced into Pellucidar while we lived.

A man may exchange that which he produces for something which he desires that another has produced; but he cannot dispose of the thing he thus acquires. In other words, a commodity ceases to have pecuniary value the instant that it passes out of the hands of its producer. All excess reverts to government; and, as this represents the production of the people as a government, government may dispose of it to other peoples in exchange for that which they produce. Thus we are establishing a trade between kingdoms, the profits from which go to the betterment of the people--to building factories for the manufacture of agricultural implements, and machinery for the various trades we are gradually teaching the people.

Already Anoroc and Luana are vying with one another in the excellence of the ships they build. Each has several large shipyards. Anoroc makes gunpowder and mines iron ore, and by means of their ships they carry on a very lucrative trade with Thuria, Sari, and Amoz. The Thurians breed lidi, which, having the strength and intelligence of an elephant, make excellent draft animals.

Around Sari and Amoz the men are domesticating the great striped antelope, the meat of which is most delicious. I am sure that it will not be long before they will have them broken to harness and saddle. The horses of Pellucidar are far too diminutive for such uses, some species of them being little larger than fox-terriers.

Dian and I live in a great palace overlooking the gulf. There is no glass in our windows, for we have no windows, the walls rising but a few feet above the floor-line, the rest of the space being open to the ceilings; but we have a roof to shade us from the perpetual noon-day sun. Perry and I decided to set a style in architecture that would not curse future generations with the white plague, so we have plenty of ventilation. Those of the people who prefer, still inhabit their caves, but many are building houses similar to ours.

At Greenwich we have located a town and an observatory--though there is nothing to observe but the stationary sun directly overhead. Upon the edge of the Land of Awful Shadow is another observatory, from which the time is flashed by wireless to every corner of the empire twenty-four times a day. In addition to the wireless, we have a small telephone system in Sari. Everything is yet in the early stages of development; but with the science of the outer-world twentieth century to draw upon we are making rapid progress, and with all the faults and errors of the outer world to guide us clear of dangers, I think that it will not be long before Pellucidar will become as nearly a Utopia as one may expect to find this side of heaven.

Perry is away just now, laying out a railway-line from Sari to Amoz. There are immense anthracite coal-fields at the head of the gulf not far from Sari, and the railway will tap these. Some of his students are working on a locomotive now. It will be a strange sight to see an iron horse puffing through the primeval jungles of the stone age, while cave bears, saber-toothed tigers, mastodons and the countless other terrible creatures of the past look on from their tangled lairs in wide-eyed astonishment.

We are very happy, Dian and I, and I would not return to the outer world for all the riches of all its princes. I am content here. Even without my imperial powers and honors I should be content, for have I not that greatest of all treasures, the love of a good woman--my wondrous empress, Dian the Beautiful?

 

 

 

      


===== BOOK: pgam.txt =====



Plays of Gods and Men, by Lord Dunsany, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

Plays of Gods and Men

by Lord Dunsany

London: Unwin

[1917]

Plays of Gods and Men, by Lord Dunsany, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

[f00]

Preface

Lest any idle person might think that I have had time to write plays during the last few years I may mention that the first act of The Tents of the Arabs was written on September 3rd, and the second act on September 8th, 1910.

The first and second acts of The Laughter of the Gods were written on January 29th, and the third act on February 2nd and 3rd, 1911. A Night at an Inn was written on January 17th, 1912, and The Queen's Enemies on April 19, 20, 21, 24, 28, 29, 1913.

Dunsany, Captain

Royal Inniskilling Fusileers.

Plays of Gods and Men, by Lord Dunsany, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

CONTENTS

[*Preface]

[*The Laughter of the Gods]

[*The Queen's Enemies]

[*The Tents of the Arabs]

[*A Night at an Inn]

Plays of Gods and Men, by Lord Dunsany, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

[f01]

The Laughter of the Gods

A Tragedy in Three Acts

Dramatis Personae

King Karnos

Voice-of-the-Gods (a prophet)

Ichtharion

Ludibras

Harpagas

First Sentry

Second Sentry

One of the Camel Guard

An Executioner

The Queen

Tharmia (wife of Ichtharion)

Arolind (wife of Ludibras)

Carolyx (wife of Harpagas)

Attendants

 

Act I

Time: About the time of the decadence in Babylon.

Scene: The jungle city of Thek in the reign of King Karnos.

Tharmia:

You know that my lineage is almost divine.

Arolind:

My father's sword was so terrible that he had to hide it with a cloak.

Tharmia:

He probably did that because there were no jewels in the scabbard.

Arolind:

There were emeralds in it that outstared the sea.

* * * * * * * *

Tharmia:

Now I must leave you here and go down among the shops for I have not changed my hair since we came to Thek.

Ichtharion:

Have you not brought that from Barbul-el-Sharnak?

Tharmia:

It was not necessary. The King would not take his court where they could not obtain necessities.

Arolind:

May I go with your Sincerity?

Tharmia:

Indeed, Princely Lady, I shall be glad of your company.

Arolind:

[To Ludibras] I wish to see the other palaces in Thek, [To Tharmia] then we can go on beyond the walls to see what princes live in the neighbourhood.

Tharmia:

It will be delightful.

[Exeunt Tharmia and Arolind]

Ichtharion:

Well, we are here in Thek.

Ludibras:

How lucky we are that the King has come to Thek. I feared he would never come.

Ichtharion:

It is a most fair city.

Ludibras:

When he tarried year after year in monstrous Barbul-el-Sharnak, I feared that I would see the sun rise never more in the windy glorious country. I feared we should live always in Barbul-el-Sharnak and be buried among houses.

Ichtharion:

It is mountainous with houses: there are no flowers there. I wonder how the winds come into it.

Ludibras:

Ah. Do you know that it is I that brought him here at last? I gave him orchids from a far country. At last he noticed them. "Those are good flowers," said he. "They come from Thek," I said. "Thek is purple with them. It seems purple far out on the sand to the camel men." Then...

Ichtharion:

No, it was not you brought him. He saw a butterfly once in Barbul-el-Sharnak. There had not been one there for seven years. It was lucky for us that it lived; I used to send for hundreds, but they all died but that one when they came to Barbul-el-Sharnak. The King saw it.

Ludibras:

It was since then that he noticed my purple orchids.

Ichtharion:

Something changed in his mind when he saw the butterfly. He became quite different. He would not have noticed a flower but for that.

Ludibras:

He came to Thek in order to see the orchids.

Ichtharion:

Come, come. We are here. Nothing else matters.

Ludibras:

Yes, we are here. How beautiful are the orchids.

Ichtharion:

What a beautiful thing the air is in the morning. I stand up very early and breathe it from my casement; not in order to nourish my body, you understand, but because it is the wild, sweet air of Thek.

Ludibras:

Yes, it is wonderful rising up in the morning. It seems all fresh from the fields.

Ichtharion:

It took us two days to ride out of Bar-el-Sharnak. Do you remember how men stared at our camels? No one had gone away from the city for years.

Ludibras:

I think it is not easy to leave a great city. It seems to grow thicker around you, and you forget the fields.

Ichtharion: [looking off]

The jungle is like a sea lying there below us. The orchids that blaze on it are like Tyrian ships, all rich with purple of that wonderful fish; they have even dyed their sails with it.

Ludibras:

They are not like ships because they do not move. They are like... They are like no tangible thing in all the world. They are like faint, beautiful songs of an unseen singer; they are like temptations to some unknown sin. They make me think of the tigers that slip through the gloom below them. [Enter Harpagas and a Noble of the Court, with spears and leather belts.]

Ichtharion:

Where are you going?

Harpagas:

We are going hunting.

Ichtharion:

Hunting! How beautiful!

Harpagas:

A little street goes down from the palace door; the other end of it touches the very jungle.

Ludibras:

O, heavenly city of Thek.

Ichtharion:

Have you ever before gone hunting?

Harpagas:

No; I have dreamed of it. In Barbul-el-Sharnak I nearly forgot my dream.

Ichtharion:

Man was not made for cities. I did not know this once.

Ludibras:

I will come with you.

Ichtharion:

I will come with you, too. We will go down by the little street, and there will be the jungle. I will fetch a spear as we go.

Ludibras:

What shall we hunt in the jungle?

Harpagas:

They say there are kroot and abbax; and tigers, some say, have been heard of.

Noble:

We must never go back to Barbul-el-Sharnak again.

Ichtharion:

You may rely on us.

Ludibras:

We shall keep the King in Thek.

[Exeunt, leaving two sentries standing beside the throne.]

1st Sentry:

They are all very glad to be in Thek. I, too, am glad.

2nd Sentry:

It is a very little city. Two hundred of these cities would not build Barbul-el-Sharnak.

1st Sentry:

No. But it is a finer palace, and Barbul-el-Sharnak is the centre of the world; men have drawn together there.

2nd Sentry:

I did not know there was a palace like this outside Barbul-el-Sharnak.

1st Sentry:

It was built in the days of the forefathers. They built palaces in those days.

2nd Sentry:

They must be in the jungle by now. It is quite close. How glad they were to go.

1st Sentry:

Yes, they were glad. Men do not hunt for tigers in Barbul-el-Sharnak.

[Enter Tharmia and Arolind weeping.]

Tharmia:

O it is terrible.

Arolind:

O! O! O!

1st Sentry: [To 2nd Sentry]

Something has happened.

[Enter Carolyx.]

Carolyx:

What is it, princely ladies?

[To Sentries] Go. Go away.

[Exeunt Sentries.]

What has happened?

Tharmia:

O. We went down a little street.

Carolyx:

Yes. Yes.

Arolind:

The main street of the city.

[Both weep quietly.]

Carolyx:

Yes? Yes? Yes?

Tharmia:

It ends in the jungle.

Carolyx:

You went into the jungle! There must be tigers there.

Tharmia:

No.

Arolind:

No.

Carolyx:

What did you do?

Tharmia:

We came back.

Carolyx: [in a voice of anguish]

What did you see in the street?

Tharmia:

Nothing.

Arolind:

Nothing.

Carolyx:

Nothing?

Tharmia:

There are no shops.

Arolind:

We cannot buy new hair.

Tharmia:

We cannot buy [sobs] gold-dust to put upon our hair.

Arolind:

There are no [sobs] neighbouring princes.

[Carolyx bursts bitterly into tears and continues to weep.]

Tharmia:

Barbul-el-Sharnak, Barbul-el-Sharnak. O why did the King leave Barbul-el-Sharnak?

Arolind:

Barbul-el-Sharnak. Its streets were all of agate.

Tharmia:

And there were shops where one bought beautiful hair.

Carolyx:

The King must go at once.

Tharmia: [calmer now.]

He shall go tomorrow. My husband shall speak to him.

Arolind:

Perhaps my husband might have more influence.

Tharmia and Arolind:

My husband brought him here.

Tharmia:

What!

Arolind:

Nothing. What did you say?

Tharmia:

I said nothing. I thought you spoke.

Carolyx:

It may be better for my husband to persuade him, for he was ever opposed to his coming to Thek.

Tharmia: [To Arolind]

He could have but little influence with His Majesty since the King has come to Thek.

Arolind:

No. It will be better for our husbands to arrange it.

Carolyx:

I myself have some influence with the Queen. Tharmia:

It is of no use. Her nerves are all a-quiver. She weeps if you speak with her. If you argue a matter with her she cries aloud and maidens must come and fan her and put scent on her hands.

Arolind:

She never leaves her chamber and the King would not listen to her.

Tharmia:

Hark, they are coming back. They are singing a hunting song.... why, they have killed a beast. All four of the men are bringing it on two branches.

Arolind: [bored]

What kind of beast is it?

Tharmia:

I do not know. It seems to have barbed horns.

Carolyx:

We must go and meet them.

[The song is loud and joyous.]

[Exeunt by the way that the Sentries went.]

[Enter Sentries.]

1st Sentry:

Whatever it is has passed away again for they were smiling.

2nd Sentry:

They feared that their husbands were lost and now they return in safety.

1st Sentry:

You do not know, for you do not understand women.

2nd Sentry:

I understand them quite as well as you.

1st Sentry:

That is what I say. You do not understand them. I do not understand them.

2nd Sentry:

......Oh. [A pause.]

1st Sentry:

We shall never leave Thek now.

2nd Sentry:

Why shall we never leave it?

1st Sentry:

Did you not hear how glad they were when they sang the hunting song? They say a wild dog does not turn from the trail, they will go on hunting now.

2nd Sentry:

But will the King stay here?

1st Sentry:

He only does what Ichtharion and Ludibras persuade him. He does not listen to the Queen.

2nd Sentry:

The Queen is mad.

1st Sentry:

She is not mad but she has a curious sickness, she is always frightened though there is nothing to fear.

2nd Sentry:

That would be a dreadful sickness; one would fear that the roof might fall on one from above or the earth break in pieces beneath. I would rather be mad than to fear things like that.

1st Sentry: [looking straight before him]

Hush.

[Enter King and retinue. He sits on the throne. Enter from other side Ichtharion, Ludibras, and Harpagas, each with his wife beside him, hand in hand. Each couple bows before the King, still hand in hand; then they seat themselves. The King nods once to each couple.]

King: [To Tharmia]

Well, your Sincerity, I trust that you are glad to have come to Thek.

Tharmia:

Very glad, your Majesty.

King: [To Arolind]

This is pleasanter, is it not, than Barbul-el-Sharnak?

Arolind:

Far pleasanter, your Majesty.

King:

And you, princely lady Carolyx, find all that you need in Thek?

Carolyx: More than all, your Majesty.

King: [To Harpagas]

Then we can stay here long, can we not?

Harpagas:

There are reasons of State why that were dangerous.

King:

Reasons of State? Why should we not stay here?

Harpagas:

Your Majesty, there is a legend in the World, that he who is greatest in the city of Barbul-el-Sharnak is the greatest in the world.

King:

I had not heard that legend.

Harpagas:

Your Majesty, little legends do not hive in the sacred ears of kings; nevertheless they hum among lesser men from generation to generation.

King:

I will not go for a legend to Barbul-el-Sharnak.

Harpagas:

Your Majesty, it is very dangerous....

King: [To Ladies]

We will discuss things of State which little interest your Sincerities.

Tharmia: [rising]

Your Majesty, we are ignorant of these things.

[Exeunt.]

King: [To Ichtharion and Ludibras]

We will rest from things of State for awhile, shall we not? We will be happy, (shall we not?) in this ancient beautiful palace.

Ludibras:

If your Majesty commands, we must obey.

King:

But is not Thek most beautiful? Are not the jungle orchids a wonder and a glory?

Ludibras:

They have been thought so, your Majesty; they were pretty in Barbul-el-Sharnak where they were rare.

King:

But when the sun comes over them in the morning, when the dew is on them still; are they not glorious then? Indeed, they are very glorious.

Ludibras:

I think they would be glorious if they were blue, and there were fewer of them.

King:

I do not think so. But you, Ichtharion, you think the city beautiful?

Ichtharion:

Yes, your Majesty.

King:

Ah. I am glad you love it. It is to me adorable.

Ichtharion:

I do not love it, your Majesty. I hate it very much. I know it is beautiful because your Majesty has said so.

Ludibras:

This city is dangerously unhealthy, your Majesty.

Harpagas:

It is dangerous to be absent from Barbul-el-Sharnak.

Ichtharion:

We implore your Majesty to return to the centre of the world.

King:

I will not go again to Barbul-el-Sharnak.

[Exeunt King with attendants. Ichtharion, Ludibras and Harpagas remain.]

[Enter Arolind and Carolyx; each goes up to her husband, very affectionate.]

Arolind:

And you talked to the King?

Ludibras:

Yes.

Arolind:

You told him he must go back to Barbul-el-Sharnak at once?

Ludibras:

Well, I----

Arolind:

When does he start?

Ludibras:

He did not say he will start.

Arolind:

What?

Carolyx:

We are not going?

[Arolind and Carolyx weep and step away from their husbands.]

Ludibras:

But we spoke to the King.

Arolind:

O, we must stay and die here.

Ludibras:

But we did what we could.

Arolind:

O, I shall be buried in Thek.

Ludibras:

I can do no more.

Arolind:

My clothes are torn, my hair is old. I am in rags.

Ludibras:

I am sure you are beautifully dressed.

Arolind: [full height]

Beautifully dressed! Of course I am beautifully dressed! But who is there to see me? I am alone in the jungle, and here I shall be buried.

Ludibras:

But----

Arolind:

Oh, will you not leave me alone? Is nothing sacred to you? Not even my grief?

[Exeunt Arolind and Carolyx.]

Harpagas: [To Ludibras]

What are we to do?

Ludibras:

All women are alike.

Ichtharion:

I do not allow my wife to speak to me like that.

[Exeunt Harpagas and Ludibras.]

I hope Tharmia will not weep; it is very distressing to see a woman in tears.

[Enter Tharmia.]

Do not be unhappy, do not be at all unhappy. But I have been unable to persuade the King to return to Barbul-el-Sharnak. You will be happy here after a little while.

Tharmia: [breaks into loud laughter]

You are the King's adviser. Ha-ha-ha! You are the Grand High Vizier of the Court. Ha-ha-ha. You are the warder of the golden wand. Ha-ha-ha O, go and throw biscuits to the King's dog.

Ichtharion:

What!

Tharmia:

Throw little ginger biscuits to the King's dog. Perhaps he will obey you. Perhaps you will have some influence with the King's dog if you feed him with little biscuits. You----

[Laughs and exits. Ichtharion sits with his miserable head in his hands.]

[Reenter Ludibras and Harpagas.]

Ludibras:

Has her Sincerity, the princely Lady Tharmia, been speaking with you?

Ichtharion:

She spoke a few words.

[Ludibras and Harpagas sigh.]

We must leave Thek. We must depart from Thek.

Ludibras:

What, without the King?

Harpagas:

No.

Ichtharion:

No. They would say in Barbul-el-Sharnak "these were once at Court," and men that we have flogged would spit in our faces.

Ludibras:

Who can command a King?

Harpagas:

Only the gods.

Ludibras:

The gods? There are no gods now. We have been civilised over three thousand years. The gods that nursed our infancy are dead, or gone to nurse younger nations.

Ichtharion:

I refuse the listen to---- O, the sentries are gone. No, the gods are no use to us; they were driven away by the decadence.

Harpagas:

We are not in the decadence here. Barbul-el-Sharnak is in a different age. The city of Thek is scarcely civilised.

Ichtharion:

But everybody lives in Barbul-el-Sharnak.

Harpagas:

The gods----

Ludibras:

The old prophet is coming.

Harpagas:

He believes as much in the gods as you or I do.

Ludibras:

Yes, but we must not speak as though we knew that.

[Voice-of-the-Gods (a prophet) walks across the stage.]

Ichtharion, Ludibras, and Harpagas: [rising]

The gods are good.

Voice-of-the-Gods:

They are benignant. [exit]

Ichtharion:

Listen! Let him prophesy to the King. Let him bid the King go hence lest they smite the city.

Ludibras:

Can we make him do it?

Ichtharion:

I think we can make him do it.

Harpagas:

The King is more highly civilised even than we are. He will not care for the gods.

Ichtharion:

He cannot ignore them; the gods crowned his forefather and if there are no gods who made him King?

Ludibras:

Why, that is true. He must obey a prophecy.

Ichtharion:

If the King disobeys the gods the people will tear him asunder, whether the gods created the people or the people created the gods.

[Harpagas slips out after the Prophet.]

Ludibras:

If the King discovers this we shall be painfully tortured.

Ichtharion:

How can the King discover it?

Ludibras:

He knows that there are no gods.

Ichtharion:

No man knows that of a certainty.

Ludibras:

But if there are----!

[Enter Prophet with Harpagas. Ichtharion quickly sends Ludibras and Harpagas away.]

Ichtharion:

There is a delicate matter concerning the King.

Voice-of-the-Gods:

Then I can help you little for I only serve the gods.

Ichtharion:

It also concerns the gods.

Voice-of-the-Gods:

Ah. Then I hearken.

Ichtharion:

This city is for the King, whose body is fragile, a very unhealthy city. Moreover, there is no work here that a King can profitably do. Also it is dangerous for Barbul-el-Sharnak to be long without a King, lest----

Voice-of-the-Gods:

Does this concern the gods?

Ichtharion:

In this respect it does concern the gods--that if the gods knew this they would warn the King by inspiring you to make a prophecy. As they do not know this----

Voice-of-the-Gods:

The gods know all things.

Ichtharion:

The gods do not know things that are not true. This is not strictly true----

Voice-of-the-Gods:

It is written and hath been said that the gods cannot lie.

Ichtharion:

The gods of course cannot lie, but a prophet may sometimes utter a prophecy that is a good prophecy and helpful to men, thereby pleasing the gods, although the prophecy is not a true one.

Voice-of-the-Gods:

The gods speak through my mouth; my breath is my own breath, I am human and mortal, but my voice is from the gods and the gods cannot lie.

Ichtharion:

Is it wise in an age when the gods have lost their power to anger powerful men for the sake of the gods?

Voice-of-the-Gods:

It is wise.

Ichtharion:

We are three men and you are alone with us. Will the gods save you if we want to put you to death and slip away with your body into the jungle?

Voice-of-the-Gods:

If you should do this thing the gods have willed it. If they have not willed it you cannot.

Ichtharion:

We do not wish to do it. Nevertheless you will make this prophecy--you will go before the King and you will say that the gods have spoken and that within three days' time, for the sake of vengeance upon some unknown man who is in this city, they will overthrow all Thek unless every man is departed.

Voice-of-the-Gods:

I will not do it, for the gods cannot lie.

Ichtharion:

Has it not been the custom since unremembered time for a prophet to have two wives?

Voice-of-the-Gods:

Most certainly. It is the law.

[Ichtharion holds up three fingers.]

What!

Ichtharion:

Three.

Voice-of-the-Gods:

Do not betray me. It was long ago.

Ichtharion:

You will be allowed to serve the gods no more if men know this. The gods will not protect you in this matter for you have offended also against the gods.

Voice-of-the-Gods:

It is worse that the gods should lie. Do not betray me.

Ichtharion:

I go to tell the others what I know.

Voice-of-the-Gods:

I will make the false prophecy.

Ichtharion:

Ah. You have chosen wisely.

Voice-of-the-Gods:

When the gods punish me who make them lie, they will know what punishment to give to you.

Ichtharion:

The gods will not punish us. It is long ago that the gods used to punish men.

Voice-of-the-Gods:

The gods will punish us.

Act II

[Same scene.]

[Same day.]

King Karnos: [pointing off L.]

Look at them now, are they not beautiful? They catch the last rays of the lingering sun. Can you say that the orchids are not beautiful now?

Ichtharion:

Your majesty, we were wrong, they are most beautiful. They tower up from the jungle to take the sun. They are like the diadem of some jubilant king.

King Karnos:

Ah. Now you have come to love the beauty of Thek.

Ichtharion:

Yes, yes, your Majesty, I see it now. I would live in this city always.

King Karnos:

Yes, we will live here always. There is no city lovelier than Thek. Am I not right?

Ludibras:

Your Majesty, no city is like it.

King Karnos:

Ah. I am always right.

Tharmia:

How beautiful is Thek.

Arolind:

Yes, it is like a god.

[Three notes are stricken on a sonorous gong.]

Whispers: [on]

There has been a prophecy. There has been a prophecy.

King Karnos:

Ah! there has been a prophecy. Bring in the prophet. [Exit attendant.]

[Enter mournfully with dejected head and walking very slowly Voice-of-the-Gods.]

King Karnos:

You have made a prophecy.

Voice-of-the-Gods:

I have made a prophecy.

King Karnos:

I would hear that prophecy. [A pause.]

Voice-of-the-Gods:

Your Majesty, the gods in three days' time----

King Karnos:

Stop! Is it not usual to begin with certain words? [A pause.]

Voice-of-the-Gods:

It is written and hath been said... that the gods cannot lie.

King Karnos:

That is right.

Voice-of-the-Gods:

That the gods cannot lie.

King Karnos:

Yes. Yes.

Voice-of-the-Gods:

In three days' time the gods will destroy this city for vengeance upon some man, unless all men desert it.

King Karnos:

The gods will destroy Thek!

Voice-of-the-Gods:

Yes.

King Karnos:

When will this happen?

Voice-of-the-Gods:

It must be in three days' time.

King Karnos:

How will it happen?

Voice-of-the-Gods:

Why. It will happen.

King Karnos:

How?

Voice-of-the-Gods:

Why... there will be a sound... as the riving of wood... a sound as of thunder coming up from the ground. A cleft will run like a mouse across the floor. There will be a red light, and then no light at all, and in the darkness Thek shall tumble in.

[The King sits in deep thought. Exit Prophet slowly; he begins to weep, then casts his cloak over his face. He stretches out his arms to grope his way and is led by the hand. The King sits thinking.]

Tharmia:

Save us, your Majesty.

Arolind:

Save us.

Ichtharion:

We must fly, your Majesty.

Ludibras:

We must escape swiftly.

[The King sits still in silence. He lifts a stick on his right to beat a little silver bell; but puts it down again. At last he lifts it up and strikes the bell. An Attendant enters.]

King Karnos:

Bring back that prophet. [Attendant bows and exits.]

[The King looks thoughtful. The rest have a frightened look. Re-enter Prophet.]

King Karnos:

When the gods prophesy rain in the season of rain, or the death of an old man, we believe them. But when the gods prophesy something incredible and ridiculous, such as happens not nowadays, and hath not been heard of since the fall of Bleth, then our credulity is overtaxed. It is possible that a man should lie; it is not possible that the gods should destroy a city nowadays.

Voice-of-the-Gods:

O King, have mercy.

King Karnos:

What, would you be sent safe away while your King is destroyed by the gods?

Voice-of-the-Gods:

No, no, your Majesty. I would stay in the city, your Majesty. But if the gods do not destroy the city, if the gods have misled me.

King Karnos:

If the gods have misled you they have chosen your doom. Why ask for mercy from me?

Voice-of-the-Gods:

If the gods have misled me, and punish me no further, I ask mercy from you, O King.

King Karnos:

If the gods have misled you, let the gods protect you from my executioner.

1st Sentry: [Laughs aside to 2nd Sentry]

Very witty.

2nd Sentry:

Yes, yes. [Laughs too.]

King Karnos:

If the doom fall not at sunset, why then the executioner----

Voice-of-the-Gods:

Your Majesty!

King Karnos:

No more! No doubt the gods will destroy the whole city at sunset.

[The sentries titter. The Prophet is led away.]

Ichtharion:

Your Majesty! Is it safe to kill a prophet, even for any guilt? Will not the people----

King Karnos:

Not while he is a prophet; but if he has prophesied falsely his death is due to the gods. The people once even burned a prophet themselves because he had taken three wives.

Ichtharion: [Aside to Ludibras]

It is most unfortunate, but what can we do?

Ludibras: [Aside to Ichtharion]

He will not be killed if he betray us instead.

Ichtharion: [Aside]

Why... that is true.

[All are whispering.]

King Karnos:

Why do you whisper?

Tharmia:

Your Majesty, we fear that the gods will destroy us all and...

King Karnos:

You do not fear it?

[Dead silence. A plaintive lament off. Enter the Queen. Her face is pale as paper.]

Queen: [loq.]

O your Majesty. Your Majesty. I have heard the lutanist, I have heard the lutanist.

King Karnos:

She means the lute that is heard by those about to die.

Queen:

I have heard Gog-Owza, the lutanist, playing his lute. And I shall die, O I shall die.

King Karnos:

No. No. No. You have not heard Gog-Owza. Send for her maidens, send for the Queen's maidens.

Queen:

I have heard Gog-Owza playing, and I shall die.

King Karnos:

Hark. Why, I hear it too. That is not Gog-Owza, it is only a man with a lute; I hear it too.

Queen:

O the King hears it too. The King will die. The great King will die. My child will be desolate for the King will die. Mourn, people of the jungle. Mourn, citizens of Thek. And thou, O Barbul-el-Sharnak, O metropolitan city, mourn thou in the midst of the nations, for the great King will die.

King Karnos:

No. No. No. [To oldest present.] Listen you. Do you not hear it?

The Oldest:

Yes, your Majesty.

King Karnos:

You see it is a real lute. That is no spirit playing.

Queen:

O but he is old; in a few days he will die; it is Gog-Owza, and the King will die.

King Karnos:

No, no, it is only a man. Look out of the window there. [To any Young Man.]

The Young Man:

It is dark, your Majesty, and I cannot see.

Queen:

It is the spirit Gog-Owza.

The Young Man:

I can hear the music clearly.

King Karnos:

He is young.

Queen:

The young are always in danger; they go about among swords. He will die too and the great King and I. In a few days we will be buried.

King Karnos:

Let us all listen; we cannot all die in a few days' time.

Tharmia:

I hear it clearly.

Queen:

Women are blossoms in the hand of Death. They are often close to Death. She will die too.

All:

I hear it. I hear it. And I. And I. And I. It is only a man with a lute.

Queen: [pacified]

I should like to see him, then I should know for certain.

[She looks out of the casement.]

No, it is too dark.

King Karnos:

We will call the man if you wish it.

Queen:

Yes, I shall be easy then, and then I shall sleep.

[King instructs Attendants to enquire without. Queen at window still.]

King Karnos:

It is some man down by the river playing his lute. I am told that sometimes a man will play all night.

Tharmia: [Aside]

That's their amusement here.

Arolind: [Aside] Well, really, its almost all the music we get.

Tharmia: [Aside]

It really is.

Arolind: [Aside]

O how I cry for the golden Hall of Song in Barbul-el-Sharnak. I think it would almost hold the city of Thek.

[Re-enter Attendant]

Attendant:

It is only a common lute, your Majesty. All hear it except one man.

King Karnos:

All except one, did you say? Ah, thank you.

[To Queen at window.]

It is only a common lute.

Queen:

One man did not hear it. Who was he? Where is he? Why didn't he?

Attendant:

He was riding back again to Barbul-el-Sharnak. He was just starting. He said he did not hear it.

Queen:

Oh, send for him here.

Attendant:

He is gone, your Majesty.

Queen:

Overtake him quick. Overtake him.

[Exit Attendant.]

Tharmia: [Aside to Arolind]

I wish that I were going back to Barbul-el-Sharnak.

Arolind:

O to be again at the centre of the world!

Tharmia:

Were we not talking of the golden hall?

Arolind:

Ah, yes. How lovely it was! How beautiful it was when the King was there and strange musicians came from the heathen lands with huge plumes in their hair, and played on instruments that we did not know.

Tharmia:

The Queen was better then. The music eased her.

Arolind:

This lute player is making her quite mad.

Tharmia:

Well. Well. No wonder. He has a mournful sound. Listen!

Arolind:

Do not let us listen. It makes me feel cold.

Tharmia:

He cannot play like Nagra or dear Trehannion. It is because we have heard Trehannion that we do not like to listen.

Arolind:

I do not like to listen because I feel cold.

Tharmia:

We feel cold because the Queen has opened the casement.

King Karnos: [To Attendant]

Find the man that is playing the lute and give him this and let him cease to play upon his lute.

[Exit Attendant]

Ichtharion:

Hark! He is playing still.

King Karnos:

Yes, we all hear him; it is only a man.

[To another or same Attendant]

Let him stop playing.

Attendant:

Yes, your Majesty. [Exit]

[Enter an Attendant with another]

Attendant:

This is the man that does not hear the lute.

King Karnos:

Ah. You are deaf, then, are you not?

Man:

No, your Majesty.

King Karnos:

You hear me clearly?

Man:

Yes, your Majesty.

King Karnos:

Listen! ...Now you hear the lute?

Man:

No, your Majesty.

King Karnos:

Who sent you to Barbul-el-Sharnak?

Man:

The captain of the camel-guard sent me, your Majesty.

King Karnos:

Then go and never return. You are deaf and also a fool. [To himself] The Queen will not sleep. [To Another] Bring music, bring music quickly. [Muttering] The Queen will not sleep.

[The man bows low and departs. He says farewell to a sentry. The Queen leans from the casement muttering. Music heard off.]

Queen:

Ah, that is earthly music, but of that other tune I have a fear.

King Karnos:

We have all heard it. Comfort yourself. Calm yourself.

Queen:

One man does not hear it.

King Karnos:

But he has gone away. We all hear it now.

Queen:

I wish that I could see him.

King Karnos:

A man is a small thing and the night very large and full of wonders. You may well not see him.

Queen:

I should like to see him. Why cannot I see him?

King Karnos:

I have sent the camel-guard to search for him and to stop him playing his lute.

[To Ichtharion]

Do not let the Queen know about this prophecy. She would think... I do not know what she would think.

Ichtharion:

No, your Majesty.

King Karnos:

The Queen has a very special fear of the gods.

Ichtharion:

Yes, your Majesty.

Queen:

You speak of me?

King Karnos:

O no. We speak of the gods.

[The earthly music ceases.]

Queen:

O do not speak of the gods. The gods are very terrible; all the dooms that shall ever be come forth from the gods. In misty windings of the wandering hills they forge the future even as on an anvil. The future frightens me.

King Karnos:

Call the Queen's maidens. Send quickly for her maidens. Do not let the future frighten you.

Queen:

Men laugh at the gods; they often laugh at the gods. I am more sure that the gods laugh too. It is dreadful to think of the laughter of the gods. O the lute! the lute! How clearly I hear the lute. But you all hear it? Do you not? You swear that you all hear it?

King Karnos:

Yes, yes. We all hear the lute. It is only a man playing.

Queen:

I wish I could see him. Then I should know that he was only a man and not Gog-Owza, most terrible of the gods. I should be able to sleep then.

King Karnos: [Soothingly]

Yes, yes.

[Enter Attendant]

Here comes the man that I have sent to find him. You have found the lute player. Tell the queen that you have found the lute player.

Attendant:

The camel-guard have searched, your Majesty, and cannot find any man that is playing a lute.

[Curtain]

Act III

[Three days elapse.]

Tharmia:

We have done too much. We have done too much. Our husbands will be put to death. The prophet will betray them and they will be put to death.

Arolind:

O what shall we do?

Tharmia:

It would have been better for us to have been clothed with rags than to bring our husbands to death by what we have done.

Arolind:

We have done much and we have angered a king, and (who knows!) we may have angered even the gods.

Tharmia:

Even the gods! We are become like Helen. When my mother was a child she saw her once. She says she was the quietest and gentlest of creatures and wished only to be loved, and yet because of her there was a war for four or five years at Troy, and the city was burned which had remarkable towers; and some of the gods of the Greeks took her side, my mother says, and some she says were against her, and they quarrelled upon Olympus where they live, and all because of Helen.

Arolind:

O don't, don't. It frightens me. I only want to be prettily dressed and see my husband happy.

Tharmia:

Have you seen the prophet?

Arolind:

Oh yes, I have seen him. He walks about the palace. He is free but cannot escape.

Tharmia:

What does he look like? Has he a frightened look?

Arolind:

He mutters as he walks. Sometimes he weeps; and then he puts his cloak over his face.

Tharmia:

I fear that he will betray them.

Arolind:

I do not trust a prophet. He is the go-between of gods and men. They are so far apart. How can he be true to both?

Tharmia:

This prophet is false to the gods. It is a hateful thing for a prophet to prophesy falsely.

[Prophet walks across hanging his head and muttering.]

Prophet:

The gods have spoken a lie. The gods have spoken a lie. Can all their vengeance ever atone for this?

Tharmia:

He spoke of vengeance.

Arolind:

O he will betray them.

[They weep. Enter the Queen.]

Queen:

Why do you weep? Ah, you are going to die. You heard the death-lute. You do well to weep.

Tharmia:

No, your Majesty. It is the man that has played for the last three days. We all heard him.

Queen:

Three days. Yes, it is three days. Gog-Owza plays no longer than three days. Gog-Owza grows weary then. He has given his message and he will go away.

Tharmia:

We have all heard him, your Majesty, except the deaf young man that went back to Barbul-el-Sharnak. We hear him now.

Queen: Yes! But nobody has seen him yet. My maidens have searched for him but they have not found him.

Tharmia:

Your Majesty, my husband heard him, and Ludibras, and while they live we know there is nothing to fear. If the King grew angry with them-- because of any idle story that some jealous man might tell--some criminal wishing to postpone his punishment--if the King were to grow angry with them they would open their veins; they would never survive his anger. Then we should all of us say, "Perhaps it was Gog-Owza that Ichtharion or Ludibras heard."

Queen:

The King will never grow angry with Ichtharion or Ludibras.

Tharmia:

Your Majesty would not sleep if the King grew angry with them.

Queen:

Oh, no. I should not sleep; it would be terrible.

Tharmia:

Your Majesty would be wakeful all night long and cry.

Queen:

Oh, yes. I should not sleep; I should cry all night. [Exit]

Arolind:

She has no influence with the King.

Tharmia:

No. But he hates to hear her cry all night.

[Enter Ichtharion]

I am sure that the prophet will betray you. But we have spoken to the Queen. We have told her it would be dreadful if the King were to grow angry with you, and she things she will cry all night if he is angry.

Ichtharion:

Poor frightened brain! How strong are little fancies! She should be a beautiful Queen. But she goes about white and crying, in fear of the gods. The gods, that are no more than shadows in the moonlight. Man's fear rises weird and large in all this mystery and makes a shadow of himself upon the ground and Man jumps and says "the gods." Why they are less than shadows; we have seen shadows, we have not seen the gods.

Tharmia:

O do not speak like that. There used to be gods. They overthrew Bleth dreadfully. And if they still live on in the dark of the hills, why, they might hear your words.

Ichtharion:

Why! you grow frightened, too. Do not be frightened. We will go and speak with the prophet, while you follow the Queen; be much with her, and do not let her forget that she will cry if the King should be angry with us.

Arolind:

I am almost afraid when I am with the Queen; I do not like to be with her.

Tharmia:

She could not hurt us; she is afraid of all things.

Arolind:

She makes me have huge fears of prodigious things.

[Exeunt Tharmia and Arolind.]

[Enter Ludibras.]

Ludibras:

The prophet is coming this way.

Ichtharion:

Sit down. We must speak with him. He will betray us.

Ludibras:

Why should the prophet betray us?

Ichtharion:

Because the guilt of the false prophecy is not his guilt; it is ours; and the King may spare him if he tells him that. Again, he mutters of vengeance as he walks; many have told me.

Ludibras:

The King will not spare him even if he betrays us. It was he that spoke the false prophecy to the King.

Ichtharion:

The King does not in his heart believe in the gods. It is for cheating him that the prophet is to die. But if he knows we had planned it----

Ludibras:

What can we say to the prophet?

Ichtharion:

Why, we can say nothing. But we can learn what he will do from what he says to us.

Ludibras:

Here he is. We must remember everything that he says.

Ichtharion:

Watch his eyes.

[Enter the Prophet, his eyes concealed by his cloak.]

Ichtharion and Ludibras:

The gods are good.

Voice-of-the-Gods:

They are benignant.

Ichtharion:

I am much to blame. I am very much to blame.

Ludibras:

We trust that the King will relent.

Ichtharion:

He often relents at sunset; he looks out over the orchids in the evening. They are very beautiful then, and if he is angry his anger passes away just when the cool breeze comes at the set of sun.

Ludibras:

He is sure to relent at sunset.

Ichtharion:

Do not be angry. I am indeed to blame. Do not be angry.

Voice-of-the-Gods:

I do not wish the King to relent at sunset.

Ichtharion:

Do not be unhappy.

Voice-of-the-Gods:

I say to you that I have betrayed the gods.

Ichtharion:

Listen to me. Do not be so unhappy. There are no gods. Everybody knows that there are no gods. The King knows it. Voice-of-the-Gods:

You have heard their prophet lie and believe that the gods are dead?

Ludibras:

There are indeed no gods. It is well known.

Voice-of-the-Gods:

There are gods, and they have a vengeance even for you. Listen and I will tell you what it shall be. Aye and for you also... Listen!... No, no, they are silent in the gloom of the hills. They have not spoken to me since I lied.

Ichtharion:

You are right; the gods will punish us. It is natural that they should not speak just now; but they will certainly punish us. It is not therefore necessary for any man to avenge himself upon us, even though there were any cause.

Voice-of-the-Gods:

It is not necessary.

Ichtharion:

Indeed, it might even further anger the gods if a man should be before them to punish us.

Voice-of-the-Gods:

The gods are very swift; no man outruns them.

Ludibras:

A man would be rash to attempt to.

Voice-of-the-Gods:

The sun is falling low. I will leave you now, for I have ever loved the sun at evening. I go to watch it drop through the gilded clouds, and make a wonder of familiar things. After the sunset, night, and after an evil deed, the vengeance of the gods. [Exit R.]

Ludibras: [with contemptuous wonder]

He really believes in the gods.

Ichtharion:

He is as mad as the Queen; we must humour his madness if we ever see him more. I think that all will be well.

[An executioner steals after the Prophet; he is dressed in crimson satin to the knees; he wears a leather belt and carries the axe of his trade.]

Ludibras:

His voice was angry as he went away. I fear he may yet betray us.

Ichtharion:

It is not likely. He thinks that the gods will punish us.

Ludibras:

How long will he think so? The Queen's fancies change thrice an hour.

Ichtharion:

The executioner keeps very close to him now. He comes closer every hour. There is not much time for him to change his fancies.

Ludibras:

He has the will to betray us if that fancy leaves him.

Ichtharion:

The executioner is very eager for him. He invented a new stroke lately, but he has not had a man since we came to Thek.

Ludibras:

I do not like an eager executioner--the King sees him and it makes him think...

Ichtharion:

Look how low the sun is; he has no time to betray us. The King is not yet here.

Ludibras:

He is coming.

Ichtharion:

But the prophet is not here.

Ludibras:

No, he is not yet come.

[Enter the King.]

King Karnos:

The Queen's maidens have persuaded her that there is nothing to fear. They are quite excellent; they shall dance before me. The Queen will sleep; they are quite excellent. Ah, Ichtharion. Come to me, Ichtharion.

Ludibras:

Why does the King send for you?

King Karnos:

You were wrong, Ichtharion.

Ichtharion:

Your Majesty!

[Ludibras watches.]

King Karnos:

You were wrong to think that Thek is not very lovely.

Ichtharion:

Yes, I was wrong and I am much to blame.

King Karnos:

Yes, it is very beautiful at evening. I will watch them go down over the orchids. I will never see Barbul-el-Sharnak any more. I will sit and watch the sun go down on the orchids till it is gone and all their colours fade.

Ichtharion:

It is very beautiful now. How still it is! I have never seen so still a sunset before.

King Karnos:

It is like a picture done by a dying painter, full of a beautiful colour. Even if all these orchids died to-night yet their beauty is an indestructible memory.

Ludibras: [Aside to Ichtharion]

The prophet is coming this way.

Ichtharion:

Your Majesty, the prophet walks about in the palace, and the executioner is close behind him. If the Queen saw him and the executioner would it not trouble her? Were it not better that he should be killed at once? Shall I whistle for the executioner?

King Karnos:

Not now. I said at sunset.

Ichtharion:

Your Majesty, it is merciful to kill a man before the set of the sun. For it is natural in a man to love the sun. But to see it set and to know that it will not come again is even a second death. It would be merciful to kill him now.

King Karnos:

I have said--at sunset. It were unjust to kill him before his prophecy is proven false.

Ichtharion:

But, your Majesty, we know that it is false. He also knows it.

King Karnos:

He shall die at sunset.

Ludibras:

Your Majesty, the prophet will pray for life if he is not killed now. It would be pity to grant it.

King Karnos:

Is not a King's word death? I have said he shall die at sunset.

[Enter Prophet. The Executioner creeps along close behind him.]

Voice-of-the-Gods:

O the gods are about to have lied. The gods will have lied. I have prophesied falsely and the gods will have lied. My death cannot atone for it nor the punishment of others.

[Ichtharion and Ludibras start.]

Ichtharion:

He will betray us yet.

Voice-of-the-Gods:

O why did you let your voice come through my lips? O why did you allow your voice to lie? For centuries it has been said from city to city, "The gods cannot lie." The nomads have known it out upon the plains. The mountaineers have known it near the dawn. That is all over now. O King, let me die at once. For I have prophesied falsely and at sunset the gods will lie.

King Karnos:

It is not sunset yet. No doubt you have spoken truly.

[Enter Queen.]

How well the Queen looks. Her maidens are quite excellent.

Ludibras: [To Ichtharion]

There is something a little dreadful in seeing the Queen so calm. She is like a windless sunset in the Winter before a hurricane comes and the snow swirls up before it over the world.

Ichtharion:

I do not like calm sunsets; they make me think that something is going to happen. Yes, the Queen is very quiet; she will sleep to-night.

Queen:

I am not frightened any longer. All the wild fancies of my brain have left it. I have often troubled you with little fears. Now they are all at rest and I am afraid no longer.

King Karnos:

That is good; I am very glad. You will sleep tonight.

Queen:

Sleep. Why--yes, I shall sleep. O yes, we shall all sleep.

King Karnos:

Your maidens have told you that there is nothing to fear.

Queen:

Nothing to fear? No, no more little fears to trouble me.

King Karnos:

They have told you there is nothing at all to fear. Indeed there is nothing.

Queen:

No more little fears. There is one great fear.

King Karnos:

A great fear! Why, what is it?

Queen:

I must not say. For you have often soothed me when I was frightened, and it were not well for me to trouble you at the last.

King Karnos:

What is your fear? Shall I send again for your maidens?

Queen:

No, it is not my fear. It is all men's fear if they knew.

King Karnos: [glancing round]

Ah, you have seen my man in red. I will send him away. I will----

Queen:

No, no. My fear is not earthly. I am not afraid of little things any more.

King Karnos:

Why, what is it then?

Queen:

I do not quite know. But you know how I have ever feared the gods. The gods are going to do some dreadful thing.

King Karnos:

Believe me; the gods do nothing nowadays.

Queen:

You have indeed been very good to me. It seems a little while since the camels came to Argun-Zeerith by the iris marshes, the camels with the gold-hung palanquin, and the bells above their heads, high up in the air, the silver bridal bells. It seems a very little while ago. I did not know how swift the end would come.

King Karnos:

What end? To whom is the end coming?

Queen:

Do not be troubled. We should not let Fate trouble us. The World and its daily cares, ah, they are frightful: but Fate--I smile at Fate. Fate cannot hurt us if we smile at it.

King Karnos:

What end do you say is coming?

Queen:

I do not know. Something that has been shall soon be no more.

King Karnos:

No, no. Look upon Thek. It is built of rock and our palace is all of marble. Time has not scratched it with six centuries. Six tearing centuries with all their claws. We are throned on gold and founded upon marble. Death will some day find me, indeed, but I am young. Sire after sire of mine has died in Barbul-el-Sharnak or in Thek, but has left our dynasty laughing sheer in the face of Time from over these age-old walls.

Queen:

Say farewell to me now, lest something happen.

King Karnos:

No, no, we will not say unhappy things.

Executioner:

The sun has set.

King Karnos:

Not yet. The jungle hides it. It is not yet set. Look at the beautiful light upon the orchids. For how long they have flashed their purple on the gleaming walls of Thek. For how long they will flash there on our immortal palace, immortal in marble and immortal in song. Ah, how the colour changes.

[To the Executioner]

The sun is set. Take him away.

[To the Queen]

It is he whose end you foresaw.

[The Executioner grips the Prophet by the arm.]

Voice-of-the-Gods:

The gods have lied!

King Karnos:

The jungle is sinking! It has fallen into the earth!

[The Queen smiles a little, holding his hand.]

The city is falling in! The houses are rolling towards us!

[Thunder off.]

Ichtharion:

They are coming up like a wave and darkness is coming with them.

[Loud and prolonged thunder. Flashes of red light and then total darkness. A little light comes back, showing recumbent figures, shattered pillars and rocks of white marble.]

[The Prophet's back is broken, but he raises the fore-part of his body for a moment.]

Voice-of-the-Gods: [triumphantly]

They have not lied!

Ichtharion:

O, I am killed.

[Laughter heard off.]

Someone is laughing. Laughing even in Thek! Why, the whole city is shattered.

[The laughter grows demoniac.]

What is that dreadful sound?

Voice-of-the-Gods:

It is the laughter of the gods that cannot lie, going back to their hills.

[He dies.]

[Curtain]

Plays of Gods and Men, by Lord Dunsany, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

[f02]

The Queen's Enemies

Dramatis Personae

The Queen Ackazarpses (her handmaid)

Prince Rhadamandaspes Prince Zophernes

The Priest of Horus

The King of the Four Countries

The Twin Dukes of Ethiopia

Tharni, Tharrabas, Harlee (Slaves) Slaves.

Scene: An underground temple in Egypt.

Time: The Sixth Dynasty.

[The Curtain rises on darkness in both parts of the stage. Two Slaves appear with tapers on the steps. As they go down the steps, they light the torches that are clamped against the wall, with their tapers. Afterwards when they come to the temple they light the torches there till they are all lit. The two Slaves are Tharni and Tharrabas.]

Tharrabas:

Is it much further, Tharni?

Tharni:

I think not, Tharrabas.

Tharrabas:

A dank and terrible place.

Tharni:

It is not much further.

Tharrabas:

Why does the Queen banquet in so fearful a place?

Tharni:

I know not. She banquets with her enemies.

Tharrabas:

In the land from which I was taken we do not banquet with our enemies.

Tharni:

No? The Queen will banquet with her enemies.

Tharrabas:

Why? Know you why?

Tharni:

It is the way of the Queen.

[Silence.]

Tharrabas:

The door, Tharni, we have come to the door!

Tharni:

Yes, that's the Temple.

Tharrabas:

Surely a grim place.

Tharni:

The banquet is prepared. We light these torches, that is all.

Tharrabas:

Unto whom is it holy?

Tharni:

They say to the Nile once. I know not to whom it is holy now.

Tharrabas:

So Nile has left it?

Tharni:

They say they worship him in this place no longer.

Tharrabas:

And if I were holy Nile I also would stay up there [pointing] in the sunlight.

[He suddenly sees the huge misshapen bulk of Harlee.]

Oh-h-h!

Harlee:

Urh

Tharni:

Why, it's Harlee.

Tharrabas:

I thought you were some fearful, evil god.

[Harlee laughs. He remains leaning on his great iron bar.]

Tharni:

He waits here for the Queen.

Tharrabas:

What sinister need could she have of Harlee?

Tharni:

I know not. You wait for the Queen, Harlee?

[Harlee nods.]

Tharrabas:

I would not banquet here. Not with a Queen.

[Harlee laughs long.]

Tharrabas:

Our work is done. Come. Let us leave this place.

[Exeunt Tharrabas and Tharni up the steps.]

[The Queen appears with her handmaid, Ackazarpses, coming down the steps. Her handmaid holds her train. They enter the temple.]

Queen:

Ah. All is ready.

Ackazarpses:

No, no, Illustrious Lady. Nothing is ready. Your raiment--we must fasten it here [shoulder], and then the bow in your hair.

[She begins to titivate the Queen.]

Queen:

Ackazarpses, Ackazarpses, I cannot bear to have enemies.

Ackazarpses:

Indeed, Illustrious Lady, it is wrong that you should have enemies. One so delicate, so slender and withal so beautiful should never have a foe.

Queen:

If the gods could understand they would never permit it.

Ackazarpses:

I have poured out dark wine to them, I have offered them fat, indeed, I have often offered them savoury things. I have said: The Queen should not have enemies; she is too delicate, too fair. But they will not understand.

Queen:

If they could see my tears they would never permit such woes to be borne by one small woman. But they only look at men and their horrible wars. Why must men slay one another and make horrible war?

Ackazarpses:

I blame your enemies, Illustrious Lady, more than the gods. Why should they trouble you who are so fair and so easily hurt by their anger? It was but a little territory you took from them. How much better to lose a little territory than to be unmannerly and unkind.

Queen:

O speak not of the territory. I know naught of these things. They say my Captains took it. How should I know? O why will they be my enemies?

Ackazarpses:

You are most fair to-night, Illustrious Lady.

Queen:

I must needs be fair to-night.

Ackazarpses:

Indeed you are most fair.

Queen:

A little more perfume, Ackazarpses.

Ackazarpses:

I will tie the coloured bow more evenly.

Queen:

O they will never look at it. They will not know if it is orange or blue. I shall weep if they do not look at it. It is a pretty bow.

Ackazarpses:

Calm yourself, lady! They will be here soon.

Queen:

Indeed I think they are very close to me now, for I feel myself trembling.

Ackazarpses:

You must not tremble, Illustrious Lady; you must not tremble.

Queen:

They are such terrible men, Ackazarpses.

Ackazarpses:

But you must not tremble, for your raiment is now perfect; yet if you tremble, alas! who may say how it will hang?

Queen:

They are such huge, terrible men.

Ackazarpses:

O the raiment, the raiment; you must not, you must not! Queen:

O I cannot bear it. I cannot bear it. There is Rhadamandaspes, that huge, fierce soldier, and the terrible Priest of Horus, and... and... O I cannot see them, I cannot see them.

Ackazarpses:

Lady, you have invited them.

Queen:

O say I am ill, say I am sick of a fever.

Quick, quick, say I have some swift fever and cannot see them.

Ackazarpses:

Illustrious Lady----

Queen:

Quick, for I cannot bear it.

[Exit Ackazarpses.]

Queen:

O, I cannot bear to have enemies.

Ackazarpses:

Lady, they are here.

Queen:

O what shall we do?... Set this bow higher upon my head so that it must be seen. [Ackazarpses does so.] The pretty bow.

[She continues to look in a hand mirror. A Slave descends the stairs. Then Rhadamandaspes and Zophernes. Rhadamandaspes and Zophernes stop; the Slave stops lower down.]

Zophernes:

For the last time, Rhadamandaspes, consider. Even yet we may turn back.

Rhadamandaspes:

She had no guards outside nor was there any hiding place for them. There was the empty plain and the Nile only.

Zophernes:

Who knows what she may have in this dark temple?

Rhadamandaspes:

It is small and the stairway narrow; our friends are close behind us. We could hold these steps with our swords against all her men.

Zophernes:

True. They are narrow steps. Yet... Rhadamandaspes, I do not fear man or god or even woman, yet when I saw the letter this woman sent bidding us banquet with her I felt that it was not well that we should come.

Rhadamandaspes:

She said that she would love us though we were her enemies.

Zophernes:

It is not natural to love one's enemies.

Rhadamandaspes:

She is much swayed by whims. They sway her as the winds in spring sway flowers--this way and that. This is one of her whims.

Zophernes:

I do not trust her whims.

Rhadamandaspes:

They name you Zophernes, giver of good counsel, therefore I will turn back because you counsel it, though I would fain go down and banquet with this little playful lady.

[They turn and mount.]

Zophernes:

Believe me, Rhadamandaspes, it is better. I think that if you had gone down these steps we scarcely should have seen the sky again.

Rhadamandaspes:

Well, well, we turn back, though I would fain have humoured the Queen's whim. But look. The others come. We cannot turn back. There comes the Priest of Horus; we must go to the banquet now.

Zophernes:

So be it.

[They descend.]

Rhadamandaspes:

We will be circumspect. If she has men in there we return at once.

Zophernes:

So be it.

[The Slave opens the door.]

Slave:

The Princes Rhadamandaspes and Zophernes.

Queen:

Welcome, Illustrious Princes.

Rhadamandaspes:

Greeting.

Queen: O you have brought your sword!

Rhadamandaspes:

I have brought my sword.

Queen:

O but it is so terrible, your great sword.

Zophernes:

We always carry our swords.

Queen:

O but you do not need them. If you have come to kill me your great hands are enough. But why do you bring your swords?

Rhadamandaspes:

Illustrious Lady, we do not come to kill you.

Queen:

To your post, Harlee.

Zophernes:

What are this Harlee and his post?

Ackazarpses:

Do not tremble, Illustrious Lady, indeed you must not tremble.

Queen:

He is but a fisherman; he lives upon the Nile. He nets fish; indeed he is nothing.

Zophernes:

For what is your great bar of iron, Slave?

[Harlee opens his mouth showing that he is tongueless. Exit.]

Rhadamandaspes:

Ugh! They have burned out his tongue.

Zophernes:

He goes on secret errands.

[Enter Second Slave.]

Second Slave:

The Priest of Horus.

Queen:

Welcome, holy companion of the gods.

Priest of Horus:

Greeting.

Third Slave:

The King of the Four Countries.

[She and he make obeisance.]

Fourth Slave:

The Twin Dukes of Ethiopia.

King of the Four Countries:

We are all met.

Priest of Horus:

All that have warred against her Captains.

Queen:

O speak not of my Captains. It troubles me to hear of violent men. But you have been my enemies, and I cannot bear to have enemies. Therefore I have asked you to banquet with me.

Priest of Horus:

And we have come.

Queen:

O look not so sternly at me. I cannot bear to have enemies. When I have enemies I do not sleep. Is it not so, Ackazarpses?

Ackazarpses:

Indeed, the Illustrious Lady has suffered much.

Queen:

O Ackazarpses, why should I have enemies?

Ackazarpses:

After to-night you will sleep, Illustrious Lady.

Queen:

Why, yes, for we shall all be friends; shall we not, princes? Let us be seated.

Rhadamandaspes:

[To Zophernes.] There is no other doorway. That is well.

Zophernes:

Why, no, there is not. Yet what is that great hole that is full of darkness?

Rhadamandaspes:

Only one man at a time could come that way. We are safe from man or beast. Nothing could enter that way for our swords.

Queen:

I pray you be seated.

[They seat themselves cautiously, she standing watching them.]

Zophernes:

There are no servitors.

Queen:

Are there not viands before you, Prince Zophernes, or are there too few fruits that you should blame me?

Zophernes:

I do not blame you.

Queen:

I fear you blame me with your fierce eyes.

Zophernes:

I do not blame you.

Queen:

O my enemies, I would have you kind to me. And indeed there are no servitors, for I know what evil things you think of me----

A Duke of Ethiopia:

No, Queen, indeed we think no evil of you.

Queen:

Ah, but you think terrible things.

Priest of Horus:

We think no evil of you, Illustrious Lady.

Queen:

I feared that if I had servitors you would think... you would say, "This wicked Queen, our enemy, will bid them attack us while we feast."

[First Duke of Ethiopia furtively hands food to his Slave standing behind him, who tastes it.]

Though you do not know how I dread the sight of blood, and indeed I would never bid them do such a thing. The sight of blood is shocking.

Priest of Horus:

We trust you, Illustrious Lady.

[He does the same with his Slave.]

Queen:

And for miles around this temple and all along this river I have said, "Let there be no man." I have commanded and there are not. Will you not trust me now?

[Zophernes does the same and all the guests, one by one.]

Priest of Horus:

Indeed, we trust you.

Queen:

And you, Prince Zophernes, with your fierce eyes that so frighten me, will you not trust me?

Zophernes:

O Queen, it is part of the art of war to be well prepared when in an enemy's country, and we have been so long at war with your Captains that we perforce remember some of the art. It is not that we do not trust you.

Queen:

I am all alone with my handmaid and none will trust me! O Ackazarpses, I am frightened: what if my enemies should slay me and carry me up, and cast my body into the lonely Nile.

Ackazarpses:

No, no, Illustrious Lady. They will not harm you. They do not know how their fierce looks distress you. They do not know how delicate you are.

Priest of Horus: [to Ackazarpses]

Indeed we trust the Queen and none would harm her.

[Ackazarpses soothes the Queen.]

Rhadamandaspes: [to Zophernes]

I think we do wrong to doubt her, seeing she is alone.

Zophernes: [to Rhadamandaspes]

Yet I would that the banquet were over.

Queen: [to Ackazarpses and the Priest of Horus, but audible to all]

Yet they do not eat the food that I set before them.

Duke of Ethiopia:

In Ethiopia when we feast with queens it is our custom not to eat at once but to await the Queen till she has eaten.

Queen: [Eats.]

Behold then, I have eaten.

[She looks at the Priest of Horus.]

Priest of Horus:

It has been the custom of all that held my office, from the time when there went on earth the children of the Moon, never to eat till the food is dedicate, by our sacred signs, to the gods. [He begins to wave his hands over the food.]

Queen:

The King of the Four Countries does not eat. And you, Prince Rhadamandaspes, you have given royal wine unto your slave.

Rhadamandaspes:

O Queen, it is the custom of our dynasty... and has indeed long been so,... as many say,... that the noble should not feast till the base have feasted, reminding us that our bodies even as the humble bodies of the base----

Queen:

Why do you thus watch your slave, Prince Rhadamandaspes?

Rhadamandaspes:

Even to remind myself that I have done as our dynasty doth.

Queen:

Alas for me, Ackazarpses, they will not feast with me, but mock me because I am little and alone. O I shall not sleep to-night, I shall not sleep. [She weeps.]

Ackazarpses:

Yes, yes, Illustrious Lady, you shall sleep. Be patient and all shall be well and you will sleep.

Rhadamandaspes:

But Queen, Queen, we are about to eat.

Duke of Ethiopia:

Yes, yes, indeed we do not mock you.

King of Four Countries:

We do not mock you, Queen.

Priest of Horus:

They do not mean to mock you.

Queen:

They... give my food to slaves.

Priest of Horus:

That was a mistake.

Queen:

It was... no mistake.

Priest of Horus:

The slaves were hungry.

Queen: [still weeping]

They believe I would poison them.

Priest of Horus:

No, no, Illustrious Lady, they do not believe that.

Queen:

They believe I would poison them.

Ackazarpses: [comforting her]

O hush, hush. They do not mean to be so cruel.

Priest of Horus:

They do not believe you would poison them. But they do not know if the meat was killed with a poisonous arrow or if an asp may have inadvertently bitten the fruit. These things may happen, but they do not believe you would poison them.

Queen:

They believe I would poison them.

Rhadamandaspes:

No; Queen, see, we eat.

[They hastily whisper to slaves.]

1st Duke of Ethiopia:

We eat your viands, Queen.

2nd Duke of Ethiopia:

We drink your wine.

King of Four Countries:

We eat your good pomegranates and Egyptian grapes.

Zophernes:

We eat.

[They all eat.]

Priest of Horus: [smiling affably]

I too eat of your excellent banquet, O Queen.

[He peels a fruit slowly, glancing constantly at the others. Meanwhile the catches in the Queen's breath grow fewer, she begins to dry her eyes.]

Ackazarpses: [in her ear]

They eat.

[Ackazarpses lifts her head and watches them.]

Queen:

Perhaps the wine is poisoned.

Priest of Horus:

No, no, Illustrious Lady.

Queen:

Perhaps the grape was cut by a poisoned arrow.

Priest of Horus:

But indeed... indeed...

[Queen drinks from his cup.]

Queen:

Will you not drink my wine?

Priest of Horus:

I drink to our continued friendship.

[He drinks.]

A Duke of Ethiopia:

Our continued friendship!

Priest of Horus:

There has been no true enmity. We misunderstood the Queen's armies.

Rhadamandaspes: [to Zophernes]

We have wronged the Queen. The wine's not poisoned. Let us drink to her.

Zophernes:

So be it.

Rhadamandaspes:

We drink to you, Queen.

Zophernes:

We drink.

Queen:

The flagon, Ackazarpses.

[Ackazarpses brings it. The Queen pours it into her cup.]

Fill up your goblets from the flagon, princes. [She drinks.]

Rhadamandaspes:

We wronged you, Queen. It is a blessed wine.

Queen:

It is an ancient wine and grew in Lesbos, looking from Mytelene to the South. Ships brought it overseas and up this river to gladden the hearts of man in holy Egypt. But to me it brings no joy.

Duke of Ethiopia:

It is a happy wine, Queen.

Queen:

I have been thought a poisoner.

Priest of Horus:

Indeed, none has thought that, Illustrious Lady.

Queen:

You have all thought it.

Rhadamandaspes:

We ask your pardon, Queen.

King of Four Countries:

We ask your pardon.

Duke of Ethiopia:

Indeed we erred.

Zophernes: [rising]

We have eaten your fruits and drunk your wine; and we have asked your pardon. Let us now depart in amity.

Queen:

No, no! No, no! You must not go! I shall say... "They are my enemies still," and I shall not sleep. I that cannot bear to have enemies.

Zophernes:

Let us depart in all amity.

Queen:

O will you not feast with me?

Zophernes:

We have feasted.

Rhadamandaspes:

No, no, Zophernes. Do you not see? The Queen takes it to heart.

[Zophernes sits down.]

Queen:

O feast with me a little longer and make merry, and be my enemies no more. Rhadamandaspes, there is some country eastwards towards Assyria, is there not? I do not know its name--a country which your dynasty claims of me...

Zophernes:

Ha!

Rhadamandaspes: [resignedly]

We have lost it.

Queen:

...and for whose sake you are my enemy and your fierce uncle, Prince Zophernes.

Rhadamandaspes:

We fought somewhat with your armies, Queen. But indeed it was but to practise the military art.

Queen:

I will call my Captains to me. I will call them down from their high places and reprove them and bid them give the country back to you that lies eastwards towards Assyria. Only you shall tarry here at the feast and forget you ever were my enemies... forget...

Rhadamandaspes:

Queen...! Queen...! It was my mother's country as a child.

Queen:

You will not leave me alone then here to-night.

Rhadamandaspes:

No, most royal lady.

Queen: [to King of Four Countries who appears about to depart]

And in the matter of the merchant men that trade amongst the isles, they shall offer spices at your feet, not at mine, and the men of the isles shall offer goats to your gods.

King of Four Countries:

Most generous Queen... indeed...

Queen:

But you will not leave my banquet and go unfriendly away.

King of Four Countries:

No, Queen... [He drinks.]

Queen: [she looks at the Twin Dukes amiably]

All Ethiopia shall be yours, down to the unknown kingdoms of the beasts.

1st Duke of Ethiopia:

Queen.

2nd Duke of Ethiopia:

Queen. We drink to the glory of your throne.

Queen:

Stay then and feast with me. For not to have enemies is the beggar's joy; and I have looked from windows long and long, envying those that go their way in rags. Stay with me, dukes and princes.

Priest of Horus:

Illustrious Lady, the generosity of your royal heart has given the gods much joy.

Queen: [smiles at him.]

Thank you.

Priest of Horus:

Er... in the matter of the tribute due to Horus from all the people of Egypt...

Queen:

It is yours.

Priest of Horus:

Illustrious Lady.

Queen:

I will take none of it. Use it how you will.

Priest of Horus:

The gratitude of Horus shall shine on you. My little Ackazarpses, how happy you are in having so royal a mistress.

[His arm is round Ackazarpses' waist: she smiles at him.]

Queen: [rising]

Princes and gentlemen, let us drink to the future.

Priest of Horus: [starting suddenly]

Ah-h-h!

Queen:

Something has troubled you, holy companion of the gods?

Priest of Horus:

No, nothing. Sometimes the spirit of prophecy comes on me. It comes not often. It seemed to come then. I thought that one of the gods spoke to me clearly.

Queen:

What said he?

Priest of Horus:

I thought he said... speaking here [right ear] or just behind me... Drink not to the Future. But it was nothing.

Queen:

Will you drink then to the past?

Priest of Horus:

O no, Illustrious Lady, for we forget the past; your good wine has made us forget the past and its quarrels.

Ackazarpses: Will you not drink to the present?

Priest of Horus:

Ah, the present! The present that places me by so lovely a lady. I drink to the present.

Queen: [to the others]

And we, we will drink to the future, and to forgetting--to the forgetting of our enemies.

[All drink; good temper comes on all. The banquet begins "to go well."]

Queen:

Ackazarpses, they are all merry now.

Ackazarpses:

They are all merry.

Queen:

They are telling Ethiopian tales.

1st Duke of Ethiopia:

...for when Winter comes the pigmies at once put themselves in readiness for war and having chosen a place for battle wait there for some days, so that the cranes when they arrive find their enemy already arrayed. And at first they preen themselves and do not give battle, but when they are fully rested after their great journey they attack the pigmies with indescribably fury so that many are slain, but the pigmies...

Queen: [taking her by the wrist]

Ackazarpses! Come!

[The Queen rises.]

Zophernes:

Queen, you do not leave us?

Queen:

For a little while, Prince Zophernes.

Zophernes:

For what purpose?

Queen:

I go to pray to a very secret god.

Zophernes:

What is his name?

Queen:

His name is secret like his deeds.

[She goes to door. Silence falls. All watch her. She and Ackazarpses slip out. For a moment silence. Then all draw their wide swords and lay them before them on the table.]

Zophernes:

To the door, slaves. Let no man enter.

1st Duke of Ethiopia:

She cannot mean to harm us!

[A Slave comes back from door and abases himself. Loq.]

Slave:

The door is bolted.

Rhadamandaspes:

It is easily broken with our swords.

Zophernes:

No harm can come to us while we guard the entrances.

[Meanwhile the Queen has gone up the stairs. She beats with a fan on the wall thrice. The great grating lifts outwards and upwards very slowly.]

Zophernes: [to the Two Dukes]

Quick, to the great hole.

Stand on each side of it with your swords.

[They lift their swords over the hole.]

Slay whatever enters.

Queen:

[on the step, kneeling, her two arms stretched upwards]

O holy Nile! Ancient Egyptian river! O blessed Nile!

When I was a little child I played beside you, picking mauve flowers. I threw you down the sweet Egyptian flowers. It is the little Queen that calls to you, Nile. The little Queen that cannot bear to have enemies.

Hear me, O Nile.

Men speak of other rivers. But I do not hearken to fools. There is only Nile. It is the little child that prays to you who used to pick mauve flowers.

Hear me, O Nile.

I have prepared a sacrifice to god. Men speak of other gods: there is only Nile. I have prepared a sacrifice of wine--the Lesbian wine from fairy Mitylene--to mingle with your waters till you are drunken and go singing to the sea from the Abyssinian hills.

O Nile, hear me.

Fruits also I have made ready, all the sweet juices of the earth; and the meat of beasts also.

Hear me, O Nile: for it is not the meat of beasts only. I have slaves for you and princes and a King. There has been no such sacrifice. Come down, O Nile, from the sunlight. O ancient Egyptian river!

The sacrifice is ready. O Nile, hear me.

Duke of Ethiopia:

No one comes.

Queen: [beats again with her fan]

Harlee, Harlee, let in the water upon the princes and gentlemen.

[A green torrent descends from the great hole. Green gauzes rise from the floor; the torches hiss out. The temple is flooded. The water from under the doors rises up the steps, the torches hiss out one by one. The water, finding its own level, just touches the end of the Queen's skirt and stops. She withdraws the skirt with catlike haste from the water.]

Queen:

O Ackazarpses! Are all my enemies gone?

Ackazarpses:

Illustrious Lady, the Nile has taken them all.

Queen: [with intense devotion]

That holy river.

Ackazarpses:

Illustrious Lady, will you sleep to-night?

Queen:

Yes. I shall sleep sweetly.

[curtain]

Plays of Gods and Men, by Lord Dunsany, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

[f03]

The Tents of the Arabs

Dramatis Personae

The King Bel-Narb, Aoob (camel-drivers) The Chamberlain Zabra (a notable) Eznarza (a gypsy of the desert)

Scene: Outside the gate of the city of Thalanna.

Time: Uncertain.

Act I

Bel-Narb:

By evening we shall be in the desert again.

Aoob:

Yes.

Bel-Narb:

Then no more city for us for many weeks.

Aoob:

Ah!

Bel-Narb:

We shall see the lights come out, looking back from the camel-track; that is the last we shall see of it.

Aoob:

We shall be in the desert then.

Bel-Narb:

The old angry desert.

Aoob:

How cunningly the Desert hides his wells. You would say he had an enmity with man. He does not welcome you as the cities do.

Bel-Narb:

He has an enmity. I hate the desert.

Aoob:

I think there is nothing in the world so beautiful as cities.

Bel-Narb:

Cities are beautiful things.

Aoob:

I think they are loveliest a little after dawn when night falls off from the houses. They draw it away from them slowly and let it fall like a cloak and stand quite naked in their beauty to shine in some broad river; and the light comes up and kisses them on the forehead. I think they are loveliest then. The voices of men and women begin to arise in the streets, scarce audible, one by one, till a slow loud murmur arises and all the voices are one. I often think the city speaks to me then: she says in that voice of hers, "Aoob, Aoob, who one of these days shall die, I am not earthly, I have been always, I shall not die."

Bel-Narb:

I do not think that cities are loveliest at dawn. We can see dawn in the desert any day. I think they are loveliest just when the sun is set and a dusk steals along the narrower streets, a kind of mystery in which we can see cloaked figures and yet not quite discern whose figures they be. And just when it would be dark, and out in the desert there would be nothing to see but a black horizon and a black sky on top of it, just then the swinging lanterns are lighted up and lights come out in windows one by one and all the colours of the raiments change. Then a woman perhaps will slip from a little door and go away up the street into the night, and a man perhaps will steal by with a dagger for some old quarrel's sake, and Skarmi will light up his house to sell brandy all night long, and men will sit on benches outside his door playing skabash by the glare of a small green lantern, while they light great bubbling pipes and smoke nargroob. O, it is all very good to watch. And I like to think as I smoke and see these things that somewhere, far away, the desert has put up a huge red cloud like a wing so that all the Arabs know that next day the Siroc will blow, the accursed breath of Eblis the father of Satan.

Aoob:

Yes, it is pleasant to think of the Siroc when one is safe in a city, but I do not like to think about it now, for before the day is out we will be taking pilgrims to Mecca, and who ever prophesied or knew by wit what the desert had in store? Going into the desert is like throwing bone after bone to a dog, some he will catch and some of them he will drop. He may catch our bones, or we may go by and come to gleaming Mecca. O-ho, I would I were a merchant with a little booth in a frequented street to sit all day and barter.

Bel-Narb:

Aye, it is easier to cheat some lord coming to buy silk and ornaments in a city than to cheat death in the desert. Oh, the desert, the desert, I love the beautiful cities and I hate the desert.

Aoob: [pointing off L]

Who is that?

Bel-Narb:

What? There by the desert's edge where the camels are?

Aoob:

Yes, who is it?

Bel-Narb:

He is staring across the desert the way that the camels go. They say that the King goes down to the edge of the desert and often stares across it. He stands there for a long time of an evening looking towards Mecca.

Aoob:

Of what use is it to the King to look towards Mecca? He cannot go to Mecca. He cannot go into the desert for one day. Messengers would run after him and cry his name and bring him back to the council-hall or to the chamber of judgments. If they could not find him their heads would be struck off and put high up upon some windy roof: the judges would point at them and say, "They see better there!"

Bel-Narb:

No, the King cannot go away into the desert. If God were to make me King I would go down to the edge of the desert once, and I would shake the sand out of my turban and out of my beard and then I would never look at the desert again. Greedy and parched old parent of thousands of devils! He might cover the wells with sand, and blow with his Siroc, year after year and century after century, and never earn one of my curses--if God made me King.

Aoob:

They say you are like the King.

Bel-Narb:

Yes, I am like the King. Because his father disguised himself as a camel-driver and came through our villages. I often say to myself, "God is just. And if I could disguise myself as the King and drive him out to be a camel-driver, that would please God for He is just."

Aoob:

If you did this God would say, "Look at Bel-Narb, whom I made to be a camel-driver and who has forgotten this." And then he would forget you, Bel-Narb.

Bel-Narb:

Who knows what God would say?

Aoob:

Who knows? His ways are wonderful.

Bel-Narb:

I would not do this thing, Aoob. I would not do it. It is only what I say to myself as I smoke, or at night out in the desert. I say to myself, "Bel-Narb is King in Thalanna." And then I say, "Chamberlain, bring Skarmi here with his brandy and his lanterns and boards to play skabash, and let all the town come and drink before the palace and magnify my name."

Pilgrims: [calling off L.]

Bel-Narb! Bel-Narb! Child of two dogs. Come and untether your camels. Come and start for holy Mecca.

Bel-Narb:

A curse on the desert.

Aoob:

The camels are rising. The caravan starts for Mecca. Farewell, beautiful city.

[Pilgrims' voices off: "Bel-Narb! Bel-Narb!"]

Bel-Narb:

I come, children of sin.

[Exeunt Bel-Narb and Aoob.]

[The King enters through the great door crowned. He sits upon the step.]

King:

A crown should not be worn upon the head. A sceptre should not be carried in Kings' hands. But a crown should be wrought into a golden chain, and a sceptre driven stake-wise into the ground so that a King may be chained to it by the ankle. Then he would know that he might not stray away into the beautiful desert and might never see the palm trees by the wells. O Thalanna, Thalanna, how I hate this city with its narrow, narrow ways, and evening after evening drunken men playing skabash in the scandalous gambling house of that old scoundrel Skarmi. O that I might marry the child of some unkingly house that generation to generation had never known a city, and that we might ride from here down the long track through the desert, always we two alone till we came to the tents of the Arabs. And the crown--some foolish, greedy man should be given it to his sorrow. And all this may not be, for a King is yet a King.

[Enter Chamberlain through door.]

Chamberlain:

Your Majesty!

King:

Well, my lord Chamberlain, have you more work for me to do?

Chamberlain:

Yes, there is much to do.

King:

I had hoped for freedom this evening, for the faces of the camels are towards Mecca, and I would see the caravans move off into the desert where I may not go.

Chamberlain:

There is very much for your Majesty to do. Iktra has revolted.

King:

Where is Iktra?

Chamberlain:

It is a little country tributary to your Majesty, beyond Zebdarlon, up among the hills.

King:

Almost, had it not been for this, almost I had asked you to let me go away among the camel-drivers to golden Mecca. I have done the work of a King now for five years and listened to my councilors, and all the while the desert called to me; he said, "Come to the tents of my children, to the tents of my children!" And all the while I dwelt among these walls.

Chamberlain:

If your majesty left the city now----

King:

I will not, we must raise an army to punish the men of Iktra.

Chamberlain:

Your Majesty will appoint the commanders by name. A tribe of your Majesty's fighting men must be summoned from Agrarva and another from Coloono, the jungle city, as well as one from Mirsk. This must be done by warrants sealed by your hand. Your Majesty's advisers await you in the council-hall.

King:

The sun is very low. Why have the caravans not started yet?

Chamberlain:

I do not know. And then your Majesty----

King: [laying his hand on the Chamberlain's arm]

Look, look! It is the shadows of the camels moving towards Mecca. How silently they slip over the ground, beautiful shadows. Soon they are out in the desert flat on the golden sands. And then the sun will set and they will be one with night.

Chamberlain:

If your Majesty has time for such things there are the camels themselves.

King:

No, no, I do not wish to watch the camels. They can never take me out to the beautiful desert to be free forever from cities. Here I must stay to do the work of a King. Only my dreams can go, and the shadows of the camels carry them, to find peace by the tents of the Arabs.

Chamberlain:

Will your Majesty now come to the council-hall?

King:

Yes, yes, I come.

[Voices off: "Ho-Yo! Ho-Yay! ...Ho-Yo! Ho-Yay!"]

Now the whole caravan has started. Hark to the drivers of the baggage-camels. They will run behind them for the first ten miles, and tomorrow they will mount them. They will be out of sight of Thalanna then, and the desert will lie all round them with sunlight falling on its golden smiles. And a new look will come into their faces. I am sure that the desert whispers to them by night saying, "Be at peace, my children, at peace, my children."

[Meanwhile the Chamberlain has opened the door for the King and is waiting there bowing, with his hand resolutely on the opened door.]

Chamberlain:

Your Majesty will come to the council-hall?

King:

Yes, I will come. Had it not been for Iktra I might have gone away and lived in the golden desert for a year, and seen holy Mecca.

Chamberlain:

Perhaps your Majesty might have gone had it not been for Iktra.

King:

My curse upon Iktra! [He goes through the doorway.]

[As they stand in doorway enter Zabra R.]

Zabra:

Your Majesty.

King:

O-ho. More work for an unhappy King.

Zabra:

Iktra is pacified.

King:

Is pacified?

Zabra:

It happened suddenly. The men of Iktra met with a few of your Majesty's fighting men and an arrow chanced to kill the leader of the revolt, and therefore the mob fled away although they were many, and they have all cried for three hours, "Great is the King!"

King:

I will even yet see Mecca and the dreamed-of tents of the Arabs. I will go down now into the golden sands, I----

Chamberlain:

Your Majesty----

King:

In a few years I will return to you.

Chamberlain:

Your Majesty, it cannot be. We could not govern the people for more than a year. They would say, "The King is dead, the King----"

King:

Then I will return in a year. In one year only. Chamberlain:

It is a long time, your Majesty.

King:

I will return at noon a year from to-day.

Chamberlain:

But, your Majesty, a princess is being sent for from Tharba.

King:

I thought one was coming from Karshish.

Chamberlain:

It has been thought more advisable that your Majesty should wed in Tharba. The passes across the mountains belong to the King of Tharba and he has great traffic with Sharan and the Isles.

King:

Let it be as you will.

Chamberlain:

But, your Majesty, the ambassadors start this week; the princess will be here in three months' time.

King:

Let her come in a year and a day.

Chamberlain:

Your Majesty!

King:

Farewell, I am in haste. I go to make ready for the desert. [Exit through door still speaking.] The olden, golden mother of happy men.

Chamberlain: [to Zabra]

One from whom God had not withheld all wisdom would not have given that message to our crazy young King.

Zabra:

But it must be known. Many things might happen if it were not known at once.

Chamberlain:

I knew it this morning. He is off to the desert now.

Zabra:

That is evil indeed; but we can lure him back.

Chamberlain:

Perhaps not for many days.

Zabra:

The King's favour is like gold. Chamberlain:

It is like much gold. Who are the Arabs that the King's favour should be cast among them? The walls of their houses are canvas. Even the common snail has a finer wall to his house.

Zabra:

O, it is most evil. Alas that I told him this! We shall be poor men.

Chamberlain:

No one will give us gold for many days.

Zabra:

Yet you will govern Thalanna while he is away. You can increase the taxes of the merchants and the tribute of the men that till the fields.

Chamberlain:

They will only pay taxes and tribute to the King, who gives of his bounty to just and upright men when he is in Thalanna. But while he is away the surfeit of his wealth will go to unjust men and to men whose beards are unclean and who fear not God.

Zabra:

We shall indeed be poor.

Chamberlain:

A little gold perhaps from evil-doers for justice. Or a little money to decide the dispute of some righteous wealthy man; but no more till the King returns, whom God prosper.

Zabra:

God increase him. Will you yet try to detain him?

Chamberlain:

No. When he comes by with his retinue and escort I will walk beside his horse and tell him that a progress through the desert will well impress the Arabs with his splendour and turn their hearts towards him. And I will speak privily to some captain at the rear of the escort and he shall afterwards speak to the chief commander that he may lose the camel-track in a few days' time and take the King and his followers to wander in the desert and so return by chance to Thalanna again. And it may yet be well with us. We will wait here till they come by.

Zabra:

Will the chief commander do this thing certainly?

Chamberlain:

Yes, he will be one Thakbar, a poor man and a righteous.

Zabra:

But if he be not Thakbar but some greedy man who demands more gold than we would give to Thakbar?

Chamberlain:

Why, then we must give him even what he demands, and God will punish his greed.

Zabra:

He must come past us here.

Chamberlain:

Yes, he must come this way. He will summon the cavalry from the Saloia Samang.

Zabra:

It will be nearly dark before they can come.

Chamberlain:

No, he is in great haste. He will pass before sunset. He will make them mount at once.

Zabra: [looking off R.]

I do not see stir at the Saloia.

Chamberlain: [looking, too] No--no. I do not see. He will make a stir.

[As they look a man comes through the doorway wearing a coarse brown cloak which falls over his forehead. Exit furtively L.]

What man is that? He has gone down to the camels.

Zabra:

He has given a piece of money to one of the camel-drivers.

Chamberlain:

See, he has mounted.

Zabra:

Can it have been the King!

[Voice off L. "Ho-Yo! Ho-Yay!"]

Chamberlain:

It is only some camel-driver going into the desert. How glad his voice sounds.

Zabra:

The Siroc will swallow him.

Chamberlain:

What--if it were the King!

Zabra:

Why, if it were the King we should starve for a year.

[One year elapses between the first and second acts.]

Act II

[The same scene.]

[The King, wrapped in a camel-driver's cloak, sits by Eznarza, a gypsy of the desert.]

King:

Now I have known the desert and dwelt in the tents of the Arabs.

Eznarza:

There is no land like the desert and like the Arabs no people.

King:

It is all over and done; I return to the walls of my fathers.

Eznarza:

Time cannot put it away; I go back to the desert that nursed me.

King:

Did you think in those days on the sands, or among the tents in the mornings, that my year would ever end, and I be brought away by strength of my word to the prisoning of a palace?

Eznarza:

I knew that Time would do it, for my people have learned the way of him.

King:

Is it then Time that has mocked our futile prayers? Is he then greater than God that he has laughed at our praying?

Eznarza:

We may not say that he is greater than God. Yet we prayed that our own year might not pass away. God could not save it.

King:

Yes, yes. We prayed that prayer. All men would laugh at it.

Eznarza:

The prayer was not laughable. Only he that is lord of the years is obdurate. If a man prayed for life to a furious, merciless Sultan well might the Sultan's slaves laugh. Yet it is not laughable to pray for life.

King:

Yes, we are slaves of Time. To-morrow brings the princess who comes from Tharba. We must bow our heads.

Eznarza:

My people say that Time lives in the desert. He lies there in the sun.

King:

No, no, not in the desert. Nothing alters there.

Eznarza:

My people say that the desert is his country. He smites not his own country, my people say. But he overwhelms all other lands of the world.

King: Yes, the desert is always the same, even the littlest rocks of it.

Eznarza:

They say that he loves the Sphinx and does not harm her. They say that he does not dare to harm the Sphinx. She has borne him many gods whom the infidels worship.

King:

Their father is more terrible than all the false gods.

Eznarza:

O, that he had but spared our little year.

King:

He destroys all things utterly.

Eznarza:

There is a little child of man that is mightier than he, and who saves the world from Time.

King:

Who is this little child that is mightier than Time? Is it Love that is mightier?

Eznarza:

No, not Love.

King:

If he conquers even Love then none are mightier.

Eznarza:

He scares Love away with weak white hairs and with wrinkles. Poor little Love, poor Love, Time scares him away.

King:

What is this child of man that can conquer Time and that is braver than Love?

Eznarza:

Even Memory.

King:

Yes. I will call to him when the wind is from the desert and the locusts are beaten against my obdurate walls. I will call to him more when I cannot see the desert and cannot hear the wind of it.

Eznarza:

He shall bring back our year to us that Time cannot destroy. Time cannot slaughter it if Memory says no. It is reprieved, though banished. We shall often see it though a little far off and all its hours and days shall dance to us and go by one by one and come back and dance again.

King:

Why, that is true. They shall come back to us. I had thought that they that work miracles whether in Heaven or Earth were unable to do one thing. I thought that they could not bring back days again when once they had fallen into the hands of Time.

Eznarza:

It is a trick that Memory can do. He comes up softly in the town or the desert, wherever a few men are, like the strange dark conjurors who sing to snakes, and he does his trick before them, and does it again and again.

King:

We will often make him bring the old days back when you are gone to your people and I am miserably wedded to the princess coming from Tharba.

Eznarza:

They will come with sand on their feet from the golden, beautiful desert; they will come with a long-gone sunset each one over his head. Their lips will laugh with the olden evening voices.

King:

It is nearly noon. It is nearly noon. It is nearly noon.

Eznarza:

Why, we part then.

King:

O, come into the city and be Queen there. I will send its princess back again to Tharba. You shall be Queen in Thalanna.

Eznarza:

I go now back to my people. You will wed the princess from Tharba on the morrow. You have said it. I have said it.

King:

O, that I had not given my word to return.

Eznarza:

A King's word is like a King's crown and a King's sceptre and a King's throne. It is in fact a foolish thing, like a city.

King:

I cannot break my word. But you can be Queen in Thalanna.

Eznarza:

Thalanna will not have a gypsy for a Queen.

King:

I will make Thalanna have her for a Queen.

Eznarza:

You cannot make a gypsy live for a year in a city.

King:

I knew of a gypsy that lived once in a city.

Eznarza:

Not such a gypsy as I... come back to the tents of the Arabs.

King:

I cannot. I gave my word.

Eznarza:

Kings have broken their words.

King:

Not such a King as I.

Eznarza:

We have only that little child of man whose name is Memory.

King:

Come. He shall bring back to us, before we part, one of those days that were banished.

Eznarza:

Let it be the first day. The day we met by the well when the camels came to El-Lolith.

King:

Our year lacked some few days. For my year began here. The camels were some days out.

Eznarza:

You were riding a little wide of the caravan, upon the side of the sunset. Your camel was swinging on with easy strides. But you were tired.

King:

You had come to the well for water. At first I could see your eyes, then the stars came out, and it grew dark and I only saw your shape, and there was a little light about your hair: I do not know if it was the light of the stars, I only knew that it shone.

Eznarza:

And then you spoke to me about the camels.

King:

Then I heard your voice. You did not say the things you would say now.

Eznarza:

Of course I did not.

King:

You did not say things in the same way even.

Eznarza:

How the hours come dancing back!

King:

No, no. Only their shadows. We went together then to Holy Mecca. We dwelt alone in tents in the golden desert. We heard the wild free day sing sings in his freedom, we heard the beautiful night wind. Nothing remains of our year but desolate shadows. Memory whips them and they will not dance.

[Eznarza does not answer.]

We made our farewells where the desert was. The city shall not hear them.

[Eznarza covers her face. The King rises softly and walks up the steps. Enter L. the Chamberlain and Zabra, only noticing each other.]

Chamberlain:

He will come. He will come.

Zabra:

But it is noon now. Our fatness has left us. Our enemies mock at us. If he do not come God has forgotten us and our friends will pity us!

[Enter Bel-Narb and Aoob.]

Chamberlain:

If he is alive he will come.

Zabra:

I fear that it is past noon.

Chamberlain:

Then he is dead or robbers have waylaid him.

[Chamberlain and Zabra put dust upon their heads.]

Bel-Narb: [To Aoob.]

God is just!

[To Chamberlain and Zabra.]

I am the King!

[The King's hand is on the door. When Bel-Narb says this he goes down the steps again and sits beside the gypsy. She raises her head from her hands and looks at him fixedly. He watches Bel-Narb, and the Chamberlain and Zabra. He partially covers his face Arab fashion.]

Chamberlain:

Are you indeed the King?

Bel-Narb:

I am the King.

Chamberlain:

Your Majesty has altered much since a year ago.

Bel-Narb:

Men alter in the desert. And alter much.

Aoob:

Indeed, your Excellency, he is the King. When the King went into the desert disguised I fed his camel. Indeed he is the King.

Zabra:

He is the King. I know the King when I see him.

Chamberlain:

You have seen the King seldom.

Zabra:

I have often seen the King.

Bel-Narb:

Yes, we have often met, often and often.

Chamberlain:

If some one could recognize your Majesty, some one besides this man who came with you, then we should all be certain.

Bel-Narb:

There is no need of it. I am the King.

[The King rises and stretches out his hand palm downwards.]

King:

In holy Mecca, in green-roofed Mecca of the many gates, we knew him for the King.

Bel-Narb:

Yes, that is true. I saw this man in Mecca.

Chamberlain: [Bowing low.]

Pardon, your Majesty. The desert had altered you.

Zabra:

I knew your Majesty.

Aoob:

As well as I do.

Bel-Narb: [Pointing to the King.]

Let this man be rewarded suitably. Give him some post in the palace.

Chamberlain:

Yes, your Majesty.

King:

I am a camel-driver and we go back to our camels.

Chamberlain:

As you wish.

[Exeunt Bel-Narb, Aoob, Chamberlain and Zabra through door.]

Eznarza:

You have done wisely, wisely, and the reward of wisdom is happiness.

King:

They have their king now. But we will turn again to the tents of the Arabs.

Eznarza:

They are foolish people.

King:

They have found a foolish King.

Eznarza:

It is a foolish man that would choose to dwell among walls.

King:

Some are born kings, but this man has chosen to be one.

Eznarza:

Come, let us leave them.

King:

We will go back again.

Eznarza:

Come back to the tents of my people.

King:

We will dwell a little apart in a dear brown tent of our own.

Eznarza:

We shall hear the sand again, whispering low to the dawn wind.

King:

We shall hear the nomads stirring in their camps far off because it is dawn.

Eznarza:

The jackals will patter past us slipping back to the hills.

King:

When at evening the sun is set we shall weep for no day that is gone.

Eznarza:

I will raise up my head of a night time against the sky, and the old, old, unbought stars shall twinkle through my hair, and we shall not envy any of the diademmed queens of the world.

CURTAIN

Plays of Gods and Men, by Lord Dunsany, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

[f04]

A Night at an Inn

Dramatis Personae

A. E. Scott-Fortescue (the Toff, dilapidated gentleman) William Jones (Bill) Albert Thomas Jacob Smith (Sniggers) (All Merchant Sailors.) 1st Priest of Klesh 2nd Priest of Klesh 3rd Priest of Klesh Klesh

[The Curtain rises on a room in an inn.]

[Sniggers and Bill are talking. The Toff is reading a paper. Albert sits a little apart.]

Sniggers:

What's his idea, I wonder?

Bill:

I don't know.

Sniggers:

And how much longer will he keep us here?

Bill:

We've been here three days.

Sniggers:

And 'aven't seen a soul.

Bill:

And a pretty penny it cost us when he rented the pub.

Sniggers:

'Ow long did 'e rent the pub for?

Bill:

You never know with him.

Sniggers:

It's lonely enough.

Bill:

'Ow long did you rent the pub for, Toffy?

[The Toff continues to read a sporting paper; he takes no notice of what is said.]

Sniggers:

'E's such a toff.

Bill:

Yet 'e's clever, no mistake.

Sniggers:

Those clever ones are the beggars to make a muddle. Their plans are clever enough, but they don't work, and then they make a mess of things much worse than you or me.

Bill:

Ah

Sniggers:

I don't like this place.

Bill:

Why not?

Sniggers:

I don't like the looks of it.

Bill:

He's keeping us here because those niggers can't find us. The three heathen priests what was looking for us so. But we want to go and sell our ruby soon.

Albert:

There's no sense in it.

Bill:

Why not, Albert?

Albert:

Because I gave those black devils the slip in Hull.

Bill:

You give 'em the slip, Albert?

Albert:

The slip, all three of them. The fellows with the gold spots on their foreheads. I had the ruby then, and I give them the slip in Hull.

Bill:

How did you do it, Albert?

Albert:

I had the ruby and they were following me....

Bill:

Who told them you had the ruby? You didn't show it?

Albert:

No.... But they kind of know.

Sniggers:

They kind of know, Albert?

Albert:

Yes, they know if you've got it. Well, they sort of mouched after me, and I tells a policeman and he says, O they were only three poor niggers and they wouldn't hurt me. Ugh! When I thought of what they did in Malta to poor old Jim.

Bill:

Yes, and to George in Bombay before we started.

Sniggers:

Ugh!

Bill:

Why didn't you give 'em in charge?

Albert:

What about the ruby, Bill?

Bill:

Ah!

Albert:

Well, I did better than that. I walks up and down through Hull. I walks slow enough. And then I turns a corner and I runs. I never sees a corner but I turns it. But sometimes I let a corner pass just to fool them. I twists about like a hare. Then I sits down and waits. No priests.

Sniggers:

What?

Albert:

No heathen black devils with gold spots on their face. I give 'em the slip.

Bill:

Well done, Albert.

Sniggers: [after a sigh of content]

Why didn't you tell us?

Albert:

'Cause 'e won't let you speak. 'E's got 'is plans and 'e thinks we're silly folk. Things must be done 'is way. And all the time I've give 'em the slip. Might 'ave 'ad one of them crooked knives in him before now but for me who give 'em the slip in Hull.

Bill:

Well done, Albert.

Sniggers:

Do you hear that, Toffy? Albert has give 'em the slip.

The Toff:

Yes, I hear.

Sniggers:

Well, what do you say to that?

The Toff:

O... Well done, Albert.

Albert:

And what a' you going to do?

The Toff:

Going to wait.

Albert:

Don't seem to know what 'e's waiting for.

Sniggers:

It's a nasty place.

Albert:

It's getting silly, Bill. Our money's gone and we want to sell the ruby. Let's get on to a town.

Bill:

But 'e won't come.

Albert: Then we'll leave him.

Sniggers:

We'll be all right if we keep away from Hull.

Albert:

We'll go to London.

Bill:

But 'e must 'ave 'is share.

Sniggers:

All right. Only let's go. [to the Toff] We're going, do you hear? Give us the ruby.

The Toff:

Certainly.

[He gives them a ruby from his waistcoat pocket: it is the size of a small hen's egg.]

[He goes on reading his paper.]

Albert:

Come on, Sniggers.

[Exeunt Albert and Sniggers.]

Bill:

Good-bye, old man. We'll give you your fair share, but there's nothing to do here, no girls, no halls, and we must sell the ruby.

The Toff:

I'm not a fool, Bill.

Bill:

No, no, of course not. Of course you ain't, and you've helped us a lot. Good-bye. You'll say good-bye?

The Toff:

Oh, yes. Good-bye.

[Still reads paper. Exit Bill.]

[The Toff puts a revolver on the table beside him and goes on with his paper.]

Sniggers: [Out of breath.]

We've come back, Toffy.

The Toff:

So you have.

Albert:

Toffy--How did they get here?

The Toff:

They walked, of course.

Albert:

But it's eighty miles.

Sniggers:

Did you know they were here, Toffy?

The Toff:

Expected them about now.

Albert:

Eighty miles.

Bill:

Toffy, old man--what are we to do?

The Toff:

Ask Albert.

Bill:

If they can do things like this there's no one can save us but you, Toffy--I always knew you were a clever one. We won't be fools any more. We'll obey you, Toffy.

The Toff:

You're brave enough and strong enough. There isn't many that would steal a ruby eye out of an idol's head, and such an idol as that was to look at, and on such a night. You're brave enough, Bill. But you're all three of you fools. Jim would have none of my plans and where's Jim? And George. What did they do to him?

Sniggers:

Don't, Toffy!

The Toff:

Well, then, your strength is no use to you. You want cleverness; or they'll have you the way that they had George and Jim.

All:

Ugh!

The Toff:

Those black priests would follow you round the world in circles, year after year, till they got the idol's eye. And if we died with it they'd follow our grandchildren. That fool thinks he can escape men like that by running round three streets in the town of Hull.

Albert:

God's truth, you 'aven't escaped them, because they're 'ere.

The Toff:

So I supposed.

Albert:

You supposed?

The Toff:

Yes, I believe there's no announcement in the Society papers. But I took this country seat especially to receive them. There's plenty of room if you dig; it is pleasantly situated and what is most important it is in a very quiet neighbourhood. So I am at home to them this afternoon.

Bill:

Well, you're a deep one.

The Toff:

And remember you've only my wits between you and death, and don't put your futile plans against those of an educated gentleman.

Albert:

If you're a gentleman, why don't you go about among gentlemen instead of the likes of us?

The Toff:

Because I was too clever for them as I am too clever for you.

Albert:

Too clever for them?

The Toff:

I never lost a game of cards in my life.

Bill:

You never lost a game?

The Toff:

Not when there was money on it.

Bill:

Well, well.

The Toff:

Have a game of poker?

All:

No, thanks.

The Toff:

Then do as you're told.

Bill:

All right, Toffy.

Sniggers:

I saw something just then. Hadn't we better draw the curtains?

The Toff:

No. Sniggers:

What?

The Toff:

Don't draw the curtains.

Sniggers:

O all right.

Bill:

But Toffy, they can see us. One doesn't let the enemy do that. I don't see why....

The Toff:

No, of course you don't.

Bill:

O all right, Toffy.

[All begin to pull out revolvers.]

The Toff: [putting his own away]

No revolvers, please.

Albert:

Why not?

The Toff:

Because I don't want any noise at my party. We might get guests that hadn't been invited. Knives are a different matter.

[All draw knives. The Toff signs to them not to draw them yet. Toffy has already taken back his ruby.]

Bill:

I think they're coming, Toffy.

The Toff:

Not yet.

Albert:

When will they come?

The Toff:

When I am quite ready to receive them. Not before.

Sniggers:

I should like to get this over.

The Toff:

Should you? Then we'll have them now.

Sniggers:

Now?

The Toff:

Yes. Listen to me. You shall do as you see me do. You will all pretend to go out. I'll show you how. I've got the ruby. When they see me alone they will come for their idol's eye.

Bill:

How can they tell like this which one of us has it?

The Toff:

I confess I don't know, but they seem to.

Sniggers:

What will you do when they come in?

The Toff:

I shall do nothing.

Sniggers:

What?

The Toff:

They will creep up behind me. Then my friends, Sniggers and Bill and Albert, who gave them the slip, will do what they can.

Bill:

All right, Toffy. Trust us.

The Toff:

If you're a little slow you will see enacted the cheerful spectacle that accompanied the demise of Jim.

Sniggers:

Don't, Toffy. We'll be there all right.

The Toff:

Very well. Now watch me.

[He goes past the windows to the inner door R.; he opens it inwards. Then under cover of the open door he slips down on his knee and closes it, remaining on the inside, appearing to have gone out. He signs to the others who understand. Then he appears to re-enter in the same manner.]

Now, I shall sit with my back to the door. You go out one by one so far as our friends can make out. Crouch very low to be on the safe side. They mustn't see you through the window.

[Bill makes his sham exit.]

The Toff:

Remember, no revolvers. The police are, I believe, proverbially inquisitive.

[The other two follow Bill. All three are now crouching inside the door R. The Toff puts the ruby beside him on the table. He lights a cigarette.]

[The door in back opens so slowly that you can hardly say at what moment it began. The Toff picks up his paper.]

[A Native of India wriggles along the floor ever so slowly, seeking cover from chairs. He moves L. where the Toff is. The three sailors are R. Sniggers and Albert lean forward. Bill's arm keeps them back. An armchair had better conceal them from the Indian. The black Priest nears the Toff.]

[Bill watches to see if any more are coming. Then he leaps forward alone (he has taken his boots off) and knifes the Priest.]

[The Priest tries to shout but Bill's left hand is over his mouth.]

[The Toff continues to read his sporting paper. He never looks round.]

Bill: [sotto voce]

There's only one, Toffy. What shall we do?

The Toff: [without turning his head]

Only one?

Bill:

Yes.

The Toff:

Wait a moment. Let me think.

[Still apparently absorbed in his paper.]

Ah, yes. You go back, Bill. We must attract another guest. Now are you ready?

Bill:

Yes.

The Toff:

All right. You shall now see my demise at my Yorkshire residence. You must receive guests for me.

[He leaps up in full view of the window, flings up both arms and falls on to the floor near the dead Priest.]

Now be ready.

[His eyes close.]

[There is a long pause. Again the door opens, very very slowly. Another Priest creeps in. He has three golden spots upon his forehead. He looks round, then he creeps up to his companion and turns him over and looks inside each of his clenched hands. Then he looks at the recumbent Toff. Then he creeps towards him. Bill slips after him and knifes him like the other with his left hand over his mouth.]

Bill: [sotto voce]

We've only got two, Toffy.

The Toff:

Still another.

Bill:

What'll we do?

The Toff: [sitting up]

Hum.

Bill:

This is the best way, much.

The Toff:

Out of the question. Never play the same game twice.

Bill:

Why not, Toffy?

The Toff:

Doesn't work if you do.

Bill:

Well?

The Toff:

I have it, Albert. You will now walk into the room. I showed you how to do it.

Albert:

Yes.

The Toff:

Just run over here and have a fight at this window with these two men.

Albert:

But they're----

The Toff:

Yes, they're dead, my perspicuous Albert. But Bill and I are going to resuscitate them.----. Come on.

[Bill picks up a body under the arms.]

That's right, Bill. [Does the same.] Come and help us, Sniggers---- [Sniggers comes] Keep low, keep low. Wave their arms about, Sniggers. Don't show yourself. Now, Albert, over you go. Our Albert is slain. Back you get, Bill. Back, Sniggers. Still, Albert. Mustn't move when he comes. Not a muscle.

[A Face appears at the window and stays for some time. Then the door opens and looking craftily round the third Priest enters. He looks at his companions' bodies and turns round. He suspects something. He takes up one of the knives and with a knife in each hand he puts his back to the wall. He looks to the left and right.]

The Toff:

Come on, Bill.

[The Priest rushes to the door. The Toff knifes the last Priest from behind.]

The Toff:

A good day's work, my friends.

Bill:

Well done, Toffy. Oh, you are a deep one.

Albert:

A deep one if ever there was one.

Sniggers:

There ain't any more, Bill, are there?

The Toff:

No more in the world, my friend.

Bill:

Aye, that's all there are. There were only three in the temple. Three priests and their beastly idol.

Albert:

What is it worth, Toffy? Is it worth a thousand pounds?

The Toff:

It's worth all they've got in the shop. Worth just whatever we like to ask for it.

Albert:

Then we're millionaires, now.

The Toff:

Yes, and what is more important, we no longer have any heirs.

Bill:

We'll have to sell it now.

Albert:

That won't be easy. It's a pity it isn't small and we had half a dozen. Hadn't the idol any other on him?

Bill:

No, he was green jade all over and only had this one eye. He had it in the middle of his forehead, and was a long sight uglier than anything else in the world.

Sniggers:

I'm sure we ought all to be very grateful to Toffy.

Bill:

And indeed we ought.

Albert:

If it hadn't 'ave been for him----

Bill:

Yes, if it hadn't 'a' been for old Toffy....

Sniggers:

He's a deep one.

The Toff:

Well, you see, I just have a knack of foreseeing things.

Sniggers:

I should think you did.

Bill:

Why, I don't suppose anything happens that our Toff doesn't foresee. Does it, Toffy?

The Toff:

Well, I don't think it does, Bill. I don't think it often does.

Bill:

Life is no more than just a game of cards to our old Toff.

The Toff:

Well, we've taken these fellows' trick.

Sniggers: [going to the window]

It wouldn't do for any one to see them.

The Toff:

O nobody will come this way. We're all alone on a moor.

Bill:

Where will we put them?

The Toff:

Bury them in the cellar, but there's no hurry.

Bill:

And what then, Toffy?

The Toff:

Why, then we'll go to London and upset the ruby business. We'll have really come through this job very nicely.

Bill:

I think the first thing we ought to do is give a little supper to old Toffy. We'll bury these fellows to-night.

Albert:

Yes, let's.

Sniggers:

The very thing.

Bill:

And we'll all drink his health.

Albert:

Good old Toffy.

Sniggers:

He ought to have been a general or a premier.

[They get bottles from cupboard, etc.]

The Toff:

Well, we've earned our bit of a supper.

[They sit down.]

Bill: [Glass in hand.]

Here's to old Toffy who guessed everything.

Albert and Sniggers:

Good old Toffy.

Bill:

Toffy who saved our lives and made our fortunes.

Albert and Sniggers:

Hear. Hear.

The Toff:

And here's to Bill who saved me twice to-night.

Bill:

Couldn't have done it but for your cleverness, Toffy.

Sniggers:

Hear, hear. Hear, hear.

Albert:

He foresees everything.

Bill:

A speech, Toffy. A speech from our general.

All:

Yes, a speech.

Sniggers:

A speech.

The Toff:

Well, get me some water. This whiskey's too much for my head, and I must keep it clear till our friends are safe in the cellar.

Bill:

Water. Yes, of course. Get him some water, Sniggers.

Sniggers:

We don't use water here. Where shall I get it?

Bill:

Outside in the garden.

[Exit Sniggers.]

Albert:

Here's to fortune. [They all drink.]

Bill:

Here's to Albert Thomas, Esquire. [He drinks.]

The Toff:

Albert Thomas, Esquire. [He drinks.]

Albert:

And William Jones Esquire.

The Toff:

Albert Jones, Esquire. [The Toff and Albert drink.]

[Re-enter Sniggers terrified.]

The Toff:

Hullo, here's Jacob Smith Esquire, J.P., alias Sniggers, back again.

Sniggers:

Toffy, I've been thinking about my share in that ruby. I don't want it, Toffy, I don't want it.

The Toff:

Nonsense, Sniggers, nonsense.

Sniggers:

You shall have it, Toffy, you shall have it yourself, only say Sniggers has no share in this 'ere ruby. Say it, Toffy, say it.

Bill:

Want to turn informer, Sniggers?

Sniggers:

No, no. Only I don't want the ruby, Toffy....

The Toff:

No more nonsense, Sniggers, we're all in together in this, if one hangs we all hang; but they won't outwit me. Besides, it's not a hanging affair, they had their knives.

Sniggers:

Toffy, Toffy, I've always treated you fair, Toffy. I was always one to say, Give Toffy a chance. Take back my share, Toffy.

The Toff:

What's the matter? What are you driving at?

Sniggers:

Take it back, Toffy.

The Toff:

Answer me; what are you up to?

Sniggers:

I don't want my share any more.

Bill:

Have you seen the police?

[Albert pulls out his knife.]

The Toff:

No, no knives, Albert.

Albert:

What then?

The Toff:

The honest truth in open court, barring the ruby. We were attacked.

Sniggers:

There's no police.

The Toff:

Well, then, what's the matter?

Bill:

Out with it.

Sniggers:

I swear to God...

Albert:

Well?

The Toff:

Don't interrupt.

Sniggers:

I swear I saw something what I didn't like.

The Toff:

What you didn't like?

Sniggers: [In tears.]

O Toffy, Toffy, take it back. Take my share. Say you take it.

The Toff:

What has he seen?

[Dead silence only broken by Sniggers' sobs. Then stony steps are heard.]

[Enter a hideous Idol. It is blind and gropes its way. It gropes its way to the ruby and picks it up and screws it into a socket in the forehead.]

[Sniggers still weeps softly; the rest stare in horror. The Idol steps out, not groping. Its steps move off then stops.]

The Toff:

O great heavens!

Albert: [In a childish, plaintive voice.]

What is it, Toffy?

Bill:

Albert, it is that obscene idol [in a whisper] come from India.

Albert:

It is gone.

Bill:

It has taken its eye.

Sniggers:

We are saved.

Off, a Voice: [With outlandish accent.]

Meestaire William Jones, Able Seaman.

[The Toff has never spoken, never moved. He only gazes stupidly in horror.]

Bill:

Albert, Albert, what is this?

[He rises and walks out. One moan is heard. Sniggers goes to window. He falls back sickly.]

Albert: [In a whisper.]

What has happened?

Sniggers:

I have seen it. I have seen it. O I have seen it. [He returns to table.]

The Toff: [Laying his hand very gently on Sniggers' arm, speaking softly and winningly.]

What was it, Sniggers?

Sniggers:

I have seen it.

Albert:

What?

Sniggers:

O.

Voice:

Meestaire Albert Thomas, Able Seaman.

Albert:

Must I go, Toffy? Toffy, must I go?

Sniggers: [Clutching him.]

Don't move.

Albert: [Going.]

Toffy, Toffy. [Exit.]

Voice:

Meestaire Jacob Smith, Able Seaman.

Sniggers:

I can't go, Toffy. I can't go. I can't do it.

[He goes.]

Voice:

Meestaire Arnold Everett Scott-Fortescue, late Esquire, Able Seaman.

The Toff:

I did not foresee it. [Exit.]

CURTAIN.

 

    


===== BOOK: phai.txt =====


     
Prolegomena to the History of Ancient Israel, by Julius Wellhausen, [1885], at sacred-texts.com

PROLEGOMENA

to the

HISTORY OF ISRAEL.

WITH A REPRINT OF THE ARTICLE "ISRAEL"
 FROM THE "ENCYCLOPAEDIA BRITANNICA."

by

JULIUS WELLHAUSEN,
 PROFESSOR OF ORIENTAL LANGUAGES IN THE UNIVERSITY OF
 MARBURG.

TRANSLATED FROM THE GERMAN, UNDER THE AUTHOR'S SUPERVISION,

by
 J. SUTHERLAND BLACK, M.A.,
 and
 ALLAN MENZIES, B.D.

with a preface by

PROF. W. ROBERTSON SMITH.

Edinburgh: Adam and Charles Black

[1885]

Initial proofing by Geoffrey Cowling. HTML formatting, Unicode markup, and final proof at sacred-texts.com, 2007 by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

      
Prolegomena to the History of Ancient Israel, by Julius Wellhausen, [1885], at sacred-texts.com

[p. v]

  

PREFACE.

THE work which forms the greater part of the present volume first appeared in 1878 under the title History of Israel. By J. Wellhausen. In two volumes. Volume I. The book produced a great impression throughout Europe, and its main thesis, that "the Mosaic history is not the starting-point for the history of ancient Israel, but for the history of Judaism," was felt to be so powerfully maintained that many of the leading Hebrew teachers of Germany who had till then stood aloof from the so-called "Grafian hypothesis"--the doctrine, that is, that the Levitical Law and connected parts of the Pentateuch were not written till after the fall of the kingdom of Judah, and that the Pentateuch in its present compass was not publicly accepted as authoritative till the reformation of Ezra--declared themselves convinced by Wellhausen's arguments. Before 1878 the Grafian hypothesis was neglected or treated as a paradox in most German universities, although some individual scholars of great name were known to have reached by independent inquiry similar views to those for which Graf was the recognised sponsor, and although in Holland the writings of Professor Kuenen, who has been aptly termed Graf's goel, had shown in an admirable and conclusive manner that the objections usually taken to Graf's arguments did not touch the substance of the thesis for which he contended.

Since 1878, partly through the growing influence of Kuenen, but mainly through the impression produced by Wellhausen's

[p. vi]

book, all this has been changed. Almost every younger scholar of mark is on the side of Vatke and Reuss, Lagarde and Graf, Kuenen and Wellhausen, and the renewed interest in Old Testament study which is making itself felt throughout all the schools of Europe must be traced almost entirely to the stimulus derived from a new view of the history of the Law which sets all Old Testament problems in a new light.

Our author, who since 1878 had been largely engaged in the study of other parts of Semitic antiquity, has not yet given to the world his promised second volume. But the first volume was a complete book in itself; the plan was to reserve the whole narrative of the history of Israel for vol. ii., so that vol. i. was entirely occupied in laying the critical foundations on which alone a real history of the Hebrew nation could be built. Accordingly, the second edition of the History, vol. i., appeared in 1883 (Berlin, Reimer), under the new title of Prolegomena to the History of Israel. In this form it is professedly, as it really was before, a complete and self-contained work; and this is the form of which a translation, carefully revised by the author, is now offered to the public.

All English readers interested in the Old Testament will certainly be grateful to the translators and publishers for a volume which in its German garb has already produced so profound an impression on the scholarship of Europe; and even in this country the author's name is too well known to make it necessary to introduce him at length to a new public. But the title of the book has a somewhat unfamiliar sound to English ears, and may be apt to suggest a series of dry and learned dissertations meant only for Hebrew scholars. It is worth while therefore to point out in a few words that this would be quite a false impression; that the matters with which Professor Wellhausen deals are such as no intelligent student of the Old Testament

[p. vii]

can afford to neglect; and that the present volume gives the English reader, for the first time, an opportunity to form his own judgment on questions which are within the scope of any one who reads the English Bible carefully and is able to think clearly, and without prejudice, about its contents. The history of Israel is part of the history of the faith by which we live, the New Testament cannot be rightly understood without understanding the Old, and the main reason why so many parts of the Old Testament are practically a sealed book even to thoughtful people is simply that they have not the historical key to the interpretation of that wonderful literature.

The Old Testament does not furnish a history of Israel, though it supplies the materials from which such a history can be constructed. For example, the narrative of Kings gives but the merest outline of the events that preceded the fall of Samaria; to understand the inner history of the time we must fill up this outline with the aid of the prophets Amos and Hosea. But the more the Old Testament has been studied, the more plain has it become that for many parts of the history something more is needed than merely to read each part of the narrative books in connection with the other books that illustrate the same period. The Historical Books and the Pentateuch are themselves very composite structures, in which old narratives occur imbedded in later compilations, and groups of old laws are overlaid by ordinances of comparatively recent date. Now, to take one point only, but that the most important, it must plainly make a vast difference to our whole view of the providential course of Israel's history if it appear that instead of the whole Pentateuchal law having been given to Israel before the tribes crossed the Jordan, that law really grew up little by little from its Mosaic germ, and did not attain its present form till the Israelites were the captives or the subjects of a foreign power. This is what

[p. viii]

the new school of Pentateuch criticism undertakes to prove, and it does so in a way that should interest every one. For in the course of the argument it appears that the plain natural sense of the old history has constantly been distorted by the false presuppositions with which we have been accustomed to approach it--that having a false idea of the legal and religious culture of the Hebrews when they first entered Canaan, we continually miss the point of the most interesting parts of the subsequent story, and above all fail to understand the great work accomplished by the prophets in destroying Old Israel and preparing the way first for Judaism and then for the Gospel. These surely are inquiries which no conscientious student of the Bible can afford to ignore.

The process of disentangling the twisted skein of tradition is necessarily a very delicate and complicated one, and involves certain operations for which special scholarship is indispensable. Historical criticism is a comparatively modern science, and in its application to this, as to other histories, it has made many false and uncertain steps. But in this, as in other sciences, when the truth has been reached it can generally be presented in a comparatively simple form, and the main positions can be justified even to the general reader by methods much less complicated, and much more lucid, than those originally followed by the investigators themselves. The modern view as to the age of the Pentateuchal law, which is the key to the right understanding of the History of Israel, has been reached by a mass of investigations and discussions of which no satisfactory general account has ever been laid before the English reader. Indeed, even on the Continent, where the subject has been much more studied than among us, Professor Wellhausen's book was the first complete and sustained argument which took up the question in all its historical bearings.

More recently Professor Kuenen of Leyden, whose discussions of the more complicated questions of Pentateuch analysis are

[p. ix]

perhaps the finest things that modern criticism can show, has brought out the second edition of the first volume of his Onderzoek, and when this appears in English, as it is soon to do, our Hebrew students will have in their hands an admirable manual of what I may call the anatomy of the Pentateuch, in which they can follow from chapter to chapter the process by which the Pentateuch grew to its present form. But for the mass of Bible-readers such detailed analysis will always be too difficult. What every one can understand and ought to try to master, is the broad historical aspect of the matter. And this the present volume sets forth in a way that must be full of interest to every one who has tasted the intense pleasure of following institutions and ideas in their growth, and who has faith enough to see the hand of God as clearly in a long providential development as in a sudden miracle.

The reader will find that every part of the Prolegomena is instinct with historical interest, and contributes something to a vivid realisation of what Old Israel really was, and why it has so great a part in the history of spiritual faith. In the first essay of the Prolegomena a complete picture is given of the history of the ordinances of worship in Israel, and the sacrifices, the feasts, the priesthood, are all set in a fresh light. The second essay, the history of what the Israelites themselves believed and recorded about their past, will perhaps to some readers seem less inviting, and may perhaps best be read after perusal of the article, reprinted from the Encyclopaedia Britannica, which stands at the close of the volume and affords a general view of the course of the history of Israel, as our author constructs it on the basis of the researches in his Prolegomena. The essay on Israel and Judaism with which the Prolegomena close, may in like manner be profitably compared with sect. 11 of the appended sketch--a section which is not taken directly from the Encyclopaedia, but

[p. x]

translated from the German edition of the article Israel, where the subject is expanded by the author. Here the reader will learn how close are the bonds that connect the critical study of the Old Testament with the deepest and unchanging problems of living faith.

W. ROBERTSON SMITH.

TRANSLATORS' NOTE.

Pages <page 237> to <page 425> of the Prolegomena and section II of Israel are translated by Mr. Menzies; for the rest of the volume Mr. Black is responsible. Both desire to express their indebtedness to Professor Robertson Smith for many valuable suggestions made as the sheets were passing through the press.

      
Prolegomena to the History of Ancient Israel, by Julius Wellhausen, [1885], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xi]

  

TABLE OF CONTENTS.

           

        

        

       PROLEGOMENA.

        

     
       

        

        

       
   INTRODUCTION--

        

     
       

        

       1

       Is the Law the starting-point for the history of ancient Israel or for   that of Judaism? The latter possibility is not precluded a priori by the history of the Canon. Reasons for considering it.   De Wette, George, Vatke, Reuss, Graf

       <page 1>

     
       

        

       2

       The three strata of the Pentateuch: Deuteronomy, Priestly Code, Jehovist

       <page 6>

     
       

        

       3

       The question is as to the Priestly Code and its historical position.   Method of the investigation

       <page 10>

     
       

        

        

       
   I. HISTORY OF WORSHIP.

        

     
      CHAP.

       I.

        

       THE PLACE OF WORSHIP--

        

     
       

        

       1

       The historical and prophetical books show no trace in Hebrew antiquity of   a sanctuary of exclusive legitimacy

       <page 17>

     
       

        

       2

       Polemic of the prophets against the sanctuaries. Fall of Samaria.   Reformation of Josiah

       <page 23>

     
       

        

       3

       Influence of the Babylonian exile

       <page 27>

     
       

       II

       1

       The Jehovist (JE) sanctions a multiplicity of altars

       <page 28>

     
       

        

       2

       Deuteronomy (D) demands local unity of worship

       <page 32>

     
       

        

       3

       The Priestly Code (RQ) presupposes that unity, and transfers it, by means   of the Tabernacle, to primitive times

       <page 34>

     
       

       III

       1

       The tabernacle, as a central sanctuary and dwelling for the ark, can   nowhere be found in the historical tradition

       <page 45>

     
       

        

       2

       Noldeke's view untenable

        
    

     
       

        

        

        

        

     
      CHAP.

       II

        

       SACRIFICE--

        

     
       

       I

       1

       The ritual is according to RQ the main subject of the Mosaic legislation,   according to JE it is pre-Mosaic usage; in RQ the point is How, according to   JE and D To Whom, it is offered

       <page 52>

     
       

        

       2

       The historical books agree with JE; the prophets down to Ezekiel   contradict RQ

       <page 55>

     
       

        

        

       [p. xii]

        

     
       

       II

       1

       Material innovations in RQ. Preliminary remarks on the notion, contents,   mode of offering, and propitiatory effects of sacrifice.

       <page 59>

     
       

        

       2

       Material and ideal refinement of the offerings in RQ

       <page 61>

     
       

        

       3

       The sacrificial meal gives way to holocausts

       <page 63>

     
       

        

       4

       Development of the trespass-offering.

       <page 72>

     
       

       III

       1

       The centralisation of worship at Jerusalem destroyed the connection of   sacrifice with the natural occasions of life, so that it lost its original   character

       <page 76>
   
   

     
       

        

        

        

        

     
      CHAP.

       III

        

       THE SACRED FEASTS--

        

     
       

       I

       1

       In JE and D there is a rotation of three festivals. Easter and Pentecost mark   the beginning and the end of the corn-harvest, and the autumn feast the   vintage and the bringing home the corn from the threshing-floor. With the   feast of unleavened bread (Maccoth) is conjoined, especially in   D, the feast of the sacrifice of the male firstborn of cattle (Pesah)

       <page 83>

     
       

        

       2

       The feasts based on the offering of firstlings of the field and of the   herd. Significance of the land and of agriculture for religion

       <page 89>

     
       

       II

       1

       In the historical and prophetical books, the autumn feast only is   distinctly attested, and it is the most important in JE and D also: of the   others there are only faint traces

       <page 92>

     
       

        

       2

       But the nature of the festivals is the same as in JE and D

       <page 95>

     
       

       III

       1

       In RQ the feasts have lost their reference to harvest and the first   fruits; and this essentially changes their nature

       <page 99>

     
       

        

       2

       The metamorphosis was due to the centralisation of worship, and may he   traced down through Deuteronomy and Ezekiel to RQ

       <page 104>

     
       

        

       3

       To the three festivals RQ adds the great day of atonement, which arose out   of the fast-days of the exile

       <page 108>

     
       

       IV

       1

       The Sabbath, which is connected with the new moon, was originally a lunar   festival

       <page 112>

     
       

        

        

       Exaggeration of the Sabbath rest in the Priestly Code

       <page 115>

     
       

        

       2

       Sabbatical year, and year of Jubilee

        

     
       

        

        

        

        

     
      CHAP.

       IV

        

       THE PRIESTS AND THE LEVITES--

        

     
       

       I

       1

       According to Ezek. xliv., only the Levites of Jerusalem, the sons of   Zadok, are to continue priests in the new Jerusalem; the other Levites are to   be degraded to their servants and denuded of their priestly rights. According   to RQ the Levites never possessed the priestly right, but only the sons of   Aaron

       <page 121>

     
       

        

       2

       These answer to the sons of Zadok

       <page 125>

     
       

        

        

       [p. xiii]

        

     
       

       II

       1

       In the earliest period of the history of Israel there is no distinction   between clergy and laity. Every one may slaughter and sacrifice; there are   professional priests only at the great sanctuaries. Priestly families at   Shiloh and Dan

       <page 127>

     
       

        

        

       No setting apart of what is holy

       <page 131>

     
       

        

       2

       Royal temples of the kings; priests at them as royal officials

       <page 131>

     
       

        

       3

       Importance of the North-Israelite priesthood in the time of the kings

       <page 133>

     
       

        

       4

       The family of Zadok at Jerusalem

       <page 138>

     
       

       III

       1

       In the oldest part of JE there are no priests; no Aaron by the side of   Moses

       <page 141>

     
       

        

       2

       In D the Levites are priests. They occur in that character, not to speak   of Judges xviii. seq., only in the literature of the exile. Their descent   from Moses or Aaron. The spiritual and the secular tribe of Levi. Difficulty   of bringing them together

       <page 141>

     
       

        

       3

       Consolidation of the spiritual tribe in RQ; separation of priests and   Levites. Further development of the clergy after the exile. The high priest   as head of the theocracy

       <page 145>

     
       

        

        

        

        

     
      CHAP.

       V

        

       THE ENDOWMENT OF THE CLERGY--

        

     
       

       I

       1

       The sacrificial dues raised in RQ

       <page 153>

     
       

        

       2

       The firstlings were turned into contributions to the priests, and doubled   in amount

       <page 155>

     
       

       II

       1

       Levitical towns

       <page 159>

     
       

        

       2

       The historical situation underlying the priestly pretensions in RQ

       <page 164>

     
       

        

        

        

        

     
       

        

        

       
   II. HISTORY OF TRADITION.

        

     
      CHAP.

       VI

        

       CHRONICLES--

        

     
       

       I

       1

       David becomes Saul's successor without any exertion, all Israel being   already on his side, namely, the priests and Levites

       <page 171>

     
       

        

        

       Distortion of the original story of the bringing of the ark to Jerusalem.   Omission of unedifying incidents in David's life

       <page 175>

     
       

        

       2

       Preparation for the building of the temple. Delight of the narrator in   numbers and names. Inconsistency with 1 Kings i, ii.

       <page 178>

     
       

        

        

       Picture of David in Chronicles

       <page 181>

     
       

       I

       3

       Solomon's sacrifice at the tabernacle at Gibeah. Building of the temple.   Retouching of the original narrative

       <page 182>

     
       

        

        

       [p. xiv]

        

     
       

       II

       1

       Estimate of the relation between Judah and Israel; the Israelites do not   belong to the temple, nor, consequently, to the theocracy

       <page 187>

     
       

        

       2

       Levitical idealising of Judah. View taken of those acts of rulers in the   temple-worship which the books of Kings condemn or approve. Inconsistencies   with the narrative of the sources; importation of priests and Levites

       <page 190>

     
       

        

       3

       Divine pragmatism of the sacred history, and its results

       <page 203>

     
       

        

       4

       The books of Kings obviously present throughout

       <page 210>

     
       

       III

       1

       The genealogical registers of 1 Chron. i-ix The ten tribes

       <page 211>

     
       

        

       2

       Judah and Levi

       <page 215>

     
       

        

       3

       Chronicles had no other sources for the period before the exile than the   historical books preserved to us in the Canon. The diversity of historical   view is due to the influence of the law, especially the Priestly Code. The   Midrash

       <page 222>

     
       

        

        

        

        

     
      CHAP.

       VII.

        

       JUDGES, SAMUEL, AND KINGS--

        

     
       

       I

       1

       The formula on which the book of Judges is constructed in point of   chronology and of religion

       <page 228>

     
       

        

       2

       Its relation to the stem of the tradition. Judg. xix.-xxi.

       <page 232>

     
       

        

       3

       Occasional additions to the original narratives

       <page 237>

     
       

        

       4

       Difference of religious attitude in the latter

       <page 240>

     
       

       II

       1

       Chronological and religious formulas in the books of Samuel

       <page 245>

     
       

        

       2

       The stories of the rise of the monarchy and the elevation of Saul entirely   recast

       <page 247>

     
       

        

       3

       Saul's relation to Samuel

       <page 256>

     
       

        

       4

       The narrative of David's youth

       <page 262>

     
       

        

        

       The view taken of Samuel may be regarded as a measure of the growth of the   tradition

       <page 267>

     
       

        

        

       Saul and David

       <page 271>

     
       

       III

       1

       The last religious chronological revision of the books of Kings. Similar   in kind to that of Judges and Samuel Its standpoint Judaean and   Deuteronomistic

       <page 272>

     
       

        

       2

        Its relation to the materials   received from tradition

       <page 279>

     
       

        

       3

       Differences of sentiment in the sources

       <page 286>

     
       

        

       4

       In Chronicles the history of ancient Israel is recast in accordance with   the ideas of the Priestly Code; in the older historical books it is judged   according to the standard of Deuteronomy

       <page 293>

     
       

        

        

        

        

     
       

        

        

       [p. xv]

        

     
      CHAP.

       VIII

        

       THE NARRATIVE OF THE HEXATEUCH--

        

     
       

       I

       1

       Genesis i. and Genesis ii. iii.

       <page 297>

     
       

        

       2

       Genesis iv.-xi.

       <page 308>

     
       

        

       3

       The primitive world-history in JE and in Q

       <page 314>

     
       

       II

       1

       The history of the patriarchs in JE

       <page 318>

     
       

        

       2

            "              "         in   Q

       <page 327>

     
       

        

       3

       Periods, numbers, covenants, sacrifices in the patriarchal age in Q

       <page 336>

     
       

       III

       1

       The Mosaic history in JE and in Q

       <page 342>

     
       

        

       2

       Comparison of the various narratives

       <page 351>

     
       

        

       3

       Conclusion

       <page 360>

     
       

        

        

        

        

     
       

        

        

       
   III. ISRAEL AND JUDAISM.

        

     
      CHAP.

       IX

        

       CONCLUSION OF THE CRITICISM OF THE LAW--

        

     
       

       I

       1

       The veto of critical analysis

       <page 368>

     
       

        

       2

       The historical presuppositions of Deuteronomy

       <page 369>

     
       

        

       3

       The Deuteronomistic revision does not extend over the Priestly Code

       <page 374>

     
       

       II

       1

       The final revision of the Hexateuch proceeds from the Priestly Code, as we   see from Leviticus xvii. seq.

       <page 376>

     
       

        

       2

       Examination of Leviticus xxvi.

       <page 380>

     
       

        

       3

       R    be separated from RQ

       <page 384>

     
       

       III

        

       The language of the Priestly Code

       <page 385>

     
      CHAP.

       X

        

        THE ORAL AND   THE WRITTEN TORAH--

        

     
       

       I

       1

       No written law in ancient Israel. The Decalogue

       <page 392>

     
       

        

       2

       The Torah of Jehovah in the mouth of priests and prophets

       <page 393>

     
       

        

       3

       View of revelation in Jeremiah, Zechariah, and the writer of Isa.   xl.-lxvi.

       <page 399>

     
       

       II

       1

       Deuteronomy was the first law in our sense of the word. It obtains   authority during the exile. End of prophecy

       <page 402>

     
       

        

       2

       The reforming legislation supplemented by that of the restoration. The   usages of worship codified and systematised by Ezekiel and his successors.   The Priestly Code--its introduction by Ezra

       <page 404>

     
       

        

       3

       The Torah the basis of the Canon. Extension of the notion originally   attached to the Torah to the other books

       <page 409>

     
       

        

        

        

        

     
       

        

        

       [p. xvi]

        

     
      CHAP.

       XI

        

       THE THEOCRACY AS IDEA AND AS INSTITUTION--

        

     
       

       I

       1

       Freshness and naturalness of early Israelite history

       <page 411>

     
       

        

       2

       Rise of the state. Relation of Religion and of the Deity to the life of   state and nation.

       <page 412>

     
       

        

       3

       The Messianic theocracy of the older prophets is built up on the   foundations afforded by the actual community of their time

       <page 414>

     
       

        

       4

       The idea of the covenant

       <page 417>

     
       

       II

       1

       Foundation of the theocratic constitution under the foreign domination

       <page 419>

     
       

        

       2

       The law and the prophets.

       <page 422>

     
       

        

        

        

        

     
       

        

        

       
   ISRAEL

        

     
       

        

       1

       The beginnings of the nation

       <page 429>

     
       

        

       2

       The settlement in Palestine

       <page 441>

     
       

        

       3

       The foundation of the kingdom, and the first three kings

       <page 448>

     
       

        

       4

       From Jeroboam I. to Jeroboam II.

       <page 457>

     
       

        

       5

       God, the world, and the life of men in Old Israel

       <page 464>

     
       

        

       6

       The fall of Samaria

       <page 470>

     
       

        

       7

       The deliverance of Judah

       <page 477>

     
       

        

       8

       The prophetic reformation

       <page 484>

     
       

        

       9

       Jeremiah and the destruction of Jerusalem

       <page 488>

     
       

        

       10

       The captivity and the restoration

       <page 492>

     
       

        

       11

       Judaism and Christianity

       <page 499>

     
       

        

       12

       The Hellenistic period

       <page 513>

     
       

        

       13

       The Hasmonaeans

       <page 518>

     
       

        

       14

       Herod and the Romans

       <page 527>

     
       

        

       15

       The Rabbins

       <page 538>

     
       

        

       16

       The Jewish Dispersion

       <page 542>

     
   
      
Prolegomena to the History of Ancient Israel, by Julius Wellhausen, [1885], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

INTRODUCTION.

IN the following pages it is proposed to discuss the place in history of the "law of Moses;" more precisely, the question to be considered is whether that law is the starting-point for the history of ancient Israel, or not rather for that of Judaism, i.e., of the religious communion which survived the destruction of the nation by the Assyrians and Chaldaeans.

I. It is an opinion very extensively held that the great mass of the books of the Old Testament not only relate to the pre-exilic period, but date from it. According to this view, they are remnants of the literature of ancient Israel which the Jews rescued as a heritage from the past, and on which they continued to subsist in the decay of independent intellectual life. In dogmatic theology Judaism is a mere empty chasm over which one springs from the Old Testament to the New; and even where this estimate is modified, the belief still prevails in a general way that the Judaism which received the books of Scripture into the canon had, as a rule, nothing to do with their production. But the exceptions to this principle which are conceded as regards the second and third divisions of the Hebrew canon cannot be called so very slight. Of the Hagiographa, by far the larger portion is demonstrably post-exilic, and no part demonstrably older than the exile. Daniel comes as far down as the Maccabaean wars, and Esther is perhaps even later. Of the prophetical literature a very appreciable fraction is later than the fall of the Hebrew kingdom; and the associated historical books (the "earlier prophets" of the Hebrew canon) date, in the form in which we now possess them, from a period subsequent to the death of Jeconiah, who must have survived the year 560 B.C. for some time. Making all allowance for the older sources utilised, and to a large extent transcribed word for word, in Judges,

[p. 2]

[paragraph continues] Samuel, and Kings, we find that apart from the Pentateuch the pre-exilic portion of the Old Testament amounts in bulk to little more than the half of the entire volume. All the rest belongs to the later period, and it includes not merely the feeble after-growths of a failing vegetation, but also productions of the vigour and originality of Isa. xl.-lxvi. and Ps. lxxiii.

We come then to the Law. Here, as for most parts of the Old Testament, we have no express information as to the author and date of composition, and to get even approximately at the truth we are shut up to the use of such data as can be derived from an analysis of the contents, taken in conjunction with what we may happen to know from other sources as to the course of Israel's history. But the habit has been to assume that the historical period to be considered in this connection ends with the Babylonian exile as certainly as it begins with the exodus from Egypt. At first sight this assumption seems to be justified by the history of the canon; it was the Law that first became canonical through the influence of Ezra and Nehemiah; the Prophets became so considerably later, and the Hagiographa last of all. Now it is not unnatural, from the chronological order in which these writings were received into the canon, to proceed to an inference as to their approximate relative age, and so not only to place the Prophets before the Hagiographa, but also the five books of Moses before the Prophets. If the Prophets are for the most part older than the exile, how much more so the Law! But however trustworthy such a mode of comparison may be when applied to the middle as contrasted with the latest portion of the canon, it is not at all to be relied on when the first part is contrasted with the other two. The very idea of canonicity was originally associated with the Torah, and was only afterwards extended to the other books, which slowly and by a gradual process acquired a certain measure of the validity given to the Torah by a single public and formal act, through which it was introduced at once as the Magna Charta of the Jewish communion (Neh. viii.-x.) In their case the canonical--that is, legal--character was not intrinsic, but was only subsequently acquired; there must therefore have been some interval, and there may have been a very long one, between the date of their origin and that of their receiving public sanction. To the Law, on the other hand, the canonical character is much more essential, and serious difficulties beset the assumption

[p. 3]

that the Law of Moses came into existence at a period long before the exile, and did not attain the force of law until many centuries afterwards, and in totally different circumstances from those under which it had arisen. At least the fact that a collection claiming public recognition as an ecclesiastical book should have attained such recognition earlier than other writings which make no such claim is no proof of superior antiquity.

We cannot, then, peremptorily refuse to regard it as possible that what was the law of Judaism may also have been its product; and there are urgent reasons for taking the suggestion into very careful consideration. It may not be out of place here to refer to personal experience. In my early student days I was attracted by the stories of Saul and David, Ahab and Elijah; the discourses of Amos and Isaiah laid strong hold on me, and I read myself well into the prophetic and historical books of the Old Testament. Thanks to such aids as were accessible to me, I even considered that I understood them tolerably, but at the same time was troubled with a bad conscience, as if I were beginning with the roof instead of the foundation; for I had no thorough acquaintance with the Law, of which I was accustomed to be told that it was the basis and postulate of the whole literature. At last I took courage and made my way through Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and even through Knobel's Commentary to these books. But it was in vain that I looked for the light which was to be shed from this source on the historical and prophetical books. On the contrary, my enjoyment of the latter was marred by the Law; it did not bring them any nearer me, but intruded itself uneasily, like a ghost that makes a noise indeed, but is not visible and really effects nothing. Even where there were points of contact between it and them, differences also made themselves felt, and I found it impossible to give a candid decision in favour of the priority of the Law. Dimly I began to perceive that throughout there was between them all the difference that separates two wholly distinct worlds. Yet, so far from attaining clear conceptions, I only fell into deeper confusion, which was worse confounded by the explanations of Ewald in the second volume of his History of Israel. At last, in the course of a casual visit in Gottingen in the summer of 1867, I learned through Ritschl that Karl Heinrich Graf placed the law later than the Prophets, and, almost without knowing his reasons for the hypothesis, I was prepared to accept it;

[p. 4]

[paragraph continues] I readily acknowledged to myself the possibility of understanding Hebrew antiquity without the book of the Torah.

The hypothesis usually associated with Graf's name is really not his, but that of his teacher, Eduard Reuss. It would be still more correct to call it after Leopold George and Wilhelm Vatke, who, independent alike of Reuss and of each other, were the first to give it literary currency. All three, again, are disciples of Martin Lebrecht de Wette, the epoch-making pioneer of historical criticism in this field. [*1] He indeed did not himself succeed in reaching a sure position, but he was the first

[p. 5]

clearly to perceive and point out how disconnected are the alleged starting-point of Israel's history and that history itself. The religious community set up on so broad a basis in the wilderness, with its sacred centre and uniform organisation, disappears and leaves no trace as soon as Israel settles in a land of its own, and becomes, in any proper sense, a nation. The period of the Judges presents itself to us as a confused chaos, out of which order and coherence are gradually evolved under the pressure of external circumstances, but perfectly naturally and without the faintest reminiscence of a sacred unifying constitution that had formerly existed. Hebrew antiquity shows absolutely no tendencies towards a hierocracy; power is wielded solely by the heads of families and of tribes, and by the kings, who exercise control over religious worship also, and appoint and depose its priests. The influence possessed by the latter is purely moral; the Torah of God is not a document in their hands which guarantees their own position, but merely an instruction for others in their mouths; like the word of the prophets, it has divine authority but not political sanction, and has validity only in so far as it is voluntarily accepted. And as for the literature which has come down to us from the period of the Kings, it would puzzle the very best intentions to beat up so many as two or three unambiguous allusions to the Law, and these cannot be held to prove anything when one considers, by way of contrast, what Homer was to the Greeks.

To complete the marvel, in post-exile Judaism the Mosaism which until then had been only latent suddenly emerges into prominence everywhere. We now find the Book regarded as the foundation of all higher life, and the Jews, to borrow the phrase of the Koran, are "the people of the Book;" we have the sanctuary with its priests and Levites occupying the central position, and the people as a congregation encamped around it; the cultus, with its burnt-offerings and sin-offerings, its purifications and its abstinences, its feasts and Sabbaths, strictly observed as prescribed by the Law, is now the principal business of life. When we take the community of the second temple and compare it with the ancient people of Israel, we are at once able to realise how far removed was the latter from so-called Mosaism. The Jews themselves were thoroughly conscious of the distance. The revision of the books of Judges, Samuel, and Kings, undertaken towards the end of the Babylonian exile, a revision much more thorough than is commonly assumed, condemns as heretical the whole age of the Kings. At a later date, as the past

[p. 6]

became more invested with a certain nimbus of sanctity, men preferred to clothe it with the characters of legitimacy rather than sit in judgment upon it. The Book of Chronicles shows in what manner it was necessary to deal with the history of bygone times when it was assumed that the Mosaic hierocracy was their fundamental institution.

2. The foregoing remarks are designed merely to make it plain that the problem we have set before us is not an imaginary one, but actual and urgent. They are intended to introduce it; but to solve it is by no means so easy. The question what is the historical place of the Law does not even admit of being put in these simple terms. For the Law, If by that word we understand the entire Pentateuch, is no literary unity, and no simple historical quantity. [*1] Since the days of Peyrerius and Spinoza, criticism has acknowledged the complex character of that remarkable literary production, and from Jean Astruc onwards has laboured, not without success, at disentangling its original elements. At present there are a number of results that can be regarded as settled. The following are some of them. The five Books of Moses and the Book of Joshua constitute one whole, the conquest of the Promised Land rather than the death of Moses forming the true conclusion of the patriarchal history, the exodus, and the wandering in the wilderness. From a literary point of view, accordingly, it is more accurate to speak of the Hexateuch than of the Pentateuch. Out of this whole, the Book of Deuteronomy, as essentially an independent law-book, admits of being separated most easily. Of what remains, the parts most easily distinguished belong to the so-called "main stock" ("Grundschrift"), formerly also called the Elohistic document, on account of the use it makes of the divine name Elohim up to the time of Moses, and designated by Ewald, with reference to the regularly recurring superscriptions in Genesis, as the Book of Origins. It is distinguished by its liking for number, and measure, and formula generally, by its stiff pedantic style, by its constant use of certain phrases and turns of expression which do not occur elsewhere in the older Hebrew; its characteristics are more strongly marked than those of any of the others, and make it accordingly the easiest to recognise with certainty. Its basis is the Book of Leviticus and the allied portions of the adjoining books,--Exod. xxv.-xl., with the exception of chaps. xxxii.-xxxiv., and Num. i.-x., xv.-xix.,

[p. 7]

xxv.-xxxvi., with trifling exceptions. It thus contains legislation chiefly, and, in point of fact, relates substantially to the worship of the tabernacle and cognate matters. It is historical only in form; the history serves merely as a framework on which to arrange the legislative material, or as a mask to disguise it. For the most part, the thread of the narrative is extremely thin, and often serves merely to carry out the chronology, which is kept up without a hiatus from the Creation to the Exodus; it becomes fuller only on the occasions in which other interests come into play, as, for example, in Genesis, with regard to the three preludes to the Mosaic covenant which are connected with the names of Adam, Noah, and Abraham respectively. When this fundamental document is also separated out as well as Deuteronomy, there remains the Jehovistic history-book, which, in contrast with the two others, is essentially of a narrative character, and sets forth with full sympathy and enjoyment the materials handed down by tradition. The story of the patriarchs, which belongs to this document almost entirely, is what best marks its character; that story is not here dealt with merely as a summary introduction to something of greater importance which is to follow, but as a subject of primary importance, deserving the fullest treatment possible. Legislative elements have been taken into it only at one point, where they fit into the historical connection, namely, when the giving of the Law at Sinai is spoken of (Exod. xx.-xxiii., xxxiv.)

Scholars long rested satisfied with this twofold division of the non-Deuteronomic Hexateuch, until Hupfeld demonstrated in certain parts of Genesis, which until then had been assigned partly to the "main stock" and partly to the Jehovist, the existence of a third continuous source, the work of the so-called younger Elohist. The choice of this name was due to the circumstance that in this document also Elohim is the ordinary name of the Deity, as it is in the "main stock" up to Exod. vi.; the epithet "younger," however, is better left out, as it involves an unproved assumption, and besides, is no longer required for distinction's sake, now that the "main stock" is no longer referred to under so unsuitable a name as that of Elohist. Hupfeld further assumed that all the three sources continued to exist separately until some one at a later date brought them together simultaneously into a single whole. But this is a view that cannot be maintained: not merely is the Elohist in his matter and in his manner of looking at things most closely akin to the Jehovist;

[p. 8]

his document has come down to us as Noldeke was the first to perceive, only in extracts embodied in the Jehovist narrative. [*1] Thus, notwithstanding Hupfeld's discovery, the old division into two great sections continues to hold good, and there is every reason for adhering to this primary distinction as the basis of further historical research, in spite of the fact, which is coming to be more and more clearly perceived, that not only the Jehovistic document, but the "main stock" as well, are complex products, and that alongside of them occur hybrid or posthumous elements which do not admit of being simply referred to either the one or the other formation. [*2]

Now the Law, whose historical position we have to determine, is the so-called "main stock," which, both by its contents and by its origin, is entitled to be called the Priestly Code, and will accordingly be so designated. The Priestly Code preponderates over the rest of the legislation in force, as well as in bulk; in all matters of primary importance it is the normal and final authority. It was according to the mode furnished by it that the Jews under Ezra ordered their sacred community, and upon it are formed our conceptions of the Mosaic theocracy, with the tabernacle at its centre, the high priest at its head, the priests and Levites as its organs, the legitimate cultus as its

[p. 9]

regular function. It is precisely this Law, so called par excellence, that creates the difficulties out of which our problem rises, and it is only in connection with it that the great difference of opinion exists as to date. With regard to the Jehovistic document, all are happily agreed that, substantially at all events, in language, horizon, and other features, it dates from the golden age of Hebrew literature, to which the finest parts of Judges, Samuel, and Kings, and the oldest extant prophetical writings also belong,--the period of the kings and prophets which preceded the dissolution of the two Israelite kingdoms by the Assyrians. About the origin of Deuteronomy there is still less dispute; in all circles where appreciation of scientific results can be looked for at all, it is recognised that it was composed in the same age as that in which it was discovered, and that it was made the rule of Josiah's reformation, which took place about a generation before the destruction of Jerusalem by the Chaldaeans. It is only in the case of the Priestly Code that opinions differ widely; for it tries hard to imitate the costume of the Mosaic period, and, with whatever success, to disguise its own. This is not nearly so much the case with Deuteronomy, which, in fact, allows the real situation (that of the period during which, Samaria having been destroyed, only the kingdom of Judah continued to subsist) to reveal itself very plainly through that which is assumed (xii. 8, xix. 8). And the Jehovist does not even pretend to being a Mosaic law of any kind; it aims at being a simple book of history; the distance between the present and the past spoken of is not concealed in the very least. It is here that all the marks are found which attracted the attention of Abenezra and afterwards of Spinoza, such as Gen. xii. 6 ("And the Canaanite was then in the land"), Gen. xxxvi. 31 ("These are the kings who reigned in Edom before the children of Israel had a king"), Num. xii. 6, 7, Deut. xxxiv. 10 ("There arose not a prophet since in Israel like unto Moses"). The Priestly Code, on the other hand, guards itself against all reference to later times and settled life in Canaan, which both in the Jehovistic Book of the Covenant (Exod. xxi.-xxiii.) and in Deuteronomy are the express basis of the legislation: it keeps itself carefully and strictly within the limits of the situation in the wilderness, for which in all seriousness it seeks to give the law. It has actually been successful, with its movable tabernacle, its wandering camp, and other archaic details, in so concealing the true date of its composition that its many serious inconsistencies with what we know,

[p. 10]

from other sources, of Hebrew antiquity previous to the exile, are only taken as proving that it lies far beyond all known history, and on account of its enormous antiquity can hardly be brought into any connection with it. It is the Priestly Code, then, that presents us with our problem.

3. The instinct was a sound one which led criticism for the time being to turn aside from the historical problem which had originally presented itself to De Wette, and afterwards had been more distinctly apprehended by George and Vatke, in order, in the first instance, to come to some sort of clear understanding as to the composition of the Pentateuch. But a mistake was committed when it was supposed that by a separation of the sources (in which operation attention was quite properly directed chiefly to Genesis) that great historical question had been incidentally answered. The fact was, that it had been merely put to sleep, and Graf has the credit of having, after a considerable interval, awakened it again. In doing so, indeed, he in turn laboured under the disadvantage of not knowing what success had been achieved in separating the sources, and thereby he became involved in a desperate and utterly untenable assumption. This assumption, however, had no necessary connection with his own hypothesis, and at once fell to the ground when the level to which Hupfeld brought the criticism of the text had been reached. Graf originally followed the older view, espoused by Tuch in particular, that in Genesis the Priestly Code, with its so obtrusively bare skeleton, is the "main stock," and that it is the Jehovist who supplements, and is therefore of course the later. But since, on the other hand, he regarded the ritual legislature of the middle books as much more recent than the work of the Jehovist, he was compelled to tear it asunder as best he could from its introduction in Genesis, and to separate the two halves of the Priestly Code by half a millennium. But Hupfeld had long before made it quite clear that the Jehovist is no mere supplementer, but the author of a perfectly independent work, and that the passages, such as Gen. xx.-xxii., usually cited as examples of the way in which the Jehovist worked over the "main stock," really proceed from quite another source,--the Elohist. Thus the stumbling-block of Graf had already been taken out of the way, and his path had been made clear by an unlooked-for ally. Following Kuenen's suggestion, he did not hesitate to take the helping-hand extended to him; he gave up his violent division of the Priestly

[p. 11]

[paragraph continues] Code, and then had no difficulty in deducing from the results which he had obtained with respect to the main legal portion similar consequences with regard to the narrative part in Genesis. [*1]

The foundations were now laid; it is Kuenen who has since done most for the further development of the hypothesis. [*2]

The defenders of the prevailing opinion maintained their ground as well as they could, but from long possession had got somewhat settled on their lees. They raised against the assailants a series of objections, all of which, however, laboured more or less under the disadvantage that they rested upon the foundation which had already been shattered. Passages were quoted from Amos and Hosea as implying an acquaintance with the Priestly Code, but they were not such as could make any impression on those who were already persuaded that the latter was the more recent. Again it was asserted, and almost with violence, that the Priestly Code could not be later than Deuteronomy, and that the Deuteronomist actually had it before him. But the evidences of this proved extremely problematical, while, on the other hand, the dependence of Deuteronomy, as a whole, on the Jehovist came out with the utmost clearness. Appeal was made to the latest redaction of the entire Hexateuch, a redaction which was assumed to be Deuteronomistic; but this yielded the result that the deuteronomistic redaction could nowhere be traced in any of the parts belonging to the Priestly Code. Even the history of the language itself was forced to render service against Graf: it had already been too much the custom to deal with that as if it were soft wax. To say all in a word, the arguments which were brought into play as a rule derived all their force from a moral conviction that the ritual legislation must be old, and

[p. 12]

could not possibly have been committed to writing for the first time within the period of Judaism; that it was not operative before then, that it did not even admit of being carried into effect in the conditions that prevailed previous to the exile, could not shake the conviction--all the firmer because it did not rest on argument--that at least it existed previously.

The firemen never came near the spot where the conflagration raged; for it is only within the region of religious antiquities and dominant religious ideas,--the region which Vatke in his Biblische Theologie had occupied in its full breadth, and where the real battle first kindled--that the controversy can be brought to a definite issue. In making the following attempt in this direction, I start from the comparison of the three constituents of the Pentateuch,--the Priestly Code, Deuteronomy, and the work of the Jehovist. The contents of the first two are, of course, legislation, as we have seen; those of the third are narrative; but, as the Decalogue (Exod. xx.), the Law of the two Tables (Exod. xxxiv.), and the Book of the Covenant (Exodus xxi.-xxiii.) show, the legislative element is not wholly absent from the Jehovist, and much less is the historical absent from the Priestly Code or Deuteronomy. Further, each writer's legal standpoint is mirrored in his account of the history, and conversely; thus there is no lack either of indirect or of direct points of comparison. Now it is admitted that the three constituent elements are separated from each other by wide intervals; the question then arises, In what order? Deuteronomy stands in a relation of comparative nearness both to the Jehovist and to the Priestly Code; the distance between the last two is by far the greatest,--so great that on this ground alone Ewald as early as the year 1831 (Stud. u. Krit., p. 604) declared it impossible that the one could have been written to supplement the other. Combining this observation with the undisputed priority of the Jehovist over Deuteronomy, it will follow that the Priestly Code stands last in the series. But such a consideration, although, so far as I know, proceeding upon admitted data, has no value as long as it confines itself to such mere generalities. It is necessary to trace the succession of the three elements in detail, and at once to test and to fix each by reference to an independent standard, namely, the inner development of the history of Israel so far as that is known to us by trustworthy testimonies, from independent sources.

The literary and historical investigation on which we thus enter is

[p. 13]

both wide and difficult. It falls into three parts. In the first, which lays the foundations, the data relating to sacred archaeology are brought together and arranged in such a way as to show that in the Pentateuch the elements follow upon one another and from one another precisely as the steps of the development demonstrably do in the history. Almost involuntarily this argument has taken the shape of a sort of history of the ordinances of worship. Rude and colourless that history must be confessed to be,--a fault due to the materials, which hardly allow us to do more than mark the contrast between pre-exilic and post-exilic, and, in a secondary measure, that between Deuteronomic and pre-Deuteronomic. At the same time there is this advantage arising out of the breadth of the periods treated: they cannot fail to distinguish themselves from each other in a tangible manner; it must be possible in the case of historical, and even of legal works, to recognise whether they were written before or after the exile. The second part, in many respects dependent on the first, traces the influence of the successively prevailing ideas and tendencies upon the shaping of historical tradition, and follows the various phases in which that was conceived and set forth. It contains, so to speak, a history of tradition. The third part sums up the critical results of the preceding two, with some further determining considerations, and concludes with a more general survey.

The assumptions I make will find an ever-recurring justification in the course of the investigation; the two principal are, that the work of the Jehovist, so far as the nucleus of it is concerned, belongs to the course of the Assyrian period, and that Deuteronomy belongs to its close. Moreover, however strongly I am convinced that the latter is to be dated in accordance with 2 Kings xxii., I do not, like Graf, so use this position as to make it the fulcrum for my lever. Deuteronomy is the starting-point, not in the sense that without it it would be impossible to accomplish anything, but only because, when its position has been historically ascertained, we cannot decline to go on, but must demand that the position of the Priestly Code should also be fixed by reference to history. My inquiry proceeds on a broader basis than that of Graf, and comes nearer to that of Vatke, from whom indeed I gratefully acknowledge myself to have learnt best and most.

Footnotes

^4:1 M. W. L. de Wette, Beitrage zur Einleitung in das A. T. (Bd. I. Kritischer Versuch uber die Glaubwurdigkeit der Bucher der Chronik; Bd. II. Kritik der Mosaischen Geschichte, Halle, 1806-07); J. F. L. George, Die alteren Judischen Feste mit einer Kritik der Gesetzgebung des Pentateuch (Berlin, 1835; preface dated 12th October); W. Vatke, Die biblische Theologie wissenschaftlich dargestellt (Berlin, 1835; preface dated 18th October; publication did not get beyond first part of the first volume); K. H. Graf, Die geschichtlichen Bucher des Alten Testaments (Leipsic, 1866). That Graf as well as J. Orth (Nouv. Rev. de Theol., iii. 84 sqq., iv. 350 sqq., Paris, 1859-60) owed the impulse to his critical labours to his Strassburg master was not unknown; but how great must have been the share of Reuss in the hypothesis of Graf has only been revealed in 1879, by the publication of certain theses which he had formulated as early as 1833, but had hesitated to lay in print before the general theological public. These are as follows:--

"1. L'element historique du Pentateuque peut et doit etre examine a part et ne pas etre confondu avec l'element legal. 2. L'un et l'autre ont pu exister sans redaction ecrite. La mention, chez d'anciens ecrivains, de certaines traditions patriarcales ou mosaiques, ne prouve pas l'existence du Pentateuque, et une nation peut avoir un droit coutumier sans code ecrit. Les traditions nationales des Israelites remontent plus haut que les lois du Pentateuque et la redaction des premieres est anterieure a celle des secondes. 4. L'interet principal de l'historien doit porter sur la date des lois, parce que sur ce terrain il a plus de chance d'arriver a des resultats certains. Il faut en consequence proceder a l'interrogatoire des temoins. 5. L'histoire racontee, dans les livres des Juges et de Samuel, et meme en partie celle comprise dans les livres des Rois, est en contradiction avec des lois dites mosaiques ; donc celles-ci etaientinconnues a l'epoque de la redaction de ces livres, a plus forte raison elles n'ont pas existe dans les temps qui y sont decrits. 6. Les prophetes du 8e et du 7e siecle ne savent rien du code mosaique. 7. Jeremie est le premier prophete qui connaisse une loi ecrite et ses citations rapportent au Deuteronome. 8. Le Deuteronome (iv. 45-xxviii. 68) est le livre que les pretres pretendaient avoir trouve dans le temple du temps du roi Josias. Ce code est la partie la plus ancienne de la legislation (redigee) comprise dans le Pentateuque. 9. L'histoire des Israelites, en tant qu'il s'agit du developpement national determine par des lois ecrites, se divisera en deux periodes, avant et apres Josias. 10. Ezechiel est anterieur a la redaction du code rituel et des lois qui ont definitivement organise la hierarchie. 11. Le livre du Josue n'est pas, tant s'en faut, la partie la plus recente de l'ouvrage entier. 12. Le redacteur du Pentateuque se distingue clairement de l'ancien prophete Moyse."--L'Histoire Sainte et la Loi, Paris, 1879, pp. 23, 24.

^6:1 Compare the article "Pentateuch" in the Ninth edition of the Encyclopaedia Britannica, vol. xviii.

^8:1 Hermann Hupfeld, Die Quellen der Genesis u. die Art ihrer Zusammersetzung, Berlin, 1853; Theodor Noldeke, Die s. g. Grundschrift des Pentateuch, in Untersuchungen zur Kritik des Alten Testaments, Kiel, 1869. 

^8:2 J. Wellhausen, Die Composition des Hexateuchs, in Jahrb. f. Deutsche Theologie, 1876, pp. 392-450, 531-602; 1877, pp. 407-479. I do not insist on all the details, but, as regards the way in which the literary process which resulted in the formation of the Pentateuch is to be looked at in general, I believe I had indicated the proper line of investigation. Hitherto the only important corrections I have received have been those of Kuenen in his Contributions to the Criticism of the Pentateuch and Joshua, published in the Leyden Theologisch Tijdschrift; but these are altogether welcome, inasmuch as they only free my own fundamental view from some relics of the old leaven of a mechanical separation of sources which had continued to adhere to it. For what Kuenen points out is, that certain elements assigned by me to the Elohist are not fragments of a once independent whole, but interpolated and parasitic additions. What effect this demonstration may have on the judgment we form of the Elohist himself is as yet uncertain. In the following pages the Jehovistic history-book is denoted by the symbol JE, its Jehovistic part by J, and the Elohistic by E; the "main stock" pure and simple, which is distinguished by its systematising history and is seen unalloyed in Genesis, is called the Book of the Four Covenants and is symbolised by Q; for the "main stock" as a whole (as modified by an editorial process) the title of Priestly Code and the symbol RQ (Q and Revisers) are employed.

^11:1 K. H. Graf, Die s. g. Grundschrift des Pentateuchs, in Merx's Archiv (1869), pp. 466-477. As early as 1866 he had already expressed himself in a letter to Kuenen November 12) as follows:--"Vous me faites pressentir une solution de cette enigme . . . c'est que les parties elohistiques de la Genese seraient posterieures aux parties jehovistiques." Compare Kuenen, Theol. Tijdschrift (1870), p. 412. Graf had also in this respect followed Reuss, who (ut supra, p. 24) says of himself: "Le cote faible de ma critique a ete que, a l'egard de tout ce qui ne rentrait pas dans les points enumeres ci-dessus, je restais dans l'orniere tracee par mes devanciers, admettant sans plus ample examen que le Pentateuque etait l'ouvrage de l'historien elohiste, complete par l'historien jehoviste, et ne me rendant pas compte de la maniere dont l'element legal, dont je m'etais occupe exclusivement, serait venu se joindre a l'element historique.

^11:2 A. Kuenen, Die Godsdienst van Israel, Haarlem, 1869-70 (Eng. transl. Religion of Israel, 1874-5), and De priesterlijke Bestanddeelen van Pentateuch en Josua, in Theol. Tijdschr. (1870), pp. 391-426.

      
Prolegomena to the History of Ancient Israel, by Julius Wellhausen, [1885], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 14] [p. 15]

  

I.

  

HISTORY OF THE ORDINANCES OF WORSHIP.

"Legem non habentes natura faciunt legis opera."--ROM. ii.

[p. 16] [p. 17]

  

CHAPTER I.

  

THE PLACE OF WORSHIP.

AS we learn from the New Testament, the Jews and the Samaritans in the days of Jesus were not agreed on the question which was the proper place of worship, but that there could be only one was taken to be as certain as the unity of God Himself. The Jews maintained that place to be the temple at Jerusalem, and when it was destroyed they ceased to sacrifice. But this oneness of the sanctuary in Israel was not originally recognised either in fact or in law; it was a slow growth of time. With the help of the Old Testament we are still quite able to trace the process. In doing so, it is possible to distinguish several stages of development. We shall accordingly proceed to inquire whether the three constituent parts of the Pentateuch give tokens of any relationship to one or other of these; whether and how they fall in with the course of the historical development which we are able to follow by the aid of the historical and prophetic books from the period of the Judges onwards.

  

I.

1. For the earliest period of the history of Israel, all that precedes the building of the temple, not a trace can be found of any sanctuary of exclusive legitimacy. In the Books of Judges and Samuel hardly a place is mentioned at which we have not at least casual mention of an altar and of sacrifice. In great measure this multiplicity of sanctuaries was part of the heritage taken over from the Canaanites by the Hebrews; as they appropriated the towns and the culture generally of the previous inhabitants, so also did they take possession of their sacred places. The system of high places (Bamoth), with all the apparatus thereto belonging, is certainly Canaanite originally (Deut. xii. 2, 30; Num. xxxiii. 52; Exod. xxxiv. 12 seq.), but afterwards is of quite general occurrence among the Hebrews. At Shechem and Gibeon the transition

[p. 18]

takes place almost in the full light of history; some other old-Israelite places of worship, certain of which are afterwards represented as Levitical towns, betray their origin by their names at least, e.g., Bethshemesh or Ir Heres (Sun-town), and Ashtaroth Karnaim (the two-horned Astarte). In the popular recollection, also, the memory of the fact that many of the most prominent sacrificial seats were already in existence at the date of the immigration continues to survive. Shechem, Bethel, Beersheba, figure in Genesis as instituted by the patriarchs; other equally important holy sites, not so. The reason for the distinction can only lie in a consciousness of the more recent origin of the latter; those of the one class had been found by the people when they came, those of the other category they had themselves established. For of course, if the Hebrews did not hesitate to appropriate to themselves the old holy places of the country, neither did they feel any difficulty in instituting new ones. In Gilgal and Shiloh, in the fixed camps where, in the first instance, they had found a permanent foothold in Palestine proper, there forthwith arose important centres of worship; so likewise in other places of political importance, even in such as only temporarily come into prominence, as Ophrah, Ramah, and Nob near Gibeah. And, apart from the greater cities with their more or less regular religious service, it is perfectly permissible to erect an altar extempore, and offer sacrifice wherever an occasion presents itself. When, after the battle of Michmash, the people, tired and hungry, fell upon the cattle they had taken, and began to devour the flesh with the blood (that is, without pouring out the blood on the altar), Saul caused a great stone to be erected, and ordered that every man should slaughter his ox or his sheep there. This was the first altar which Saul erected to Jehovah, adds the narrator, certainly not as a reproach, nor even to signalise his conduct as anything surprising or exceptional. The instance is all the more instructive, because it shows how the prohibition to eat flesh without rendering the blood back to God at a time when the people did not live crowded together within a quite limited area necessarily presupposed liberty to sacrifice anywhere--or to slaughter anywhere; for originally the two words are absolutely synonymous.

It need not be said that the sacrificial seats (even when the improvised ones are left out of account) were not all alike in the regard in which they were held, or in the frequency with which they were resorted to. Besides purely local ones, there were others to which pilgrimages

[p. 19]

were made from far and near. Towards the close of the period of the judges, Shiloh appears to have acquired an importance that perhaps extended even beyond the limits of the tribe of Joseph. By a later age the temple there was even regarded as the prototype of the temple of Solomon, that is, as the one legitimate place of worship to which Jehovah had made a grant of all the burnt-offerings of the children of Israel (Jer. vii. 12; 1 Sam. ii. 27-36). But, in point-of fact, if a prosperous man of Ephraim or Benjamin made a pilgrimage to the joyful festival at Shiloh at the turn of the year, the reason for his doing so was not that he could have had no opportunity at his home in Ramah or Gibeah for eating and drinking before the Lord. Any strict centralisation is for that period inconceivable, alike in the religious as in every other sphere. This is seen even in the circumstance that the destruction of the temple of Shiloh, the priesthood of which we find officiating at Nob a little later, did not exercise the smallest modifying influence upon the character and position of the cultus; Shiloh disappears quietly from the scene, and is not mentioned again until we learn from Jeremiah that at least from the time when Solomon's temple was founded its temple lay in ruins.

For the period during which the temple of Jerusalem was not yet in existence, even the latest redaction of the historical books (which perhaps does not everywhere proceed from the same hand, but all dates from the same period--that of the Babylonian exile--and has its origin in the same spirit) leaves untouched the multiplicity of altars and of holy places. No king after Solomon is left uncensured for having tolerated the high places, but Samuel is permitted in his proper person to preside over a sacrificial feast at the Bamah of his native town, and Solomon at the beginning of his reign to institute a similar one at the great Bamah of Gibeon, without being blamed. The offensive name is again and again employed in the most innocent manner in 1 Sam. ix., x., and the later editors allow it to pass unchallenged. The principle which guides this apparently unequal distribution of censure becomes clear from 1 Kings iii. 2: "The people sacrificed upon the high places, for as yet no house to the name of Jehovah had been built." Not until the house had been built to the name of Jehovah--such is the idea--did the law come into force which forbade having other places of worship besides. [*1]

From the building of the temple of Solomon,

[p. 20]

which is also treated as a leading epoch in chronology, a new period in the history of worship is accordingly dated,--and to a certain extent with justice. The monarchy in Israel owed its origin to the need which, under severe external pressure, had come to be felt for bringing together into the oneness of a people and a kingdom the hitherto very loosely connected tribes and families of the Hebrews; it had an avowedly centralising tendency, which very naturally laid hold of the cultus as an appropriate means for the attainment of the political end. Gideon even, the first who came near a regal position, erected a costly sanctuary in his city, Ophrah. David caused the ark of Jehovah to be fetched into his fortress on Mount Sion, and attached value to the circumstance of having for its priest the representative of the old family which had formerly kept it at Shiloh. Solomon's temple also was designed to increase the attractiveness of the city of his residence. It is indubitable that in this way political centralisation gave an impulse to a greater centralisation of worship also, and the tendency towards the latter continued to operate after the separation of the two kingdoms,--in Israel not quite in the same manner as in Judah. Royal priests, great national temples, festal gatherings of the whole people, sacrifices on an enormous scale, these were the traits by which the cultus, previously (as it would seem) very simple, now showed the impress of a new time. One other fact is significant: the domestic feasts and sacrifices of single families, which in David's time must still have been general, gradually declined and lost their importance as social circles widened and life became more public.

But this way of regarding the influence of the monarchy upon the history of the worship is not that of the author of the Books of Kings. He views the temple of Solomon as a work undertaken exclusively in the interests of pure worship, and as differing entirely in origin from the sacred buildings of the kings of Israel, with which accordingly it is not compared, but contrasted as the genuine is contrasted with the spurious. It is in its nature unique, and from the outset had the design of setting aside all other holy places,--a religious design independent of and unconnected with politics. The view, however, is unhistorical; it carries back

[p. 21]

to the original date of the temple, and imports into the purpose of its foundation the significance which it had acquired in Judah shortly before the exile. In reality the temple was not at the outset all that it afterwards became. Its influence was due to its own weight, and not to a monopoly conferred by Solomon. We nowhere learn that that king, like a forerunner of Josiah, in order to favour his new sanctuary sought to abolish all the others; there is not the faintest historical trace of any such sudden and violent interference with the previously existing arrangements of worship. Never once did Solomon's successors, confined though they were to the little territory of Judah, and therefore in a position in which the experiment might perhaps have been practicable, make the attempt (which certainly would have been in their interest) to concentrate all public worship within their own temple, though in other directions we find them exercising a very arbitrary control over affairs of religion. The high places were not removed; this is what is regularly told us in the case of them all. For Israel properly so called, Jerusalem was at no time, properly speaking, the place which Jehovah had chosen; least of all was it so after the division of the kingdom.

The Ephraimites flocked in troops through the entire length of the southern kingdom as pilgrims to Beersheba, and, in common with the men of Judah, to Gilgal on the frontier. Jerusalem they left unvisited. In their own land they served Jehovah at Bethel and Dan, at Shechem and Samaria, at Penuel and Mizpah, and at many other places. Every town had its Bamah, in the earlier times generally on an open site at the top of the hill on the slopes of which the houses were. Elijah, that great zealot for purity of worship, was so far from being offended by the high places and the multiplicity of altars to Jehovah that their destruction brought bitterness to his soul as the height of wickedness, and with his own hand he rebuilt the altar that had fallen into ruins on Mount Carmel. And that the improvised offering on extraordinary occasions had also not fallen into disuse is shown by the case of Elisha, who, when his call came as he was following the plough, hewed his oxen to pieces on the spot and sacrificed. In this respect matters after the building of Solomon's temple continued to be just as they had been before.

If people and judges or kings alike, priests and prophets, men like Samuel and Elijah, sacrificed without hesitation whenever occasion and opportunity presented themselves, it is manifest that during the whole of that period nobody had the faintest suspicion that such conduct

[p. 22]

was heretical and forbidden. If a theophany made known to Joshua the sanctity of Gilgal, gave occasion to Gideon and Manoah to rear altars at their homes, drew the attention of David to the threshing-floor of Araunah, Jehovah Himself was regarded as the proper founder of all these sanctuaries,--and this not merely at the period of the Judges, but more indubitably still at that of the narrator of these legends. He rewarded Solomon's first sacrifice on the great Bamah at Gibeon with a gracious revelation, and cannot, therefore, have been displeased by it. After all this, it is absurd to speak of any want of legality in what was then the ordinary practice; throughout the whole of the earlier period of the history of Israel, the restriction of worship to a single selected place was unknown to any one even as a pious desire. Men believed themselves indeed to be nearer God at Bethel or at Jerusalem than at any indifferent place, but of such gates of heaven there were several; and after all, the ruling idea was that which finds its most distinct expression in 2 Kings v. 17,--that Palestine as a whole was Jehovah's house, His ground and territory. Not outside of Jerusalem, but outside of Canaan had one to sojourn far from His presence, under the dominion and (cujus regio ejus religio) in the service of strange gods. The sanctity of the land did not depend on that of the temple; the reverse was the case. [*1]

[p. 23]

2. A change in this respect first begins to be prepared at that important epoch of the religious history of Israel which is marked by the fall of Samaria and the rise of the prophets connected therewith. Amos and Hosea presuppose a condition of matters just such as has been described: everywhere--in the towns, on the mountains, under green trees--a multitude of sanctuaries and altars, at which Jehovah is served in good faith, not with the purpose of provoking Him, but in order to gain His favour. The language held by these men was one hitherto unheard of when they declared that Gilgal, and Bethel, and Beersheba, Jehovah's favourite seats, were an abomination to Him; that the gifts and offerings with which He was honoured there kindled His wrath instead of appeasing it; that Israel was destined to be buried under the ruins of His temples, where protection and refuge were sought (Amos ix.). What did they mean? It would be to misunderstand the prophets to suppose that they took offence at the holy places--which Amos still calls Bamoth (vii. 9), and that too not in scorn, but with the deepest pathos--in and by themselves, on account of their being more than one, or not being the right ones. Their zeal is directed, not against the places, but against the cultus there carried on, and, in fact not merely against its false character as containing all manner of abuses, but almost more against itself, against the false value attached to it. The common idea was that just as Moab showed itself to be the people of Chemosh because it brought to Chemosh its offerings and gifts, so Israel proved itself Jehovah's people by dedicating its worship to Him, and was such all the more surely as its worship was zealous and splendid; in times of danger and need, when His help was peculiarly required, the zeal of the worshippers was doubled and trebled. It is against this that the prophets raise their protest while they demand quite other performances as a living manifestation of the relation of Israel to Jehovah. This was the reason of their so great hostility to the cultus, and the source of their antipathy to the great sanctuaries, where superstitious zeal outdid itself; it was this that provoked their wrath against the multiplicity of the altars which flourished so luxuriantly on the soil of a false confidence. That the holy places should be abolished, but the cultus itself remain as before the main concern of religion, only limited to a single locality was by no means their wish; but at the same time, in point of fact, it came about as an incidental result of their teaching that the high place in Jerusalem ultimately abolished all the other

[p. 24]

[paragraph continues] Bamoth. External circumstances, it must be added, contributed most essentially towards the result.

As long as the northern kingdom stood, it was there that the main current of Israelite life manifested itself; a glance into the Books of Kings or into that of Amos is enough to make this clear. In Jerusalem, indeed, the days of David and of Solomon remained unforgotten; yearning memories went back to them, and great pretensions were based upon them, but with these the actual state of matters only faintly corresponded. When Samaria fell, Israel shrivelled up to the narrow dimensions of Judah, which alone survived as the people of Jehovah. Thereby the field was left clear for Jerusalem. The royal city had always had a weighty preponderance over the little kingdom, and within it, again, the town had yielded in importance to the temple. From the few narratives we have relating to Judah one almost gathers an impression as if it had no other concern besides those of the temple; the kings in particular appear to have regarded the charge of their palace sanctuary as the chief of all their cares. [*1] In this way the increased importance of Judah after the fall of Samaria accrued in the first instance to the benefit of the capital and its sanctuary, especially as what Judah gained by the fall of her rival was not so much political strength as an increase of religious self-consciousness. If the great house of God upon Mount Zion had always overtopped the other shrines in Judah, it now stood without any equal in all Israel. But it was the prophets who led the way in determining the inferences to be drawn from the change in the face of things. Hitherto they had principally had their eyes upon the northern kingdom, its threatened collapse, and the wickedness of its inhabitants, and thus had poured out their wrath more particularly upon the places of worship there. Judah they judged more favourably, both on personal and on substantial grounds, and they hoped for its preservation, not concealing their sympathies for Jerusalem (Amos i. 2). Under the impression produced by their discourses accordingly, the fall of Samaria was interpreted as a judgment of God against the sinful kingdom and in favour of the fallen house of David, and the destruction of the sanctuaries of Israel was accepted as an unmistakable declaration on Jehovah's part against His older seats on behalf of His favourite dwelling on Zion. Finally, the fact that twenty

[p. 25]

years afterwards Jerusalem made her triumphant escape from the danger which had proved fatal to her haughty rival, that at the critical moment the Assyrians under Sennacherib were suddenly constrained to withdraw from her, raised to the highest pitch the veneration in which the temple was held. In this connection special emphasis is usually laid--and with justice--upon the prophetical activity of Isaiah, whose confidence in the firm foundation of Zion continued unmoved, even when the rock began to shake in an alarming way. Only it must not be forgotten that the significance of Jerusalem to Isaiah did not arise from the temple of Solomon, but from the fact that it was the city of David and the focus of his kingdom, the central point, not of the cultus, but of the sovereignty of Jehovah over His people. The holy mount was to him the entire city as a political unity, with its citizens, councillors, and judges (xi. 9); his faith in the sure foundation on which Zion rested was nothing more than a faith in the living presence of Jehovah in the camp of Israel. But the contemporaries of the prophet interpreted otherwise his words and the events which had occurred. In their view Jehovah dwelt on Zion because His house was there; it was the temple that had been shown by history to be His true seat, and its inviolability was accordingly the pledge of the indestructibility of the nation. This belief was quite general in Jeremiah's time, as is seen in the extremely vivid picture of the seventh chapter of his book; but even as early as the time of Micah, in the first third of the seventh century, the temple must have been reckoned a house of God of an altogether peculiar order, so as to make it a paradox to put it on a level with the Bamoth of Judah, and a thing unheard of to believe in its destruction.

At the same time, notwithstanding the high and universal reverence in which the temple was held, the other sanctuaries still continued, in the first instance, to subsist alongside of it. King Hezekiah indeed is said to have even then made an attempt to abolish them, but the attempt, having passed away without leaving any trace, is of a doubtful nature. It is certain that the prophet Isaiah did not labour for the removal of the Bamoth. In one of his latest discourses his anticipation for that time of righteousness and the fear of God which is to dawn after the Assyrian crisis is: "Then shall ye defile the silver covering of your graven images and the golden plating of your molten images--ye shall cast them away as a thing polluted; Begone! shall ye say unto them" (xxx. 22). If he thus hopes for a purification from superstitious accretions of the places where

[p. 26]

[paragraph continues] Jehovah is worshipped, it is clear that he is not thinking of their total abolition. Not until about a century after the destruction of Samaria did men venture to draw the practical conclusion from the belief in the unique character of the temple at Jerusalem. That this was not done from a mere desire to be logical, but with a view to further reforms, need not be said. With the tone of repudiation in which the earlier prophets, in the zeal of their opposition, had occasionally spoken of practices of worship at large, there was nothing to be achieved; the thing to be aimed at was not abolition, but reformation, and the end it was believed would be helped by concentration of all ritual in the capital. Prophets and priests appear to have made common cause in the prosecution of the work. It was the high priest Hilkiah who in the first instance called attention to the discovered book which was to be made the basis of action; the prophetess Huldah confirmed its divine contents; the priests and prophets were a prominent element in the assembly at which the new law was promulgated and sworn to. Now an intimate fellowship between these two leading classes appears to be characteristic of the whole course of the religious movement in Judah, and to have been necessarily connected with the lines on which that movement advanced; [*1] we shall be justified therefore in assuming that the display of harmony between them on this occasion was not got up merely for the purposes of scenic effect, but that the change in the national cultus now proposed was really the common suggestion of prophets and priests. In point of fact, such a change was equally in accordance with the interests of the temple and with those of the prophetic party of reform. To the last named the restriction of the sacrificial worship must have in itself seemed an advantage; to it in later times the complete abolition of sacrifice was mainly due, and something of the later effect doubtless lay in the original intention. Then, too, the Jehovah of Hebron was only too easily regarded as distinct from the Jehovah of Bethshemesh or of Bethel, and so a strictly monarchical conception of God naturally led to

[p. 27]

the conclusion that the place of His dwelling and of His worship could also only be one. All writers of the Chaldaean period associate monotheism in the closest way with unity of worship (Jer. ii. 28, xi. 13). And the choice of the locality could present no difficulty; the central point of the kingdom had of necessity also to become the central point of the worship. Even Jerusalem and the house of Jehovah there might need some cleansing, but it was clearly entitled to a preference over the obscure local altars. It was the seat of all higher culture, lying under the prophets' eyes, much more readily accessible to light and air, reform and control. It is also possible, moreover, that the Canaanite origin of most of the Bamoth, which is not unknown, for example, to Deuteronomy, may have helped to discredit them, while, on the other hand, the founding of Jerusalem belonged to the proudest memories of Israelite history, and the Ark, which had been the origin of the temple there, had a certain right to be considered the one genuine Mosaic sanctuary. [*1]

In the eighteenth year of Josiah, 601 B.C., the first heavy blow fell upon the local sacrificial places. How vigorously the king set to work, how new were the measures taken, and how deeply they cut, can be learned from the narrative of 2 Kings xxiii. Yet what a vitality did the green trees upon the high mountains still continue to show! Even now they were but polled, not uprooted. After Josiah's death we again see Bamoth appearing on all hands, not merely in the country, but even in the capital itself. Jeremiah has to lament that there are as many altars as towns in Judah. All that had been attained by the reforming party was that they could now appeal to a written law that had been solemnly sworn to by the whole people, standing ever an immovable witness to the rights of God. But to bring it again into force and to carry it out was no easy matter, and would certainly have been impossible to the unaided efforts of the prophets--a Jeremiah or an Ezekiel.

3 Had the people of Judah remained in peaceful possession of their land, the reformation of Josiah would hardly have penetrated to the

[p. 28]

masses; the threads uniting the present with the past were too strong. To induce the people to regard as idolatrous and heretical centres of iniquity the Bamoth, with which from ancestral times the holiest memories were associated, and some of which, like Hebron and Beersheba, had been set up by Abraham and Isaac in person, required a complete breaking-off of the natural tradition of life, a total severance of all connection with inherited conditions. This was accomplished by means of the Babylonian exile, which violently tore the nation away from its native soil, and kept it apart for half a century,--a breach of historical continuity than which it is almost impossible to conceive a greater. The new generation had no natural, but only an artificial relation to the times of old; the firmly rooted growths of the old soil, regarded as thorns by the pious, were extirpated, and the freshly ploughed fallows ready for a new sowing. It is, of course, far from being the case that the whole people at that time underwent a general conversion in the sense of the prophets. Perhaps the majority totally gave up the past, but just on that account became lost among the heathen, and never subsequently came into notice. Only the pious ones, who with trembling followed Jehovah's word, were left as a remnant; they alone had the strength to maintain the Jewish individuality amid the medley of nationalities into which they had been thrown. From the exile there returned, not the nation, but a religious sect,--those, namely, who had given themselves up body and soul to the reformation ideas. It is no wonder that to these people, who, besides, on their return, all settled in the immediate neighbourhood of Jerusalem, the thought never once occurred of restoring the local cults. It cost them no struggle to allow the destroyed Bamoth to continue lying in ruins; the principle had become part of their very being, that the one God had also but one place of worship, and thenceforward for all time coming this was regarded as a thing of course.

  

II.

Such was the actual historical course of the centralisation of the cultus, and such the three stadia which can be distinguished. The question now presents itself, whether it is possible to detect a correspondence between the phases of the actual course of events and those of the legislation relating to this subject. All three portions of the

[p. 29]

legislation contain ordinances on the subject of sacrificial places and offerings. It may be taken for granted that in some way or other these have their roots in history, and do not merely hang in the air, quite away from or above the solid ground of actuality.

1. The main Jehovistic law, the so-called Book of the Covenant, contains (Exod. xx. 24-26) the following ordinance: "An altar of earth shalt thou make unto me, and thereon shalt thou sacrifice thy burnt offerings and thy peace-offerings, thy sheep and thine oxen; in place where I cause my name to be honoured will I come unto and will bless thee. Or if thou wilt make me an altar of stones, thou shalt not build it of hewn stones, for if thou hast lifted up thy tool upon it thou hast polluted it. And thou shalt not go up to mine altar by steps, that thy nakedness be not discovered before it." Unquestionably it is not the altar of the tabernacle, which was made of wood and plated over with brass, nor that of Solomon's temple, which on its eastern side had a flight of steps, [*1] and had a passage right round it at half its height, that is here described as the only true one. On the other hand, it is obvious that a multiplicity of altars is not merely regarded as permissible, but assumed as a matter of course. For no stress at all is laid upon having always the same sacrificial seat, whether fixed or to be moved about from place to place; earth and unhewn stones [*2] of the field can be found everywhere, and such an altar falls to pieces just as readily as it is built. A choice of two kinds of material is also given, which surely implies that the lawgiver thought of more than one altar; and not at the place, but at every place where He causes His name to

[p. 30]

be honoured will Jehovah come to His worshippers and bless them. Thus the law now under consideration is in harmony with the custom and usage of the first historical period, has its root therein, and gives sanction to it. Certainly the liberty to sacrifice everywhere seems to be somewhat restricted by the added clause, "in every place where I cause my name to be honoured." But this means nothing more than that the spots where intercourse between earth and heaven took place were not willingly regarded as arbitrarily chosen, but, on the contrary, were considered as having been somehow or other selected by the Deity Himself for His service.

In perfect correspondence with the Jehovistic law is the Jehovistic narrative of the Pentateuch, as, in particular, the story of the patriarchs in J and E very clearly shows. At every place where they take up their abode or make a passing stay, the fathers of the nation, according to this authority, erect altars, set up memorial stones, plant trees, dig wells. This does not take place at indifferent and casual localities, but at Shechem and Bethel in Ephraim, at Hebron and Beersheba in Judah, at Mizpah, Mahanaim, and Penuel in Gilead; nowhere but at famous and immemorially holy places of worship. It is on this that the interest of such notifications depends; they are no mere antiquarian facts, but full of the most living significance for the present of the narrator. The altar built by Abraham at Shechem is the altar on which sacrifice still continues to be made, and bears "even unto this day" the name which the patriarch gave it. On the spot where at Hebron he first entertained Jehovah, there down to the present day the table has continued to be spread; even as Isaac himself did, so do his sons still swear (Amos viii. 14; Hos. iv. 15) by the sacred well of Beersheba, which he digged, and sacrifice there upon the altar which he built, under the tamarisk which he planted. The stone which Jacob consecrated at Bethel the generation of the living continues to anoint, paying the tithes which of old he vowed to the house of God there. This also is the reason why the sacred localities are so well known to the narrator, and are punctually and accurately recorded notwithstanding the four hundred years of the Egyptian sojourn, which otherwise would have made their identification a matter of some little difficulty. The altar which Abraham built at Bethel stands upon the hill to the east of the town, between Bethel on the west and Ai on the east; others are determined by means of a tree or a well, as that of

[p. 31]

[paragraph continues] Shechem or Beersheba. [*1] But of course it was not intended to throw dishonour upon the cultus of the present when its institution was ascribed to the fathers of the nation. Rather, on the contrary, do these legends glorify the origin of the sanctuaries to which they are attached, and surround them with the nimbus of a venerable consecration. All the more as the altars, as a rule, are not built by the patriarchs according to their own private judgment wheresoever they please; on the contrary, a theophany calls attention to, or at least afterwards confirms, the holiness of the place. Jehovah appears at Shechem to Abraham, who thereupon builds the altar "to Jehovah who had appeared unto him;" he partakes of his hospitality under the oak of Mamre, which is the origin of the sacrificial service there; He shows him the place where he is to make an offering of his son, and here the sanctuary continues to exist. On the first night of Isaac's sleeping on the sacred soil of Beersheba (xxvi. 24) he receives a visit from the Numen there residing, and in consequence rears his altar. Surprised by profane glances, Jehovah acts as a destroyer, but Himself spontaneously points out to His favoured ones the places where it is His pleasure to allow Himself to be seen; and where men have seen Him and yet lived, there a sanctuary marks the open way of access to Him. The substance of the revelation is in these cases comparatively indifferent: "I am God." What is of importance is the theophany in and for itself, its occurrence on that particular place. It must not be regarded as an isolated fact, but rather as the striking commencement of an intercourse (r'h pny yhwh) between God and man which is destined to be continued at this spot, and also as the first and strongest expression of the sanctity of the soil. This way of looking at the thing appears most clearly and with incomparable charm in the story of the ladder which Jacob saw at Bethel. "He dreamed, and behold a ladder set up on the earth, and the top of it reached to heaven, and behold the angels of God ascending and descending on it. And he was afraid and said, How dreadful is this place! This is none

[p. 32]

other but the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven." The ladder stands at the place not at this moment merely, but continually, and, as it were, by nature. Bethel--so Jacob perceives from this--is a place where heaven and earth meet, where the angels ascend and descend, to carry on the communication between earth and heaven ordained by God at this gate.

All this is only to be understood as a glorification of the relations and arrangements of the cultus as we find them (say) in the first centuries of the divided kingdom. All that seems offensive and heathenish to a later age is here consecrated and countenanced by Jehovah Himself and His favoured ones,--the high places, the memorial stones (macceboth), the trees, the wells. [*1] An essential agreement prevails between the Jehovistic law which sanctions the existing seats of worship and the Jehovistic narrative; the latter is as regards its nucleus perhaps somewhat older. Both obviously belong to the pre-prophetic period; a later revision of the narrative in the prophetic sense has not altered the essential character of its fundamental elements. It is inconceivable that Amos or Hosea, or any like-minded person, could go with such sympathising love and believing reverence into narratives which only served to invest with a still brighter nimbus and higher respect the existing religious worship, carried on by the people on the high places of Isaac as their holiest occupation.

2. The Jehovistic Book of the Covenant lies indeed at the foundation of Deuteronomy, but in one point they differ materially, and that precisely the one which concerns us here. As there, so here also, the legislation properly so called begins (Deut. xii.) with an ordinance relating to the service of the altar; but now we have Moses addressing the Israelites in the following terms: "When ye come into the land of Canaan, ye shall utterly destroy all the places of worship which ye find there, and ye shall not worship Jehovah your God after the manner in which the heathen serve theirs. Nay, but only unto the place which the Lord your God shall choose out of all your tribes for His habitation shall ye seek, and thither shall ye bring your offerings and gifts, and there shall ye eat before Him and rejoice. Here at this day we do every

[p. 33]

man whatsoever is right in his own eyes, but when ye have found fixed abodes, and rest from your enemies round about, then shall the place which Jehovah shall choose for His habitation in one of your tribes be the one place to which ye shall bring your offerings and gifts. Take heed that ye offer not in every place that ye see; ye may not eat your holy gifts in every town, but only in the place which Jehovah shall choose."

The Law is never weary of again and again repeating its injunction of local unity of worship. In doing so, it is in conscious opposition to "the things that we do here this day," and throughout has a polemical and reforming attitude towards existing usage. It is rightly therefore assigned by historical criticism to the period of the attacks made on the Bamoth by the reforming party at Jerusalem. As the Book of the Covenant, and the whole Jehovistic writing in general, reflects the first pre-prophetic period in the history of the cultus, so Deuteronomy is the legal expression of the second period of struggle and transition. The historical order is all the more certain because the literary dependence of Deuteronomy on the Jehovistic laws and narratives can be demonstrated independently, and is an admitted fact. From this the step is easy to the belief that the work whose discovery gave occasion to King Josiah to destroy the local sanctuaries was this very Book of Deuteronomy, which originally must have had an independent existence, and a shorter form than at present. This alone, at least, of all the books of the Pentateuch, gives so imperious an expression to the restriction of the sacrificial worship to the one chosen place; here only does the demand make itself so felt in its aggressive novelty and dominate the whole tendency of the law-maker. The old material which he makes use of is invariably shaped with a view to this, and on all hands he follows the rule out to its logical consequences. To make its fulfilment possible, he changes former arrangements, permitting what had been forbidden, and prohibiting what had been allowed; in almost every case this motive lies at the foundation of all his other innovations. This is seen, for example, when he permits slaying without sacrificing, and that too anywhere; when, in order not to abolish the right of asylum (Exod. xxi. 13, 14; 1 Kings ii. 28) along with the altars, he appoints special cities of refuge for the innocent who are pursued by the avenger of blood; when he provides for the priests of the suppressed sanctuaries, recommending the provincials to take them along with them on their sacrificial

[p. 34]

pilgrimages, and giving them the right to officiate in the temple at Jerusalem just like the hereditarily permanent clergy there. In other respects also the dominance of the same point of view is seen: for example, it is chiefly from regard to it that the old ordinances and customs relating to the religious dues and the festivals are set forth in the form which they must henceforth assume. A law so living, which stands at every point in immediate contact with reality, which is at war with traditionary custom, and which proceeds with constant reference to the demands of practical life, is no mere velleity, no mere cobweb of an idle brain, but has as certainly arisen out of historical occasions as it is designed to operate powerfully on the course of the subsequent history. A judgment pronounced in accordance with the facts can therefore assign to it an historical place only within that movement of reformation which was brought to a victorious issue by King Josiah.

3. It is often supposed that the Priestly Code is somewhat indifferent to the question of the one sanctuary, neither permitting multiplicity of sacrificial centres nor laying stress upon the unity, and that on account of this attitude it must be assigned to an earlier date than Deuteronomy. [*1] Such an idea is, to say the least, in the highest degree superficial. The assumption that worship is restricted to one single centre runs everywhere throughout the entire document. To appeal specially, in proof of the restriction, to Lev. xvii. or Josh. xxii., is to indicate a complete failure to apprehend the whole tenor of Exod. xxv.-Lev. ix. Before so much as a single regulation having reference to the matter of worship can be given (such is the meaning of the large section referred to), the one rightful place wherein to engage in it must be specified. The tabernacle is not narrative merely, but, like all the narratives in that book, law as well; it expresses the legal unity of the worship as an historical fact, which, from the very beginning, ever since the exodus, has held good in Israel. One God one sanctuary, that is the idea. With the ordinances of the tabernacle, which form the sum of the divine revelation on Sinai, the theocracy was founded; where the one is, there is the other. The description of it, therefore,

[p. 35]

stands at the head of the Priestly Code, just as that of the temple stands at the head of the legislation in Ezekiel. It is the basis and indispensable foundation, without which all else would merely float in the air: first must the seat of the Divine Presence on earth be given before the sacred community can come into life and the cultus into force. Is it supposes that the tabernacle tolerates other sanctuaries besides itself? Why then the encampment of the twelve tribes around it, which has no military, but a purely religious significance, and derives its whole meaning from its sacred centre? Whence this concentration of all Israel into one great congregation (qhl, `dh), without its like anywhere else in the Old Testament? On the contrary, there is no other place besides this at which God dwells and suffers Himself to be seen; no place but this alone where man can draw near to Him and seek His face with offerings and gifts. This view is the axiom that underlies the whole ritual legislation of the middle part of the Pentateuch. It is indicated with special clearness by the lpny 'hl mw`d (before the tabernacle), introduced at every turn in the ordinances for sacrifice.

What then are we to infer from this as to the historical place of the Priestly Code, if it be judged necessary to assign it such a place at all? By all the laws of logic it can no more belong to the first period than Deuteronomy does. But is it older or younger than Deuteronomy? In that book the unity of the cultus is commanded; in the Priestly Code it is presupposed. Everywhere it is tacitly assumed as a fundamental postulate, but nowhere does it find actual expression; [*1] it is nothing new, but quite a thing of course. What follows from this for the question before us? To my thinking, this:--that the Priestly Code rests upon the result which is only the aim of Deuteronomy. The latter is in the midst of movement and conflict: it clearly speaks out its reforming intention, its opposition to the traditional "what we do here this day;" the former stands outside of and above the struggle,--the end has been reached and made a secure possession. On the basis of the Priestly Code no reformation would ever have taken place, no Josiah would ever have observed from it that the actual condition of affairs was perverse and required to be set right; it proceeds as if everything had been for long in the best of

[p. 36]

order. It is only in Deuteronomy, moreover, that one sees to the root of the matter, and recognises its connection with the anxiety for a strict monotheism and for the elimination from the worship of the popular heathenish elements, and thus with a deep and really worthy aim; in the Priestly Code the reason of the appointments, in themselves by no means rational, rests upon their own legitimacy, just as everything that is actual ordinarily seems natural and in no need of explanation. Nowhere does it become apparent that the abolition of the Bamoth and Asherim and memorial stones is the real object contemplated; these institutions are now almost unknown, and what is really only intelligible as a negative and polemical ordinance is regarded as full of meaning in itself.

The idea as idea is older than the idea as history. In Deuteronomy it appears in its native colours, comes forward with its aggressive challenge to do battle with the actual. One step indeed is taken towards investing it with an historical character, in so far as it is put into the mouth of Moses; but the beginning thus made keeps within modest limits. Moses only lays down the law; for its execution he makes no provision as regards his own time, nor does he demand it for the immediate future. Rather it is represented as not destined to come into force until the people shall have concluded the conquest of the country and secured a settled peace. We have already found reason to surmise that the reference to "menuha" is intended to defer the date when the Law shall come into force to the days of David and Solomon (1 Kings viii. 16). This is all the more probable inasmuch as there is required for its fulfilment "the place which Jehovah shall choose," by which only the capital of Judah can be meant. Deuteronomy, therefore, knows nothing of the principle that what ought to be must actually have been from the beginning. Until the building of Solomon's temple the unity of worship according to it had, properly speaking, never had any existence; and, moreover, it is easy to read between the lines that even after that date it was more a pious wish than a practical demand. The Priestly Code, on the other hand, is unable to think of religion without the one sanctuary, and cannot for a moment imagine Israel without it, carrying its actual existence back to the very beginning of the theocracy, and, in accordance with this, completely altering the ancient history. The temple, the focus to which the worship was concentrated, and which in reality was not built until Solomon's time, is by this document regarded as so

[p. 37]

indispensable, even for the troubled days of the wanderings before the settlement, that it is made portable, and in the form of a tabernacle set up in the very beginning of things. For the truth is, that the tabernacle is the copy, not the prototype, of the temple at Jerusalem. The resemblance of the two is indeed unmistakable, [*1] but it is not said in 1 Kings vi. that Solomon made use of the old pattern and ordered his Tyrian workmen to follow it. The posteriority of the Mosaic structure comes into clearer light from the two following considerations brought forward by Graf (p. 60 seq.). In the first place, in the description of the tabernacle mention is repeatedly made of its south, north, and west side, without any preceding rubric as to a definite and constantly uniform orientation; the latter is tacitly taken for granted, being borrowed from that of the temple, which was a fixed building, and did not change its site. In the second place, the brazen altar is, strictly speaking, described as an altar of wood merely plated with brass,--for a fireplace of very large size, upon which a strong fire continually burns, a perfectly absurd construction, which is only to be accounted for by the wish to make the brazen altar which Solomon cast (1 Kings xvi. 14) transportable, by changing its interior into wood. The main point, however, is this, that the tabernacle of the Priestly Code in its essential meaning is not a mere provisional shelter for the ark on the march, but the sole legitimate sanctuary for the community of the twelve tribes prior to the days of Solomon, and so in fact a projection of the later temple. How modest, one might almost say how awkwardly bashful, is the Deuteronomic reference to the future place which Jehovah is to choose when compared with this calm matter-of-fact assumption that the necessary centre of unity of worship was given from the first! In the one case we have, so to speak, only the idea as it exists in the mind of the lawgiver, but making no claim to be realised till a much later date; in the other, the Mosaic idea has acquired also a Mosaic embodiment, with which it entered the world at the very first.

By the same simple historical method which carries the central sanctuary back into the period before Solomon does the Priestly author abolish the other places of worship. His forty-eight Levitical cities are for the most part demonstrably a metamorphosis of the old

[p. 38]

[paragraph continues] Bamoth to meet the exigencies of the time. The altar which the tribes eastward of Jordan build (Josh. xxii.) is erected with no intention that it should be used, but merely in commemoration of something. Even the pre-Mosaic period is rendered orthodox in the same fashion. The patriarchs, having no tabernacle, have no worship at all; according to the Priestly Code they build no altars, bring no offerings, and scrupulously abstain from everything by which they might in any way encroach on the privilege of the one true sanctuary. This manner of shaping the patriarchal history is only the extreme consequence of the effort to carry out with uniformity in history the semper ubique et ab omnibus of the legal unity of worship.

Thus in Deuteronomy the institution is only in its birth-throes, and has still to struggle for the victory against the praxis of the present, but in the Priestly Code claims immemorial legitimacy and strives to bring the past into conformity with itself, obviously because it already dominates the present; the carrying back of the new into the olden time always takes place at a later date than the ushering into existence of the new itself. Deuteronomy has its position in the very midst of the historical crisis, and still stands in a close relation with the older period of worship, the conditions of which it can contest, but is unable to ignore, and still less to deny. But, on the other hand, the Priestly Code is hindered by no survival to present times of the older usage from projecting an image of antiquity such as it must have been; unhampered by visible relics or living tradition of an older state, it can idealise the past to its heart's content. Its place, then, is after Deuteronomy, and in the third post-exilian period of the history of the cultus, in which, on the one hand, the unity of the sanctuary was an established fact, contested by no one and impugned by nothing, and in which, on the other hand, the natural connection between the present and the past had been so severed by the exile that there was no obstacle to prevent an artificial and ideal repristination of the latter.

  

III.

The reverse of this is what is usually held. In Deuteronomy, it is considered, there occur clear references to the period of the kings; but the Priestly Code, with its historical presuppositions, does not fit in with any situation belonging to that time, and is therefore older. When the

[p. 39]

cultus rests upon the temple of Solomon as its foundation, as in Ezekiel, then every one recognises the later date; but when it is based upon the tabernacle, the case is regarded as quite different. The great antiquity of the priestly legislation is proved by relegating it to an historical sphere, created by itself out of its own legal premisses, but which is nowhere to be found within, and therefore must have preceded actual history. Thus (so to speak) it holds itself up in the air by its own waistband.

1. It may, however, seem as if hitherto it had only been asserted that the tabernacle rests on an historical fiction. In truth it is proved; but yet it may be well to add some things which have indeed been said long before now, but never as yet properly laid to heart. The subject of discussion, be it premised, is the tabernacle of the Priestly Code; for some kind of tent for the ark there may well have been: in fact, tents were in Palestine the earliest dwellings of idols (Hos. ix. 6), and only afterwards gave place to fixed houses; and even the Jehovistic tradition (although not J) knows of a sacred tent [*1] in connection with the Mosaic camp, and outside it, just as the older high places generally had open sites without the city. The question before us has reference exclusively to the particular tent which, according to Exodus xxv. seq., was erected at the command of God as the basis of the theocracy, the pre-Solomonic central sanctuary, which also in outward details was the prototype of the temple. At the outset its very possibility is doubtful. Very strange is the contrast between this splendid structure, on which the costliest material is lavished and wrought in the most advanced style of Oriental art, and the soil on which it rises, in the wilderness amongst the native Hebrew nomad tribes, who are represented as having got it ready offhand, and without external help. The incompatibility has long been noticed, and gave rise to doubts as early as the time of Voltaire. These may, however, be left to themselves; suffice it that Hebrew tradition, even from the time of the judges and the first kings, for which the Mosaic tabernacle was strictly speaking intended, knows nothing at all about it.

It appears a bold thing to say so when one sees how much many a modern author who knows how to make a skilful use of the Book of

[p. 40]

[paragraph continues] Chronicles has to tell about the tabernacle. For in 2 Chron. i. 3 seq. we are told that Solomon celebrated his accession to the throne with a great sacrificial feast at Gibeon, because the tabernacle and the brazen altar of Moses were there. In like manner in 1 Chron. xxi. 29 it is said that David offered sacrifice indeed on the threshing-floor of Araunah, but that Jehovah's dwelling-place and the legitimate altar were at that time at Gibeon; and further (xvi. 39), that Zadok, the legitimate high priest, officiated there. From these data the Rabbins first, and in recent times Keil and Movers especially, have constructed a systematic history of the tabernacle down to the building of the temple. Under David and Solomon, as long as the ark was on Mount Zion, the tabernacle was at Gibeon, as is also shown by the fact that (2 Sam. xxi. 6, 9) offerings were sacrificed to Jehovah there. Before that it was at Nob, where ephod and shewbread (1 Sam. xxi.) are mentioned, and still earlier, from Joshua's time onward, it was at Shiloh. But these were only its permanent sites, apart from which it was temporarily set up now here, now there, saving by its rapidity of movement--one might almost say ubiquity--the unity of the cultus, notwithstanding the variety and great distances of the places at which that cultus was celebrated. In every case in which a manifestation of Jehovah and an offering to Him are spoken of, the tabernacle must be tacitly understood. [*1]

The dogmatic character of this way of making history, and the absurd consequences to which it leads, need not in the meantime be insisted on; what is of greatest importance is that the point from which it starts is in the last degree insecure; for the statement of Chronicles that Solomon offered the offering of his accession upon the altar of the tabernacle at Gibeon is in contradiction with that of the older parallel narrative of 1 Kings iii. 1-4. The latter not only is silent about the Mosaic tabernacle, which is alleged to have stood at Gibeon, but expressly says that Solomon offered upon a high place (as such), and excuses him for this on the plea that at that time no house to the name of Jehovah had as yet been built. That the Chronicler draws from this narrative is certain on general grounds, and is shown particularly by this, that he designates the tabernacle at Gibeon by the name of Bamah--a contradictio in adjecto 

[p. 41]

which is only to be explained by the desire to give an authentic interpretation of "the great Bamah at Gibeon" in 1 Kings iii. Here, as elsewhere, he brings the history into agreement with the Law: the young and pious Solomon can have offered his sacrifice only at the legal place which therefore must be that high place at Gibeon. Along with 2 Chron. i. 3 seq. also fall the two other statements (1 Chron. xvi. 39, xxi. 29), both of which are dependent on that leading passage, as is clear revealed by the recurring phrase "the Bamah of Gibeon." The tabernacle does not elsewhere occur in Chronicles; it has not yet brought its consequences with it, and not yet permeated the historical view of the author. He would certainly have experienced some embarrassment at the question whether it had previously stood at Nob, for he lays stress upon the connection between the legitimate sanctuary and the legitimate Zadok-Eleazar priestly family, which it is indeed possible to assume for Shiloh, but not for Nob. [*1]

The fact that Chronicles represents the Israelite history in accordance with the Priestly Code has had the effect of causing its view of the history to be involuntarily taken as fundamental, but ought much rather to have caused it to be left altogether out of account where the object to ascertain what was the real and genuine tradition. The Books of Judges and Samuel make mention indeed of many sanctuaries, but never among them of the tabernacle, the most important of all. For the single passage where the name Ohel Moed occurs (1 Sam. ii. 22 is badly attested, and from its contents open to suspicion. [*2] Of the existence of the ark of Jehovah there certainly are distinct traces towards the end of the period of the judges (compare 1 Samuel iv.-vi.) But is the ark a guarantee of the existence of the tabernacle? On the contrary its whole history down to the period of its being deposited in the temple of Solomon is a proof that it was regarded as quite independent of any tent specially consecrated for its reception. But this abolishes the notion of the Mosaic tabernacle; for according to the law, the two things belong necessarily to each other; the one cannot exist without the other; both are of equally great importance. The tabernacle must everywhere accompany the symbol of its presence; the darkness of the holy of

[p. 42]

holies is at the same time the life-element of the ark; only under compulsion of necessity, and even then not except under the covering of the curtains, does it leave its lodging during a march, only to return to it again as soon as the new halting-place is reached. But according to 1 Sam. iv. seq., on the other hand, it is only the ark that goes to the campaign; it alone falls into the hands of the Philistines. Even in chap. v., where the symbol of Jehovah is placed in the temple of Dagon at Ashdod, not a word is said of the tabernacle or of the altar which is necessarily connected with it; and chap. vi. is equally silent, although here the enemy plainly gives back the whole of his sacred spoil. It is assumed that the housing of the ark was left behind at Shiloh. Very likely; but that was not the Mosaic tabernacle, the inseparable companion of the ark. In fact, the narrator speaks of a permanent house at Shiloh with doors and doorposts; that possibly may be an anachronism [*1] (yet why?); but so much at least may be inferred from it that he had not any idea of the tabernacle, which, however, would have had to go with the ark to the field. If on this one occasion only an illegal exception to the Law was made, why in that case was not the ark, at least after its surrender, again restored to the lodging from which, strictly speaking, it ought never to have been separated at all? Instead of this it is brought to Bethshemesh, where it causes disaster, because the people show curiosity about it. Thence it comes to Kirjathjearim, where it stays for many years in the house of a private person. From here David causes it to be brought to Jerusalem,--one naturally supposes, if one thinks in the lines of the view given in the Pentateuch and in Chronicles, in order that it may be at last restored to the tabernacle, to be simultaneously brought to Jerusalem. But no thought of this, however obvious it may seem, occurs to the king. In the first instance, his intention is to have the ark beside himself in the citadel; but he is terrified out of this, and, at a loss where else to put it, he at last places it in the house of one of his principal people, Obed-Edom of Gath. Had he known anything about the tabernacle, had he had any suspicion that it

[p. 43]

was standing empty at Gibeon, in the immediate neighbourhood, he would have been relieved of all difficulty. But inasmuch as the ark brings blessing to the house of Obed-Edom,--the ark, be it remembered, in the house of a soldier and a Philistine, yet bringing down, not wrath, but blessing [*1],--the king is thereby encouraged to persevere after all with his original proposal, and establish it upon his citadel. And this he does in a tent he had caused to be made for it (2 Sam. vi. 17), which tent of David in Zion continued to be its lodging until the temple was built.

Some mention of the tabernacle, had it existed, would have been inevitable when the temple took its place. That it did not serve as the model of the temple has already been said; but it might have been expected at least that in the account of the building of the new sanctuary some word might have escaped about the whereabouts of the old. And this expectation seems to be realised in 1 Kings viii. 4, which says that when the temple was finished there were brought into it, besides the ark, the Ohel Moed and all the sacred vessels that were therein. Interpreters hesitate as to whether they ought to understand by the Ohel Moed the tent of the ark upon Zion, to which alone reference has been made in the preceding narrative (1 Kings i. 39, ii. 28-30), or whether it is the Mosaic tent, which, according to Chronicles, was standing at Gibeon, but of which the Book of Kings tells nothing, and also knows nothing (iii. 2-4). It is probable that the author of viii. 4 mixed up both together; but we have to face the following alternative. Either the statement belongs to the original context of the narrative in which it occurs, and in that case the Ohel Moed can only be the tent on Mount Zion, or the Ohel Moed of 1 Kings viii. 4 is the Mosaic tabernacle which was removed from Gibeon into Solomon's temple, and in that case the allegation has no connection with its context, and does not hang together with the premisses which that furnishes; in other words, it is the interpolation of a later hand. The former alternative, though possible, is improbable, for the name Ohel Moed occurs absolutely nowhere in the Books of Judges, Samuel, and Kings (apart from the interpolation in 1 Samuel ii. 22 b), and particularly it is not used

[p. 44]

to denote David's tent upon Mount Zion; and, moreover, that tent had received too little of the consecration of antiquity, and according to 2 Sam. vii. was too insignificant and provisional to be thought worthy of preservation in the temple. But if the Ohel Moed is here (what it everywhere else is) the tabernacle, as is indicated also by the sacred vessels, then the verse is, as has been said, an interpolation. The motive for such a thing is easily understood; the same difficulty as that with which we set out must have made it natural for any Jew who started from the ideas of the Pentateuch to look for the tabernacle here, and, if he did not find it, to introduce it. Yet even the interpolation does not remove the difficulties. Where is the Mosaic altar of burnt-offering? It was quite as important and holy as the tabernacle itself; even in Chronicles it is invariably mentioned expressly in connection with it, and did not deserve to be permitted to go to ruin at Gibeon, which, from another point of view, would also have been extremely dangerous to the unity of the sacrificial worship. Further, if the sacred vessels were transferred from the tabernacle to the temple, why then was it that Solomon, according to 1 Kings vii., cast a completely new set? [*1] The old ones were costly enough, in part even costlier than the new, and, moreover, had been consecrated by long use. It is clear that in Solomon's time neither tabernacle, nor holy vessels, nor brazen altar of Moses had any existence.

But if there was no tabernacle in the time of the last judges and first kings, as little was it in existence during the whole of the previous period. This is seen from 2 Sam. vii., a section with whose historicity we have here nothing to do, but which at all events reflects the view of a pre-exilian author. It is there told that David, after he had obtained rest from all his enemies, contemplated building a worthy home for the ark, and expressed his determination to the prophet Nathan in the words, "I dwell in a house of cedar, and the ark of God within curtains." According to vi. 17, he can only mean the tent which he had set up, that is to say, not the Mosaic tabernacle, which, moreover, according to the description of Exod. xxv. seq., could not

[p. 45]

appropriately be contrasted with a timber erection, still less be regarded as a mean structure or unworthy of the Deity, for in point of magnificence it at least competed with the temple of Solomon. Nathan at first approves of the king's intention, but afterwards discountenances it, saying that at present God does not wish to have anything different from that which He has hitherto had. "I have dwelt in no house since the day that I brought the children of Israel out of Egypt, but have wandered about under tent and covering." Nathan also, of course, has not in his eye the Mosaic tabernacle as the present lodging of the ark, but David's tent upon Zion. Now he does not say that the ark has formerly been always in the tabernacle, and that its present harbourage is therefore in the highest degree unlawful, but, on the contrary, that the present state of matters is the right one,--that until now the ark has invariably been housed under an equally simple and unpretentious roof. As David's tent does not date back to the Exodus, Nathan is necessarily speaking of changing tents and dwellings; the reading of the parallel passage in 1 Chron. xvii. 5, therefore, correctly interprets the sense. There could be no more fundamental contradiction to the representation contained in the Pentateuch than that embodied in these words: the ark has not as its correlate a single definite sacred tent of state, but is quite indifferent to the shelter it enjoys--has frequently changed its abode, but never had any particularly fine one. Such has been the state of matters since the time of Moses.

Such is the position of affairs as regards the tabernacle; if it is determined that the age of the Priestly Code is to hang by these threads, I have no objection. The representation of the tabernacle arose out of the temple of Solomon as its root, in dependence on the sacred ark, for which there is early testimony, and which in the time of David, and also before it, was sheltered by a tent. From the temple it derives at once its inner character and its central importance for the cultus as well as its external form.

2. A peculiar point of view is taken up by Theodor Noldeke. He grants the premisses that the tabernacle is a fiction, of which the object is to give pre-existence to the temple and to the unity of worship, but he denies the conclusion that in that case the Priestly Code presuppose; the unity of worship as already existing in its day, and therefore is late, than Deuteronomy. In his Untersuchungen zur Kritik des Alten Testaments (p. 127 seq.) he says:--

[p. 46]

"A strong tendency towards unity of worship must have arisen as soon as Solomon's temple was built. Over against the splendid sanctuary with its imageless worship at the centre of the kingdom of Judah, the older holy places must ever have shrunk farther into the background, and that not merely in the eyes of the people, but quite specially also in those of the better classes and of those whose spiritual advancement was greatest (compare Amos iv. 4, viii. 14). If even Hezekiah carried out the unification in Judah with tolerable thoroughness, the effort after it must surely have been of very early date; for the determination violently to suppress old sacred usages would not have been easily made, unless this had been long previously demanded by theory. The priests at Jerusalem must very specially at an early date have arrived at the conception that their temple with the sacred ark and the great altar was the one true place of worship, and an author has clothed this very laudable effort on behalf of the purity of religion in the form of a law, which certainly in its strictness was quite impracticable (Lev. xvii. 4 seq.), and which, therefore, was modified later by the Deuteronomist with a view to practice."

What must have happened is of less consequence to know than what actually took place. Noldeke relies solely upon the statement of 2 Kings xviii. 4, 22, that Hezekiah abolished the high places and altars of Jehovah, and said to Judah and Jerusalem, "Before this altar shall ye worship in Jerusalem." With reference to that statement doubts have already been raised above. How startling was the effect produced at a later date by the similar ordinance of Josiah! Is it likely then that the other, although the earlier, should have passed off so quietly and have left so little mark that the reinforcement of it, after an interval of seventy or eighty years, is not in the least brought into connection with it, but in every respect figures as a new first step upon a path until then absolutely untrodden? Note too how casual is the allusion to a matter which is elsewhere the chief and most favoured theme of the Book of Kings! And there is besides all this the serious difficulty, also already referred to above, that the man from whom Hezekiah must, from the nature of the case, have received the impulse to his reformatory movement, the prophet Isaiah, in one of his latest discourses expressly insists on a cleansing merely of the local sanctuaries from molten and graven images, that is to say, does not desire their complete removal. So much at least is certain that, if the alleged fact

[p. 47]

at present under discussion amounts to anything at all [*1], Hezekiah only made a feeble and wholly ineffectual attempt in this direction, and by no means "carried out the unification in Judah with tolerable thoroughness." At the same time, one might concede even this last point, and yet not give any ground for the theory at which Noldeke wishes to arrive.

For his assumption is that the effort after unity had its old and original seat precisely in the priestly circles of Jerusalem. If the Priestly Code is older than Deuteronomy, then of course the prophetic agitation for reform of worship in which Deuteronomy had its origin must have been only the repetition of an older priestly movement in the same direction. But of the latter we hear not a single word, while we can follow the course of the former fairly well from its beginnings in thought down to its issue in a practical result. It was Amos, Hosea, and Isaiah who introduced the movement against the old popular worship of the high places; in doing so they are not in the least actuated by a deep-rooted preference for the temple of Jerusalem, but by ethical motives, which manifest themselves in them for the first time in history, and which we can see springing up in them before our very eyes: their utterances, though historically occasioned by

[p. 48]

the sanctuaries of northern Israel, are quite general, and are directed against the cultus as a whole. Of the influence of a point of view even remotely akin to the priestly position that worship in this or that special place is of more value than anywhere else, and on that account alone deserves to be preserved, no trace is to be found in them; their polemic is a purely prophetic one, i.e., individual, "theopneust" in the sense that it is independent of all traditional and preconceived human opinions. But the subsequent development is dependent upon this absolutely original commencement, and has its issue, not in the Priestly Code, but in Deuteronomy, a book that, with all reasonable regard for the priests (though not more for those of Jerusalem than for the others), still does not belie its prophetic origin, and above all things is absolutely free from all and every hierocratic tendency. And finally, it was Deuteronomy that brought about the historical result of Josiah's reformation. Thus the whole historical movement now under our consideration, so far as it was effective and thereby has come to our knowledge, is in its origin and essence prophetic, even if latterly it may have been aided by priestly influences; and it not merely can, but must be understood from itself. Any older or independent contemporary priestly movement in the same direction remained at least entirely without result, and so also has left no witnesses to itself. Perhaps it occurs to us that the priests of Jerusalem must after all have been the first to catch sight of the goal, the attainment of which afterwards brought so great advantage to themselves, but it does not appear that they were so clever beforehand as we are after the event. At least there are no other grounds for the hypothesis of a long previously latent tendency towards centralisation on the part of the Jerusalem priesthood beyond the presumption that the Priestly Code must chronologically precede, not Deuteronomy merely, but also the prophets. For the sake of this presumption there is constructed a purely abstract (and as such perfectly irrefragable) possibility that furnishes a door of escape from the historical probability, which nevertheless it is impossible to evade.

How absolutely unknown the Priestly Code continued to be even down to the middle of the exile can be seen from the Books of Kings, which cannot have received their present shape earlier than the death of Nebuchadnezzar. The redactor, who cites the Deuteronomic law and constantly forms his judgment in accordance with it, considered (as

[p. 49]

we have learned from 1 Kings iii. 2) that the Bamoth were permissible prior to the building of Solomon's temple; the tabernacle therefore did not exist for him. Jeremiah, who flourished about a generation earlier, is equally ignorant of it, but--on account of the ark, though not necessarily in agreement with traditional opinion--regards the house of God at Shiloh (whose ruins, it would seem, were at that time still visible) as the forerunner of the temple of Jerusalem, and in this he is followed by the anonymous prophecy of 1 Sam. ii. 27-36, the comparatively recent date of which appears from the language (ii. 33), and from the circumstance that it anticipates the following threatening in iii. In all these writers, and still more in the case of the Deuteronomist himself, who in xii. actually makes the unity of the cultus dependent on the previous choice of Jerusalem, it is an exceedingly remarkable thing that, if the Priestly Code had been then already a long time in existence, they should have been ignorant of a book so important and so profound in its practical bearings. In ancient Hebrew literature such an oversight could not be made so easily as, in similar circumstances, with the literature of the present day. And how comes it to pass that in the Book of Chronicles, dating from the third century, the Priestly Code suddenly ceases to be, to all outward seeming, dead, but asserts its influence everywhere over the narrative in only too active and unmistakable a way? To these difficulties Noldeke is unreasonably indifferent. He seems to be of the opinion that the post-exilian time would not have ventured to take in hand so thoroughgoing an alteration, or rather reconstruction, of tradition as is implied in antedating the temple of Solomon by means of the tabernacle. [*1] But it is, on the contrary, precisely the mark which distinguished the post-exile writers that they treat in the freest possible manner, in accordance with their own ideas, the institutions of the bygone past, with which their time was no longer connected by any living bond. For what reason does Chronicles stand in the canon at all, if not in order to teach us this?

But when Noldeke excuses the ignorance with regard to the tabernacle on the plea that it is a mere creature of the brain, [*2] he for the

[p. 50]

moment forgets that there underlies this creation the very real idea of unity of worship, for the sake of which it would surely have been very welcome, to the Deuteronomist, for example, even as a mere idea. It is only the embodiment of the tabernacle that is fancy; the idea of it springs from the ground of history, and it is by its idea that it is to be apprehended. And when Noldeke finally urges in this connection as a plea for the priority of the Priestly Code that, in spite of the limitation of sacrifice to a single locality, it nevertheless maintains the old provision that every act of killing must be a sacrifice, while Deuteronomy, going a step farther, departs from this, here also his argument breaks down.

For we read in Lev. xvii., "What man soever there be of the house of Israel that killeth an ox or sheep or goat in the camp, or out of the camp, and bringeth it not to the door of the tabernacle, to offer them as an offering unto the Lord before the tabernacle of the Lord, blood shall be imputed unto that man: he hath shed blood, and that man shall be cut off from among his people: to the end that the children of Israel may bring their sacrifices which they offer in the open field, even that they may bring them to the Lord, to the door of the tabernacle, to the priest, and offer them for peace-offerings unto the Lord. . . . And they shall no more offer sacrifices unto devils, after whom they have gone a whoring." The intention of this prescription is simply and solely to secure the exclusive legitimation of the one lawful place of sacrifice; it is only for this, obviously, that the profane slaughtering outside of Jerusalem, which Deuteronomy had permitted, is forbidden. Plainly the common man did not quite understand the newly drawn and previously quite unknown distinction between the religious and the profane act, and when he slaughtered at home (as he was entitled to do), he in doing so still observed, half-unconsciously perhaps, the old sacred sacrificial ritual. From this arose the danger of a multiplicity of altars again furtively creeping in, and such a danger is met, in an utterly impracticable way indeed, in Lev. xvii. And it is worth noticing how much this law, which, for the rest, is based upon the Book of Deuteronomy, has grown in the narrowness of its legitimistic mode of viewing things. Deuteronomy thoroughly recognises that offerings, even though offered outside of Jerusalem, are still offered to Jehovah; for the author of Lev. xvii. this is an impossible idea, and he regards such offerings simply as made to

[p. 51]

devils. [*1] I refuse to believe that any such thing could have been possible for one who lived before the Deuteronomic reformation, or even under the old conditions that were in existence immediately before the exile.

Lev. xvii., moreover, belongs confessedly to a peculiar little collection of laws, which has indeed been taken up into the Priestly Code, but which in many respects disagrees with it, and particularly in respect of this prohibition of profane slaughterings. With reference to the Priestly Code as a whole, Noldeke's assertion is quite off the mark. The code, on the contrary, already allows slaughter without sacrifice in the precepts of Noah, which are valid not merely for all the world, but also for the Jews. Farther on this permission is not expressly repeated indeed, but it is regarded as a thing of course. This alone can account for the fact that the thank-offering is treated so entirely as a subordinate affair and the sacrificial meal almost ignored, while in Lev. vii. 22-27 rules are even given for procedure in the slaughter of such animals as are not sacrificed. [*2] Here accordingly is another instance of what we have already so often observed: what is brought forward in Deuteronomy as an innovation is assumed in the Priestly Code to be an ancient custom dating as far back as to Noah. And therefore the latter code is a growth of the soil that has been prepared by means of the former.

Footnotes

^19:1 Compare 1 Kings viii. 16. According to Deut. xii. 10 seq., the local unity of [p. 20] worship becomes law from the time when the Israelites have found rest (menuha). Comparing 2 Sam. vii. 11 and 1 Kings v. 18 (A.V., v. 4), we find that "menuha" first came in with David and Solomon. The period of the judges must at that time have been regarded as much shorter than appears in the present chronology.

^22:1 Gen. iv. 14, 16: when Cain is driven out of the land (Canaan), he is driven from the presence of Jehovah (Jonah i. 3, 10). Gen. xlvi. 4: Jacob is not to hesitate about going down into Egypt, for Jehovah will, by a special act of grace, change His dwelling-place along with him. Exodus xv. 17: "Thou broughtest thy people to the mountain of thine inheritance, to the place which thou hadst prepared for thyself to dwell in," the explanation which follows, "to the sanctuary which thy hand had established," is out of place, for the mountain of the inheritance can only be the mountainous land of Palestine. 1 Sam. xxvi. 19: David, driven by Saul into foreign parts, is thereby violently sundered from his family share in the inheritance of Jehovah, and compelled to serve other gods. Hos. viii. 1: one like an eagle comes against the house of Jehovah, i.e., the Assyrian comes against Jehovah's land. Hos. ix. 15: "I will drive them out of mine house," i.e., the Israelites out of their land. Most distinct is the language of Hos. ix. 3-5: "They shall not continue to dwell in Jehovah's land; Ephraim must back to Egypt, and must eat that which is unclean in Assyria. They shall not any more offer wine-offerings to Jehovah, or set forth offerings [read with Kuenen y`rkw for y`rbw] before Him; their bread is as the bread of mourners; whosoever eats of it is polluted, for their bread shall be only for the staying of hunger, and shall not be brought into the house of Jehovah. What indeed will ye do in the time of the solemn assembly and in the day of the feast of Jehovah? "Compare Jer. xvi. 13; Ezek. iv. 13; Mal. ii. 11; 2 Kings xvii. 25 seq. It is also possible that the "great indignation" of 2 Kings iii. 27 is regarded less as Jehovah's than as that of Chemosh, in whose land the army of Israel is at the time.

^24:1 Nearly all the Judaean narratives in the Books of Kings relate to the temple and the measures taken by the ruling princes with reference to this their sanctuary.

^26:1 While Hosea, the man of northern Israel, frequently assails the clergy of his home, and lays upon them the chief share of the blame for the depraved and blinded condition of the people, Isaiah even in his fiercest declamation against the superstitious worship of the multitude, has not a word to say against the priests, with whose chief, Uriah, on the contrary, he stands in a relation of great intimacy. But it is from the Book of Jeremiah, the best mirror of the contemporary relations in Judah, that the close connection between priests and prophets can be gathered most particularly. To a certain extent they shared the possession of the sanctuary between them. (Compare Lam. ii. 20.)

^27:1 Luther in his address to the princes of Germany counsels in the twentieth place that the field chapels and churches be destroyed, as devices of the devil used by him to strengthen covetousness, to set up a false and spurious faith, to weaken parochial churches, to increase taverns and fornication, to squander money and labour to no purpose, and merely to lead the poor people about by the nose. (Niemeyer's Reprint, p. 54.)

^29:1 The altar of the second temple had no steps, but a sloping ascent to it, as also, according to the belief of the Jews, had that of the tabernacle. The reason, moreover, for which in Exodus xx. 26 steps are forbidden, disappears when the priests are provided with breeches (Exod. xxviii. 42).

^29:2 The plural "stones" is perhaps worthy of note. There were also sacrificial places consisting of one great stone (1 Sam. xiv. 33, vi. 14, 15; 2 Sam. xx. 8; Judges vi. 20, xiii. 19, 20; 1 Kings i. 9); to the same category also doubtless belongs originally the threshing-floor of Araunah, 2 Sam. xxiv. 21; compare Ezra iii. 3, `l mkwnthw. But inasmuch as such single sacred stones easily came into a mythological relation to the Deity, offence was taken at them, as appears from Judges vi. 22-24, where the rock altar, the stone under the oak which was conceived of as the seat of the theophany, upon which Gideon offers, and out of which the flame issues (vi. 19-21), is corrected into an altar upon the rock. The macceboth are distinguished from the altar in Exod. xxiv. 4, yet elsewhere clearly put on the same plane with it (Gen. xxxiii. 20), and everywhere more or less identified with the Deity (Gen. xxviii.).

^31:1 The correct explanation of this is found in Ewald, Gesch. d. V. Israels, i. 436 seq. (3d edit.). A. Bernstein (Ursprung der Sagen von Abraham, etc., Berlin, 1871) drags in politics in a repulsive way. "He does not indeed actually enter Shechem and Bethel--these are places hostile to Judah--but in a genuine spirit of Jewish demonstration he builds altars in their vicinity and calls on the name of Jehovah" (p. 22). Rather, he builds the altars precisely on the places where, as can be shown, they afterwards stood, and that was not inside the towns. In Gen. xviii. also the oak of Mamre is employed to fix not Abraham's residence, but the place of Jehovah's appearing.

^32:1 But it is only the public cultus and that of certain leading sanctuaries that is thus glorified; on the other hand, the domestic worship of seraphim, to which the women are specially attached, is already discountenanced (in E) by Jacob. Asherim are not alluded to, molten images are rejected, particularly by E. Here perhaps a correction of the ancient legend has already taken place in JE.

^34:1 De Wette, in the fifth place of his Habilitationsschrift uber das Deuteronomium (Jena, 1805): "De hoc unico cultus sacri loco. . . priores libri nihil omnino habent. De sacrificiis tantum unice ante tabernaculum conventus offerendis lex quaedam extat. Sed in legibus de diebus festis, de primitiis et decimis, tam saepe repetitis, nihil omnino monitum est de loco unico, ubi celebrari et offerri debeant" (Opusc. Theol., p. 163-165).

^35:1 Except in Lev. xvii.; but the small body of legislation contained in Lev. xvii-xxvi is the transition from Deuteronomy to the Priestly Code.

^37:1 In Wisdom of Solomon ix. 8 the temple is called mimema skeneis agias. Josephus (Ant. iii. 6, 1) says of the tabernacle, e d' oyden metaferomenoy kai symperinostountos naou diefere.

^39:1 It is never, however, employed for legislative purposes, but is simply a shelter for the ark; it stands without the camp, as the oldest sanctuaries were wont to do outside the cities. It is kept by Joshua as aedituus, who sleeps in it, as did Samuel the aedituus for Eli.

^40:1 Josh. xxiv. 24, 33 (LXX): after the death of Joshua and Eleazar, labontes oi yioi Israel ten kibuton tou theou perieferosan en eaytois. After J. Buxtorf and Sal. van Til (Ugol., Thes. viii.), this theory has been, worked out specially by Movers. See, on the other hand, De Wette, Beitrage, p. 108 seq., and Vatke, ut supra, p. 316, note.

^41:1 Of the priests at Nob, Abiathar alone escaped the massacre (1 Sam. xxii.); Gad therefore was not one of them.

^41:2 The passage does not occur in the LXX, and everywhere else in 1 Sam. i-iii the sanctuary of Shiloh is called hekal, that is to say, certainly not a tent.

^42:1 Compare similar passages in Josh. vi. 19, 24, ix. 27, where the very anachronism shows that the idea of the tabernacle was unknown to the narrator. That, moreover. a permanent house did actually exist then at Shiloh follows from the circumstance that Jeremiah (vii. 12) speaks of its ruins. For he could not regard any other than a pre-Solomonic sanctuary as preceding that of Jerusalem; and besides, there is not the faintest trace of a more important temple having arisen at Shiloh within the period of the kings.

^43:1 The Chronicle has good reason for making him a Levite. But Gath without any qualifying epithet, and particularly in connection with David, is the Philistine Gath, and Obed-Edom belongs to the bodyguard, which consisted chiefly of foreigners and Philistines. His name, moreover, is hardly Israelite.

^44:1 The brazen altar cast by Solomon (1 Kings viii. 64; 2 Kings xvi. 14, 15) is not now found in the inventory of the temple furniture in 1 Kings vii.; but originally it cannot have been absent, for it is the most important article. It has therefore been struck out in order to avoid collision with the brazen altar of Moses. The deletion is the negative counterpart to the interpolation of the tabernacle in 1 Kings viii. 4.

^47:1 Little importance is to be attached to 2 Kings xviii. 22. The narrative of the Assyrian siege of Jerusalem is not a contemporary one, as appears generally from the entirely indefinite character of the statements about the sudden withdrawal of the Assyrians and its causes, and particularly from xix. 7, 36, 37. For in this passage the meaning certainly is that Sennacherib was assassinated soon after the unsuccessful expedition of 701, but in point of fact he actually reigned until 684 or 681 (Smith, Assyrian Eponym Canon, pp. 90, 170). Thus the narrator writes not twenty years merely after the event, but so long after it as to make possible the elision of those twenty years: probably he is already under the influence of Deuteronomy. 2 Kings xviii. 4 is certainly of greater weight than 2 Kings xviii. 22. But although highly authentic statements have been preserved to us in the epitome of the Book of Kings, they have all, nevertheless, been subjected not merely to the selection, but also to the revision of the Deuteronomic redactor, and it may very well be that the author thought himself justified in giving his subject a generalised treatment, according to which the cleansing (of the temple at Jerusalem in the first instance) from idols, urged by Isaiah and carried out by Hezekiah, was changed into an abolition of the Bamoth with their Macceboth and Asherim. It is well known how indifferent later writers are to distinctions of time and degree in the heresy of unlawful worship; they always go at once to the completed product. But in actual experience the reformation was doubtless accomplished step by step. At first we have in Hosea and Isaiah the polemic directed against molten and graven images, then in Jeremiah that against wood and stone, i.e., against Macceboth and Asherim; the movement originated with the prophets, and the chief, or rather the only, weight is to be attached to their authentic testimony.

^49:1 Jahrb. fur prot. Theol., i. p. 352: "And now let me ask whether a document of this kind presenting, as it does, a picture of the history, land distribution, and sacrificial rites of Israel, as a whole, which in so many particulars departs from the actual truth, can belong to a time in which Israel clung to what was traditional with such timid anxiety?"

^49:2 Unters., p. 130: "It must always be remembered that the author in his statements, [p. 50] as in his laws, does not depict actual relations, but in the first instance his own theories and ideals. Hence the glorification of the tabernacle," &c. &c.

^51:1 With reference to these rural demons, compare my note in Vakidi's Maghazi (Berlin, 1882), p. 113. It is somewhat similar, though not quite the same thing, when the Moslems say that the old Arabs dedicated their worship to the Jinns; and other instances may be compared in which divinities have been degraded to demons.

^51:2 That Lev. vii. 22-27 is not a repetition of the old and fuller regulations about the thank-offering, but an appendix containing new ones relating to slaughtering, is clear from "the beast of which men offer an offering unto the Lord" (ver. 25), and "in all your dwellings" (ver. 26), as well as from the praxis of Judaism.

      
Prolegomena to the History of Ancient Israel, by Julius Wellhausen, [1885], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 52]

  

CHAPTER II.

  

SACRIFICE.

WITH the Hebrews, as with the whole ancient world, sacrifice constituted the main part of worship. The question is whether their worship did not also in this most important respect pass through a history the stages of which are reflected in the Pentateuch. From the results already reached this must be regarded at the outset as probable, but the sources of information accessible to us seem hardly sufficient to enable us actually to follow the process, or even so much as definitely to fix its two termini.

  

I.

1. The Priestly Code alone occupies itself much with the subject; it gives a minute classification of the various kinds of offerings, and a description of the procedure to be followed in the case of each. In this way it furnishes also the normative scheme for modern accounts of the matter, into which all the other casual notices of the Old Testament on the subject must be made to fit as best they can. This point accordingly presents us with an important feature by which the character of the book can be determined. In it the sacrificial ritual is a constituent, and indeed a very essential element, of the Mosaic legislation: that ritual is not represented as ancient use handed down to the Israelites by living practice from ancestral times: it was Moses who gave them the theory of it--a very elaborate one too--and he himself received his instruction from God (Exod. xxv. seq.; Lev. i. seq.). An altogether disproportionate emphasis is accordingly laid upon the technique of sacrifice corresponding to the theory, alike upon the when, the where, and the by whom, and also in a very special manner upon the how. It is from these that the sacrifice obtains its specific value; one could almost suppose that even if it were offered to another God, it would by means of the legitimate

[p. 53]

rite alone be at once made essentially Jehovistic. The cultus of Israel is essentially distinguished from all others by its form, the distinctive and constitutive mark of the holy community. With it the theocracy begins and it with the theocracy; the latter is nothing more than the institution for the purpose of carrying on the cultus after the manner ordained by God. For this reason also the ritual, which appears to concern the priests only, finds its place in a law-book intended for the whole community; in order to participate in the life of the theocracy, all must of course, have clear knowledge of its essential nature, and in this the theory of sacrifice holds a first place.

The Jehovistic portion of the Pentateuch also knows of no other kind of divine worship besides the sacrificial, and does not attach to it less importance than the Priestly Code. But we do not find many traces of the view that the sacrificial system of Israel is distinguished from all others by a special form revealed to Moses, which makes it the alone legitimate. Sacrifice is sacrifice: when offered to Baal, it is heathenish; when offered to Jehovah, it is Israelite. In the Book of the Covenant and in both Decalogues it is enjoined before everything to serve no other God besides Jehovah, but also at the proper season to offer firstlings and gifts to Him. Negative determinations, for the most part directed against one heathenish peculiarity or another, occur but there are no positive ordinances relating to the ritual. How one is to set about offering sacrifice is taken for granted as already known, and nowhere figures as an affair for the legislation, which, on the contrary, occupies itself with quite other things. What the Book of the Covenant and the Decalogue leave still perhaps doubtful becomes abundantly clear from the Jehovistic narrative. The narrative has much more to say about sacrifice than the incorporated law books, and this may be regarded as characteristic; in the Priestly Code it is quite the other way. But what is specially important is that, according to the Jehovistic history, the praxis of sacrifice, and that too of the regular and God-pleasing sort, extends far beyond the Mosaic legislation, and, strictly speaking, is as old as the world itself. A sacrificial feast which the Hebrews wish to celebrate in the wilderness is the occasion of the Exodus; Moses already builds an altar at Rephidim (Exod. xvii.), and, still before the ratification of the covenant on Sinai, a solemn meal in the presence of Jehovah is set on foot on occasion of Jethro's visit (Exod. xviii.). But the custom is much older still; it was known and practiced by Abraham, Isaac, and

[p. 54]

[paragraph continues] Jacob. Noah, the father of all mankind, built the first altar after the Flood, and long before him Cain and Abel sacrificed in the same way as was usual in Palestine thousands of years afterwards. Balaam the Aramaean understands just as well as any Israelite how to offer sacrifices to Jehovah that do not fail of their effect. All this brings out, with as much clearness as could be desired, that sacrifice is a very ancient and quite universal mode of honouring the Deity, and that Israelite sacrifice is distinguished not by the manner in which, but by the being to whom, it is offered, in being offered to the God of Israel. According to this representation of the matter, Moses left the procedure in sacrifice, as he left the procedure in prayer, to be regulated by the traditional praxis; if there was any definite origination of the cultus of Israel, the patriarchs must be thought of, but even they were not the discoverers of the ritual; they were merely the founders of those holy places at which the Israelites dedicated gifts to Jehovah, a usage which was common to the whole world. The contrast with the Priestly Code is extremely striking, for it is well known that the latter work makes mention of no sacrificial act prior to the time of Moses, neither in Genesis nor in Exodus, although from the time of Noah slaughtering is permitted. The offering of a sacrifice of sheep and oxen as the occasion of the exodus is omitted, and in place of the sacrifice of the firstlings we have the paschal lamb, which is slaughtered and eaten without altar, without priest, and not in the presence of Jehovah. [*1]

The belief that the cultus goes back to pre-Mosaic usage is unquestionably more natural than the belief that it is the main element of the Sinaitic legislation; the thought would be a strange one that God should suddenly have revealed, or Moses discovered and introduced, the proper sacrificial ritual. At the same time this does not necessitate the conclusion that the Priestly Code is later than the Jehovist. Nor does this follow from the very elaborately-developed technique of the agenda, for elaborate ritual may have existed in the great sanctuaries at a very early period,--though that, indeed, would not prove it to be genuinely Mosaic. On the other hand, it is certainly a consideration deserving of great weight that the representation of the exclusive legitimacy of so definite a sacrificial ritual, treated in the Priestly Code as the only possible one in Israel, is one which can have arisen only as a consequence of the centralisation of the cultus at Jerusalem. Yet by

[p. 55]

urging this the decision of the question at present before us would only be referred back to the result already arrived at in the preceding chapter, and it is much to be desired that it should be solved independently, so as not to throw too much weight upon a single support.

2. In this case also the elements of a decision can only be obtained from the historical documents dating from the pre-exilic time,--the Books of Judges, Samuel, and Kings on the one hand, and the writings of the prophets on the other. As regards those of the first class, they represent the cultus and sacrifice on all occasions as occupying a large place in the life of the nation and of the individual. But, although it would be wrong to say that absolutely no weight is attached to the rite, it is certainly not the fact that the main stress is laid upon it; the antithesis is not between rite and non-rite, but between sacrifice to Jehovah and sacrifice to strange gods, the reverse of what we find in the Priestly Code. Alongside of splendid sacrifices, such as those of the kings, presumably offered in accordance with all the rules of priestly skill, there occur others also of the simplest and most primitive type, as, for example, those of Saul (1 Sam. xiv. 35) and Elisha (1 Kings xix. 21); both kinds are proper if only they be dedicated to the proper deity. Apart from the exilian redaction of the Book of Kings, which reckons the cultus outside of Jerusalem as heretical, it is nowhere represented that a sacrifice could be dedicated to the God of Israel, and yet be illegitimate. Naaman (2 Kings v. 17), it is to be supposed, followed his native Syrian ritual, but this does not in the least impair the acceptability of his offering. For reasons easily explained, it is seldom that an occasion arises to describe the ritual, but when such a description is given it is only with violence that it can be forced into accordance with the formula of the law. Most striking of all is the procedure of Gideon in Judges vi. 19-21, in which it is manifest that the procedure still usual at Ophrah in the time of the narrator is also set forth. Gideon boils a he-goat and bakes in the ashes cakes of unleavened bread, places upon the bread the flesh in a basket and the broth in a pot, and then the meal thus prepared is burnt in the altar flame. It is possible that instances may have also occurred in which the rule of the Pentateuch is followed, but the important point is that the distinction between legitimate and heretical is altogether wanting. When the Book of Chronicles is compared the difference is at once perceived.

[p. 56]

The impression derived from the historical books is confirmed by the prophets. It is true that in their polemic against confounding worship with religion they reveal the fact that in their day the cultus was carried on with the utmost zeal and splendour, and was held in the highest estimation. But this estimation does not rest upon the opinion that the cultus, as regards its matter, goes back to Moses or to Jehovah Himself, gives to the theocracy its distinctive character, and even constitutes the supernatural priesthood of Israel among the nations, but simply upon the belief that Jehovah must be honoured by His dependents, just as other gods are by their subjects, by means of offerings and gifts as being the natural and (like prayer) universally current expressions of religious homage. The larger the quantity, and the finer the quality, so much the better; but that the merit arising from the presentation depends upon strict observance of etiquette regarded as Jehovah's law is not suggested. Thus it is that the prophets are able to ask whether then Jehovah has commanded His people to tax their energies with such exertions? the fact presupposed being that no such command exists, and that no one knows anything at all about a ritual Torah. Amos, the leader of the chorus, says (iv. 4 seq.), "Come to Bethel to sin, to Gilgal to sin yet more, and bring your sacrifices every morning, your tithes every three days, for so ye like, ye children of Israel." In passing sentence of rejection upon the value of the cultus he is in opposition to the faith of his time; but if the opinion had been a current one that precisely the cultus was what Jehovah had instituted in Israel, he would not have been able to say, "For so ye like." "Ye," not Jehovah; it is an idle and arbitrary worship. He expresses himself still more clearly in v. 21 seq. "I hate, I despise your feasts, and I smell not on your holy days; though ye offer me burnt-offerings and your gifts, I will not accept them; neither do I regard your thank-offerings of fatted calves. Away from me with the noise of thy songs, the melody of thy viols I will not hear; but let judgment roll on like waters, and righteousness like a mighty stream. Did ye offer unto me sacrifices and gifts in the wilderness the forty years, O house of Israel?" In asking this last question Amos has not the slightest fear of raising any controversy; on the contrary, he is following the generally received belief. His polemic is directed against the praxis of his contemporaries, but here he rests it upon a theoretical foundation in which they are at one with him,--on this, namely, that

[p. 57]

the sacrificial worship is not of Mosaic origin. Lastly, if ii. 4 be genuine, it teaches the same lesson. By the Law of Jehovah which the people of Judah have despised it is impossible that Amos can have understood anything in the remotest degree resembling a ritual legislation. Are we to take it then that he formed his own special private notion of the Torah? How in that case would it have been possible for him to make himself understood by the people, or to exercise influence over them? Of all unlikely suppositions, at all events it is the least likely that the herdsman of Tekoah, under the influence of prophetic tradition (which in fact he so earnestly disclaims), should have taken the Torah for something quite different from what it actually was.

Hosea, Isaiah, and Micah are in agreement with Amos. The first mentioned complains bitterly (iv. 6 seq.) that the priests cultivate the system of sacrifices instead of the Torah. The Torah, committed by Jehovah to their order, lays it on them as their vocation to diffuse the knowledge of God in Israel,--the knowledge that He seeks truthfulness and love, justice and considerateness, and no gifts; but they, on the contrary, in a spirit of base self-seeking, foster the tendency of the nation towards cultus, in their superstitions over-estimate of which lies their sin and their ruin. "My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge; ye yourselves (ye priests!) reject knowledge, and I too will reject you that ye shall not be priests unto me; seeing ye have forgotten the law of your God, so will I also forget you. The more they are, the more they sin against me; their glory they barter for shame. They eat the sin of my people, and they set their heart on their iniquity." From this we see how idle it is to believe that the prophets opposed "the Law;" they defend the priestly Torah, which, however, has nothing to do with cultus, but only with justice and morality. In another passage (viii. 11 seq.) we read, "Ephraim has built for himself many altars, to sin; the altars are there for him, to sin. How many soever my instructions (torothai) may be, they are counted those of a stranger." This text has had the unmerited misfortune of having been forced to do service as a proof that Hosea knew of copious writings similar in contents to our Pentateuch. All that can be drawn from the contrast "instead of following my instructions they offer sacrifice" (for that is the meaning of the passage) is that the prophet had never once dreamed of the possibility of cultus being made the subject of Jehovah's directions. In Isaiah's discourses the well-known passage of

[p. 58]

the first chapter belongs to this connection: "To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto me? saith the Lord. I am weary with the burnt-offerings of rams and the fat of fed beasts, and I delight not in the blood of bullocks and of lambs and of he-goats. When ye come to look upon my face, who hath required this at your hands?--to trample my courts!" This expression has long been a source of trouble, and certainly the prophet could not possibly have uttered it if the sacrificial worship had, according to any tradition whatever, passed for being specifically Mosaic. Isaiah uses the word Torah to denote not the priestly but the prophetical instruction (i. 10, ii. 3, v. 24, viii. 16, 20, xxx. 9); as both have a common source and Jehovah is the proper instructor (xxx. 20), this is easily explicable, and is moreover full of instruction as regards the idea involved; the contents of the Priestly Code fit badly in with the Torah of i. 10. Lastly, Micah's answer to the people's question, how a return of the favour of an angry God is to be secured, is of conspicuous significance (vi. 6 seq.): "Shall I come before Him with burnt-offerings with calves of a year old? Is the Lord pleased with thousands of rams, with ten thousands of rivers of oil? Shall I give my first-born for my transgression, the fruit of my body as atonement for my soul?--It hath been told thee, O man, what is good, and what Jehovah requireth of thee. Nay, it is to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly before thy God." Although the blunt statement of the contrast between cultus and religion is peculiarly prophetic, Micah can still take his stand upon this, "It hath been told thee, O man, what Jehovah requires." It is no new matter, but a thing well known, that sacrifices are not what the Torah of the Lord contains.

That we have not inferred too much from these utterances of the older prophets is clear from the way in which they are taken up and carried on by Jeremiah, who lived shortly before the Babylonian exile. Just as in vi. 19 seq. he opposes the Torah to the cultus, so in vii. 11 seq. he thus expresses himself: "Add your burnt-offerings to your sacrifices, and eat flesh! For I said nought unto your fathers, and commanded them nought, in the day that I brought them out of the land of Egypt, concerning burnt-offerings or sacrifices. But this thing commanded I them: hearken to my voice, and I will be your God, and ye shall be my people, and walk ye in the way that I shall always teach you, that it may be well with you." The view indeed, that the prophets

[p. 59]

[paragraph continues] (who, from the connection, are the ever-living voice to which Israel is to hearken) are the proper soul of the theocracy, the organ by which Jehovah influences and rules it, has no claim to immemorial antiquity. But no stress lies upon the positive element here; enough that at all events Jeremiah is unacquainted with the Mosaic legislation as it is contained in the Priestly Code. His ignoring of it is not intentional, for he is far from hating the cultus (xvii. 26). But, as priest and prophet, staying continually in the temple at Jerusalem, he must have known it, if it had existed and actually been codified. The fact is one which it is difficult to get over.

Thus the historical witnesses, particularly the prophets, decide the matter in favour of the Jehovistic tradition. According to the universal opinion of the pre-exilic period, the cultus is indeed of very old and (to the people) very sacred usage, but not a Mosaic institution; the ritual is not the main thing in it, and is in no sense the subject with which the Torah deals. [*1] In other words, no trace can be found of acquaintance with the Priestly Code, but, on the other hand, very clear indications of ignorance of its contents.

3. In this matter the transition from the pre-exilic to the post-exilic period is effected, not by Deuteronomy, but by Ezekiel the priest in prophet's mantle, who was one of the first to be carried into exile. He stands in striking contrast with his elder contemporary Jeremiah. In the picture of Israel's future which he drew in B.C. 573 (chaps. xl.-xlviii.), in which fantastic hopes are indeed built upon Jehovah, but no impossible demand made of man, the temple and cultus hold a central place. Whence this sudden change? Perhaps because now the Priestly Code has suddenly awakened to life after its long trance, and become the inspiration of Ezekiel? The explanation is certainly not to be sought in any such occurrence, but simply in the historical circumstances. So long as the sacrificial worship remained in actual use, it was zealously carried on, but people did not concern themselves with it theoretically, and had not the least occasion for reducing it to a code. But once the temple was in ruins, the cultus at an end, its personnel out

[p. 60]

of employment, it is easy to understand how the sacred praxis should have become a matter of theory and writing, so that it might not altogether perish, and how an exiled priest should have begun to paint the picture of it as he carried it in his memory, and to publish it as a programme for the future restoration of the theocracy. Nor is there any difficulty if arrangements, which as long as they were actually in force were simply regarded as natural, were seen after their abolition in a transfiguring light, and from the study devoted to them gained artificially a still higher value. These historical conditions supplied by the exile suffice to make clear the transition from Jeremiah to Ezekiel, and the genesis of Ezekiel xl.-xlviii. The co-operation of the Priestly Code is here not merely unnecessary, it would be absolutely disconcerting. Ezekiel's departure from the ritual of the Pentateuch cannot be explained as intentional alterations of the original; they are too casual and insignificant. The prophet, moreover, has the rights of authorship as regards the end of his book as well as for the rest of it; he has also his right to his picture of the future as the earlier prophets had to theirs. And finally, let its due weight be given to the simple fact that an exiled priest saw occasion to draft such a sketch of the temple worship. What need would there have been for it, if the realised picture, corresponding completely to his views, had actually existed, and, being already written in a book, wholly obviated any danger lest the cultus should become extinct through the mere fact of its temporary cessation?

Here again a way of escape is open by assuming a lifeless existence of the law down to Ezra's time. But if this is done it is unallowable to date that existence, not from Moses, but from some other intermediate point in the history of Israel. Moreover, the assumption of a codification either as preceding all praxis, or as alongside and independent of it, is precisely in the case of sacrificial ritual one of enormous difficulty, for it is obvious that such a codification can only be the final result of an old and highly developed use, and not the invention of an idle brain. This consideration also makes retreat into the theory of an illegal praxis impossible, and renders the legitimacy of the actually subsisting indisputable.

[p. 61]

  

II.

At all times, then, the sacrificial worship of Israel existed, and had great importance attached to it, but in the earlier period it rested upon custom, inherited from the fathers, in the post-exilian on the law of Jehovah, given through Moses. At first it was naive, and what was chiefly considered was the quantity and quality of the gifts; afterwards it became legal,--the scrupulous fulfilment of the law, that is, of the prescribed ritual, was what was looked to before everything. Was there then, apart from this, strictly speaking, no material difference? To answer this question our researches must be carried further afield, after some preliminary observations have been made in order to fix our position.

1. In the Pentateuch the sacrificial ritual is indeed copiously described, but nowhere in the Old Testament is its significance formally explained; this is treated as on the whole self-evident and familiar to every one. The general notion of a sacrifice is in the Priestly Code that of korban, in the rest of the Old Testament that of minha, [*1] i.e., "gift;" the corresponding verbs are hakrib and haggish, i.e., "to bring near." Both nouns and both verbs are used originally for the offering of a present to the king (or the nobles) to do him homage, to make him gracious, to support a petition (Judges iii. 17 seq.; 1 Sam. x. 27; 1 Kings v. 1 [A.V. iv. 21]), and from this are employed with reference to the highest King (Malachi i. 8).

Dura theous peithei, dur' aidoioys basileias

[paragraph continues] The gift must not be unseasonably or awkwardly thrust upon the recipient, not when the king's anger is at white heat, and not by one the sight of whom he hates.

With respect to the matter of it, the idea of a sacrifice is in itself indifferent, if the thing offered only have value of some sort, and is the property of the offerer. Under korban and minha is included also that which the Greeks called anathema. The sacred dues which at a later

[p. 62]

date fall to the priest were without doubt originally ordinary offerings, and amongst these are found even wool and flax (Deut. xviii. 4; Hos. ii. 7, 11 [A.V. 5, 9]). But it is quite in harmony with the naivete of antiquity that as to man so also to God that which is eatable is by preference offered; in this there was the additional advantage, that what God had caused to grow was thus rendered back to Him. In doing this, the regular form observed is that a meal is prepared in honour of the Deity, of which man partakes as God's guest. Offering without any qualifying expression always means a meat or drink offering. On this account the altar is called a table, on this account also salt goes along with flesh, oil with meal and bread, and wine with both; and thus also are we to explain why the flesh, according to rule, is put upon the altar in pieces and (in the earlier period) boiled, the corn ground or baked. Hence also the name "bread of Jehovah" for the offering (Lev. xxi. 22). It is of course true that "in his offering the enlightened Hebrew saw no banquet to Jehovah:" but we hardly think of taking the enlightened Protestant as a standard for the original character of Protestantism.

The manner in which the portions pertaining to God are conveyed to Him varies. The most primitive is the simple "setting in order" ('rk, struere) and "pouring out" (shpk, fundere) in the case of the shewbread and drink offerings; to this a simple eating and drinking would correspond. But the most usual is burning, or, as the Hebrews express it, "making a savour" (hqtyr), to which corresponds the more delicate form of enjoyment, that of smelling. Originally, however, it is God Himself who consumes what the flame consumes. In any case the burning is a means of conveying the offering, not, as one might perhaps be disposed to infer from the "sweet savour" (rych nychch Gen. viii. 21), a means of preparing it. For in ancient times the Hebrews did not roast the flesh, but boiled it; in what is demonstrably the oldest ritual (Judges vi. 19), the sacrifice also is delivered to the altar flame boiled; and, moreover, not the flesh only but also the bread and the meal are burnt.

As regards the distinction between bloodless and bloody offerings, the latter, it is well known, are preferred in the Old Testament, but, strictly speaking, the former also have the same value and the same efficacy. The incense-offering is represented as a means of propitiation (Lev. xvi., Num. xvii. 12 [A.V. xvi. 47]), so also are the ten thousands of rivers of oil figuring between the thousands of rams and the human

[p. 63]

sacrifice in Micah vi. That the cereal offering is never anything but an accompaniment of the animal sacrifice is a rule which does not hold, either in the case of the shewbread or in that of the high priest's daily minha (Lev. vi. 13 [A.V. 20]; Neh. x. 35). Only the drink-offering has no independent position, and was not in any way the importance it had among the Greeks.

When a sacrifice is killed, the offering consists not of the blood but of the eatable portions of the flesh. Only these can be designated as the "bread of Jehovah," and, moreover, only the eatable domestic animals can be presented. At the same time, however, it is true that in the case of the bloody offerings a new motive ultimately came to be associated with the original idea of the gift. The life of which the blood was regarded as the substance (2 Sam. xxiii. 17) had for the ancient Semites something mysterious and divine about it; they felt a certain religious scruple about destroying it. With them flesh was an uncommon luxury, and they ate it with quite different feelings from those with which they partook of fruits or of milk. Thus the act of killing was not so indifferent or merely preparatory a step as for example the cleansing and preparing of corn; on the contrary, the pouring out of blood was ventured upon only in such a way as to give it back to the Deity, the source of life. In this way, not by any means every meal indeed, but every slaughtering, came to be a sacrifice. What was primarily aimed at in it was a mere restoration of His own to the Deity, but there readily resulted a combination with the idea of sacrifice, whereby the latter was itself modified in a peculiar manner. The atoning efficacy of the gift began to be ascribed mainly to the blood and to the vicarious value of the life taken away. The outpouring and sprinkling of blood was in all sacrifices a rite of conspicuous importance, and even the act of slaughtering in the case of some, and these the most valued, a holy act.

2. The features presented by the various literary sources harmonise with the foregoing sketch. But the Priestly Code exhibits some peculiarities by which it is distinguished from the pre-exilian remains in matters sacrificial.

In the first place, it is characterised in the case of bloodless offerings by a certain refinement of the material. Thus in the meal-offerings it will have slth (simila) not qmch (far). In the whole pre-exilian literature the former is mentioned only three times altogether, but

[p. 64]

never in connection with sacrifice, where, on the contrary, the ordinary meal is used (Judges vi. 19; 1 Sam. i. 24). That this is no mere accident appears on the one hand from the fact that in the later literature, from Ezekiel onwards, qmch as sacrificial meal entirely disappears, and slth invariably take its place; on the other hand, from this that the LXX (or the Hebrew text from which that version was taken) is offended by the illegality of the material in 1 Sam. i. 24, and alters the reading so as to bring it to conformity with the Law. [*1]

So also a striking preference is shown for incense. With every meal-offering incense is offered upon the altar; in the inner sanctuary a special mixture of spices is employed, the accurately given recipe for which is not to be followed for private purposes. The offering of incense is the privilege of the higher priesthood; in the ritual of the great Day of Atonement, the sole one in which Aaron must discharge the duties in person, it occupies a conspicuous place. It has an altogether dangerous sanctity; Aaron's own sons died for not having made use of the proper fire. It is the cause of death and destruction to the Levites of Korah's company who are not entitled to use it, while immediately afterwards, in the hands of the legitimate high priest, it becomes the means of appeasing the anger of Jehovah, and of staying the plague. Now of this offering, thus invested with such a halo of sanctity, the older literature of the Jewish Canon, down to Jeremiah and Zephaniah, knows absolutely nothing. The verb qtur there used invariably and exclusively of the burning of fat or meal, and thereby making to God a sweet-smelling savour; it is never used to denote the offering of incense, and the substantive qtrth as a sacrificial term has the quite general signification of that which is burnt on the altar. [*2]

In enumerations where the prophets

[p. 65]

exhaust everything pertaining to sacred gifts and liturgic performances, in which, for the sake of lengthening the catalogue, they do not shrink from repetitions even, there is not any mention of incense-offerings, neither in Amos (iv. 4 seq., v. 21 seq.) nor in Isaiah (i. 11 seq.) nor in Micah (vi. 6 seq.). Shall we suppose that they all of them forget this subject by mere accident, or that they conspired to ignore it? If it had really existed, and been of so great consequence, surely one of them at least would not have failed to speak of it. The Jehovistic section of the Hexateuch is equally silent, so also the historical books, except Chronicles, and so the rest of the prophets, down to Jeremiah, who (vi. 20) selects incense as the example of a rare and far-fetched offering: "To what purpose cometh there to me incense from Sheba, and the precious cane from a far country?" Thenceforward it is mentioned in Ezekiel, in Isaiah (xl.-lxvi.), in Nehemiah, and in Chronicles; the references are continuous. The introduction of incense is a natural result of increased luxury; one is tempted to conjecture that its use must have first crept into the Jehovah worship as an innovation from a more luxuriously-developed foreign cultus. But the importance which it has attained in the ritual legislation of the Pentateuch is manifest above all from this, that it has led to the invention of a peculiar new and highly sacred piece of furniture, namely, the golden altar in the inner tabernacle, which is unknown to history, and which is foreign even to the kernel of the Priestly Code itself.

We expect to find the altar of incense in Exod. xxv.-xxix., but find it instead as an appendix at the beginning of Exod. xxx. Why not until now? why thus separated from the other furnishings of the inner sanctuary? and not only so, but even after the ordinances relating to the

[p. 66]

adornment of the priests, and the inauguration of the divine service? The reason why the author of chaps. xxv.-xxix. is thus silent about the altar of incense in the passage in which the furniture of the tabernacle, consisting of ark, table, and candlestick, is described, is, that he does not know of it. There is no other possibility; for he cannot have forgotten it. [*1] And the phenomenon is repeated; the altar of incense occurs only in certain portions of the Priestly Code, and is absent from others where it could not possibly have been omitted, had it been known. The rite of the most solemn atoning sacrifice takes place in Leviticus iv. indeed on the golden altar, but in Exod. xxix., Levi. viii., ix., without its use. A still more striking circumstance is, that in passages where the holiest incense-offering itself is spoken of, no trace can be discovered of the corresponding altar. This is particularly the case in Lev. xvi. To burn incense in the sanctuary, Aaron takes a censer, fills it with coals from the altar of burnt-offering (ver. 12, 18-20), and lays the incense upon them in the adytum. Similarly in Lev. x., Num. xvi., xvii., incense is offered on censers, of which each priest possesses one. The coals are taken from the altar of burnt-offering (Num. xvii. 11; [A.V. xvi. 46]), which is plated with the censers of the Korahite Levites (xvii. 3, 4; [A.V. xvi. 38, 39]); whoever takes fire from any other source, incurs the penalty of death (Lev. x. 1 seq.). The altar of incense is everywhere unknown here; the altar of burnt-offering is the only altar, and, moreover, is always called simply the altar, as for example, even in Exodus xxvii., where it would have been specially necessary to add the qualifying expression. Only in certain later portions of the Priestly Code does the name altar of burnt-offering occur, viz., in those passages which do recognise the altar of incense. In this connection the command of Exod. xxvii. as compared with the execution in Exod. xxxviii. is characteristic.

The golden altar in the sanctuary is originally simply the golden

[p. 67]

table; the variation of the expression has led to a doubling of the thing. Ezekiel does not distinguish between the table and the altar in the temple, but uses either expression indifferently. For he says (xii. 21 seq.): "Before the adytum stood what looked like an altar of wood, three cubits in height, two cubits in length and breadth, and it had projecting corners, and its frame and its walls were of wood; this is the table which is before the Lord." In like manner he designates the service of the priests in the inner sanctuary as table-service (xliv. 16); table is the name, altar the function. [*1] In 1 Kings vii. 48, it is true that the golden altar and the golden table are mentioned together. It seems strange, however, that in this case the concluding summary mentions one piece of furniture more--and that piece one of so great importance--than the preceding detailed description; for in the latter only the preparation of the golden altar is spoken of, and nothing is said of the golden table (vi. 20-22). As matters stand, nothing is less improbable than that some later transcriber should have interpolated the golden table in vii. 48, regarding it, in accordance with the Pentateuch, as distinct from the golden altar, and therefore considering its absence as an omission. From other considerations also, it is clear that the text of the whole chapter is in many ways corrupt and interpolated.

It is not to be wondered at if in the post-exilian temple there existed both a golden altar and a golden table. We learn from 1 Macc. i. 21 seq., iv. 49, that both were carried off by Antiochus Epiphanes, and renewed at the Feast of the Dedication. But it causes no small surprise to find that at the destruction of Jerusalem the Romans found and carried off table and candlestick only. What can have become, in the meantime, of the golden altar of incense? And it is further worth remarking that in the LXX the passage Exod. xxxvii. 25-29 is absent; that is to say, the altar of incense is indeed commanded, but there is no word of its execution. In these circumstances, finally, the vacillating statement as to its position in Exod. xxx. 6, and the supposed mistake of the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, are important and intelligible. Compare also 2 Mac. ii. 5, where only the table, but not the altar, is hidden by Jeremiah.

So much for the offering of incense and its altar. We may in like manner venture to regard it as a kind of refinement, though rather a

[p. 68]

refinement of idea, that the flesh of the sacrifice in the Priestly Code is no longer boiled, but consigned to the altar flames in its raw condition. Such was not the ancient custom, as is seen, not only from the case of Gideon already cited (Judges vi.), but also from the procedure at Shiloh, described in 1 Sam. ii., where the sons of Eli will not wait until the flesh of the sacrifice has been boiled, and the altar pieces burnt, but demand their share raw for roasting. The meal which the Deity shares with men is prepared in the same way as for men. This naive conception gave way before advancing culture, and that at a comparatively early date. It is possible that another cause may also have co-operated towards this result. The old method of preparing flesh in general use among the people, at a later period also, was by boiling. The word bshl (to seethe in water) occurs with extreme frequency; 'lh (to roast), on the other hand, only in Exod. xii. 8, and Isa. xliv. 16, 19. All sacrificial flesh (bshlh) was boiled, and there was no other kind. [*1] But among persons of the upper class roasting must also have come into use at an early period. "Give flesh to roast for the priest; for he will not take sodden flesh of thee, but raw," says the servant of the sons of Eli in 1 Sam. ii. 15. The fact that in the interval the custom of boiling had gone generally somewhat out of fashion may accordingly have also contributed to bring about the abandonment of the old usage of offering the sacrificial portions boiled. In any case this is the explanation of the circumstance that the paschal lamb, which originally was boiled like all other offerings, could, according to the express appointment of the Priestly Code, be eaten roasted only. [*2]

The phenomenon that in the Law meal is by preference offered raw, while in the earlier period, even as an adjunct of the burnt-offering, it was presented baked, belongs to the same category. The latter is the case in Judges vi. 19 at least, and the statement of 1 Sam. i. 24 is also to be understood in the same sense; the sacrificer brings meal along with him in order to bake it into maccah on the spot (Ezek. xlvi. 20). But he may bring along with him common, that is leavened, cakes also (1 Sam. x. 3), which seem originally by no means to have

[p. 69]

been considered unfit to be offered as in Lev. ii. 11. For under this law of Lev. ii. even the presentation of the shewbread would be inexplicable, and moreover it is certain that at first the loaves of the feast of weeks were offerings, properly so called, and not merely dues to the priests. According, to Amos iv. 5, leavened bread was made use of precisely at a particularly solemn sacrifice, and a reminiscence of this usage has been preserved even in Lev. vii. 13, although of course without any practical weight being attached to it. [*1] Moreover, maccah also means, properly speaking, only the bread that is prepared in haste and in the most primitive manner for immediate use, and originally implies no contrast with leaven, but simply with the more artificial and tedious manners of producing ordinary bread [*2] In the Priestly Code the materials are finer, but they are as much as possible left in their raw condition; both are steps in advance.

3. There is another and much more important difference in the case of the animal sacrifice. Of this the older practice knows only two kinds apart from extraordinary varieties, which may be left out of account. These two are the burnt-offering ('Olah) and the thank-offering (Shelem, Zebah, Zebah-Shelamim). In the case of the first the whole animal is offered on the altar; in the other God receives, besides the blood, only an honorary portion, while the rest of the flesh is eaten by the sacrificial guests. Now it is worth noticing how seldom the burnt-offering occurs alone. It is necessarily so in the case of human sacrifice (Gen. xxii. 2 seq.; Judges xi. 31; [*3] 2 Kings iii. 27; Jer. xix. 5); otherwise it is not usual (Gen. viii. 20; Num. xxiii. 1 seq.; Judges vi. 20, 26, xiii. 16, 23; 1 Sam. vii. 9 seq.;

[p. 70]

[paragraph continues] 1 Kings iii. 4, xviii. 34, 38); [*1] moreover, all the examples just cited are extraordinary or mythical in their character, a circumstance that may not affect the evidence of the existence of the custom in itself, but is important as regards the statistics of its frequency. As a rule, the 'Olah occurs only in conjunction with Zebahim, and when this is the case the latter are in the majority and are always in the plural, while on the other hand the first is frequently in the singular. [*2]

They supplement each other like two corresponding halves; the 'Olah is, as the name implies, properly speaking, nothing more than the part of a great offering that reaches the altar. One might therefore designate as 'Olah also that part of a single animal which is consecrated to the Deity; this, however, is never done; neither of the blood nor of the fat (qtr) is the verb h`lh used, but only of the pieces of the flesh, of which in the case of the minor offering nothing was burnt. But the distinction is merely one of degree; there is none in kind; a small Zebah, enlarged and augmented, becomes an 'Olah and Zebahim; out of a certain number of slaughtered animals which are eaten by the sacrificial company, one is devoted to God and wholly given to the flames. For the rest, it must be borne in mind that as a rule it is only great sacrificial feasts that the historical books take occasion to mention, and that consequently the burnt-offering, notwithstanding what has been said, comes before us with greater prominence than can have been the average case in ordinary life. Customarily, it is certain, none but thank-offerings were offered; necessarily so

[p. 71]

if slaughtering could only be done beside the altar. Where mention is made of a simple offering in the Books of Samuel and Kings, that it is a thank-offering is matter of course. 1 Sam. ii. 12 seq. is in this connection also particularly instructive.

From what has been said it results that according to the praxis of the older period a meal was almost always connected with a sacrifice. It was the rule that only blood and fat were laid upon the altar, but the people ate the flesh; only in the case of very great sacrificial feasts was a large animal (one or more) given to Jehovah. Where a sacrifice took place, there was also eating and drinking (Exod. xxxii. 6; Judges ix. 27; 2 Sam. xv. 11 seq.; Amos ii. 7); there was no offering without a meal, and no meal without an offering (1 Kings i. 9); at no important Bamah was entertainment wholly wanting, such a lesxe as that in which Samuel feasted Saul, or Jeremiah the Rechabites (1 Sam. ix. 22; Jer. xxxv. 2). To be merry, to eat and drink before Jehovah, is a usual form of speech down to the period of Deuteronomy; even Ezekiel calls the cultus on the high places an eating upon the mountains (1 Sam. ix. 13,19 seq.), and in Zechariah the pots in the temple have a special sanctity (Zech. xiv. 20). By means of the meal in presence of Jehovah is established a covenant fellowship on the one hand between Him and the guests, and on the other hand between the guests themselves reciprocally, which is essential for the idea of sacrifice and gives their name to the Shelamim (compare Exod. xviii. 12, xxiv. 11). In ordinary slaughterings this notion is not strongly present, but in solemn sacrifices it was in full vigour. It is God who invites, for the house is His; His also is the gift, which must be brought to Him entire by the offerer before the altar, and the greater portion of which He gives up to His guests only after that. Thus in a certain sense they eat at God's table, and must accordingly prepare or sanctify themselves for it. [*1] Even on occasions that, to our way of 

[p. 72]

thinking, seem highly unsuitable, the meal is nevertheless not wanting (Judges xx. 26, xxi. 4; 1 Sam xiii. 9-12). That perfect propriety was not always observed might be taken for granted, and is proved by Isa. xxviii. 8 even with regard to the temple of Jerusalem; "all tables are full of vomit, there is no room." Hence also Eli's suspicion regarding Hannah was a natural one, and by no means so startling as it appears.

How different from this picture is that suggested by the Priestly Code! Here one no longer remarks that a meal accompanies every sacrifice; eating before Jehovah, which even in Deuteronomy is just the expression for sacrificing, nowhere occurs, or at all events is no act of divine worship. Slaying and sacrificing are no longer coincident, the thank-offering of which the breast and right shoulder are to be consecrated is something different from the old simple Zebah. But, precisely for this reason, it has lost its former broad significance. The mizbeah, that is, the place where the zebahim are to be offered, has been transformed into a mizbah ha-'olah. The burnt-offering has become quite independent and comes everywhere into the foreground, the sacrifices which are unconnected with a meal altogether predominate,--so much that, as is well known, Theophrastus could declare there were no others among the Jews, who in this way were differentiated from all other nations. [*1] Where formerly a thank-offering which was eaten before Jehovah, and which might with greater clearness be called a sacrificial meal, was prescribed, the Priestly Code, as we shall afterwards see, has made out of it simple dues to the priests, as, for example, in the case of the first-born and of firstlings. Only in this point it still bears involuntary testimony to the old custom by applying the names Todah, Neder, and Nedabah, of which the last two in particular must necessarily have a quite general meaning (Lev. xxii. 18; Ezek. xlvi. 12), exclusively to the thank-offering, while Milluim and paschal sacrifice are merely subordinate varieties of it.

4. What the thank-offering has lost, the sin and trespass offering have gained; the voluntary private offering which the sacrificer ate in a joyful company at the holy place has given way before the compulsory, of which he obtains no share, and from which the character of the sacred meal has been altogether taken away. The burnt-offering, it is true, still continues to be a meal, if only a one-sided one, of which God alone partakes; but in the case of the sin-offering everything is kept far

[p. 73]

out of sight which could recall a meal, as, for example, the accompaniments of meal and wine, oil and salt; of the flesh no portion reaches the altar, it all goes as a fine to the priest. Now, of this kind of sacrifice, which has an enormous importance in the Priestly Code, not a single trace occurs in the rest of the Old Testament before Ezekiel, neither in the Jehovist and Deuteronomist, nor in the historical and prophetical books. [*1] 'Olah and Zebah comprehend all animal sacrifices, 'Olah and Minhah, or Zebah and Minhah, all sacrifices whatsoever; nowhere is a special kind of sacrifice for atonement met with (1 Sam. iii. 14). Hos. iv. 8 does indeed say: "They eat the sin of my people, and they are greedy for its guilts," but the interpretation which will have it that the priests are here reproached with in the first instance themselves inducing the people to falsification of the sacred dues, in order to make these up again with the produce of the sin and trespass offerings, is either too subtle or too dull. [*2] It would be less unreasonable to co-ordinate with the similarly named sin and trespass offering of the Pentateuch the five golden mice, and the five golden emerods with which the Philistines send back the ark, and which in 1 Sam. vi. 3, 4, 8 are designated asham, or, still better, the sin and trespass monies which, according to 2 Kings xii. 17 [A.V. 16], fell to the share of the Jerusalem priests. Only the fact is that even in the second passage the asham and hattath are no sacrifices, but, more exactly to render the original meaning of the words, mere fines, and in fact money fines. On the other hand, the hattath referred to in Micah vi. 7 has nothing to do with a due of the priests, but simply denotes the guilt which eventually another takes upon himself. Even in Isa. liii. 10, a passage which is certainly late, asham must not be taken in the technical sense of the ritual legislation, but simply (as in Micah) in the sense of guilt, borne by the innocent for the guilty. For the explanation of this prophetic passage Gramberg has rightly had recourse to the narrative of 2 Sam. xi. 1-14. "Upon Saul and upon his house lies blood-guiltiness,

[p. 74]

for having slain the Gibeonites" is announced to David as the cause of a three years' famine. When asked how it can be taken away, the Gibeonites answer, "It is not a matter of silver and gold to us with respect to Saul and his house; let seven men of his family be delivered to us that we may hang them up unto the Lord in Gibeah of Saul upon the mountain of the Lord." This was done; all the seven were hanged.

Asham and hattath as offerings occur for the first time in Ezekiel, and appear, not long before his day to have come into the place of the earlier pecuniary fines (2 Kings xii. 17 [16]), which perhaps already also admitted of being paid in kind; probably in the seventh century, which seems to have been very open to the mystery of atonement and bloodshedding, and very fertile in the introduction of new religious usages. [*1] The sin and trespass offerings of the Pentateuch still bear traces of their origin in fines and penalties; they are not gifts to God, they are not even symbolical, they are simply mulcts payable to the priests, partly of fixed commutation value (Lev. v. 15). Apart from the mechanical burning of the fat they have in common with the sacrifice only the shedding of blood, originally a secondary matter, which has here become the chief thing. This circumstance is an additional proof of our thesis. The ritual of the simple offering has three acts: (1.) the presentation of the living animal before Jehovah, and the laying on of hands as a token of manumission on the part of the offerer; (2.) the slaughtering and the sprinkling of the blood on the altar; (3.) the real or seeming gift of the sacrificial portions to the Deity, and the meal of the human guests. In the case of the burnt-offering the meal in the third act disappears, and the slaughtering in the second comes into prominence as significant and sacred, inasmuch as (what is always expressly stated) it must take place in the presence of Jehovah, at the north side of the altar. In the case of the sin and trespass offering the third act is dropped entirely, and accordingly the whole significance of the rite attaches to the slaughtering, which of course also takes place before the altar, and to the sprinkling of the blood, which has become peculiarly developed

[p. 75]

here. It is obvious how the metamorphosis of the gift and the meal into a bloody atonement advances and reaches its acme in this last sacrificial act.

This ritual seems to betray its novelty even within the Priestly Code itself by a certain vacillation. In the older corpus of law (Lev. xvii.-xxvi.) which has been taken into that document, all sacrifices are still embraced under one or other of the two heads zbch and `lh (xvii. 8, xxii. 18, 21); there are no others. The asham indeed occurs in xix. 21 seq., but, as is recognised, only in a later addition; on the other hand, it is not demanded [*1] in xxii. 14, where it must have been according to Lev. v. and Num. v. And even apart from Lev. xvii.-xxvi there is on this point no sort of agreement between the kernel of the Priestly Code and the later additions, or "novels," so to speak. For one thing, there is a difference as to the ritual of the most solemn sin-offering between Exod. xxix., Lev. ix. on the one hand, and Leviticus iv. on the other; and what is still more serious, the trespass-offering never occurs in the primary but only in the secondary passages, Lev. iv.-vii., xiv.; Num. v. 7, 8, vi. 1, xviii. 9. In the latter, moreover, the distinction between asham and hattath is not very clear, but only the intention to make it, perhaps because in the old praxis there actually was a distinction between ksp cht'wth and ksp 'shm, and in Ezekiel between cht'th and 'shm. [*2]

[p. 76]

  

III.

The turning-point in the history of the sacrificial system was the reformation of Josiah; what we find in the Priestly Code is the matured result of that event. It is precisely in the distinctions that are characteristic of the sacrificial law as compared with the ancient sacrificial praxis that we have evidence of the fact that, if not all exactly occasioned by the centralisation of the worship, they were almost all somehow at least connected with that change.

In the early days, worship arose out of the midst of ordinary life, and was in most intimate and manifold connection with it. A sacrifice was a meal, a fact showing how remote was the idea of antithesis between spiritual earnestness and secular joyousness. A meal unites a definite circle of guests, and in this way the sacrifice brought into connection the members of the family, the associates of the corporation, the soldiers of the army, and, generally speaking, the constituents of any permanent or temporary society. It is earthly relationships that receive their consecration thereby, and in correspondence are the natural festal occasions presented by the vicissitudes of life. Year after year the return of vintage, corn-harvest, and sheep-shearing brought together the members of the household to eat and to drink in the presence of Jehovah; and besides these there were less regularly recurring events which were celebrated in one circle after another. There was no warlike expedition which was not inaugurated in this fashion, no agreement that was not thus ratified, no important undertaking of any kind was gone about without a sacrifice. [*1]

When an honoured guest arrives, there is slaughtered for him a calf, not without an offering of the blood and fat to the Deity. The occasion arising out of daily life is thus inseparable from the holy action, and is what gives it meaning and character; an end corresponding to the situation always underlies it. Hence also prayer must not be wanting. The verb h`thyr, to "burn" (fat and minha), means simply to "pray," and conversely bqsh 'th yhwh, "to seek Jehovah," in point of fact not unfrequently means to "sacrifice." The gift serves to reinforce

[p. 77]

the question or the request, and to express thankfulness; and the prayer is its interpretation. This of course is rather incidentally indicated than expressly said (Hos. v. 6; Isa. i. 15; Jer. xiv. 12; 1 Kings viii. 27 seq.; Prov. xv. 8); we have a specimen of a grace for the offering of the festival gift only in Deuteronomy xxvi. 3 seq.; a blessing is pronounced when the slaughtering takes place (1 Sam. ix. 13). The prayer of course is simply the expression of the feeling of the occasion, with which accordingly it varies in manifold ways. Arising out of the exigencies and directed to the objects of daily life, the sacrifices reflect in themselves a correspondingly rich variety. Our wedding, baptismal, and funeral feasts on the one hand, and our banquets for all sorts of occasions on the other, might still be adduced as the most obvious comparison, were it not that here too the divorce between sacred and secular destroys it. Religious worship was a natural thing in Hebrew antiquity; it was the blossom of life, the heights and depths of which it was its business to transfigure and glorify.

The law which abolished all sacrificial seats, with a single exception, severed this connection. Deuteronomy indeed does not contemplate such a result. Here, in marked opposition to what we find in the Priestly Code, to eat and be merry before Jehovah is the standing phrase for sacrificing; the idea is that in concentrating all the worship towards Jerusalem, all that is effected is a mere change of place, the essence of the thing remaining unaltered. This, however, was a mistake. To celebrate the vintage festival among one's native hills, and to celebrate it at Jerusalem, were two very different things; it was not a matter of indifference whether one could seize on the spot any occasion that casually offered itself for a sacrificial meal, or whether it was necessary that one should first enter upon a journey. And it was not the same thing to appear by oneself at home before Jehovah and to lose oneself in a large congregation at the common seat of worship. Human life has its root in local environment, and so also had the ancient cultus; in being transplanted from its natural soil it was deprived of its natural nourishment. A separation between it and the daily life was inevitable, and Deuteronomy itself paved the way for this result by permitting profane slaughtering. A man lived in Hebron, but sacrificed in Jerusalem; life and worship fell apart. The consequences which lie dormant in the Deuteronomic law are fully developed in the Priestly Code.

This is the reason why the sacrifice combined with a meal, formerly

[p. 78]

by far the chief, now falls completely into the background. One could eat flesh at home, but in Jerusalem one's business was to do worship. Accordingly, those sacrifices were preferred in which the religious character came to the front with the utmost possible purity and without any admixture of natural elements, sacrifices of which God received everything and man nothing,--burnt-offerings, sin-offerings, and trespass-offerings.

If formerly the sacrifice had taken its complexion from the quality of the occasion which led to it, it now had essentially but one uniform purpose--to be a medium of worship. The warm pulse of life no longer throbbed in it to animate it; it was no longer the blossom and the fruit of every branch of life; it had its own meaning all to itself. It symbolised worship, and that was enough. The soul was fled; the shell remained, upon the shaping out of which every energy was now concentrated. A manifoldness of rites took the place of individualising occasions; technique was the main thing, and strict fidelity to rubric.

Once cultus was spontaneous, now it is a thing of statute. The satisfaction which it affords is, properly speaking, something which lies outside of itself and consists in the moral satisfaction arising out of the conscientiousness with which the ritual precepts, once for all enjoined by God on His people, are fulfilled. The freewill offering is not indeed forbidden, but value in the strict sense is attached only to those which have been prescribed, and which accordingly preponderate everywhere. And even in the case of the freewill offering, everything must strictly and accurately comply with the restrictions of the ordinance; if any one in the fulness of his heart had offered in a zebah shelamim more pieces of flesh than the ritual enjoined, it would have been the worse for him.

Of old the sacrifice combined with a meal had established a special relation between the Deity and a definite society of guests; the natural sacrificial society was the family or the clan (1 Sam. i. 1 seq., xvi. 1 seq., xx. 6). Now the smaller sacred fellowships get lost, the varied groups of social life disappear in the neutral shadow of the universal congregation or church (qhl, `dh). The notion of this last is foreign to Hebrew antiquity, but runs through the Priestly Code from beginning to end. Like the worship itself, its subject also became abstract, a spiritual entity which could be kept together by no other means except worship. As now the participation of the "congregation of the children of Israel" in the sacrifice was of necessity always mainly ideal, the consequence

[p. 79]

was that the sacred action came to be regarded as essentially perfect by virtue of its own efficacy in being performed by the priest, even though no one was present. Hence later the necessity for a special sacrificial deputation, the anshe ma'amad. The connection of all this with the Judaising tendency to remove God to a distance from man, it may be added, is clear. [*1]

Two details still deserve special prominence here. In the Priestly Code the most important sacrifice is the burnt-offering; that is to say, in point of fact, the tamid, the holocaustum juge, consisting of two yearling lambs which are daily consumed upon the "altar of burnt-offering," one in the morning, another in the evening. The custom of daily offering a fixed sacrifice at a definite time existed indeed, in a simpler form, [*2] even in the pre-exilian period, but alongside of it at that

[p. 80]

time, the freewill private offerings had a much more important place, and bulked much more largely. In the law the tamid is in point of fact the fundamental element of the worship, for even the sacrifices of Sabbaths and feast days consist only of its numerical increase (compare Num. xxviii., xxix.). Still later, when it is said in the Book of Daniel that the tamid was done away, this is equivalent to saying that the worship was abolished (viii. 11-13, xi. 31, xii. 11). But now the dominant position of the daily, Sabbath day, and festival tamid means that the sacrificial worship had assumed a perfectly firm shape, which was independent of every special motive and of all spontaneity; and further (what is closely connected with this), that it took place for the sake of the congregation,--the "congregation" in the technical sense attached to that word in the Law. Hence the necessity for the general temple-tax, the prototype of which is found in the poll-tax of half a shekel for the service of the tabernacle in Exod. xxx. 11 seq. Prior to the exile, the regular sacrifice was paid for by the Kings of Judah, and in Ezekiel the monarch still continues to defray the expenses not only of the Sabbath day and festival sacrifices (xiv. 17 seq.), but also of the tamid (xlvi. 13-15). [*1] It is also a mark of the date that, according to Exod. xxx., the expenses of the temple worship are met directly out of the poll-tax levied from the community, which can only be explained by the fact that at that time there had ceased to be any sovereign. So completely was the sacrifice the affair of the community in Judaism that the voluntary korban of the individual became metamorphosed into a money payment as a contribution to the cost of the public worship (Mark vii., xii. 42 seq.; Matt. xxvii. 6).

The second point is this: Just as the special purposes and occasions of sacrifice fall out of sight, there comes into increasing prominence the one uniform and universal occasion--that of sin; and one uniform and universal purpose--that of propitiation. In the Priestly Code the peculiar mystery in the case of all animal sacrifices is atonement by blood; this appears in its purest development in the case of the sin and trespass offerings, which are offered as well for individuals as for the congregation and for its head. In a certain sense the great day of atonement is the culmination of the whole religious and sacrificial

[p. 81]

service, to which, amid all diversities of ritual, continuously underlying reference to sin is common throughout. Of this feature the ancient sacrifices present few traces. It was indeed sought at a very early period to influence the doubtful or threatening mood of Deity, and make His countenance gracious by means of rich gifts, but the gift had, as was natural then, the character of a tentative effort only (Micah vi. 6). There was no such thought as that a definite guilt must and could be taken away by means of a prescribed offering. When the law discriminates between such sins as are covered by an offering and such sins as relentlessly are visited with wrath, it makes a distinction very remote from the antique; to Hebrew antiquity the wrath of God was something quite incalculable, its causes were never known, much less was it possible to enumerate beforehand those sins which kindled it and those which did not. [*1] An underlying reference of sacrifice to sin, speaking generally, was entirely absent. The ancient offerings were wholly of a joyous nature,--a merrymaking before Jehovah with music and song, timbrels, flutes, and stringed instruments (Hos. ix. 1 seq.; Amos v. 23, viii. 3; Isa. xxx. 3). No greater contrast could be conceived than the monotonous seriousness of the so-called Mosaic worship. Nomos pareiseilthen ina pleoiasei to paraptuma.

In this way the spiritualisation of the worship is seen in the Priestly Code as advancing pari passu with its centralisation. It receives, so to speak, an abstract religious character; it separates itself in the first instance from daily life, and then absorbs the latter by becoming, strictly speaking, its proper business. The consequences for the future were momentous. The Mosaic "congregation" is the mother of the Christian church; the Jews were the creators of that idea.

We may compare the cultus in the olden time to the green tree which grows up out of the soil as it will and can; later it becomes the regularly shapen timber, ever more artificially shaped with square and compass. Obviously there is a close connection between the qualitative antithesis we have just been expounding and the formal one of law and

[p. 82]

custom from which we set out. Between "naturaliter ea quae legis sunt facere" and "secundum legem agere" there is indeed a more than external difference. If at the end of our first section we found improbable precisely in this region the independent co-existence of ancient praxis and Mosaic law, the improbability becomes still greater from the fact that the latter is filled with a quite different spirit, which can be apprehended only as Spirit of the age (Zeitgeist). It is not from the atmosphere of the old kingdom, but from that of the church of the second temple, that the Priestly Code draws its breath. It is in accordance with this that the sacrificial ordinances as regards their positive contents are no less completely ignored by antiquity than they are scrupulously followed by the post-exilian time.

Footnotes

^54:1 With regard to sacrifice, Deuteronomy still occupies the same standpoint as JE.

^59:1 That the priests were not mere teachers of law and morals, but also gave ritual instruction (e.g., regarding cleanness and uncleanness), is of course not denied by this. All that is asserted is that in pre-exilian antiquity the priests' own praxis (at the altar) never constituted the contents of the Torah, but that their Torah always consisted of instructions to the laity. The distinction is easily intelligible to those who choose to understand it.

^61:1 Gen. iv. 3-5, Num. xvi. 15; 1 Sam. ii. 17, 29, xxvi. 19; Isa. i. 13; Mal. i. 10-13, ii. 12, 13, iii. 3, 4. In the Priestly Code minha is exclusively a terminus technicus for the meal-offering. The general name in the LXX and in the New Testament is duron (Matt. v. 23-24, viii. 4, xv. 5, xxiii. 18, 19). Compare Spencer, "De ratione et origine sacrificiorum" (De Legibus Hebraeorum ritualibus, iii. 2), by far the best thing that has ever been written on the subject.

^64:1 Ezekiel xvi. 13, 19, xlvi. 14; 1 Chron. ix. 29, xxiii. 22; Ecclus. xxxv. 2, xxxviii. 11, xxxix. 32; Isaiah i. 13 (LXX); lxvi. 3 (LXX). In the Priestly Code slth occurs more than forty times.

^64:2 The verb is used in piel by the older writers, in hiphil by the Priestly Code (Chronicles), and promiscuously in both forms during the transition period by the author of the Books of Kings. This is the case, at least, where the forms can with certainty be distinguished, namely, in the perfect, imperative, and infinitive; the distinction between yqtr and yqtyr, mqtr and mqtyr rests, as is well known, upon no secure tradition. Compare, for example, katter jaktirun, 1 Sam. ii. 16; the transcribers and punctuators under the influence of the Pentateuch preferred the hiphil. In the Priestly Code (Chronicles) hqtyr has both meanings alongside of each other, but when used without a qualifying phrase it generally means incensing, and when consuming a sacrifice is intended hmzbchh is usually added, "on the altar," that is, the [p. 65] place on which the incense-offering strictly so called was not offered. The substantive qtrth in the sense of "an offering of incense" in which it occurs exclusively and very frequently in the Priestly Code, is first found in Ezekiel (viii. 11, xvi. 18, xxiii. 41) and often afterwards in Chronicles, but in the rest of the Old Testament only in Proverbs xxvii. 9, but there in a profane sense. Elsewhere never, not even in passages so late as 1 Sam. ii. 28; Ps. lxvi. 15, cxli. 2. In authors of a certainly pre-exilian date the word occurs only twice, both times in a perfectly general sense. Isaiah i. 13: "Bring me no more oblations; it is an abominable incense to me." Deut. xxxiii. 10: "The Levites shall put incense (i.e., the fat of thank-offerings) before thee, and whole burnt-offerings upon thine altar." The name lbnh (frankincense) first occurs in Jeremiah (vi. 20, xvii. 26, xli. 5); elsewhere only in the Priestly Code (nine times), in Isa. xl.-lxvi. (three times), in Chronicles and Nehemiah (three times), and in Canticles (three times). Compare Zeph. iii. 10; 1 Kings ix. 25.

^66:1 There is a peculiar perversity in meeting the objection by alleging other singularities in the ordinance as for example, that the vessels of the tabernacle are appointed (chap. xxv.) before the tabernacle itself (chap. xxvi.). This last is no eccentricity; the order in commanding is first the end, and then the means; but in obeying, the order is reversed. In like manner, it is not at all surprising if subsidiary implements, such as benches for slaughtering. or basins for washing, which have no importance for the cultus, properly so called, should be either passed over altogether, or merely brought in as an appendix. The case is not at all parallel with the omission of the most important utensil of the sanctuary from the very passage to which it necessarily belongs.

^67:1 Malachi, on the other hand, designates the so-called altar of burnt-offering as a table.

^68:1 Accordingly one must understand `shh also of boiling (Judges vi. 19). Compare the boiling-houses of the temple still found in Ezek. xlvi. 20-24. In 1 Sam. i. 9 pronounce beshela instead of beshilo, and delete w'hry shthh.

^68:2 Compare the polemical ordinance of Exod. xii. 9 with Deut. xvi. 7.

^69:1 The loaves are passed over in silence in Leviticus vii. 29 seq., although it is in this very place that the matter of presenting on the part of the offerer is most fully described. And when it is said (vii. 12), "If he offer it for a thanksgiving (Todah), then he shall offer with it unleavened cakes mingled with oil, and unleavened wafers anointed with oil and fine flour (LXX), mingled with oil;" vii. 13, "[With] leavened cakes shall he offer as a gift with the thank-offering of the Todah," the suspicion very readily occurs that verse 12 is an authentic interpretation prefixed, to obviate beforehand the difficulty presented by verse 13, and that similarly the first `l in verse 13 is also a later correction, which does not harmonise well by any means with the second. Verse 13 connects itself better with verse 11 than with verse 12.--Exod. xxxiv. 25.

^69:2 Compare Gen. xviii. 6 with xix. 3.

^69:3 It is probable that Jephthah expected a human creature and not an animal to meet him from his house.

^70:1 In the above list of passages no notice is taken of the sacrificium juge of 2 Kings xvi. 15. The statement in 1 Kings iii. 4 is perhaps to be taken along with iii. 15, but does not become at all more credible on that account. Of course it is understood that only those passages are cited here in which mention is made of offerings actually made, and not merely general statements about one or more kinds of offering. The latter could very well fix attention upon the 'Olah alone without thereby throwing any light upon the question as to the actual practice.

^70:2 Exod. x. 25, xviii. 12, xxiv. 5, xxxii. 6; Joshua viii. 31; Judges xx. 26, xxi. 4; 1 Sam. vi. 14 seq., x. 8, xiii. 9-12; 2 Sam. vi. 17 seq., xxiv. 23-25, 1 Kings iii. 15, viii. 63 seq.; 2 Kings v. 17, x. 24, 25. The zeugma in Judges xx. 26, xxi. 4 is inconsistent with the older usus loquendi. The proper name for the holocaust appears to be klyl (Deuteronomy xxxiii. 10; 1 Samuel vii. 9) not `lh. It is impossible to decide whether the sacrificial due in all sorts of Zebah was the same, but most probably it was not. Probably the Shelamim are a more solemn kind of sacrifice than the simple Zebah. The word 'fat' is used in Gen. iv. 4; Exod. xxiii. 18 in a very general sense. It is not quite clear what is meant by the blessing of the Zebah in 1 Sam. ix. 13; perhaps a kind of grace before meat.

^71:1 In order to appear before Jehovah the guest adorns himself with clothes and ornaments (Exod. iii. 22, xi. 2 seq.; Hos. ii. 15 [A.V. 13]; Ezek. xvi. 13; compare Koran, Sur. xx. 61), sanctifies himself (Num. xi. 18) and is sanctified (1 Sam. xvi. 5; Exod. xix. 10, 14). The sacrificial meal is regarded as Kodesh (hallowed) for not only the priests, but all the sanctified persons eat Kodesh (1 Sam. xxi. 5 seq. On what is meant by sanctification light is thrown by 1 Sam. xxi. 5; 2 Sam. xi. 2. Compare l' lpnw chnp yb' (Job xiii. 16; Lev. vii. 20; Matt. xxii. 11-13). Jehovah invites the armies of the nations to His sacrifice, for which He delivers over to them some other nation, and calls the Medes, to whom He gives Babylon over, His sanctified ones, that is, His guests (Zeph. i. 7 seq.; Jer. xlvi. 10; Ezek. xxxix 17; Isa. xiii. 3).

^72:1 Porphyry, De Abstin. ii. 26. Compare Joseph., C. Ap., ii. 13: oytoi eyxontai uein ekatombas tois theois kai xruntai tois iereios pros eyuxian.

^73:1 How great is the difference in Deut. xxi. 1-9; how very remote the sacrificial idea!

^73:2 The sin and guilt are the sacrificial worship generally as carried on by the people (viii. 11; Amos iv. 4); in the entire section the prophet is preparing the way for the here sharply accentuated reproach against the priests that they neglect the Torah and encourage the popular propensity to superstitious and impure religious service. Besides, where is there any reproach at all, according to the Pentateuch, in the first section of iv. 8? And the second speaks of `wnm, not of 'shmm.

^74:1 Consider for example the prevalence of child sacrifice precisely at this time, the introduction of incense, the new fashions which King Manasseh brought in, and of which certainly much survived that suited the temper of the period, and admitted of being conjoined with the worship of Jehovah, or even seemed to enhance its dignity and solemnity.

^75:1 Perhaps it would be more accurate to say that the asham here, in the case of property unlawfully held, is simply the impost of a fifth part of the value, and not the sacrifice of a ram, which in Lev. v. is required in addition. In Num. v. also, precisely this fifth part is called asham.

^75:2 The three sections, Lev. iv. 1-35 (hattath), v. 1-13 (hattath-asham), and v. 14-26 (asham), are essentially not co-ordinate parts of one whole, but independent pieces proceeding from the same school. For v. 1-13 is no continuation of or appendix to iv. 27-35, but a quite independent treatment of the same material, with important differences of form. The place of the systematic generality of chap. iv. is here taken by the definite individual case, and what is analogous to it; the ritual is given with less minuteness, and the hierarchical subordination of ranks has no influence on the classification of offences. In this section also asham and hattath occur interchangeably as synonymous. In the third section a ram as an asham is prescribed (v. 17-19) for the very case in which in the first a he-goat or a she-goat is required as hattath (iv. 22, 27). The third section has indeed in form greater similarity to the second, but cannot be regarded as its true completion, for this simple reason, that the latter does not distinguish between hattath and asham. If Lev. v. 13-16, 20-26 be followed simply without regard being had to vers. 17-19, the asham comes in only in the case of voluntary restitution of property illegally come by or detained, more particularly of the sacred dues. The goods must be restored to their owner augmented by a fifth part of their value; and as an asham there must be added a ram, which falls to the [p. 76] sanctuary. In Num. v. 5-10 the state of the case is indeed the same, but the language employed is different, for in this passage it is the restored property that is called asham, and the ram is called 'yl hkprym. Comp. Lev. xxii. 14.

^76:1 Sacrifice is used as a pretext in 1 Sam. xvi. 1 seq.; 1 Kings i. 9 seq. Compare Proverbs vii. 14.

^79:1 It is not asserted that the cultus before the law (of which the darker sides are known from Amos and Hosea) was better than the legal, but merely that it was more original; the standard of judgment being, not the moral element, but merely the idea, the primary meaning of worship. Nor is it disputed further that the belief in the dependence of sacrifices and other sacred acts upon a laboriously strict compliance with traditional and prescriptive rites occurs in the case of certain peoples, even in the remotest antiquity. But with the Israelites, judging by the testimony of the historical and prophetical books, this was not on the whole the case any more than with the ancient Greeks; there were no Brahmans or Magians in either case. Moreover, it must be carefully noted that not even in the Priestly Code do we yet find the same childish appreciation of the cultus as occurs in such a work as the Rigveda, and that the strict rules are not prescribed and maintained with any such notion in view as that by their observance alone can the taste of the Deity be pleased; the idea of God is here even strikingly remote from the anthropomorphic, and the whole cultus is nothing more than an exercise in piety which has simply been enjoined so once for all without any one being in any way the better for it.

^79:2 See Kuenen, Godsdienst van Israel, ii. 271. According to 2 Kings xvi. 15, an `lh in the morning and a mnchh in the evening were daily offered in the temple of Jerusalem, in the time of Ahaz. Ezekiel also (xlvi. 13-15) speaks only of the morning `lh. Compare also Ezra ix. 4; Neh. x. 33. In the Priestly Code the evening minhah has risen to the dignity of a second 'olah; but at the same time survives in the daily minhah of the high priest, and is now offered in the morning also (Lev. vi. 12-16). The daily minhah appears to be older than the daily 'olah. For while it was a natural thing to prepare a meal regularly for the Deity, the expense of a daily 'olah was too great for an ordinary place of worship, and, besides, it was not in accordance with the custom of men to eat flesh every day. The offering of the daily minhah is already employed in 1 Kings xviii. 29, 36, as a mark of time to denote the afternoon, and this use is continued down to the latest period, while the tamid, i.e., the 'olah, is never so utilised. The oddest custom of all, however, was doubtless not the daily minhah, but the offering of the shewbread, which served the same purpose, but was not laid out fresh every day.

^80:1 Compare LXX. The Massoretic text has corrected the third person (referring to the princes) into the second, making it an address to the priests, which, however, is quite impossible in Ezekiel.

^81:1 When the wrath is regulated by the conditions of the "covenant," the original notion (which scorns the thought of adjustment) is completely changed. What gave the thing its mysterious awfulness was precisely this: that in no way was it possible to guard against it, and that nothing could avail to counteract it. Under the pressure of Jehovah's wrath not only was sacrifice abandoned, but even the mention of His name was shunned so as to avoid attracting His attention (Hos. iii. 4, ix. 4; Amos vi. 10).

      
Prolegomena to the History of Ancient Israel, by Julius Wellhausen, [1885], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 83]

  

CHAPTER III.

  

THE SACRED FEASTS.

THE feasts, strictly speaking, belong to the preceding chapter, for originally they were simply regularly recurring occasions for sacrifice. The results of the investigation there made accordingly repeat themselves here, but with such clearness and precision as make it worth while to give the subject a separate consideration. In the first place and chiefly, the history of the solar festivals, that of those festivals which follow the seasons of the year, claims our attention.

  

I.

1. In the Jehovistic and Deuteronomistic parts of the Pentateuch there predominates a rotation of three great festivals, which alone receive the proper designation of hag: "Three times in the year shalt thou keep festival unto me, three times in the year shall all thy men appear before the Lord Jehovah, the God of Israel" (Exod. xxiii. 14, 17, xxxiv. 23; Deut. xvi. 16). "The feast of unleavened bread (maccoth) shalt thou keep; seven days shalt thou eat maccoth as I commanded thee, in the time appointed of the month Abib, for in it thou camest out from Egypt; and none shall appear before me empty; and the feast of harvest (kacir), the first-fruits of thy labours, which thou hast sown in the field; and the feast of ingathering (asiph), in the end of the year, when thou gatherest in thy labours out of the field." So runs the command in the Book of the Covenant (Exod. xxiii. 15, 16). The Law of the Two Tables (Exod. xxxiv. 18 seq.) is similar: "The feast of unleavened bread shalt thou keep. Seven days shalt thou eat unleavened bread, as I commanded thee, in the time of the month Abib: for in the month Abib thou camest out of Egypt. All that openeth the womb is mine; every firstling among thy cattle, whether ox or sheep, that is male. The firstling of an ass thou shalt redeem with a lamb: and if thou redeem him not, then shalt thou break his neck. All the firstborn of thy sons shalt

[p. 84]

thou redeem. And none shall appear before me empty. Six days shalt thou work; but on the seventh day shalt thou rest: even in ploughing time and in harvest shalt thou rest. And the feast of weeks (shabuoth) shalt thou observe, the feasts of the first-fruits of wheat harvest, and the feast of ingathering (asiph) at the change of the year." Minuter, on the other hand, and of a somewhat different character, are the precepts laid down in Deut. xvi.: "Take heed to the month Abib, and keep the passover unto Jehovah thy God, for in the month Abib did Jehovah thy God bring thee forth out of Egypt by night. Thou shalt therefore sacrifice the passover unto Jehovah thy God, of the flock or of the herd, in the place which Jehovah shall choose for the habitation of His name. Thou shalt eat no leavened bread with it; seven days shalt thou eat unleavened bread (maccoth) therewith, the bread of affliction, for thou camest forth out of the land of Egypt in anxious haste, that all the days of thy life thou mayest remember the day when thou camest forth out of the land of Egypt. There shall no leavened bread be seen with thee in all thy border seven days, and of the flesh which thou didst sacrifice on the first day, in the evening, nothing shall remain all night until the morning. Thou mayest not sacrifice the passover within any of thy gates which the Lord thy God giveth thee, but at the place which Jehovah thy God shall choose for the habitation of His name, there shalt thou sacrifice the passover, in the evening, at the going down of the sun, at the time of thy coming forth out of Egypt. And thou shalt boil and eat it in the place which the Lord thy God shall choose, and in the morning shalt thou return to thy home. Six days shalt thou eat maccoth, and on the seventh day shall be the closing feast to Jehovah thy God; thou shalt do no work therein" (ver. 1-8). "Seven weeks thenceforward shalt thou number unto thee; from such time as thou beginnest to put the sickle to the corn shalt thou begin to number seven weeks, and then thou shalt keep the feast of weeks (shabuoth) to Jehovah thy God, with a tribute of freewill offerings in thy hand, which thou shalt give, according as the Lord thy God hath blessed thee. And thou shalt rejoice before Jehovah thy God, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy man-servant, and thy maid-servant, and the Levite that is within thy gates, and the stranger, and the fatherless, and the widow that are among you in the place which Jehovah thy God shall choose for the habitation of His name. And thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in Egypt, and thou shalt observe and do these statutes" (ver. 9-12). "The feast

[p. 85]

of tabernacles (sukkoth) thou shalt observe seven days after thou hast gathered in thy corn and thy wine; and thou shalt rejoice in thy feast,--thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy man-servant, and thy maid-servant, and the Levite, and the stranger, and the fatherless, and the widow that are within thy gates. Seven days shalt thou keep a solemn feast unto Jehovah thy God in the place which Jehovah shall choose, because Jehovah thy God cloth bless thee in all thine increase, and in all the works of thy hands, therefore thou shalt surely rejoice. Three times in a year shall all thy men appear before Jehovah thy God in the place which He shall choose: in the feast of unleavened bread, of weeks, and of tabernacles (hag ha-maccoth,--shabuoth,--sukkoth), and they shall not appear before me empty; every man shall give as he is able, according to the blessing of Jehovah thy God, which He hath given thee" (ver. 13-17).

As regards the essential nature of the two last-named feasts, these passages are at one. The sukkoth of Deuteronomy and the asiph of the Jehovistic legislation do not coincide in time merely, but are in fact one and the same feast, the autumnal ingathering of the wine and of the oil from the vat and press, and of the corn from the threshing-floor. The name asiph refers immediately to the vintage and olive-gathering, to which the word sukkoth seems also to relate, being most easily explained from the custom of the whole household, old and young, going out to the vineyard in time of harvest, and there camping out in the open air under the improvised shelter of booths made with branches (Isaiah i. 8). Kacir and shabuoth in like manner are only different names for the same reality, namely, for the feast of the corn-reaping, or, more strictly, the wheat-reaping, which takes place in the beginning of summer. Thus both festivals have a purely natural occasion. On the other hand, the spring festival, which always opens the series, has a historical motive assigned to it, the exodus--most expressly in Deuteronomy--being given as the event on which it rests. The cycle nevertheless seems to presuppose and to require the original homogeneity of all its members. Now the twofold ritual of the pesah and the maccoth points to a twofold character of the feast. The hag, properly so named, is called not hag ha-pesah,  [*1] but hag ha-maccoth, and

[p. 86]

it is only the latter that is co-ordinated with the other two haggim; the name pesah indeed does not occur at all until Deuteronomy, although in the law of the two tables the sacrifice of the first-born seems to be brought into connection with the feast of unleavened bread. It follows that only the maccoth can be taken into account for purposes of comparison with kasir and asiph. As to the proper significance of maccoth, the Jehovistic legislation does not find it needful to instruct its contemporaries, but it is incidentally disclosed in Deuteronomy. There the festival of harvest is brought into a definite relation in point of time with that of maccoth; it is to be celebrated seven weeks later. This is no new ordinance, but one that rests upon old custom, for the name, "feast of weeks," occurs in a passage so early as Exod. xxxiv. (comp Jer. v. 24). Now "seven weeks after Easter" (Deut. xvi. 9) is further explained with greater elaborateness as meaning seven weeks after the putting of the sickle to the corn. Thus the festival of maccoth is equivalent to that of the putting of the sickle to the corn, and thereby light is thrown on its fixed relation to Pentecost. Pentecost celebrates the close of the reaping, which commences with barley harvest, and ends with that of wheat; Easter its beginning in the "month of corn ears;" and between the two extends the duration of harvest time, computed at seven weeks. The whole of this tempus clausum is a great festal season rounded off by the two festivals. We gain further light from Lev. xxiii. 9-22.  [*1] The Easter point is here, as in Deuteronomy, fixed as being the beginning of harvest, but is still more definitely determined as the day after the first Sabbath falling within harvest time, and Pentecost follows the same reckoning. And the special Easter ritual consists in the offering of a barley sheaf; before this it is not lawful to taste of the new crop; and the corresponding Pentecostal rite is the offering of ordinary wheaten loaves. The corn harvest begins with barley and ends with wheat; at the beginning the first-fruits are presented in their crude state as a sheaf, just as men in like

[p. 87]

manner partake of the new growth in the form of parched ears (Lev. xxiii. 14; Josh. v. 11); at the end they are prepared in the form of common bread. Thus the maccoth now begin to be intelligible. As has been already said (see p. 69), they are not, strictly speaking, duly prepared loaves, but the bread that is hurriedly baked to meet a pressing emergency (1 Sam. xxviii. 24); thus they are quite correctly associated with the haste of the exodus, and described as bread of affliction. At first people do not take time in a leisurely way to leaven, knead, and bake the year's new bread, but a hasty cake is prepared in the ashes; this is what is meant by maccoth. They are contrasted with the Pentecostal loaves precisely as are the sheaf and the parched ears, which last, according to Josh. v. 11, may be eaten in their stead, and without a doubt they were originally not the Easter food of men merely, but also of the Deity, so that the sheaf comes under the category of the later spiritual refinements of sacrificial material.

Easter then is the opening, as Pentecost is the closing festivity, or (what means the same thing) 'acereth, [*1] of the seven weeks' "joy of harvest," and the spring festival no longer puzzles us by the place it holds in the cycle of the three yearly festivities. But what is the state of the case as regards the pesah? The meaning of the name is not clear; as we have seen, the word first occurs in Deuteronomy, and there also the time of the celebration is restricted to the evening and night of the first day of maccoth, from sunset until the following morning. In point of fact, the pesah points back to the sacrifice of the firstlings (Exod. xxxiv. 18 seq., xiii. 12 seq.; Deut. xv. 19 seq., xvi. 1 seq.), and it is principally upon this that the historical character of the whole festivity hinges. It is because Jehovah smote the first-born of Egypt and spared those of Israel that the latter thenceforward are held sacred to Him. Such is the representation given not merely in the Priestly Code but also in Exod. xiii. 11 seq. But in neither of its sources does the Jehovistic tradition know anything of this. "Let my people go, that they may keep a feast unto me in the wilderness with sacrifices and cattle and sheep: "this from the first is the demand made upon Pharaoh, and it is in order to be suitably adorned for this purpose, contemplated by them from the first, that the departing Israelites borrow

[p. 88]

festal robes and ornaments from the Egyptians. Because Pharaoh refuses to allow the Hebrews to offer to their God the firstlings of cattle that are His due, Jehovah seizes from him the first-born of men. Thus the exodus is not the occasion of the festival, but the festival the occasion, if only a pretended one, of the exodus. If this relationship is inverted in Exodus xiii, it is because that passage is not one of the sources of the Jehovistic tradition, but is part of the redaction, and in fact (as is plain from other reasons with regard to the entire section xiii. 1-16) of a Deuteronomic redaction. From this it follows that the elaboration of the historical motive of the passover is not earlier than Deuteronomy, although perhaps a certain inclination to that way of explaining it appears before then, just as in the case of the maccoth (Exod. xii. 34). What has led to it is evidently the coincidence of the spring festival with the exodus, already accepted by the older tradition, the relation of cause and effect having become inverted in course of time. The only view sanctioned by the nature of the case is that the Israelite custom of offering the firstlings gave rise to the narrative of the slaying of the first-born of Egypt; unless the custom be pre-supposed the story is inexplicable, and the peculiar selection of its victims by the plague is left without a motive.

The sacrifice of the first-born, of the male first-born, that is to say--for the females were reared as with us--does not require an historical explanation, but can be accounted for very simply: it is the expression of thankfulness to the Deity for fruitful flocks and herds. If claim is also laid to the human first-born, this is merely a later generalisation which after all resolves itself merely into a substitution of an animal offering and an extension of the original sacrifice. In Exod. xx. 28, 29 and xxxiv. 19 this consequence does not yet seem to be deduced or even to be suspected as possible; it first appears in xxxiv. 20 and presents itself most distinctly in the latest passage (xiii. 12), for there ptr rchm is contrasted with ptr shgr, and for the first the expression h`byr, a technical one in the time of Jeremiah and Ezekiel for child sacrifice, is used. The view of some scholars (most of them mere casual visitors in the field of Old Testament research) that the slaying of the first-born male children was originally precisely the main feature of the passover, hardly deserves refutation. Like the other festivals, this also, apart from the view taken of it in the Priestly Code, has a thoroughly joyous character (Exod. x. 9); Deut, xvi. 7; comp. Isa. xxx. 29).

[p. 89]

[paragraph continues] There are some historical instances indeed of the surrender of an only child or of the dearest one, but always as a voluntary and quite exceptional act; the contrary is not proved by Hosea xiii. 2. [*1] The offering of human first-born was certainly no regular or commanded exaction in ancient times; there are no traces of so enormous a blood tax, but, on the contrary, many of a great preference for eldest sons. It was not until shortly before the exile that the burning of children was introduced on a grand scale along with many other innovations, and supported by a strict interpretation of the command regarding firstlings (Jer. vii. 31, xix. 5; Ezek. xx. 26). In harmony with this is the fact that the law of Exod. xiii. 3-16 comes from the hand of the latest redactor of the Jehovistic history.

2. "Abel was a shepherd and Cain was a husbandman. And in process of time it came to pass that Cain brought of the fruit of the ground an offering unto the Lord; and Abel also brought an offering of the firstlings of his sheep." It is out of the simplest, most natural, and most wide-spread offerings, those of the first-fruits of the flock, herd, and field, the occasions for which recur regularly with the seasons of the year, that the annual festivals took their rise. The passover corresponds with the firstlings of Abel the shepherd, the other three with the fruits presented by Cain the husbandman; apart from this difference, in essence and foundation they are all precisely alike. Their connection with the aparchai of the yearly seasons is indeed assumed rather than expressly stated in the Jehovistic and Deuteronomistic legislation. Yet in Exod. xxiii. 17-19, xxxiv. 23-26 we read: "Three times in the year shall all thy men appear before the Lord Jehovah; thou shalt not mingle the blood of my sacrifice with leaven, neither shall the fat of my sacrifice remain until the morning. The best of the first-fruits of thy land shalt thou bring into the house of Jehovah thy God; thou shalt not seethe the kid in the milk of its mother." It is forbidden to appear before Jehovah empty, hence the connection between the first general

[p. 90]

sentence and the details which follow it. Of these, the first seems to relate to the passover; doubtless indeed it holds good of all animal sacrifices, but in point of fact these are offered in preponderating numbers at the great festival after the herds and flocks have produced their young. The remaining sentences relate to the feasts of harvest and ingathering, whose connection with the fruits of the field is otherwise clear. As for Deuteronomy, there also it is required on the one hand that the dues from the flock and herd and field shall be personally offered at Jerusalem, and made the occasion of joyous sacrificial feasts; on the other hand, that three appearances in the year shall be made at Jerusalem, at Easter, at Pentecost, and at the feast of tabernacles, and not with empty hands. These requirements can only be explained on the assumption that the material of the feasts was that furnished by the dues. Clearly in Deuteronomy all three coincide; sacrifices, dues, feasts; other sacrifices than those occasioned by the dues can hardly be thought of for the purpose of holding a joyous festival before Jehovah; the dues are, properly speaking, simply those sacrifices prescribed by popular custom, and therefore fixed and festal, of which alone the law has occasion to treat. [*1] It results from the very nature of the case that the people come together to offer thanks for Jehovah's blessing, but no special emphasis is laid upon this. In the Jehovistic legislation (Exod. xxiii., xxxiv.) the terms have not yet come to be fixed, so that it is hardly possible to speak of a "dies festus" in the strict sense; festal seasons rather than festal days are what we have. Easter is celebrated in the month Abib, when the corn is in the ear (Exod. ix. 31, 32), Pentecost when the wheat is cut, the autumn festival when the vintage has been completed,--rather vague and shifting determinations. Deuteronomy advances a step towards fixing the terms and intervals more accurately, a circumstance very intimately connected with the centralisation of the worship in Jerusalem. Even here, however, we do not meet with one general festive offering on the part of the community, but only with isolated private offerings by individuals.

[p. 91]

In correspondence with this the amount of the gifts is left with considerable vagueness to the good-will of the offerers. Only the firstlings are definitely demanded. The redemption allowed in Deuteronomy by means of money which buys a substitute in Jerusalem has no proper meaning for the earlier time; yet even then the offerer may in individual instances have availed himself of liberty of exchange, all the more because even then his gift, as a sacrificial meal, was essentially a benefit to himself (Exod. xxiii. 18; Gen. iv. 4, wmchlbyhn). For the first-fruits of the field Exodus prescribes no measure at all,  demands the tithe of corn, wine, and oil, which, however, is not to be understood with mathematical strictness, inasmuch as it is used at sacrificial meals, is not made over to a second party, and thus does not require to be accounted for. The tithe, as appears from Deut. xxvi., is offered in autumn, that is, at the feast of tabernacles; this is the proper autumn festival of thanksgiving, not only for the wine harvest, but also for that of the threshing-floor (xvi. 13); it demands seven days, which must all be spent in Jerusalem, while in the case of maccoth only one need be spent there. It is self-evident that there is no restriction to the use of vegetable gifts merely, but sacrifices of flesh are also assumed--purchased perhaps with the proceeds of the sale of the tithe. In this way the special character of the feasts, and their connection with the first-fruits peculiar to them, could easily disappear, a thing which seems actually to have occurred in Deuteronomy, and perhaps even earlier. It is not to be wondered at that much should seem unclear to us which must have been obvious to contemporaries; in Deuteronomy, moreover, almost everything is left to standing custom, and only the one main point insisted on, that the religious worship, and thus also the festivals, must be celebrated only in Jerusalem.

Leaving out of account the passover, which originally had an independent standing, and only afterwards through its connection with maccoth was taken into the regular cycle of the haggim, it cannot be doubted, generally speaking and on the whole, that not only in the Jehovistic but also in the Deuteronomic legislation the festivals rest upon agriculture, the basis at once of life and of religion. The soil, the fruitful soil, is the object of religion; it takes the place alike of heaven and of hell. Jehovah gives the land and its produce; He receives the best of what it yields as an expression of thankfulness, the tithes in recognition of His seigniorial right. The relation between

[p. 92]

[paragraph continues] Himself and His people first arose from His having given them the land in fee; it continues to be maintained, inasmuch as good weather and fertility come from Him. It is in Deuteronomy that one detects the first very perceptible traces of a historical dress being given to the religion and the worship, but this process is still confined within modest limits. The historical event to which recurrence is always made is the bringing up of Israel out of Egypt, and this is significant in so far as the bringing up out of Egypt coincides with the leading into Canaan, that is, with the giving of the land, so that the historical motive again resolves itself into the natural. In this way it can be said that not merely the Easter festival but all festivals are dependent upon the introduction of Israel into Canaan, and this is what we actually find very clearly in the prayer (Deut. xxvi.) with which at the feast of tabernacles the share of the festal gifts falling to the priest is offered to the Deity. A basket containing fruits is laid upon the altar, and the following words are spoken: "A wandering Aramaean was my father, and he went down into Egypt and sojourned there, a few men strong, and became there a nation, great, mighty, and populous. And the Egyptians evil-entreated them and oppressed them, and laid upon them hard bondage. Then called we upon Jehovah the God of our fathers, and He heard our voice and looked on our affliction and our labour and our oppression. And Jehovah brought us forth out of Egypt with a mighty hand, and with an outstretched arm, and with great terribleness, and with signs and with wonders, and brought us unto this place, and gave us this land, a land where milk and honey flow!. And now, behold, I have brought the best of the fruits of the land, which thou, O Lord, hast given me." Observe here how the act of salvation whereby Israel was founded issues in the gift of a fruitful land.

  

II.

With this account of the Jehovistic-Deuteronomistic legislation harmonises the pre-exilic practice so far as that can be traced or is borne witness to in the historical and prophetical books.

Ancient festivals in Israel must have had the pastoral life as their basis; only the passover therefore can be regarded as belonging, to the

[p. 93]

number of these. [*1] It is with perfect accuracy accordingly that precisely the passover is postulated as having been the occasion of the exodus, as being a sacrificial feast that has to be celebrated in the wilderness and has nothing to do with agriculture or harvest. But it is curious to notice how little prominence is afterwards given to this festival, which from the nature of the case is the oldest of all. It cannot have been known at all to the Book of the Covenant, for there (Exod. xxii. 29, 30) the command is to leave the firstling seven days with its dam and on the eighth day to give it to Jehovah. Probably through the predominance gained by agriculture and the feasts founded on it the passover fell into disuse in many parts of Israel, and kept its ground only in districts where the pastoral and wilderness life still retained its importance. This would also explain why the passover first comes clearly into light when Judah alone survives after the fall of Samaria. In 2 Kings xxiii. 21 seq. we are told that in the eighteenth year of King Josiah the passover was held according to the precept of the law (Deut. xvi.), and that for the first time,--never until then from the days of the Judges had it been so observed. If in this passage the novelty of the institution is so strongly insisted on, the reference is less to the essence of the thing than to the manner of celebration as enjoined in Deuteronomy.

Agriculture was learned by the Hebrews from the Canaanites in whose land they settled, and in commingling with whom they, during the period of the Judges, made the transition to a sedentary life. Before the metamorphosis of shepherds into peasants was effected, they could not possibly have had feasts which related to agriculture. It would have been very strange if they had not taken them also over from the Canaanites. The latter owed the land and its fruits to Baal, and for this they paid him the due tribute; the Israelites stood in the same relation to Jehovah. Materially and in itself, the act was neither heathenish nor Israelite; its character either way was determined

[p. 94]

by its destination. There was, therefore, nothing against a transference of the feasts from Baal to Jehovah; on the contrary, the transference was a profession of faith that the land and its produce, and thus all that lay at the foundations of the national existence, were due not to the heathen deity but to the God of Israel.

The earliest testimony is that which we have to the existence of the vintage festival in autumn,--in the first instance as a custom of the Canaanite population of Shechem. In the old and instructive story of Abimelech the son of Jerubbaal we are told (Judges ix. 27) of the citizens of Shechem that "they went out into the fields, and gathered their vineyards, and trode the grapes, and celebrated hillulim, and went into the house of their god, and ate and drank, and cursed Abimelech." But this festival must also have taken root among the Israelites at a tolerably early period. According to Judges xxi. 19 seq. there was observed yearly at Shiloh in the vineyards a feast to Jehovah, at which the maidens went out to dance. Even if the narrative of Judges xix. seq. be as a whole untrustworthy as history, this does not apply to the casual trait just mentioned, especially as it is confirmed by 1 Sam. i. In this last-cited passage a feast at Shiloh is also spoken of, as occurring at the end of the year, that is, in autumn at the time of the asiph, [*1] and as being an attraction to pilgrims from the neighbourhood. Obviously the feast does not occur in all places at once, but at certain definite places (in Ephraim) which then influence the surrounding district. The thing is connected with the origin of larger sanctuaries towards the end of the period of the Judges, or, more properly speaking, with their being taken over from the previous inhabitants; thus, for example, on Shechem becoming an Israelite town the hillulim were no more abolished than was the sanctuary itself.

Over and above this the erection of great royal temples must have exerted an important influence. Alike at Jerusalem and at Bethel "the feast" was celebrated from the days of Solomon and Jeroboam just as previously at Shechem and Shiloh, in the former place in September, in the latter perhaps somewhat later. [*2] This was at that period

[p. 95]

the sole actual panegyris. The feasts at the beginning of summer may indeed also have been observed at this early period (Isa. ix. 2), but in smaller local circles. This distinction is still discernible in Deuteronomy, for although in that book the feast of tabernacles is not theoretically higher than the others, in point of fact it alone is observed from beginning to end at the central sanctuary, while Easter, on the other hand, is for the most part kept at home, being only during the first day observed at Jerusalem; moreover, the smaller demand is much more emphatically insisted on than the larger, so that the first seems to have been an innovation, the latter to have had the sanction of older custom. Amos and Hosea, presupposing as they do a splendid cultus and great sanctuaries, doubtless also knew of a variety of festivals, but they have no occasion to mention any one by name. More definite notices occur in Isaiah. The threatening that within a year's time the Assyrians will be in the land is thus (xxix. 1) given: "Add ye year to year, let the feasts come round, yet I will distress Jerusalem," and at the close of the same discourse the prophet expresses himself as follows (xxxii. 9 seq.): "Rise up, ye women that are at ease; hear my voice, ye careless daughters; give ear unto my speech. Days upon a year shall ye be troubled, ye careless women; for the vintage shall fail, the ingathering shall not come. Ye shall smite upon the breasts, for the pleasant fields, for the fruitful vine." When the two passages are taken together we gather that Isaiah, following the universal custom of the prophets in coming forward at great popular gatherings, is here speaking at the time of the autumn festival, in which the women also took an active part (Judges xxi. 19 seq.). But this autumn festival, the joyous and natural character of which is unmistakably revealed, takes place with him at the change of the year, as may be inferred from a comparison between the ynqpw of xxix. 1, and the thqpth of Exod. xxxiv. 22, 1 Sam. i. 20, and closes a cycle of festivals here for the first time indicated.

2. The preceding survey, it must be admitted, scarcely seems fully to establish the alleged agreement between the Jehovistic law and the older praxis. Names are nowhere to be found, and in point of fact it is only the autumn festival that is well attested, and this, it would appear, as the only festival, as the feast. And doubtless it was also the oldest and most important of the harvest festivals, as it never ceased to be the concluding solemnity of the year. What has been prosperously brought to

[p. 96]

a close is what people celebrate most rightly; the conclusion of the ingathering, both of the threshing and of the vintage, is the most appropriate of all occasions for a great joint festival,--for this additional reason, that the term is fixed, not, as in the case of the joy of reaping, by nature alone, but is in man's hands and can be regulated by him. Yet even under the older monarchy the previous festivals must also have already existed as well (Isa. xxix. 1). The peculiarity of the feast of tabernacles would then reduce itself to this, that it was the only general festival at Jerusalem and Bethel; local celebrations "at all threshing floors "--i.e., on all high places--are not thereby excluded (Hos. ix. 1). But the Jehovistic legislation makes no distinction of local and central, for it ignores the great temples throughout. [*1] Possibly, also, it to some extent systematises the hitherto somewhat vaguer custom; the transition from the aparchai to a feast was perhaps in practice still somewhat incomplete. In the paucity of positive data one is justified, however, in speaking of a substantial agreement, inasmuch as in the two cases the idea of the festivals is the same. Very instructive in this respect are two sections of Hosea (chaps. ii. and ix.), which on this account deserve to be fully gone into.

In the first of these Israel is figured as a woman who receives her maintenance from her husband, that is, from the Deity; this is the basis of the covenant relationship. But she falls into error as to the giver of her meat and drink and clothing, supposing them to come from the idols, and not from Jehovah. "She hath said, I will go after my lovers, who give me my bread and my water, my wool and my flax, mine oil and my drink. Doth she then not know that it is I (Jehovah) who have given her the corn and the wine and the oil, and silver in abundance, and gold--out of which she maketh false gods? Therefore will I take back again my corn in its time, and my wine in its season, and I will take away my wool and my flax that should cover her nakedness; and now will I discover her shame before the eyes of her lovers, and none shall deliver her out of my hand. And I will bring all her mirth to an end, her festival days, her new moons and her sabbaths, and all her solemn feasts. And I will destroy her vines and her fig-trees whereof she saith, 'They are my hire, that my lovers have given me,' and I will make them a wilderness, and the beasts of the

[p. 97]

field shall eat them. Thus will I visit upon her the days of the false gods, wherein she burnt fat offerings to them and decked herself with her rings and her jewels, and went after her lovers and forget me, saith the Lord. Therefore, behold, I will allure her and bring her into the wilderness, and there I will assign her her vineyards: then shall she be docile as in her youth, and as in the day when she came up out of the land of Egypt. Thereafter I betroth thee unto me anew for ever, in righteousness and in judgment, in loving kindness and in mercies. In that day, saith the Lord, will I answer the heavens, and they shall answer the earth, and the earth shall answer the corn and the wine and the oil, and these shall answer Jezreel" (ii. 7-24 [5-22]). The blessing of the land is here the end of religion, and that quite generally,--alike of the false heathenish and of the true Israelitish. [*1] It has for its basis no historical acts of salvation, but nature simply, which, however, is regarded only as God's domain and as man's field of labour, and is in no manner itself deified. The land is Jehovah's house (viii. 1, ix. 15), wherein He lodges and entertains the nation; in the land and through the land it is that Israel first becomes the people of Jehovah, just as a marriage is constituted by the wife's reception into the house of the husband, and her maintenance there. And as divorce consists in the wife's dismissal from the house, so is Jehovah's relation to His people dissolved by His making the land into a wilderness, or as in the last resort by His actually driving them forth into the wilderness; He restores it again by "sowing the nation into the land" anew, causing the heavens to give rain and the earth to bear, and thereby bringing into honour the name of "God sown" for Israel (ii. 25 [23]). In accordance with this' worship consists simply of the thanksgiving due for the gifts of the soil, the vassalage payable to the superior who has given the land and its fruits. It ipso facto ceases when the corn and wine cease; in the wilderness it cannot be thought of, for if God bestows nothing then man cannot rejoice, and religious worship is simply rejoicing over blessings bestowed. It has, therefore, invariably and throughout the character given in the Jehovistic legislation to the feasts, in which also, according to Hosea's

[p. 98]

description, it culminates and is brought to a focus. For the days of the false gods, on which people adorned themselves and sacrificed, are just the feasts, and in fact the feasts of Jehovah, whom however the people worshipped by images, which the prophet regards as absolutely heathenish.

Equally instructive is the second passage (ix. 1-6). "Rejoice not too loudly, O Israel, like the heathen, that thou hast gone a whoring from thy God, and lovest the harlot's hire upon every threshing-floor. The floor and the wine-press shall not feed them, and the new wine shall fail them. They shall not dwell in Jehovah's land; Ephraim must return to Egypt, and eat what is unclean in Assyria. Then shall they no more pour out wine to Jehovah, or set in order sacrifices to Him; like bread of mourners is their bread, [*1] all that eat thereof become unclean, for their bread shall only be for their hunger, it shall not come into the house of the Lord. What will ye do in the day of festival and in the day of the feast of the Lord? For lo, after they have gone away from among the ruins, Egypt shall keep hold of them, Memphis shall bury them; their pleasant things of silver shall nettles possess, the thornbush shall be in their tents." It need not surprise us that here again the prophet places the worship which in intention is obviously meant for Jehovah on the same footing with the heathen worship which actually has little to distinguish it externally therefrom, being constrained to regard the "pleasant things of silver" in the tents in the high places not as symbols of Jehovah, but as idols, and their worship as whoredom. Enough that once more we have a clear view of the character of the popular worship in Israel at that period. Threshing-floor and wine-press, corn and wine, are its motives,--vociferous joy, merry shoutings, its expression. All the pleasure of life is concentrated in the house of Jehovah at the joyous banquets held to celebrate the coming of the gifts of His mild beneficence; no more dreadful thought than that a man must eat his bread like unclean food, like bread of mourners, without having offered the aparchai at the festival. [*2] It is this

[p. 99]

thought which gives its sting to the threatened exile; for sacrifice and feast are dependent upon the land, which is the nursing-mother and the settled home of the nation, the foundation of its existence and of its worship.

The complete harmony of this with the essential character of the worship and of the festivals in the Book of the Covenant, in the law of the Two Tables, and in Deuteronomy, is clear in itself, but becomes still more evident by a comparison with the Priestly Code, to which we now proceed.

  

III.

In the Priestly Code the festal cycle is dealt with in two separate passages (Lev. xxiii; Num. xxviii., xxix.), of which the first contains a fragment (xxiii. 9-22, and partly also xxiii. 39-44) not quite homogeneous with the kernel of the document. In both these accounts also the three great feasts occur, but with considerable alteration of their essential character.

1. The festal celebration, properly so called, is exhausted by a prescribed joint offering. There are offered (1.) during Easter week and also on the day of Pentecost, besides the tamid, two bullocks, one ram, seven lambs as a burnt-offering, and one he-goat as a sin-offering daily; (2.) at the feast of tabernacles, from the first to the seventh day two rams, fourteen lambs, and, in descending series, from thirteen to seven bullocks; on the eighth day one bullock, one ram, seven lambs as a burnt offering, besides one he-goat daily as a sin-offering. Additional voluntary offerings on the part of individuals are not excluded, but are treated as of secondary importance. Elsewhere, alike in the older practice (1 Sam. i. 4 seq.) and in the law (Exod. xxiii. 18) it is precisely the festal offering that is a sacrificial meal, that is to say, a private sacrifice. In Deuteronomy it has been possible to find anything surprising in the joyous meals only because people are wont to know their Old Testament merely through the perspective of the Priestly Code; at most the only peculiar thing in that book is a certain humane application of the festal offering, the offerer being required to invite to it the poor and landless of his acquaintance. But this is a development which harmonises much more with the old idea of an offering as a communion between God and man than does the other self-sufficing general churchly sacrifice. The passover alone continues in the Priestly Code also to be a sacrificial meal, and participation therein to be restricted to the family or a limited

[p. 100]

society. But this last remnant of the old custom shows itself here as a peculiar exception; the festival in the house instead of "before Jehovah" has also something ambiguous about it, and turns the sacrifice into an entirely profane act of slaughtering almost--until we come to the rite of expiation, which is characteristically retained (Exod. xii. 7; comp. Ezek. xiv. 19).

Of a piece with this is the circumstance that the "first-fruits" of the season have come to be separated from the festivals still more than had been previously the case. While in Deuteronomy they are still offered at the three great sacrificial meals in the presence of Jehovah, in the Priestly Code they have altogether ceased to be offerings at all, and thus also of course have ceased to be festal offerings, being merely dues payable to the priests (by whom they are in part collected) and not in any case brought before the altar. Thus the feasts entirely lose their peculiar characteristics, the occasions by which they are inspired and distinguished; by the monotonous sameness of the unvarying burnt-offering and sin-offering of the community as a whole they are all put on the same even level, deprived of their natural spontaneity, and degraded into mere "exercises of religion." Only some very slight traces continue to bear witness to, we might rather say, to betray, what was the point from which the development started, namely, the rites of the barley sheaf, the loaves of bread, and the booths (Lev. xxiii.). But these are mere rites, petrified remains of the old custom; the actual first-fruits belonging to the owners of the soil are collected by the priests, the shadow of them is retained at the festival in the form of the sheaf offered by the whole community--a piece of symbolism which has now become quite separated from its connection and is no longer understood. And since the giving of thanks for the fruits of the field has ceased to have any substantial place in the feasts, the very shadow of connection between the two also begins to disappear, for the rites of Lev. xxiii. are taken over from an older legislation, and for the most part are passed over in silence in Num. xxviii., xxix. Here, again, the passover has followed a path of its own. Even at an earlier period, substitution of other cattle and sheep was permitted. But now in the Priestly Code the firstlings are strictly demanded indeed, but merely as dues, not as sacrifices; the passover, always a yearling lamb or kid, has neither in fact nor in time anything to do with them, but occupies a separate position alongside. But as it is represented to have been instituted in order that the Hebrew firstborn

[p. 101]

may be spared in the destruction of those of the Egyptians, this connection betrays the fact that the yearling lambs are after all only a substitute for the firstlings of all animals fit for sacrifice, but in comparison with the cattle and sheep of the Jehovistic tradition and Deuteronomy a secondary substitute, and one for the uniformity of which there is no motive; and we see further that if the firstlings are now over and above assigned to the priests this is equivalent to a reduplication, which has been made possible first by a complete obscuration, and afterwards by an artificial revival of the original custom.

A further symptom also proper to be mentioned here is the fixing of harvest festival terms by the days of the month, which is to be found exclusively in the Priestly Code. Easter falls upon the fifteenth, that is, at full moon, of the first, the feast of tabernacles upon the same day of the seventh month; Pentecost, which, strange to say, is left undetermined in Num. xxviii., falls, according to Lev. xxiii., seven weeks after Easter. This definite dating points not merely to a fixed and uniform regulation of the cultus, but also to a change in its contents. For it is not a matter of indifference that according to the Jehovistic-Deuteronomic legislation Easter is observed in "the month of corn ears" when the sickle is put to the corn, Pentecost at the end of the wheat harvest, and the feast of tabernacles after the ingathering; as harvest feasts they are from their very nature regulated by the condition of the fruits of the soil. When they cease to be so, when they are made to depend upon the phases of the moon, this means that their connection with their natural occasion is being lost sight of. Doubtless the accurate determination of dates is correlated with the other circumstance that the festivals are no longer kept in an isolated way by people at any place they may choose, but by the whole united nation at a single spot. It is therefore probable that the fixing of the date w as accomplished at first in the case of the autumn festival, which was the first to divest itself of its local character and most readily suffered a transposition of a week or two. It was hardest to change in the case of the maccoth festival; the putting of the sickle to the corn is very inconvenient to shift. But here the passover seems to have exerted an influence. For the passover is indeed an annual feast, but not by the nature of things connected with any particular season of the year; rather was it dependent originally on the phases of the moon. Its character as a pannychis (Exod. xii. 42) points in this direction, as also does the analogy of the Arab feasts.

[p. 102]

The verification of the alleged denaturalisation of the feasts in the Priestly Code lies in this, that their historical interpretation, for which the way is already paved by the Jehovistic tradition, here attains its full development. For after they have lost their original contents and degenerated into mere prescribed religious forms, there is nothing to prevent the refilling of the empty bottles in any way accordant with the tastes of the period. Now, accordingly, the feast of tabernacles also becomes historical (Lev. xxiii.), instituted to commemorate the booths under which the people had to shelter themselves during the forty years of wandering in the wilderness. In the case of Easter a new step in advance is made beyond the assignation of its motive to the exodus, which is already found in Deuteronomy and in Exod. xiii. 3 seq. For in the Priestly Code this feast, which precisely on account of its eminently historical character is here regarded as by far the most important of all, is much more than the mere commemoration of a divine act of salvation, it is itself a saving deed. It is not because Jehovah smote the firstborn of Egypt that the passover is afterwards instituted on the contrary, it is instituted beforehand, at the moment of the exodus, in order that the firstborn of Israel may be spared. Thus not merely is a historical motive assigned for the custom; its beginning is itself raised to the dignity of a historical fact upon which the feast rests,--the shadow elsewhere thrown only by another historical event here becomes substantial and casts itself. The state of matters in the case of the unleavened cakes is very similar. Instead of having it as their occasion and object to keep in remembrance the hasty midnight departure in which the travellers were compelled to carry with them their dough unleavened as it was (Exod. xii. 34), in the Priestly Code they also are spoken of as having being enjoined beforehand (xii. 15 seq.), and thus the festival is celebrated in commemoration of itself; in other words, not merely is a historical motive assigned to it, it is itself made a historical fact. For this reason also, the law relating to Easter is removed from all connection with the tabernacle legislation (Exod. xii. 1 seq.), and the difficulty that now in the case of the passover the sanctuary which elsewhere in the Priestly Code is indispensable must be left out of sight is got over by divesting it as much as possible of its sacrificial character. [*1]

[p. 103]

In the case of Pentecost alone is there no tendency to historical explanation; that in this instance has been reserved for later Judaism, which from the chronology of the Book of Exodus discerned in the feast a commemoration of the giving of the law at Sinai. But one detects the drift of the later time.

It has been already pointed out, in what has just been said, that as regards this development the centralisation of the cultus was epoch-making. Centralisation is synonymous with generalisation and fixity, and these are the external features by which the festivals of the Priestly Code are distinguished from those which preceded them. In evidence I point to the prescribed sacrifice of the community instead of the spontaneous sacrifice of the individual, to the date fixed for the 15th of the month, to the complete separation between sacrifices and dues, to the reduction of the passover to uniformity; nothing is free or the spontaneous growth of nature, nothing is indefinite and still in process of becoming; all is statutory, sharply defined, distinct. But the centralisation of the cultus had also not a little to do with the inner change which the feasts underwent. At first the gifts of the various seasons of the year are offered by the individual houses as each one finds convenient; afterwards they are combined, and festivals come into existence; last of all, the united offerings of individuals fall into the back ground when compared with the single joint-offering on behalf of the entire community. According as stress is laid upon the common character of the festival and uniformity in its observance, in precisely the same degree does it become separated from the roots from which it sprang, and grow more and more abstract. That it is then very ready to assume a historical meaning may partly also be attributed to the circumstance that history is not, like harvest, a personal experience of individual households, but rather an experience of the nation as a whole. One does not fail to observe, of course, that the festivals--which always to a certain degree have a centralising tendency--have in themselves a disposition to become removed from the particular motives of their institution, but in no part of the legislation has this gone so far as in the Priestly Code. While everywhere else they still continue to stand, as

[p. 104]

we have seen, in a clear relationship to the land and its increase, and are at one and the same time the great days of homage and tribute for the superior and grantor of the soil, here this connection falls entirely out of sight. As in opposition to the Book of the Covenant and Deuteronomy, nay, even to the corpus itself which forms the basis of Lev. xvii.-xxvi., one can characterise the entire Priestly Code as the wilderness legislation, inasmuch as it abstracts from the natural conditions and motives of the actual life of the people in the land of Canaan and rears the hierocracy on the tabula rasa of the wilderness, the negation of nature, by means of the bald statutes of arbitrary absolutism, so also the festivals, in which the connection of the cultus with agriculture appears most strongly, have as much as possible been turned into wilderness festivals, but most of all the Easter festival, which at the same time has become the most important.

2. The centralisation of the cultus, the revolutionising influence of which is seen in the Priestly Code, is begun by Deuteronomy. The former rests upon the latter, and draws its as yet unsuspected consequences. This general relation is maintained also in details; in the first place, in the names of the feasts, which are the same in both,--pesah, shabuoth, sukkoth. This is not without its inner significance, for asiph (ingathering) would have placed much greater hindrances in the way of the introduction of a historical interpretation than does sukkoth (booths). So also with the prominence given to the passover, a festival mentioned nowhere previously--a prominence which is much more striking in the Priestly Code than in Deuteronomy. Next, this relation is observed in the duration of the feasts. While Deuteronomy certainly does not fix their date of commencement with the same definiteness, it nevertheless in this respect makes a great advance upon the Jehovistic legislation, inasmuch as it lays down the rule of a week for Easter and Tabernacles, and of a day for Pentecost. The Priestly Code is on the whole in agreement with this, and also with the time determination of the relation of Pentecost to Easter, but its provisions are more fully developed in details. The passover, in the first month, on the evening of the 14th, here also indeed begins the feast, but does not, as in Deut. xvi. 4, 8, count as the first day of Easter week; on the contrary, the latter does not begin until the 15th and closes with the 21st (comp. Lev. xxiii. 6; Num. xxviii. 17; Exod. xii. 18). The beginning of the festival week being thus distinctly indicated, there arises in this way not merely an ordinary but also an extraordinary

[p. 105]

feast day more, the day after the passover, on which already, according to the injunctions of Deuteronomy, the pilgrims were required to set out early in the morning on the return journey to their homes. [*1] Another advance consists in this, that not only the passover, as in Deuteronomy, or the additional first day of the feast besides, but also the seventh (which, according to Deuteronomy xvi. 8, is marked only by rest), must be observed as mikra kodesh in Jerusalem. In other words, such pilgrims as do not live in the immediate neighbourhood are compelled to pass the whole week there, an exaction which enables us to mark the progress made with centralisation, when the much more moderate demands of Deuteronomy are compared. The feast of tabernacles is in the latter law also observed from beginning to end at Jerusalem, but the Priestly Code has contrived to add to it an eighth day as an 'acereth to the principal feast, which indeed still appears to be wanting in the older portion of Lev. xxiii. From all this it is indisputable that the Priestly Code has its nearest relations with Deuteronomy, but goes beyond it in the same direction as that in which Deuteronomy itself goes beyond the Jehovistic legislation. In any case the intermediate place in the series belongs to Deuteronomy, and if we begin that series with the Priestly Code, we must in consistency close it with the Sinaitic Book of the Covenant (Exod. xx. 23 seq.).

After King Josiah had published Deuteronomy and had made it the Book of the Covenant by a solemn engagement of the people (621 B.C.), he commanded them to "keep the passover to Jehovah your God as it is written in this Book;" such a passover had never been observed from the days of the judges, or throughout the entire period of the kings (2 Kings xxiii. 21, 22). And when Ezra the scribe introduced the Pentateuch as we now have it as the fundamental law of the church of the second temple (444 B.C.), it was found written in the Torah which Jehovah had commanded by Moses, that the children of

[p. 106]

[paragraph continues] Israel were to live in booths during the feast in the seventh month, and further, to use branches of olive and myrtle and palm for this purpose, and that the people went and made to themselves booths accordingly; such a thing had not been done "since the days of Joshua the son of Nun even unto that day" (Neh. viii. 14 seq.). That Josiah's passover rests upon Deuteronomy xvi. and not upon Exodus xii. is sufficiently proved by the circumstance that the observance of the festival stands in connection with the new unity of the cultus, and is intended to be an exemplification of it, while the precept of Exod. xii., if literally followed, could only have served to destroy it. We thus find that the two promulgations of the law, so great in their importance and so like one another in their character, both take place at the time of a festival, the one in spring, the other in harvest; and we also discover that the festal observance of the Priestly Code first began to show life and to gain currency about two hundred years later than that of Deuteronomy. This can be proved in yet another way. The author of the Book of Kings knows only of a seven days' duration of the feast of tabernacles (1 Kings viii. 66); Solomon dismisses the people on the eighth day. On the other hand, in the parallel passage in Chronicles (2 Chron. vii. 9) the king holds the 'acereth on the eighth, and does not dismiss the people until the following day, the twenty-third of the month; that is to say, the Deuteronomic use, which is followed by the older author and by Ezekiel (xiv. 25) who was, roughly speaking, his contemporary, is corrected by the later writer into conformity with that of the Priestly Code in force since the time of Ezra (Neh. viii. 18). In later Judaism the inclination to assert most strongly precisely that which is most open to dispute led to the well-known result that the eighth day of the feast was regarded as the most splendid of all (John vii. 37).

On this question also the Book of Ezekiel stands nearest the Priestly Code, ordaining as follows (xiv. 21-25):--"In the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month, ye shall keep the passover, ye shall eat maccoth seven days; on that day shall the prince offer for himself and for all the people of the land a bullock for a sin-offering, and during the seven days he shall offer a burnt-offering to the Lord, seven bullocks and seven rams daily for the seven days, and a he-goat daily for a sin offering; and he shall offer as a meal-offering an ephah for every bullock and every ram and a hin of oil for the ephah. In the seventh month, on the fifteenth day of the month, in the feast shall he do the

[p. 107]

like for seven days, according to the sin-offering, according to the burnt-offering, and according to the meal-offering, and according to the oil." Here indeed in details hardly any point is in agreement with the prescriptions of the ritual law of Lev. xxiii., Num. xxviii., xxix. Apart from the fact that the day of Pentecost is omitted (it is restored in the Massoretic text by an absurd correction in ver. 11), in the first place there is a discrepancy as to the duration of the feasts; both last seven and not eight days, and the passover is taken for the first day of Easter, as in Deuteronomy. Further, the offerings differ, alike by their never-varying number and by their quality; in particular, nothing is said of the passover lamb, but a bullock as a general sin-offering is mentioned instead. From the minha the wine is wanting, but this must be left out of the account, for Ezekiel banishes wine from the service on principle. Lastly, it is not the congregation that sacrifices, but the prince for himself and for the people. But in spite of all differences the general similarity is apparent; one sees that here for the first time we have something which at all points admits of correlation with the Priestly Code, but is quite disparate with the Jehovistic legislation, and half so with that of Deuteronomy. On both hands we find the term fixed according to the day of the month, the strictly prescribed joint burnt-offering and sin-offering, the absence of relation first-fruits and agriculture, the obliteration of natural distinctions so as to make one general churchly festival. But Ezekiel surely could hardly have had any motive for reproducing Lev. xxiii. and Num. xxviii. seq., and still less for the introduction of a number of aimless variations as he did so. Let it be observed that in no one detail does he contradict Deuteronomy, while yet he stands so infinitely nearer to the Priestly Code; the relationship is not an arbitrary one, but arises from their place in time. Ezekiel is the forerunner of the priestly legislator in the Pentateuch; his prince and people, to some extent invested with the colouring of the bygone period of the monarchy, are the antecedents of the congregation of the tabernacle and the second temple. Against this supposition there is nothing to be alleged, and it is the rational one, for this reason, that it was not Ezekiel but the Priestly Code that furnished the norm for the praxis of the later period.

For, as the festival system of the Priestly Code absolutely refuses to accommodate itself to the manner of the older worship as we are made acquainted with it in Hos. ii., ix. and elsewhere, in the same degree

[p. 108]

does it furnish in every respect the standard for the praxis of post-exilian Judaism, and, therefore, also for our ideas thence derived. No one in reading the New Testament dreams of any other manner of keeping the passover than that of Exodus xii., or of any other offering than the paschal lamb there prescribed. One might perhaps hazard the conjecture that if in the wilderness legislation of the Code there is no trace of agriculture being regarded as the basis of life, which it still is in Deuteronomy and even in the kernel of Lev. xvii.-xxvi., this also is a proof that the Code belongs to a very recent rather than to a very early period, when agriculture was no longer rather than not yet. With the Babylonian captivity the Jews lost their fixed seats, and so became a trading people.

3. No notice has as yet been taken of one phenomenon which distinguishes the Priestly Code, namely, that in it the tripartite cycle of the feasts is extended and interrupted. In the chronologically arranged enumeration of Lev. xxiii. and Num. xxviii., xxix., two other feast days are interpolated between Pentecost and Tabernacles: new year on the first, and the great day of atonement on the tenth of the seventh month. One perceives to what an extent the three originally connected harvest feasts have lost their distinctive character, when it is observed that these two heterogeneous days make their appearance in the midst of them;--the yom kippurim in the same series with the old haggim, i.e., dances, which were occasions of pure pleasure and joy, not to be named in the same day with fasts and mournings. The following points demand notice in detail.

In the period of the kings the change of the year occurred in autumn. The autumn festival marked the close of the year and of the festal cycle (Exod. xxiii. 16, xxxiv. 22; 1 Sam. i. 21, 21; Isa. xxix. 1, xxxii. 10). Deuteronomy was discovered in the eighteenth year of Josiah, and in the very same year Easter was observed in accordance with the prescriptions of that law--which could not have been unless the year had begun in autumn. Now the ecclesiastical festival of new year in the Priestly Code is also autumnal. [*1] The yom teruah (Lev. xxiii 24, 25; Num, xxix. 1 seq.) falls on the first new moon of autumn, and it follows from a tradition confirmed by Lev. xxv. 9, 10,

[p. 109]

that this day was celebrated as new year (r'sh hshnh). But it is always spoken of as the first of the seventh month. That is to say, the civil new year has been separated from the ecclesiastical and been transferred to spring; the ecclesiastical can only be regarded as a relic surviving from an earlier period, and betrays strikingly the priority of the division of the year that prevailed in the time of the older monarchy. It appears to have first begun to give way under the influence of the Babylonians, who observed the spring era. [*1] For the designation of the months by numbers instead of by the old Hebrew names, Abib, Zif, Bul, Ethanim and the like,--a style which arises together with the use of the spring era,--does not yet occur in Deuteronomy (xvi. 1), but apart from the Priestly Code, and the last redactor of the Pentateuch (Deut. i. 3) is found for the first time in writers of the period of the exile. It is first found in Jeremiah, but only in those portions of his book which were not committed to writing by him, or at least have been edited by a later hand; [*2] then in Ezekiel and the author of the Book of Kings, who explains the names he found in his source by giving the numbers (1 Kings vi. 37, 38, viii. 2); next in Haggai and Zechariah; and lastly in Chronicles, though here already the Babylonio-Syrian names of the months, which at first were not used in Hebrew, have begun to find their way in (Neh. i. 1, ii. 1; Zech. i. 7). The Syrian names are always given along with the numbers in the Book of Esther, and are used to the exclusion of all others in that of Maccabees. It would be absurd to attempt to explain this demonstrable change which took place in the calendar after the exile as a mere incidental effect of the Priestly Code, hitherto in a state of suspended animation, rather than by reference to general causes arising from the circumstances of the time, under whose influence the Priestly Code itself also stood, and which then had for their result a complete change in the greater accuracy and more general applicability of the methods by which time was reckoned. A similar phenomenon presents itself in connection with the metric system. The "shekel of the sanctuary," often mentioned in the Priestly Code, and there only, cannot possibly have

[p. 110]

borne this name until the most natural objects of the old Israelite regime had begun to appear surrounded by a legendary nimbus, because themselves no longer in actual existence. Over against it we have the "king's weight" mentioned in a gloss in 2 Sam. xiv. 26, the king being none other than the great king of Babylon. It is an interesting circumstance that the "shekel of the sanctuary "spoken of in the Priestly Code is still the ordinary shekel in Ezekiel; compare Exod. xxx. 13 with Ezek. xliv. 12.

During the exile the observance of the ecclesiastical new year seems to have taken place not on the first but on the tenth of the seventh month (Lev. xxv. 9; Ezek. xl. 1), and there is nothing to be wondered at in this, after once it had come to be separated from the actual beginning of the year. [*1] This fact alone would suffice to bring into a clear light the late origin of the great day of atonement in Leviticus xvi., which at a subsequent period was observed on this date; for although as a ceremonial of general purification that day occurs appropriately enough at the change of the year, the joyful sound of the new year trumpets ill befits its quiet solemnity, the ywm thrw`h in the Priestly Code being in fact fixed for the first of the seventh month. Notwithstanding its conspicuous importance, there is nothing known of the great day of atonement either in the Jehovistic and Deuteronomic portions of the Pentateuch or in the historical and prophetical books. It first begins to show itself in embryo during the exile. Ezekiel (xiv. 18-20) appoints two great expiations at the beginning of the two halves of the year; for in xiv. 20 the LXX must be accepted, which reads bshb`y bchdsh, "in the seventh month at new moon." The second of these, in autumn, is similar to that of the Priestly Code, only that it falls on the first and new year on the tenth, while in the latter, on the contrary, new year is observed on the first and the atonement on the tenth; the ritual is also much simpler. Zechariah towards the end of the sixth century looks back upon two regular fast days, in the fifth and the seventh month, as having been in observance for seventy years, that is, from the beginning of the exile (vii. 5), and to these he adds (viii. 19) two

[p. 111]

others in the fourth and in the tenth. They refer, according to the very probable explanation of C. B. Michaelis, to the historical days of calamity which preceded the exile. On the ninth day of the fourth month Jerusalem was taken (Jer. xxxix. 2); on the seventh of the fifth the city and the temple were burnt (2 Kings xxv. 8); in the seventh month Gedaliah was murdered, and all that remained of the Jewish state annihilated (Jer. xli.); in the tenth the siege of the city by Nebuchadnezzar was begun (2 Kings xxv. 1). Zechariah also still knows nothing of the great day of atonement in Leviticus xvi., but only mentions among others the fast of the seventh month as having subsisted for seventy years. Even in 444 B.C., the year of the publication of the Pentateuch by Ezra, the great day of atonement has not yet come into force. Ezra begins the reading of the law in the beginning of the seventh month, and afterwards the feast of tabernacles is observed on the fifteenth; of an atoning solemnity on the tenth of the month not a word is said in the circumstantial narrative, which, moreover, is one specially interested in the liturgical element, but it is made up for on the twenty-fourth (Neh. viii., ix.). This testimonium e silentio is enough; down to that date the great day of the Priestly Code (now introduced for the first time) had not existed. [*1] The term is partly fixed, following Ezekiel, by reference to the old new year's day (Lev. xxv. 9); partly, following Zechariah, by reference to the fast of Gedaliah, which indeed was still observed later as a separate solemnity.

Even before the exile general fast days doubtless occurred, but they were specially appointed, and always arose out of extraordinary occasions, when some sin was brought home to the public conscience, or when the divine anger threatened, especially in connection with calamities affecting the produce of the soil (1 Kings xxi. 9, 12; Jer. xiv. 12, xxxvi. 6, 9; Joel i. 14, ii. 12, 15). In the exile they began to be a regular custom (Isa. lviii.), doubtless in the first instance in remembrance of the dies atri that had been experienced, but also in a certain measure as a surrogate, suited to the circumstances, for the joyous popular gatherings of Easter, Pentecost, and Tabernacles which were possible only in the

[p. 112]

[paragraph continues] Holy Land. [*1] At last they came into a position of co-ordination with the feasts, and became a stated and very important element of the ordinary worship. In the Priestly Code, the great fast in the tenth of the seventh month is the holiest day of all the year. Nothing could illustrate more clearly the contrast between the new cultus and the old; fixing its regard at all points on sin and its atonement, it reaches its culmination in a great atoning solemnity. It is as if the temper of the exile had carried itself into the time of liberation also, at least during the opening centuries; as if men had felt themselves not as in an earlier age only momentarily and in special circumstances, but unceasingly, under the leaden pressure of sin and wrath. It is hardly necessary to add here expressly that also in regard to the day of atonement as a day sacred above all others the Priestly Code became authoritative for the post-exilian period. "Ritual and sacrifice have through the misfortunes of the times disappeared, but this has retained all its old sacredness; unless a man has wholly cut himself adrift from Judaism he keeps this day, however indifferent he may be to all its other usages and feasts."

  

IV.

A word, lastly, on the lunar feasts, that is, new moon and Sabbath. That the two are connected cannot be gathered from the Pentateuch, but something of the sort is implied in Amos viii. 5, and 2 Kings iv. 22, 23. In Amos the corn-dealers, impatient of every interruption of their trade, exclaim, "When will the new moon be gone, that we may sell corn; and the Sabbath, that we may set forth wheat?" In the other passage the husband of the woman of Shunem, when she begs him for an ass and a servant that she may go to the prophet Elisha, asks why it is that she proposes such a journey now, for "it is neither new moon nor Sabbath;" it is not Sunday, as we might say. Probably the Sabbath was originally regulated by the phases of the moon, and thus occurred on the seventh, fourteenth, twenty-first (and twenty-eighth) day of the month, the new moon being reckoned as the first; at least no other explanation can be discovered. [*2] For that the week should

[p. 113]

be conditioned by the seven planets seems very barely credible. It was not until after people had got their seven days that they began to call them after the seven planets; [*1]the number seven is the only bond of connection between them. Doubtless the week is older than the names of its days.

Lunar feasts, we may safely say, are in every case older than annual or harvest feasts; and certainly they are so in the case of the Hebrews. In the pre-historic period the new moon must have been observed with such preference that an ancient name for it, which is no longer found in Biblical Hebrew, even furnished the root of the general word for a festive occasion, which is used for the vintage feast in a passage so early as Judges ix. 27. [*2] But it is established by historical testimonies besides that the new moon festival anciently stood, at least, on a level with that of the Sabbath. Compare 1 Sam. xx. 5, 6; 2 Kings iv. 23; Amos viii. 5; Isa. i. 13; Hos. ii. 13 (A.V. 11). In the Jehovistic and Deuteronomic legislation, however, it is completely ignored, and if it comes into somewhat greater prominence in that of Ezekiel and the Priestly Code (but without being for a moment to be compared with the Sabbath), this perhaps has to do with the circumstance that in the latter the great festivals are regulated by the new moon, and that therefore it is important that this should be observed. It may have been with a deliberate intention that the new moon festival was thrust aside on account of all sorts of heathenish superstition which readily associated themselves with it; but, on the other hand, it is possible that the undersigned

[p. 114]

preponderance gained by the Sabbath may have ultimately given it independence, and led to the reckoning of time by regular intervals of seven days without regard to new moon, with which now it came into collision, instead of, as formerly, being supported by it.

As a lunar festival doubtless the Sabbath also went back to a very remote antiquity. But with the Israelites the day acquired an altogether peculiar significance whereby it was distinguished from all other feast days; it became the day of rest par excellence. Originally the rest is only a consequence of the feast, e.g. that of the harvest festival after the period of severe labour; the new moons also were marked in this way (Amos viii. 5; 2 Kings iv. 23). In the case of the Sabbath also, rest is, properly speaking, only the consequence of the fact that the day is the festal and sacrificial day of the week (Isa. i. 13; Ezek. xlvi. 1 seq.), on which the shewbread was laid out; but here, doubtless on account of the regularity with which it every eighth day interrupted the round of everyday work, this gradually became the essential attribute. In the end even its name came to be interpreted as if derived from the verb "to rest." But as a day of rest it cannot be so very primitive in its origin; in this attribute it presupposes agriculture and a tolerably hard-pressed working-day life. With this it agrees that an intensification of the rest of the Sabbath among the Israelites admits of being traced in the course of the history. The highest development, amounting even to a change of quality, is seen in the Priestly Code.

According to 2 Kings iv. 22, 23, one has on Sabbath time for occupations that are not of an everyday kind; servant and ass can be taken on a journey which is longer than that "of a Sabbath day." In Hos. ii. 13 (11) we read, "I make an end of all your joy, your feasts, your new moons and your Sabbaths," that is to say, the last-named share with the first the happy joyousness which is impossible in the exile which Jehovah threatens. With the Jehovist and the Deuteronomist the Sabbath, which, it is true, is already extended in Amos viii. 5 to commerce, is an institution specially for agriculture; it is the day of refreshment for the people and the cattle, and is accordingly employed for social ends in the same way as the sacrificial meal is (Exod. xx. 10, xxiii. 12, xxxiv. 21; Deut. v. 13, 14). Although the moral turn given to the observance is genuinely Israelitic and not original, yet the rest even here still continues to be a feast, a satisfaction for the labouring classes; for what is enjoined as a duty--upon the Israelite rulers, that

[p. 115]

is, to whom the legislation is directed--is less that they should rest than that they should give rest. In the Priestly Code, on the contrary, the rest of the Sabbath has nothing at all of the nature of the joyous breathing-time from the load of life which a festival affords, but is a thing for itself, which separates the Sabbath not only from the week days, but also from the festival days, and approaches an ascetic exercise much more nearly than a restful refreshment. It is taken in a perfectly abstract manner, not as rest from ordinary work, but as rest absolutely. On the holy day it is not lawful to leave the camp to gather sticks or manna (Exod. xvi.; Num. xv.), not even to kindle a fire or cook a meal (Exod. xxxv. 3); this rest is in fact a sacrifice of abstinence from all occupation, for which preparation must already begin on the preceding day (Exod. xvi.). Of the Sabbath of the Priestly Code in fact it could not be said that it was made for man (Mark ii. 27); rather is it a statute that presents itself with all the rigour of a law of nature, having its reason with itself, and being observed even by the Creator. The original narrative of the Creation, according to which God finished His work on the seventh day, and therefore sanctified it, is amended so as to be made to say that He finished in six days and rested on the seventh. [*1]

Tendencies to such an exaggeration of the Sabbath rest as would make it absolute are found from the Chaldaean period. While Isaiah, regarding the Sabbath purely as a sacrificial day, says, "Bring no more vain oblations; it is an abominable incense unto me; new moon and Sabbath, the temple assembly--I cannot endure iniquity and solemn meeting," Jeremiah, on the other hand, is the first of the prophets who stands up for a stricter sanctification of the seventh day, treating it, however, merely as a day of rest: "Bear no burden on the Sabbath day, neither bring in by the gates of Jerusalem nor carry forth a burden out of your houses, neither do ye any work" (xvii. 21, 22). He adds that this precept had indeed been given to the fathers, but hitherto has not been kept; thus, what was traditional appears to have been only the abstinence from field work and perhaps also from professional pursuits. In this respect the attitude of Jeremiah is that which is taken also by his

[p. 116]

exilian followers, not merely by Ezekiel (xx. 16, xxii. 263 but also by the Great Unknown (Isa. lvi. 2, lviii. 13), who does not otherwise manifest any express partiality for cultus. While according to Hos. ii. 13, and even Lam. ii. 6, the Sabbath, as well as the rest of the acts of divine worship, must cease outside of the Holy Land, it in fact gained in importance to an extraordinary degree during the exile, having severed itself completely, not merely from agriculture, but in particular also from the sacrificial system, and gained entire independence as a holy solemnity of rest. Accordingly, it became along with circumcision the symbol that bound together the Jewish diaspora; thus already in the Priestly Code the two institutions are the general distinguishing marks of religion ('wth: Gen. xvii. 10, 11; Exod. xxxi. 13) which also continue to subsist under circumstances where as in the exile the conditions of the Mosaic worship are not present (Gen. ii. 3, xvii. 12, 13). The trouble which in the meantime the organisers of the church of the second temple had in forcing into effect the new and strict regulations is clear from Nehemiah xiii. 15 seq. But they were ultimately successful. The solemnisation of the Sabbath in Judaism continued to develop logically on the basis of the priestly legislation, but always approximating with increasing nearness to the idea; of absolute rest, so that for the straitest sect of the Pharisees the business of preparing for the sacred day absorbed the whole week, and half man's life, so to speak, existed for it alone. "From Sunday onwards think of the Sabbath," says Shammai. Two details are worthy of special prominence; the distinction between yom tob and shabbath, comparable to that drawn by the Puritans between Sundays and feast days, and the discussion as to whether the Sabbath was broken by divine worship; both bring into recognition that tendency of the Priestly Code in which the later custom separates itself from its original roots.

2. Connected with the Sabbath is the sabbatical year. In the Book of the Covenant it is commanded that a Hebrew who has been bought as a slave must after six years of service be liberated on the seventh unless he himself wishes to remain (Exod. xxi. 2-6). By the same authority it is ordained in another passage that the land and fruit-gardens are to be wrought and their produce gathered for six years, but on the seventh the produce is to be surrendered (shmt), that the poor of the people may eat, and what they leave the beasts of the field may at (xxiii. 10, 11). Here there is no word of a sabbatical year. The

[p. 117]

liberation of the Hebrew slave takes place six years after his purchase, that is, the term is a relative one. In like manner, in the other ordinance there is nothing to indicate an absolute seventh year; and besides, it is not a Sabbath or fallow time for the land that is contemplated, but a surrender of the harvest.

The first of these commands is repeated in Deuteronomy without material alteration, and to a certain extent word for word (xv. 12-18). The other has at least an analogue in Deut. xv. 1-6: "At the end of every seven years thou shalt make a release (surrender, shmth), and this is the manner of it; no creditor that lendeth aught shall exact it of his neighbour or of his brother, because Jehovah's release has been proclaimed; of a foreigner thou mayst exact it again, but that which is of thine with thy brother, thy hand shall release." That this precept is parallel with Exod. xxiii. 10, 11, is shown by the word shmth; but this has a different meaning put upon it which plainly is introduced as new. Here it is not landed property that is being dealt with, but money, and what has to be surrendered is not the interest of the debt merely (comparable to the fruit of the soil), but the capital itself; the last clause admits of no other construction, however unsuitable the regulation may be. A step towards the sabbatical year is discernible in it, in so far as the seventh year term is not a different one for each individual debt according to the date when it was incurred (in which case it might have been simply a period of prescription), but is a uniform and common term publicly fixed: it is absolute, not relative. But it does not embrace the whole seventh year, it does not come in at the end of six years as in Exodus, but at the end of seven; the surrender of the harvest demands the whole year, the remission of debts, comparatively speaking, only a moment.

The sabbatical year is peculiar to the Priestly Code, or, to speak more correctly, to that collection of laws incorporated and edited by it, which lies at the basis of Lev. xvii.-xxvi. In Lev. xxv. 1-7 we read: "When ye come into the land which I give you, then shall the land keep a Sabbath to Jehovah. Six years shalt thou sow thy field and prune thy vineyard, and gather in the fruit thereof; but in the seventh year shall the land keep a Sabbath of rest unto Jehovah: thy field shalt thou not sow, thy vineyard shalt thou not prune; that which groweth of its own accord of thy harvest shalt thou not reap, neither shalt thou gather the grapes of thy vine undressed; the land shall have a year of

[p. 118]

rest, and the Sabbath of the land shall be food for you; for thee, and for thy servant, and for thy maid, and for thy hired servant, and for thy cattle, and for all the beasts that are in thy land, shall all the increase thereof be food." The expressions make it impossible to doubt that Exod. xxiii. 10, 11 lies at the foundation of this law; but out of this as a basis it is something different that has been framed. The seventh year, which is there a relative one, has here become fixed,--not varying for the various properties, but common for the whole land, a sabbatical year after the manner of the Sabbath day. This amounts to a serious increase in the difficulty of the matter, for it is not one and the same thing to have the abstinence from harvest spread over seven years and to have it concentrated into one out of every seven. In like manner a heightening of the demand is also seen in the circumstance that not merely harvesting but also sowing and dressing are forbidden. In the original commandment this was not the case; all that was provided for was that in the seventh year the harvest should not fall to the lot of the proprietor of the soil, but should be publici juris,--a relic perhaps of communistic agriculture. Through a mere misunderstanding of the verbal suffix in Exod. xxiii. 11, as has been conjectured by Hupfeld, a surrender of the fruit of the land has been construed into a surrender of the land itself--a general fallow year (Lev. xxv. 4). The misunderstanding, however, is not accidental, but highly characteristic. In Exod. xxiii. the arrangement is made for man; it is a limitation, for the common good, of private rights of property in land,--in fact, for the benefit of the landless, who in the seventh year are to have the usufruct of the soil; in Lev. xxv. the arrangement is for the sake of the land,--that it may rest, if not on the seventh day, at least on the seventh year, and for the sake of the Sabbath--that it may extend its supremacy over nature also. Of course this presupposes the extreme degree of Sabbath observance by absolute rest, and becomes comprehensible only when viewed as an outgrowth from that. For the rest, a universal fallow season is possible only under circumstances in which a people are to a considerable extent independent of the products of their own agriculture; prior to the exile even the idea of such a thing could hardly have occurred.

In the Priestly Code the year of jubilee is further added to supplement in turn the sabbatical year (Lev. xxv. 8 seq.). As the latter is framed to correspond with the seventh day, so the former corresponds

[p. 119]

with the fiftieth, i.e., with Pentecost, as is easily perceived from the parallelism of Lev. xxv. 8 with Lev. xxiii. 15. As the fiftieth day after the seven Sabbath days is celebrated as a closing festival of the forty-nine days' period, so is the fiftieth year after the seven sabbatic years as rounding off the larger interval; the seven Sabbaths falling on harvest time, which are usually reckoned specially (Luke vi. 1), have, in the circumstance of their interrupting harvest work, a particular resemblance to the sabbatic years which interrupt agriculture altogether. Jubilee is thus an artificial institution superimposed upon the years of fallow regarded as harvest Sabbaths after the analogy of Pentecost. Both its functions appear originally to have belonged also to the Sabbath year and to be deduced from the two corresponding regulations in Deuteronomy relating to the seventh year, so that thus Exod. xxiii. would be the basis of Lev. xxv. 1-7 and Deut. xv. that of xxv. 8 seq. The emancipation of the Hebrew slave originally had to take place on the seventh year after the purchase, afterwards (it would seem) on the seventh year absolutely; for practical reasons it was transferred from that to the fiftieth. Analogous also, doubtless, is the growth of the other element in the jubilee--the return of mortgaged property to its hereditary owner--out of the remission of debts enjoined in Deut. xv. for the end of the seventh year; for the two hang very closely together, as Lev. xxv. 23 seq. shows.

As for the evidence for these various arrangements, those of the Book of the Covenant are presupposed alike by Deuteronomy and by the Priestly Code. It seems to have been due to the prompting of Deuteronomy that towards the end of the reign of Zedekiah the emancipation of the Hebrew slaves was seriously gone about; the expressions in Jer. xxxiv. 14 point to Deut. xv. 12, and not to Exod. xxi. 2. The injunction not having had practical effect previously, it was in this instance carried through by all parties at the same date: this was of course inevitable when it was introduced as an extraordinary innovation; perhaps it is in connexion with this that a fixed seventh year grew out of a relative one. The sabbatical year, according to the legislator's own declaration, was never observed throughout the whole pre-exilic period; for, according to Lev. xxvi. 34, 35, the desolation of the land during the exile is to be a compensation made for the previously neglected fallow years: "Then shall the land pay its Sabbaths as long as it lieth desolate; when ye are in your enemies' land then shall the land rest

[p. 120]

and pay its Sabbaths; all the days that it lieth desolate shall it rest, which it rested not in your Sabbaths when ye dwelt upon it." The verse is quoted in 2 Chron. xxxvi. 21 as the language of Jeremiah,--a correct and unprejudiced indication of its exilic origin. But as the author of Leviticus xxvi. was also the writer of Lev. xxv. 1-7, that is to say, the framer of the law of the sabbatic year, the recent date of the latter regulation also follows at once. The year of jubilee, certainly derived from the Sabbath year, is of still later origin. Jeremiah (xxxiv. 14) has not the faintest idea that the emancipation of the slaves must according to "law" take place in the fiftieth year. The name drwr, borne by the jubilee in Lev. xxv. 10, is applied by him to the seventh year; and this is decisive also for Ezek. xlvi. 17: the gift of land bestowed by the prince on one of his servants remains in his possession only until the seventh year.

Footnotes

^85:1 The original form of the expression of Exodus xxxiv. 25 has been preserved in Exodus xxiii. 18 (chguy not chn hpsch). In Deuteronomy, although psch is more prominent, it is called hn hmtzwth in xvi. 16.

^86:1 Against this there is of course possible the objection that the passage at present forms part of the Priestly Code. But the collection of laws embraced in Lev. xvii.-xxvi, it is well known, has merely been redacted and incorporated by the author of the Priestly Code, and originally was an independent corpus marking the transition from Deuteronomy to the Priestly Code, sometimes approximating more to the one, and at other times to the other, and the use of Lev. xxiii. 9-22 in this connection is completely justified by the consideration that only in this way do the rites it describes find meaning and vitality.

^87:1 Haneberg, Alterthumer, 2d edit., p. 656. In Deuteronomy Pentecost as 'acereth lasts for only one day, while Easter and the feast of tabernacles each last a week.

^89:1 "They make them molten images of their silver, idols according to their fancy. To them they speak, men doing sacrifice kiss calves!" The prophet would hardly blame human sacrifices only thus incidentally, more in ridicule than in high moral indignation; he would bring it to prominence the horrible and revolting character of the action much more than its absurdity. Thus zbchy 'dm means most probably, "offerers belonging to the human race." At the same time, even if the expression did mean "sacrificers of men," it would prove nothing regarding regular sacrifices of children.

^90:1 Deut. xii. 6 seq., 11 seq., xiv. 23-26, xvi. 7, 11, 14. In the section xiv. 22-xvi. 17, dues and feasts are taken together. In the first half (xiv. 22-xv. 18) there is a progression from those acts which are repeated within the course of a year to those which occur every three years, and finally to those which occur every seven; in the second half (xv. 19-xvi. 17) recurrence is again made to the principal, that is, the seasonal dues, first to the firstlings and the passover feast, and afterwards to the two others, in connection with which the tithes of the fruits are offered.

^93:1 The ancient Arabs also observed the sacrifice of the firstlings as a solemnity in the sacred month Rajab, which originally fell in spring (comp. Ewald, Ztschr. f. d. Kunde des Morgenlandes, 1840, p. 419; Robertson Smith, Prophets, p. 383 sq). A festivity mentioned among the earliest, and that for pastoral Judah, is the sheep-shearing (1 Sam. xxv. 2 seq.; Gen. xxxviii. 12); but it does not appear to have ever developed into a regular and independent festival. Aparchai of wool and flax are mentioned in Hosea (ii. 7, 11 [A.V. 5, 9]) as of wool alone in Deuteronomy (xviii. 4).

^94:1 lchqpth hymym (i.e., at the new year) 1 Sam. i. 20; Exod. xxxiv. 22. In this sense is also to be understood mymym ymymh Judges xxi. 19, 1 Sam. i. 3. Comp. Zech. xiv. 16.

^94:2 1 Kings xii. 32 is, it must be owned, far from trustworthy. 1 Kings viii. 2 is difficult to harmonise with vi. 38, if the interpretation of Bul and Ethanim is correct.

^96:1 Exod. xx. 24-26 looks almost like a protest against the arrangements of the temple of Solomon,--especially ver. 26.

^97:1 Comp. Zech. xiv. 16 seq. All that are left of the nations which came against Jerusalem shall go up from year to year to worship Jehovah of hosts and to keep the feast of tabernacles. And whoso of the families of the earth shall not come up unto Jerusalem to worship Jehovah of hosts, upon them shall be no rain. But for the Egyptians--who on account of the Nile are independent of rain--another punishment is threatened if they do not come to keep the feast of tabernacles.

^98:1 For y`rbw (ix. 4) read y`rkw, and lchmm for lchm. See Kuenen, National Religions and Universal Religions (1882), p. 312 seq.

^98:2 Times of mourning are, so to speak, times of interdict, during which intercourse between God and man is suspended. Further, nothing at all was ever eaten except that of which God had in the first instance received His share;--not only no flesh but also no vegetable food, for the "first-fruits" of corn and wine represented the produce of the year and sanctified the whole. All else was unclean. Comp. Ezek. iv. 13.

^102:1 The ignoring of the sanctuary has a reason only in the case of the first passover, and perhaps ought to be regarded as holding good for that only. The distinction [p. 103] between the psch mtzrym and the psch hdwrwth is necessary, if only for the reason that the former is a historical fact, the latter a commemorative observance. When it is argued for the originality of the passover ritual in the Priestly Code that it alone fits in with the conditions of the sojourn in Egypt, the position is not to be disputed.

^105:1 It is impossible to explain away this discrepancy by the circumstance that in the Priestly Code the day is reckoned from the evening; for (1.) this fact has no practical bearing, as the dating reckons at any rate from the morning, and the evening preceding the 15th is always called the 14th of the month (Lev. xiii. 27, 32); (2.) the first day of the feast in Deuteronomy is just the day on the evening of which the passover is held, and upon it there follow not seven but six days more, whereas in the Priestly Code the celebration extends from the 14th to the 21st of the month (Exod. xii. 18). When the mchrth hshbth is made to refer, not as in Josh. v. 11 to the 14th, but as in Jewish tradition (LXX on Lev. xxiii. 11) to the day following the 15th of Nisan, the 16th of Nisan is added to the 14th and 15th as a special feast day.

^108:1 In this way Tabernacles comes not before but after new year; this probably is connected with the more definite dating (on the fifteenth day of the month), but is quite contrary to the old custom and the meaning of the feast.

^109:1 In Exod. xii. 2 this change of era is formally commanded by Moses: "This month (the passover month) shall be the beginning of months unto you, it shall be to you the first of the months of the year." According to George Smith, the Assyrian year commenced at the vernal equinox; the Assyrian use depends on the Babylonian (Assyrian Eponym Canon, p. 19).

^109:2 Kuenen, Hist.-Krit. Onderzoek (1863), ii. pp. 197, 214.

^110:1 The tenth of the month is to be taken in Ezekiel as strictly new year's day; for the designation r'sh hshnh occurs in no other meaning than this, and moreover it is by no mere accident that the prophet has his vision of the new Jerusalem precisely at the new year. But according to Lev. xxv. 9 it is the seventh month that is meant, on the tenth day of which the trumpets are blown at the commencement of the year of jubilee.

^111:1 "If Lev. xvi. belongs to the original of the Priestly Code, and the entire Pentateuch was published by Ezra in the year 444, and yet the day was not then celebrated, then it has ipso facto been conceded that it is possible that there can be laws which yet are not carried into effect." So writes Dillmann in his introduction to Lev. xvi. (1880, p. 525); every one will grant him that the law, before it could attain public currency, must have been previously written and promulgated.

^112:1 After the second destruction of Jerusalem by Titus, the system of fasts received such an impulse that it was necessary to draw up a list of the days on which fasting was forbidden.

^112:2 George Smith, Assyrian Eponym Canon, pp. 19, 20. "Among the Assyrians the first twenty-eight days of every month were divided into four weeks of seven days [p. 113] each, the seventh, fourteenth, twenty-first, and twenty-eight days respectively being Sabbaths; and there was a general prohibition of work on these days." See further Hyde, Hist. Rel. Vet. Pers., p. 239. Among the Syrians shbu' means the week, just as among the Arabs sanba and sanbata (Pl. sanabit, dim. suneibita) mean a period of time (Lagarde, Ps. Hieronymi; p. 158), and in fact, according to the lexicographers, a comparatively long one. But in the sole case cited by the Tag al' Arus, it means rather a short interval. "What is youth? It is the beginning of a sanbata," meaning something like the Sunday of a week. According to this it would appear as if the sabbath had been originally the week itself, and only afterwards became the weekly festival day. The identity of the Syriac word (ta sabbata) in the New Testament) with the Hebrew is guaranteed by the twofold Arabic form.

^113:1 The peculiar order in which the names of the planets are used to designate the days of the week makes this very clear; see Ideler, Handb. d. Chron. i. 178 seq., ii 77 seq.

^113:2 Sprenger (Leben Moh. iii. 527) and Lagarde have rightly correlated the Hebrew hallel with the Arabic ahalla (to call out, labbaika, see, for example Abulf. i. p. 180). But there is no uncertainty as to the derivation of ahalla from hilal (new moon)

^115:1 The contradiction is indubitable when in Gen. ii. 2 it is said in the first place that on the seventh day God ended the work which He had made; and then that He rested on the seventh day from His work. Obviously the second clause is an authentic interpretation added from very intelligible motives.

      
Prolegomena to the History of Ancient Israel, by Julius Wellhausen, [1885], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 121]

  

CHAPTER IV.

  

THE PRIESTS AND THE LEVITES.

  

I.

1. THE problem now to be dealt with is exhibited with peculiar distinctness in one pregnant case with which it will be well to set out. The Mosaic law, that is to say, the Priestly Code, distinguishes, as is well known, between the twelve secular tribes and Levi, and further within the spiritual tribe itself, between the sons of Aaron and the Levites, simply so called. The one distinction is made visible in the ordering of the camp in Num. ii., where Levi forms around the sanctuary a cordon of protection against the immediate contact of the remaining tribes; on the whole, however, it is rather treated as a matter of course, and not brought into special prominence (Num. xviii. 22). The other is accentuated with incomparably greater emphasis. Aaron and his sons alone are priests, qualified for sacrificing and burning incense; the Levites are hieroduli (3 Esdras i. 3), bestowed upon the Aaronidae for the discharge of the inferior services (Num. iii. 9). They are indeed their tribe fellows, but it is not because he belongs to Levi that Aaron is chosen, and his priesthood cannot be said to be the acme and flower of the general vocation of his tribe. On the contrary, rather was he a priest long before the Levites were set apart; for a considerable time after the cultus has been established and set on foot these do not make any appearance,--not at all in the whole of the third book, which thus far does little honour to its name Leviticus. Strictly speaking, the Levites do not even belong to the clergy: they are not called by Jehovah, but consecrated by the children of Israel to the sanctuary,--consecrated in the place of the first-born, not however as priests (neither in Num, iii., iv., viii., nor anywhere else in the Old Testament, is there a single trace of the priesthood of the first-born), but as a gift due to the priests, as such being even required to undergo the

[p. 122]

usual "waving" before the altar, to symbolise their being cast into the altar flame (Num. viii.). The relationship between Aaron and Levi, and the circumstance that precisely this tribe is set apart for the sanctuary in compensation for the first-born, appears almost accidental, but at all events cannot be explained by the theory that Aaron rose on the shoulders of Levi; on the contrary, it rather means that Levi has mounted up by means of Aaron, whose priesthood everywhere is treated as having the priority. Equality between the two is not to be spoken of; their office and their blood relationship separates them more than it binds them together.

Now, the prophet Ezekiel, in the plan of the new Jerusalem which he sketched in the year 573, takes up among other things the reform of the relations of the personnel of the temple, and in this connection expresses himself as follows (xliv. 6-16):--"Thus saith the Lord Jehovah, Let it suffice you of all your abominations, O house of Israel! in that ye have brought in strangers, uncircumcised in heart and uncircumcised in flesh, to be in my sanctuary, to pollute it, even my house, when ye offer my bread, the fat and the blood, and have broken my covenant by all your abominations. And ye have not kept the charge of my holy things, inasmuch as ye have set these [*1] to be keepers of my charge in my sanctuary. Therefore, thus saith the Lord Jehovah, No stranger uncircumcised in heart and uncircumcised in flesh shall enter into my sanctuary; none, of all that are among the children of Israel. But the Levites who went away far from me when Israel went astray from me after their idols, they shall even bear their iniquity, and they shall be ministers in my sanctuary, officers at the gates of the house and ministers of the house; they shall slay for the people the burnt-offering and the thank-offering, and they shall stand before them to minister unto them. Because they ministered unto them before their idols, and caused the house of Israel to fall into iniquity, therefore have I lifted up my hand against them, saith the Lord Jehovah, and they shall bear their iniquity. They shall not come near unto me to do the office of a priest unto me, nor to come near to any of my holy things, but they shall bear their shame and their abominations which they have committed. And I will make them keepers of the charge of the house, for all its service, and for all that shall be done therein. But the priests,

[p. 123]

the Levites, sons of Zadok, that kept the charge of my sanctuary when the children of Israel went astray from me, they shall come near to me to minister unto me, and they shall stand before me to offer unto me the fat and the blood, saith the Lord Jehovah; they shall enter into my sanctuary, and come near to my table to minister unto me, and they shall keep my charge."

From this passage two things are to be learned. First, that the systematic separation of that which was holy from profane contact did not exist from the very beginning; that in the temple of Solomon even heathen (Zech. xiv. 21), probably captives, were employed to do hierodulic services which, according to the law, ought to have been rendered by Levites, and which afterwards actually were so rendered. Ezekiel, it is indeed true, holds this custom to be a frightful abuse, and one might therefore maintain it to have been a breach of the temple ordinances suffered by the Jerusalem priests against their better knowledge, and in this way escape accusing them of ignorance of their own law. But the second fact, made manifest by the above-quoted passage, quite excludes the existence of the Priestly Code so far as Ezekiel and his time are concerned. The place of the heathen temple-slaves is in future to be taken by the Levites. Hitherto the latter had held the priesthood, and that too not by arbitrary usurpation, but in virtue of their own good right. For it is no mere relegation back to within the limits of their lawful position when they are made to be no longer priests but temple ministrants, it is no restoration of the status quo ante, the conditions of which they had illegally broken; it is expressly a degradation, a withdrawal of their right, which appears as a punishment and which must be justified as being deserved; "they shall bear their iniquity." They have forfeited their priesthood, by abusing it to preside over the cultus of the high places, which the prophet regards as idolatry and hates in his inmost soul. Naturally those Levites are exempted from the penalty who have discharged their functions at the legal place,--the Levites the sons of Zadok,--namely, at Jerusalem, who now remain sole priests and receive a position of pre-eminence above those who hitherto have been their equals in office, and who are still associated with them by Ezekiel, under the same common name, but now are reduced to being their assistants and hieroduli.

It is an extraordinary sort of justice when the priests of the abolished Bamoth are punished simply for having been so, and conversely the

[p. 124]

priests of the temple at Jerusalem rewarded for this; the fault of the former and the merit of the latter consist simply in their existence. In other words, Ezekiel merely drapes the logic of facts with a mantle of morality. From the abolition of the popular sanctuaries in the provinces in favour of the royal one at Jerusalem, there necessarily followed the setting aside of the provincial priesthoods in favour of the sons of Zadok at the temple of Solomon. The original author of the centralisation, the Deuteronomic lawgiver, seeks indeed to prevent this consequence by giving to the extraneous Levites an equal right of sacrificing in Jerusalem with their brethren hereditarily settled there, but it was not possible to separate the fate of the priests from that of their altars in this manner. The sons of Zadok were well enough pleased that all sacrifices should be concentrated within their temple, but they did not see their way to sharing their inheritance with the priesthood of the high places, and the idea was not carried out (2 Kings xxiii. 9). Ezekiel, a thorough Jerusalemite, finds a moral way of putting this departure from the law, a way of putting it which does not explain the fact, but is merely a periphrastic statement of it. With Deuteronomy as a basis it is quite easy to understand Ezekiel's ordinance, but it is absolutely impossible if one starts from the Priestly Code. What he regards as the original right of the Levites, the performance of priestly services, is treated in the latter document as an unfounded and highly wicked pretension which once in the olden times brought destruction upon Korah and his company; what he considers to be a subsequent withdrawal of their right, as a degradation in consequence of a fault, the other holds to have been their hereditary and natural destination. The distinction between priest and Levite which Ezekiel introduces and justifies as an innovation, according to the Priestly Code has always existed; what in the former appears as a beginning, in the latter has been in force ever since Moses,--an original datum, not a thing that has become or been made. [*1] That the prophet should know nothing about a priestly law with whose tendencies he is in thorough sympathy admits of only one explanation,--that it did not then exist. His own ordinances are only to be understood as preparatory steps towards its own exactment.

[p. 125]

2. Noldeke, however, interprets the parallelism between the sons of Aaron and the sons of Zadok in favour of the priority of the Priestly Code, which, after all, he points out, is not quite so exclusive as Ezekiel. [*1] But, in the first place, this is a point of subordinate importance, the main thing being that Ezekiel has to make the distinction between priests and Levites, which is regarded in the Priestly Code as very ancient. In presence of the fact that the former introduces as a new thing the separation which the latter presupposes, the precise degree of the distinction drawn by the two is of no consequence whatever. In the next place, to bring the sons of Aaron into comparison with the sons of Zadok, as a proof of their higher antiquity, is just as reasonable as to bring the tabernacle into comparison with the temple of Jerusalem for a similar purpose. The former are priests of the tabernacle, the latter of the temple; but as in point of fact the only distinction to be drawn between the Mosaic and the actual central sanctuary is that between shadow and substance, so neither can any other be made between the Mosaic and the actual central priesthood. In the Priestly Code the ancient name is introduced instead of the historical one, simply in order to maintain the semblance of the Mosaic time; if the circumstance is to be taken as betokening the earlier origin of the work, then a similar inference must be drawn also from the fact that in it the origin and character of the Levites is quite obscure, while in Ezekiel it is palpably evident that they are the priests thrown out of employment by the abolition of the Bamoth, whom necessity has compelled to take a position of subordination under their haughty fellow-priests at Jerusalem. In truth it is, quite on the contrary, a proof of the post-exilian date of the Priestly Code that it makes sons of Aaron of the priests of the central sanctuary, who, even in the traditional understanding (2 Chron. xiii. 10), are in one way or other simply the priests of Jerusalem. By this means it carries their origin back to the foundation of the theocracy, and gives them out as from the first having been alone legitimate. But such an idea no one could have ventured to broach before the exile. At that time it was too well known that the priesthood of the Jerusalem sept could not be traced further back than David's time, but dated from Zadok, who in Solomon's reign ousted the

[p. 126]

hereditary house of Eli from the position it had long previously held, first at Shiloh and Nob, and afterwards at Jerusalem, at what had become the most prominent sanctuary of Israel.

In a passage of Deuteronomic complexion, which cannot have been written long before the exile, we read in a prediction made to Eli regarding the overthrow of his house by Zadok: "I said indeed, saith Jehovah the God of Israel, that thy house and the house of thy father shall walk before me for ever; but now I say, Be it far from me, for them that honour me I will honour, but they that despise me shall be lightly esteemed. Behold, the days come that I will cut off thine arm and the arm of thy father's house, . . .and I will raise up for myself a faithful priest who shall do according to what is in my heart and in my mind; and I will build him a sure house, and he shall walk before mine anointed for ever" (1 Sam. ii. 27-36). Here it is the house of Eli, and of Eli's father, that is the priestly family duly chosen in Egypt; contrary to hereditary title, and contrary to a promise of perpetual continuance, is it deposed at the higher claims of justice. The faithful priest who is to fill the vacant place is Zadok. This is expressly said in 1 Kings 2:27; and no other than he ever had a "sure house" and walked uninterruptedly as its head and ruler before the kings of Judah. This Zadok, accordingly, belongs neither to Eli's house nor to that of Eli's father; his priesthood does not go back as far as the time of the founding of the theocracy, and is not in any proper sense "legitimate;" rather has he obtained it by the infringement of what might be called a constitutional privilege, to which there were no other heirs besides Eli and his family. Obviously he does not figure as an intermediate link in the line of Aaron, but as the beginner of an entirely new genealogy; the Jerusalem priests, whose ancestor he is, are interlopers dating from the beginning of the monarchical period, in whom the old Mosaic sacerdotium is not continued, but is broken off. If then they are called in the Priestly Code "sons of Aaron," or at least figure there among the sons of Aaron, with whom they can only in point of fact be contrasted, the circumstance is an unmistakable indication that at this point the threads of tradition from the pre-exilic period have been snapped completely, which was not yet the case in Ezekiel's time. [*1]

[p. 127]

The relation between the priestly legislation and the Book of Ezekiel, which has now been shown, gives direction and aim to the following sketch, in which it is sought to exhibit the individual phenomenon in its general connection.

  

II.

1. The setting apart from the rest of the people of an entire tribe as holy, and the strongly accentuated distinction of ranks within that tribe, presuppose a highly systematised separation between sacred and profane, and an elaborate machinery connected with cultus. In fact, according to the representation given in the Priestly Code, the Israelites from the beginning were organised as a hierocracy, the clergy being the skeleton, the high priest the head, and the tabernacle the heart. But the suddenness with which this full-grown hierocracy descended on the wilderness from the skies is only matched by the suddenness with which it afterwards disappeared in Canaan, leaving no trace behind it. In the time of the Judges, priests and Levites, and the congregation of the children of Israel assembled around them, have utterly vanished; there is hardly a people Israel,--only individual tribes which do not combine even under the most pressing necessities, far less support at a common expense a clerical personnel numbering thousands of men, besides their wives and families. Instead of the Ecclesiastical History of the Hexateuch, the Book of Judges forthwith enters upon a secular history completely devoid of all churchly character. The high priest, who according to the Priestly Code is the central authority by the grace of God, is here quite left out in the cold, for the really acting heads of the people are the Judges, people of an entirely different stamp, whose authority, resting on no official position, but on strength of personality and on the force of circumstances, seldom extends beyond the limits of their tribe. And it is plain that in this we behold not the sorry remains of an ecclesiastico-political system once flourishing under Moses and Joshua, now completely fallen into ruins, but the first natural beginnings of a civil authority which after a course of further development finally led to the monarchy.

In the kernel of the Book of Judges (chaps. iii.-xvi.) there nowhere occurs a single individual whose profession is to take charge of the cultus.

[p. 128]

[paragraph continues] Sacrifice is in two instances offered, by Gideon and Manoah; but in neither case is a priest held to be necessary. In a gloss upon 1 Sam. vi. 13 seq. the divergence of later custom reveals itself. When the ark of Jehovah was brought back from exile in Philistia upon the new cart, it halted in the field of Bethshemesh beside the great stone, and the inhabitants of Bethshemesh, who were at the time busy with the wheat harvest, broke up the cart and made on the stone a burnt-offering of the kine by which it had been drawn. After they have finished, the Levites come up (ver. 15) (in the pluperfect tense) and proceed as if nothing had happened, lift the ark from the now no longer existent cart, and set it upon the stone on which the sacrifice is already burning;--of course only in order to fulfil the law, the demands of which have been completely ignored in the original narrative. Until the cultus has become in some measure centralised the priests have no locus standi; for when each man sacrifices for himself and his household, upon an altar which he improvises as best he can for the passing need, where is the occasion for people whose professional and essential function is that of sacrificing for others? The circumstance of their being thus inconspicuous in the earliest period of the history of Israel is connected with the fact that as yet there are few great sanctuaries. But as soon as these begin to occur, the priests immediately appear. Thus we find Eli and his sons at the old house of God belonging to the tribe of Ephraim at Shiloh. Eli holds a very exalted position, his sons are depicted as high and mighty men, who deal with the worshippers not directly but through a servant, and show arrogant disregard of their duties to Jehovah. The office is hereditary, and the priesthood already very numerous. At least in the time of Saul, after they had migrated from Shiloh to Nob, on account of the destruction by the Philistines of the temple at the former place, they numbered more than eighty-five men, who, however, are not necessarily proper blood-relations of Eli, although reckoning themselves as belonging to his clan (1 Sam. xxii. 11). [*1] One sanctuary more is referred to towards the close of the period of the Judges,--that at Dan beside the source of the Jordan. A rich Ephraimite, Micah, had set up to Jehovah a silver-covered

[p. 129]

image, and lodged it in an appropriate house. At first he appointed one of his sons to be its priest, afterwards Jonathan ben Gershom ben Moses, a homeless Levite of Bethlehem-Judah, whom he counted himself happy in being able to retain for a yearly salary of ten pieces of silver, besides clothing and maintenance. When, however, the Danites, hard pressed by the Philistines, removed from their ancient settlements in order to establish a new home for themselves on the slopes of Hermon in the north, they in passing carried off both Micah's image and his priest; what led them to do so was the report of their spies who had formerly lodged with Micah and there obtained an oracle. It was in this way that Jonathan came to Dan and became the founder of the family which retained the priesthood at this afterwards so important sanctuary down to the period of the deportation of the Danites at the Assyrian captivity (Judges xvii., xviii.). His position seems very different from that of Eli. The only point of resemblance is that both are hereditary priests, Levites so called, and trace their descent from the family of Moses,--of which more anon. But while Eli is a man of distinction, perhaps the owner of the sanctuary, at all events in a position of thorough independence and the head of a great house, Jonathan is a solitary wandering Levite who enters the service of the proprietor of a sanctuary for pay and maintenance, and is indeed nourished as a son by his patron, but by no means treated with special respect by the Danites.

The latter case, it may well be conjectured, more nearly represents the normal state of matters than the former. An independent and influential priesthood could develop itself only at the larger and more public centres of worship, but that of Shiloh seems to have been the only one of this class. The remaining houses of God, of which we hear some word from the transition period which preceded the monarchy, are not of importance, and are in private hands, thus corresponding to that of Micah on Mount Ephraim. That of Ophra belongs to Gideon, and that of Kirjathjearim to Abinadab. In fact, it appears that Micah, in appointing one to minister at his sanctuary for hire, would seem to have followed a more general practice. For the expression ml' ydw, which still survived as a terminus technicus for the ordination of priests long after they had attained a perfectly independent position, can originally in this connection hardly have meant anything else than a filling of the hand with money or its equivalent; thus the priestly office would appear in the older time to have been a paid one, perhaps

[p. 130]

the only one that was paid. Whom he shall appoint is at the discretion of the proprietor: if no one else is available, he gives it to one of his sons (Judges xvii. 5; 1 Sam. vii. 1),--of a "character indelibilis" there is of course in such a case no idea, as one can learn from the earliest example, in which Micah's son retires again from the service after a brief interval. David, when he removed the ark, intrusted it in the first instance to the house of Obededom, a captain of his, a Philistine of Gath, whom he made its keeper. A priest of regular calling, a Levite, is, according to Judges xvii. 13, a very unusual person to find at an ordinary sanctuary. Even at Shiloh, where, however, the conditions are extraordinary, the privilege of the sons of Eli is not an exclusive one; Samuel, who is not a member of the family, is nevertheless adopted as a priest. The service for which a stated minister was needed was not that of offering sacrifice; this was not so regular an occurrence as not to admit of being attended to by one's self. For a simple altar no priest was required, but only for a house which contained a sacred image; [*1] this demanded watching and attendance (1 Sam. vii. 1)--in fact, an ephod like that of Gideon or that of Micah (Judges viii. 26, 27, xvii. 4) was an article well worth stealing, and the houses of God ordinarily lay in an open place (Exodus xxxiii. 7). The expressions shmr and shrth to denote the sacred service were retained in use from this period to later times; and, while every one knows how to sacrifice, the art of dealing with the ephod and winning its oracle from it continues from time immemorial to be the exclusive secret of the priest. In exceptional cases, the attendant is occasionally not the priest himself, but his disciple. Thus Moses has Joshua with him as his aedituus [*2] (Exod. xxxiii. 11), who does not quit the tent of Jehovah; so also Eli has Samuel, who sleeps at night in the inner portion of the temple beside the ark of the covenant; even if perhaps the narrative of Samuel's early years is not quite in accordance with the actual circumstances as they existed at Shiloh, it is still in any case a perfectly good witness to a custom of the existence of which we are apprised from other sources. Compare now with this simple state of affairs the fact that in the Priestly Code the sons of Aaron have something

[p. 131]

like the half of a total of 22,000 Levites to assist them as watchers and ministers of the sanctuary.

Any one may slaughter and offer sacrifice (1 Sam. xiv. 34 seq.); and, even in cases where priests are present, there is not a single trace of a systematic setting apart of what is holy, or of shrinking from touching it. When David "entered into the house of God and did eat the shewbread, which it is not lawful to eat save for the priests, and gave also to them that were with him" (Mark ii. 26), this is not represented in 1 Sam. xxi. as illegitimate when those who eat are sanctified, that is, have abstained on the previous day from women. Hunted fugitives lay hold of the horns of the altar without being held guilty of profanation. A woman, such as Hannah, comes before Jehovah, that is, before the altar, to pray; the words wththytzb lpny yy (1 Sam. i. 9) supplied by the LXX, are necessary for the connection, and have been omitted from the Massoretic text as offensive. In doing so she is observed by the priest, who sits quietly, as is his wont, on his seat at the temple door. The history of the ark particularly, as Vatke justly remarks (pp. 317, 332), affords more than one proof of the fact that the notion of the unapproachableness of the holy was quite unknown; I shall content myself with the most striking of these. Samuel the Ephraimite sleeps by virtue of his office every night beside the ark of Jehovah, a place whither, according to Lev. xvi., the high priest may come only once in the year, and even he only after the strictest preparation and with the most elaborate atoning rites. The contrast in the tone of feeling is so great that no one as yet has even ventured to realise it clearly to himself.

2. With the commencement of the monarchical period the priests forthwith begin to come into greater prominence along with the kings; the advance in centralisation and in publicity of life makes itself noticeable also in the department of worship. At the beginning of Saul's reign we find the distinguished Ephraimitic priesthood, the house of Eli, no longer at Shiloh, but at Nob, in the vicinity of the king, and to a certain degree in league with him; for their head, Ahijah the priest, is in immediate attendance on him when arms are first raised against the Philistines, shares the danger with him, and consults the ephod on his behalf. Subsequently the entente cordiale was disturbed, Ahijah and his brethren fell a sacrifice to the king's jealousy, and thus the solitary instance of an independent and considerable priesthood to

[p. 132]

be met with in the old history of Israel came for ever to an end. Abiathar, who alone escaped the massacre of Nob (1 Sam. xxii.), fled with the ephod to David, for which he was rewarded afterwards with high honours, but all that he became he became as servant of David. Under David the regius priesthood began to grow towards the importance which it from that time forward had. This king exercised unfettered control over the sanctuary of the ark which stood in his citadel, as also over the appointment of the priests, who were merely his officials. Alongside of Abiathar he placed Zadok (and subsequently Ira also), as well as some of his own sons. For when it is stated in 2 Sam. viii. 18 that the sons of David were priests, the words must not out of regard to the Pentateuch be twisted so as to mean something different from what they say. We also (1 Kings iv. 5) find the son of the prophet Nathan figuring as a priest, and on the other hand the son of Zadok holding a high secular office (ver. 2); even at this date the line of demarcation afterwards drawn between holy and non-holy persons has no existence. What under David was still wanting to the institution of the royal worship and the regius priests--a fixed centre--was added by the erection of the temple under his successor. At the beginning of Solomon's reign there was still no Israelite place of sacrifice such as sufficed for the greater contingencies; he was compelled to celebrate his accession at the great Bamah at Gibeon, a town in the neighbourhood of Jerusalem, which, although it had been subjugated for a considerable time, was still entirely Canaanite. He now took care to make it possible that his colossal festivals should be celebrated at his own sanctuary. And next he made Zadok its priest after having previously deposed and relegated to his patrimonial property at Anathoth, a village adjoining Jerusalem, the aged Abiathar, a man of pure and honourable priestly descent, on account of the support he had given to the legitimate heir to the crown, thereby bringing to pass the fate with which the once so proud and powerful family of Eli had in 1 Sam. ii. been threatened. Doubtless other priests also by degrees attached themselves to the family of Zadok, and ultimately came even to call themselves his sons, just as the Rechabites regarded Jonathan ben Rechab, or the "children of the prophets" one or other of the great prophets, as their father.

Regarding their sanctuaries as their own private property, precisely as Micah does in the classical instance recorded in Judges xvii., xviii., and proceeding quite untrammelled in the appointment and removal

[p. 133]

of the officials employed, neither do these early kings hesitate in the least to exercise personally the rights which had emanated from themselves, and been delegated to others. Of Saul, who indeed was in the habit of delegating but seldom, and of doing with his own hand all that required to be done, it is several times mentioned that he sacrificed in person; and it is clear that this is not brought as a charge against him in 1 Sam. xiv. and xv. David sacrificed on the occasion of his having successfully brought the ark to Jerusalem; that it was he himself who officiated appears from the fact that he wore the priestly ephod--the ephod bad--and at the close of the offering pronounced the benediction (2 Sam. vi. 14, 18). In the same way was the consecration of the temple conducted by Solomon; it was he who went before the altar, and after praying there upon his knees with outstretched arms, rose and blessed the people (1 Kings viii. 22, 54, 53),--doubtless also it was he who with his own hands offered the first sacrifice. The priests' technical skill is necessary only for inquiring of the oracle before the ephod (1 Sam. xiv. 18).

3. These beginnings are continued in the history of the priesthood after the division of the kingdom. Jeroboam I., the founder of the kingdom of Israel, is treated by the historian as the founder also of Israel's worship in so far as the latter differed from the Judaean ideal: "he made the two calves of gold, and set them up at Bethel and at Dan; he made the Bamoth-houses and made priests from the mass of the people, who were not of the sons of Levi, and ordained a feast in the eighth month and ascended to the altar to burn incense" (1 Kings xii. 28 seq., xiii. 33). Here indeed after the well-known manner of pious pragmatism retrospective validity is given to the Deuteronomic law which did not come into force until three centuries afterwards, and judgment is thus passed in accordance with a historically inadmissable standard; moreover, the facts on which the judgment is based are on the one hand too much generalised, and on the other hand laid too exclusively to the charge of Jeroboam. The first king bears the weight of all the sins in worship of all his successors and of the whole body of the people. But the recognition of the sovereign priesthood of the ruler, of the formative influence which he exercised over the worship, is just. The most important temples were royal ones, and the priests who attended at them were the king's priests (Amos vii. 10 seq.). When therefore Jehu overthrew the house of Ahab, he did not extirpate all its members merely,

[p. 134]

and its officials and courtiers, but also its priests as well; they too were servants of the crown and in positions of trust (2 Kings x. 11; comp. 1 Kings iv. 5). The statement that they were chosen at the pleasure of the king is therefore to be taken as implying that, as in David's and Solomon's time, so also later they could and might be chosen at pleasure; on the other hand, in point of fact the sacred office, in Dan at least, continued from the period of the Judges down to the Assyrian deportation hereditary in the family of Jonathan. One must, moreover, avoid imagining that all the "houses of the high places" and all the priestly posts [*1] belonged to the king; it was impossible that the government should be so all-pervading in such matters. At this period most of the sanctuaries were public, but not therefore as yet on that account royal, and so also doubtless there were numerous priests who were not servants of the king. The preponderance of official cultus and of an official personnel to carry it on was counteracted in the northern kingdom by the frequent dynastic changes and the unattached particularism of the separate tribes; the conditions may be presumed to have developed themselves with great variety and freedom, hereditary and unhereditary priests, priests with independent benefices and others in complete poverty, subsisting side by side; the variety and the equality of rights enjoyed by all is the distinguishing mark of the time.

Speaking generally, however, the priesthood has distinctly consolidated itself as compared with its former condition, and gained not a little alike in number and in influence; it has become an important power in public life, without which the nation cannot be imagined. It would perhaps be somewhat bold to assert this on the strength merely of the brief and inadequate indications in the Book of Kings, which is chiefly interested in the extraordinary interventions of the prophets in the course of Israel's history, but other and more authentic testimonies justify us in doing so. First of these is the Blessing of Moses, an independent document of northern Israel which speaks for itself. Here we read: "Thy Thummim and thy Urim belong to the man of thy friendship, whom thou didst prove at Massah, for whom thou didst strive at the waters of Meribah; who saith of father and mother,

[p. 135]

[paragraph continues] I have never seen them, and acknowledgeth not his brethren nor knoweth his own children--for they observe thy word and keep thy covenant, they teach Jacob thy judgments and Israel thy law; they bring savour of fat before thee and whole burnt sacrifice upon thine altar; bless, O Lord, his strength, and accept the work of his hands; smite through the loins of them that rise up against him, and of them that hate him that they rise not again" (Deut. xxxiii. 8-11). In this passage the priests appear as a strictly close corporation, so close that they are mentioned only exceptionally in the plural number, and for the most part are spoken of collectively in the singular, as an organic unity which embraces not merely the contemporary members, but also their ancestors, and which begins its life with Moses, the friend of Jehovah who as its beginning is identified with the continuation just as the man is identified with the child out of which he has grown. The history of Moses is at the same time the history of the priests, the Urim and Thummim belong--one is not quite sure to which, but it comes to the same thing; every priest to whom the care of an ephod has been intrusted interrogates before it the sacred oracle. The first relative clause relating to Moses passes over without change of subject into one that refers to the priests, so that the singular immediately falls into plural and the plural back to the singular. Yet this so strongly marked solidarity of the priesthood as a profession rests by no means upon the natural basis of family or clan unity; it is not blood, but on the contrary the abnegation of blood that constitutes the priest, as is brought out with great emphasis. He must act for Jehovah's sake as if he had neither father nor mother, neither brethren nor children. Blind prepossession in people's conceptions of Judaism has hitherto prevented the understanding of these words, but they are thoroughly unambiguous. What they say is, that in consecrating himself to the service of Jehovah a man abandons his natural relationships, and severs himself from family ties; thus, with the brotherhood of the priests in northern Israel the case is precisely similar as with that of the religious guilds of the sons of the prophets--the Rechabites, and doubtless too the Nazarites (Amos ii. 11 seq.)--also native there. Whosoever chose (or, whomsoever he chose) was made priest by Jeroboam--such is the expression of the Deuteronomic redactor of the Book of Kings (1 Kings xiii. 33). A historical example of what has been said is afforded by the young Samuel, as he figures in the narrative of his early years contained in

[p. 136]

[paragraph continues] 1 Samuel i.-iii.--a narrative which certainly reflects the condition of things in Ephraim at the period of the monarchy. The child of a well-to-do middle class family at Ramah, in the district of Zuph Ephraim, he is even before his birth vowed to Jehovah by his mother, and as soon as possible afterwards is handed over to the sanctuary at Shiloh,--not to become a Nazarite or one of the Nethinim in the sense of the Pentateuch, but to be a priest,--for in his ministry he wears the linen ephod, the ephod bad, and even the pallium (1 Sam. ii. 18) [*1] And it is made very plain that the mother's act, in thus giving up her son, who is properly hers, or (as she expresses it) lending him to Jehovah for ever (1 Sam. i. 28: mwsh'l = shmw'l), is regarded as a renunciation of family rights. The circumstance that it is by the parents and not by Samuel himself that the consecration is made makes no material difference; the one thing is on the same plane with the other, and doubtless occurred as well as the other, although seldomer. But, on the other hand, it can hardly have been the rule that any one should abandon not parents and brethren merely, but also wife and children as well in order to enter the priesthood; in Deut. xxxiii. 9 this is adduced only as an extreme instance of the spirit of self-sacrifice. In any case it is not to be inferred that celibacy was demanded, but only that the priestly office was often barely sufficient to support the man, not to speak of a family.

So fixed and influential, so independent and exclusive had the priesthood become at the date of the composition of the Blessing of Moses, that it takes a place of its own alongside of the tribes of the nation, is itself a tribe, constituted, however, not by blood, but by community of spiritual interests. Its importance is brought into clearness even by the opposition which it encounters, and which occasions so vigorous a denunciation of its enemies that one might well believe the person who committed it to writing to have been himself a priest. The cause of the hostility is not stated, but it seems to be directed simply against the very existence of a professional and firmly organised clergy, and to proceed from laymen who hold fast by the rights of the old priestless days.

Next to the Blessing of Moses the discourses of Hosea contain our most important materials for an estimate of the priesthood of Northern

[p. 137]

[paragraph continues] Israel. How important that institution was for public life is clear from his expressions also. The priests are the spiritual leaders of the people; the reproach that they do not fulfil their high vocation proves in the first place that they have it. Degenerate they are, to be sure; in Hosea's representation they are seen in the same light as that in which the sons of Eli appear as described in 1 Sam. ii. 22 seq., from which description one conjectures the author to have derived his colours from a state of matters nearer his own day than the period of the judges. The priests of Shechem are even taxed by the prophet with open highway robbery (vi. 9), and in one charge after another he accuses them of taking advantage of their office for base gain, of neglecting its most sacred duties, and in this way having the principal blame for the ruin of the people. "Hear the word of Jehovah, ye children of Israel, for the Lord hath a controversy with the inhabitants of the land, because there is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land. (2.) There is swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing adultery; they use violence and add murder to murder. (3.) Therefore the land mourneth, and every creature that dwelleth therein languisheth, even to the wild beasts of the field and the fowls of heaven; and even the fishes of the sea are taken away. (4.) Yet let no man strive and no man reprove; for the people do just as their priests. (5.) Therefore shall ye (priests) stumble on that day, and also the prophets with you on that night; and I will destroy your kin. (6.) My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge, because ye yourselves reject knowledge; I will therefore reject you that ye shall be no longer priests unto me; ye have forgotten the doctrine of your God, so will I forget your children. (7.) The more they are, the more they sin against me; their glory they turn into shame. (8.) They eat up the sin of my people, and they set their heart on their iniquity. (9.) And it shall be as with the people so with the priest; I will punish them for their ways and requite them for their doings. (10.) They shall eat and not have enough, they shall commit whoredom and shall not increase, because they have ceased to take heed to the Lord" (Hos. iv. 1-10). [*1]

[p. 138]

[paragraph continues] In the northern kingdom, according to this, the spiritual ascendancy of the priests over the people seems hardly to have been less than that of the prophets, and if in the history we hear less about it, [*1] the explanation is to be sought in the fact that they laboured quietly and regularly in limited circles, taking no part in politics, and fully submissive to the established order, and that for this reason they attracted less notice and were less talked about than the prophets who, like Elijah and Elisha, stirred up Israel by their extraordinary and oppositional action.

4. In Judah the nucleus of the development was the same as in Israel. The idea that in Judah the genuine Mosaic priesthood had by

[p. 139]

the grace of God been maintained, while in Israel, on the other hand, a schismatic priesthood had intruded itself by the favour of the king and man's device, is that of the later Judaeans who had the last word, and were therefore of course in the right. The B'ne Zadok of Jerusalem as contrasted with the B'ne Eli whom they superseded were originally illegitimate (if one may venture to apply a conception which at that time was quite unknown), and did not inherit their right from the fathers, but had it from David and Solomon. They always remained in this dependent condition, they at all times walked, as 1 Sam. ii. 35 has it, "before Jehovah's anointed," as his servants and officers. To the kings the temple was a part of their palace which, as is shown by 1 Kings vii. and 2 Kings xi., stood upon the same hill and was contiguous with it; they placed their threshold alongside of that of Jehovah, and made their door-posts adjoin to His, so that only the wall intervened between Jehovah and them (Ezek. xliii. 8). They shaped the official cultus entirely as they chose, and regarded the management of it, at least so far as one gathers from the epitome of the "Book of the Kings," as the main business of their government. They introduced new usages and abolished old ones; and as they did so the priests always bent to their will and were merely their executive organs. [*1] That they were at liberty to offer sacrifice also is a thing of course; they did it, however, only on exceptional occasions, such as, perhaps, at the dedication of a new altar (2 Kings xvi. 12, 13). Even with Jeremiah, who as a rule does not consider sacrifice and drawing near to Jehovah (Num. xvi 5) as every man's business, the king as such is held to be also the supreme priest; for at the beginning of the exile and the foreign domination his hope for the future is: "Their potentate shall be of themselves, and their governor shall proceed from the midst of them, and I will cause him to draw near, and he shall approach unto me; for who else should have the courage to approach unto me? saith the Lord" (xxx. 21). Ezekiel is the first to protest against dealing with the temple as a royal dependency; for him the prerogative of the prince is reduced to this, that it is his duty to support the public cultus at his own expense.

The distinction between the Judaean and the Israelite priesthood did not exist at first, but arose out of the course of events. The sheltered and quiet life of the little state in the south presents a marked

[p. 140]

contrast with the external and internal conflicts, the easily raised turmoil, of the northern kingdom. In the latter, the continual agitation brought extraordinary personalities up to the surface; in the former, institutions based upon the permanent order of things and supported by permanent powers were consolidated. [*1]

Naturally the monarchy itself benefited most by this stability. The king's cultus, which in the kingdom of Samaria was in no position to supersede the popular and independent worship, easily obtained a perceptible preponderance in the smaller Judah; the king's priesthood, which in the former was incidentally involved in disaster by the overthrow of the dynasty, in the latter gained in strength side by side with the house of David--even Aaron and Amminadab were according to the Priestly Code related to the royal family, as Jehoiada and Ahaziah were in actual fact. Thus at an early period was the way paved for the Act of Uniformity by which Josiah made the king's cultus the official and the only one. One effect which accompanied the measures he took was naturally the exclusive legitimation of the king's priesthood at Jerusalem. But the principle of heredity had already pervaded the other priestly families so thoroughly that to enter any secular calling was nowhere expected of them. The Deuteronomic legislator had conferred upon them the right of carrying on their office at Jerusalem, and of executing it there on behalf of any one who requested their services; but this regulation, from the opposition of the B'ne Zadok, was found on the whole impracticable (2 Kings xxiii. 9), although doubtless some extraneous elements may at that time have succeeded in making their way into the temple nobility. The bulk of the priests of the high places who had been superseded had to content themselves (since they could not now get rid of their spiritual character) with being degraded among their brethren at Jerusalem, and with admission to a subordinate share in the service of the sanctuary (comp. 1 Sam. ii. 36). It was thus, at the close of the pre-exilic history, that the distinction between priests and Levites arose to which Ezekiel is at pains to give the sanction of law.

[p. 141]

  

III.

1. On the whole it is easy here to bring the successive strata of the Pentateuch into co-ordination with the recognisable steps of the historical development. In the Jehovistic legislation there is no word of priests (Exod. xx.-xxiii., xxxiv.), and even such precepts as "Thou shalt not go up by steps unto mine altar, that thy nakedness be not discovered thereon" (Exod. xx. 26) are directed to the general "thou," that is, to the people. With this corresponds the fact that in the solemn ratification of the covenant of Sinai (Exod. xxiv. 3-8), it is young men of the children of Israel who officiate as sacrificers. Elsewhere in the Jehovist Aaron (Exod. iv. 14, xxxii. 1 seq.) and Moses (xxxiii. 7-11; Deut. xxxiii. 8) figure as the founders of the clerical order. Twice (in Exod. xix. 22 and xxxii 29) mention is made of other priests besides; but Exod. xxxii. 29 rests upon Deuteronomy, and even Exod. xix. 22 can hardly have been an original constituent of one of the Jehovistic sources.

2. In Deuteronomy the priests, as compared with the judges and the prophets, take a very prominent position (xvi. 18-xviii. 22) and constitute a clerical order, hereditary in numerous families, whose privilege is uncontested and therefore also does not require protection. Here now for the first time begins the regular use of the name of Levites for the priests,--a name of which the consideration has been postponed until now.

In the pre-exilic literature apart from the Pentateuch it occurs very seldom. First in the prophets, once in the Book of Jeremiah (xxxiii. 17-22), in a passage which in any case is later than the capture of Jerusalem by the Chaldaeans, and certainly was not written by Jeremiah. [*1] The use of the name is an established thing in Ezekiel (573 B.C.), and henceforward occurs without interruption in the writings of the later prophets, a sign that its earlier absence is not to be explained as accidental, not even in Jeremiah, who speaks so frequently of the priests. [*2] In the historical books the Levites (leaving out of account

[p. 142]

[paragraph continues] 1 Sam. vi. 15, 2 Sam. xv. 24, and 1 Kings viii. 4, xii. 31) [*1] occur only in the two appendices to the Book of Judges (chaps. xvii., xviii., and xix., xx.), of which, however, the second is unhistorical and late, and only the first is certainly pre-exilic. But in this case it is not the Levites who are spoken of, as elsewhere, but a Levite, who passes for a great rarity, and who is forcibly carried off by the tribe of Dan, which has none.

Now this Jonathan, the ancestor of the priests of Dan, notwithstanding that he belongs to the tribe of Judah, is represented as a descendant of Gershom the son of Moses (Judges xviii. 30). The other ancient priestly family that goes back to the period of the Judges, the Ephraimitic, of Shiloh, appears also to be brought into connection with Moses; at least in 1 Sam. ii. 27 (a passage, however, which is certainly post-Deuteronomic), where Jehovah is spoken of as having made himself known to the ancestors of Eli in Egypt, and as thereby having laid the foundation for the bestowal of the priesthood, it is clearly Moses who is thought of as the recipient of the revelation. Historical probability admits of the family being traced back to Phinehas, who during the early period of the judges was priest of the ark, and from whom the inheritance on Mount Ephraim and also the second son of Eli were named; it is not to be supposed that he is the mere shadow of his younger namesake, as the latter predeceased his father and was of quite secondary importance beside him. But Phinehas is both in the Priestly Code and in Josh. xxiv. 33 (E) the son of Eleazar, and Eleazar is, according to normal tradition, indeed a son of Aaron, but according to the sound of his name (Eliezer) a son of Moses along with Gershom. Between Aaron and Moses in the Jehovistic portion of the Pentateuch no great distinction is made; if Aaron, in contradistinction from his brother, is characterised as The Levite (Exod. iv. 14), Moses on the other hand bears the priestly staff, is over the sanctuary, and has Joshua to assist him as Eli had Samuel (Exod. xxxiii. 7-11). Plainly the older claims are his; in the main Jehovistic source, in J, Aaron originally does not occur at all, [*2] neither is he mentioned in Deuteronomy xxxiii. 8. In the

[p. 143]

genealogies of the Priestly Code one main branch of the tribe of Levi is still called, like the eldest son of Moses, Gershom, and another important member is actually called Mushi, i.e., the Mosaite.

It is not impossible that the holy office may have continued in the family of Moses, and it is very likely that the two oldest houses in which it was hereditary, those at Dan and at Shiloh, may have claimed in all seriousness to have been descended from him. Afterwards, as Deut. xxxiii. 8 seq. informs us, all priests honoured Moses as their father, not as being the head of their clan but as being the founder of their order. The same took place in Judah, but there the clerical guild ultimately acquired a hereditary character, and the order became a sort of clan. Levite, previously an official name, now became a patronymic at the same time, and all the Levites together formed a blood-kinship, [*1] a race which had not received any land of its own indeed, but in compensation had obtained the priesthood for its heritage. This hereditary clergy was alleged to have existed from the very beginning of the history of Israel, and even then as a numerous body, consisting of many others besides Moses and Aaron. Such is the representation made by Deuteronomist and subsequent writers, but in Deuteronomy we read chiefly of the Levites in the provincial towns of Judah and of the priests, the Levites in Jerusalem, seldom of Levi as a whole (x. 8 seq., xviii. 1) [*2]

That the hereditary character of the priesthood is here antedated and really first arose in the later period of the Kings, has already been shown in the particular instance of the sons of Zadok of Jerusalem, who were at first parvenus and afterwards became the most legitimate of the legitimate. But it is very remarkable how this artificial construction of a priestly family,--a construction which has absolutely nothing perplexing

[p. 144]

in itself--was suggested and favoured by the circumstance that in remote antiquity there once actually did exist a veritable tribe of Levi which had already disappeared before the period of the rise of the monarchy. This tribe belonged to the group of the four oldest sons of Leah,--Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Judah,--who are always enumerated together in this order, and who settled on both sides of the Dead Sea, towards the wilderness. Singularly no one of them succeeded in holding its own except Judah; all the others became absorbed among the inhabitants of the wilderness or in other branches of their kindred. The earliest to find this destiny were the two tribes of Simeon and Levi (in Gen. xlix. regarded as one), in consequence of a catastrophe which must have befallen them at some time during the period of the judges. "Simeon and Levi are brethren, their shepherds' staves are weapons of slaughter; O my soul, come not thou into their assembly! mine honour, be thou far from their band! for they slew men in their anger, and in their self-will they houghed oxen; cursed be their anger--so fierce! and their wrath--so cruel! I will divide them in Jacob and scatter them over Israel!" (Gen. xlix. 5-7). The offence of Simeon and Levi here rebuked cannot have been committed against Israelites, for in such a case the thought could not have occurred, which is here emphatically repelled, that Jacob, that is to say, Israel as a whole, could have made common cause with them. What is here spoken of must be some crime against the Canaanites, very probably the identical crime which is charged upon the two brothers in Gen. xxxiv., and which there also Jacob (ver. 30) repudiates,--the treacherous attack upon Shechem and massacre of its inhabitants, in disregard of the treaty which had been made. In Judges ix. it is related that Shechem, until then a flourishing town of the Canaanites, with whom moreover Israelite elements were already beginning to blend, was conquered and destroyed by Abimelech, but it is quite impossible to bring into any connection with this the violent deed of Simeon and Levi, which must have taken place earlier, although also within the period of the judges. The consequences of their act, the vengeance of the Canaanites, the two tribes had to bear alone; Israel, according to the indication given in Gen. xlix. 6, xxxiv. 30, did not feel any call to interfere on their behalf or make common cause with them. Thus they fell to pieces and passed out of sight,--in the opinion of their own nation a just fate. In the historical books they are never again mentioned.

[p. 145]

It is quite impossible to regard this Levi of the Book of Genesis as a mere shadow of the caste which towards the end of the monarchy arose out of the separate priestly families of Judah. The utterance given in Gen. xlix. 5-7 puts the brothers on an exact equality, and assigns to them an extremely secular and blood-thirsty character. There is not the faintest idea of Levi's sacred calling or of his dispersion as being conditioned thereby; the dispersion is a curse and no blessing, an annihilation and no establishment of his special character. But it is equally an impossibility to derive the caste from the tribe; there is no real connection between the two, all the intermediate links are wanting; the tribe succumbed at an early date, and the rise of the caste was very late, and demonstrably from unconnected beginnings. But in these circumstances the coincidence of name is also very puzzling: Levi the third son of Jacob, perhaps a mere patronymic derived form his mother Leah, and Levi the official priest. If it were practicable to find a convincing derivation of Levi in its later use from the appellative meaning of the root, then one might believe the coincidence to be merely fortuitous, but it is impossible to do so. The solution therefore has been suggested that the violent dissolution of the tribe in the period of the judges led the individual Levites, who now were landless, to seek their maintenance by the exercise of sacrificial functions; this lay to their hand and was successful because Moses them an of God had belonged to their number and had transmitted to them by hereditary succession a certain preferential claim to the sacred office. But at that time priestly posts were not numerous, and such an entrance of the Levites en masse into the service of Jehovah in that early time is in view of the infrequency of the larger sanctuaries a very difficult assumption. It is perhaps correct to say that Moses actually was descended from Levi, and that the later significance of the name Levite is to be explained by reference to him. In point of fact, the name does appear to have been given in the first instance only to the descendants of Moses, and not to have been transferred until a later period to those priests as a body, who were quite unconnected with him by blood, but who all desired to stand related to him as their head. Here it will never be possible to get beyond conjecture.

3 While the clerical tribe of the Levites is still brought forward only modestly in Deuteronomy (x. 8 seq. xviii. 1; Josh. xiii. 14, 33), it is dealt with in very real earnest in the Priestly Code. The tribe of 

[p. 146]

[paragraph continues] Levi (Num. i. 47, 49, iii. 6, xvii. 3, xviii. 2) is given over by the remaining tribes to the sanctuary, is catalogued according to the genealogical system of its families, reckons 22,000 male members, and even receives a sort of tribal territory, the forty-eight Levitical cities (Josh. xxi.). At the beginning of this chapter we have already spoken of a forward step made in the Priestly Code, connected with this enlargement of the clergy, but of much greater importance; hitherto the distinction has been between clergy and laity, while here there is introduced the great division of the order itself into sons of Aaron and Levites. Not in Deuteronomy only, but everywhere in the Old Testament, apart from Ezra, Nehemiah, and Chronicles, Levite is the priest's title of honour. [*1] Aaron himself is so styled in the often-quoted passage, Exod. iv. 14, and that too to denote his calling, not his family, for the latter he has in common with Moses, from whom, nevertheless, it is intended to distinguish him by the style, "thy brother the Levite." In Deuteronomy we are struck by the deliberate emphasis laid on the equal right of all the Levites to sacrificial service in Jerusalem--"The priests, the Levites, the whole tribe of Levi, shall have no portion or inheritance with Israel; they shall eat the offerings of Jehovah and his inheritance. . . .And if a Levite come from any of thy cities out of all Israel, where he sojourned, and come to the place which Jehovah shall choose, then he shall minister in the name of Jehovah his God as all his brethren the Levites do who stand there before Jehovah" (Deut. xviii. 1, 6, 7). Here the legislator has in view his main enactment, viz., the abolition of all places of worship except the temple of Solomon; those who had hitherto been the priests of these could not be allowed to starve. Therefore it is that he impresses it so often and so earnestly on the people of the provinces that in their sacrificial pilgrimages to Jerusalem they ought not to forget the Levite of their native place, but should carry him with them. For an understanding of the subsequent development this is very important, in so far as it shows how the position of the Levites outside of Jerusalem was threatened by the centralisation of the worship. In point of fact, the good intention of the

[p. 147]

[paragraph continues] Deuteronomist proved impossible of realisation; with the high places fell also the priests of the high places. In so far as they continued to have any part at all in the sacred service, they had to accept a position of subordination under the sons of Zadok (2 Kings xxiii. 9). Perhaps Graf was correct in referring to this the prophecy of 1 Sam. ii. 36 according to which the descendants of the fallen house of Eli are to come to the firmly established regius priest, to beg for an alms, or to say, "Put me, I pray thee, into one of the priests' offices, that I may eat a piece of bread:" that historically the deposed Levites had no very intimate connection with those ancient companions in misfortune is no serious objection to such an interpretation in the case of a post-Deuteronomic writer. In this way arose as an illegal consequence of Josiah's reformation, the distinction between priests and Levites. With Ezekiel this distinction is still an innovation requiring justification and sanction; with the Priestly Code it is a "statute for ever," although even yet not absolutely undisputed, as appears from the Priestly version of the story of Korah's company. [*1] For all Judaism subsequent to Ezra, and so for Christian tradition, the Priestly Code in this matter also has been authoritative. Instead of the Deuteronomic formula "the priests the Levites," we henceforward have "the priests and the Levites," particularly in Chronicles, [*2] and in the ancient versions the old usus loquendi is frequently corrected. [*3]

[p. 148]

The copestone of the sacred structure reared by the legislation of the middle books of the Pentateuch is the high priest. As the Aaronites are above the Levites so is Aaron himself above his sons; in his person culminates the development of the unity of worship inaugurated by Deuteronomy and the agency of Josiah. No figure of such incomparable importance occurs anywhere else in the Old Testament; a high priest of pre-eminent sanctity is still unknown to Ezekiel even. Even before the exile, it is true, the temple worship at Jerusalem had become so magnificent and its personnel so numerous as to render necessary an orderly division of offices and a gradation of ranks. In Jeremiah's time

[p. 149]

the priests constituted a guild divided into classes or families with elders at their head; the principal priest had a potent voice in the appointment of his inferior colleagues (1 Sam. ii. 36); alongside of him stood the second priest, the keepers of the threshold, the captain of the watch as holders of prominent charges. [*1] But in the Law the position of Aaron is not merely superior but unique, like that of the Pope in relation to the episcopate; his sons act under his oversight (Num. iii. 4); he alone is the one fully qualified priest, the embodiment of all that is holy in Israel He alone bears the Urim and Thummim and the Ephod; the Priestly Code indeed no longer knows what those articles are for, and it confounds the ephod of gold with the ephod of linen, the plated image with the priestly robe; but the dim recollections of these serve to enhance the magical charm of Aaron's majestic adornment. He alone may enter into the holy of holies and there offer incense; the way at other times inaccessible (Neh. vi. 10, 11) is open to him on the great day of atonement. Only in him, at a single point and in a single moment, has Israel immediate contact with Jehovah. The apex of the pyramid touches heaven.

The high priest stands forth as absolutely sovereign in his own domain. Down to the exile, as we have seen, the sanctuary was the property of the king, and the priest was his servant; even in Ezekiel who on the whole is labouring towards emancipation, the prince has nevertheless a very great importance in the temple still; to him the dues of the people are paid, and the sacrificial expenses are in return defrayed by him. In the Priestly Code, on the other hand, the dues are paid direct into the sanctuary, the worship is perfectly autonomous, and has its own head, holding not from man but from the grace of God. Nor is it merely the autonomy of religion that is represented by the high priest; he exhibits also its supremacy over Israel. He does not carry sceptre and sword; nowhere, as Vatke (p. 539) well remarks, is any attempt made to claim for him secular power. But just in virtue of

[p. 150]

his spiritual dignity, as the head of the priesthood, he is head of the theocracy, and so much so that there is no room for any other alongside of him; a theocratic king beside him cannot be thought of (Num. xxvii. 21). He alone is the responsible representative of the collective nation, the names of the twelve tribes are written on his breast and shoulders; his transgression involves the whole people in guilt, and is atoned for as that of the whole people, while the princes, when their sin-offerings are compared with his, appear as mere private persons (Lev. iv. 3, 13, 22, ix. 7, xvi. 6). His death makes an epoch; it is when the high priest--not the king--dies that the fugitive slayer obtains his amnesty (Num. xxxv. 28). At his investiture he receives the chrism like a king, and is called accordingly the anointed priest; he is adorned with the diadem and tiara (Ezek. xxi. 31, A.V. 26) like a king, and like a king too he wears the purple, that most unpriestly of all raiment, of which he therefore must divest himself when he goes into the holy of holies (Lev. xvi. 4). What now can be the meaning of this fact,--that he who is at the head of the worship, in this quality alone, and without any political attributes besides, or any share in the government, is at the same time at the head of the nation? What but that civil power has been withdrawn from the nation and is in the hands of foreigners; that Israel has now merely a spiritual and ecclesiastical existence? In the eyes of the Priestly Code Israel in point of fact is not a people, but a church; worldly affairs are far removed from it and are never touched by its laws; its life is spent in religious services. Here we are face to face with the church of the second temple, the Jewish hierocracy, in a form possible only under foreign domination. It is customary indeed to designate in the Law by the ideal, or in other words blind, name of theocracy that which in historical reality is usually called hierarchy; but to imagine that with the two names one has gained a real distinction is merely to deceive oneself. But, this self-deception accomplished, it is easy further to carry back the hierocratic churchly constitution to the time of Moses, because it excludes the kingship, and then either to assert that it was kept secret throughout the entire period of the judges and the monarchy, or to use the fiction as a lever by which to dislocate the whole of the traditional history.

To any one who knows anything about history it is not necessary to prove that the so-called Mosaic theocracy, which nowhere suits the

[p. 151]

circumstances of the earlier periods, and of which the prophets, even in their most ideal delineations of the Israelite state as it ought to be, have not the faintest shadow of an idea, is, so to speak, a perfect fit for post-exilian Judaism, and had its actuality only there. Foreign rulers had then relieved the Jews of all concern about secular affairs; they had it in their power, and were indeed compelled to give themselves wholly up to sacred things, in which they were left completely unhampered. Thus the temple became the sole centre of life, and the prince of the temple the head of the spiritual commonwealth, to which also the control of political affairs, so far as these were still left to the nation, naturally fell there being no other head. [*1] The Chronicler gave a corresponding number of high priests to the twice twelve generations of forty years each which were usually assumed to have elapsed between the exodus and the building of Solomon's temple, and again between that and the close of the captivity; the official terms of office of these high priests, of whom history knows nothing, have taken the place of the reigns of judges and kings, according to which reckoning was previously made (1 Chron. v. 29, seq.). One sees clearly from Sirach l., and from more than one statement of Josephus (e.g., Ant., xviii. 4, 3, xx. 1, 11), how in the decorations of Aaron (where, however, the Urim and Thummim were wanting; Neh. vii. 65) people reverenced a transcendent majesty which had been left to the people of God as in some sense a compensation for the earthly dignity which had been lost. Under the rule of the Greeks the high priest became ethnarch and president of the synedrium; only through the pontificate was it possible for the Hasmonaeans to attain to power, but when they conjoined it with full-blown secular sovereignty, they created a dilemma to the consequences of which they succumbed.

Footnotes

^122:1 In ver. 7 for wyprw read wthprw, in ver. 8 for wthshymwn read wthshymwm, and for lkm read lkn, in each case following the LXX.

^124:1 "If by reason of their birth it was impossible for the Levites to become priests, then it would be more than strange to deprive them of the priesthood on account of their faults,--much as if one were to threaten the commons with the punishment of disqualification to sit or vote in a house of lords" (Kuenen, Theol. Tijdschr., iii. 465).

^125:1 Jahrb. f. prot. Theol., 1875, p. 351: "Its doctrine that the Aaronidae alone are true priests has its parallel in Ezekiel, who still more exclusively recognises only the sons of Zadok as priests."

^126:1 To satisfy the Pentateuch it is shown in the Book of Chronicles, by means of artificial genealogies, how the sons of Zadok derived their origin in an unbroken line from Aaron and Eleazar. Compare my Pharisaer u. Sadducaer, p. 48 seq. This [p. 127] point was first observed by Vatke (p. 344 seq.), then by Kuenen (Theol. Tijdschr., iii. p. 463-509) and lastly by me (Text der BB. Sam., p. 48-51).

^128:1 In 1 Sam. i. seq., indeed, we read only of Eli and his two sons and one servant, and even David and Solomon appear to have had only a priest or two at the chief temple. Are we to suppose that Doeg, single-handed, could have made away with eighty-five men?

^130:1 byth 'lhym, "house of God," is never anything but the house of an image. Outside of the Priestly Code, ephod is the image, ephod bad the priestly garment.

^130:2 mshrth mshh, more precisely m 'th yy 'th pny mshh hkhz, 1 Sam. ii. 11.

^134:1 The parallelism between "Bamoth-houses" and a priestly appointment in 1 Kings xii. 31 seems not to be casual merely. Whilst a Bamah may be a simple altar, a "Bamoth-house" presupposes a divine image, and renders an aedituus necessary.

^136:1 Comp. Koran, iii. 31: "I vow to thee that which is in my womb as a devotee of the mosque, to serve it."

^137:1 In the introductory words the people are invited to hear what it is that Jehovah complains of them for; sin prevails to such an extent that the complete ruin of the country is inevitable (vers. 1-3). With the word "yet" at the beginning of the following verse the prophet changes the course of his thought; from the people he passes to the priests; the root of the general corruption is the want of divine knowledge (the knowledge, namely, that "I will have mercy and not sacrifice; "compare [p. 138] Jer. xxii. 16), and for this the priests are to blame, whose task it was to diffuse "knowledge," but who, instead of this for their own selfish interests fostered the tendency of the people to seek Jehovah's grace by sacrifice rather than by righteousness. For if it be conceded that it is the priests who are addressed from ver. 6 onwards, then it is not easy to see why a change in the address should take place between ver. 5 and ver. 6, especially as the co-ordination of priests with prophets seems more reasonable in ver. 5 than that of prophets and people. As ver. 4 in this way occupies an intermediate position between the complaint made against the people in vers. 1-3, and that against the priests in vers. 5-10, the transition from the one to the other, indicated by the "yet," must occur in it. Hosea abruptly breaks off from reproaching the people, "Yet let no man strive and no man reprove"--why not, the words that follow must explain. In verse 4b some circumstance must be mentioned which excuses the people, and at the same time draws down indignation upon the priests who are the subjects of the following. These considerations necessarily determine the thought which we are to expect, namely, this--"for the people do just as their priests." This meaning is obtained by the conjectural reading w`my kkmryw instead of w`mkkmryb. Comp. ver. 9. The remaining ykh must be deleted. The ordinary view of ver. 4 is hardly worth refuting. The 'l ywkch, it is said, is spoken from the people's point of view. The people repel the prophet's reproach and rebuke, because (such is the interpretation of ver. 4b) they themselves have no scruples in striving even with the priest. "Even," for want of subjection to the priests is held to be specially wicked. But the prophet Hosea would hardly have considered it a capital offence if the people had withheld from the priests the respect of which, according to his own language, they were so utterly unworthy. Moreover, every exegesis which finds in ver. 4 a reproach brought against the people, leaves in obscurity the point at which the transition is made from reproach of the people to reproach of the priests.

^138:1 According to 2 Kings xvii. 27, 28, the foreign colonies introduced by the Assyrians into Samaria after it had been depopulated, were at first devoured by lions because they were ignorant of the right way of honouring the deity of the land. Esarhaddon therefore sent one of the exiled Samaritan priests, who fixed his abode at Bethel, the ancient chief sanctuary, and instructed (mwrh) the settlers in the religion of the god of the country. This presupposes a definite priesthood, which maintained itself even in exile for a considerable time.

^139:1 Compare for example 2 Kings xii. 5 seq. (Joash and Jehoiada), xvi. 10 seq. (Ahaz and Urijah), and, finally, chap. xxii. (Josiah and Hilkiah).

^140:1 The Rechabites, who arose in the northern kingdom, continued to subsist in Judah, and Jeremiah prophesied to them that there should never fail them a priestly head of the family of their founder (xxxv. 19).

^141:1 In the LXX, chap. xxxiii. 14-26 is wanting. The parallelism between vers. 17-22 and 23-26 is striking. It looks as if David and Levi arose out of a misunderstanding of the families mentioned in ver. 24, namely, Judah and Ephraim. In any case wdwd in ver. 26 is an interpolation.

^141:2 Ezek. xl. 46, xliii. 19, xliv. 10, 15, xlv. 5, xlviii. 11-13, 22, 31; Isa. lxvi. 21; Zech. xii. 13; Mal. ii. 4, 8, iii. 3.

^142:1 Upon 1 Sam. vi. 15 all that is necessary has been said at <page 128>; on 1 Kings viii. 4 see. <page 43>. That 1 Kings xii. 31 proceeds from the Deuteronomic redactor, the date of whose writing is not earlier than the second half of the exile, needs no proof. The hopeless corruptness of 2 Sam. xv. 24 I have shown in Text. d. BB. Sam. (Gottingen, 1871).

^142:2 That Aaron was not originally present in J, but owed his introduction to tile redactor who combined J and E together into JE, can be shown best from Exod. vii. [p. 143] x. For Jehovah's command to appear before Pharaoh is in J given to Moses alone (vii. 14, 26 [viii. 1], viii. 16 [20], ix. 1, 13, x. 1); it is only in the sequel that Aaron appears along with him four times, always when Pharaoh in distress summons Moses and Aaron in order to ask their intercession. But strangely enough Aaron is afterwards completely ignored again; Moses alone makes answer, speaking solely in his own name and not in Aaron's also (viii. 5, 22, 25 [9, 26, 29]; ix. 29), and although he has not come alone; he goes so and makes his prayer in the singular (viii. 8, 26 [12, 30], ix. 33, x. 18), the change of the number in x. 17 is under these circumstances suspicious enough. It appears as if the Jehovistic editor had held Aaron's presence to be appropriate precisely at the intercession.

^143:1 The instance of the Rechabites shows how easily the transition could made.

^143:2 On Deut xxvii. compare Kuenen, Theol. Tijdschr., 1878, p. 297.

^146:1 Exod. iv. 14; Deut. xxxiii. 8; Judges xvii. seq.; Exod. xxxii. 26-28; Deut. x. 8 seq., xii. 12, 18 seq. xiv. 27, 29, xvi. 11, 14, xvii. 9, 18, xviii. 1-8, xxiv. 8, xxvii. 9, 14, xxxi. 9, 25; Josh. iii. 3, xiii. 14, 33, xiv. 3 seq., xviii. 7; Judges xix. seq., 1 Sam. vi. 15; 1 Kings xii. 31, Jer. xxxiii 17-22; Ezek. xliv. 8 seq.; Isa. lxvi. 2, Zech. xii. 13, Mal. ii. 4, 8, iii. 3. Only the glosses 2 Sam. xv. 24, and 1 Kings viii. 4 (compare, however, 2 Chron. v. 5) can rest upon the Priestly Code.

^147:1 Distorted references to the historical truth are round also in Num. xvii. 25 and xviii. 23, passages which are unintelligible apart from Ezek. xliv. Compare Kuenen, Theol. Tijdschr., 1878, p. 138 seq.

^147:2 Except in 2 Chron. v. 5, xxx. 27.

^147:3 E.g., Josh. iii. 3 and Isa. lxvi. 21 in the LXX, Deut. xviii. 1 and Judges xvii. 13 in "Jerome; and many passages in the Syriac. On the carrying out of the new organisation of the temple personnel after the exile, see Vatke, p. 568, Graf (in Merx's Archiv, i., p. 225 seq.), and Kuenen (Godsdienst, ii. p. 104 seq.). With Zerubbabel and Joshua, four priestly families, 4289 persons in all, returned from Babylon in 538 (Ezra iv. 36-39); with Ezra in 458 came two families in addition, but the number of persons is not stated (viii. 2). Of Levites there came on the first occasion 74 (ii. 40); on the second, of the 1500 men who met at the rendezvous appointed by Ezra to make the journey through the wilderness, not one was a Levite, and it was only on the urgent representations of the scribe that some thirty were at last induced to join the company (viii. 15-20). How can we explain this preponderance of priests over Levites, which is still surprising even if the individual figures are not to be taken as exact? Certainly it cannot be accounted for if the state of matters for a thousand years had been that represented in the Priestly Code and in Chronicles. On the other hand, all perplexity vanishes if the Levites were the degraded priests of the high places of Judah. These were certainly not on the whole more numerous [p. 148] than the Jerusalem college, and the prospect of thenceforward not being permitted to sacrifice in their native land, but of having slaughtering and washing for sole duties, cannot have been in any way very attractive to them; one can hardly blame them if they were disinclined voluntarily to lower themselves to the position of mere laborers under the sons of Zadok. Besides, it may be taken for granted that many (and more particularly Levitical) elements not originally belonging to it had managed to make way into the ranks of the Solomonic priesthood; that all were not successful (Ezra ii. 61) shows that many made the attempt, and considering the ease with which genealogies hoary with age were then manufactured and accepted, every such attempt cannot have failed.

How then came it to pass that afterwards, as one must conclude from the statements in Chronicles, the Levites stood to the priests in a proportion so much more nearly, if even then not quite fully corresponding to the law? Simply by the "Levitising" of alien families. At first in the community of the second temple the Levites continued to be distinguished from the singers, porters, and Nethinim (Ezra ii. 41-58), guilds which from the outset were much more numerous and which rapidly grew (Neh. xi. 17, 19, 36, xii. 28 seq.; 1 Chron. ix. 16, 22, 25). But the distinction had in fact no longer any actual basis, once the Levites had been degraded to the rank of temple-servitors and become Nethinim to the priests (Num. iii. 9). Hence, where the Chronicler, who is at the same time the author of the Books of Ezra and Nehemiah, is not reproducing old sources but is writing freely, he regards the singers also and the porters as Levites. By artificial genealogies of rather a rough and ready kind the three families of singers, Heman, Asaph, and Ethan are traced up (1 Chron. vi. 1 seq.) to the old Levitical families of Kohath, Gershon, and Merari (see Graf, as above, p. 231; and Ewald, iii. p. 380 seq.). How far the distinction between the Nethinim and the Levites was afterwards maintained (Josh. ix. 21 seq., I Esdr. i. 3; Ezra viii. 20) is not clear. It would not be amiss if Ezekiel's intention of banishing foreigners from the temple found its fulfilment only through these heathen hieroduli, the Mehunim, the Nephisim, the sons of Shalmai, and the others whose foreign-sounding names are given in Ezra ii. 43 seq., obtaining admission into the tribe of Levi by artificial genealogies. A peculiar side light is thrown upon the course of development by the fact that the singers who in Ezra's time were not yet even Levites, afterwards felt shame in being so, and desired at least externally to be placed on all equality with priests. They begged of King Agrippa II. to obtain for them the permission of the synedrium to wear the white priestly dress.

^149:1 The Kohen ha-rosh first occurs in 2 Sam. xv. 27, but here hr'sh (so read, instead of hrw'h) comes from the interpolator of ver. 24. So again 2 Kings xii. 11, hkhz hndwl, but 2 Kings xii. is from the same hand as 2 Kings xvi. 10 seq. and xxii. seq. Elsewhere we have simply "the priest," compare besides 2 Kings xix. 2; Jer. xix. 1; 2 Kings xxiii. 4; xxv. 18; Jer. xx. 1; xxix. 25, 26; In 1 Sam. ii. 36 spchny "incorporate me" shows that khnh must mean "priestly guild" or "order." In connection with the name lwy it is noteworthy that spch is parallel with lwh in Isa. xiv. 1.

^151:1 Very interesting and instructive is Ewald's proof of the way in which Zech. vi. 9-15 has been tampered with, so as to eliminate Zerubbabel and leave the high priest alone. Just so in dealing with Caliphs and Sultans, the Patriarchs were and are the natural heads of the Greek and Oriental Christians even in secular matters.

      
Prolegomena to the History of Ancient Israel, by Julius Wellhausen, [1885], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 152]

  

CHAPTER V.

  

THE ENDOWMENT OF THE CLERGY.

THE power and independence of the clergy run parallel with its material endowment, which accordingly passes through the same course of development. Its successive steps are reflected even in the language that is employed, in the gradual loss of point sustained by the phrase "to fill the hand," at all times used to denote ordination. Originally it cannot have had any other meaning than that of filling the hand with money or its equivalent; we have seen that at one time the priest was appointed by the owner of a sanctuary for a salary, and that, without being thus dependent upon a particular employer, he could not then live on the income derived from those who might employ him sacrificially. But when the Levitical hereditary priesthood arose in the later kingdom of Judah the hands of the priests were no longer filled by another who had the right to appoint and to dismiss, but they themselves at God's command "filled their own hand," or rather they had done so in the days of Moses once for all, as is said in Exod. xxxii. 26-29, an insertion corresponding with the position of Deuteronomy. It is obvious that such a statement, when carefully looked at, is absurd, but is to be explained by the desire to protest against outside interference. Even here the etymological sense is still sufficiently felt to create an involuntary jar and leads to a change of the construction; but finally all sense of it is lost, and the expression becomes quite colourless: "to fill the hand" means simply "to consecrate." In Ezekiel not only the priest but also the altar has its "hand filled" (xliii. 26); in the Priestly Code the abstract milluim ["consecrations"] is chiefly used, with subject and object left out, as the name of a mere inaugural ceremony which lasts for several days (Leviticus viii. 33; Exod. xxix. 34), essentially consists in the bringing of an offering on the part of the person to be consecrated, and has no longer even the remotest connection with actual filling of the hand (2 Chron. xiii. 7; comp.

[p. 153]

xxix. 31). The verb, therefore, now means simply the performance of this ceremony, and the subject is quite indifferent (Lev. xvi. 32, xxi. 10; Num. iii. 3); the installation does not depend upon the person who performs the rite, but upon the rite itself, upon the unction, investiture, and other formalities (Exod. xxix. 29).

This variation in the usus loquendi is the echo of real changes in the outward condition of the clergy, which we must now proceed to consider more in detail.

  

I.

1. Of the offerings, it was the custom in the earlier time to dedicate a portion to the deity but to use the greater part in sacred feasts, at which a priest, if present, was of course allowed also in one way or another to participate. But he does not appear to have had a legal claim to any definite dues of flesh. "Eli's sons were worthless persons, and cared not about Jehovah, or about the priests' right and duty with the people. When any man offered a sacrifice the servant of the priest came (that is all we have here to represent the 22,000 Levites) while the flesh was in seething, with a three-pronged flesh-hook in his hand, and stuck it into the pan, or kettle, or caldron, or pot; and all that the flesh-hook brought up the priest took. So they did in Shiloh unto all the Israelites that came thither. Even before the fat was burnt, the servant of the priest came and said to the man that sacrificed: "Give flesh to roast for the priest; he will not take sodden flesh of thee, but raw. And if the other said to him: Let the fat first be burnt, and then take according to thy soul's desire; then he would answer: Nay, but thou shalt give it now; and if not, I will take it by force" (1 Sam. ii. 12-16). The tribute of raw portions of flesh before the burning of the fat is here treated as a shameless demand which is fitted to bring Jehovah's offering into contempt (ver. 17), and which has the ruin of the sons of Eli as its merited reward. More tolerable is it, though even that is an abuse, when the priests cause boiled flesh to be brought them from the pot, though not seeking out the best for themselves, but leaving the selection to chance; they ought to wait and see what is given to them, or be contented with an invitation to the banquet. On the other hand we have it in Deuteronomy as "the priest's due from the people" (xviii. 3 = 1 Sam. ii. 12) that he receives the shoulder and the two cheeks and the maw of the slaughtered animal; and yet this is a modest

[p. 154]

claim compared with what the sons of Aaron have in the Priestly Code (Lev. vii. 34),--the right leg and the breast. The course of the development is plain; the Priestly Code became law for Judaism. In sacrifice, its demands were those which were regarded; but in order to fulfil all righteousness the precept of Deuteronomy was also maintained, this being applied--against the obvious meaning and certainly only as a result of later scrupulosity of the scribes--not to sacrifices but to ordinary secular slaughterings, from which also accordingly the priests received a portion, the cheeks (according to Jerome on Mal. ii. 3), including the tongue, the precept being thus harmonistically doubled. [*1] At an earlier date the priests at Jerusalem received money from those who employed them (Deut. xviii. 8), but for this had the obligation of maintaining the temple; from this one can discern that the money was properly speaking paid to the sanctuary, and was only conditionally delivered to its servitors. When they failed to observe the condition, King Jehoash took the money also from them (2 Kings xii. 7 seq.).

The meal-offerings are in the Priestly Code a subordinate matter, and the share that falls to the priests is here trifling compared with what they receive of the other sacrifices. The meal, of which only a handful is sprinkled upon the altar, the baked bread, and the  altogether are theirs entirely, so also the sin and trespass offerings so frequently demanded, of which God receives only the blood and the fat and the offerer nothing at all (Ezek. xliv. 29); of the burnt-offering at least the skin falls to their lot, These perquisites, however, none of them in their definite form demonstrably old, and some of them demonstrably the reverse, may be presumed to have had their analogues in the earlier period, so that they cannot be regarded absolutely as augmentation of the priestly income. In Josiah's time the maccoth were among the principal means of support of the priests (2 Kings xxiii. 9); doubtless they came for the most part from the minha. Instead of sin and trespass offerings, which are still unknown to Deuteronomy, there were formerly sin and trespass dues in the form of money payments to the priests,--payments which cannot, however, have been so regular (2 Kings xii. 17). It is as if money payments were in the eye of the law too profane; for atonement there must be shedding of blood. That the skin of the holocaust, which cannot well be consumed

[p. 155]

on the altar, should fall to the priest is so natural an arrangement, that one will hardly be disposed to regard it as new, although Ezekiel is silent about a due which was not quite worthless (xliv. 28-31).

So far then as departures from earlier custom can be shown in the sacrificial dues enjoined by the Priestly Code, they must not indeed be treated as purely local differences, but neither are they to be regarded as on the whole showing a serious raising of the tariff. But in the Code the sacrificial dues are only a subordinate part of the income of the priests. In Deuteronomy the priests are entirely thrown upon the sacrifices; they live upon them (xviii. 1) and upon invitations to the sacred banquets (xii. 12, 18 seq.); if they are not exercising the priestly function they must starve (1 Sam. ii. 36). On the other hand, the Aaronidae of the Priestly Code do not need to sacrifice at all, and yet have means of support, for their chief revenue consists of the rich dues which must be paid them from the products of the soil.

2. The dues falling to the priests according to the law were all originally offerings--the regular offerings which had to be brought on the festivals; and these all originally were for sacred banquets, of which the priests received nothing more than the share which was generally customary. This is true in the first instance of the male firstlings of cattle. As we have seen in the chapter on the sacred feasts, these are sacrifices and sacrificial meals, alike in the Jehovistic legislation and in the Jehovistic narrative of the exodus and of Abel, as were all the offerings brought by private individuals in the olden time. When in Exod. xxii. 29 it is said that they must be given to Jehovah, this does not mean that they must be given to the priests; no such thing is anywhere said in the Book of the Covenant. Matters still stand on essentially the same footing in Deuteronomy also: "thou shalt sanctify them unto Jehovah; thou shalt not plough with the firstling of the bullock, nor shear the firstling of thy sheep; thou shalt eat it before Jehovah year by year in the place which He shall choose; and if there be any blemish therein, thou shalt not offer it to Jehovah thy God" (Deut. xv. 19, 20). To sanctify to Jehovah, to eat before Jehovah, to offer to Jehovah, are here three equivalent ideas. If now, in Num. xviii. 15 seq., every first birth is assigned without circumlocution to the priest, and a special paschal offering is appointed in addition, this can only be understood as the last phase in the development, partly because the idea of dues altogether is secondary to that

[p. 156]

of offerings, and partly because the immense augmentation in the income of the priests points to an increase of the hierocratic power. Ezekiel does not yet reckon the firstlings among the revenues of the clergy (xliv. 28-31); the praxis of Judaism, on the other hand, since Neh. x. 37, is regulated, as usual, in accordance with the norm of the Priestly Code.

The tithe also is originally given to God, and treated just as the other offerings are; that is to say, it is not appropriated by the priests, but eaten by those who bring it in sacred banquets. It does not occur in the Jehovistic legislation, but Jacob dedicates it (Gen. xxviii. 22) to the God of Bethel, a place where, although the whole story is a projection out of a later time, it would hardly be in harmony with the conceptions of the narrator to think of the presence of priests. The prophet Amos, who probably represents much the same stage of the cultus as the Jehovist does, says: "Come to Bethel to transgress, to Gilgal to sin still more; and bring every morning your sacrifices, every three days your tithes, and offer with bread pieces of flesh to the flames, and proclaim free offerings aloud, for so ye like, ye children of Israel" (Amos iv. 4 seq.). He ironically recommends them to persevere in the efforts they have hitherto made in honour of God, and to double them; to offer daily, instead of, as was usual (1 Sam. i.), yearly at the chief festival; to pay tithes every three days, instead of, as was the custom, every three years. It is clear that the tithe here holds rank with Zebah, Toda, and Nedaba; it is a sacrifice of joy, and a splendid element of the public cultus, no mere due to the priests. Now, in this point also Deuteronomy has left the old custom, on the whole, unchanged. According to xiv. 22 seq. the tithe of the produce of the soil, or its equivalent in money, must be brought year by year to the sanctuary, and there consumed before Jehovah that is, as a sacrificial meal; only every third year it is not to be offered in Jerusalem, but is to be given as alms to the people of the locality who have no land, to which category the Levites in particular belong. This last application is an innovation, connected on the one hand with the abolition of the sanctuaries, and on the other with the tendency of the Deuteronomist to utilise festal mirth for humane ends. [*1] But this is a mere trifle compared with what we find in the Priestly Code, where the whole tithe has

[p. 157]

become a mere due to be collected by the Levites (Neh. x. 38 [37]) on behalf of the clergy, whose endowment thereby is again very largely increased. Ezekiel is silent on this point also (xliv. 18-31), but as the tithe is demanded in Numbers (xviii. 21 seq.), so was it paid from the days of Nehemiah (x. 38 [37] seq.) by the church of the second temple. Later there was added over and above, so as to meet the divergent requirement of Deuteronomy, the so-called second tithe, which usually was consumed at Jerusalem, but in every third year was given to the poor (so Deut. xxvi. 12, LXX), and in the end the tithe for the poor was paid separately over and above the first and second (Tobit i. 7, 8; Jos., Ant., iv. 8, 22).

It is absolutely astounding that the tithe which in its proper nature should apply only to products of definite measure, such as corn and wine and oil (Deut. xiv. 23), comes to be extended in the Priestly Code to cattle also, so that besides the male firstlings every tenth head of cattle and of sheep must also be paid to the priests. This demand, however, is not yet met with in Numbers xviii., nor even in Neh. x. 38, 39, but first occurs as a novel in Lev. xxvii. 32 (1 Sam. viii. 17). Whether it ever came into the actual practice of Judaism seems doubtful; in 2 Chron. xxxi. 6 the tithe of cattle is indeed mentioned, but on the other hand the firstlings are not; in the pre-rabbinical literature no traces of it are discoverable,--especially not in Philo, who knows only of the ordinary tithes due to the Levites, and not of the tithes of cattle due to the priests (De praem. sacerd. 6).

With the tithe of the fruit of the soil the first fruits are at bottom identical; the latter were reduced to definite measure later and through the influence of the former. This is no doubt the reason why in the Jehovistic legislation tithe and first fruits are not both demanded, but only a gift of the first and best of corn, wine, and oil, left to the free discretion of the offerer, which is conjoined with the firstling of cattle and sheep (Exod. xxii. 28 [29]. xxiii. 19, xxxiv. 26). In a precisely similar way the tithe of the field stands conjoined with the firstlings of cattle in Deuteronomy (xiv. 22, 23, xv. 19 seq.). But also the reshith, usually translated first-fruits, occurs in Deuteronomy,--as a payment of corn, wine, oil, and wool to the priests (xviii. 4); a small portion, a basketful, thereof is brought before the altar and dedicated with a significant liturgy (xxvi. 1 seq.). It appears that it is taken from the tithe, as might be inferred from xxvi. 12 seq. taken as the continuation of vers. 1-11; in one passage, xxvi. 2, the more general

[p. 158]

usus loquendi reappears, according to which the reshith means the entire consecrated fruit, which as a whole is consumed by the offerers before Jehovah, and of which the priests receive only a portion. But in the Priestly Code not only is the entire tithe demanded as a due of the clergy, the reshith also is demanded in addition (Num. xviii. 12), and it is further multiplied, inasmuch as it is demanded from the kneading-trough as well as from the threshing-floor: in every leavening the halla belongs to Jehovah (xv. 20). Nor is this all; to the reshith (xviii. 12) are added the bikkurim also (xviii. 13), as something distinct. The distinction does not occur elsewhere (Exod. xxxiv. 26); prepared fruits alone are invariably spoken of, the yield of the threshing-floor and the wine-press, of which first produce--"the fulness and the overflow "--was to be consecrated. The fat of oil, wine, and corn is the main thing in Num. xviii. also, and is called reshith (ver. 12) or terumah (ver. 27); but the bikkurim (ver. 13) seem to be a separate thing, and, if this be really the case, must mean those raw fruits which have ripened earliest. Judaism, here once more moulding itself essentially in accordance with the tenor of the Priestly Code, actually drew this distinction; from the publication of the Law through Ezra the community pledged itself to bring up yearly the bikkurim to the house of Jehovah, and to deliver the reshith into the temple cells (Neh. x. 36 [35]). The former was a religious solemnity, associated with processions, and the use of the ritual in Deut. xxvi.; the latter was rather a simple tax paid from natural products,--a distinction which perhaps is connected with the different expressions they shall bring (Num. xviii. 13) and they shall give (xviii. 12). The LXX keeps aparxe and prutogeniemata strictly apart, as also do Philo (De praem. sacerd. 1, 2) and Josephus (Ant., iv. 4, 8, 22).

3. The amount which at last is required to be given is enormous. What originally were alternatives are thrown together, what originally was left free and undetermined becomes precisely measured and prescribed. The priests receive all the sin and trespass offerings, the greater share of the vegetable offerings, the hides of the burnt offerings, the shoulder and breast of meat offerings. Over and above are the firstlings, to which are added the tithes and first-fruits in a duplicate form, in short, all kodashim, which originally were demanded merely as ordinary meat offerings (Deut. xii. 26 = ver. 6, 7, and so on), and were consumed at holy places and by consecrated guests indeed, but not by

[p. 159]

the priest. And, notwithstanding all this, the clergy are not even asked (as in Ezekiel is the prince, who there receives the dues, xlv. 13 seq.) to defray the cost of public worship; for this there is a poll-tax, which is not indeed enjoined in the body of the Priestly Code, but which from the time of Nehemiah x. 33 [32] was paid at the rate of a third of a shekel, till a novel of the law (Exod. xxx. 15) raised it to half a shekel.

  

II.

1. To the endowment of the clergy in the Priestly Code belong finally the forty-eight cities assigned by Joshua in accordance with the appointment of Moses (Num. xxxv.; Josh. xxi.). The tribes gave them up freely; the smaller giving few and the larger more (Num. xxxv. 8). The Aaronidae and the three families of the Levites cast lots about them in four divisions; the sons of Aaron get thirteen cities in Judah, the Levites ten in Ephraim-Manasseh, thirteen in Galilee, and twelve in the territory eastward of Jordan. It is not merely the right to inhabit, but, in spite of all apologetic rationalism, the right of absolute possession that they receive (Josh. xxi. 12), inclusive of a portion of land two thousand ells square (square in the strictly literal sense; Num. xxxv. 5), which serves as public common.

The physical impracticability of such an arrangement has been conclusively shown, after Gramberg, by Graf (Merx, Archiv, i. p. 83). The 4 * 12 or the substituted 13 + 10 + 13 + 12 cities, of which in spite of Num. xxxv. 8 for the most part four belong to each of the twelve tribes, are already sufficient to suggest a suspicion of artificial construction; but the regulation that a rectangular territory of two thousand ells square should be measured off as pasture for the Levites around each city (which at the same time is itself regarded only as a point; Num. xxxv. 4) might, to speak with Graf, be very well carried out perhaps in a South Russian steppe or in newly founded townships in the western States of America, but not in a mountainous country like Palestine, where territory that can be thus geometrically portioned off does not exist, and where it is by no means left to arbitrary legal enactments to determine what pieces of ground are adapted for pasturage and what for tillage and gardening; there, too, the cities were already in existence, the land was already under cultivation, as the Israelites slowly conquered

[p. 160]

it in the course of centuries. Besides, from the time of Joshua there is not a historical trace of the existence of the Levitical cities. Quite a number of them were in the days of the judges and down to the early monarchy still in the hands of the Canaanites,--Gibeon, Shechem, Gezer, Taanach; some perhaps may even have so continued permanently. Those on the other hand which passed into the possession of the Israelites at no time belonged to the Levites. Shechem, Hebron, Ramoth, were the capital cities of Ephraim, Judah, and Gilead; and Gibeon, Gezer, Heshbon were in like manner important but by no means ecclesiastical towns. In the Deuteronomic period the Levites were scattered throughout Judah in such a manner that each locality had its own Levites or Levite; nowhere did they live separated from the rest of the world in compact masses together, for they made their living by sacrificing for others, and without a community they could not exercise their calling. Some indeed possessed land and heritage; such were at an earlier period the Silonic family at Gibeath-Phineas, Amaziah at Bethel, and Abiathar at Anathoth, and at a later period Jeremiah, also at Anathoth. But Anathoth (for example) was not on that account a priestly city in the sense of Joshua xxi.; Jeremiah had his holding there as a citizen and not as a priest, and he shared not with the priests but with the people (xxxvii. 12). As a tribe Levi was distinguished from the other tribes precisely by holding no land, and its members joined themselves to the settled citizens and peasants, for the most part as dependent inmates (Deuteronomy x. 9, xviii. 1).

Even after the exile, indeed, matters were not different in this respect. "Ab excidio templi prioris sublatum est Levitis jus suburbiorum," says R. Nachman (B. Sotah, 48b), and he is borne out by the silence of Neh. x. The execution of the law was probably postponed to the days of the Messiah; it was not in truth within the power of man, and cannot be seriously demanded in the Priestly Code itself, which contemplates a purely ideal Israel, with ideal boundaries, and leaves the sober reality so far out of sight that on archaeological grounds it never once so much as mentions Jerusalem, the historical capital of the priests.

The circumstance that these towns lay in partibus infiidelium seems to make them unavailable as a means of fixing the antiquity of the Priestly Code. It is possible with Bleek to explain the transcendence of history as Mosaicity; such a view is not to be argued against. But it is also possible with Noldeke to insist that an

[p. 161]

invention so bold cannot possibly be imputed to the spirit of the exilic and post-exilic time, which in everything is only anxiously concerned to cleave to what is old and to restore it; and such a contention deserves and admits of refutation. It is not the case that the Jews had any profound respect for their ancient history; rather they condemned the whole earlier development, and allowed only the Mosaic time along with its Davidic reflex to stand; in other words, not history but the ideal. The theocratic ideal was from the exile onwards the centre of all thought and effort, and it annihilated the sense for objective truth, all regard and interest for the actual facts as they had been handed down. It is well known that there never have been more audacious history-makers than the Rabbins. But Chronicles affords evidence sufficient that this evil propensity goes back to a very early time, its root the dominating influence of the Law, being the root of Judaism itself. Judaism is just the right soil for such an artificial growth as the forty-eight priestly and Levitical cities. It would hardly have occurred to an author living in the monarchical period, when the continuity of the older history was still unbroken, to look so completely away from all the conditions of the then existing reality; had he done so, he would have produced upon his contemporaries the impression merely that he had scarcely all his wits about him. But after the exile had annihilated the ancient Israel, and violently and completely broken the old connection with the ancient conditions, there was nothing to hinder from planting and partitioning the tabula rasa in thought at pleasure, just as geographers are wont to do with their map as long as the countries are unknown.

But, of course, no fancy is pure fancy; every imagination has underlying it some elements of reality by which it can be laid hold of, even should these only be certain prevailing notions of a particular period. It is clear, if a proper territory is assigned to the clergy, that the notion of the clerical tribe which already had begun to strike root in Deuteronomy has here grown and gathered strength to such a degree that even the last and differentiating distinction is abolished which separates the actual tribes from the Levites, viz. communal independence and the degree of concentration which expresses itself in separate settlements. For when we read, notwithstanding, in the Priestly Code that Aaron and Levi are to have no lot nor inheritance in Israel (Num. xviii. 20, 23), this is merely a form of speech taken over from Deuteronomy and at the same time an involuntary concession to

[p. 162]

fact; what would the forty-eight cities have been, had they actually existed, if not a lot, a territorial possession, and that too a comparatively large one? The general basis which serves as starting-point for the historical fiction being thus far recognisable, we are able also to gain a closer view of its concrete material. The priestly and Levitical cities stand in close connection with the so-called cities of refuge. These are also appointed in Deuteronomy (xix.), although not enumerated by name (for Deut. iv. 41-43 cannot be regarded as genuine). Originally the altars were asylums (Exod. xxi. 14; 1 Kings ii. 28), some in a higher degree than others (Exod. xxi. 13). In order not to abolish the asylums also along with the altars, the Deuteronomic legislator desired that certain holy places should continue as places of refuge, primarily three for Judah, to which, when the territory of the kingdom extended, three others were to be afterwards added. The Priestly Code adopts the arrangement, and specifies three definite cities on this side and three on the other side of Jordan (Num. xxxv.; Josh. xx.), four of which are demonstrably famous old seats of worship,--all the three western ones, and Ramoth, that is, Mizpah, of the eastern ones (Gen. xxxi.; Judges xi. 11). But as all these asylums are at the same time priestly and Levitical cities, it is an obvious conjecture that these also in like manner arose out of old sanctuaries. We need not suppose that there is more in this than an echo of the general recollection that there were once in Israel many holy places and residences of priesthoods; it is by no means necessary to assert that each of the towns enumerated in Josh. xxi. had actually been an ancient sanctuary. In many cases, however, this also admits of being shown, [*1] although some of the most famous (or according to the later view, infamous) high places, such as Bethel, Dan, Gilgal, and Beersheba are omitted, probably of set purpose.

The immediate starting-point, however, for this territorial donation to the Levites is perhaps to be sought in Ezekiel, in the picture of the

[p. 163]

future Israel which he draws at the close of his book. He concerns himself there in a thorough-going manner about the demarcation of the national and tribal boundaries, and in doing so sets quite freely to work, taking, so to speak, the yard measure in his hand. Leaving the land eastward of Jordan wholly to the Saracens, he divides the western portion into thirteen parallel transverse sections; in the middle of the thirteenth (the rest of which is assigned to the prince), lying between Judah and Benjamin, the twelve tribes give up a square with a base line of 25,000 ells as a sacred offering to Jehovah. This square is divided into three parallelograms, 25,000 ells long, running east and west; the southernmost of these, 5000 ells broad, includes the capital with its territory; the middle one, 10,000 ells broad, contains the temple and the priestly territory; the northernmost, also 10,000 ells broad, has the inheritance and the cities of the Levites. [*1] Thus we have here also a surrender of land to the clergy on the part of the tribes; the comparison with Josh. xxi. is not to be put aside,--all the less, because nowhere else in the Old Testament is anything similar met with. Now Ezekiel is quite transparent, and requires no interpreter but himself. In order that the temple may be protected in its sanctity in the best possible manner, it is placed in the centre of the priestly territory, which in its turn is covered by the city on the south, and by the Levites on the north. At the same time the personnel connected with the function of worship is to dwell as much as possible apart on its own soil and territory, which shall serve them for separate houses to sanctify them, as is expressly remarked for the priests (xiv. 4), and in an inferior degree holds good also, of course, for the Levites beside them. Here everything starts from, and has its explanation in, the temple. Its original is unmistakably the temple of Solomon; its site is beside the capital, in the heart of the sacred centre of the land between Judah and Benjamin; there the sons of Zadok have their abode, and beside them are the Levites whom Josiah had brought up from all the country to Jerusalem. Obviously the motives are not here far to seek. In the Priestly Code, on the other hand, which was not in a position to shape the future freely out of the present, but was compelled to accept archaeological restrictions, the motives are historically concealed and almost paralysed. The result has remained, namely, the

[p. 164]

holding of separate territory by the clergy, but the cause or the purpose of it can no longer be recognised on account of the sanctuary being now an abstract idea. Jerusalem and the temple, which, properly speaking, occasioned the whole arrangement, are buried in silence with a diligence which is in the highest degree surprising; and on the other hand, in remembrance of the priesthoods scattered everywhere among the high places of Israel in earlier days, forty-eight fresh Levitical cities are created, from which, however, their proper focus, a temple to wit, is withheld only in the circumstance that precisely the thirteen cities of Judah and Benjamin happen to fall to the lot of the sons of Aaron, does the influence of Jerusalem unconsciously betray itself.

2. Apart from this historical fiction, the other claims that are made for the endowment of the clergy are, however exorbitant, nevertheless practicable and seriously meant. So far as the circumstances of their origin are concerned, two possibilities present themselves. Either the priests demanded what they could hope to obtain, in which case they were actually supreme over the nation, or they set up claims which at the time were neither justified nor even possible; in which case they were not indeed quite sober, yet at the same time so sane prophetically, that centuries afterwards the revenues they dreamed of became in actuality theirs. Is it to be supposed that it was (say) Moses, who encouraged his people as they were struggling for bare life in the wilderness to concern themselves about a superabundantly rich endowment of their clergy? Or is it believed that it was in the period of the judges, when the individual tribes and families of Israel, after having forced their way among the Canaanites, had a hard fight to maintain their position, get somehow settled in their new dwelling-places and surroundings, that the thought first arose of exacting such taxes from a people that was only beginning to grow into a national unity, for an end that was altogether remote from its interest? What power could then have been able in those days, when every man did what was right in his own eyes, to compel the individual to pay? But even when actually, under the pressure of circumstances, a political organisation had arisen which embraced all the tribes, it could hardly have occurred to the priests to utilise the secular arm as a means for giving to themselves a place of sovereignty; and still less could they have succeeded without the king on whom they were so completely dependent. In short, the claims they make in the Law would in the pre-exilic period have been regarded as utopian in the strict

[p. 165]

sense of that word; they allow of explanation only by the circumstances which from the beginning of the Chaldaean rule, and still more that of the Persians, lent themselves to the formation of a hierocracy, to which, as to the truly national and moreover divine authority, the people gave voluntary obedience, and to which the Persians also conceded rights they could not have granted to the family of David. At the very beginning of the exile, Ezekiel begins to augment the revenues of the priests (xliv. 28-30), yet he still confines himself on the whole to the lines of Deuteronomy, and makes no mention of tithes and firstlings. Of the demands of the Priestly Code in their full extent we hear historically in Neh. x. for the first time; there it is stated that they were carried through by men who had the authority of Artaxerxes behind them. This was the most difficult and at the same time the most important part of the work Ezra and Nehemiah had to do in introducing the Pentateuch as the law of the Jewish Church; and that is the reason why it is so specially and minutely spoken of. Here plainly lies the material basis of the hierocracy from which the royal throne was ultimately reached.

For all these dues, apart from sacrificial perquisites, flowed into a common coffer, and benefited those who had the control of this, viz., the priestly aristocracy of Jerusalem, whom it helped to rise to a truly princely position. The ordinary priests, and especially the Levites, did not gain by all this wealth. The latter indeed ought, according to law, to have had the tithes, and to have handed over the tithes of these again to the sons of Aaron, but as the general tendency of the time was to depress the Levites, this legal revenue was also gradually withdrawn from them and appropriated by the priests. Afterwards the chief priests claimed the tithes for themselves alone, while their inferior brethren had to suffer severe privation and even hunger itself (Josephus, Ant., xx. 8, 8; 9, 2).

Upon the difference just stated between the later practice and the Law, one argument more has recently been founded against assigning the latter to the Babylonio-Persian period. "Another testimony borne by tradition completely excludes the idea of the Elohistic torah (i.e., the Priestly Code) having been composed by Ezra. As is well known, it is the Elohistic torah that carefully regulates the mutual relations of priests and Levites, while Deuteronomy groups the two together without bringing forward the distinction. It is the former that assigns the tithes to the Levites, while requiring these in their turn to

[p. 166]

hand over the tithe of their tithes as a due to the priests. Such was also the practice (Neh. x. 38 seq.) soon after the exile [i.e., a hundred years later; Neh. vii. 5]. But subsequently the payment of the tithes to the Levites fell entirely into disuse; these were rendered immediately and exclusively to the priests, so that Jose ben Hanina actually confesses: "We do not pay the tithes according to the command of God" (Sota, 47b). But everywhere the Talmud refers this practice back to Ezra. Ezra it was who punished the Levites by withdrawal of the tithes, and that because they had not come out from Babylon (Jebam. 386b; Chullin 11b). The point to be noted is that Ezra, according to the testimony of tradition, superseded a precept of the Elohistic torah, supporting himself in this perhaps by reference to the Deuteronomic torah." So Delitzsch in the Zeitschr. fur luth. Theol., 1877, p. 448 seq. That Ezra is not the author of the Priestly Code may readily be granted--only not on such an argument as this. If the genuine historical tradition expressly names Ezra as the man who introduced the Levites' tithe just as prescribed by law (Neh. x. 38 seq.), what conscientious man can attach any weight to the opposite assertion of the Talmud?

But, even assuming that the divergence of practice from the legal statute actually does go back to the time of Ezra, what would follow from that against the post-exilic origin of the Priestly Code? For this is what the question comes to, not to Ezra's authorship, which is made the main point by a mere piece of transparent controversial tactics. The demands of the Priestly Code, which demonstrably were neither laid down, nor in any sense acted on before the exile, attained the force of law one hundred years after the return from Babylon (Neh. x.); the whole taxation system of Judaism ever afterwards rested upon it;--shall this be held to have no meaning as against the trifling circumstance that the tithe also was indeed paid to the clergy, in full accordance with the Priestly Code, and inconsistently with ancient custom, but paid to the higher, and not to the lower order?

In point of fact any other difference whatever between Jewish practice and the Law might better have been adduced against the thesis of Graf,--for example, the absence of Urim and Thummim (Neh. vii. 65), or of the forty-eight Levitical cities, the church of the returned exiles instead of that of the twelve tribes of Israel, the second temple instead of the tabernacle, Ezra instead of Moses, the sons of

[p. 167]

[paragraph continues] Zadok instead of the sons of Aaron, the absence of the other marks of Mosaicity. For the position of the Levites is the Achilles heel of the Priestly Code. If the Levites at a later date were still further lowered beneath the priests, and put into a worse position in favour of these, this nevertheless presupposes the distinction between the two; let it first then be shown that the distinction is known to the genuine Old Testament, and that, in particular, it is introduced by Ezekiel not as a new thing, but as of immemorial antiquity. Or is the primary fact that the separation between priests and Levites was set up only in the Priestly Code and in Judaism, and that its genesis can be traced with confidence from the time of Josiah downwards, a fact of less importance than the secondary one that the distinction extended itself somewhat further still in the subsequent development of Judaism?

Footnotes

^154:1 Philo, De praem. sacerd., sec. 3. Josephus, Ant., iii. 9. 2; iv. 4, 4.

^156:1 Connection is, however, possible with some older custom, such as must certainly be assumed for Amos iv. 4. Comp. Deut. xxvi. 12, "the year of tithing."

^162:1 In the cases of Hebron, Gibeon, Shechem, Ramoth, Mahanaim and Tabor (Host v. 1) by historical data; in those of Bethshemesh, Ashtaroth, Kadesh,, perhaps also Rimmon, by the names. Not even here can one venture to credit the Priestly Code with consistent fidelity to history. As for Hosea v. 1, 2, the original meaning seems to be: "A snare have ye become for Mizpah, and an outspread net upon Tabor, and the pit-fall of Shittim (shchth hshtym) have they made deep." Shittim as a camping-place under Moses and Joshua must certainly have been a sanctuary, just like Kadesh, Gilgal, and Shiloh; the prophet names these seats at which in his opinion the worship was especially seductive and soul-destroying; his reproach is levelled at the priests most famous (or according to the later view, infamous) high places, such as Bethel, Dan, Gilgal, and Beersheba are omitted, probably of set purpose.

^163:1 For `shrym lshkth (xlv. 5), read, with the LXX, sh`rym lshbth "to dwell within the gates." Compare a similar transposition of letters in xiii. 3, LXX. The expression "gates" for "cities" has its origin in Deuteronomy.

      
Prolegomena to the History of Ancient Israel, by Julius Wellhausen, [1885], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 168] [p. 169]

  

II.
 HISTORY OF TRADITION.

Pleon emisy pantos--Hesiod.

[p. 170] [p. 171]

  

CHAPTER VI.

  

CHRONICLES.

UNDER the influence of the spirit of each successive age, traditions originally derived from one source were very variously apprehended and shaped; one way in the ninth and eighth centuries, another way in the seventh and sixth, and yet another in the fifth and fourth. Now, the strata of the tradition show the same arrangement as do those of the legislation. And here it makes no difference whether the tradition be legendary or historical, whether it relates to pre-historic or to historic times; the change in the prevailing ideas shows itself equally in either case. To show the truth of this in the case of the Hexateuch is of course our primary object, but we make our commencement rather with the properly historical books. For on various grounds we are here able with greater certainty to assert: Such was the aspect of history at this period and such at that; such were the influences that had the ascendancy at one time, and such those which prevailed at another.

We begin the inquiry where the matter is clearest--namely, with the Book of Chronicles. Chronicles, which properly speaking forms but a single book along with Ezra and Nehemiah, is a second history running parallel with the Books of Samuel and Kings, and we are here in the favourable position of starting with the objects of comparison distinctly defined, instead of having as usual to begin by a critical separation of sources of various age combined in one document. And, what is more, we can also date the rival histories with tolerable certainty. The Books of Samuel and of Kings were edited in the Babylonian exile; Chronicles, on the other hand, was composed fully three hundred years later, after the downfall of the Persian empire, out of the very midst of fully developed Judaism. We shall now proceed to show that the mere difference of date fully accounts for the varying ways in which the two histories represent the same facts and events, and the difference of spirit arises from the influence of the Priestly Code

[p. 172]

which came into existence in the interval. De Wette's "Critical Essay on the Credibility of the Books of Chronicles" (Beitrage, i.; 1806), is throughout taken as the basis of the discussion: that essay has not been improved on by Graf (Gesch. Bucher d. A. T. p. 114 seq.), for here the difficulty, better grappled with by the former, is not to collect the details of evidence, but so to shape the superabundant material as to convey a right total impression.

  

I.

1. After Jehovah had slain Saul (so begins the narrative of Chronicles), He turned the kingdom unto David the son of Jesse. All Israel gathered themselves unto David to Hebron and anointed him king over Israel, according to the word of Jehovah by Samuel (1 Chron. x. 1.-xi. 3). How simply and smoothly and wholly without human intervention according to this version did the thing come to pass! Quite otherwise is it in the narrative of the Book of Samuel. This also indeed has the statement of Chronicles word for word, but it has something over and above which gives a quite different aspect to the matter. Here David, on the lowest step to the throne, is the guerilla leader in the wilderness of Judah who finally is compelled by Saul's persecutions to pass over to Philistine territory, there under the protection of the enemies of his nation, carrying on his freebooter life. After the battle of Gilboa he avails himself of the dissolution of the kingdom to set up a separate principality in the south as a vassal of the Philistines; he is not chosen, but comes with a following six hundred strong, and offers himself to the elders of Judah, whom he has already at an earlier period laid under obligations to him by various favours and gifts. In the meantime Saul's cousin Abner takes over what of the kingdom there is, not for himself but for the legitimate heir Ishbaal; from Gilead, whither the government had been transferred after the great catastrophe, he gradually reconquers the territory west of Jordan, and is scheming how to recover also the lost Judah. Thus it comes to protracted struggles between Abner and David, in which fortune is most on the side of the latter; yet he does not leave the defensive or gain the sovereignty over Israel. That falls into his hands rather by treachery. Abner himself, indignant at the ingratitude of his royal nephew, offers the crown to his rival, and enters into negotiations with

[p. 173]

him about it; but as he immediately afterwards falls a victim to blood revenge, nothing comes of the matter until Ishbaal is privily murdered in his sleep by two of his captains; then at last the elders of Israel come to Hebron, and David becomes king in succession to Saul. What a length of time these affairs demand, how natural is their development, how many human elements mingle in their course,--cunning, and treachery, and battle, and murder! Chronicles indeed knows them all well enough, as is clear from incidental expressions in chaps. xi. and xii., but they are passed over in silence. Immediately after his predecessor's death the son of Jesse is freely chosen by all Israel to be king, according to the word of Jehovah by Samuel. The sequence of x. 13, 14, xi. 1 does not admit of being understood in any other way, nor is it in point of fact otherwise understood, for it has actually been successful, at least to this extent, that the kingship of Ishbaal has virtually dropped out of traditional Bible history; after Saul came David is what is said. We have before us a deliberate and in its motives a very transparent mutilation of the original narrative as preserved for us in the Book of Samuel.

As all Israel has made David the successor of Saul, and all Israel gone out with him to the conquest of Jerusalem (xi. 4),--in 2 Sam. v. 6 we hear only of David's following,--so now immediately afterwards, the noblest representatives of all the tribes of Israel, who even before he had attained the throne were in sympathy and indeed already on his side, are enumerated by name and numbers in three lists (xi. 10-xii. 40), which are introduced between what is said in 2 Sam. v. 1-1110 and in 2 Sam. v. 11 seq. The first (xi. 10-47: "these are the mighty men who took part with him with all Israel to make him king") is the list of 2 Sam. xxiii., which the Chronicler, as he betrays in chaps. xx., xxi., was acquainted with as it stood in that place, and here gives much too early, for it is for the most part warriors of David's later campaigns who are enumerated. [*1] The second list (xii. 1-22: "these are they that came to David to Ziklag, while he yet kept himself close because of Saul") is not taken from the Book of Samuel, but one also

[p. 174]

observes this difference: along with old and genuine there are extremely common names, and hardly one that occurs here only; the notes of ancestry carefully given in chap. xi. are almost always wanting; and instead of performing before our eyes such deeds as the rescue of a field of barley from the enemy, the purchase of a draught of water with blood, the slaying of a lion in a pit, the heroes receive all sorts of epitheta ornantia (xii. 1-3) and titles of honour (xii. 14, 20), and ordinarily talk a highly spiritual language (xii. 17, 18). And as for the historical situation, how impossible that a great Israelite army should have been gathered around David as the feudatory of the Philistines in Ziklag (xii. 22), with a crowd of captains of hundreds and thousands! Plainly the banished fugitive is according to this representation the splendid king and illustrious ancestor of the established dynasty; hence also the naive remark of ver. 29. No better is it with the third list (xii. 23-40: "these are the numbers of the bands, ready armed for the war, who came to David to Hebron"). Observe the regular enumeration of the twelve tribes, which nowhere occurs in the older historical books, and is quite artificial; then the vast numbers, which are not matters of indifference here, but the principal thing and make up the entire contents; finally, the 4600 Levites and 3700 priests, who also take their place in the martial train, and constitute the proper guard of the king; to Chronicles the distinction between secular and spiritual soldiers is not altogether clear. There are but a few details of a special kind; the remark in xii. 32 is perhaps connected with 2 Sam. xx. 18; Jehoiada the prince of the house of Aaron, i.e., the high priest, alongside of the historically certain series,--Eli, Phinehas, Ahitub, Ahiah (Ahimelech), Abiathar,--an utterly impossible person, is a reflection of the Jehoiada of 2 Kings xi., xii., and the allegation that Zadok at that time joined David at the head of twenty-two chief priests is a hardly credible substitute for what is stated in Samuel, according to which Abiathar, whose older claims were disagreeable to the B'ne Zadok and those who came later, was the priest who from the beginning held with David; the twenty-two chief priests appear to correspond to the heads of the twenty-two post-exilian priestly families (Neh. xii. 1-7, 12-21, x. 3-9; 1 Chron. xxiv. 7-18). Yet it is hardly necessary to go so minutely into the contents of the above lists, for the purpose with which they are given is stated without circumlocution at the close (2 Chron. xii. 38, 39): "All these men of war, in order of battle, came with a perfect heart to Hebron to make David 

[p. 175]

king over all Israel, and all the rest of Israel also were of one heart to make David king. And they were there with David three days, eating and drinking, for there was joy in Israel."

After the explication of the idea "all Israel" thus inappropriately interpolated, the narrative proceeds to reproduce the contents of 2 Samuel v.-vii. David's first deed, after the conquest of the stronghold of Jebus, is in Chronicles to make it the holy city by transferring the ark of Jehovah thither (xiii. 1 seq.). It seems as if the building of a palace and the Philistine war (2 Sam. v. 11-25) were to be omitted; but after the narrative in 2 Samuel vi. 1 seq. has been given down to the place "and the ark of Jehovah abode in the house of Obed-edom three months" (1 Chron. xiii. 14 = 2 Sam. vi. 11), the pause of a quarter of a year is utilised for the purpose of overtaking what had been left out (xiv. 1-17 = 2 Sam. v. 11-25), and then the history of the ark is completed. This indeed is to separate things mutually connected, but at the same time the secular business which, according to the older narrative, is the nearest and most pressing, is reduced to the level of a mere episode in the midst of the sacred. That there is no room for the building of a house and a Philistine war within the three months which offer themselves so conveniently for the interpolation is a subordinate affair.

As regards the sacred business, the transference of the ark to Zion, almost everything that is said in 2 Samuel vi. is repeated word for word in Chronicles also (xiii., xv., xvi., xvii. 1). Two traits only are absent in Chronicles, and in neither case is the omission helpful to the connection David's wife Michal, it is said in 2 Sam. vi. 16, 20-23, when she saw the king dancing and leaping in the procession, despised him in her heart; afterwards when he came home she told him what she thought of his unworthy conduct. The first of these two statements is found in Chronicles also (xv. 29), but the second is (all but the introductory notice, xvi. 43 = 2 Sam. vi. 20, here torn from its connection) omitted, although it contains the principal fact, for the historical event was the expression of her contempt, not its psychological origin; a woman--such is the idea--must not say a thing like that to David. The other case is quite similar. On account of the calamity by which those who were bringing up the ark were overtaken, David does not at first venture to receive it into his citadel, but deposits it in the house of Obed-edom, one of his captains; but when Jehovah blesses the

[p. 176]

house of Obed-edom, he takes courage to bring the ark to his own home (2 Sam. vi. 10-12). Chronicles also tells that Jehovah blessed the house of Obed-edom (xiii. 14), but mentions no consequent result; again the cause is given without the effect. Another explanation is substituted; David perceived that the disaster connected with the removal of the ark was due to the fact of its not having been carried by the Levites in accordance with the Law; the Levites accordingly were made to bear it and no harm ensued (xv. 2, 13-15). This is in complete and manifest contradiction to the older narrative, and as Chronicles (chapter xiii.) copies that narrative, it also contradicts itself (xiii. 10), and that all the more strikingly as by the addition in xiii. 2 it represents the accompanying clergy as tacitly approving the carrying of the ark on the ox-cart. Then due participation in the sacred procession having been thus once secured them, 1 Chron. xv. positively revels in priests and Levites, of whom not a sing]e word is to be found in 2 Sam. vi., and moreover a sort of musical service is instituted by David himself before the ark, and a festal cantata made up by him out of post-exilian psalms is quoted (chapter xvi.). In this way, out of the original narrative, the scattered fragments of which now show themselves very strangely in the new connection, something quite different has grown. "In the former everything is free, simply the affair of king and people, here all is priestly ceremonial; there the people with their king shout and dance with joy before the ark, here the Levites are the musicians and singers in formal order. To seek to combine the two versions is wholly against the laws of historical interpretation. If the first were curt and condensed the unification of the two might perhaps be possible, but no story could be more particular or graphic, and could it have been that the Levites alone should be passed over in silence if they had played so very important a part? The author of Chronicles was able to introduce them only by distorting and mutilating his original and landing himself in contradiction after all. He cannot allow anything to happen without Levites; and was the ark of the covenant to be fetched to Jerusalem without them? was the Law to be even a second time broken under the pious king David? This seemed to him impossible. That Uzzah perished in the first attempt to fetch the ark, and that on the second occasion--when only a quite short journey is spoken of--the ark was carried, 2 Sam. vi. 13, may have been the suggestions by which he was led. Fertile

[p. 177]

in combinations, he profited by the hint." So, justly, De Wette (Beitrage, i. 88-91).

The narrative of 2 Sam. vi. having been broken off at the first half of ver. 19 (1 Chron. xvi. 3), the second half of the verse and the beginning of the next are reproduced (xvi. 43) after the interpolation of xvi. 4-42, and then 2 Sam. vii. is appended word for word (1 Chron. xvii.),--the resolution of David to build a house for the ark, and what Jehovah said to him about the subject through Nathan. The point of the prophet's address turns on the antithesis (2 Sam. vii.). "Thou wilt build a house for me? rather will I build a house for thee;" the house of David is of course the Davidic dynasty. But an interpolation has already crept into the text of Samuel (vii. 13), which apprehends the antithesis thus: "Thou wilt build a house for me? Nay, thy son shall build a house for me." Now Chronicles, for which David comes into consideration merely as the proper founder of the Solomonic temple, takes up the narrative of 2 Sam. vii. precisely on account of this interpolation, as is clear from xxii. 9, 10--increases the misunderstanding by going back to it in an addition (xvii. 14)--and at the outset destroys the original antithesis by the innocent alteration, "Thou shalt not build the house for me" instead of "Wilt thou build a house for me? "The house can here mean only that imperatively needed one, long kept in view alike by God and men, which must by all means he built, only not by David but by Solomon; it is without any ambiguity the temple, and does not, like a house, contain that possibility of a double meaning on which the original point depends. It is interesting also to compare 2 Sam. vii. 14 with 1 Chron. xvii. 13: "I will be to thy seed a father, and he shall be to me a son. If he commit iniquity, then I will chasten him with the rod of men, and with the stripes of the sons of men; but my mercy shall not depart from him." The words in italics are wanting in Chronicles; the meaning, that Jehovah will not withdraw His grace from the dynasty of Judah altogether, even though some of its members should deserve punishment, is thereby destroyed and volatilised into an abstract idealism, which shows that to the writer the Davidic kingly family is known only as a dissolving view, and not by historical experience as it is to the author of 2 Samuel vii.

In chaps xviii.-xx., Chronicles seems to refresh itself with a little variety, relating as it does the foreign wars of David after the order of 2 Sam., viii., x., xi. 1, xii. 30, 30, xxi. 18-22. But in this it still keeps

[p. 178]

in view its purpose, which is directed towards David as founder of the Jerusalem worship; those wars brought him the wealth that was required for the building of the temple. On the other hand, everything so fully and beautifully told in the Book of Samuel about the home occurrences of that period is omitted, for after all it does not contribute much to the glorification of the king. So the story of Meribaal and Ziba (chap. ix.), of Bathsheba and Uriah (xi., xii.), of Tamar and Amnon (xiii., xiv.), of Absalom's rebellion (xv.-xx.), and of the delivering-up of the sons of Saul (xxi. 1-14). The rude and mechanical manner in which statements about foreign wars are torn from the connection with domestic events in which they stand in the older narrative is shown in 1 Chron. xx. 1, 2, as compared with 2 Sam. xi. 1, xii. 30. In 2 Sam. xi. the mention of the fact that David remained in Jerusalem when the army set out against Rabbah, prepares for the story of his adultery with the wife of a captain engaged in active service in the field; but 1 Chron. xx. 1 is meaningless, and involves a contradiction with ver. 2. according to which David appears after all in the camp at Rabbah, although the connection,--namely, that he followed the army--and all the intermediate occurrences relating to Bathsheba and Uriah, are left out (De Wette, pp. 19, 20, 60). To what extent the veil is drawn over the scandalous falls of saints may be judged also from the fact that from the list of David's foreign encounters also, which are otherwise fully given, a single one is omitted which he is supposed not to have come through with absolute honour, that with the giant Ishbi-benob (2 Sam. xxi. 15-17). Lastly, the alteration made in 1 Chron. xx. 5 is remarkable. Elhanan the son of Jair of Bethlehem, we read in 2 Sam. xxi. 19, was he who slew Goliath of Gath, the shaft of whose spear was as thick as a weaver's beam. But on the other hand, had not David of Bethlehem according to 1 Sam. xvii. vanquished Goliath the giant, the shaft of whose spear was as thick as a weaver's beam? In Chronicles accordingly Elhanan smites the brother of the veritable Goliath.

2. The closing chapters of 2 Samuel  (xxi.-xxiv.) are, admittedly, an appendix of very peculiar structure. The thread of xxi. 1-14 is continued in xxiv. 1-25, but in the interval between the two passages occurs xxi. 15-xxiii. 39, in a very irrational manner, perhaps wholly due to chance. In this interposed passage itself, again, the quite similar lists xxi. 15-22 and xxiii. 8-39 are very closely connected;

[p. 179]

and the two songs, xxii. 1-51, xxiii. 1-7, are thus an interpolation within an interpolation. This want of order is imitated by the author of Chronicles also, who takes 2 Sam. xxiii. 8-39 as separated from xxi. 15-22, and gives 2 Sam. xxiv. last, a position which does not belong to it from any material considerations, but merely because it had originally been tagged on as an appendix, and besides had been separated from its connection with xxi. 1-14 by a large interpolation.

1 Chron. xxi. (the pestilence as punishment of David's sin in numbering the people, and the theophany as occasioning the building of an altar on the threshing-floor of Araunah) is on the whole a copy of 2 Sam. xxiv., but with omission of the precise and interesting geographical details of ver. 5 seq., and with introduction of a variety of improving touches. Thus (xxi. 1): "And Satan stood up against Israel and moved David;" instead of: "And the anger of Jehovah was kindled against Israel, and he moved David." Similarly (xxi. 6): "Levi and Benjamin Joab counted not among them; for the king's word was abominable to him,"--an addition which finds its explanation on the one hand in Num. i. 49, and on the other in the circumstance that the holy city lay within the territory of Benjamin. Again (xxi. 16, 27): "David saw the angel of Jehovah standing between heaven and earth, and his sword drawn in his hand and stretched out towards Jerusalem;" compare this with Sam xxiv. 16 (1 Chron. xxi. 15): "The angel stretched out his hand to Jerusalem to destroy it, and he was by the threshing floor of Araunah;" according to the older view, angels have no wings (Gen. xxviii.). Further (xxi. 25): "David gave to Araunah for his threshing-floor 600 shekels of gold;" compare with 2 Sam. xxiv. 24, 50 shekels of silver; to make the king pay right royally costs the Chronicler nothing. But lastly, his most significant addition is the fire from heaven which consumes the burnt-offering (xxi. 26); by this means the altar on the threshing-floor of Araunah, in other words, that of the sanctuary of Jerusalem, is intended to be put on a level with that of the tabernacle, its predecessor, the fire on which was also kindled from heaven (Lev. ix. 24). Whoever has understood the narratives of altar-buildings by the Patriarchs, by Joshua, Gideon, and Manoah, will grant that the author of Chronicles has quite correctly understood the intention of 2 Sam. xxiv., in accordance with which he here proposes to relate the divine inauguration of the place of worship at Jerusalem; but what in that passage, as in similar older legends

[p. 180]

about the indication of consecrated places by means of a theophany, is only hinted at for contemporaries who understood the idea conveyed, he requires to retouch strongly in order that a later generation may notice it; and yet he has half spoiled the point by making the angel not stand by the threshing-floor of Araunah on the sacred spot, but hover aloft in the air.

2 Sam. xxiv. = 1 Chron. xxi. serves further as a starting point for the free construction of 1 Chron. xxii.-xxix. The circumstance that in the last chapter of the Book of Samuel David builds the altar at Jerusalem is expanded into the statement that in the last year of his reign he prepared beforehand the building of the temple of Solomon in all its parts down to the minutest detail. Unhampered by historical tradition, the author here expatiates with absolute freedom in his proper element. All that has hitherto been said about the king on the basis of the older source is by means of additions and omissions fashioned into what shall serve as a mere prologue to the proper work of his life, which is now described thoroughly con amore. He himself unfortunately has not been allowed to build the house, having shed much blood and carried on great wars (xxii. 8, xxviii. 3), but he yet in the last year of his reign forestalls from his successor the whole merit of the business (xxiii. 1, xxviii. 1). My son Solomon, he says, is young and tender, but the house to be built for Jehovah must be great and glorious; I will therefore prepare it for him (xxii. 5). Accordingly he gets ready beforehand the workmen and artificers, in particular bringing into requisition the non-Israelitic population; he provides the material, stone and wood and brass and iron, and gold and silver and jewels without number; he also gives the plan or rather receives it direct from Jehovah, and that in black and white (xxviii. 19), while Moses built the tabernacle only according to his recollection of the heavenly pattern which had been shown to him on Sinai. But before all he appoints the personnel for the temple service,--priests, Levites, porters, singers,--divides their thousands into classes, and assigns to them their functions by lot. In doing so he interests himself, naturally, with special preference, in the music, being the designer of the instruments (xxiii. 5), and himself acting as principal conductor (xxv. 2, 6). And as he is still king after all, he at the close takes an inventory also of his secular state, after having duly ordered the spiritual. All this he does for the future, for his son and successor; not in reality, but only in plan, are the door-keepers,

[p. 181]

for example, assigned to their posts (xxvi. 12 seq.), but none the less with strictest specification and designation of the localities of the temple,--and that too the second temple! His preparations concluded, David calls a great assembly of prelates and notables (xxiii. 1, xxviii. 1), has Solomon anointed as king, and Zadok as priest (xxix. 22), and in a long discourse hands over to the former along with the kingdom the task of his reign, namely, the execution of what he himself has prepared and appointed; on this occasion yet more precious stones and noble metals--among them gold of Ophir and Persian darics--are presented by David and the princes for the sacred building. The whole section 1 Chron. xxii.-xxix. is a startling instance of that statistical phantasy of the Jews which revels in vast sums of money on paper (xxii. 14), in artificial marshallings of names and numbers (xxiii.-xxvii.), in the enumeration of mere subjects without predicates, which simply stand on parade and neither signify nor do anything. The monotony is occasionally broken only by unctuous phrases, but without refreshing the reader. Let the experiment of reading the chapters through be tried.

According to 1 Kings i., ii., King David in his closing days was sick and feeble in body and mind, and very far from being in a condition thus to make preparations on behalf of his successor shortly before his own death, or to prepare his bread for him so far that nothing remained but to put it into the oven. His purpose of building a house to Jehovah is indeed spoken of in 2 Sam. vii. in connection with vi. 17, but it is definitively abandoned in consequence of Jehovah's refusal, on the ground that it is not man's part to build a house for God, but God's to build a house for man. In strange contrast with this explanation is that of Chronicles that David is a man of war and has shed much blood, and therefore dare not set up the temple; that he had waged the wars of Jehovah, that Jehovah had given victory by his hand, would in the older warlike time have seemed no reason against but rather an argument establishing his fitness for such a work. But the worst discrepancy is that between the solemn installation of Solomon as king and of Zadok as priest with all the forms of law and publicity as related in 1 Chron. xxviii., xxix. (comp. xxii., xxiii. 1) and the older narrative of 1 Kings i., ii. According to the latter it was much more an ordinary palace intrigue, by means of which one party at court succeeded in obtaining from the old king, enfeebled with age, his sanction for Solomon's succession. Until then Adonijah had been regarded as heir-apparent

[p. 182]

to the throne, by David himself, by all Israel, and the great officers of the kingdom, Joab and Abiathar; what above all things turned the scale in favour of Solomon was the weight of Benaiah's six hundred praetorians, a formidable force in the circumstances of the period. The author of Chronicles naively supposes he has successfully evaded all difficulties by giving out the coronation of Solomon related by himself to be the second (xxix. 22),--an advertence to 1 Kings i., ii. which does not remove but only betrays the contradiction.

Yet this is as nothing over against the disharmony of the total impression. See what Chronicles has made out of David! The founder of the kingdom has become the founder of the temple and the public worship, the king and hero at the head of his companions in arms has become the singer and master of ceremonies at the head of a swarm of priests and Levites; his clearly cut figure has become a feeble holy picture, seen through a cloud of incense. It is obviously vain to try to combine the fundamentally different portraits into one stereoscopic image; it is only the tradition of the older source that possesses historical value. In Chronicles this is clericalised in the taste of the post-exilian time, which had no feeling longer for anything but cultus and torah, which accordingly treated as alien the old history (which, nevertheless, was bound to be a sacred history), if it did not conform with its ideas and metamorphose itself into church history. Just as the law framed by Ezra as the foundation of Judaism was regarded as having been the work of Moses, so what upon this basis had been developed after Moses--particularly the music of the sanctuary and the ordering of the temple personnel--was carried back to King David, the sweet singer of Israel, who had now to place his music at the service of the cultus, and write psalms along with Asaph, Heman, and Jeduthun, the Levitical singing families.

3. With regard to Solomon, Chronicles (2 Chron. i.-ix.) nowhere departs very far from the lines of the Book of Kings. As the story of 1 Kings i., ii., which is not an edifying one, and mercilessly assails that of 1 Chron. xxii.-xxix., required to be omitted, the narrative accordingly begins with 1 Kings iii., with Solomon's accession, sacrifices on the great altar at Gibeon, and the revelation of Jehovah, which was thereupon communicated to him in a dream. This last is transcribed with slight alterations, but at the outset a characteristic divergence is found. "Solomon loved Jehovah, walking in the statutes of David his father,

[p. 183]

only he sacrificed and burnt incense on the high places (because there was no house built unto the name of Jehovah until those days). And the king went to Gibeon to sacrifice there; for that was the great high place; a thousand burnt-offerings did Solomon offer upon that altar, and Jehovah appeared unto him in a dream: Ask what I shall give thee." So 1 Kings iii. 2 seq. Chronicles, after its manner, first surrounds the king with a great assemblage of captains of hundreds and thousands, of judges and princes and heads of houses, and purely Pentateuchal dignities, and then proceeds: "And Solomon and all the congregation with him went to the high place in Gibeon, for there was God's tent of meeting, which Moses, the servant of God, had made in the wilderness. But the ark of God had David brought up from Kirjath-jearim, where he had prepared for it; for he had pitched a tent for it at Jerusalem. But the brazen altar that Bezaleel, the son of Uri, the son of Hur, had made, stood there, before the tabernacle of Jehovah, and Solomon and the congregation sought unto it. And Solomon offered there, upon the brazen altar, before Jehovah, by the tent of meeting, he offered a thousand burnt-offerings, and God appeared to him in a dream, saying, Ask what I shall give thee" (2 Chron. i. 3 seq.). In the older narrative there is nothing about the tabernacle, it being assumed that no apology would be either necessary or possible for Solomon having sacrificed on a high place. Chronicles, dominated in its views of antiquity by the Priestly Code, has missed the presence of the tabernacle and supplied the want in accordance with that norm; the young and pious king could not possibly have made his solemn inaugural sacrifice, for which he had expressly left Jerusalem, anywhere else than at the legally prescribed place; and still less could Jehovah otherwise have bestowed on him His blessing. It betokens the narrowness, and at the same time the boldness of the author, that he retains the expression high place used in 1 Kings iii. 3, and co-ordinates it with tabernacle, although the one means precisely the opposite of the other. But it is instructive to notice how, on other occasions, he is hampered by his Mosaic central sanctuary, which he has introduced ad hoc into the history. According to 1 Chron. xvi. David is in the best position to institute also a sacrificial service beside the ark of Jehovah, which he has transferred to Zion; but he dare not, for the Mosaic altar stands at Gibeon, and he must content himself with a musical surrogate (vers. 37-42). The narrative of 1 Chron. xxi., that David was led by the

[p. 184]

theophany at the threshing-floor of Araunah to build an altar there, and present upon it an offering that was accepted by heaven, is at its close maimed and spoiled in a similar way by the remark, with anticipatory reference to 2 Chron. i., that the Mosaic tabernacle and altar of burnt offering were indeed at that time in the high place at Gibeon, but that the king had not the strength to go before it to inquire of Jehovah, being so smitten with fear of the angel with the drawn sword. So also must the sacrifice which Solomon should have offered on his return from Gibeon before the ark at Jerusalem be similarly ignored (2 Chron. i. 13), because it would destroy the force of the previous explanation of the high place at Gibeon. Thus the shadow takes the air from the body. In other places the tabernacle is significantly confounded with the temple of Jerusalem (Graf, p. 56), but on the whole it remains a tolerably inert conception, only made use of in the passage before us (2 Chron. i.) in an ex machina manner in order to clear Solomon of a heavy reproach.

Upon the last solemn act of worship at the Mosaic sanctuary immediately follows the building of the temple (i. 18 [ii. 1]-vii. 11), 1 Kings iii. 10-v. 14 [iv. 34] being passed over. A few little touches are however brought in to show the wealth of Solomon (i. 14-17); they do not occur in Kings until chap. x. (vers. 26-29), and are also repeated in Chronicles (ix. 25 seq.) in this much more appropriate connection (comp. 1 Kings iii., LXX). Strictly speaking indeed, David has taken the preparations for the sacred building out of the hands of his successor, but the latter appears not to be satisfied with these (ii. 16 [17]) and looks after them once more (i. 18-ii. 17 [ii. 1-18]). A comparison with Ezra iii. (preparation of the second temple) shows that the story is an elaboration of the author, although suggested by 1 Kings v. 16 [2] seq., and with preservation of many verbal reminiscences. While Hiram and Solomon according to the older record are on a footing of equality and make a contract based on reciprocity of service, the Tyrian king is here the vassal of the Israelite, and renders to him what he requires as tribute; instead of as there explaining himself by word of mouth, he here writes a letter in which he not only openly avows his faith in Jehovah the God of Israel, the maker of heaven and earth, but also betrays an extraordinary acquaintance with the Pentateuchal Priestly Code. The brassfounder whom Solomon brings from Tyre (1 Kings vii. 13, 14) is (ii. 13) described as a very Daedalus and prodigy of artistic skill, like

[p. 185]

[paragraph continues] Bezaleel (Exodus xxxi. 2 seq.); his being made the son of a woman of Dan and not of a widow of Naphtali supplies interpreters with the materials for the construction of a little family romance, [*1] but has no more real value than the idea that sandalwood is obtained from Lebanon. The statement of 1 Kings v. 27 [13] (xi. 28, xii. 4) that Israel was requisitioned in large numbers to render forced service to the king has substituted for it by the Chronicler that which occurs in another place (1 Kings ix. 21), that only the Canaanite serfs were employed for this purpose; at the same time, he reckons their number from the figures supplied in 1 Kings v. 29 [15] seq. Lastly, the manner in which Solomon (ii. 2 [3]) assures Hiram that he will arrange the divine service in the new house in a thoroughly correct manner according to the ordinance of the Priestly Code, is also characteristic; similar remarks, from which the uninterrupted practice of the Mosaic cultus according to the rules of the Law is made to appear, are afterwards repeated from time to time (viii. 12-16, xiii. 11).

In chaps. iii., iv. the author repeats the description of the temple in 1 Kings vi., vii., with the omission of what relates to profane buildings. Perhaps in one passage (1 Kings vii. 23) he found the now very corrupt text in a better state; otherwise he has excerpted from it in a wretchedly careless style or word for word transcribed it, adding merely a few extravagances or appointments of later date (e.g., the specification of the gold in iii. 4 seq. 8, 9, of the ten golden tables and hundred golden basins in iv. 8, of the brass-covered doors of the outer gateway in iv. 9, of the court of the priests in iv. 9, of the curtain between the holy place and the holy of holies in iii. 14; compare Vatke, pp. 332, 333, 340, 341). To deny that the original (to which reference must in many places be made in order that the meaning may be understood) exists in 1 Kings vi., vii., requires an exercise of courage which might be much better employed, all the more because in 2 Chron. iv. 11-v. 1, the summary list follows the description of details precisely as in 1 Kings vii. 40-51.

While the concrete and material details of 1 Kings vi., vii. are reproduced only in an imperfect and cursory manner, the act of consecration on the other hand, and the discourse delivered by Solomon

[p. 186]

on the occasion, is accurately and fully given (v. 2-vii. 10) in accordance with 1 Kings viii.; such additions and omissions as occur are all deliberate. In 1 Kings viii. the priests and Levites on an occasion which so closely concerned their interests do not play any adequate part, and in particular give none of the music which nevertheless is quite indispensable at any such solemnity. Accordingly, the Chronicler at the word "priests" inserts between the violently separated clauses of 1 Kings viii. 10, 11, the following: "For all the priests present had sanctified themselves without distinction of classes, and the Levites, the singers, all stood in white linen with cymbals and psalteries and harps at the east end of the altar, and with them an hundred and twenty priests sounding with trumpets. And it came to pass when the trumpeters and singers were as one to make one sound to be heard in praising and thanking the Lord, and when the music began with trumpets, and cymbals, and instruments, and the song of praise, Praise ye Jehovah, for He is good; for His mercy endureth for ever, then the house was filled with a cloud" (v. 11-13). Proceeding, the narrative of 1 Kings viii. 22 that Solomon came in front of the altar and there prayed is indeed in the first instance copied (vi. 12), but forthwith authoritatively interpreted in the sense that the king did not really and actually stand before the altar (which was lawful for the priests alone), but upon an improvised pulpit in the inner court upon a propped-up caldron of brass (vi. 13), an excellent idea, which has met with the due commendation of expositors. The close of Solomon's prayer (1 Kings viii. 49-53) is abridged (vi. 39, 40)--perhaps in order to get rid of viii. 50--and there is substituted for it an original epilogue (vi. 41, 42) recalling post-exilian psalms. Then comes a larger omission, that of 1 Kings viii. 54-61, explained by the difficulty involved in the king's here kneeling, not upon the caldron, but before the altar, then standing up and blessing like a priest; in place of this it is told (vii. 1-3) how the altar was consecrated by fire from heaven, which indeed had already descended upon it (1 Chron. xxi. 26), but as it appears had unaccountably gone out. In vii. 4 the author again returns to his original at 1 Kings viii. 62 seq., but tricks it out, wherever it appears to him too bare, with trumpeting priests and singing Levites (vii. 6), and finally dismisses the people, not on the eighth day of the feast of tabernacles (1 Kings viii. 66), but on the ninth (vii. to), in accordance with the enactment in Num. xxix. 35.

[p. 187]

The rest of Solomon's history (vii. 11-ix. 28) is taken over from 1 Kings ix., x. In doing so what is said in 1 Kings ix. 10-18, to the effect that Solomon handed over to Hiram twenty Galilaean cities, is changed into the opposite--that Hiram ceded the cities to Solomon, who settled them with Israelites (viii. 1, 2); and similarly the already observed statement of 1 Kings ix. 24 about the removal of Solomon's Egyptian wife out of the city of David into his new palace [*1] is altered and put in quite a false light: "Solomon brought up the daughter of Pharaoh out of the city of David unto the house that he had built for her; for he said, No woman shall dwell in the house of David, for the place is holy whereunto the ark of Jehovah hath come" (viii. 11). There is no further need to speak of viii. 12-16 (1 Kings ix. 25); more indifferent in their character are the addition in vii. 12-15, a mere compilation of reminiscences, the embellishment in viii. 3-6, derived from 1 Kings ix. 17-19, and the variations in viii. 17 seq., ix. 21, misunderstood from 1 Kings ix. 26 seq., x. 22. The concluding chapter on Solomon's reign (1 Kings xi.), in which the king does not appear in his most glorious aspect, is passed over in silence, for the same motives as those which dictated the omission of the two chapters at the beginning.

The history of the son is treated after the same plan and by the same means as that of the father, only the subject accommodates itself more readily to the purpose of the change. The old picture is retouched in such wise that all dark and repulsive features are removed, and their place taken by new and brilliant bits of colour not in the style of the original but in the taste of the author's period,--priests and Levites and fire from heaven, and the fulfilment of all righteousness of the law, and much music, and all sorts of harmless legendary anachronisms and exaggerations besides. The material of tradition seems broken up in an extraneous medium, the spirit of post-exilian Judaism.

  

II.

1. After Solomon's death the history of Israel in Chronicles is traced only through Jehovah's kingdom in the hand of the sons

[p. 188]

of David, and all that relates to the ten tribes is put aside. For according to the notions of the Judaistic period Israel is the congregation of true worship, and this last is connected with the temple at Jerusalem, in which of course the Samaritans have no part. Abijah of Judah makes this point of view clear to Jeroboam I. and his army in a speech delivered from Mount Zemaraim before the battle. "Think ye to withstand the kingdom of Jehovah in the hand of the sons of David, because ye are a great multitude, and with you are the golden calves which Jeroboam made you for gods? Have ye not cast out the priests of Jehovah, the sons of Aaron and the Levites, and made for yourselves priests after the manner of the Gentiles? so that whosoever cometh to fill his hands with a young bullock and seven rams, even he may become a priest for the false gods? But as for us, we have not forsaken Jehovah our God, and our priests minister to Jehovah, the sons of Aaron and the Levites in the service; and they burn unto Jehovah every morning and every evening burnt sacrifices and sweet incense; the shewbread also is upon the pure table; for we have maintained the service of Jehovah our God, but ye have forsaken Him. And behold, God Himself is with us at our head, and His priests, and the loud-sounding trumpets to cry an alarm against you. O children of Israel, fight ye not against Jehovah the God of your fathers, for ye shall not prosper" (2 Chron. xiii. 8-12; comp. xi. 13-17).

The kingdom which bore the name of Israel was actually in point of fact in the olden time the proper Israel, and Judah was merely a kind of appendage to it. When Amaziah of Judah after the conquest of the Edomites challenged to battle King Jehoash of Samaria, whose territory had at that time suffered to the utmost under the continual wars with the Syrians, the latter bid say to him: "The thistle that was in Lebanon sent to the cedar that was in Lebanon, saying, Give thy daughter to my son to wife;--then passed by a wild beast that was in Lebanon and trode down the thistle. Thou hast indeed smitten Edom, and thy heart hath lifted thee up. Enjoy thy glory, but tarry at home." (2 Kings xiv. 9, 10). And as the other would not listen, he punished him as if he had been a naughty boy and then let him go. Religiously the relative importance of the two corresponded pretty nearly to what it was politically and historically. Israel was the cradle of prophecy; Samuel, Elijah, and Elisha exercised their activity there; what contemporary figure from Judah is there to place alongside of these?

[p. 189]

[paragraph continues] Assuredly the author of the Book of Kings would not have forgotten them had any such there been, for he is a Judaean with all his heart, yet is compelled purely by the nature of the case to interest himself chiefly about the northern kingdom. And yet again at the very close it was the impending fall of Samaria that called into life a new phase of prophecy; he who inaugurated it, the Judaean Amos of Tekoah, was sent not to Judah but to Israel, the history of which had the first and fullest sympathy of his inmost soul as that of the people of Jehovah. Isaiah was the first who placed Jerusalem in the centre of his field of vision and turned away from Israel; for at the time of his first public appearance war was raging between the sister nations, and when his activity was at its acme all was over with the northern kingdom and all hope had to cling to the remnant,--the fallen tabernacle of David. As regards the cultus, certainly, matters may have been somewhat less satisfactory in Israel than in Judah, at least in the last century before the Assyrian captivity, but at the outset there was no essential difference. On all hands Jehovah was worshipped as the peculiar divinity of the nation at numerous fanes, in the service at the high places there were wanting neither in the one nor in the other sacred trees, posts, and stones, images of silver and gold (Isa. ii. 8 seq., xvii. 8, xxxi. 22; Mic. v. 12). It is a question whether in the time before Hezekiah the cultus of the kingdom at Jerusalem had so much to distinguish it above that at Bethel or at Dan; against Jeroboam's golden calves must be set the brazen serpent of Moses, and the ark of Jehovah itself--which in ancient times was an idol (1 Sam. iv.-vi.) and did not become idealised into an ark of the covenant, i.e., of the law, until probably it had actually disappeared. As for the prophetic reaction against the popular cultus, the instance of Hosea shows that it came into activity as early and as powerfully in Israel as in Judah. Even after Josiah's reformation Jeremiah complains that the sister who hitherto had been spared is in no respect better than the other who a hundred years before had fallen a victim to the Assyrians (iii. 6-10); and though in principle the author of the Book of Kings, taking his stand upon Deuteronomy, prefers Judah and Jerusalem, yet he does not out of deference to this judgment alter the facts which show that old Israel was not further than old Judah from compliance with the Deuteronomic precepts.

Chronicles, on the other hand, not only takes the Law--the Pentachal Law as a whole, but more particularly the Priestly Code therein

[p. 190]

preponderating--as its rule of judgment on the past; but also idealises the facts in accordance with that norm, and figures to itself the old Hebrew people as in exact conformity with the pattern of the later Jewish community,--as a monarchically graded hierocracy with a strictly centralised cultus of rigidly prescribed form at the holy place of Jerusalem. When, accordingly, the ten tribes fail to exhibit all the marks of the kingdom of God, this is taken to mean their falling away from the true Israel; they have made goats and calves their gods, driven away the priests and Levites, and in a word broken quite away from the institutions which shaped themselves in Judah during the period subsequent to Josiah and received their finishing-touches from Ezra. [*1] Like other heathen, therefore, they are taken account of by the sacred history only in so far as they stood in relations of friendship or hostility with the people of Jehovah properly so called, the Israel in the land of Judah (2 Chron. xxiii. 2), and in all references to them the most sedulous and undisguised partisanship on behalf of Judah is manifested, even by the inhabitants of the northern kingdom itself. [*2] If one seriously takes the Pentateuch as Mosaic law, this exclusion of the ten tribes is, in point of fact, an inevitable consequence, for the mere fact of their belonging to the people of Jehovah destroys the fundamental pre-supposition of that document, the unity and legitimacy of the worship as basis of the theocracy, the priests and Levites as its most important organs, "the sinews and muscles of the body politic, which keep the organism together as a living and moving whole."

2. The reverse side is, of course, the idealisation of Judah from the point of view of the legitimate worship,--a process which the reader can imagine from the specimens already given with reference to David and Solomon. The priests and Levites who migrated from Israel are represented as having strengthened the southern kingdom (xi. 17), and here constitute the truly dominant element in the history. It is for their sake that kings exist as protectors and guardians of the cultus, with the internal arrangements of which, however, they dare not intermeddle (xxvi. 16 seq.); to deliver discourses and ordain spiritual

[p. 191]

solemnities (which figure as the culminating points in the narrative) are among the leading duties of their reign. [*1]

Those among them who are good apprehend their task and are inseparable from the holy servants of Jehovah,--so, in particular, Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, and Josiah. Of the first mentioned we are told that in the third year of his reign he appointed a royal commission of notables, priests, and Levites, to go about with the Book of the Law, and teach in the cities of Judah (xvii. 7-9); in the larger places, in the strongholds, he further instituted colleges of justice, and over them a supreme tribunal at Jerusalem, also consisting of priests, Levites, and notables, under the presidency of the high priest for spiritual, and of the Prince of the house of Judah for secular affairs (xix. 5-11). There is nothing about this in the Book of Kings, although what is of less importance is noticed (1 Kings xxii. 47); the Chronicler makes the statement in his own language, which is unmistakable, especially in the pious speeches. Probably it is the organisation of justice as existing in his own day that he here carries back to Jehoshaphat, so that here most likely we have the oldest testimony to the synedrium of Jerusalem as a court of highest instance over the provincial synedria, as also to its composition and presidency. The impossibility of such a judiciary system in antiquity is clear from its presupposing the Book of the Law as its basis, from its co-ordination of priests and Levites, and also from its actual inconsistency with incidental notices, particularly in Isaiah and the older prophets (down to Jeremiah xxvi.), in which it everywhere is taken for granted as a thing of course that the rulers are also at the same time the natural judges. Moreover, Chronicles already tells us about David something similar to what it says about Jehoshaphat (1 Chron. xxiii. 4, xxvi. 29-32); the reason why the latter is selected by preference for this work lies simply in his name "Jehovah is Judge," as he himself is made to indicate in various ways (xix. 5-11; compare Joel iv. 12). But the king of Judah is strengthened by the priests and Levites, not only in these domestic affairs, but also for war. As the trumpets of the priests give to Abijah courage and the victory against Jeroboam of Israel, so do the Levites also to Jehoshaphat against Moab and Ammon. Having fasted, and received, while praying, the comfortable assurance of the singer Jahaziel ("See God"), he advances next morning, with his army, against the enemy, having in the van the Levites, who march in sacred attire in front of the armed men and sing:

[p. 192]

[paragraph continues] "Praise ye the Lord, for His mercy endureth for ever." He then finds that the fighting has already been done by the enemy themselves, who, at the sound of that song of praise, have fallen upon and annihilated one another. Three days are spent in dividing the spoil, and then he returns as he came, the Levitical music leading the van, with psalteries, and harps, and trumpets to the house of Jehovah (2 Chron. xx. 1-28). Hezekiah is glorified in a similar manner. Of the Assyrian siege of Jerusalem and the memorable relief, comparatively little is made (xxxii. 1 seq.; comp. De Wette, i. 75); according to Chronicles, his master-work is that, as soon as he has mounted the throne, in the first month of the year, and of his reign (Exod. xl. 2; Lev. ix. 1). he institutes by means of the priests and Levites, whom he addresses quite paternally as his children (xxix. 11), a great feast of consecration of the temple, alleged to have been closed and wasted by Ahaz; thereupon in the second month to celebrate the passover in the most sumptuous manner; and finally, from the third to the seventh month to concern himself about the accurate rendering of their dues to the clergy. All is described in the accustomed style, in the course of three long chapters, which tell us nothing indeed about the time of Hezekiah, but are full of information for the period in which the writer lived, particularly with reference to the method then followed in offering the sacred dues (xxix. 1-xxxi. 21). In the case of Josiah also the account of his epoch-making reformation of the worship is, on the whole, reproduced in Chronicles only in a mutilated manner, but the short notice of 2 Kings xxiii. 21-23 is amplified into a very minute description of a splendid passover feast, in which, as always, the priests and above all the Levites figure as the leading personalities. In this last connection one little trait worth noticing remains, namely, that the great assembly in which the king causes the Book of the Law to be sworn to, is, in every other respect, made up in 2 Chron. xxxiv. 29 seq. exactly as it is in 2 Kings xxiii. 1,, except that instead of "the priests and prophets" we find "the priests and Levites." The significance of this is best seen from the Targum, where "the priests and prophets" are translated into "the priests and scribes."

By this projection of the legitimate cultus prescribed in the Law and realised in Judaism, the Chronicler is brought however into a peculiar conflict with the statements of his authority, which show that the said cultus was not a mature thing which preceded all history, but came gradually into being in the course of history; he makes his escape

[p. 193]

as well as he can, but yet not without a strange vacillation between the timeless manner of looking at things which is natural to him, and the historical tradition which he uses and appropriates. The verses in 1 Kings (xiv. 22, 23): Judah (not Rehoboam merely) did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah and provoked Him to jealousy by their sins which they sinned, above all that their fathers had done; and they set up for themselves high places, macceboth and asherim, &c., which in the passage where they occur are, like the parallel statement regarding Israel (xii. 25 seq.), of primary importance, and cancel by one bold stroke the alleged difference of worship between the Levitical and non-Levitical kingdom, are omitted as quite too impossible, although the whole remaining context is preserved (2 Chron. xii. 1-16). In the same way the unfavourable judgment upon Rehoboam's successor Abijah (1 Kings xv. 3-5) is dropped, because the first kings of Judah, inasmuch as they maintain the true religion against those of Israel who have fallen away from it, must of necessity have been good. But though the Chronicler is silent about what is bad, for the sake of Judah's honour, he cannot venture to pass over the improvement which, according to 1 Kings xv. 12 seq., was introduced in Asa's day, although one does not in the least know what need there was for it, everything already having been in the best possible state. Nay, he even exaggerates this improvement, and makes of Asa another Josiah (2 Chron. xv. 1-15), represents him also (xiv. 3) as abolishing the high places, and yet after all (xv. 1 7) repeats the statement of 1 Kings xv. 14 that the high places were not removed. So also of Jehoshaphat, we are told in the first place that he walked in the first ways of his father Asa and abolished the high places in Judah (2 Chron. xvii. 3, 6, xix. 3), a false generalisation from 1 Kings (xxii. 43, 47); and then afterwards we learn (xx. 32, 33) that the high places still remained, word for word according to 1 Kings xxii. 43, 44. To the author it seems on the one hand an impossibility that the worship of the high places, which in spite of xxxiii. 17 is to him fundamentally idolatry, should not have been repressed even by pious, i.e., law-observing kings, and yet on the other hand he mechanically transcribes his copy.

In the case of the notoriously wicked rulers his resort is to make them simply heathen and persecutors of the covenant religion, for to him they are inconceivable within the limits of Jehovism, which always in his view has had the Law for its norm, and is one and the same with the exclusive Mosaism of Judaism. So first, in the case of Joram: he

[p. 194]

makes high places on the hills of Judah and seduces the inhabitants of Jerusalem to commit fornication, and Judah to apostatise (xxi. 11), and moreover slays all his brethren with the sword (ver. 4)--the one follows from the other. His widow Athaliah breaks up the house of Jehovah by the hand of her sons (who had been murdered, but for this purpose are revived), and makes images of Baal out of the dedicated things (xxiv. 7); none the less on that account does the public worship of Jehovah go on uninterrupted under Jehoiada the priest. Most unsparing is the treatment that Ahaz receives. According to 2 Kings xvi. 10 seq., be saw at Damascus an altar which took his fancy, and he caused a similar one to be set up at Jerusalem after its pattern, while Solomon's brazen altar was probably sent to the melting-pot; it was Urijah the priest who carried out the orders of the king. One observes no sign of autonomy, or of the inviolable divine right of the sanctuary; the king commands and the priest obeys. To the Chronicler the story so told is quite incomprehensible; what does he make of it? Ahaz introduced the idolatrous worship of Damascus, abolished the worship of Jehovah, and shut up the temple (2 Chron. xxviii. 23 seq.). He regards not the person of a man, the inflexible unity of the Mosaic cultus is everything to the Chronicler, and its historical identity would be destroyed if an orthodox priest, a friend of the prophet Isaiah, had lent a helping hand to set up a foreign altar. To make idolaters pure and simple of Manasseh and Amon any heightening of what is said in 2 Kings xxi. was hardly necessary; and besides, there were here special reasons against drawing the picture in too dark colours. It is wonderful also to see how the people, which is always animated with alacrity and zeal for the Law, and rewards its pious rulers for their fidelity to the covenant (xv. 15, xvii. 5, xxiv. 10, xxxi. 10), marks its censure of these wicked kings by withholding from them, or impairing, the honour of royal burial (xxi. 19, 20, xxviii. 27, xxxiii. 10),--in spite of 2 Kings ix. 28, xvi. 20, xxi. 1 8.

The periodically recurring invasions of heathenism help, at the same time, to an understanding of the consequent reforms, which otherwise surpass the comprehension of the Jewish scribe. According to the Books of Kings, Joash, Hezekiah, and Josiah hit upon praiseworthy innovations in the temple cultus, set aside deeply rooted and immemorial customs, and reformed the public worship of Jehovah. These advances within Jehovism, which, of course, are quite incompatible with its

[p. 195]

[paragraph continues] Mosaic fixity, are made by the Chronicler to be simple restorations of the pure religion following upon its temporary violent suspension. It is in Hezekiah's case that this is done in the most thoroughgoing manner. After his predecessor has shut the doors of the house of Jehovah, put out the lights, and brought the service to an end, he sets all in operation again by means of the resuscitated priests and Levites; the first and most important act of his reign is the consecration of the temple (2 Chron. xxix.), with which is connected (xxx., xxxi.) the restoration of the passover and the restitution of the temporalia to the clergy, who, as it seems, have hitherto been deprived of them. That 2 Kings xviii. 1-7, although very different, has supplied the basis for all these extravagances, is seen by comparing 2 Chron. xxix. 1, 2, xxxi. 1, 20, 21, xxxii. 22 only, that the king destroyed the brazen serpent Nehushtan (2 Kings xviii. 4) is passed over in silence, as if it were incredible that such an image should have been worshipped down to that date in the belief that it had come down from the time of Moses; the not less offensive statement, on the other hand, that he took away the Asherah (by which only that of the temple altar can be understood; comp. Deut. xvi. 21) is got over by charging the singular into the plural; he took away the Asherahs (xxxi. 1), which occurred here and there throughout Judah, of course at heathen altars.

In the cases of Joash and Josiah the free flight of the Chronicler's law-crazed fancy is hampered by the copy to which he is tied, and which gives not the results merely, but the details of the proceedings themselves (2 Chron. xxii., xxiii.; 2 Kings xi., xii.). It is precisely such histories as these, almost the only circumstantially told ones relating to Judah in the Book of Kings, which though in their nature most akin to our author's preference for cultus, bring him into the greatest embarrassment, by introducing details which to his notions are wholly against the Law, and yet must not be represented otherwise than in the most favourable light.

It cannot be doubted that the sections about Joash in 2 Kings (xi. 1-xii. 17 [16]), having their scene end subject laid in the temple, are at bottom identical with 2 Chron. xxii. 10-xxiv. 14. In the case of 2 Kings xi., to begin with, the beginning and the close, vers. 1-3, vers. 13-20, recur verbatim in 2 Chron. xxii. 10-12, xxiii. 12-21, if trifling alterations be left out of account. But in the central portion also there occur passages which are taken over into 2 Chronicles without any change,

[p. 196]

Only here they are inappropriate, while in the original connection they are intelligible. For the meaning and colour of the whole is entirely altered in Chronicles, as the following comparison in the main passage will show; to understand it one must bear in mind that the regent Athaliah has put to death all the members of the house of David who had escaped the massacre of Jehu, with the exception of the child Joash, who, with the knowledge of Jehoiada, the priest, has found hiding and protection in the temple.

          2 KINGS xi.

           

       2 CHRONICLES xxiii.

     
      4. In the seventh year Jehoiada sent and took the captains of the Carians   and runners,

        

       1. In the seventh year Jehoiada   strengthened himself and took the   captains, Azariah the son of Jeroham, and Ishmael the son of Jehohanan,   and Azariah the son of Obed, and Maaseiah the son of Adaiah, and Elishaphat   the son of Zichri, into covenant with him.

     
       

        

       2. And they went about in Judah and gathered the Levites out of all the   cities in Judah, and the chiefs of the Fathers of Israel, and they came to   Jerusalem,

     
      and brought them to him into the house of Jehovah, and made a covenant   with them, and took an oath of them in the house of Jehovah, and showed them   the king's son;

        

       3. And the whole congregation made a   covenant in the house of God with the king. And he said unto them, Behold; the king's son shall reign, as   Jehovah said concerning the sons of David.

     
      5. And commanded them, saying, This is the thing that ye shall do; the   third part of you which enter on the Sabbath and keep the watch of the king's   house,

        

       4. This is the thing that ye shall   do: he third part of you, which enter on the Sabbath, of the priests and   of the Levites, shall keep the doors.

     
      [6. And the third part in the gate of Jesod, and the third part in the   gate behind the runners, and ye shall keep the watch in the house . . . . ]:

        

       5. And the third part of you shall be in   the house of the king, and the third part in the gate Jesod; and all the   people shall be in the courts of the house of Jehovah.

     
      7. And the two other third parts of you, those who go forth on the Sabbath   and keep the watch in the house of Jehovah about the king:

        

       6. And no one shall come into the house of Jehovah save the priests and   they of the Levites that minister; they shall go in, for they are holy; but   all the people shall keep the ordinance of Jehovah.

     
      8. Ye shall encompass the king round about, every man with his weapons in   his hand, and whosoever cometh within the ranks, shall be put to death, and   ye

        

       7. And the Levites shall compass the   ring round about, every man with his weapons in his hand, and whosoever   cometh into the house, shall be put to 

     
      [p. 197]

        

        

     
      shall be with the king whithersoever he goeth.

        

       death; and they shall be with the   king whithersoever he goeth.

     
      9. And the captains did according to all that Jehoiada the priest had   commanded, and took each his men, those that were to come in on the Sabbath   with those that were to go out on the Sabbath, and came to Jehoiada the   priest.

        

       8. And the Levites and all Judah did   according to all that Jehoiada the priest had commanded, and took each his   men, those that were to come in on the Sabbath with those that were to go out   on the Sabbath, for Jehoiada the priest dismissed not the divisions.

     
      10. And to the captains the priest gave King David's spears and shields   that were in the house of Jehovah.

        

       9. And Jehoiada the priest delivered to the captains of hundreds the   spears and the bucklers and the shields that King David had, which were in   the house of God.

     
      11. And the runners stood, every man with his weapons in his hand, from   the south side of the house to the north side, along by the altar and the   house, round about the king.

        

       10. And he set all the people, every man having his weapon in his hand,   from the south side of the house to the north side, along by the altar and   the house, round about the king.

     
      12. And he brought forth the king's son and put upon him the crown and the   bracelet, and they made him king and anointed him, and they clapped their   hands and said: Long live the king.

        

       11. And they brought out the king's son and put upon him the crown and the   bracelet and they made him king; and Jehoiada and his sons anointed him and   said: Long live the king.

     
   Can the enthronement of Joash, as on a former occasion that of Solomon, possibly have been accomplished by the agency of the bodyguard of the kings of Judah? Is it possible that the high priest should have made a covenant with the captains within the house of Jehovah, and himself have held out the inducement to those half-pagan mercenaries to penetrate into the temple precincts? That were indeed an outrage upon the Law not lightly to be imputed to so holy a man! Why then did not Jehoiada make use of his own guard, the myriads of Levites who were at his command? Such a course was the only right one, and therefore that which was followed. "No one shall come into the house of Jehovah save the priests and they of the Levites that minister:" in accordance with this fundamental principle stated by himself (xxiii. 6; comp ver. 7 into the house instead of within the ranks), our pious historian substitutes his priests and Levites for the Carians and runners. Hereby also Jehoiada comes into the place that belongs to him as sovereign of the sanctuary and of the congregation. He therefore needs no longer to set on foot in secret a conspiracy with the chiefs of the body-guard, but through his own spiritual officers calls together the Levites and heads of houses from all the cities of Judah into the temple,

[p. 198]

and causes the whole assemblage there to enter into a covenant with the young king. The glaring inconsistencies inevitably produced by the new colouring thus given to individual parts of the old picture must simply be taken as part of the bargain. If Jehoiada has unrestricted sway over such a force and sets about his revolution with the utmost publicity, then it is he and not Athaliah who has the substance of power; why then all this trouble about the deposition of the tyrant? Out of mere delight in Levitical pomp and high solemnities? What moreover is to be done with the captains who are retained in xxiii. 1, 9, and in ver. 14 are even called officers of the host as in 2 Kings xi 15, after their soldiers have been taken from them or metamorphosed? Had the Levites a military organisation, and, divided into three companies, did they change places every week in the temple service? The commentators are inclined to call in to their aid such inventive assumptions, with which, however, they may go on for ever without attaining their end, for the error multiplies itself. As a specially striking instance of the manner in which the procedure of Chronicles avenges itself may be mentioned chapter xxiii. 8: "and they took each his men," &c. The words are taken from 2 Kings xi. 9, but there refer to the captains, while here the antecedents are the Levites and all the men of Judah--as if each one of these last had a company of his own which entered upon service, or left it, every Sabbath day.

The comparison of 2 Chron. xxiv. 4-14 with 2 Kings xii. 5-17 [4-16] is not much less instructive. According to 2 Kings xii. Joash enjoined that all the money dues payable to the temple should in future fall to the priests, who in turn were to be under obligation to maintain the building in good repair. But they took the money and neglected the other side of the bargain, and when they and Jehoiada in particular were blamed by the king on that account, they gave up the dues so as not to be liable to the burden. Thereupon the king set up a kind of sacred treasury, a chest with a hole in the lid, near the altar, "on the right hand as one goes into the temple," into which the priests were to cast the money which came in, with the exception of the sin and trespass moneys, which still belonged to them. And as often as the chest became full, the king's scribes and the chief priest removed the money, weighed it, and handed it over to the contractors for payment of the workmen; that none of it was to be employed for sacred vessels is expressly said (ver. 14). This arrangement by King

[p. 199]

[paragraph continues] Joash was a lasting one, and still subsisted in Josiah's time (2 Kings xxii. 3 seq.).

The arbitrary proceeding of Joash did not well suit the ideas of an autonomous hierocracy. According to the Law the current money dues fell to the priests; no king had the right to take them away and dispose of them at his pleasure. How was it possible that Jehoiada should waive his divine right and suffer such a sacrilegious invasion of sacred privileges? how was it possible that he should be blamed for his (at first) passive resistance of the illegal invasion; how was it possible at all that the priest in his own proper department should be called to account by the king? Chronicles knows better than that. The wicked Athaliah had wasted and plundered the temple; Joash determined to restore it, and for this purpose to cause money to be collected throughout all Israel by the agency of the Levites. But as these last were in no hurry, he made a chest and set it outside in the doorway of the sanctuary; there the people streamed past, and gentle and simple with joyful heart cast in their gifts until the chest was full. This being announced by the keepers of the door, the king's scribe and the delegate of the high priest came to remove the money; with it the king and the high priest paid the workmen, and what remained over was made into costly vessels (2 Chron. xxiv. 5-14). According to this account Joash makes no arrangement whatever about the sacred dues, but sets on foot an extraordinary collection, as had once been done by Moses for the building of the tabernacle (xxiv. 6, 9); following upon this, everything else also which in 2 Kings xii. is a permanent arrangement, here figures as an isolated occurrence; instead of necessary repairs of the temple constantly recurring, only one extraordinary restoration of it is mentioned, and for this occasional purpose only is the treasure chest set up,--not, however, beside the altar, but only at the doorway (xxiv. 8; comp. 2 Kings xii. 10). The clergy, the Levites, are charged only with making the collection, not with maintaining the building out of the sacred revenues; consequently they are not reproached with keeping the money to themselves, but only with not being heartily enough disposed towards the collection. It appears, however, that they were perfectly justified in this backwardness, for the king has only to set up the "treasury of God," when forthwith it overflows with the voluntary offerings of the people who flock to it, so that out of the proceeds something remains over (ver. 14) for certain other purposes--which

[p. 200]

according to 2 Kings xii. 14 [13] were expressly excluded. Joash imposes no demands at all upon the priests, and Jehoiada in particular stands over against him as invested with perfectly equal rights; if the king sends his scribe, the high priest also does not appear personally, but causes himself to be represented by a delegate (xxiv. 11; comp. 2 Kings xii. 11 [10]). Here also many a new piece does not come well into the old garment, as De Wette (i. 100) shows. Chronicles itself tacitly gives the honour to the older narrative by making Joash at last apostatise from Mosaism and refuse the grateful deference which he owed to the high priest; this is the consequence of the unpleasant impression, derived not from its own story, but from that of the Book of Kings, with regard to the undue interference of the otherwise pious king in the affairs of the sanctuary and of the priests.

Chronicles reaps the fruits of its perversion of 2 Kings xii. in its reproduction of the nearly related and closely connected section 2 Kings xxii. 3-10. It is worth while once more to bring the passages together.

          2 KINGS xxii.

           

       2 CHRONICLES xxxiv.

     
      3. And in the eighteenth year of king Josiah the king sent Shaphan the son   of Azaliah, the son of Meshullam, the scribe, to the house of Jehovah,   saying,

4. Go up to Hilkiah the high priest, that he may empty the money which   hath been brought into the house of Jehovah, which the keepers of the   threshold have gathered of the people.

5. And let them deliver it into the hand of the doers of the work that   have the oversight of the house of Jehovah, and let them give it to the doers   of the work who are in the house of Jehovah to repair the breaches of the   house.

6. Unto carpenters, and builders, and masons, and to buy timber and hewn   stones to repair the house.

7. But let no reckoning he made with them as to the money that is   delivered into their hand, because they deal faithfully.

        

       8. And in the eighteenth year of his reign, to cleanse the land and the   house, he sent Shaphan the son of Azaliah, and Maaseiah the governor of the   city, and Joah the son of Joahaz the recorder, to repair the house of Jehovah   his God.

9. And they came to Hilkiah the high priest, and they delivered the money   that had been brought into the house of God which the Levites that kept the   threshold had gathered from Ephraim and Manasseh and all the remnant of   Israel and from all Judah and Benjamin, and had returned therewith to   Jerusalem.

10. And they gave it into the hand of the workmen that had the oversight   of the house of Jehovah, and of the workmen that wrought in the house of   Jehovah to repair and amend the house.

11. They gave it to the artificers and to the builders to buy hewn stone   and timber for roofs and beams of the houses which the kings of Judah had   destroyed.

12. And the men slid the work faithfully. And the overseers of them were

     
      [p. 201]

        

        

     
       

        

       [paragraph continues] Jahath and Obadiah, the Levites, of the sons of Merari; and   Zechariah and Meshullam, of the Kohathites, to preside; and all the Levites   that had skill in instruments of music

13. Were over the bearers of burdens and overseers of ail that wrought the   work in any manner of service; and others of the Levites were scribes and   officers and porters.

14. And when they brought out the money that had been brought into the   house of Jehovah, Hilkiah the priest found the book of the law of Jehovah by   the hand of Moses.

 

     
      8. And Hilkiah the high priest said unto Shaphan the scribe: I have found   the book of the law in the house of Jehovah. And Hilkiah gave the book to   Shaphan, and he read it.

9. And Shaphan the scribe came to the king and brought the king word   again, and said: Thy servants have emptied out the money that was found in   the house and have delivered it into the hand of them that do the work, that   have the oversight of the house of Jehovah.

10. And Shaphan the scribe told the king, saying: Hilkiah the priest hath   delivered to me a book. And Shaphan read it before the king.

 

        

       15. And Hilkiah answered and said to Shaphan the scribe: I have found the   book of the law in the house of Jehovah. And Hilkiah delivered the book to   Shaphan.

16. And Shaphan carried the book to the king, and besides brought word   back to the king, saying: All that was committed to thy servants they are   doing.

17. And they have emptied out the money that was found in the house of   Jehovah, and have delivered it into the hand of the overseers and into the   hand of the workmen.

18. And Shaphan the scribe told the king, saying: Hilkiah the priest hath   given me a book. And Shaphan read out of it before the king.

     
   The occasion on which the priest introduces the Book of the Law to the notice of Shaphan has presuppositions in the arrangement made by Joash which Chronicles has destroyed, substituting others in its place,--that the temple had been destroyed under the predecessors of Josiah, but that under the latter money was raised by the agency of peripatetic Levites throughout all Israel for the restoration, and in the first instance deposited in the treasure-chest. At the emptying of this chest the priest is then alleged to have found the book (ver. 14, after Deut. xxxi. 26), notwithstanding that on this occasion Shaphan also and the two accountants added in ver. 8 were present, and ought therefore to have had a share in the discovery which, however, is excluded by ver. 15 (= 2 Kings xxii. 8). There are other misunderstandings

[p. 202]

besides; in particular, the superintendents of the works (muphkadim), to whom, according to the original narrative, the money is handed over for payment, are degraded to the rank of simple workmen, from whom, nevertheless, they are again afterwards distinguished; and while in 2 Kings xxii. 7 they are represented as dealing faithfully in paying out the money, in 2 Chron. xxxiv. 12 they deal faithfully in their work. Perhaps, however, this is no mere misunderstanding, but is connected with the endeavour to keep profane hands as far off as possible from that which is holy, and, in particular, to give the management of the work to the Levites (vers. 12,13). To what length the anxiety of later ages went in this matter is seen in the statement of Josephus (Ant., xv. 11, 2), that Herod caused one thousand priests to be trained as masons and carpenters for the building of his temple. The two most interesting alterations in Chronicles are easily overlooked. In ver. 1 8 the words: "He read the book to the king," are changed into "He read out of the book to the king;" and after "Hilkiah gave the book to Shaphan" (ver. 15) the words "and he read it" are omitted. In 2 Kings the book appears as of very moderate size, but the author of Chronicles figures to himself the whole Pentateuch under that name.

In the sequel 2 Kings xxii. 11-xxiii. 3 is indeed repeated verbatim in 2 Chron. xxxiv. 19-32, but the incomparably more important section connected with it (xxiii. 4-10), giving a detailed account of Josiah's vigorous reformation, is omitted, and its place taken by the meagre remark that the king removed all abominations out of Israel (xxxiv. 33); in compensation his passover feast is described all the more fully (chap. xxxv.). In recording also the finding and publication of the Law, Chronicles fails to realise that this document begins now for the first time to be historically operative, and acquires its great importance quite suddenly. On the contrary, it had been from the days of Moses the basis on which the community rested, and had been in force and validity at all normal times; only temporarily could this life-principle of the theocracy be repressed by wicked kings, forthwith to become vigorous and active again as soon as the pressure was removed. As soon as Ahaz has closed his eyes, Hezekiah, in the first month of his first year, again restores the Mosaic cultus; and as soon as Josiah reaches years of discretion he makes good the sins of his fathers. Being at his accession still too young, the eighth year of his reign is, as a tribute to propriety, selected instead of the eighth year of his life, and the great

[p. 203]

reformation assigned to that period which in point of fact he undertook at a much later date (xxxiv. 3-7 = 2 Kings xxiii. 4-20). Thus the movement happily becomes separated from its historical occasion, and in character the innovation appears rather as a simple recovery of the spring after the pressure on it has been removed. The mist disappears before the sun of the Law, which appears in its old strength; its light passes through no phases, but shines from the beginning with uniform brightness. What Josiah did had also been done before him already by Asa, then by Jehoshaphat, then by Hezekiah; the reforms are not steps in a progressive development, but have all the same unchanging contents. Such is the influence upon historical vision of that transcendental Mosaism raised far above all growth and process of becoming, which can be traced even in the Book of Kings, but is so much more palpable in the Book of Chronicles.

3. Apart from the fact that it represents the abiding tradition of the legitimate cultus at Jerusalem, the history of Judah in the Book of Chronicles has yet another instructive purpose. In the kingdom of Judah it is not a natural and human, but a divine pragmatism that is operative. To give expression to this is what the prophets exist for in unbroken succession side by side with high priests and kings; they connect the deeds of men with the events of the course of the world, and utilise the sacred history as a theme for their preaching, as a collection of examples illustrative of the promptest operation of the righteousness of Jehovah. In doing so they do not preach what is new or free, but have at their command, like Jehovah Himself, only the Law of Moses, setting before their hearers prosperity and adversity in conformity with the stencil pattern, just as the law is faithfully fulfilled or neglected. Of course their prophecies always come exactly true, and in this way is seen an astonishing harmony between inward worth and outward circumstance. Never does sin miss its punishment, and never where misfortune occurs is guilt wanting.

In the fifth year of Rehoboam Judah and Jerusalem were ravaged by Pharaoh Shishak (1 Kings xiv. 25). The explanation is that three years they walked in the ways of David and Solomon, because for three years they were strengthened and reinforced by the priests and Levites and other pious persons who had immigrated from the northern kingdom (2 Chron. xi. 17); but thereafter in the fourth year, after the kingdom of Rehoboam had been strengthened and confirmed, he forsook the Law

[p. 204]

and all Israel with him (xii. 1)--and in the fifth year followed the invasion of Shishak. A prophet announces this, and in consequence the king humbles himself along with his people and escapes with comparatively trifling punishment, being thought worthy to reign yet other twelve years.

Asa in his old age was diseased in his feet (1 Kings xv. 23). According to 2 Chron. xvi. 12, he died of this illness, which is described as extremely dangerous, in the forty-first year of his reign, after having already been otherwise unfortunate in his later years. And why? He had invoked foreign aid, instead of the divine, against Baasha of Israel. Now, as Baasha survived only to the twenty-sixth year of Asa, the wickedness must have been perpetrated before that date. But in that case its connection with the punishment which overtook the king only towards the close of his life would not be clear. Baasha's expedition against Jerusalem, accordingly, and the Syrian invasion of Israel occasioned by Asa on that account are brought down in Chronicles to the thirty-sixth year of the latter (xvi. 1). It has been properly observed that Baasha was at that date long dead, and the proposal has accordingly been made to change the number thirty-six into sixteen,--without considering that the first half of the reign of Asa is expressly characterised as having been prosperous, that the thirty-fifth year is already reached in chap. xv. 19, and that the correction destroys the connection of the passage with what follows (xvi. 7 seq.). For it is in connection with that flagitious appeal for aid to the Syrians that the usual prophet makes his appearance (xvi. 7), and makes the usual announcement of impending punishment. It is Hanani, a man of Northern Israel (1 Kings xvi. 7), but Asa treats him as if he were one of his own subjects, handles him severely, and shuts him in prison. By this he hastens and increases his punishment, under which he falls in the forty-first year of his reign.

Jehoshaphat, the pious king, according to 1 Kings xxii., took part in the expedition of the godless Ahab of Israel against the Damascenes. Chronicles cannot allow this to pass unrebuked, and accordingly when the king returns in peace, the same Hanani announces his punishment, albeit a gracious one (2 Chron. xix. 1-3). And gracious indeed it is; the Moabites and Ammonites invade the land, but Jehoshaphat without any effort on his part wins a glorious victory, and inexhaustible plunder (xx. 1 seq.). One cannot blame him, therefore, for once more entering

[p. 205]

into an alliance with Ahab's successor for a naval expedition to be undertaken in common, which is to sail from a port of the Red Sea, probably round Africa, to Tarshish (Spain, 2 Chron. ix. 21). But this time he is punished more seriously as Eliezer the son of Dodavah had prophesied, the ships are wrecked. Compare on the other hand 1 Kings xxii. 48, 49: "Jehoshaphat made ships of Tarshish to go to Ophir for gold, but they went not, for the ships were wrecked in the harbour on the Red Sea. At that time Ahaziah the son of Ahab had said to Jehoshaphat: Let my servants go with thy servants in the ships; but Jehoshaphat would not." So the original statement. But in Chronicles a moral ground must be found for the misfortune, and Jehoshaphat therefore makes with the king of Samaria a sinful alliance, which in point of fact he had declined, not indeed from religious motives.

Joram, the son of Jehoshaphat, conducted himself very ill, it is said in 2 Kings viii. 18; Chronicles enhances his offence, and above all adds the merited reward (xxi. 4, seq.). Elijah, although he had quitted this earth long before (2 Kings iii. 11 seq.), must write to the offender a letter, the threats of which are duly put into execution by Jehovah. The Philistines and Arabians having previously pressed him hard, he falls into an incurable sickness of the bowels, which afflicts him for years, and finally brings him to his end in a most frightful manner (xxi. 12, seq.). In concurrence with the judgment of God, the people withhold from the dead king the honours of royalty, and he is not buried beside his fathers, notwithstanding 2 Kings viii. 24.

Joash, according to 2 Kings xii., was a pious ruler, but met with misfortune; he was compelled to buy off Hazael, who had laid siege to Jerusalem, at a heavy price, and finally he died by the assassin's hand. Chronicles is able to tell how he deserved this fate. In the sentence: "He did what was right in the sight of the Lord all his days, because Jehoiada the high priest had instructed him" (2 Kings xii. 3 [2]), it alters the last expression into "all the days of Jehoiada the priest," (xxiv. 2). After the death of his benefactor he fell away, and showed his family the basest ingratitude; at the end of that very year the Syrians invade him; after their departure his misfortunes are increased by a dreadful illness, under which he is murdered (xxiv. 17 seq.).

Amaziah was defeated, made prisoner, and severely punished by Jehoash, king of Samaria, whom he had audaciously challenged

[p. 206]

[paragraph continues] (2 Kings xiv. 8 seq.). Why? because he had set up in Jerusalem idols which had been carried off from Edom, and served them (2 Chron. xxv. 1 4). He prefers the plundered gods of a vanquished people to Jehovah at the very moment when the latter has proved victorious over them! From the time of this apostasy--a crime for which no punishment could be too great--his own servants are also stated to have conspired against him and put him to death (xxv. 27), and yet we are assured in ver. 25 (after 2 Kings xiv. I;) that Amaziah survived his adversary by fifteen years.

Uzziah, one of the best kings of Judah, became a leper, and was compelled to hand over the regency to his son Jotham (2 Kings xv. 5); for, adds Chronicles, "when he had become strong, his heart was lifted up, even to ruin, so that he transgressed against Jehovah his God, and went into the temple of Jehovah, to burn incense upon the altar of incense. And Azariah the priest went in after him, and with him fourscore priests of Jehovah, and withstood him and said: It is not for thee to burn incense, but only for the sons of Aaron who are consecrated thereto. Then Uzziah was wroth and laid not the censer aside, and the leprosy rose up in his forehead, and the priests thrust him out from thence" (xxvi. 16-20). The matter is now no longer a mystery.

Ahaz was a king of little worth, and yet he got fairly well out of the difficulty into which the invasion of the allied Syrians and Israelites had brought him by making his kingdom tributary to the Assyrian Tiglath-Pileser (2 Kings xvi. 1 seq.). But Chronicles could not possibly let him off so cheaply. By it he is delivered into the hand of the enemy: the Israelites alone slaughter 120,000 men of Judah, including the king's son and his most prominent servants, and carry off to Samaria 200,000 women and children, along with a large quantity of other booty. The Edomites and Philistines also fall upon Ahaz, while the Assyrians whom he has summoned to his aid misunderstand him, and come up against Jerusalem with hostile intent; they do not, indeed, carry the city, but yet become possessors, without trouble, of its treasures, which the king himself hands over to them (xxviii. 1-21).

The Book of Kings knows no worse ruler than Manasseh was; yet he reigned undisturbed for fifty-five years--a longer period than was enjoyed by any other king (2 Kings xxi. 1-18). This is a stone of stumbling that Chronicles must remove. It tells that Manasseh was

[p. 207]

carried in chains by the Assyrians to Babylon, but there prayed to Jehovah, who restored him to his kingdom; he then abolished idolatry in Judah (xxxiii. 11-20). Thus on the one hand he does not escape punishment, while on the other hand the length of his reign is nevertheless explained. Recently indeed it has been sought to support the credibility of these statements by means of an Assyrian inscription, from which it appears that Manasseh did pay tribute to Esarhaddon. That is to say, he had been overpowered by the Assyrians; that is again to say, that he had been thrown into chains and carried off by them. Not so rapid, but perhaps quite as accurate, would be the inference that as a tributary prince he must have kept his seat on the throne of Judah, and not have exchanged it for the prison of Babylon. In truth, Manasseh's temporary deposition is entirely on the same plane with Nebuchadnezzar's temporary grass-eating. The unhistorical character of the intermezzo (the motives of which are perfectly transparent) follows not only from the silence of the Book of Kings (a circumstance of no small importance indeed), but also, for example, from Jer. xv. 4; for when it is there said that all Judah and Jerusalem are to be given up to destruction because of Manasseh, it is not presupposed that his guilt has been already borne and atoned for by himself.

To justify the fact of Josiah's defeat and death at Megiddo, there is attached to him the blame of not having given heed to the words of Necho from the mouth of God warning him against the struggle (xxxv. 21, 22). Contrariwise, the punishment of the godless Jehoiakim is magnified; he is stated to have been put in irons by the Chaldaeans and carried to Babylon (xxxvi. 6)--an impossibility of course before the capture of Jerusalem, which did not take place until the third month of his successor. The last prince of David's house, Zedekiah, having suffered more severely than all his predecessors, must therefore have been stiff-necked and rebellious (xxxvi. 12, 13),--characteristics to which, according to the authentic evidence of the prophet Jeremiah, he had in reality the least possible claim.

It is thus apparent how inventions of the most circumstantial kind have arisen out of this plan of writing history, as it is euphemistically called. One is hardly warranted, therefore, in taking the definiteness of statements vouched for by Chronicles alone as proof of their accuracy. The story about Zerah the Ethiopian (2 Chron. xiv. 9 seq.) is just as apocryphal as that of Chushan-Rishathaim (Judges iii. 10).

[p. 208]

[paragraph continues] Des Vignoles has indeed identified the first-named with the Osorthon of Manetho, who again occurs in the Egyptian monuments as Osorkon, son of Shishak, though not as renewing the war against Palestine; but Osorkon was an Egyptian, Zerah an Ethiopian, and the resemblance of the names is after all not too obvious. But, even if Zerah were really a historical personage, of what avail would this be for the unhistorical connection? With a million of men the king of the Libyans and Moors, stepping over Egypt, comes against Judah. Asa, ruler of a land of about sixty German square miles, goes to meet the enemy with 580,000, and defeats him on the plain to the north of Mareshah so effectually that not a single soul survives. Shall it be said that this story, on account of the accurate statement of locality (although Mareshah instead of Gath is not after all suggestive of an old source), is credible-at all events after deduction of the incredibilities? If the incredibilities are deducted, nothing at all is left. The invasion of Judah by Baasha of Israel, and Asa's deportment towards him (1 Kings xv. 17 seq.), are quite enough fully to dispose of the great previous victory over the Ethiopians claimed for Asa. The case is no better with the victory of Jehoshaphat over the Ammonites and Moabites (2 Chron. xx.); here we have probably an echo of 2 Kings iii., where we read of Jehoshaphat's taking part in a campaign against Moab, and where also recurs that characteristic feature of the self-destruction of the enemy, so that for the opposing force nothing remains but the work of collecting the booty (iii. 23; compare 2 Chron. xx. 23). The Chronicler has enemies always at his command when needed,--Arabians, Ethiopians (xvii. 11, xxi. 16, xxii. 1, xxvi. 7), Mehunims (xx. 1, xxvi. 1), Philistines (xvii. 11, xxi. 16, xxvi. 6 seq., xxviii. 18), Ammonites (xx. 1, xxvi. 8, xxvii. 5), whose very names in some cases put them out of the question for the older time. Such statements as that the Ammonites became subject to Kings Uzziah and Jotham, are, in the perfect silence of the credible sources, condemned by their inherent impossibility; for at that period the highway to Ammon was Moab, and this country was by no means then in the possession of Judah, nor is it anywhere said that it was. The Philistines as vindictive enemies are rendered necessary by the plan of the history (xxi. 16, xxviii. 18), and this of itself throws suspicion upon the previous statements (xvii. 11, xxvi. 6 seq.) that they were laid under tribute by Jehoshaphat, and subjugated by Uzziah; it is utterly impossible to believe that the latter should have broken down the

[p. 209]

walls of Ashdod (Amos i. 7), or have established fortresses in Philistia. According to the Book of Kings, he did indeed conquer Edom anew; Edom is according to this authority the one land to which the descendants of David lay claim and against which they wage war, while Moab and Philistia (the most important towns being excepted, however, in the case of the latter) virtually belong to the territory of Ephraim.

The triumphs given by the Chronicler to his favourites have none of them any historical effect, but merely serve to add a momentary splendour to their reigns. Merit is always the obverse of success. Joram, Joash, Ahaz, who are all depicted as reprobates, build no fortresses, command no great armies, have no wealth of wives and children; it is only in the case of the pious kings (to the number of whom even Rehoboam and Abijah also belong) that the blessing of God manifests itself by such tokens. Power is the index of piety, with which accordingly It rises and fall. Apart from this it is of no consequence if, for example, Jehoshaphat possesses more than 1,100,000 soldiers (xvii, 14 seq.), for they are not used for purposes of war; the victory comes from God and from the music of the Levites (chap. xx.). In the statements about fortress-building which regularly recur in connection with the names of good rulers, [*1] general statements, such as those of Hosea viii. 14, 2 Kings xviii. 13, are illustrated by concrete examples, a few elements of tradition being also employed (Lachish). It is not possible, but, indeed, neither is it necessary, to demonstrate in every case the imaginary character of the statements; according to xix. 5 it would appear as if simply every city of any kind of consequence was regarded as a fortress and in the list given in chap. xi. 6 seq., we chiefly meet with names which were also familiar in the post-exile period. That Abijah deprived Jeroboam of Bethel amongst others, and that Jehoshaphat set governors over the Ephraimite cities which had been taken by Asa his father (xiii. 19, xvii. 2), would excite surprise if it stood anywhere else than in Chronicles. In forming a judgment on its family history of the descendants of David, the statement contained in xiii. 21 is specially helpful both in manner and substance: "And Abijah waxed mighty, and he married fourteen wives, and begat twenty and two sons, and sixteen daughters." This can only be taken as referring to the reign of Abijah, and that too after the alleged victory

[p. 210]

over Jeroboam; but he reigned altogether for only three years, and is it to be supposed that within this interval one of his sons should even have attained to man's estate? In reality, however, Abijah had no son at all, but was succeeded by his brother, for the definite and doubtless authentic statement that Maachah, the wife of Rehoboam, was the mother both of Abijah and of Asa, and that the latter removed her from her position at court (1 Kings xv. 2, 10, 13), must override the allegation of ver. 8, that the successor of Abijah was his son. After Jehoshaphat's death it is said in the first place that Jehoram slew all his brethren (2 Chr. xxi. 4), and afterwards that the Arabians slew all Jehoram's children with the exception of one (xxii. 1); how many of the Davidic house in that case survive for Jehu, who nevertheless slew forty-two of them (2 Kings x. 14)? In short, the family history of the house of David is of equal historical value with all the other matters on which the Chronicler is more widely and better informed than all the older canonical books. The remark applies to names and numbers as well; about such trifles, which produce an appearance of accuracy, the author is never in any embarrassment.

4. The Book of Kings then everywhere crops up as the real foundation of the portion of Chronicles relating to Judah after the period of Solomon. Where the narrative of the former is detailed and minute, our author also has fuller and more interesting material at his command; so, for example, in the history relating to the temple and to the common and mutual relations of Judah and Israel (2 Chr. x., xviii., xxiii., seq., xxv. 17-24, xxxiii. seq.). Elsewhere he is restricted to the epitome that constitutes the framework of the Book of Kings; by it he is guided in his verdicts as to the general character of the successive sovereigns as well as in his chronological statements, although, in accordance with his plan, he as a rule omits the synchronisms (xiii. 1, xxv. 25). The positive data also, given by the epitome with reference to the legislation in matters of worship by the various kings, are for the most part reproduced word for word, and float in a fragmentary and readily distinguishable way in the mixture of festivals, sermons, choruses, law, and prophets. For this is an important verification of all the results already obtained; all in Chronicles that is not derived from Samuel and Kings, has a uniform character not only in its substance, but also in its awkward and frequently unintelligible language--plainly belonging to a time in which Hebrew was approaching extinction--in its artificiality of style, deriving

[p. 211]

its vitality exclusively from Biblical reminiscences. This is not the place for the proof of these points, but the reader may compare Stahelin's Emleitung (1862), p. 139 seq.; Bertheau, p. xiv. seq., and Graf, p. 116.

  

III.

1. When the narrative of Chronicles runs parallel with the older historical books of the canon, it makes no real additions, but the tradition is merely differently coloured, under the influence of contemporary motives. In the picture it gives the writer's own present is reflected, not antiquity. But neither is the case very different with the genealogical lists prefixed by way of introduction in 1 Chron. i.-ix.; they also are in the main valid only for the period at which they were drawn up--whether for its actual condition or for its conceptions of the past.

The penchant for pedigrees and genealogical registers, made up from a mixture of genealogico-historical and ethnologico-statistical elements, is a characteristic feature of Judaism; along with the thing the word ychsh also first came into use during the later times. Compendious histories are written in the form of thldwth and ywchshyn. The thread is thin and inconspicuous, and yet apparently strong and coherent; one does not commit oneself to much, and yet has opportunity to introduce all kinds of interesting matter. Material comes to one's hand, given a beginning and an end, the bridge is soon completed. Another expression of the same tendency is the inclination to give a genealogical expression to all connections and associations of human society whatsoever, to create artificial families on all hands and bring them into blood relationship, as if the whole of public life resolved itself into a matter of cousinship,--an inclination indicative of the times of political stagnation then prevalent. We hear of the families of the scribes at Jabesh, of the potters and gardeners and byssus-workers, of the sons of the goldsmiths, apothecaries, and fullers, these corporations being placed on the same plane with actual families. The division into classes of the persons engaged in religious service is merely the most logical development of this artificial system which is applied to all other social relations as well.

Proceeding now to a fuller examination of the contents of 1 Chron. i.-ix. and other texts connected with that, we have here, apart from the first chapter, which does not demand further attention, an ethno-genealogical

[p. 212]

survey of the twelve tribes of Israel, which is based mostly on the data of the Priestly Code (Gen. xlvi.; um. xxvi.), expanded now more now less. But while the statements of the Priestly Code have to hold good for the Mosaic period only, those of Chronicles have also to apply to the succeeding ages,--those, for example, of Saul and David, of Tiglath-Pileser and Hezekiah. As early as the time of the judges, however, very important changes had taken place in the conditions. While Dan continued to subsist with difficulty, Simeon and Levi had been completely broken up (Gen. xlix. 7); in the Blessing of Moses the latter name denotes something quite different from a tribe, and the former is not even so much as named, although the enumeration is supposed to be complete; in David's time it had already been absorbed by families of mingled Judaic and Edomitic descent in the district where it had once had independent footing. Eastward of Jordan Leah's first-born had a similar fate, although somewhat later. After it has been deposed from its primacy in Gen. xlix. and twitted in Judges v. with its brave words unaccompanied by corresponding deeds, the faint and desponding wish is expressed in Deut. xxxiii. 6 that "Reuben may live and not die," and King Mesha is unaware that any other than the Gadite had ever dwelt in the land which, properly speaking, was the heritage of Reuben. But in Chronicles these extinct tribes again come to life--and not Levi alone, which is a special case, but also Simeon and Reuben, with which alone we are here to deal--and they exist as independent integral twelfths of Israel, precisely like Ephraim and Manasseh, throughout the whole period of the monarchy down to the destruction of the kingdom by the Assyrians. [*1] This is diametrically opposed to all authentic tradition; for to maintain that nothing else is intended than a continued subsistence of individual Simeonite and Reubenite families within other tribes is merely a desperate resort of the harmonists, and every attempt to tone down the fact that those extinct and half-mythical tribes are in Chronicles placed side by side with the rest without any distinction is equally illegitimate. The historical value thus lost by the narrative as a whole cannot be restored by the seeming truthfulness of certain details. Or is more

[p. 213]

significance really to be attached to the wars of the Simeonites and Reubenites against the Arabians than to the rest of the extemporised wars of the kings of Judah against these children of the wilderness? If only at least the names had not been "sons of Ham, and Mehunim and Hagarenes" (iv. 40 seq. [Heb.], v. 10)! As for the pedigrees and genealogical lists, are they to be accepted as historical merely because their construction is not apparent to us, and they evade our criticism? The language affords no room for the conjecture that we here possess extracts from documents of high antiquity (iv. 33, 38, 41, v. 1 seq., 7, 9 seq.), and proper names such as Elioenai and the like (iv. 35 seq.) are not striking for their antique originality.

Of the remaining tribes, so far as they belong to Israel and not to Judah, the next in the series after Reuben are the trans-Jordanic (v. 11-26). They are said to have been numbered in the days of Jotham of Judah and Jeroboam of Israel, on which occasion 44,760 warriors were returned; they took the field against the Hagarenes, Ituraeans, Nephishites, and Nabataeans, gaining the victory and carrying off much booty, "for they cried to God in the battle, and He was entreated of them because they put their trust in Him." But afterwards they fell away from the God of their fathers, and as a punishment were carried off by Pul and Tiglath-Pileser to Armenia by the Chaboras and the river of Gozan. Apart from the language, which in its edifying tone is that of late Judaism, and leaving out of account the enumeration "the sons of Reuben and the Gadites and half of the tribe of Manasseh," the astonishing and highly doubtful combinations are eloquent: Pul and Tiglath-Pileser, the Chaboras and the river of Gozan, are hardly distinguished from each other; Jotham and Jeroboam, on the other hand, make so impossible a synchronism that the partisans of Chronicles will have it that none is intended,--forgetful, to be sure, of Hosea i. 2, and omitting to say what in that case Jotham of Judah has to do here at all in this connection. The Hagarenes and Ituraeans too, instead of (say) the Moabites and Ammonites, furnish food for reflection, as also do the geographical statements that Gad had his seat in Bashan and Manasseh in and near Lebanon. As for the proper names of families and their heads, they are certainly beyond our means of judging; the phrases however of the scheme they fill (anshe shemoth rashe l'beth abotham, migrash, jahes) are peculiar to the Priestly Code and Chronicles, and alongside of elements which are old and attested from other quarters,

[p. 214]

occur others that look very recent, as for example (v. 24) Eliel, Azriel, Jeremiah, Hodaviah, Jahdiel.

In the introduction the Galilaean tribes have no prominent place, but in the rest of the book they make a favourable appearance (see especially 1 Chron. xii. 32-34, 40, and 2 Chron. xxx. 10, 11, 18); it readily occurs to one, especially in the last-cited passage, to think of the later Judaising process in Galilee. In Issachar there are stated to have been 87,000 fighting men in David's time (misparam l'toledotham l'beth abotham, vii. 1-5); out of Zebulun and Naphtali, again, exactly 87,000 men came to David at Hebron, to anoint him and be feasted three days,--it is carefully mentioned, however (xii. 40), that they took their provisions up with them. The proper kernel of Israel, Ephraim and Manasseh, is, in comparison with Simeon, Reuben, Gad, Issachar, treated with very scant kindness (vii. 14-29),--a suspicious sign. The list of the families of Manasseh is an artificial rechauffe of elements gleaned anywhere; Maachah passes for the wife as well as the sister of Machir, but being a Gileaditess (Beth-Maachah), ought not to have been mentioned at all in this place where the cis-Jordanic Manasseh is being spoken of; to fill up blanks every contribution is thankfully received. [*1] In the case of Ephraim a long and meagre genealogy only is given, which, begun in vers. 20, 21, and continued in ver. 25, constantly repeats the same names (Tahath, Tahan, 1 Sam. i. 1; Eladah, Laadan, Shuthelah, Telah), and finally reaches its end and goal in Joshua, whose father Nun alone is known to the older sources! Into the genealogy a wonderful account of the slaying of the children of Ephraim by the men of Gath (1 Sam. iv.?) has found its way, and (like viii. 6, 7) according to the prevailing view must be of venerable antiquity. But in that case the statement of iv. 9 must also be very ancient, which yet obviously is connected with the rise of the schools of the scribes stated in ii. 55 to have existed in Jabez.

Everywhere it is presupposed that Israel throughout the entire period of the monarchy was organised on the basis of the twelve tribes (ii.-ix.; xii.; xxvii.), but the assumption is certainly utterly false, as can be seen for example from 1 Kings iv. Further, the penchant of later Judaism for statistics is carried back to the earlier time, to which surveys and censuses were repugnant in the extreme. In spite of 2 Sam. xxiv., we are told that under David enumerations both of the spiritual and of

[p. 215]

the secular tribes were made again and again; so also under his successors, as may be inferred partly from express statements and partly from the precise statistics given as to the number of men capable of bearing arms: in these cases the most astounding figures are set down,--always, however, as resting on original documents and accurate enumeration. In the statistical information of Chronicles, then, so far as it relates to pre-exilic antiquity, we have to do with artificial compositions. It is possible, and occasionally demonstrable, that in these some elements derived from tradition have been used. But it is certain that quite as many have been simply invented; and the combination of the elements--the point of chief importance--dates, as both form and matter show, from the very latest period. One might as well try to hear the grass growing as attempt to derive from such a source as this a historical knowledge of the conditions of ancient Israel.

2. As regards Judah and Benjamin, and to a certain extent Levi also, the case of course is somewhat different from that of the ten extinct tribes. It is conceivable that here a living ethno-genealogical tradition may have kept the present connected with the past. Nevertheless, on closer examination, it comes out that most of what the Chronicler here relates has reference to the post-exilic time, and that the few fragments which go up to a higher antiquity are wrought into a connection which on the whole is of a very recent date. Most obtrusively striking is it that the list of the heads of the people dwelling in Jerusalem given in ix. 4-17 is simply identical with Neh. xi. 3-19. In this passage, introducing as it does the history of the kings (x. seq.), one is by no means prepared to hear statements about the community of the second temple; but our author is under the impression that in going there he is letting us know about the old Jerusalem; from David to Nehemiah is no leap for him, the times are not distinct from one another to his mind. For chap. viii. also, containing a full enumeration of the Benjamite families, with special reference to those which had their seat in the capital, Bertheau has proved the post-exilic reference; it is interesting that in the later Jerusalem there existed a widespread family which wished to deduce its origin from Saul and rested its claims to this descent on a long genealogy (viii. 33-40). [*1] It cannot be said that this produces a very favourable impression for the high antiquity of the other list of the Benjamites in vii. 6-11; to see how little value is to be attached to the pretensions of the latter

[p. 216]

to be derived from original documents of hoary antiquity, it is only necessary to notice the genuinely Jewish phraseology of vers. 7, 9, 11, such proper names as Elioenai, and the numbers given (22,034 + 20,200 + 17,200, making in all 59,434 fighting men).

The registers of greatest historical value are those relating to the tribe of Judah (ii. 1-iv. 23). But in this statement the genealogy of the descendants of David must be excepted (chapter iii.), the interest of which begins only with Zerubbabel, the rest being merely an exceedingly poor compilation of materials still accessible to us in the older historical books of the canon, and in Jeremiah. According to iii. 5, the first four of David's sons, born in Jerusalem, were all children of Bathsheba; the remaining seven are increased to nine by a textual error which occurs also in the LXX version of 2 Sam. v. 16. Among the sons of Josiah (iii. 15 seq.), Johanan, i.e. Jehoahaz, is distinguished from Shallum (Jer. xxii. 11), and because he immediately succeeded his father, is represented as the first-born, though in truth Jehoiakim was older (2 Kings xxiii. 31, 36); Zedekiah, Jehoiakim's brother, is given out to be the son of Jeconiah, the son of Jehoiakim, because he was the successor of Jeconiah, who succeeded Jehoiakim. Similar things occur also in the Book of Daniel, but are usually overlooked, with a mistaken piety. Whoever has eyes to see cannot assign any high value except to the two great Jewish genealogies in chaps. ii. and iv. Yet even here the most heterogeneous elements are tossed together, and chaff is found mingled with wheat. [*1]

Apart from the introduction, vers. 1-8, chap. ii. is a genealogy of the children of Hezron, a tribe which in David's time had not yet been wholly amalgamated with Judah, but which even then constituted the real strength of that tribe and afterwards became completely one with it. The following scheme discloses itself amid the accompanying matters: "The sons of Hezron are Jerahmeel and Celubai" (Caleb) (ver. 9). "and the sons of Jerahmeel, the first-born of Hezron, were. . ." (ver. 25). "These were the sons of Jerahmeel. And the sons of Caleb the brother of Jerahmeel were. . ." (ver. 42). "These were the sons of Caleb" (ver. 50 a). That which is thus formally defined and kept by itself apart (compare in this connection "Jerahmeel the first-born of Hezron," "Caleb the brother of Jerahmeel") is materially also distinguished from

[p. 217]

all else. It is the kernel of the whole, and refers to the pre-exilian time. Even the unusual et fuerunt (vers. 25, 33, 50) points to this conclusion, as well as, in the case of Caleb, the positive fact that the towns named in ver. 42-49 are all situated near Hebron and in the Negeb of Judah, where after the exile the Idumaeans were settled, and, in the case of Jerahmeel, the negative circumstance that here no towns at all are mentioned among the families, Molid, ver. 29, being perhaps a single exception, and thus the extreme south is indicated. But this kernel is amplified by a number of post-exilian additions. In the first place, in connection with Jerahmeel, an appendix (vers. 34-41) is given which is not ethnological but purely genealogical, and brings a pedigree of fifteen members manifestly down to near the age of the Chronicler, and which moreover is only in apparent connection with what precedes it (comp. ver. 34 with ver. 31), and invariably uses the hiphil form holid, a form which occurs in vers. 25-33 never, and in vers. 42-50 only sporadically in three places open to the suspicion of later redaction (comp. especially ver. 47). Much more important, however, are the additions under Caleb; of these the one is prefixed (vers. 18-24), the other, more appropriately, brought in at the close (vers. 50-55, beginning with "and the sons of Hur, the firstborn of Ephrath," Caleb's second wife, ver. 19). Here Caleb no longer presents himself in the extreme south of Judah and the vicinity of Jerahmeel (1 Samuel xxv. 3, xxvii. 10, xxx. 14, 29), where he had his settlement prior to the exile, but his families, which are all of them descended from his son Hur, inhabit Bethlehem, Kirjath-jearim, Zorah, Esthaol, and other towns in the north, frequently mentioned in Ezra and Nehemiah. Thus the Calebites in consequence of the exile have forsaken their old seats and have taken up new ones on their return; this fact is expressed in ver. 18 to the effect that Caleb's first wife Azubah bath Jerioth (Deserta filia Nomadum) had died, and that he had then married a second, Ephrath, by whom he became the father of Hur: Ephrath is the name of the district in which Bethlehem and Kirjath-jearim are situated, and properly speaking is merely another form of Ephraim, as is shown by the word Ephrathite. In addition to these appendices to Jerahmeel and Caleb, we have also the genealogy of David (vers. 10-17). The Book of Samuel knows only of his father Jesse; on the other hand, Saul's genealogy is carried further back, and there was no reason for not doing so in David's case also if the materials had existed. But here, as in Ruth, the pedigree is traced backwards

[p. 218]

through Jesse, Obed, Boaz, up to Salma. Salma is the father of Bethlehem (ii. 54), and hence the father of David. But Salma is the father of Bethlehem and the neighbouring towns or fractions of towns after the exile; he belongs to Kaleb Abi Hur. [*1] But if anything at all is certain, it is this, that in ancient times the Calebites lived in the south and not in the north of Judah, and in particular that David by his nativity belonged not to them but rather to the older portion of Judah which gravitated towards Israel properly so called, and stood in most intimate relations with Benjamin. Of the first three members of the genealogy, Nahshon and Amminadab occur as princes of Judah in the Priestly Code, and are fitly regarded as the ancestors of those who come after them; Ram is the first-born of Hezron's first-born (ver. 25), and by the meaning of his name also (Ram = the high one), is, like Abram, qualified to stand at the head of the princely line.

While in chap ii. we thus in point of fact fall in with an old kernel, and one that necessarily goes back to sound tradition (apparently preserved indeed, however, merely for the sake of the later additions), the quite independent and parallel list, on the other hand, contained in iv. 1-23 is shown by many unmistakable indications to be a later composition having its reference only to post-exilian conditions, perhaps incorporating a few older elements, which, however, it is impossible with any certainty to detect. [*2]

Levi of course receives the fullest treatment (1 Chron. v. 27 [vi. 1]-vi. 66 [81], ix. 10 seq., xv., xvi., xxiii.-xxvii., &c.). We know that this clerical tribe is an artificial production, and that its hierarchical subdivision, as worked out in the Priestly Code, was the result of the centralisation of the cultus in Jerusalem. Further, it has been already shown that in the history as recorded in Chronicles the effort is most conspicuous to

[p. 219]

represent the sons of Aaron and the Levites, in all cases where they are absent from the older historical books of the canon, as playing the part to which they are entitled according to the Priestly Code. How immediate is the connection with the last-named document, how in a certain sense that code is even carried further by Chronicles, can be seen for example from this circumstance, that in the former Moses in a novel reduces the period of beginning public service in the case of a Levite from thirty years of age to twenty-five (Num. iv. 3 seq., viii. 23 seq.), while in the latter David (1 Chron. xxiii. 3, 24 seq.) brings it down still further to the age of twenty; matters are still to some extent in a state of flux, and the ordering of the temple worship is a continuation of the beginning made with the tabernacle service by Moses. Now, in so far as the statistics of the clergy have a real basis at all, that basis is post-exilian. It has long ago been remarked how many of the individuals figuring under David and his successors (e.g., Asaph, Heman, Jeduthun) bear names identical with families or guilds of a later time, how the two indeed are constantly becoming confluent, and difficulty is felt in determining whether by the expression "head" a person or a family ought to be understood. But, inasmuch as the Chronicler nevertheless desires to depict the older time and not his own, he by no means adheres closely to contemporary statistics, but gives free play at the same time to his idealising imagination; whence it comes that in spite of the numerous and apparently precise data afforded, the reader still finds himself unable to form any clear picture of the organisation of the clergy,--the ordering of the families and tribes, the distribution of the offices,--nay, rather, is involved in a maze of contradictions. Obededom, Jeduthun, Shelomith, Korah, occur in the most different connections, belong now to one, now to another section of the Levites, and discharge at one time this function, at another, that. Naturally the commentators are prompt with their help by distinguishing names that are alike, and identifying names that are different.

Some characteristic details may still be mentioned here. The names of the six Levitical classes according to 1 Chron. xxv. 4, Giddalti, V'romamti-Ezer, Joshbekashah, Mallothi, Hothir, Mahazioth, are simply the fragments of a consecutive sentence which runs: I have magnified | and exalted the help | of him who sat in need: | I have spoken | abundance of | prophecies. The watchman or singer Obededom who is alleged to have discharged his functions in the days of

[p. 220]

[paragraph continues] David and Amaziah, is no other than the captain to whom David intrusted for three months the custody of the ark, a Philistine of Gath. The composition of the singers' pedigrees is very transparent, especially in the case of Heman (1 Chron. vi. 7-l2 [22-27] = ver. 18-23, [33-37]). Apart from Exod. vi. 16-19, use is chiefly made of what is said about the family of Samuel (1 Sam. i. 1, viii. 2), who must of course have been of Levitical descent, because his mother consecrated him to the service of the sanctuary. Heman is the son of Joel b. Samuel b. Elkanah b. Jeroham b. Eliab b. Tahath b. Zuph, only the line does not terminate with Ephraim as in 1 Sam. i. 1 (LXX) because it is Levi who is the goal; Zuph. however, is an Ephraitic district, and Tahath (Tohu, Toah, Tahan, Nahath) is an Ephraimite family (vii. 20). Further back the same elements are individually repeated more than once, Elkanah four times in all; he occurs once as early as in Exod. vi. 24, where also he is doubtless borrowed from 1 Samuel i. The best of it is that, contrary to the scope of the genealogies recorded in 1 Chron. vi., which is to provide a Levitical origin for the guilds of singers, there is found in close contiguity the statement (ii. 6) that Heman and Ethan were descendants of Zerah b. Pharez, b. Judah. The commentators are indeed assisted in their efforts to differentiate the homonyms by their ignorance of the fact that even as late as Nehemiah's time the singers did not yet pass for Levites, but their endeavours are wrecked by the circumstance that the names of fathers as well as of sons are identical (Ps. lxxxviii. 1, lxxxix. 1; Ewald, iii. 380 seq.). In point of history these musicians of the second temple are descended of course neither from Levi nor from the sons of Mahol (1 Kings v. 11 [iv. 31), but they have at least derived their names from the latter. On all hands we meet with such artificial names in the case of Levites. One is called Issachar; it would not be surprising to meet with a Naphtali Cebi, or Judah b. Jacob. Jeduthun is, properly speaking, the name of a tune or musical mode (Ps. xxxix. 1, lxii. 1, lxxvii. 1), whence also of a choir trained in that. Particularly interesting are a few pagan names, as for example Henadad, Bakbuk, and some others, which, originally borne by the temple servitors (Neh. vii. 46 seq.), were doubtless transferred along with these to the Levites.

With the priests, of whom so many are named at all periods of the history of Israel, matters are no better than with the inferior Levites, so far as the Books of Samuel and Kings are not drawn upon. In particular, the twenty-four priestly courses or orders are an institution, not

[p. 221]

of King David, but of the post-exilic period. When Hitzig, annotating Ezek. viii. 16, remarks that the five-and-twenty men standing between the temple and the altar worshipping the sun toward the east are the heads of the twenty-four priestly courses with the high priest at their head (because no one else had the right to stand in the inner court between temple and altar), he reveals a trait that is characteristic, not only of himself, but also of the entire so-called historico-critical school, who exert their whole subtlety on case after case, but never give themselves time to think matters over in their connection with each other; nay, rather simply retain the traditional view as a whole, only allowing themselves by way of gratification a number of heresies. It is almost impossible to believe that Hitzig, when he annotated Ezek. viii., could have read those passages Ezekiel xliii. 7 seq., xliv. 6 seq., from which it is most unambiguously clear that the later exclusion of the laity from the sanctuary was quite unknown in the pre-exilic period. The extent of the Chronicler's knowledge about the pre-exilic priesthood is revealed most clearly in the list of the twenty-two high priests in 1 Chron. v. 29-41 (vi. 3-15). From the ninth to the eighteenth the series runs--Amariah, Ahitub, Zadok, Ahimaaz, Azariah, Johanan, Azariah, Amariah, Ahitub, Zadok. As for the first five, Azariah was not the son, but the brother of Ahimaaz, and the latter apparently not a priest (1 Kings iv. 2); but Ahitub, the alleged father of Zadok, was, on the contrary, the grandfather of Zadok's rival, Abiathar, of the family of Eli (1 Sam. xiv. 3, xxii. 20); the whole of the old and famous line--Eli, Phinehas, Ahitub; Ahimelech, Abiathar--which held the priesthood of the ark from the time of the judges down into the days of David, is passed over in absolute silence, and the line of Zadok, by which it was not superseded until Solomon (1 Kings ii. 35), is represented as having held the leadership of the priesthood since Moses. As for the last four in the above-cited list, they simply repeat the earlier. In the Book of Kings, Azariah II., Amariah, Ahitub, Zadok, do not occur, but, on the contrary, other contemporary high priests, Jehoiada and Urijah, omitted from the enumeration in Chronicles. At the same time this enumeration cannot be asserted to be defective; for, according to Jewish chronology, the ancient history is divided into two periods, each of 480 years, the one extending from the exodus to the building of the temple, the other from that epoch down to the establishment of the second theocracy. Now, 480 years are twelve generations of forty years, and in 1 Chron. v. there

[p. 222]

are twelve high priests reckoned to the period during which there was no temple (ver. 36b to come after ver. 35a), and thence eleven down to the exile; that is to say, twelve generations, when the exile is included. The historical value of the genealogy in 1 Chron. v. 26-41 is thus inevitably condemned. But if Chronicles knew nothing about the priestly princes of the olden time, its statements about ordinary priests are obviously little to be relied on.

3. To speak of a tradition handed down from pre-exilic times as being found in Chronicles, either in 1 Chron. i.-ix. or in 1 Chron. x.-2 Chron. xxxvi., is thus manifestly out of the question. As early as 1806 this had been conclusively shown by the youthful De Wette (then twenty-six years of age). But since that date many a theological Sisyphus has toiled to roll the stone again wholly or half-way up the hill--Movers especially, in genius it might seem the superior of the sober Protestant critic--with peculiar results. This scholar mixed up the inquiry into the historical value of those statements in Chronicles which we are able to control, with the other question as to the probable sources of its variations from the older historical books of the canon. In vain had De Wette, at the outset, protested against such a procedure, contending that it was not only possible, but conceded that Chronicles, where at variance or in contradiction, was following older authority, but that the problem still really was, as before, how to explain the complete difference of general conception and the multitude of discrepancies in details; that the hypothesis of "sources," as held before Movers by Eichhorn, was of no service in dealing with this question, and that in the critical comparison of the two narratives, and in testing their historical character, it was after all incumbent to stick to what lay before one (Beitr., i. pp. 24, 29, 38). For so ingenious an age such principles were too obvious; Movers produced a great impression, especially as he was not so simple as to treat the letters of Hiram and Elijah as authentic documents, but was by way of being very critical. At present even Dillmann also unfortunately perceives "that the Chronicler everywhere has worked according to sources, and that in his case deliberate invention or distortion of the history are not for a moment to be spoken of" (Herzog, Realencyk., ii. p. 693, 1st edit.; iii. 223, 2d edit.). And from the lofty heights of science the author of Part V. of the Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament looks compassionately down upon K. H. Graf, "who has loitered so far behind the march of Old Testament research, as

[p. 223]

to have thought of resuscitating the views of De Wette;" in fact, that Chronicles may be established on an independent footing and placed on a level with the Books of Samuel and Kings, he utterly denies any indebtedness at all, on its part, to these, and in cases where the transcription is word for word, maintains that separate independent sources were made use of,--a needless exaggeration of the scientific spirit, for the author of the Book of Kings himself wrote the prayer of Solomon and the epitome, at least, without borrowing from another source; the Chronicler therefore can have derived it, directly or indirectly, only from him.

In reply to all this, one can only repeat what has already been said by De Wette. It may be that the Chronicler has produced this picture of old Israel, so different in outline and colour from the genuine tradition, not of his own suggestion and on his own responsibility, but on the ground of documents that lay before him. But the historical character of the work is not hereby altered in the smallest degree, it is merely shared by the so-called "sources." 2 Maccabees and a multitude of other compositions have also made use of "sources," but how does this enhance the value of their statements? That value must in the long run be estimated according to their contents, which, again, must be judged, not by means of the primary sources which have been lost, but by means of the secondary literary products which have survived. The whole question ultimately resolves itself into that of historical credibility; and to what conclusions this leads we have already seen. The alterations and additions of Chronicles are all traceable to the same fountain-head--the Judaising of the past, in which otherwise the people of that day would have been unable to recognise their ideal. It was not because tradition gave the Law and the hierocracy and the Deus ex Machina as sole efficient factor in the sacred narrative, but because these elements were felt to be missing, that they were thus introduced. If we are to explain the omissions by reference to the "author's plan," why may we not apply the same principle to the additions? The passion displayed by Ewald (Jahrbb. x. 261) when, in speaking of the view that Manasseh's captivity has its basis in Jewish dogmatic, he calls it "an absurdly infelicitous idea, and a gross injustice besides to the Book of Chronicles," recalls B. Schaefer's suggestive remark about the Preacher of Solomon, that God would not use a liar to write a canonical book. What then does Ewald say to the narratives of Daniel or Jonah?

[p. 224]

[paragraph continues] Why must the new turn given to history in the case of Manasseh be judged by a different standard than in the equally gross case of Ahaz, and in the numerous analogous instances enumerated in preceding pages (p. 203 seq.). With what show of justice can the Chronicler, after his statements have over and over again been shown to be incredible, be held at discretion to pass for an unimpeachable narrator? In those cases at least where its connection with his "plan" is obvious, one ought surely to exercise some scepticism in regard to his testimony; but it ought at the same time to be considered that such connections may occur much oftener than is discernible by us, or at least by the less sharp-sighted of us. It is indeed possible that occasionally a grain of good corn may occur among the chaff, but to be conscientious one must neglect this possibility of exceptions, and give due honour to the probability of the rule. For it is only too easy to deceive oneself in thinking that one has come upon some sound particular in a tainted whole. To what is said in 2 Sam. v. 9, "So David dwelt in the stronghold (Jebus), and he called it the city of David, and he built round about from the rampart and inward," there is added in 1 Chron. xi. 8, the statement that "Joab restored the rest of the city (Jerusalem)." This looks innocent enough, and is generally accepted as a fact. But the word chyh for bnh shows the comparatively modern date of the statement, and on closer consideration one remembers also that the town of Jebus at the time of its conquest by David consisted only of the citadel, and the new town did not come into existence at all until later, and therefore could not have been repaired by Joab; in what interest the statement was made can be gathered from Neh. vii. 11. In many cases it is usual to regard such additions as having had their origin in a better text of Samuel and Kings which lay before the Chronicler; and this certainly is the most likely way in which good additions could have got in. But the textual critics of the Exegetical Handbook are only too like-minded with the Chronicler, and are always eagerly seizing with both hands his paste pearls and the similar gifts of the Septuagint.

It must be allowed that Chronicles owes its origin, not to the arbitrary caprice of an individual, but to a general tendency of its period. It is the inevitable product of the conviction that the Mosaic law is the starting-point of Israel's history, and that in it these is operative a play of sacred forces such as finds no other analogy; this conviction could not but lead to a complete transformation of the ancient tradition.

[p. 225]

[paragraph continues] Starting from a similar assumption, such an author as C. F. Keil could even at the present day write a book of Chronicles, if this were not already in existence. Now, in this aspect, for the purpose of appraising Chronicles as the type of that conception of history which the scribes cherished, the inquiry into its "sources" is really important and interesting. References to other writings, from which further particulars can be learned, are appended as a rule, to the account of each sovereign's reign, the exceptions being in the cases of Joram, Ahaziah, Athaliah, Amon, Jehoahaz, Jehoiakim, Zedekiah. The titles referred to in this way may be classed under two groups: (1.) The Book of the Kings of Israel and Judah, or of Judah and Israel (in the cases of Asa, Amaziah, Jotham; Ahaz, Josiah, and Jehoiakim), with which the Book of the Kings of Israel (in the cases of Jehoshaphat and Manasseh; comp. 1 Chron. ix. 1) is identical, for the kingdom of the ten tribes is not reckoned by the Chronicler. (2.) The Words of Samuel the Seer, Nathan the Prophet, and Gad the Seer (for David; 1 Chron. xxix. 29; comp. xxvii. 24; Ecclus. xlvi. 13, xlvii. 1); the Words of Nathan the Prophet, the Prophecy of Ahijah of Shiloh and the Vision of Iddo the Seer concerning Jeroboam ben Nebat (for Solomon; 2 Chron. ix. 29); the Words of Shemaiah the Prophet and Iddo the Seer (for Rehoboam; xii. 15); the words of Jehu ben Hanani, which are taken over into the Book of the Kings of Israel (Jehoshaphat; xx. 34); a writing of Isaiah the prophet (Uzziah; xxvi. 22), more precisely cited as the Vision of Isaiah the Prophet, the son of Amoz, in the Book of the Kings of Judah and Israel (Hezekiah; xxxii. 32); the Words of the Seer in the Book of the Kings of Israel (Manasseh; xxxiii. 18; comp. also ver. 19). Following in the footsteps of Movers, Bertheau and others have shown that under these different citations it is always one and the same book that is intended, whether by its collective title, or by the conventional sub-titles of its separate sections. [*1] Bertheau calls attention to the fact that ordinarily it is either the one or the other title that is given, and when, as is less usual, there are two, then for the most part the prophetic writing is designated as a portion of the Book of the Kings of Israel (xx. 34, xxxii. 32; and, quite vaguely, xxxiii. 18). The peculiar mode

[p. 226]

of naming the individual section [*1]--at a time when chapters and verses were unknown--has its origin in the idea that each period of the sacred history has its leading prophet (akribes tun profetun diadoxe; Jos., c. Ap. i. 8), but also at the same time involves (according to xxvi. 22, in spite of ix. 29, xii. 15, xiii. 22; 1 Chron. xxix. 29) the notion that each prophet has himself written the history of his own period. Obviously, this is the explanation of the title prophetae priores borne by the Books of Joshua, Judges, Samuel, and Kings in the Jewish canon, and of the view which led to the introduction of 2 Kings xviii. 18 seq. into the Book of Isaiah. The claims of history being slight, it was easy to find the needful propheta eponymus for each section. Jehu ben Hanani, a northern Israelite of Baasha's time, has to do duty for Asa, and also for Jehoshaphat as well. Iddo the seer, who prophesied against Jeroboam ben Nebat, is the anonymous prophet of 1 Kings xiii. (Jos., Ant. viii. 8, 5; Jer. on Zach. i. 1); by this time it was possible, also, to give the names of the wives of Cain, and of the patriarchs.

As regards a more definite determination of the date of the "Book of Kings" which lies at the foundation of Chronicles, a co-ordination of the two series of the Kings of Israel and Judah can only have been made after both had been brought to a close; in other words, not before the Babylonian exile. And in the Babylonian exile it was that the canonical Book of Kings actually came into existence, and the "Chronicles" of Israel and those of Judah were for the first time worked together by its author; at least he refers only to the separate works and knows of no previous combination of them. It would seem, therefore, very natural to identify the work alluded to in Chronicles with our present canonical book, which is similar in title and has corresponding contents. But this we cannot do, for in the former there were matters of which there are in the latter no trace; for example, according to 1 Chron. ix. 1, it contained family and numerical statistics for the whole of Israel after the manner of 1 Chron. i.-ix. (chapters for the most part borrowed from it) and according to 1 Chron. xxxiii 19, the Prayer of Manasseh. From these two data, as well as from the character of the items of information which may have been conjectured to have been derived from this source, the conclusion is forced upon us that the Book of Kings cited by the Chronicler is a late compilation far removed from actual tradition, and

[p. 227]

in relation to the canonical Book of Kings it can only be explained as an apocryphal amplification after the manner in which the scribes treated the sacred history. This conclusion, derived from the contents themselves, is supported by an important positive datum, namely, the citation in 2 Chron. xxiv. 27 of the Midrash [A.V. "Story"] of the Book of Kings, and in xiii. 22 of the Midrash of the prophet Iddo. Ewald is undoubtedly right when he recognises here the true title of the writing elsewhere named simply the Book of Kings. Of course the commentators assert that the word Midrash, which occurs in the Bible only in these two passages, there means something quite different from what it means everywhere else; but the natural sense suits admirably well and in Chronicles we find ourselves fully within the period of the scribes. Midrash is the consequence of the conservation of all the relics of antiquity, a wholly peculiar artificial reawakening of dry bones, especially by literary means, as is shown by the preference for lists of names and numbers. Like ivy it overspreads the dead trunk with extraneous life, blending old and new in a strange combination. It is a high estimate of tradition that leads to its being thus modernised; but in the process it is twisted and perverted, and set off with foreign accretions in the most arbitrary way. Jonah as well as Daniel and a multitude of apocryphal writings (2 Macc. ii. 13) are connected with this tendency to cast the reflection of the present back into the past; the Prayer of Manasseh, which now survives only in Greek, appears, as Ewald has conjectured, actually to have been taken direct from the book quoted in 2 Chron. xxxiii. 19. Within this sphere, wherein all Judaism moves, Chronicles also has had its rise. Thus whether one says Chronicles or Midrash of the Book of Kings is on the whole a matter of perfect indifference; they are children of the same mother, and indistinguishable in spirit and language, while on the other hand the portions which have been retained verbatim from the canonical Book of Kings at once betray themselves in both respects.

Footnotes

^173:1 The division into a group of three and another of thirty heroes, obscured in 2 Sam. xxiii. by corruption of the text (Text der Bb. Sam. p. 213-216), has not been understood by the Chronicler, and thus been made quite unrecognisable. In this way he has been able to bring in at the end (xi. 42-47) a string of additional names exceeding the number of thirty. In ver. 42 his style unmistakably betrays itself, wherever it may be that he met with the elements.

^185:1 She was by birth a woman of Dan, married into the tribe of Napthali, lost her husband, and as widow out of the tribe of Naphtali became the wife of the Tyrian. So Bertheau in loc.

^187:1 Even in the text of Kings this statement has been obscured; Comp. 1 Kings iii. 1. In ix. 24 we must at least say betho asher bana lo, but this perhaps is not enough.

^190:1 The Chronicler indeed is unable, even in the case of these schismatics, to divest himself of his legal notions, as appears almost comically in the circumstance that the priests of Jeroboam set about their heretical practices quite in accordance with the prescriptions of the Priestly Code, and procure their consecration by means of a great sacrifice (2 Chron. xiii. 9).

^190:2 Compare xi. 16, xv. 9, xix. 2, xx. 35 seq.. xxv 7, xxviii. 9 seq., xxx. 6.

^191:1 xiii. 7 seq., xv. 10 seq., xx. 6 seq., xxix. 5 seq., xxx. 1 seq., xxxv. 1 seq.

^209:1 viii. 3-6, xi. 5-12, xiii. 19, xiv. 5, 6 [6, 7], xvii. 12, xix. 5, xxvi. 9, 10, xxvii. 4, xxxii. 5, xxxiii. 14.

^212:1 For Reuben see (in addition to 1 Chron. v. 1-10) v. 18, xi. 42, xii. 37. xxvi. 32, xxvii. 16, for Simeon, 1 Chron. iv. 24-43, with xii. 25, and 2 Chron. xv. 9, xxxiv. 6, observing that in the last two passages Simeon is reckoned as belonging to the northern kingdom, so as to complete the number of the ten tribes.

^214:1 Kuenen, Th. Tijdschr., 1877, pp. 484, 488; Godsdienst v. Isr., i. 165.

^215:1 Equivalent to ix. 35-44, which perhaps proves the later interpolation of ix. 1-34.

^216:1 For further details the reader is referred to the author's dissertation De gentibus et familiis Judaeis, Gottingen, 1870.

^218:1 In the Targum, Caleb's kindred the Kenites are designated as Salmaeans; the name also occurs in Canticles (i. 5, the tents of Kedar, the curtains of Salmah), and also as the name of a Nabataean tribe in Pliny. Among the families of the Nethinim enumerated in Nehemiah vii. 46-60 the B'ne Salmah also occur, along with several other names which enable us distinctly to recognise (Ezek. xliv.) the non-Israelite and foreign origin of these temple slaves; see, for example, vers. 48, 52, 55, 57.

^218:2 Pharez, Hezron, Carmi, Hur, Shobal (iv. 1), is a genealogically descending series; Chelubai must therefore of necessity be read instead of Carmi, all the more because Chelub and not Carmi appears in the third place in the subsequent expansion; for this, ascending from below, begins with Shobal (ver. 2), then goes on to Hur (vers. 5-10), who stands in the same relation to Ash-hur as Tob to Ish-tob, and finally deals with Chelub or Caleb (vers. 11-15).

^225:1 In Ezra and Nehemiah also the Chronicler has not used so many sources as are usually supposed. There is no reason for refusing to identify the "lamentations" of 2 Chron. xxxv. 25, with our Lamentations of Jeremiah: at least the reference to the death of Josiah (Jos., Ant. x. 5, 1), erroneously attributed to them, ought not in candour to be regarded as such.

^226:1 Romans xi. 2: en Eliai ti legei e grafe i.e., How stands it written in the section relating to Elijah?

      
Prolegomena to the History of Ancient Israel, by Julius Wellhausen, [1885], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 228]

  

CHAPTER VII. 

  

JUDGES, SAMUEL, AND KINGS.

IN the history of Hebrew literature, so full as it is of unfortunate accidents, one lucky circumstance at least requires to be specially mentioned. Chronicles did not succeed in superseding the historical books upon which it was founded; the older and the newer version have been preserved together. But in Judges, Samuel, and Kings even, we are not presented with tradition purely in its original condition; already it is overgrown with later accretions. Alongside of an older narrative a new one has sprung up, formerly independent, and intelligible in itself, though in many instances of course adapting itself to the former. More frequently the new forces have not caused the old root to send forth a new stock, or even so much as a complete branch; they have only nourished parasitic growths; the earlier narrative has become clothed with minor and dependent additions. To vary the metaphor, the whole area of tradition has finally been uniformly covered with an alluvial deposit by which the configuration of the surface has been determined. It is with this last that we have to deal in the first instance; to ascertain its character, to find out what the active forces were by which it was produced. Only afterwards are we in a position to attempt to discern in the earlier underlying formation the changing spirit of each successive period.

  

I.

1. The following prologue supplies us with the point of view from which the period of the judges is estimated. "After the death of Joshua, the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord and forsook the Lord God of their fathers, who brought them out of the land of Egypt, and followed other gods, of the gods of the people that were round about them, the Baals and Astartes. And the anger of the Lord was hot against Israel, and He delivered them into the hands of

[p. 229]

spoilers, that spoiled them and sold them into the hand of their enemies round about; whithersoever they went out the hand of the Lord was against them for evil, as the Lord had said, and as the Lord had sworn unto them; and they were greatly distressed. Nevertheless the Lord raised up unto them judges, and was with the judge, and delivered them out of the hand of their enemies all the days of the judge, for it repented the Lord because of their groanings, by reason of them that oppressed them and vexed them. And it came to pass when the judge was dead that they returned and corrupted themselves more than their fathers, in following other gods to serve them; they ceased not from their own doings, nor from their stubborn way. And the anger of the Lord was hot against Israel," &c. &c. (Judges ii.).

Such is the text, afterwards come the examples. "And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord, and forget the Lord their God, and served the Baals and Astartes. Therefore the anger of the Lord was hot against Israel, and He sold them into the hand of Chushan-Rishathaim, king of Mesopotamia, and they served him eight years. And when the children of Israel cried unto the Lord, the Lord raised up to them a helper, Othniel b. Kenaz, and delivered the king of Mesopotamia into his hand, and the land had rest forty years. And Othniel b. Kenaz died." The same points of view and also for the most part the same expressions as those which in the case of Othniel fill up the entire cadre, recur in the cases of Ehud, Deborah, Gideon, Jephthah, and Samson, but there form only at the beginning and at the end of the narratives a frame which encloses more copious and richer contents, occasionally they expand into more exhaustive disquisitions, as in vi. 7, x. 6. It is in this way that Judges ii.-xvi. has been constructed with the workman-like regularity it displays. Only the six great judges, however are included within the scheme; the six small ones stand in an external relation to it, and have a special scheme to themselves, doubtless having been first added by way of appendix to complete the number twelve.

The features which characterise this method of historical work are few and strongly distinctive. A continuous chronology connects the times of rest and their separating intervals, and thereby the continuity of the periods is secured. In order justly to estimate this chronology, it is necessary to travel somewhat beyond the limits of Judges. The key to it is to be found in 1 Kings vi. 1. "In the four hundred and eightieth year after the children of Israel were come out of the land of

[p. 230]

Egypt, in the fourth year of the reign of Solomon, he began to build the house of the Lord." As observed by Bertheau, and afterwards by Noldeke, who has still farther pursued the subject, these 480 years correspond to 12 generations of 40 years each. Analogously in 1 Chron. v. 29-34 [vi. 2-8], 12 high priests from Aaron to Ahimaaz are assumed for the same period of time, and the attempt was made to make their successions determine those of the generations (Num. xxxv. 28). Now it is certainly by no means at once clear how this total is to be brought into accord with the individual entries. Yet even these make it abundantly plain that 40 is the fundamental number of the reckoning. The wandering in the wilderness, during which the generation born in Egypt dies out, lasts for 40 years; the land has 40 years of rest under Othniel, Deborah, and again under Gideon; it has 80 under Ehud; the domination of the Philistines lasts for 40 years, the duration also of David's reign. On the necessary assumption that the period of the Philistines (Judges xiii. 1), which far exceeds the ordinary duration of the foreign dominations, coincides with that of Eli (1 Sam. iv. 18), and at the same time includes the 20 years of Samson (Judges xvi. 31), and the 20 of the interregnum before Samuel (1 Sam. vii. 2), we have already 8 * 40 accounted for, while 4 * 40 still remain. For these we must take into account first the years of the two generations for which no numbers are given, namely, the generation of Joshua and his surviving contemporaries (Judges ii. 7), and that of Samuel to Saul, each, it may be conjectured, having the normal 40, and the two together certainly reckoning 80 years. For the remaining 80 the most disputable elements are the 71 years of interregna or of foreign dominations, and the 70 of the minor judges. One perceives that these two figures cannot both be counted in,--they are mutually exclusive equivalents. For my own part, I prefer to retain the interregna; they alone, so far as we can see at present, being appropriate to the peculiar scheme of the Book of Judges. The balance of 9 or 10 years still remaining to be applied are distributed between Jephthah (6 years), and Solomon (down to the building of the temple), who claims 3 or 4 years, or, if these are left out of account, 3 years may be given to Abimelech.

The main thing, however, is not the chronology, but the religious connection of the events. The two are intimately associated, not only formally, as can be gathered from the scheme, but also by a real inner connection. For what is aimed at in both alike is a connected view of

[p. 231]

large periods of time, a continuous survey of the connection and succession of race after race, the detailed particulars of the occurrences being disregarded; the historical factors with which the religious pragmatism here has to do are so uniform that the individual periods in reality need only to be filled up with the numbers of the years. One is reminded of the "Satz," "Gegensatz," and "Vermittelung" of the Hegelian philosophy when one's ear has once been caught by the monotonous beat with which the history here advances, or rather moves in a circle. Rebellion, affliction, conversion, peace; rebellion, affliction, conversion, peace. The sole subjects of all that is said are Jehovah and Israel; their mutual relation alone it is that keeps the course of things in motion, and that too in opposite directions, so that in the end matters always return to their original position.

"They did what was evil in the sight of Jehovah, they went a-whoring after strange gods,"--such is the uninterrupted key-note. Although Jehovistic monolatry is so potently recommended from without, it yet takes no firm root, never becomes natural to the people, always remains a precept above and beyond their powers. For decennia on end indeed they hold fast to it, but soon their idolatrous tendency, which has only been repressed by fear of the judge during his lifetime, again finds expression; they must have a change. Now this rebellion is indeed quite indispensable for the pragmatism, because otherwise there would be nothing at all to tell; it is on the unrest in the clock that the whole movement depends. But at the same time this is of course no extenuation; the conduct of the people is manifestly totally inexcusable, the main actions, the deeds of the judges, are for this manner of historical treatment always only proofs of Israel's sin and of the unmerited grace of Jehovah that puts them to shame.

That all this is no part of the original contents of the tradition, but merely a uniform in which it is clothed, is admitted. Numero Deus impare gaudet. It is usual to call this later revision Deuteronomistic. The law which Jehovah has enjoined upon the fathers, and the breach of which He has threatened severely to punish (ii. 15, 21), is not indeed more definitely characterised, but it is impossible to doubt that its quintessence is the injunction to worship Jehovah alone and no other God. Now in this connection it is impossible to think of the Priestly Code, for in that document such a command is nowhere expressly enjoined, but, on the contrary, is assumed as a matter of course.

[p. 232]

[paragraph continues] Deuteronomy, on the other hand, has in fact no precept on which it lays greater emphasis than the "Hear, O Israel"--that Jehovah is the only God, and the worship of strange gods the sin of sins. This precept was apprehended much more clearly by contemporaries than the moral demands in the interest of humanity and kindness which are also insisted on in Deuteronomy, but are not new, being derived from older collections; on this side alone, in so far as it follows up the monotheism of the prophets into its practical consequences within the sphere of worship, has Josiah's law-book had historical importance, on this side alone has it continued to act upon Ezekiel and those who came after him. If, then, the norm of the theocratic relationship assumed in the redaction of the Book of Judges is to be sought in a written Torah, this can indubitably only be that of Deuteronomy. The decisive settlement of the question depends in a comparison with the Book of Kings, and must accordingly be postponed until then.

2. As for the relation between this superstructure and that on which it rests, there is a striking difference between the two styles. The revised form in which the Book of Judges found its way into the canon is unquestionably of Judaean origin, but the histories themselves are not such,--nay, in the song of Deborah, Judah is not reckoned at all as belonging to Israel. The one judge who belongs to the tribe of Judah is Othniel, who however is not a person, but only a clan. What is said of him is quite void of contents, and is made up merely of the schematic devices of the redactor, who has set himself to work here, so as to make the series open with a man of Judah; the selection of Othniel was readily suggested by Judges i. 12-15. Here again we have an exception which proves the rule. More important are the inner differences which reveal themselves. To begin with the most general,--the historical continuity on which so much stress is laid by the scheme, is in no way shown in the individual narratives of the Book of Judges. These stand beside one another unconnectedly and without any regard to order or sequence, like isolated points of light which emerge here and there out of the darkness of forgetfulness. They make no presence of actually filling up any considerable space of time; they afford no points of attachment whereon to fasten a chronology. In truth, it is hardly the dim semblance of a continuity that is imparted to the tradition by the empty framework of the scheme. The conception of a period of the judges between Joshua and Saul, during which judges ruled over Israel

[p. 233]

and succeeded one another almost as regularly as did the kings at a later period, is quite foreign to that tradition. It is impossible to doubt that Judges i., xvii., xviii. have the best right to be reckoned as belonging to the original stock; but these portions are excluded from reception within the scheme, because they have nothing to say about any judges, and give a picture of the general state of affairs which accords but ill with that plan. [*1]

At the bottom of the spurious continuity lies an erroneous widening of the areas in which the judges exerted their influence. Out of local contiguity has arisen succession in time, what was true of the part having been transferred to the whole; it is always the children of Israel in a body who come upon the scene, are oppressed by the enemy, and ruled by the judges. In reality it is only the individual tribes that come into the action; the judges are tribal heroes,--Ehud of Benjamin, Barak and Deborah of Issachar, Gideon of Joseph, Jephthah of Gilead, Samson of Dan. It was only for the struggle against Sisera that a number of tribes were united, receiving on that account extraordinary praise in the song of Deborah. It is nowhere said "at the time when the judges ruled," but "at the time when there was yet no king over Israel, and every man did what was right in his own eyes;" the regular constitution of the period is the patriarchal anarchy of the system of families and septs. And in chap. i, division and isolation are made to appear not unclearly as the reason why the Canaanites were so long of being driven out from the greater cities; matters did not change until Israel became strong, that is to say, until his forces were welded into one by means of the monarchy.

[p. 234]

But the unity of Israel is the presupposition upon which rests the theocratic relation, the reciprocal attitude between Israel and Jehovah, whereby according to the scheme the course of the history is solely conditioned. In the genuine tradition the presupposition disappears, and in connection with this the whole historical process assumes an essentially different, not to say a more natural aspect. The people are no longer as a body driven hither and thither by the same internal and external impulses, and everything that happens is no longer made to depend on the attraction and repulsion exercised by Jehovah. Instead of the alternating see-saw of absolute peace and absolute affliction, there prevails throughout the whole period a relative unrest; here peace, there struggle and conflict. Failure and success alternate, but not as the uniform consequences of loyalty or disobedience to the covenant. When the anonymous prophet who, in the insertion in the last redaction (chap. vi. 7-10), makes his appearance as suddenly as his withdrawal is abrupt, improves the visitation of the Midianites as the text for a penitential discourse, the matter is nevertheless looked at immediately thereafter with quite different eyes. For to the greeting of the angel, "Jehovah is with thee, thou mighty man of velour," Gideon answers, "If Jehovah be with us, why then is all this befallen us? and where be all His miracles, of which our fathers told us? "He knows nothing about any guilt on the part of Israel. Similarly the heroic figures of the judges refuse to fit in with the story of sin and rebellion: they are the pride of their countrymen, and not humiliating reminders that Jehovah had undeservedly again and again made good that which men had destroyed. Finally, with what artificiality the sins which appear to be called for are produced, is incidentally made very clear. After the death of Gideon we read in chap. viii. 33, "the children of Israel went a-whoring after the Baals, and made Baal Berith their god." But from the following chapter it appears that Baal or El Berith was only the patron god of Shechem and some other cities belonging to the Canaanites; the redactor transforms the local worship of the Canaanites into an idolatrous worship on the part of all Israel. In other cases his procedure is still more simple,--for example, in x. 6 seq., where the number seven in the case of the deities corresponds with the number seven of the nations mentioned in that connection. Ordinarily he is content with "Baals" or "Astartes" or "Asheras," where the plural number is enough to show how little of what is individual or positive

[p. 235]

underlies the idea, not to mention that Asheras are no divinities at all, but only sacred trees or poles.

In short, what is usually given out as the peculiar theocratic element in the history of Israel is the element which has been introduced by the redaction. There sin and grace are introduced as forces into the order of events in the most mechanical way, the course of events is systematically withdrawn from all analogy, miracles are nothing extraordinary, but are the regular form in which things occur, are matters of course, and produce absolutely no impression. This pedantic supra-naturalism, "sacred history" according to the approved recipe, is not to be found in the original accounts. In these Israel is a people just like other people, nor is even his relationship to Jehovah otherwise conceived of than is for example that of Moab to Chemosh (chap. xi. 24). Of theophanies and manifestations of the Godhead there is no lack, but the wonders are such as to make one really wonder. Once and again they interrupt the earthly nexus, but at the same time they form no connected system; they are poetry, not prose and dogma. But on the whole the process of history, although to appearance rougher and more perplexed, is nevertheless in reality much more intelligible, and though seemingly more broken up, actually advances more continuously. There is an ascent upward to the monarchy, not a descent from the splendid times of Moses and Joshua (Judges i. 28-35, xiii. 5, xviii. 1).

One narrative, it is true, apart from that relating to Othniel, which is not to be reckoned here, is exactly what sacred history ought to be in order to fit into the theoretical scheme,--I mean Judges xix.-xxi. To appreciate it rightly it will be well first of all to cast a glance upon the preceding narrative relating to the migration of the tribe of Dan to the north. The Danites, 600 strong, fall upon the Canaanite town of Laish not because it lies within the limits assigned to the people of God, and because its conquest is a duty--though they inquire of the oracle, they are nevertheless far from relying on the divine right so plainly made known in the Book of Joshua--but because it is inhabited by a peaceable and unsuspecting people, which is quite defenceless against such a band of desperadoes; and they have as little scruple in practicing the same treachery to Israelites such as Micah. They take it that might is right, and recognise no restraining consideration; their conduct is natural to the verge of absolute shamelessness. And

[p. 236]

yet they are pious in their way; how highly they value Jehovah they show by this, that they steal His image out of the house of God, and the priest who keeps it into the bargain. As for the religious usages mentioned in the two chapters, hardly an abomination forbidden by the Law is wanting: the private sanctuary in the possession of the Ephraimite Micah, the grandson of Moses as priest in his service and pay, ephod and teraphim as the requisite necessaries in the worship of Jehovah; and yet all this is so recounted by the narrator as if it were all quite regular and void of offence, although his purpose in doing so is not to narrate temporary departures from rule, but the origin of permanent institutions at a chief sanctuary of ancient Israel. One is translated into another world on passing from this to the narrative immediately following, about the shameful deed of the Benjamites and their exemplary punishment; a greater or more instructive contrast as regards religious history is hardly to be found in all the Old Testament. In Judges xx.-xxi. it is not as invariably elsewhere the individual tribes which act, not even the people Israel, but the congregation of the covenant, which has its basis in the unity of worship. The occasion of their action is a sin committed in their midst which must be done away; it is the sanctity of the theocracy which brings these 400,000 men to arms and fills them at once with unction and with sanguinary zeal. The clerical instincts have entirely taken possession of this uniform mass, have passed into their flesh and blood, and moulded them into a single automaton, so that all that takes place is invariably done by all at once. No individuals come to the front, not even by name, still less by deeds of velour; the moral tone is anything but heroic. When the godless reprobates of Gibeah seek to assail the person of the Levite who is passing the night there, he hands over to them his wife in order to save himself, and all Israel finds nothing objectionable in this revolting act of cowardice, the opinion probably being that by his conduct the holy man had kept the sinners from still graver guilt. "Of the Mosaic law not a word is said in these chapters, but who could fail to perceive that the spirit which finds its expression in the law pervaded the community which acted thus? Had we more narratives of similar contents we should be able to solve many a riddle of the Pentateuch. Where under the monarchy could we find an Israel so united, vigorous, earnest, so willing to enter upon the severest conflict for the sake of the highest ends? "Thus Bertheau, rightly feeling that this story has a quite

[p. 237]

exceptional position, and contradicts all that we learn from other quarters of the period of the judges or even the kings. Only we cannot reckon it a proof of the historic value of the story, that it gives the lie to the rest of the tradition in the Books of Judges, Samuel, and Kings, and is homogeneous not with these books but with the Law. On the other hand, the writer betrays himself with a self-contradiction, when, unconsciously remembering the preceding chapters, he laments the disorganisation of the time he is dealing with (xix. 1, xxi. 25), and yet describes Israel to us as existing in a religious centralisation, such as demonstrably was never attained in the earlier life of the nation, but only came about as a consequence of the exile, and is the distinctive mark of Judaism.

As this narrative is not one of those included in the Deuteronomistic scheme of the Book of Judges, there may be a question whether it presupposes the Deuteronomic law only, or the priestly law as well. Its language has most points of contact with Deuteronomy; but one extremely important expression and notion, that of "the congregation of the children of Israel," points rather to the Priestly Code. The same may be said of Phinehas ben Eleazar ben Aaron (xx. 28). The latter, however, occurs but once, and that in a gloss which forms a very awkward interruption between "and the children of Israel inquired of Jehovah," and the word "saying" which belongs to that phrase. We have also to remark that there is no mention of the tabernacle, for which there is no room in addition to Mizpeh (p. 256), so that the principal mark of the Priestly Code is wanting. It is only in preparation, it has not yet appeared: we are still standing on the ground of Deuteronomy, but the way is being prepared for the transition.

3. Going a step further back from the last revision we meet with an earlier effort in the same direction, which, however, is less systematically worked out, in certain supplements and emendations, which have here and there been patched on to the original narratives. These may be due in part to the mere love of amplification or of talking for talking's sake, and in so far we have no further business with them here. But they originated partly in the difficulty felt by a later age in sympathising with the religious usages and ideas of older times. Two instances of this kind occur in the history of Gideon. We read (vi. 25-32), that in the night after his call Gideon destroyed, at the commandment of Jehovah, the altar of Baal in Ophra, his native town, as well as the

[p. 238]

[paragraph continues] Ashera which stood beside it; and that in place of it he built an altar to Jehovah, and burned on it a yearling bullock, with the wood of the Ashera for fuel. The next morning the people of Ophra were full of indignation, and demanded that the author of the outrage should be given up to them to be put to death; his father, however, withstood them, saying, "Will ye contend for Baal? Will ye save him? If he be a god, let Baal contend (Heb. Jareb Baal) for himself." In consequence of this speech Gideon received his second name of Jerubbaal. This conflicts with what is said in an earlier part of the chapter. There Gideon has already made an altar of the great stone under the oak of Ophra, where he saw Jehovah sitting, and has offered upon it the first sacrifice, which was devoured by flames breaking out of themselves, the Deity Himself ascending in the flames to heaven. Why the two altars and the two stories of their inauguration, both tracing their origin to the patron of Ophra? They do not agree together, and the reason is plain why the second was added. The altar of a single stone, the flames bursting out of it, the evergreen tree, the very name of which, Ela, seems to indicate a natural connection with El, [*1]--all this was in the eyes of a later generation far from correct, indeed it was Baal-work. A desire that the piety of Gideon should be above suspicion gave rise to the second story, in which he erects an altar of Jehovah in place of the former altar of Baal. How far this desire attained its end we may best judge from the kindred effort to remove another ground of offence, which lies in the name Jerubbaal. In accordance with the occasion out of which the name is said to have arisen it is said to mean, "Let Baal contend." Etymologically this derivation is extremely far-fetched, and from every point of view impossible: the name of a god is only assumed by those who are his worshippers. In Hebrew antiquity Baal and El are interchangeable and used indifferently; Jehovah Himself is spoken of up to the times of the prophet Hosea as the Baal, i.e., the lord. This is distinctly proved by a series of proper names in the families of Saul and David, Ishbaal, Meribaal, Baaljada, to which we may now add the name Jerubbaal given to the conqueror of Midian.

[p. 239]

[paragraph continues] If then even in the time of the kings Baal was by no means simply the antipode of Jehovah, whence the hostile relation of the two deities, which Jerubbaal displays by the acts he does, although he praises the great Baal by wearing his name? The view, also, that the Ashera was incompatible with the worship of Jehovah, does not agree with the belief of the earlier age; according to Deut. xvi. 21, these artificial trees must have stood often enough beside the altars of Jehovah. The inserted passage itself betrays in a remarkable manner that its writer felt this sort of zeal for the legitimate worship to be above the level of the age in question. We receive the impression that the inhabitants of Ophra do not know their worship of Baal to be illegitimate, that Gideon also had taken part in it in good faith, and that there had never been an altar of Jehovah in the place before.

Of a somewhat different form is a correction which is to be found at the close of the history of Gideon (viii. 22 seq.). After the victory over the Midianites the Israelites are said to have asked Gideon to be king over them. This he declined out of regard to Jehovah the sole ruler of Israel, but he asked for the gold nose-rings which had been taken from the enemy, and made of them an image of Jehovah, an ephod, which he set up in Ophra to be worshipped. "And all Israel went thither a-whoring after it, and it became a snare to Gideon and to his house." Now the way in which such a man acts in such a moment is good authority for the state of the worship of Israel at the time, and not only so, but we cannot impute it to the original narrator that he chose to represent his hero as showing his thankfulness to the Deity by the most gratuitous declension from His worship, as in fact crowning His victory with an act of idolatry. This is seen to be the more impossible when we consider that according to the testimony of Hosea, Isaiah, and Micah, such images were even in the Assyrian period a regular part of the belongings of the "houses of God" not only in Samaria but in Judah as well. We have also to remember that the contradiction between a human kingship and the kingship of Jehovah, such as is spoken of in these verses, rests upon theories which arose later, and of which we shall have more to say. [*1] Studer will thus be correct in his assertion that the

[p. 240]

old tradition could not see anything in Gideon's refusing the gold for himself and dedicating it to God but a fine proof of his unselfishness and piety, and that in viii. 22-27 we have a secondary product, in which the original features of the story are distorted so as to make them suit later tastes. The second hand has unfortunately supplanted in this instance the work of the first. The older narrative breaks off (viii. 21) with the words: "Gideon took away the ornaments that were on the necks of the camels of the kings." What he did with them we do not learn, but naturally we must suppose that it was of them that he made the ephod. According to the secondary passage, which begins immediately after viii. 21, he used for this purpose the nose-rings which the whole of Israel had taken from all the Midianites, amounting in weight to 1700 shekels, besides the ornaments of the kings and of their camels. The proportion is similar to that between the 600 Danites in chap. xviii. and the 25,700 Benjamites in chap. xx., or between the 40,000 men of Israel in v. 8, and the 400,000 in xx. 2.

4. In the last place it is possible to trace even in the original narratives themselves certain differences of religious attitude which indicate to us unobtrusively and yet clearly that tendency in the development of the tradition which reached its end in the revision and ornamentation of which we have hitherto been speaking. This is especially the case with regard to those narratives which are preserved to us in a double form. These are not frequent in Judges, but they do occur. A very simple case of the kind is seen on comparing chap. iv. with chap. v.

The Canaanites again lift their heads under their great king Sisera, and from their towns in the plains harass the hill villages of the new settlers. Deborah unites the Hebrew tribes for the contest. From the North and from the South the hosts of Jehovah descend before our eyes towards Jezreel, the prophetess Deborah at their head, the warrior Barak at her side. The conflict takes place at the brook Kishon, and ends with the defeat of the kings of Canaan. Sisera himself is killed in the flight by Jael, the wife of a nomad Kenite. Such are the contents of the song in chap. v. In the preceding narrative (chap. iv.) we should expect to find a historical commentary on the song, but we find a mere reproduction in which the special features of the story are blurred and falsified. Instead of the kings of Canaan we have the king of Canaan, as if Canaan had been a kingdom. Sisera, the head of the Canaanite kings, is transformed into a mere general; the oppression of

[p. 241]

the Hebrews is made general and indefinite. Jael murders Sisera when he is lying in a deep sleep by driving a tent-peg into the ground through his temples. There is nothing of this in the song: there he is drinking when she strikes the blow, and is conceived as standing at the time, else he could not bow down at her feet and fall, and lie struck dead where he fell (ver. 27).

In the song the campaign is prepared with human means. Negotiations are carried on among the tribes, and in the course of these differences crop up. The lukewarmness or the swelling words of some tribes are reproved, the energetic public spirit and warlike courage of others praised. In the narrative, on the contrary, the deliverance is the work of Jehovah alone; the men of Israel are mere dummies, who show no merit and deserve no praise. To make up for this, interest is concentrated on the act of Jael, which instead of being an episode becomes the central point of the whole narrative. Indeed it is announced as being so, for Deborah prophesies to Barak that the glory of the conflict will not be his but a woman's, into whose hand the enemy is to be sold; it is not the hero, not human strength, that accomplishes what is done: Jehovah shows His strength in man's weakness. And Barak's part in the work is depreciated in yet another way. Deborah summons him to go not to the battle, but to the holy hill of Tabor, where Jehovah will bring about what is further to happen; he, however, objects to this, and insists that the prophetess herself shall go with him. This is regarded as a caprice of unbelief, because the prophetess is thought to have exhausted her mission when she transmitted the command of the Deity to His instrument: she has appeared for no end but to make it known through her prophecy that Jehovah alone brings everything to pass. In the song this is different. There Barak is not summoned against his will; on the contrary, he has a personal motive for taking up arms: "Arise, Barak; take captive thy captors, thou son of Ahinoam." And the prophetess has not only to prophesy; she works in a more psychological manner; she is part of the battle, and inflames with her song the courage of the fighting battalions: "Awake, Deborah, awake, sing the song!" [*1] Throughout these variations of the prose reproduction we feel that the rich colour of the events as they occurred is bleached

[p. 242]

out of them by the one universal first cause, Jehovah. The presence and energy of Jehovah are not wanting in the song; they are felt in the enthusiasm which fills the Hebrew warriors, and in the terror and panic which confound the prancing vigour of the foe. But in the prose narrative, the Divine action is stripped of all mystery, and mechanic prophecy finds no difficulty in showing distinctly and with sober accuracy what the part of the Deity in the history has been. But the more special the intervention of Deity, the further is it from us; the more precise the statements about it, the less do we feel it to be there.

There is another instance in the Book of Judges of the occurrence of the same historical material in two different forms; it is the story of Gideon of the Manassite house of Abiezer. Studer saw that there is a break between viii. 3 and viii. 4, and that the two stories, from the one of which we pass to the other at that point, have to be understood separately; viii. 1-3 is the conclusion of the first story. We have been told how, after the success of the first attack on the Midianites, Gideon raised the levy of all Israel for the pursuit, and how then the Ephraimites seized the fords of the Jordan before the arrival of the flying nomads and got the two leaders of the Midianites into their hands. Now we hear in conclusion that the Ephraimites, elated by their success began to find fault with Gideon, but that he pacified their wrath by saying, "What have I done now in comparison of you? Is not the gleaning of the grapes of Ephraim better than the vintage of Abiezer? God hath delivered into your hand the princes of Midian, and what was I able to do in comparison of you?" A domestic contention like this about the respective shares in the victory could only arise when the victory had been gained, when the strife with the enemy was fought out; the metaphor of harvest and gleaning shows that the victory was complete and all the fruits of it gathered in. Chapter viii. 1-3 concludes the business, and the following narrative is not a continuation of what has gone before, but a second version of the story in which many of the circumstances are quite different. According to vii. 23 seq. there was a great army on foot, but in viii. 4 seq. Gideon has only his own three hundred men with him. In viii. 1-3 the vintage and the gleaning are over and the object of the fighting is attained; but in viii. 4 seq. Gideon pursues the enemy without any interruption, and when he asks the men of Succoth and Penuel for bread for his wearied and hungry troops, they inquire sarcastically whether he is already certain of success, so that

[p. 243]

it should be necessary for them to espouse his cause. The two chiefs who in the former account are called the princes Oreb and Zeeb, and are already taken, are here called the kings Zebah and Zalmunna, and are not taken yet. Unfortunately the beginning of viii. 4 seq. is not preserved, and we cannot make out whether the pursuit in which we find Gideon here engaged was preceded by an action. Such a supposition is not exactly impossible, yet the distance to which the nomads had carried their booty, and their carelessness in camp, make it more likely that the occurrence was like that in 1 Sam. xxx. This, however, makes no difference as to the particulars with regard to which the two narratives conflict with each other.

But how did the difference arise? This we shall best learn by comparing the beginnings of the two stories. We remarked that the second, as it stands, wanted a beginning, but what is wanting may be to some extent supplied from what follows. According to viii. 4 seq., Gideon's aim is to get hold of the two kings of the Midianites: these appear all through as the particular enemies whom he is pursuing: as to the rest of the Midianites he is more or less indifferent. And the reason, as we learn from viii. 18 seq., is that the two kings had slain his brothers at Tabor; it is to take vengeance for them that he sets out to pursue the slayers, and does not rest till they are in his hand. It is the duty of blood-revenge which causes him to take the war-path with his household, unconcerned by the disproportion in numbers between his followers and theirs: it is the powerful sentiment of family which sets him in motion and causes him to become, as it were incidentally, the liberator of Israel from the spoilers. In the first account (vi. 11-viii. 3) these natural motives have completely disappeared, and others have taken their place which are almost of an opposite character. Before anything has happened, before the Midianites have made their yearly incursion, Gideon, who expects nothing of the kind, is summoned by a theophany to battle against them. When they arrive he is seized by the Spirit and sets out against them. What is human in him has no part in the act he is called to do; flesh and blood set themselves against it. He is impelled by the direct impulse of Jehovah, and here, of course, he goes forth in behalf of the public interests of Israel, against the Midianites, not against their princes personally. And accordingly everything possible is done to cast the man into the shade behind the Deity. Gideon, according to the second account a distinguished and

[p. 244]

royal man, is in the first of a poor house and family; in the second story he is remarkable for irrepressible energy, but here he is timid and shrinking up to the last moment, and new miracles have constantly to be wrought to encourage and strengthen him. The 32,000 men with whom he takes the field he is ordered by Jehovah to send away all but l,000 and again all but 300, "lest Israel vaunt themselves against Me, and say, Mine own hand hath saved me." The weapons with which the nocturnal attack of the 300 is made are torches, pitchers, and trumpets; the men have not a hand left to hold swords (vii. 20); and the hostile army has accordingly to do itself the work of its own destruction (vii. 22).

Few of the deviations of the religious version from the natural one are not transparent; one of these few is the removal of the scene to this side of the Jordan. Most of them are at once recognisable as due to the process of glorification, illumination, and religious inflation, by which the body of the tradition is etherealised and the story lifted up into the region of the air. For example, the company of Gideon at the main action, the attack on the hostile camp, consists of 300 men in chap. vii. as well as in chap viii.; but in chap. vii., to draw out the significance of the small number, they are treated as the last residuum of what was at first quite a considerable army; and this gives rise to a long story. We may also remark that chap. vi. begins with the relation in which the judge stood to the sanctuary of his native town, while chap. viii. closes with this. In the one case he discovers by a theophany, like the patriarchs in Genesis, the sacredness of the altar-stone under the oak; in the other he sets up, in far more realistic fashion, the plated image (ephod) he has made of the golden ornaments of the Midianite kings. History has to take account principally, if not exclusively, of the natural version, which is dry in tone and lets things speak for themselves, not overlaying the simple story with the significance of its consequences. The relation, however, is somewhat different from that which we found existing between Judges iv. and v. Chap. vi. seq. is not based directly on chap. viii., but was probably formed from independent oral material Though the local colour is lively, the historical reminiscences are extremely vague, and there has been a much freer growth of legend than in Jud. iv., producing pictures of greater art and more naivete. But in the field of miracle poetry is manifestly earlier than prose.

[p. 245]

In the case of those narratives which have come down to us in double form, the difference of standpoint is unmistakable; but it may also be perceived in cases where we have no direct parallels to compare. How noticeably does the story of Abimelech differ, say from that of Jephthah which follows it, in the rich detail of its facts, and in the spontaneous interest it shows in the secondary and subordinate links in the chain of events! There is no gilding with a supernatural nimbus; facts are simply and plainly set down such as they are; the moral is left to speak for itself as the story goes on. In the Samson legends again we find two souls united, as it were, in one body. Traits belonging to the rough life and spirit of the people are wrought, especially at the beginning and end of the narrative, into a religious national form; yet the two stand in an inner contrast to each other, and it is scarcely probable that the exploits of this grotesque religious hero were at first conceived in the Spirit of Jehovah, of which, in the story as we have it, they are the product. More probably the religious way of telling the story was preceded by a way considerably more profane; but we cannot now separate the older stage from that which is more recent. We may also remark that the contrast of historical and unhistorical is obviously inapplicable to this case, and, moreover, is unessential for the end we have in view. Only it may stand as a general principle, that the nearer history is to its origin the more profane it is. In the pre-Deuteronomic narratives, the difference is to be recognised less in the kind of piety than in the degree of it.

  

II.

1. The comprehensive revision which we noticed in the Book of Judges has left its mark on the Books of Samuel too. As, however, in this case the period is short, and extremely rich in incident, and really forms a connected whole, the artificial frame- and net-work does not make itself so much felt. Yet it is by no means wanting, as the dates of themselves indicate, whose place in the chronological system was shown above. It is worthy of notice how very loosely these are fitted into their context. In 1 Samuel iv. 18 seq. we read: "And when the messenger made mention of the ark of God, Eli fell backwards off his seat, and his neck brake, and he died, for he was an old man and heavy, and he judged Israel forty years; and when his daughter-in-law,

[p. 246]

the wife of Phinehas, who was with child, heard the tidings," etc. The statement of the date is not altogether inappropriately dragged in, indeed, yet it is easy to see that it is dragged in. In 2 Sam. ii. 8-13 we read: "Abner, the captain of Saul's host, took Ishbaal the son of Saul, and brought him over the Jordan to Mahanaim, and made him king over Gilead and Geshur, and Jezreel, and Ephraim, and Benjamin, and all Israel. Ishbaal was forty years old when he began to reign over Israel, and he reigned two years. But the house of Judah followed David. And the time that David was king in Hebron was seven years and six months. And Abner and the servants of Ishbaal went out from Mahanaim to Gibeon, and Joab with the servants of David went out to meet him." The words in italics manifestly interrupt the connection; and with regard to Ishbaal's dates we have also to remark that from what we learn of him elsewhere he was, in the first place, still in the years of pupilage, and in the next must have reigned as long in Mahanaim as David in Hebron. The number two connected with his reign is to be explained as in the case of Saul (1 Sam. xiii. 1): Saul was. . . years old when he began to reign, and he reigned two years over Israel. In this verse, which is not found in the LXX, the number for the years of his life is wanting; and originally the number for the years of his reign was left out too: the two is quite absurd, and has grown out of the following word for year, which in Hebrew has a somewhat similar appearance.

In company with the chronological formulas, we find also the religious (1 Sam. vii. 2-4). "While the ark abode in Kirjath-jearim, it was twenty years; and all the house of Israel came together after Jehovah. And Samuel spake unto the whole house of Israel, saying: 'If ye do return to Jehovah with all your hearts, then put away the strange gods and the Astartes from among you, and prepare your hearts unto Jehovah, and serve Him only; and He will deliver you out of the hand of the Philistines.' And the children of Israel did put away the Baals and Astartes, and served Jehovah only." We are not told, in what precedes this passage, of any act of declension from Jehovah, and according to chap. iv. the Israelites showed no want of faith in Jehovah in the unfortunate battle with the Philistines. This taking for granted that the yoke of a foreign rule was laid on them as a punishment for their sins is characteristic. A further example occurs in the speech of Samuel (1 Sam. xii.), which, as the introduction to the time of the kings,

[p. 247]

may be compared with Judges ii., the introduction to the time of the judges. "Stand still that I may reason with you before Jehovah of all the righteous acts of Jehovah with which He did right to you and to your fathers! When Jacob was come into Egypt, your fathers cried to Jehovah, and He sent Moses and Aaron and brought your fathers out of Egypt and made them dwell in this land. And when they forget Jehovah their God, He sold them into the hand of Sisera, captain of the host of Hazor, and into the hand of the Philistines, and the Moabites, and they fought against them. And they cried unto Jehovah, and said, We have sinned, because we have forsaken Jehovah and have served Baal and Astarte, but now deliver us out of the hand of our enemies and we will serve Thee. And Jehovah sent Jerubbaal, and Barak, and Jephthah, and Samuel, and delivered you out of the hand of your enemies on every side, and ye dwelled safe. And when ye saw that Nahash the king of the children of Ammon came against you, ye said unto me, Nay, but a king shall reign over us, when Jehovah your God is your king. Now therefore behold the king whom ye have desired; behold, Jehovah has set a king over you. If ye will hear Jehovah and serve Him and obey His voice, and not rebel against the commandment of Jehovah, good: but if ye rebel against the commandment of Jehovah, then shall the hand of Jehovah be against you as it was against your fathers." It is the familiar strain: rebellion, affliction, conversion, peace, Jehovah the keynote, and the first word and the last. The eye does not dwell on the details of the story; the gaps in the tradition are turned to account as well as its contents, which are concentrated at so few points. Details are regarded only as they bear on the whole; the periods are passed in review in a broad and general style, and the law enunciated which connects them with one another. In doing this Samuel seems to presuppose in his hearers a knowledge of the biblical history in a distinct form; and he even speaks without hesitation of his own historical significance. The hearers are bidden to look back upon a period in the living movement of which they themselves are standing, as if it were a dead past. As they are thus lifted up to the height of an objective contemplation of themselves and their fathers, in the end the result which was to be expected takes place: they become conscious of their grievous sin. Confronted with the Deity they have always an uneasy feeling that they deserve to be punished.

2. The Deuteronomist revision asserts itself, it is true, only in these

[p. 248]

two places, or rather this one place; but this is the principal epoch in the book--the transition to the monarchy which is associated with the name of Samuel. And on this account the revision here acts the more trenchantly; it is not only an addition to give a new flavour to the older tradition; it changes the nature of the tradition entirely. For the passages we have just quoted from it are merely fragments of a considerable connected historical scheme. The first piece of this scheme, vii. 2-17, first claims our attention. After summoning the children of Israel to repentance (vii. 2-4), Samuel convokes an assembly of them at Mizpeh, near Jerusalem, in order to entreat for them that the Philistine affliction may be turned away. This measure is of course closely connected with the previously-mentioned abolition of idolatry: for, after the guilt has ceased, the punishment also must be removed. They assemble, draw water to pour it out before Jehovah, fast, and confess their sins, at Mizpeh. When the Philistines hear this, they are on the spot the very same day and fall upon the assembly at its prayers. Samuel, however, sacrifices a sucking lamb and cries for help to Jehovah, and the engagement takes place while he is so occupied. Jehovah thunders terribly against the Philistines and throws them into disorder, so that they are forced to yield, and are pursued to a great distance. And the Philistines, this is the end of the narrative, were humbled and came no more into the coasts of Israel; and the hand of Jehovah was against the Philistines all the days of Samuel, and the cities which the Philistines had taken from Israel were recovered; Ekron and Gath and their coasts did Israel take from the Philistines, and there was peace between Israel and the Amorites.

The mere recapitulation of the contents of this narrative makes us feel at once what a pious make-up it is and how full of inherent impossibilities: to think of all that is compressed into the space of this one day! But we have also to remark the utter contradiction of the whole of the rest of the tradition. In the history which follows we find the domination of the Philistines by no means at an end; not only do they invade the Israelite territory several times in Samuel's lifetime, they are in possession of the land of Israel, and one of their governors lives at Gibeah in the midst of Benjamin. The struggle with them is the true and real origin and task of the monarchy. The writer had no idea that Samuel had discharged this labour and won this victory already, and had even "restored" Ekron and Gath. On the contrary,

[p. 249]

the yoke of the Philistines lay most heavily on Israel just in his days.

There cannot be a word of truth in the whole narrative. Its motives, however, are easily seen. Samuel is a saint of the first degree (Jer. xv. 1), and in the theocracy, i.e., in the religious community such as ancient Israel is represented to have been, cut to the pattern of Judaism, such a man must take his place at the head of the whole. His influence must have prevailed to exclude idolatry and unfaithfulness to Jehovah on the part of the people; and the general character of the time must on the whole have answered to the type he set before it. But here a very unpleasant difficulty suggests itself. If the fact of Samuel being at the head is sufficient guarantee that all was as it should be within the state, how can there have been such great pressure externally, so as to endanger the very existence of the people? If men do their part, how can Jehovah fail to do His? On the contrary, it must be believed that the righteousness which prevailed within had its counterpart in the external vindication of His people by Jehovah. Even under Samuel the Philistines were with God's help driven across the border, and as long as he lived they were not seen within it again. The piety of a praying assembly was suitably acknowledged by Jehovah, who dropped into its lap a success such as in after times the sword of warlike kings sought long and in vain to achieve.

But this example of history corrected does not stand alone, and becomes completely intelligible only when taken in connection with the similar pieces which belong to it. 1 Sam. vii. is continued in chap. viii., and chap. viii. again in x. 17-xii. 25. Samuel, after setting the land free from foreign tyranny, conducts a quiet and successful reign till old age comes upon him. His sons, however, whom he has made his assessors, do not walk in his steps; and the elders of Israel make this the occasion to ask him to give them a king. But this is a mere pretext for their sinful desire to shake off the divine rule and to be like the heathen round about them. Samuel is extremely indignant at their ingratitude, but is directed by Jehovah to comply with their request. "They have not rejected thee, but they have rejected Me, that I should not reign over them; according to all the works that they have done since the day that I brought them up out of Egypt, wherewith they have forsaken Me and served other gods. so do they also unto thee." It is in vain that Samuel exhibits to them an alarming catalogue of the

[p. 250]

rights of the king: they are not to be moved from their determination, and he accordingly summons a general convention of the people at Mizpeh (viii. 22, x. 17). There, after the opening lecture, lots are drawn for the king, and Saul is chosen, whereupon Samuel has still to write down the law of the kingdom and lay it up before Jehovah. The people are then dismissed; "and Saul also went home to Gibeah, and with him the warriors whose heart God had touched, but the children of Belial despised him, and said 'How shall this man save us!'"

But Saul is at this point only king de jure; he does not become king de facto until after he has proved himself, chap. xi. After an interval of a month (x. 27 LXX) the men of Jabesh, besieged by the Ammonites and in great straits, send messengers throughout Israel to implore speedy assistance, since in seven days they have to surrender to their enemies and each of them to lose his right eye. The messengers come to the town of Saul, Gibeah in Benjamin, and tell their message before the people; the people lift up their voices and weep. Saul meanwhile comes from the field with a yoke of oxen, and, observing the general weeping, asks what has happened. The story is told him, and at once the Spirit of God comes upon him and his anger is kindled greatly; he hews in pieces his oxen and sends the pieces throughout Israel with the summons: Whoever does not come forth to the battle, so shall it be done to his oxen! And the fear of Jehovah falls on the people, and they go out as one man and relieve the besieged town. Hereupon "the kingdom is renewed" for Saul at Gilgal, and only now does Samuel abdicate his government, in the long speech (chap. xii.) a considerable portion of which was given above.

That chap. xi. is now an integral part of this version of the history is clear from xii. 12, and also from xi. 12-14. But it was not originally designed for this connection. For we hear nothing of the warriors who according to x. 26 were in company with Saul; it is not on his account that the messengers of Jabesh came to Gibeah. When the supposed king comes home from ploughing, nothing is done to indicate that the news concerns him specially: no one tells him what has happened, he has to ask the reason of the general weeping. He summons the levy of Israel not in virtue of his office as king, but in the authority of the Spirit, and it is owing to the Spirit acting on the people that he is obeyed. Only after he has showed his power and defeated the Ammonites do the people make him king (xi. 15); the "renewal" of the kingdom (xi. 14), after

[p. 251]

a month's interval, is a transparent artifice of the author of viii. 10, 1) seq. to incorporate in his own narrative the piece which he had borrowed from some other quarter: the verses xi. 12-14 are due to him.

Chapter xi. stood originally in connection with the other narrative of the elevation of Saul (ix. 1-X. 16). Hero Saul first appears engaged in searching for strayed she-asses. After a vain search of several days he arrives in the neighbourhood of Ramah, and at the suggestion of his servant applies for information as to the asses to a seer there, to Samuel. His approach has been announced to the seer by Jehovah the day before: "To-morrow I will send to thee a man out of the land of Benjamin, and thou shalt anoint him to be ruler over My people Israel; he shall save them from the Philistines." He was accordingly expecting him, and had instituted a sacrificial feast on the bamah for him even before he arrived. At this moment Samuel has gone down to the town between the sacrificial act and the meal which followed it, and just as he is going back to his guests he meets in the gate Saul, who is asking for him, and at a whisper from Jehovah he recognises in him his man. He takes him up with him to the bamah, reassures him about the asses, and then at once tells him to what high things he is called, and gives him convincing proofs that he had reckoned on his presence at the feast as the guest of the occasion. He then gives him lodgings for the night, and accompanies him on his way next morning. The servant is sent on a little way before, Samuel stands still and anoints Saul, for a sign that he is chosen by Jehovah to be the king and deliverer of Israel, and in conclusion instructs him that, when the opportunity for action comes, he is to use it, in the consciousness that God is with him. On his way home three signs come to pass which the seer had announced to him. He is thus assured that all that was said to him was true; his heart is changed by degrees till he cannot contain himself; on his arrival at Gibeah his acquaintances are struck with his strange demeanour, but he does not disclose even to his most intimate friend at home what Samuel had said to him, but waits for the things that shall come to pass.

This is the point arrived at in x. 16. It is clear that thus far no conclusion has yet been reached: the seed that is sown must spring up, the changed spirit must produce its effects. And this requirement is abundantly satisfied if chap. xi. is regarded as immediately continuing the story from x. 16. After about a month, the opportunity presents

[p. 252]

itself for Saul to act, which Samuel had bidden him to look for. While others are weeping at the disgrace which threatens an Israelite town at the hands of the Ammonites, he is filled with the Spirit and with rage, the arrow is still in his heart from that conversation, and he now does "what his hand finds to do." The result is a great success; the word of the seer finds its fulfilment in the most natural way in the world.

If chap. xi. belongs originally to the narrative of ix. 1.-x. 16, it follows at once that the other sections are dependent and later. But what is the inner relation of the one version to the other? They coincide in their ideas here and there. In the one story Saul seeks the asses and finds the crown, in the other he hides himself among the stuff and is drawn forth king. In the one he is called by the seer, in the other he is chosen by lot--the divine causality operative in both cases. But how the idea is exaggerated at the later stage, and how nakedly it is put forward! And if there is this similarity of view, yet the deviation of the secondary version from the original is much more striking than the resemblance. For its tendency we are prepared by chapter vii. Samuel has set his countrymen free from their enemies, and ruled over them afterwards in righteousness and prosperity; why then should they desire a change in the form of government? They have just as much and as little reason for desiring this as for the falling away from Jehovah, which also is a periodical craving on their part, whenever they have had some years' rest: it is the expression of the deep-seated heathenism of their nature. That is the account of chapter viii. with what belongs to it. Chapter ix. seq., however, gives quite a different account. Here, at the end of the period of the judges, Israel is not at the summit of power and prosperity, but in a state of the deepest humiliation and the means of saving the people from this state is seen in the monarchy alone. And this difference is closely connected with another as to the view taken of the authority of Samuel. In chap. viii. as in chap. vii. he is the vicegerent of Jehovah, with unlimited authority. He feels the institution of the monarchy to be his own deposition, yet the children of Israel by no means rebel against him; they come to him to ask him for a king. He might have refused the request; he might also have given them a ruler according to his own good pleasure, but as a correct theocrat he leaves the decision to Jehovah. At the end he solemnly lays down the government he has hitherto carried on, and hands it over to his successor. The latter is superior to him in point of title, but not

[p. 253]

in point of power: indeed in the latter respect he is rather inferior to Samuel, being a mere earthly prince (xii. 23 seq.). But how do matters stand in chap. ix. seq.? Here Samuel is quite a stranger to Saul, who knows neither his name nor his residence. Only his servant has heard of Samuel, who enjoys a high reputation as a seer in his own neighbourhood. What we are to think of when we read of a seer of that period, we are clearly and circumstantially informed: for Samuel is consulted as to the whereabouts of strayed she-asses, and a fee of a quarter of a silver shekel is tendered to him for his advice. This seer stands, it is clear, above the average of those who practiced the same calling; yet his action on the history is quite within the limits of what was possible, say to Calchas: it exhibits not a trace of the legislative and executive power of a regent of the theocracy. He does not bring help; he only descries help and the helper. The very event which, according to chap. viii. seq., involved the removal of Samuel from his place and his withdrawal to the background of the history, is here the sole basis of his reputation: the monarchy of Saul, if not his work, is his idea. He announces to the Benjamite his high calling, interpreting in this the thoughts of the man's own heart (ix. 19). With this his work is done; he has no commission and no power to nominate his successor in the government. Everything else he leaves to the course of events and to the Spirit of Jehovah which will place Saul on his own feet.

In the great difference which separates these two narratives we recognise the mental interval between two different ages. In the eyes of Israel before the exile the monarchy is the culminating point of the history, and the greatest blessing of Jehovah. It was preceded by a period of unrest and affliction, when every man did what was right in his own eyes, and the enemies of Israel accordingly got everything their own way. Under it the people dwell securely and respected by those round about; guarded by the shelter of civil order, the citizen can sit under his own vine and his own fig-tree. That is the work of the first two kings, who saved Israel from his spoilers, and gave him power and rest. No difference is made between them in this respect: the one commenced the work which the other completed (1 Sam. ix. 16, xiv. 48; 2 Sam. iii. 18, xix. 9). Before them there was no breathing space left in the hard work of fighting, but now there is time to think of other things. Even Deuteronomy, which was written not long before the exile, regards the period before the monarchy as a time of preparation

[p. 254]

and transition, not to be counted complete in itself: Israel must first acquire fixed seats and a settled way of living, and then Jehovah also will choose a seat for Himself and make known His desires with regard to the cultus. David brought things so far that the people had room and struck firm roots into the ground, and ceased to tremble before their enemies, who had kept them on the strain from the beginning, and all the days of the judges; and under his successor the time came when the temple could be built and higher interests receive attention. That Hebrew antiquity knew nothing of any hostility or incompatibility between the heavenly and the earthly ruler is plain from the title Anointed of Jehovah, and from the hope of the prophets, whose ideal future would be incomplete without a human king. The ancient Israelites were as fully conscious as any other people of the gratitude they owed to the men and to the institutions by whose aid they had been lifted out of anarchy and oppression, and formed into an orderly community, capable of self-defence. Of this the Books of Samuel afford the most eloquent testimony. [*1]

The position taken up in the version of 1 Sam. vii. viii. x. 17 seq. xii., presents the greatest possible contrast to this way of thinking. There, the erection of the monarchy only forms a worse stage of backsliding from Jehovah. There can be no progress beyond the Mosaic ideal; the greater the departure from it the greater the declension. The capital sin of placing a human ruler on the throne of Jehovah makes even the period of the judges appear not quite black. Dark as the colours are with which that period is generally painted, it held fast to the original form of the theocracy, and so appears somewhat brighter: at last indeed, to heighten the contrast, it is represented as a splendid age. Under the rule of Samuel, everything was as it should be. Should we ask, how were things then? what was exactly the nature of the theocratic constitution? we receive, it is true, no satisfactory answer to the question.

[p. 255]

[paragraph continues] We might draw conclusions with regard to the body from the head: but what sort of an idea can we form of the position of Samuel? As he appears in these chapters, we entirely fail to dispose of him in any of the categories applicable to the subject; he is not a judge, not a priest, not a prophet,--if at least we use these words with their true historical meaning. He is a second Moses? Yes, but that does not tell us much. So much only is clear, that the theocracy is arranged on quite a different footing from the kingdoms of this world, and that it amounts to a falling away into heathenism when the Israelites place a king at their head like other nations, and he keeps courtiers and ministers, officers and soldiers, horses and chariots. It is accordingly a spiritual community: the spiritual character of the regent places this beyond doubt. Samuel admonishes the people to give up idolatry; he presides at the great day of repentance at Mizpeh, which forms an epoch in the sacred history; and Jehovah can refuse nothing to his prayers and cries (xii. 1 7). "God forbid," he says in taking leave of them (xii. 23), "that I should cease to pray for you and teach you the good way." Such is his position: and the citizens of the theocracy have the corresponding duty of cultivating the worship of Jehovah, and not withdrawing themselves from the guidance of the representative of Deity. They do not need to trouble themselves about means for warding off the attacks of their enemies; if they fast and pray, and give up their sins, Jehovah hurls back the foe with His thunder and lightning, and so long as they are pious He will not allow their land to be invaded. All the expenses are then naturally superfluous by which a people usually safeguards it own existence. That this view is unhistorical is self-evident; and that it contradicts the genuine tradition we have seen. The ancient Israelites did not build a church first of all: what they built first was a house to live in, and they rejoiced not a little when they got it happily roofed over (xi. 15). But we have still to add, in conclusion, that the idea here before us can only have arisen in an age which had no knowledge of Israel as a people and a state, and which had no experience of the real conditions of existence in these forms; in other words. It is the offspring of exilic or post-exilic Judaism. At that time the nation was transformed into a religious community, whose members were at liberty to concentrate themselves on what they held to be the great business of life, worship and religiousness, because the Chaldeans or the Persians had relieved them of all care for worldly concerns. At that time, accordingly, the theocracy existed, and it is from

[p. 256]

that time that it is transported in an idealised form to early times. The material basis on which the theocracy rested in fact, namely, the foreign domination, is put out of sight, and it is counted heathenism in the old Israelites that they cared for the external conditions of their national existence, that they are a people in the full sense of the word, and seek to maintain themselves as such with the weapons which are found necessary in the work-a-day world. It naturally never came into the heads of these epigoni to conceive that the political organisation and centralisation which the monarchy called into being provided the basis for the organisation and centralisation of the worship, and that their church was merely a spiritualised survival of the nation. What is added to Moses is taken away from the monarchy.

One more point has to be noticed. The chapters vii. viii. x. 17 seq. xii. betray a close relationship with Judges xix.-xxi., not only by their general tendency, but by a geographical detail in which the two passages agree. It is only here that Mizpeh, near Jerusalem, occurs as the place of meeting of all Israel; we find no further mention of the place in the whole period of the judges and the kings. Only after the destruction of Jerusalem is it mentioned, and there as the centre of the new Jewish community instituted by the Chaldeans (Jer. xl. seq.) as the substitute of the old capital. It appears once more, and in a similar character, in 1 Macc. iii. 46 seq. at a time when the temple of Jerusalem was in the hands of the Syrians, and the Jews could not get to it. The Mizpeh of Judges xx., 1 Sam. vii. 10, is probably the same as that of Jer. xl. seq., and intended to be, like these, in place of Jerusalem, the only legitimate sanctuary, which, however, did not exist at that early time. This is a further proof of the post-Deuteronomic and Jewish origin of these narratives, but at the same time an indication that, with every inclination to the views of the Priestly Code, the writer yet had not that code before him. For in that work the projection of Jerusalem into the period before Solomon is carried out in quite a different way: the tabernacle renders Mizpeh superfluous. It has also to be remarked that the rite of pouring out water (1 Sam. vii.) is foreign to the Priestly Code.

3. The relation of Saul to Samuel is a subject which lends itself readily to general views, and the development of the tradition is visible in it in other particulars besides those we have mentioned. Taking the view of 1 Samuel vii. viii. xii. as the lower limit, the narrative nearest in character is the story about Samuel contained in an insertion in chap. xiii.

[p. 257]

[paragraph continues] After Saul is made king at Gilgal by the levy with which he relieved Jabesh, he selects from it a body of men who camp with him and Jonathan at Gibeah and the neighbouring Michmash: and Jonathan, by killing the officer at Gibeah, gives the signal for battle with the old enemy of his race. The Philistines advance, and take up a position to the north of Gibeah, with only a deep valley between them and the Israelites. But Saul, we hear all at once, xiii. 7 (cf. ver. 4) was yet in Gilgal, and waited seven days for Samuel, according to the set time the latter had appointed; but Samuel did not come, and the warriors began to scatter. As he was himself offering the sacrifice without which no campaign could be commenced, Samuel arrived, and at once opened upon him. Saul defended his act with great force: the people were scattering, and Samuel had not come at the appointed time, and as the Philistines had advanced close up to Gibeah, he had found it impossible to delay longer, and had offered the sacrifice in order to advance against them. To all this Samuel's only answer was: "Thou hast done foolishly; if thou hadst kept the commandment of Jehovah, He would have established thy kingdom for ever, but now thy kingdom shall not continue; Jehovah has sought Him a man after His own heart, and appointed him to be ruler over His people, because thou hast not kept that which Jehovah commanded thee." So he said, and walked off; but Saul went with the army from Gilgal to Gibeah. At Gibeah, the following verse (xiii. 16) goes on, abode Saul and Jonathan, and their men, when the Philistines encamped in Michmash.

The change of place distinctly shows the whole passage about the meeting of the king with the prophet at Gilgal (xiii. 7-15) to be an insertion by a later hand. At the beginning of the narrative Saul is at Gibeah (ver. 2, 3), and the Philistines seek him there, and halt before the place because they meet with resistance. All at once, at ver. 7, it is assumed without being stated, that Saul had stayed at Gilgal since he was chosen king till now, and had only now advanced from there against the Philistines who were waiting for him before Gibeah. Verse 16, however, gives us the impression that Saul had been posted at Gibeah with his men for some time, when the Philistines took up their camp over against them. Only in this way is justice done to the contrasted participle of state (sedentes) and inchoative perfect (castrametati sunt). And in the sequel the triumphant continuation of the story, especially in chap. xiv., shows no indication that the ominous scene in Gilgal weighed on the mind of Saul, or of the people, or of the historian.

[p. 258]

According to xiii. 7-15, Saul is to wait seven days for Samuel at Gilgal. Here there is a reference to x. 8, where the seer says to the future king, "Thou shalt go down before me to Gilgal, and I will come after thee there to offer sacrifices; seven days shalt thou tarry till I come and show thee what thou shalt do." This verse is condemned by other arguments than its connection with xii. 7-15. Samuel's object at this point, according to x. 1-7, is to overcome the reluctance of the Benjamite who had gone forth to seek his asses, to undertake the high calling announced to him, and to inspire him with faith and confidence,--not to give him unintelligible directions as to what he is to do first when he has actually become king, and how long he has to wait for the seer at Gilgal. The schoolmaster tone of x. 8 is particularly out of place after the preceding words of ver. 7, that, when the three signs have come to pass, Saul is to do what his hand finds, because God is with him. This is surely giving him perfect freedom of action, and for the reason that God's Spirit is working in him, which "bloweth where it listeth," and suffers no interference from any authority. [*1]

This insertion is based on an older account of the breach between Samuel and Saul in 1 Sam. xv. Here also the matter of dispute is a sacrifice, and Gilgal is the scene; and this alone serves to explain how Gilgal is adhered to in xiii. 7-15 in spite of all impossibility, as being the right and necessary place for the occurrence. Jehovah, by the mouth of Samuel, commands the king to devote the Amalekites to destruction because of an act of treachery they had committed against Israel in ancient times, and to spare no living thing. Saul accordingly makes war on the Amalekites and defeats them; but he does not carry out the proscription entirely, as he spares the best of their cattle and their king Agag, whom he takes prisoner. At Gilgal, where the victory is celebrated before Jehovah, he is called to account for this by Samuel, and states that he intended the booty for a sacrifice to Jehovah. His statement, however, makes no impression. "Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams: behold, rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is as

[p. 259]

idolatry and teraphim. Because thou hast rejected the word of Jehovah, He also hath rejected thee." The king acknowledges his guilt, and tries to pacify Samuel; but the latter turns from him in anger, and when Saul lays hold of him, his mantle tears. "Jehovah hath torn the kingdom of Israel from thee this day, and given it to one better than thee; and the Truthful One of Israel will not lie nor repent; for He is not a man, that He should repent." Yet at Saul's entreaty that he would at least not refuse to honour him before the people, Samuel takes part in the sacrifice, and even begins it by hewing Agag in pieces before Jehovah. Then they part, never to see each other again; but Samuel mourns for Saul, that Jehovah had repented of having made him king over Israel. There is another narrative intimately connected with this one in subject and treatment, thought and expression, namely, that of the witch of Endor. When Saul, shortly before the battle in which he fell, surveyed the hostile army, he was seized with anxiety and terror. He inquired of Jehovah, but received no answer, neither by dreams, nor by the ephod, nor by prophets. In his extremity he was driven into the arms of a black art which he had formerly persecuted and sought to extirpate. By night and in disguise, with two companions, he sought out a woman at Endor who practiced the raising of the dead, and after reassuring her with regard to the mortal danger connected with the practice of her art, he bade her call up Samuel. She, on seeing the spirit ascending, at once perceives that the man he had come up to converse with is the king himself; she cries out loud, but allows herself to be reassured, and describes the appearance of the dead person. Saul does not see him, only hears him speak. "Why hast thou disquieted me, to bring me up? Jehovah doeth to thee as He spake by me: He rends the kingdom out of thy hand, and gives it to another, because thou obeyedst not the voice of Jehovah, nor executedst His fierce wrath upon Amalek; to-morrow shalt thou and thy sons be with me, and Jehovah also shall deliver the host of Israel into the hands of the Philistines." At these words Saul falls all his length on the ground. He had eaten nothing all the day before and all night; he is with difficulty induced to take some food: then he rises up with his men to go and meet his fate (1 Sam. xxviii. 3-25).

Comparing with this original the copy in xiii. 7-15, we are struck, in the first place, with the placing of the rupture so much earlier. Scarcely is Saul made king when he is deposed, on the spot, at Gilgal. And for

[p. 260]

what reason? Samuel has fixed, in a purely arbitrary fashion, the time he is to wait, and Saul waits, and makes arrangements for departure only when the time has run out, although the need is pressing; and for this he is rejected! It is clear that Samuel has from the first felt towards him as a legitimate prince feels to a usurper; he has arranged so as to find an occasion to show unmistakably where they both stand. Strictly speaking he did not find the occasion, Saul having observed the appointed time; but the opinion is present, though unexpressed, that the king was not entitled to sacrifice, either before the expiry of the seven days or at any time: his sacrificing is regarded as sacrilege. And thus the autonomous theocracy stands all at once before our eyes, which no one thought of before Ezekiel. We are reminded of the stories of Joash and Uzziah in the Chronicles. The incidents in 1 Sam. xv. xxviii. are similar, but the spirit of the narrative is different and more antique. The rejection does not come here with such mad haste, and we do not get the impression that Samuel is glad of the opportunity to wash his hands of the king. On the contrary, he honours him before the people, he mourns that Jehovah has rejected him; and Saul, who never again sees him alive, turns to him dead in the hour of his extremity, and does not regard him as his implacable enemy. Again, in the former case the king's offence is that he has too low an estimate of the sacredness of sacrifice, and fails to regard the altar as unapproachable to the laity: while in the latter case he is reproached with attaching. to sacrifice far too high a value. In the former case, in fine, the Deity and the representative of the Deity act with absolute caprice, confront men stiffly with commands of incredible smallness, and challenge them to opposition; in the latter, the conduct of Samuel is not (supposing it to have been the custom to devote enemies to destruction) unintelligible, nor his demeanour devoid of natural spirit; he appeals not to an irresponsible position, but to the manifest truth that obedience is better than the fat of rams.

Not that chapters xv. and xxviii. belong to the original growth of the tradition. In the case of xxviii. 3-25 it is easy to show the insertion: the thread of xxviii. 1, 2, coming from chapter xxvii. is continued at xxix. 1. According to xxviii. 4 the Philistines have advanced as far as Shunem in Jezreel; in xxix. 1 they are only at Aphek in Sharon, and they do not go on to Jezreel till xxix. 11. To prove an insertion in the case of chap. xv. we might point to the fact that there is a direct connection

[p. 261]

between xiv. 52 and xvi. 14; but this must be proved somewhat circumstantially. Let it suffice, then, to say that in the preceding narrative of Saul's history, the war with the Amalekites appears in quite a different light (ix. 1-x. 16, xi. xiii. xiv.; cf. also Num. xxiv. 7). The occasion of it, according to xiv. 48, lay in the needs of the time, and the object was the very practical one of "saving Israel out of the hands of them that spoiled them." There is nothing here to suggest that the campaign was undertaken in consequence of a religious command, to punish the Amalekites for an offence over which long ages had passed, and information about which could only be gathered from historical books dealing with the age of Moses. Both the narratives, chap. xv. as well as chap. xxviii, are preludes of events afterwards to happen. At chap. xvi. David appears upon the scene; he is thenceforth the principal person of the story, and thrusts Saul on one side. Chapter xv. is the prophetic introduction to this change. The fact had been handed down that Saul was chosen by Jehovah to be king. How was it possible that in spite of this his rule had no continuance? Jehovah, who as a rule does not change His mind, was mistaken in him; and Samuel, who called the king, had now to his great sorrow to pronounce the sentence of rejection against him. The occasion on which he does this is evidently historical, namely, the festival of victory at Gilgal, at which the captured leader of the Amalekites was offered up as the principal victim. The sacrifice of Agag being quite repugnant to later custom, it was sought to account for it by saying that Saul spared the king, but Jehovah required his death, and caused him to be hewn in pieces at the altar by Samuel. The rest could easily be spun out of this; it is superfluous to discuss how. Chapter xxviii., again, is related to chap. xv. as the second step to the first. No proof is wanted to show that this is the prophetic shadow cast before the fall of Saul in his last fight with the Philistines. His turning to the witch to call up to him the departed Samuel suggests in the most powerful way his condition of God-forsakenness since Samuel turned away from him. And, to conclude--the general colouring of the hostile relation between Saul and Samuel is borrowed from the actual relations which must have come to subsist between the prophets and the kings, particularly in the kingdom of Samaria (1 Kings xiv. 7). In their treatment of this relation our narratives manifestly take up the prophetic position;

[p. 262]

and the doctrinal ideas of which they are made the vehicles clearly show them to be prophetic conceptions.

4. David is the first hero of Judah whom we meet with; and he at once throws all others into the shade. His acts are narrated to us in two detailed and connected works which are mutually complementary. The first of these is contained in 1 Sam. xiv. 52-2 Sam. viii 18, and in it we are circumstantially informed how David rose to the throne. There follows his principal achievement as king, the humiliation of the Philistines and the foundation of Jerusalem, the work concluding with a short notice of other remarkable circumstances. This narrative is preserved to us complete, only not in the earliest form, but with many interruptions and alterations. The second work, 2 Sam. ix.-2 Kings ii. is mutilated at its commencement, but otherwise almost completely intact, if 2 Sam. xxi.-xxiv. be removed. It tells chiefly of the occurrences at the court of Jerusalem in the later years of the king, and carefully traces the steps by which Solomon, whose birth, with its attendant circumstances, is narrated at the outset, reached the throne over the heads of his brothers Amnon, Absalom, and Adonijah, who stood before him. Both works are marked by an essentially historical character. The treatment is much more detailed, while not nearly so poetical as in the history of Saul (1 Sam. ix. seq.). There are no exaggerations, such as xiv. 46 seq. The second is the better work of the two, and frequently affords us a glance into the very heart of events, showing us the natural occasions and human motives which gave rise to the different actions. The point of view is, however, the narrow one of Jerusalem; for example, the real reasons of the revolt of the men of Judah under Absalom are scarcely even hinted at. The leading sentiment of the writer, there can be no doubt, is enthusiasm for David, but his weaknesses are not concealed; the relations prevailing at his court, far from edifying as they are, are faithfully reported, and the palace intrigue which placed Solomon upon the throne is narrated with a naivete which is almost malicious. The first work (1 Sam. xvi.-2 Sam. viii.) gives a less circumstantial narrative, but follows the thread of events not less conscientiously, and is based on information little inferior to that of the second. The author's partisanship is more noticeable, as he follows the style of a biographer, and makes David the hero of the history from his very first appearance, although king Saul is the ruling and motive power in it. But Judaistic leanings were unavoidable, and they

[p. 263]

have not gone so far as to transform the facts, nor indeed operated in a different way or to a greater degree here than local interest in the tribal hero, which is always the earliest motive for narration, has done in other cases. This praise applies to 1 Sam. xvi. seq., however, only so far as its original form goes. It is different with the insertions, here very numerous, which have crept into the older connection, or replaced a genuine piece of the old story with a newer edition of it. In these the tendency to idealise the founder of the dynasty of Judah has worked creatively, and here we find rich materials for the history of the tradition, in the rude style in which alone it is possible as yet to construct that history. The beginning of the first work especially is overgrown with later legendary formations.

David, known as a man of courage and prudence, and of a skilful tongue, and recommended, moreover, by his skill on the harp, came to the king's court and became his armour-bearer (xvi. 14-23). He so approved himself in the war with the Philistines that Saul advanced him step after step, and gave him his daughter in marriage (xviii. 6 seq.). But the success and fame of the man of Judah filled Saul with jealousy, and in one of his fits of frenzy (to which x. 10 also shows him to have been subject) he threw his javelin at David, who was seeking to drive away the evil spirit by his playing (xix. 8-10). David agreed with Jonathan that it was advisable for him to absent himself, but this only confirmed the king's suspicions, which prompted him to destroy the priests of Nob, because their head had provided David with food and consulted the oracle for him (xxi 2-7, xxii. 6-23). The fugitive himself Saul failed to lay hands on; he gathered round him his own family and other desperate men, and became their leader in the wilderness of Judah (xxii. 1-5, xxiii. 1-13, xxv. 2 seq.). To escape the repeated persecutions of Saul, he at length passed over to the country of the Philistines, and received the town of Ziklag in Judah as a fief from the hands of the prince Achish (xxvii. 1 seq.).

Such is the beginning of the history of David according to the simple thread of the old narrative. The first accretion we notice is the legend of the encounter of the shepherd boy with Goliath (xvii. 1-xviii. 5), which is involved in contradiction both with what goes before and with what follows it. According to xvi. 14-23, David, when he first came in contact with Saul, was no raw lad, ignorant of the arts of war, but "a mighty valiant man, skilful in speech, and of a goodly

[p. 264]

presence;" and according to xviii. 6 the women sang at the victorious return of the army, "Saul has slain his thousands of the Philistines, and David his tens of thousands," so that the latter was the leader of Israel beside the king, and a proved and well-known man. Evidently something of a different nature must originally have stood between xvi. 23 and xviii. 6. Now the fate of the story of Goliath (xvii. 1-xviii. 5) involves that of the story of the anointing of David (xvi. 1-13), which is dependent on it (xvi. 12, xvii. 42); and, as we have already decided that chapter xv. is a secondary production, xiv. 52 joins on at once to xvi. 14. In xviii. 6 seq., where we are told of the origin of Saul's jealousy, several of the worst additions and interruptions are wanting in the LXX, especially the first throwing of the javelin (xviii. 9-11) and the betrothal to Merab (xviii. 17-19). The insertions are most varied and confusing in the account of the outbreak of the hostility of Saul and of David's flight (chapters xix. xx). Chapter xix. 1-7, a pointless and artificial passage, betrays its later origin by its acquaintance with chapter xvii.; xviii. 29a (LXX) is continued at xix. 8. After Saul's spear-cast David takes flight for the first time, but at verse 11 he is still at home, and makes his escape the second time with the aid of feminine artifice, going to Samuel at Ramah, but to appear in chap. xx. at Gibeah as before. The king remarks his absence from table; Jonathan assures him of his father's favour, which, however, David doubts, though he has no distinct evidence to the contrary. When quite certain of the deadly hatred of the king, David takes flight in earnest; in chapter xxi. seq. we find him at Nob on his way to Judah, but at xxi. 10 he goes away afresh from the face of Saul. It is evident that in reality and in the original narrative the flight took place only once, and that it must from the first have been directed to the place of refuge, i.e., to Judah. This is enough to dispose of xix. 11-24: the twentieth chapter is impossible in the connection, at least in its present form, and in chapter xxi. verses 8-10 and 11-16 must be left out. In the section which deals with the freebooter life of David, chaps. xxiii-xxvii., considerable pieces have been added; xxvii. 7-12 of course is one; but also the encounters of David with his pursuers. There are two versions: the one, xxvi. 1-25, is placed before chapter xxvii. on account of verse 19; the other, xxiii. 14-xxiv. 22, is placed before chapter xxv. to avoid too near a contact. There is a good deal of verbal coincidence between the two, and we are entitled to regard the shorter and more pointed version (chapter xxvi.)

[p. 265]

as the basis. But the sequence (xxvi. 25, xxvii. 1) shows beyond a doubt that chapter xxvi. does not belong to the original tradition. The process of inserting the additions naturally was not completed without all sorts of editorial changes in the older materials, e.g., xvi. 14.

Though proceeding from the same root, these offshoots are by no means of the same nature, nor do they all belong to the same stage of the process. Some of them are popular legends and unconscious fictions. Of this nature is the story of Michal, who takes the part of her husband against her father, lets him down in the evening with a rope through the window, detains the spies for a time by saying that David is sick, and then shows them the household god which she has arranged on the bed and covered with the counterpane (xix. 11-17). The scenes in which Saul and David meet are of a somewhat different colour, yet we notice that the conviction that the latter is the king of the future does not interfere with the recognition of the former as the king de facto and the anointed of Jehovah; Saul too appears not wicked, but blinded. The secondary version (xxiii. 14 seq.) contains (not to speak of the distinctly later insertion between verse 15 and 19), in addition to the touching features of the story, a good-natured jest, telling how the two played hide-and-seek round a hill, which took its name from the circumstance. These stories present certain marks which serve to fix their date in the history of the religion: one is, that the image in David's house is spoken of quite simply; another, the expression in xxvi. 19, "If Jehovah have stirred thee up against me, let Him accept an offering, but if it be men, cursed be they before Jehovah, because they have driven me out this day from the fellowship in the land of Jehovah, and obliged me to serve other gods." It is perhaps not by mere chance that this speech is wanting in the parallel version, and that there is added in place of it a formal act of recognition which Saul pays at the end to his destined successor. As for the story of Goliath, it is also quite artless, but its religious colouring is much more marked. The speech with which David goes to meet the giant is characteristic on this side (xvii. 4 seq.): "Thou comest to me with a sword and with a spear, but I come unto thee in the name of Jehovah of hosts, whom thou hast defied. This day will He deliver thee into mine hand, that all the earth may know that there is a God in Israel, and that this assembly (hqhl = Israel) may know that Jehovah saveth not with sword and spear, for the battle is His."

[p. 266]

[paragraph continues] This approaches to the religious language of the post-Deuteronomic time. According to 2 Samuel xxi. 19, Goliath of Gath, whose spear-shaft was as thick as a weaver's beam, [*1] fought in the wars, not in Saul's time, but in that of his successor, and was killed, not by a shepherd boy but by a warrior of Bethlehem named Elhanan.

The theme of David and Jonathan has no doubt a historical basis, but for us it is found only in second-hand versions. The story of the farewell (chapter xx.) must be placed in this category. Yet it appears to point back to an earlier basis, and the earlier story may very possibly have belonged to the connection of the original work. For the shooting of the arrow could only have a meaning if it was impossible for the two friends to have an interview. But as the story goes, they come together and speak out freely what they have in their hearts, and so the dumb signal is not only superfluous, but unintelligible and meaningless. But if the most characteristic trait of the whole story does not fit into it as it now stands, that is just saying that the story has not come down to us in its true form. Originally Jonathan only discharged the arrow, and called to his boy where it lay; and David, hid in the neighbourhood of the shooting range, heard in the call to the boy the preconcerted signal. In calling that the arrow was nearer him or beyond him, Jonathan was apparently telling the boy, but in reality telling his friend, to come towards him or go farther away from him. The latter was the case, and if so, the friends could not enter into conversation; the tearful farewell then disappears, and the sentimental speeches spoken before it in the same style, in which Jonathan virtually admits that his father is right, and yet decidedly espouses David's cause, disregarding the fact that David will deprive him of his inheritance. [*2]

[p. 267]

Chapter xviii. 6 seq. manifests tendency in a bad sense, even apart from the additions of the Masoretic text. Here Saul's enmity against David is carried back to the very beginning of their relations together, and even his friendship is represented as dissembled hatred. All the honours with which the king covers his armour-bearer are interpreted as practices to get rid of him. He makes him his son-in-law in order to expose him to deadly danger in his efforts to procure the hundred foreskins of the Philistines which were the price of the daughter. The connection cannot dispense with xviii. 6 seq., but at the same time it is beyond doubt that the venomous way of interpreting the facts is a mark of later revision. For Saul here practices his perfidies with the cognisance of his servants, who must therefore have been well aware of his disposition towards David; but the old narrator proceeds on the opposite assumption, that his hatred appeared all at once, and that David had been held by all up to that time to be one of the king's favourite servants: cf. xxi. 2-xxii. 14 seq., not to speak of chapter xx. And this alone agrees with the nature of Saul as it is everywhere described to us.

It is a characteristic circumstance that the corruption of the tradition is greatest in those narratives in which Samuel enters into the history of David. There are two insertions of this kind. According to xix. 18-24 David flees to the old man at Ramah, where the school of the prophets is; Saul sends messengers to take him, but these, when they come near Samuel and see him in command of a troop of ecstatic enthusiasts, are seized by the frenzy like the rest. The second set of messengers whom Saul sends, and the third, fare no better; and Saul has at last to come himself. But he also is drawn into the vortex, tears off his clothes and dances before Samuel and David, the only self-possessed spectators of the bacchantic company, till he falls down; and he lies naked as he is a whole day and a whole night upon the ground--whence the proverb, "Is Saul also among the prophets?" But that David when he fled, fled in earnest and went in the direction of Judah, instead of amusing himself by going first towards the north, is perfectly evident, as much so as that it is a serious abuse of the spirit of prophecy to make it serve ends which are foreign to its nature, and turn it into a mere instrument for the personal safety of David, who had

[p. 268]

no need whatever to wait for Saul at Ramah to play him a trick there. The narrative, which is unknown to the author of xv. 35, arose out of the proverb which is quoted in it, but this receives elsewhere (x. 12) a much more worthy interpretation. We can scarcely avoid the suspicion that what we have before us here is a pious caricature; the point can be nothing but Samuel's and David's enjoyment of the disgrace of the naked king. For the general history of the tradition the most interesting circumstance is that Samuel has here become the head of a school of prophets and the leader of their exercises. In the original view of the matter (chaps. ix. x.) he appears alone and independent, and has nothing to do with the companies of the ecstatics, the Nebiim. He is a Roeh or seer, not a Nabi or prophet. True, it is asserted in the gloss, ix. 9, that the two words mean the same thing, that what is now called Nabi was formerly called Roeh. But that is scarcely quite correct. The author of ix. x. knows the name Nabi very well too, but he never applies it to Samuel; he only uses it, in the plural, of the troops of Jehovah--intoxicated dervishes. He gives it quite a different meaning from Roeh, and also quite a different meaning from that in which Isaiah and Jeremiah use the word Nabi. [*1] We cannot doubt that these distinctions rest on a historical basis, and only gradually melted away in later times: so that Samuel the seer need not be degraded into one of the flagellants.

David's flight to Samuel presupposes some previous relation to him, and xix. 18 seq. seems to point back to xvi. 1-13. In this piece David's career begins with his being anointed king in Saul's place at Jehovah's command, when a mere shepherd boy, who was not even counted in the family he belonged to. But in the sequel no one knows anything about this. Even in the story of Goliath (which in other respects harmonizes better with xvi. 1-13 than any other piece) the older brothers, here three, not seven, know nothing of the anointing of the youngest, although they were present and heard their own claims discussed (xvii. 28). In the stories of David's persecution also, chapter xxiv. xxvi., Saul alone is the sacred person, the anointed of Jehovah, not David. A belief that David is chosen for high things by God is quite a different matter from an anointing which has already taken place in fact. And if consequent and antecedent be inseparable,

[p. 269]

we must remember how, according to xv. 35, Samuel not only withdraws himself from Saul till his death, but also feels grieved for him till his death. It is a harsh transition from xv. 35: "Samuel came no more to see Saul till the day of his death, because he mourned over him," to xvi. 1: "and Jehovah spake to him, How long wilt thou mourn for Saul, seeing I have rejected him?" But it appears clearly that the appointment of the successor was connected with, and a consequence of, the deposition of the predecessor.

The anointing of David by Samuel is at the same time the set-off to the anointing of Saul by Samuel. This is clearly seen on comparing x. 6, xi. 6, "and the Spirit of God leapt upon Saul," with xvi. 13, 14, "and the Spirit of Jehovah leapt upon David, and it departed from Saul." In the former case the inspiration is a momentary foaming over, in the latter (the leaping notwithstanding) it is a permanent property; and this difference alone leaves no doubt as to where the original is to be looked for, and where the imitation. Saul alone, according to the old tradition, was made king in a divine, i.e. an overpowering and ideal manner: David was made king in a tedious human way, and after many intermediate stages. Of Saul alone was it originally told that the sudden outbreak of the spirit with which he, unelected as he was, summoned the levy of Israel, placed himself at its head, defeated the Ammonites, and became king, was quietly prepared by an old seer, who pointed out to him his great calling, and filled him with confidence in himself by secretly anointing him in the name of Jehovah. All that was known of David was how by his own energy he raised himself from a soldier to be the leader of a band, from that to be the vassal prince, under the Philistines, of Ziklag and Judah, and from a vassal prince to be the independent and powerful king of Israel. He also was anointed, not, however, beforehand by God, but after his elevation, by the elders of Judah and Israel. But this human origin and this inferiority in point of divine consecration to a predecessor whose kingdom, as it turned out, Jehovah had not made to stand, was found by a later age to be unworthy of him: he must at least have received his anointing from Samuel as well as Saul. And this was accordingly made good by the legend (xvi. 1-13). It is a step further on this downward path that in the Judaistic version (x. 17 seq.) all mention is omitted of the anointing of Saul.

We return to Samuel. The Books of Samuel take their name from

[p. 270]

him, and he is a figure of great importance, if not for the history itself, yet for the history of the tradition, the progress of which may be measured by the change of view about his person. In the views taken about him we may distinguish four stages. Originally (ix. 1-x. 16) he is simply a seer, but at the same time a patriotic Israelite, who feels deeply the need of his country, and uses his authority as seer to suggest to the ear and to the mind of one whom he recognises as fit for the purpose, his destination to be Israel's deliverer and leader. This relation between seer and warrior must be held fast and regarded as historical if Samuel is to mean anything at all. Similar instances are those of Deborah and Barak in earlier times, and later, that of Elisha and Hazael, and still more, that of Elisha and Jehu. Samuel's greatness consists in this, that he rouses to activity the man who comes after him, and is greater than he: after kindling the light which now burns in its full brightness, he himself disappears. But his meteoric appearance and disappearance excited wonder, and this in early times produced a story of his youth, in which, while still a boy, he predicts the ruin of pre-monarchical Israel (1 Sam. i.-iii.). After he has done this, darkness closes completely around him. Even in chapter iv. he has completely disappeared, and when we meet him again he is an old man. On the other side the circumstance that we hear nothing more of the seer after his meeting with Saul, caused it to be believed that a rupture very soon took place between the two.

This belief we meet with at the second stage of the tradition which is represented by the prophetical narratives recorded in chaps. xvi. and xxviii. It arose out of the inconsistency involved in the fact that Jehovah did not afterwards confirm in his reign the man whom He had chosen to be king, but overthrew his dynasty. Thus it becomes necessary that Samuel, who anointed Saul, should afterwards sorrowfully reject him. Even here he appears no longer as the simple seer, but as a prophet in the style of Elijah and Elisha who regards the Lord's anointed as his own handiwork, and lays on him despotic commands (xv. 1), though according to x. 7 he had expressly left him to be guided by his own inspiration.

The transition from the second to the third stage is easy. Here Samuel, after withdrawing the unction from Saul, at once transfers it to David, and sets him up against his rejected predecessor as being now de jure king by the grace of God. The respect with which he is regarded

[p. 271]

has meanwhile increased still further; when he comes to Bethlehem the elders tremble at his approach (xvi. 4 seq.); and in xix. 18 seq. he has a magical power over men. Up to this stage, however, he has always been regarded as intellectually the author of the monarchy. It is reserved for the last (exilian or post-exilian) stage of the development of the tradition to place him in the opposite position of one who resists to the uttermost the desire of the people to have a king. Here pre-monarchical Israel is advanced to a theocracy, and Samuel is the head of the theocracy, which accounts for the feelings aroused in him by their demand.

The modern judgment has been prejudiced in Saul's favour by Samuel's curse, and to David's disadvantage by Samuel's blessing; the picture of the one has not suffered from the blackening so much as that of the other from the glorification. [*1] Some critics, who are unencumbered either by prejudice or by knowledge of the subject, regard Saul as the antagonist and David as the creature of the clerical lust of rule, of which they see the embodiment in Samuel. But this view gives Samuel a powerful position over against the king such as he cannot have possessed unless he had broad ground under his feet and an influence well and extensively organised. Did he find support in the Nebiim? These were only then rising into view out of an irregular enthusiasm which was not yet confined to any definite circle or school; and besides, the old tradition speaks of a close connection between them and the king, but not between them and the seer. The belief that the latter was the founder and president of their guild is based on the worthless anachronistic anecdote, 1 Sam. xix. 18 seq. Or was Samuel in conspiracy with the priests against Saul? This is inferred from 1 Sam. xxi.-xxii. where Abimelech of Nob provides David with bread on his wanderings, and expiates this offence with his own death and that of the whole race of Eli. But in the first place these priests

[p. 272]

have no connection with Samuel. In the second place there is nothing to make it probable that they had an understanding with David, or were acquainted with his ambitious plans if he had then begun to cherish them. In the third place, it is positively certain that they represented no distinct power in the state as against the king, but on the contrary were entirely the creatures of his smile or frown; on the occurrence of a faint suspicion they were put to death to a man without a dog barking to remonstrate. The liberal view we are discussing of Samuel's relation to Saul and David is based on the erroneous assumption that Samuel had the hierocracy to rest on in his acts of opposition to the monarchy. But the student who carries back the hierocracy to these early times has still to learn the very elements of what is necessary to a true historical appreciation of Hebrew antiquity.

  

III.

It is in the Book of Kings that the last revision works most unrestrictedly. Here also chronological and religious elements combine to the building up of the framework, and we begin with examining the chronological system.

From the exodus from Egypt to the beginning of the building of the temple was a period of 430 years; and from the latter to the destruction of Jerusalem, a period, according to the numbers of the kings of Judah, of 430 years, or reckoning the exile, of 480 years, as before. In Chronicles, the succession from Azariah ben Ahimaaz, who was, according to the correct reading, the first to officiate in the temple of Solomon, to Jozadak, who was carried away in the captivity, consists of eleven high priests; thus, reckoning the exile, we have again twelve generations of 40 years each. The detailed figures which compose the total are here more complicated, which is no doubt partly due to the fact that some of them are dates which the reviser found given. Yet in this instance also the number 40 is the basis of calculation, as we see in the reigns of the kings of Judah. From the division of the kingdom to the destruction of Samaria in the 6th year of Hezekiah, the numbers are as follows: Rehoboam and Abijam, 20; Asa, 41; Jehoshaphat, Joram, Ahaziah, Athaliah, 40; Joash, 40; Amaziah and Uzziah, 81; Jotham, Ahaz, Hezekiah, 38. From the destruction of Samaria to the last date in Kings (2 Kings xxv. 27), Hezekiah, Manasseh, Amon, have 80; Josiah,

[p. 273]

[paragraph continues] Jehoahaz, Jehoiakim, Jehoiachin, 79  1/4. Let him believe who can that it is a mere chance that the figures 41 + 81 + 38 make up exactly 40 + 80 + 40.

The series of the kings of Israel is in point of chronology dependent on the series of Judah. According to the numbers of the latter, 393 years elapsed from the division of the kingdom to the Babylonian captivity; and if we assume with Ezekiel (iv. 4) that Samaria fell 150 years earlier than Judah, 243 years remain for the duration of the northern kingdom. The figures given amount in fact to 242 years. These 150 Israelite years, from the destruction of Samaria to the destruction of Jerusalem, exceed, it is true, by 17 the sum of the parallel years of Judah; and the Israelite years from 1 Jeroboam to 9 Hosea fall short of the years in Judah from 1 Rehoboam to 6 Hezekiah by about the same number. This shows that no effort was made at first to synchronise the individual reigns in the two series. The 242 years of the northern kingdom are divided, by the epoch of 1 Jehu, into 98 and 144. If we take them at 240, the half of 480, the 98 must be changed into 96, which then agree with the contemporary 96 Jewish years. The deduction must be made at the reign of Baasha. Then we get the following play of figures: Jeroboam 22, Nadab 2, Baasha 22, Elah 2, Omri 12, Ahab 22, Ahaziah 2, Joram 12. That is to say, the eight kings have together 96 years, the first four and the last four 48 each. Two have the average number 12; the other 6 consists of three pairs of father and son; and the twice 12 years belonging to each pair are divided so that the father gets 12 + 10, and the son 12 - 10, obviously because the father was considered much more important than the son. [*1]

[p. 274]

The great period thus marked off and artificially divided into sub-periods, is surveyed and appraised at every important epoch in sermon-like discourses. These are much more frequent in Kings than in Judges and Samuel. It makes no difference whether the writer speaks in his own person, or by the mouth of another; in reviews of the past he speaks himself, 2 Kings xvii.; in anticipations of the future he makes another speak (1 Kings viii. ix.). A few examples must be cited to show what we mean.

The great epoch of the work is the building of the temple. On this occasion Solomon makes a great dedicatory oration, in which he entreats Jehovah to hear from heaven the prayer of those who shall seek Him in this place. He concludes as follows: "If they sin against Thee (for there is no man that sinneth not) and Thou be angry with them and deliver them to be carried away captive into the land of the enemy, far or near, if they then bethink themselves and make supplication to Thee, saying, We have sinned and have done perversely and are guilty, and so return unto Thee with all their heart and all their soul in the land of the enemies which led them away captive, and pray unto Thee toward their land which Thou gavest unto their fathers, the city which Thou hast chosen, and the house which Thou hast built for Thy name, then hear Thou in heaven their prayer and their supplication, and maintain their cause, and forgive thy people their unfaithfulness, and give them compassion before them that carried them away captive, that they may have compassion upon them. For they be Thy people and Thine inheritance, which Thou broughtest forth out of Egypt from the midst of the furnace of iron, and didst separate them to Thyself from among all the people of the earth, as Thou spakest by Moses thy servant." What Jehovah answered to this we learn in chapter ix. "I have heard thy prayer and thy supplication which thou hast made before me; I have hallowed this house, to put my name there for ever, and mine eyes and

[p. 275]

my heart shall be there perpetually. If thou wilt walk before me, as did David thy father, in integrity of heart and in uprightness, to do all that I have commanded thee, and wilt keep my statutes and my judgments, I will establish the throne of thy kingdom upon Israel for ever, as I promised to David thy father, saying, There shall not fail thee a man upon the throne of Israel. But if ye or your children turn away from me, and will not keep my statutes and my judgments which I have set before you, but worship other gods, then will I cut off Israel out of the land which I have given them, and this house which I have hallowed for my name I will cast out of my sight, and Israel shall be a proverb and a byword among all people, and this house a ruin. And when they ask: Why hath Jehovah done thus to this land and to this house? the answer shall be: Because they forsook Jehovah their God, who brought forth their fathers out of the land of Egypt, and have taken hold upon other gods, and have worshipped them and served them."

The division of the kingdom is also a very marked era in the history. It is introduced by a prophecy of Abijah to the first Jeroboam. "Behold, I rend the kingdom out of the hand of Solomon, and will give ten tribes to thee; but he shall have one tribe for my servant David's sake, and for Jerusalem's sake, the city which I have chosen; because he has forsaken me, and worshipped Astarte of Sidon, and Chemosh of Moab, and Milcom of Ammon, and has not walked in my ways to do that which is right in my eyes, my statutes, and my judgments, like David his father. And it shall be, if thou wilt hearken unto all that I command thee, and wilt walk in my ways, and do what is right in my sight, to keep my statutes and my commandments as David my servant did, that I will be with thee and build thee a sure house as I built for David, and will give Israel unto thee. And I will for this afflict the seed of David, but not for ever."

We pass over a series of prophecies in a similar strain which occur regularly at the changes of dynasty in the northern kingdom, and cite only the concluding words which accompany the fall of the kingdom of the ten tribes (2 Kings xvii.). This fall came about "because the children of Israel sinned against Jehovah their God, which brought them up out of the land of Egypt, and feared other gods, and walked in the statutes of the heathen whom they had driven out, and in the innovations of the kings of Israel; and because the children of Israel

[p. 276]

imputed to Jehovah their God things which are not so, and built them high places in all their cities, from the tower of the watchman to the fenced city; and they set up pillars and Asheras on every high hill and under every green tree, and there they sacrificed in all the high places, as did the people whom Jehovah had driven out before them: and wrought wicked things to provoke Jehovah to anger, and served the abominations which Jehovah had forbidden. Yet Jehovah testified to them by all the prophets and seers, saying, Turn ye from your evil ways, and keep my commandments and my statutes according to all the torah which I commanded your fathers, and which I sent unto you by my servants the prophets; but they would not hear, but hardened their necks like their fathers, that they did not believe in Jehovah their God; and they rejected His statutes and His covenant that He made with their fathers, and His testimonies with which He warned them, and they followed vanity and became vain, and went after the heathen that were round about them, concerning whom Jehovah had charged them that they should not do like them. And they left all the commandments of Jehovah their God, and made them molten images and an Asherah, and worshipped the whole host of heaven, and served Baal; and they caused their children to pass through the fire, and used divination and enchantments, and sold themselves to do evil in the sight of Jehovah, to provoke Him to anger. And Jehovah was very wroth with Israel, and removed them out of His sight; there was none left but the men of Judah only. But they of Judah also kept not the commandment of their God, but walked in the manner of Israel: and Jehovah rejected the whole race of Israel, and humbled them, and delivered them unto the hand of spoilers, until He had cast them out of His sight." No special concluding discourse is given for Judah, but that for Israel applies to Judah as well. This we see both directly from the last words of the passage cited, and from the circumstance that two very characteristic abominations in the foregoing catalogue, the worship of the host of heaven and the sacrifice of children, were introduced, according to the testimony of the prophets, which alone can determine the point, not in the eighth but only in the seventh century, under Manasseh, and accordingly are not chargeable on Israel, but only on Judah.

The water accumulates, so to speak, at these gathering places of the more important historical epochs: but from these reservoirs it finds its

[p. 277]

way in smaller channels on all sides. [*1] The first question asked with regard to each ruler is, what position he took up to the pure religion--whether he did what was right or what was evil in the sight of Jehovah. Even in the case of those who only reigned a week, this question receives an answer. In general it has to be stated that they did evil. All except David and Hezekiah and Josiah, were defective, says Jesus Sirach (xlix. 4),--not quite accurately perhaps, but yet truly in so far as there is always some objection even to the good kings. But the sin here reproved is no longer, at least not principally, the worship of strange gods; it is the perverted worship of Jehovah. A more special standard, and therefore a stricter one, is now employed, and we know the reason of this: the temple having once been built in the place which Jehovah has chosen for Himself, the kindly naturalness hitherto belonging to His worship comes to an end (Deut. xii. 8): and in particular the prohibition of the bamoth comes into force (1 Kings iii. 2). That these continued to exist is the special sin of the period, a sin widespread and persistent. It is aggravated by the fact, that with the bamoth all kinds of unlawful abuses crept into the worship of Jehovah, Maccebas and Asheras, evergreen trees, and prostitutes of both sexes. Israel, continually compared with Judah in the matter, is further charged with a second great sin, the sin of Jeroboam, i.e., the golden calves at Bethel and at Dan. The religious estimate combines with the chronological facts to form that scheme in which every single reign of the kings of Israel and Judah is uniformly framed. Sometimes the frame is well filled in with interesting matter, but in not a few cases historical matter is almost entirely absent. The scheme appears most nakedly in such chapters as 1 Kings xv. xvi., 2 Kings xiii. xiv. xv.

That this redaction of our book is essentially uniform with that of the two historical books which precede it, requires no proof. Only it has here a warmer and more lively tone, and a much closer relation to the facts. In consequence of this we find it much easier to determine the point of view from which it proceeds. The mere fact that the

[p. 278]

narrative extends to the destruction of Jerusalem, nay, to the death of the captive king Jehoiachin, shows that we must place the date of the work not earlier than the Babylonian exile, and, indeed, the second part of the exile. The chronology reckons the exile in the period of 480 years, giving 50 years to it; and this would bring us still lower down; but it is open to us to assume that this is a later modification, which has not further affected the general character of the work. [*1] The writer looks back on the time of the kings as a period past and closed, on which judgment has already been declared. Even at the consecration of the temple the thought of its destruction is not to be restrained; and throughout the book the ruin of the nation and its two kingdoms is present to the writer's mind. This is the light in which the work is to be read; it shows why the catastrophe was unavoidable. It was so because of unfaithfulness to Jehovah, because of the utterly perverted tendency obstinately followed by the people in spite of the Torah of Jehovah and His prophets. The narrative becomes, as it were, a great confession--of sins of the exiled nation looking back on its history. Not only the existing generation, but the whole previous historical development is condemned--a fashion which we meet with first in Jeremiah (ii. 1 seq., iv. 3), who was actually confronted with the question as to the cause of the calamity. [*2] Ezekiel carried out this negative criticism of the

[p. 279]

past to greater lengths, with particular reference to the abominations of the older worship (chapter xvi., xx., xxiii.); and it is also to be found in Isa. xl.-xlvi. (xlii. 24, xliii. 27), though here it is supplemented by a positive and greatly more suggestive view; we find it also in Deut. xxviii.-xxx., and in Lev. xxvi. The whole of the past is regarded as one enormous sin, which is to be expiated in the exile (Jer. xxxii. 30; Ezek. xviii. 2, xxxiii. 10; Isa. xl. 1); the duration of the punishment is even calculated from that of the sin (Leviticus xxvi. 34). The same attitude towards old times is continued after the return (Zech. viii. 13 seq., ix. 7 seq.; Nehem. ix. 7 seq.).

The treatment is naturally from a Judaean point of view. Outside of Jerusalem the worship of Jehovah is heretical, so that the political revolt of the Northern Israelites was at the same time an ecclesiastical schism. Yet they are not excluded in consequence from community with the people of God, as in the Chronicles: the old traditions are not thrown so completely overboard as yet: only after the destruction of Samaria by the Assyrians does Judah continue the history alone. Almost the same reverence is paid to David and his house as to the city and the temple. His house has the promise of eternal continuance, with regard to which the writer likes to make use of the words of Jer. xxxiii. 17. The book closes, doubtless not by chance, with the liberation from prison of the Davidide Jehoiachin; this is the earnest of greater things yet in store. In the words of Abijah to Jeroboam, also, when he says that the humiliation of the house of David and the revolt from it of the ten tribes will not last for ever, we see the Messianic hope appear, which, as we learn from Haggai and Zechariah, largely occupied the minds of the Jews at the time of the exile and after it.

In the case of the books of Judges and Samuel it is not perhaps possible to decide with perfect certainty what was the norm applied by the last reviser in forming his estimates of the past. In the Books of Kings there can be no doubt on this point. The writer deals not only in indefinite references to the will of Jehovah, which Israel ought to

[p. 280]

obey, but resists; he speaks now and again (1 K. ii. 3, 2 K. xiv. 6, xvii. 37) of the written Torah in which the judgments and statutes of Jehovah are contained, a difference which indicates, one must allow, a historical feeling. Now the code which is implicitly regarded as the standard is that the discovery of which under Josiah is circumstantially narrated in 2 Kings xxii. xxiii., viz., Deuteronomy. We are led to this conclusion, it is allowed on all hands, both by the phraseology of the reviser and by the spirit of his judgments. He condemns those sins specially against which Deuteronomy and the reformation of King Josiah were directed. And the one verbal quotation made from the book of the Torah is from Deuteronomy (2 Kings xiv. 6; Deut. xxiv. 16). On the other hand, there are clear signs that the author of the revision was not acquainted with the Priestly Code. Nowhere is any distinction drawn between priests and Levites; the sons of Aaron are never mentioned. The idea of a central sanctuary before Solomon is contradicted by 1 Kings iii. 2. In one section only, a section which has been greatly exposed to corrections and interpolations of all kinds, namely, the description of the temple and its consecration, 1 K. vi.-viii., do we meet with signs of the influence of the Priestly Code, especially in the Massoretic text; in the Septuagint this is not so much the case. The most important example of this has already been investigated, p. 43, 44.

If, accordingly, we are fully justified in calling the revision Deuteronomistic, this means no more than that it came into existence under the influence of Deuteronomy, which pervaded the whole century of the exile. The difference between Deuteronomistic and Deuteronomic is one not of time only but of matter as well: [*1] Deuteronomy itself has not yet come to regard the cultus in this way as the chief end of Israel, and is much closer to the realism of the actual life of the people. A difference in detail which allows of easy demonstration is connected with the mode of dating. The last reviser distinguishes the months not by their old Hebrew names, Zif, Bul, Ethanim, but by numbers, commencing with spring as the beginning of the year. In this he differs not only from his older sources (1 Kings vi. 37, 38, viii. 2), but also from Deuteronomy.

2. This revision is, as we expect to find, alien to the materials it found to work on, so that it does violence to them. They have been

[p. 281]

altered in particular by a very one-sided selection, which is determined by certain religious views. In these views an interest in the prophets mingles with the interest in worship. It is not meant that the selection is due entirely to the last reviser, though it is thoroughly according to his taste; others had probably worked before him in this direction. But for us it is neither possible nor important to distinguish the different steps in the process of sifting through which the traditions of the time of the kings had to pass.

The culminating point of the whole book is the building of the temple; almost all that is told about Solomon has reference to it. This at once indicates to us the point of view; it is one which dominates all Judaistic history: the history is that of the temple rather than of the kingdom. The fortunes of the sanctuary and its treasures, the institution and arrangements of the kings with reference to worship--we are kept au courant about these, but about hardly anything else. The few detailed narratives given (2 Kings xi seq. xvi. xxii. seq.) have the temple for their scene, and turn on the temple. Only in xviii. seq. does the prophetical interest predominate.

As for the kingdom of Israel, the statements about the cultus of that state are very scanty and for the most part rather vague. Here the prophetical narratives come to the front, generally such as are told from the prophetic point of view, or at least tell of the public appearances and acts of the prophets. Here and there we are told of occasions on which the Northern kingdom came in contact with Judah; here the Jewish feeling appears which dictated the selection. What is merely historical, purely secular, is communicated only in the scantiest measure: often there is nothing but the names and succession of the kings. We learn hardly anything about King Omri, the founder of the town of Samaria and re-founder of the kingdom, who seems to have reduced Judah also to the position of a dependent ally, nor do we learn more about Jeroboam II., the last great ruler of Israel; while the conflict with the Assyrians and the fall of Samaria are despatched in a couple of verses which tell us scarcely anything at all. Sometimes a brilliant breaks in on the surrounding night (2 Kings ix. x.), but after it we grope in the dark again. Only so much of the old tradition has been preserved as those of a later age held to be of religious value: it has lost its original centre of gravity, and assumed an attitude which it certainly had not at first. It may have been the case in Judah that the

[p. 282]

temple was of more importance than the kingdom, but there can be no doubt that the history of Israel was not entirely, not even principally, the history of prophecy. The losses we have to deplore must have affected the Israelitish tradition most seriously.

The damage done by the revision by its positive meddling with the materials as found in the sources, is not so irreparable; yet it is considerable enough. The change of colour which was effected may be best seen and characterised in the far-reaching observations which introduce the Israelite series of kings; "Jeroboam said in his heart, Now shall the kingdom return to the house of David; if this people go up to do sacrifice in the house of Jehovah at Jerusalem, then shall the heart of this people turn again to their rightful lord, and they will kill me, and become subject again to Rehoboam king of Judah. Whereupon the king took counsel and made two calves of gold, and said unto them, Cease to go up to Jerusalem; behold thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the land of Egypt. And he set the one in Bethel and the other in Dan. And this thing became a sin; for the people went as one man, even unto Dan. And he made temples of high places, and took priests from the midst of the people which were not of the house of Levi; whomsoever he would he installed as priest of the high places" (1 K. xii. 26-30, xiii. 33). The perversion is scarcely so great as in Chronicles, but the anachronism is sufficiently glaring in the mode of view discernible in these reflections of Jeroboam, who appears to feel that the Ephraimite kingdom was illegitimate in its origin and could only be kept separate from the south by artificial means. The blessing of Jacob and the blessing of Moses show us what the sentiment of Northern Israel actually was. In the former Joseph is called the crowned of his brethren, in the second we read "His first-born bullock, full of majesty (the king), has the horns of a buffalo, with which he thrusts down the peoples; these are the ten thousands of Ephraim and the thousands of Manasseh." Whence came the charm of the name of Ephraim but from its being the royal tribe, and the most distinguished representative of the proud name of Israel? Of Judah we read in the same chapter, "Hear, Jehovah, the voice of Judah, and bring him back to his people." There can be no doubt what the people is to which Judah belongs: we cannot but agree with Graf, that this tribe is here regarded as the alienated member, and its reunion with the greater kingdom spoken of as the desire of Judah itself, and this is not so remarkable

[p. 283]

when we reflect that the part belongs to the whole and not the whole to the part. Only by long experience did Judah learn the blessing of a settled dynasty, and Ephraim the curse of perpetual changes on the throne.

Judah's power of attraction for the inhabitants of the Northern Kingdom is thought to lie in the cultus of the Solomonic temple; and Jeroboam is said to have tried to meet this by creating new sanctuaries, a new form of the worship of Jehovah, and a new order of priesthood. The features in which the Samaritan worship differed from the Jewish pattern are represented as intentional innovations of the first king, in whose sin posterity persisted. But in making Bethel and Dan temples of the kingdom--that he set up high places, is a statement which need not be considered--Jeroboam did nothing more than Solomon had done before him; only he had firmer ground under his feet than Solomon, Bethel and Dan being old sanctuaries, which Jerusalem was not. The golden calves, again, which he set up, differed in their gold but not in their object from the ephods and idols of other kinds which were everywhere to be found in the older "houses of God"; e.g. from the brazen serpent at Jerusalem. [*1] Even Eichhorn remarked with force and point, that though Elijah and Elisha protested against the imported worship of Baal of Tyre, they were the actual champions of the Jehovah of Bethel and Dan, and did not think of protesting against His pictorial representation; even Amos makes no such protest, Hosea is the first who does so. As for the non-Levitical priests whom the king is said to have installed, all that is necessary has been said on this subject above (p. 138 seq.).

A remarkable criticism on this estimate of the Samaritan worship follows immediately afterwards in the avowal that that of Judah was not different at the time, at any rate not better. In the report of Rehoboam's reign we read (1 Kings xiv. 22 seq.): "They of Judah also set up high places and pillars on every high hill, and under every green tree, and whoredom at sacred places was practiced in the land." This state of things continued to exist, with some fluctuations, till near the time of

[p. 284]

the exile. If then the standard according to which Samaria is judged never attained to reality in Judah either, it never existed in ancient Israel at all. We know the standard is the book of the law of Josiah: but we see how the facts were not merely judged, but also framed, in accordance with it.

One more instance is worthy of mention in this connection. King Solomon, we are told, had, besides the daughter of Pharaoh, many foreign wives, from Moab, Ammon, and other peoples, intermarriage with whom Jehovah had forbidden (Deut. xvii 17). And when he was old, they seduced him to the worship of their gods, and he erected on the Mount of Olives at Jerusalem high places for Chemosh of Moab, and for Milcom of Ammon, and for the gods of his other wives. As a punishment for this Jehovah announced to him that his kingdom should be torn from him after his death and given to his servant, and also raised up adversaries to him, in Hadad the Edomite, who freed Edom, and in the Syrian Rezon teen Eliadah, who made Damascus independent. And by the prophet Abijah of Shiloh, he caused the Ephraimite Jeroboam, who then had the supervision of the forced labour of the house of Joseph in the fortification of the city of David, to be nominated as the future king of the ten tribes. So we read in 1 Kings xi. But Edom, and, as it appears, Damascus as well, broke away from the kingdom of David immediately after his death (xi. 21 seq., 25); and the fortification of the citadel, in which Jeroboam was employed when incited to revolt by Abijah, though it falls somewhat later, yet belongs to the first half of Solomon's reign, since it is connected with the rest of his buildings (ix. 15, 24). Now Solomon cannot have been punished by anticipation, in his youth, for an offence which he only committed in his old age, and the moral connected with these events is contradicted by chronology and cannot possibly be ascribed to the original narrator. The Deuteronomistic revision betrays itself, in fact, in every word of xi. 1-13. To the original tradition belongs only the mention of the many wives--without the reprobation attached to it,--and the statement about the building of the altars of Chemosh and Milcom and perhaps Astarte, on the Mount of Olives, where they stood till the time of Josiah (2 Kings xxiii. 13). The connection of the two events, in the relation of cause and effect, belongs to the last editor, as well as the general statement that the king erected altars of the gods of all the nationalities represented by his wives.

[p. 285]

In the Books of Kings, it is true, the tradition is not systematically translated into the mode of view of the Law, as is the case in Chronicles. What reminds us most strongly of Chronicles is the introduction from time to time of a prophet who expresses himself in the spirit of Deuteronomy and in the language of Jeremiah and Ezekiel, and then disappears. [*1] In this way the Law is introduced into the history in a living way; the prophets keep it effective and see it applied, according to the principle stated, 2 Kings xvii. 13, which is founded on Jer. vii. 25; Deut. xviii. 18: "Jehovah testified to them by all the prophets and seers saying, Turn ye from your evil ways and keep my commandments and statutes, according to all the Torah which I commanded your fathers and which I sent unto you by my servants the prophets." The most unblushing example of this kind, a piece which, for historical worthlessness may compare with Judges xix.-xxi. or 1 Sam. vii. seq., or even stands a step lower, is 1 Kings xiii. A man of God from Judah here denounces the altar of Bethel, at which King Jeroboam is in the act of offering sacrifice, in these terms: "O altar, altar, behold a son shall be born to the house of David, Josiah by name; and upon thee shall he offer the priests of the high places, that burn incense upon thee, and men's bones shall be burned upon thee." And to guarantee the truth of this prophecy, to be fulfilled three hundred years afterwards, he gives the sign that the altar shall burst asunder, and the ashes of the sacrifice upon it be poured out--which at once takes place. This legend, however, does not really belong to the Deuteronomist, but is a still later addition, as is easily to be seen from the fact that the sentence xii. 31 is only completed at xiii. 34. It deserves remark that in the two verses which introduce the thirteenth chapter, xii. 32 seq., the feast of tabernacles is fixed, in accordance with the Priestly Code, as the 15th of the 7th month.

[p. 286]

3. In this case also we are able to discern considerable shades and gradations in the sources the reviser had at command. In the Books of Kings for the first time we meet with a series of short notices which arrest attention, in the surroundings they are in, by their brevity and directness of statement and the terseness of their form, and have the semblance of contemporary records. In spite of their looseness of arrangement these form the real basis of our connected knowledge of the period; and the religious chronological framework is regularly filled in with them (e.g. 1 Kings xiv.-xvi.); their loose connection and neutral tone made it specially easy for later editors to interweave with them additions of their own, as has actually been done to no small extent. [*1] These valuable notes commence even with Solomon, though here they are largely mixed with anecdotic chaff. They are afterwards found principally, almost exclusively, in the series of Judah. Several precise dates point to something of the nature of annals, [*2] and with these the characteristic then might be thought to be connected, which frequently introduces the short sentences, and as it now stands is generally meaningless. In what circles these records were made, we can scarcely even surmise. Could we be certain that the reference to the royal temple of Judah, which is a prevailing feature of them, is due not to selection at a later time but to the interest of the first hands, we should be led to think of the priesthood at Jerusalem. The loyalist, perfectly official tone would agree very well with this theory, for the sons of Zadok were, down to Josiah's time, nothing else than the obedient servants of the successors of David, and regarded the unconditional authority claimed by these kings over their sanctuary as a matter of course (2 K. xvi. 10 seq., xii. 18). These notices, however, as we have them, are not drawn from the documents

[p. 287]

themselves, but from a secondary compilation, perhaps from the two sets of chronicles cited at the end of each reign of the kings of Israel and those of Judah, from which at all events the succession of the rulers appears to the drawn. These chronicles are not to be identified, it is clear, with the original annals. The book of the annals must be distinguished from the Dibre-hajamim themselves. Whether the chronicle of Israel--hardly anything out of which is communicated to us--was composed much earlier than the chronicle of Judah (which seems to close with Jehoiachim), and whether it and the chronicle of Solomon (1 K. xi. 41) are a quite independent work, I am inclined to consider doubtful.

The excerpts from the annals are interrupted by more extensive episodes which are interwoven with them, and are also embraced in the Deuteronomistic scheme. Of these the Jewish ones are the minority, the greater part are Samaritan, but they all belong to a very limited period of time. I select the miraculous history of Elijah as an example of these, to show the sentiment and the change of sentiment in this instance also.

The prophet Elijah, from Tishbeh in Gilead, appears before King Ahab of Samaria, and says, "By the life of Jehovah the God of Israel, whom I serve, there shall not be dew nor rain these years but according to my word." The story begins abruptly; we require to know that Ahab, stirred up by Jezebel, has been propagating in Israel the worship of the Tyrian Baal, and has killed the prophets of Jehovah by hundreds: this is the reason of the punishment which comes on him and his land (xviii. 13, 22). Elijah vanishes as suddenly as he appeared. We find him again at the brook Cherith, which flows into the Jordan; then in the land of Baal with a widow at Zarepta; while following his fortunes we are made to feel in a simple and beautiful way the severity of the famine. Ahab in the meantime had sent out messengers to take him, and had required of every state to which the vain search had extended, an oath that he was not to be found there. Now, however, necessity obliged him to think of other things; he had to go out himself with his minister Obadiah to seek fodder for the still remaining war-horses (Amos vii. 1). In this humiliating situation he all at once met the banished man. He did not believe his eyes. "Is it thou, O troubler of Israel?" "I have not troubled Israel, but thou and thy father's house!" After this greeting Elijah challenged the king to institute a

[p. 288]

contest between the 450 prophets of Baal, and him, the only prophet of Jehovah left remaining. A trial by sacrifice took place on Mount Carmel before the whole people. Each party was to prepare a bullock and lay it on the altar without setting fire to the wood; and the divinity who should answer by fire was the true God. The prophets of Baal came first and sought after their own manner to influence their deity. They shouted and leapt wildly, wounded themselves with swords and lances till they were covered with blood, and kept up their raving ecstasy from morning till mid-day, and from mid-day till evening. During this time Elijah looked at them and mocked them, saying, "Cry louder, for he is a god; either he is talking, or he is somehow engaged, or he is asleep and must be awaked." At last his turn came; he repaired the altar of Jehovah, which was broken down, spread the pieces of the sacrifice upon it, and, to make the miracle still more miraculous, caused them to be flooded two or three times with water. Then he prayed to Jehovah, and fire fell from heaven, and consumed the sacrifice. The people, up to this point divided in their mind, now took the side of the zealot for Jehovah, laid hold of the prophets of Baal, and slaughtered them down below at the brook. A great storm of rain at once came to refresh the land.

This triumph of Elijah was only a prelude. When Jezebel heard what had happened she swore vengeance against him, and he fled for his life to Beersheba in Judah, the sanctuary of Isaac. Wearied to death he lay down under a juniper-bush in the wilderness, and with the prayer, It is enough: now, O Jehovah, take away my life, he fell asleep. Then he was strengthened with miraculous food by a heavenly messenger, and bidden to go to Horeb, the mount of God. He arrived there after a long journey, and withdrew into a cave; a rushing wind sweeps past; the wind and the earthquake and the lightning are the forerunners of Jehovah; and after them He comes Himself in the low whispering that follows the storm. His head covered, Elijah steps out of the cave and hears a voice ask what ails him. Having poured out his heart, he receives the divine consolation that his cause is by no means lost; that the direst vengeance, the instruments of which he is himself to summon to their task, is to go forth on all the worshippers of Baal, and that those 7000 who have not bowed their knee to Baal shall gain the day--"Thou shalt anoint Hazael to be King over Damascus, and Jehu ben Nimshi shalt thou anoint to be

[p. 289]

king over Israel, and Elisha ben Shaphat to be prophet in thy room; and him that escapeth the sword of Hazael shall Jehu slay, and him that escapeth the sword of Jehu shall Elisha slay." The account of the execution of these commands by Elijah is at present wanting; we shall soon see why it was omitted. The conclusion of chapter xix. only tells us that he called Elisha from the plough to follow him. Of the account of the judgment which overtook the worshippers of Baal, this group of narratives contains only the beginning, in chapter xxi. Ahab wanted to have a vineyard which was situated beside his palace in Jezreel, his favourite residence: but Naboth, the owner, was unwilling to enter on a sale or an exchange. The king was angry, yet thought he could do no more in the matter; but Jezebel of Tyre had other notions of might and right and said to him, "Dost thou now govern the kingdom of Israel? be of good courage; I will get thee the vineyard." She wrote a letter to the authorities of the town, and got Naboth put out of the way by means of corrupt judges. As Ahab was just going to take possession of the vineyard which had fallen into his hands, his enemy came upon him. The prophet Elijah, always on the spot at the right moment, hurled the word at him, "Hast thou killed and also taken possession? Behold, in the place where dogs licked the blood of Naboth, shall dogs lick thy blood also." Here this story breaks off. What follows is not the true continuation.

The thread of the narrative xvii.-xix. xxi. is also broken off here, without reaching its proper conclusion. The victory of Jehovah over Baal, of the prophet over the king, is wanting; the story of Naboth is, as we said, only the introduction to it. We are sufficiently informed about the facts, but in form the narratives do not answer to the announcement in chapter xix. and xxi.; they are drawn from other sources. According to xix. 1 7 the Syrian wars ought to result in vengeance on the worshippers of Baal, and specially on the idolatrous royal house; but in the narrative of the wars (1 Kings xx. xxii. 2 Kings vii. ix.) this point of view does not prevail. On the contrary, Ahab and Joram there maintain themselves in a manly and honourable way against the superior power of Damascus it is only after the extirpation of Baal worship under Jehu that affairs took an unfortunate turn, and Hazael, who brought about this change, was not anointed by Elijah

[p. 290]

but by Elisha (2 K. viii. 7 seq.) [*1] The massacre at Jezreel, too, which is predicted in the threat of 1 K. xxi. 19, would need to be told otherwise than in 2 K. ix. x., to form a proper literary sequel to the story of Naboth. According to 1 K. xxi. 19 the blood of Ahab is to be shed at Jezreel; according to 2 K. ix. 25 his son's blood was shed there, to avenge Naboth. It is true, the explanation is appended in xxi. 27-29, that, as the king took to heart the threats of Elijah, Jehovah made a supplementary communication to the prophet that the threat against Ahab's house would only be fulfilled in the days of his son; but who does not see in this an attempt to harmonise conflicting narratives? [*2] A whole series of subordinate discrepancies might be mentioned, which prove that 2 K. ix. x. does not look back to the story of the murder of Naboth as told in 1 K. xxi. According to ix. 25, 26, the dispute was not about the vineyard, but about the field of Naboth, which lay some distance from the town. His family was put to death along with him, and on the following day, when Ahab rode out in company with Jehu and Ben Deker to take possession of the field, the word of the prophet (not framed so specially against him personally) met him: "Surely I have seen yesterday the blood of Naboth and of his sons, and I will requite it in this plat."

With the help of these other accounts, among which there is a considerable group of uniform character (1 K. xx. xxii. 2 K. iii. vi. 24-xii. 20. ix. 1-x. 27) favourably distinguished from the rest, we are placed in a position to criticise the history of Elijah, and to reach a result which is very instructive for the history of the tradition, namely that the influence of the mighty prophet on his age has after all been appraised much too highly. His reputation could not be what it is but for the wide diffusion of Baal worship in Israel: and this is not a little exaggerated.

[p. 291]

[paragraph continues] Anything like a suppression of the national religion at the time of Elijah is quite out of the question, and there is no truth in the statement that the prophets of Jehovah were entirely extirpated at the time and Elijah alone left surviving. The prophetic guilds at Bethel, Jericho, and Gilgal continued without any interruption. In the Syrian wars prophets of Jehovah stand by the side of Ahab; before his last campaign there are four hundred of them collected in his capital, one of them at least long known to the king as a prophet of evil, but left alive before and left alive now, though he persisted in his disagreeable practices. Of the sons whom Jezebel bore him, Ahab called one Ahaziah, i.e. Jehovah holds, and another Jehoram, i.e. Jehovah is exalted: he adhered to Jehovah as the god of Israel, though to please his wife he founded at Samaria a temple and a cultus of the Syrian goddess. This being so, Elijah's contest with Baal cannot have possessed the importance attributed to it from the point of view of a later time. In the group of popular narratives above referred to, there is no trace of a religious commotion that tore Israel asunder: the whole strength of the people is absorbed in the Syrian wars. The kings are the prominent figures, and do well and according to their office in battle: Elijah stands in the background. From several indications, though from no direct statements, we learn of the high esteem which Ahab enjoyed from friend and foe alike (xx. 31, xxii. 32-34 seq.). Joram also, and even Jezebel, are drawn not without sympathy (2 K. vi. 30, ix. 31). We can scarcely say the same of Jehu, the murderer, instigated by the prophets, of the house of Ahab (2 K. ix. 10).

It is the fact, certainly, that the prophets' hatred of Baal succeeded at last in overturning the dynasty of Omri. But in what manner was this done? At a time when King Joram was prevented by a wound he had received from being with his army in the field, a messenger of Elisha went to the camp, called the captain apart from a banquet at which he found him, to a secret interview, and anointed him king. When Jehu returned to his comrades at their wine, they asked him what that mad fellow had wanted, and, his evasive answers failing to satisfy them, he told them the truth. They at once raised him on an improvised throne, and caused the trumpets to proclaim him king: they were quite ready for such an exploit, not that they cared in the least for "that mad fellow." Jehu justified their confidence by his astounding mastery in treachery and bloodshed, but he placed his reliance entirely on

[p. 292]

the resources of his own talent for murder. He was not borne along by any general movement against the dynasty; the people, which he despised (x. 9), stood motionless and horrified at the sight of the crimes which came so quickly one after another; even a hundred years afterwards the horror at the massacre of Jezreel still lived (Hosea i. 4). The crown once gained, the reckless player showed his gratitude to the fanatics, and sent the priests and worshippers of Baal after the priests of Jehovah whom he had slaughtered along with all belonging to the royal house (x. 11). The manner in which he led them into the snare (x. 18 seq.) shows that no one had thought before this of regarding him as the champion of Jehovah; and even at this time his zeal was manifestly only ostensible: he was not fighting for an idea (x. 15. seq.). Thus we see that Baal did not bring about the fall of the house of Ahab, but common treason; the zealots employed for their purposes a most unholy instrument, which employed them in turn as a holy instrument for its purposes; they did not succeed in rousing the people to a storm against Baal, far from it. The execution of Naboth seems to have excited greater indignation: it was a crime against morals, not against religion. Even in the history of Elijah the admission is made that this struggle against Baal, in spite of his sacrificial victory on Carmel, was in the end without result, and that only the judicial murder of Naboth brought about a change in the popular sentiment. But according to 2 K. ix. 25, this murder proved a momentous event, not because it led, as we should expect, to a popular agitation, but from the fortuitous circumstance that Jehu was a witness of the never-to-be-forgotten scene between Ahab and Elijah, and seemed therefore to the prophets to be a fit person to carry out his threatenings.

It is certainly the case that the grand figure of Elijah could not have been drawn as we have it except from the impression produced by a real character. [*1] But it is too much torn away from the historical position it belongs to, and is thereby magnified to colossal proportions.

[p. 293]

[paragraph continues] It may be said of this class of narratives generally, that the prophets are brought too much into the foreground in them, as if they had been even in their lifetime the principal force of Israelite history, and as if the influence which moved them had ruled and pervaded their age as well. That was not the case; in the eyes of their contemporaries they were completely overshadowed by the kings; only to later generations did they become the principal personages. They were important ideally, and influenced the future rather than the present; but this was not enough, a real tangible importance is attributed to them. In the time of Ahab and Jehu the Nebiim were a widespread body, and organised in orders of their own, but were not highly respected; the average of them were miserable fellows, who ate out of the king's hand and were treated with disdain by members of the leading classes. Amos of Tekoa, who, it is true, belonged to a younger generation, felt it an insult to be counted one of them. Elijah and Elisha rose certainly above the level of their order; but the first, whose hands remained pure, while he no doubt produced a great impression at the time by his fearless words, effected nothing against the king, and quite failed to draw the people over to his side: while Elisha, who did effect something, made use of means which could not bear the light, and which attest rather the weakness than the strength of prophecy in Israel.

4. Let us conclude by summing up the results to which we have been led by our eclectic pilgrimage through the historical books. What in the common view appears to be the specific character of Israelite history, and has chiefly led to its being called sacred history, rests for the most part on a later re-painting of the original picture. The discolouring influences begin early. I do not reckon among these the entrance of mythical elements, such as are not wanting even in the first beginnings to which we can trace the course of the tradition, nor the inevitable local colour, which is quite a different thing from tendency. I think only of that uniform stamp impressed on the tradition by men who regarded history exclusively from the point of view of their own principles. Here we observe first a religious influence, which in the Books of Samuel and Kings turns out to be the prophetical one. The view appears to me erroneous that it is to the prophets that the Hebrew people owe their history as a whole. The song, Judges v., though perhaps the oldest historical monument in the Old Testament, cannot be cited in support of that view, for even if it were actually composed

[p. 294]

by Deborah, the seer stands in no connection with the prophets. Least of all can the colleges of the B'ne Nebiim at Gilgal and other places be regarded as nurseries of historic tradition: the products which are to be traced to these circles betray a somewhat narrow field of vision (2 Kings ii., iv. 1-6, 23). The prophets did not form the tradition at first, but came after, shedding upon it their peculiar light. Their interest in history was not so great that they felt it necessary to write it down; they only infused their own spirit into it subsequently.

But the systematic recoining of the tradition was only effected when a firmer stamp had become available than the free ideas of the prophets, the will of God having been formulated in writing. When this point was reached, no one could fail to see the discrepancy between the ideal commencement, which was now sought to be restored as it stood in the book, and the succeeding development. The old books of the people, which spoke in the most innocent way of the most objectionable practices and institutions, had to be thoroughly remodelled according to the Mosaic form, in order to make them valuable, digestible, and edifying, for the new generation. A continuous revision of them was made, not only in the Chronicles, at the beginning of the Greek domination, but, as we have seen in this chapter, even in the Babylonian exile. The style of the latter revision differed from that of the former. In Chronicles the past is remodelled on the basis of the law: transgressions take place now and then, but as exceptions from the rule. In the Books of Judges, Samuel, and Kings, the fact of the radical difference of the old practice from the law is not disputed. In these works also the past is in some cases remodelled on the basis of the ideal, but as a rule it is simply condemned. That is one difference; another has to be added which is of far greater importance. In the Chronicles the pattern according to which the history of ancient Israel is represented is the Pentateuch, i.e. the Priestly Code. In the source of Chronicles, in the older historical books, the revision does not proceed upon the basis of the Priestly Code, which indeed is completely unknown to them, but on the basis of Deuteronomy. Thus in the question of the order of sequence of the two great bodies of laws, the history of the tradition leads us to the same conclusion as the history of the cultus.

Footnotes

^233:1 The redaction, as is well knows, extends only from ii. 6 xvi. 31, thus excluding both i. 1-ii. 5, and xvii. 1-xxi. 24. But it is easy to perceive how excellently the first portion fits into its place as a general introduction to the period between Moses and the monarchy, and how much more informing and instructive it is in this respect than the section which follows. There exists besides a formal connection between i. 16 and iv. 11. As regards chaps. xvii., xviii., this story relating to the migration of Dan northwards is plainly connected with that immediately preceding where the tribe still finds itself "in the camp of Dan," but is hard pressed and obtains no relief even with the aid of Samson. In the case of chaps. xix.-xxi., indeed, it admits of doubt whether they were excluded from the redaction, or whether they were not extant as yet; but it is worth noticing that here also chaps. xvii., xviii. are assumed as having gone before. The Levite of Bethlehem-Judah testifies to this, and especially the reminiscence contained in xix. 1, which, as we shall see, has nothing to rest on in chaps. xix.-xxi. Compare further xx. 19 with i. 1 seq.

^238:1 'lh, 'lwn, in Aramaic simply tree, in Hebrew the evergreen, and in general the holy tree (Isaiah i. 29 seq.) mostly without distinguishing the species. Not only are oaks and terebinths included, but also palms. For the 'lwn dbwrh at Bethel is elsewhere called thmr; Elim derives its names from the 70 palms, and the same may be the case with Elath on the Red sea.

^239:1 "The words of Gideon are only intelligible on the presupposition that the rule of Jehovah had a visible representative prophet or priest. But this was not the case in the period of the judges, as Gideon's own history shows us." Vatke, p. 263. We see besides from ix. 1 seq. that Gideon really was the ruler of Ephraim and Manasseh.

^241:1 Ver. 12 is a summons to begin the battle, and Deborah cannot here be singing the song of triumph which celebrates its happy issue. For a similar reason the translation given above, "take captive thy captors," is the more natural and correct.

^254:1 In Balaam's view of the happy future of Israel (Numbers xxiii. seq.), the monarchy is spoken of as one of Israel's chief blessings. Generally (xxiii. 21): "Jehovah his God is with him, and the shout of a king is among them." With reference to Saul (xxiv. 7): "And his king triumphs over Agag, and his kingdom shall be exalted." To David (xxiv. 17): "I see him, though not now; I behold him, though not nigh: there rises (zrch) a star out of Jacob and a rod out of Israel, and smites in pieces the temples of Moab and the skull of all the sons of Seth: and Edom also becomes a conquest." According to Deuteronomy xxxiii. 4, 5, the monarchy and the Torah are the two great gifts of God's grace to Israel.

^258:1 It is also clear that the writer of x. 8, xiii. 7-15 cannot possibly have found Samuel in Gilgal in chap. xi. before making him go there in chap. xiii. We have already seen xi. 12-14 to be a later addition; the name of Samuel must be interpolated in xi. 7, too. In fact in xi. 15 the people, i.e., the army, acts quite of itself even in our present text. Hence it follows also, that x. 8, xiii. 7-15 are older than vii. viii. x. 17 seq. xii.

^266:1 This expression occurs in 1 Sam. xvii., and shows this legend to be dependent on 2 Sam. xxi. xxiii., a collection of anecdotes about heroes from the Philistine wars of David in the genuine short popular style. Cf., on 1 Chron. xii., supra, p. 173.

^266:2 Only in one direction does he set limits to his self-denial: he makes the future king solemnly promise to spare his family. Here manifests itself an interest belonging to the time of the narrator. The oriental custom according to which the new ruler extirpates the preceding dynasty, was not systematically carried out by David, and a special exception was made in favour of a son left by Jonathan. "All my father's house," says Meribaal (2 Sam. xix. 28), "were dead men before my lord the king yet thou didst set me at thy table: what right have I therefore yet to complain unto the king (even about injustice)?" Now this son of Jonathan was the ancestor of a Jerusalem family which flourished till after the exile. Older traits in 1 Sam. xx. are the importance attached to the new moon, the family sacrifice at Bethlehem, perhaps [p. 267] the stone 'bn 'tzl which appears to have implied something inconsistent with later orthodoxy, the name being in two passages so singularly corrupted.

^268:1 As the words are used in 1 Samuel ix., Isaiah and Jeremiah would rather be called Roeh; and this is the justification of the gloss, ix. 9.

^271:1 The efforts of later writers to glorify David are at their worst in their account of his last testament (1 Kings ii. 1-12). Even the language betrays this piece as a post-Deuteronomic insertion (v. 2-4); the contents are borrowed from the succeeding narrative. But in the narrative Solomon's conduct towards Adonijah, Abiathar, Joab, and Shimei is not dictated by any means by the testament, but by other considerations; and it is the declared object of the narrator to show how Solomon's throne was established by the removal of the elements of danger. Nor do the acute calculations of the weak old king agree very well with the general impression given of him at this time by 1 Kings i. ii.

^273:1 Numbers of the kings of Judah from Solomon: 37+ 17+ 3 + 41 + 25 + 8 + 1 + 6 + 40 + 29 + 52 + 16 + 29 + 55 + 2 + 31 + 11 + 11=430 years. Jehoahaz and Jechoiachin are not counted; if they are included and a year allowed for them, we must say 36 for Solomon. Numbers of the kings of Israel from 1 Jeroboam: 22 + 2 + 24 +2+ 12 + 22 + 2+ 12 + 28 + 17 + 16 + 41 + 1 + 10 + 2 + 20 + 9. The artificial relations of the numbers, as explained above, were communicated to me by Ernst Krey. On the point that the synchronisms do not belong to the original arrangement, see Jahrb. fur Deutsche Theol., 1875, p. 607 seq. The correct view of Ezekiel iv. was first published by Bernhard Duhm (Theol. dir Proph., p. 253). The number 390, given in the Massoretic text in verse 5 for the duration of the captivity of the northern Israelites, is impossible. For Ezekiel cannot mean that they have been 350 years in exile already, and on the other hand he cannot reckon the remaining period of their punishment at more than 40 years, because 40 years is his calculation of the period of exile of Judah, and the restitution of Israel and that of Judah are in his view to [p. 274] take place at the same time; and indeed that of Egypt as well, obviously because brought about by the same cause (xxix. 1 1-16), the fall of the Chaldeans, which may be expected to take place in 40 years. The number 390 has got into verse 5 by mistake from verse 9, where it is used of a quite different subject, not the years of the exile, but the days of the last siege of Jerusalem. The gloss verse 13 rests on a similar confusion. The Septuagint correctly gives for the Israelite exile the number of 150 years, or 190, according as the last 40 years in which their punishment continued, along with that of Judah, were included or omitted. It may be remarked that 390 = 240 + 150. Compare further Robertson Smith, in the Journal of Philology, vol. x., p. 209-213.

^277:1 Such additions as mtzwth yhwh, 1 Kings xviii. 18 [LXX has correctly yhwh, without mtzwth] `zbw brythk [LXX correctly `zbw without brythk] and more extensive ones, as 1 Kings xviii. 31, 32a; 2 Sam. vii. 2b ('shr nqr' wnw) I do not reckon because they proceed from various periods, and are mostly younger than the Deuteronomic revision, and belong rather to textual than to literary criticism. It is certainly in itself very important to detect and remove these re-touchings. The whole old tradition is covered with them.

^278:1 Krey surmises that the last date mentioned, the liberation from prison of, Jehoiachin in the 37th year after his accession to the throne, was originally intended to form the lower limit of the chronology, especially as the periods of 40 years under which, as we have seen, the Jewish figures naturally fall, come exactly to this date. But if this be the case, we cannot regard the 4th or 5th year of Solomon as the era started from, for then there is no room for the 36 or 37 remaining years of Solomon's reign. But such a starting-point is entirely unnatural; Solomon's 40 years cannot be torn up in this way: if we are to make a division at all in that period, it must be at the disruption of the monarchy, the natural point of departure for the series of kings of Israel and of Judah. It deserves remark, that the 37 years of Jehoiachin, at the close of the older mode of calculation, which perhaps only tried to bring out generations of 40 years, but also perhaps a period of 500 years from David (40 + 40 + 20 + 41 + 40 + 40 + 81 + 38 + 80 + 79 1/4), answer to the 37 years of Solomon at the beginning of the method now carried through. That a process of alteration and improvement of the chronology was busily carried on in later times, we see from the added synchronisms of the kings of Israel and Judah, from the uncertain statements in the Book of Judges, some of them parallel with each other (e.g., the interregna and minor judges, and the threefold counting of the time of the Philistines) and even from the variants of the LXX.

^278:2 The fall of Samaria suggested similar reflections to the earlier prophets with reference to the northern kingdom, but their views are, as a rule (Amos v., Isa. ix.), [p. 279] not nearly so radical nor so far-fetched. Hosea does certainly trace the guilt of the present up to the commencement, but he exemplifies the principle (like Micah, chapter vi.) chiefly from the early history of Jacob and Moses: as for the really historical period he belongs to it too much himself to survey it from so high a point of view. In this also he is a precursor of later writers, that he regards the human monarchy as one of the great evils of Israel: he certainly had very great occasion for this in the circumstances of the time he lived in.

^280:1 Post-deuteronomic, but still from the time of the kings, are 1 Sam. ii. 27 seq.; 2 Sam. vii, 1 seq.; 2 Kings xviii. 13, 17 seq., xix. 1 seq.; chaps. xi. xii. xxi. xxiii.

^283:1 "Although Jeroboam had lived in Egypt, it would he wrong to say that he brought animal worship with him from that country, as wrong as to regard Aaron's golden calf as a copy of Apis. The peculiarity of the animal-worship of Egypt, and of its bull-worship in particular, was that sanctity was attributed to living animals." Vatke, p. 398. Egyptian gods cannot help against Egypt, Exod. xxxii. 4; 1 Kings xii. 28.

^285:1 Cf. Kuenen, Profeten onder Israel (1875), ii. p. 143; English translation (1877), p 398. One of these Deuteronomistic prophecies is cited above, p. 275. They are in part anonymous, e.g., 2 Kings x. 30, xxi. 10 seq., in part connected with old names, e.g., 1 Kings xvi. 1 seq. In many instances no doubt the reviser found flints in his sources and worked them out in his own style; thus, 1 Kings xiv. 7 seq., xxi 21 seq. 2 Kings ix. 7 seq. In these passages the Deuteronomistic ideas and the phraseology of Jeremiah and Ezekiel are distinctly present (hnny mby' r`h), but detached expressions of an original type also occur,--which, it is true, are then constantly repeated, e.g., `tzwr w`zwb. Names, too, like Jehu ben Hanani, are certainly not fictitious: we are not so far advanced as in Chronicles. Cf. 1 Sam. ii. 27 seq.; 2 Sam. vii. 1 seq.

^286:1 The passage discussed above, 1 Kings xi. 1 seq., gives a good example of this; we at once pick out the terse 'z ybnh wnw from the barren diffuseness surrounding it.

^286:2 5th of Rehoboam (1 K.s xiv. 25); 23rd of Jehoash (2 K. xii, 6); 14th of Hezekiah (2 K. xviii. 13); 18th of Josiah (2 K. xxii. 3); 4th and 5th of Solomon (1 K. vi. 37, 38). These dates occur, it is true, partly in circumstantial Jewish narratives, but these are intimately related to the brief notices spoken of above, and appear to be based on them. It may be surmised that such definite numbers, existing at one time in much greater abundance, afforded the data for an approximate calculation of the figures on which the systematic chronology is built up. These single dates at any rate are not themselves parts of the system. The same is true of the statements of the age of the Jewish kings when they ascended the throne. These also perhaps go back to the "Annals." The 'z is found 1 K. iii. 16, viii. 1, 12, ix. 11, xi. 7, xvi. 21, xxii. 50; 2 K. viii. 22, xii. 18, xiv. 8, xv. 16, xvi. 5.

^290:1 The same applies to Jehu (2 K. ix. 1 seq.). This is the reason of the above remarked omission after 1 K. xix. 21: cf. Thenius's commentary.

^290:2 In spite of xxi. 27-29, an attempt is made at xxii. 38 to show that the threat was fulfilled in Ahab himself. We are told that Ahab was shot in his chariot and that his servants brought his body from Ramoth-Gilead to bury it there. Then we read xxii. 38 "and they washed the chariot in the pool of Samaria, and the dogs licked up his blood, and the harlots bathed in it, according to the word of Jehovah." Thus it is explained how the dogs were able to lick his blood in Samaria, though it had had plenty of time to dry up after the battle! The fact was unfortunately over-looked that according to xxi. 19 the dogs were to lick the blood of Ahab not at Samaria but at Jezreel, the place of Naboth. The verse xxii. 38 is an interpolation which does credit to Jewish acuteness.

^292:1 The distance of the narrator is not so very great in point of time from the events he deals with. He is a North-Israelite, as the 'shr lyhwdh of xix. 3 shows: this may also be gathered from xix. 8 compared with Deut. i. 2. A man of Judah could not easily make so considerable a mistake about the distance, though we have to remember that with this narrator the situation of Horeb can scarcely have been that which we have long been accustomed to assume. Another sign of antiquity is the way in which Elijah is represented as combating Baal in Israel, and in the land of Sidon associating with the worshippers of Baal on the most friendly terms (Luke iv. 25 seq.).

      
Prolegomena to the History of Ancient Israel, by Julius Wellhausen, [1885], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 295]

  

CHAPTER VIII.

  

THE NARRATIVE OF THE HEXATEUCH.

IN the historical books the tradition is developed by means of supplement and revision; double narratives occur here and there, but not great parallel pieces of connected matter side by side. In the Hexateuch additions and supplements have certainly taken place on the most extensive scale, but the significant feature is here that continuous narratives which can and must be understood each by itself are woven together in a double or threefold cord. Critics have shown a disposition, if not in principle yet in fact, to take the independence of these so-called sources of the Hexateuch as if it implied that in point of matter also each is a distinct and independent source. But this is, even a priori, very improbable. Even in the case of the prophets who received their word from the Lord the later writer knows and founds upon the earlier one. How much more must this be the case with narrators whose express business is with the tradition? Criticism has not done its work when it has completed the mechanical distribution; it must aim further at bringing the different writings when thus arranged into relation with each other, must seek to render them intelligible as phases of a living process, and thus to make it possible to trace a graduated development of the tradition.

The striking agreement of the different works, not only in matter, but in their arrangement of the narratives, makes the office of criticism as now described not less but more necessary. There is no primitive legend, it is well known, so well knit as the biblical one, and thus it is no wonder that it became the frame for many others and infused into them some of its own colour. This connection is common in its main features to all the sources alike. The Priestly Code runs, as to its historical thread, quite parallel to the Jehovist history. This alone made it possible to interfuse the two writings as we now have them in the Pentateuch.

[p. 296]

[paragraph continues] That this was not done altogether without violence is less to be wondered at than that the violence which was done is so small, and particularly that the structure of each writing is left almost unimpaired. This can only be explained from the intimate agreement of the two works in point of plan. When the subject treated is not history but legends about pre-historic times, the arrangement of the materials does not come with the materials themselves, but must arise out of the plan of a narrator: even the architecture of the generations, which forms the scaffolding of Genesis, is not inseparably bound up with the matters to be disposed of in it. From the mouth of the people there comes nothing but the detached narratives, which may or may not happen to have some bearing on each other: to weave them together in a connected whole is the work of the poetical or literary artist. Thus the agreement of the sources in the plan of the narrative is not a matter of course, but a matter requiring explanation, and only to be explained on the ground of the literary dependence of one source on the other. The question how this relation of dependence is to be defined is thus a much more pressing one than is commonly assumed. [*1]

This, however, is not the place to attempt a history of the development of the Israelite legend. We are only to lay the foundation for such a work, by comparing the narrative of the Priestly Code with the Jehovistic one. In doing so we shall see that Buttmann (Mythologus, i. p. 122 seq.) is right in asserting against de Wette (Beitrage, ii.), that, the Jehovistic form of the legend is the earlier of the two. [*2]

[p. 297]

  

I.

1. The Bible begins with the account of the Priestly Code of the creation of the world. In the beginning is chaos; darkness, water, brooding spirit, which engenders life, and fertilises the dead mass. The primal stuff contains in itself all beings, as yet undistinguished: from it proceeds step by step the ordered world; by a process of unmixing, first of all by separating out the great elements. The chaotic primal gloom yields to the contrast of light and darkness; the primal water is separated by the vault of heaven into the heavenly water, out of which there grows the world above the firmament which is withdrawn from our gaze, and the water of the earth: the latter, a slimy mixture, is divided into land and sea, whereupon the land at once puts on its green attire. The elements thus brought into existence, light, heaven, water, land, are then enlivened, pretty much in the order in which they were created, with individual beings; to the light correspond the lamps of the stars, fishes to the water, to the heaven the birds of heaven, and the other creatures to the land. The last act of creation is markedly emphasised. "And God said: Let us make man after our likeness; and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the living creatures of the earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth. So God created man after His own image, in the image of God created He him, and He created them male and female. And God blessed them, and said: Be fruitful and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it: and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that moveth upon the face of the earth. And God said, Behold, I have given unto you every herb bearing seed, which is upon the face of all the earth, and every tree with seed-fruits: to you it shall be for food: and to every beast of the earth and to every fowl of the air, and to everything that creepeth upon the earth, wherein there is life, I have given the green herb for meat. Thus the heavens and the earth were made and all the host of them, and on the seventh day God ended His work, and blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it." (Gen. i. 1-ii. 4a).

It is commonly said that the aim of this narrative is a purely religious one. The Israelite certainly does not deny himself in it: the religious spirit with which it is penetrated even comes at some points into conflict

[p. 298]

with the nature of its materials. The notion of chaos is that of uncreated matter; here we find the remarkable idea that it is created in the beginning by God. Brooded over by the Spirit, it is further of a nature for development to take place out of it, and the trait that the creation is represented throughout as a separation of elements which in chaos were mixed together, betrays even now the original design: but in the Hebrew narrative the immanent Spirit has yielded to the transcendent God, and the principle of evolution is put aside in favour of the fiat of creation. Yet for all this the aim of the narrator is not mainly a religious one. Had he only meant to say that God made the world out of nothing, and made it good, he could have said so in simpler words, and at the same time more distinctly. There is no doubt that he means to describe the actual course of the genesis of the world, and to be true to nature in doing so; he means to give a cosmogonic theory. Whoever denies this confounds two different things--the value of history for us, and the aim of the writer. While our religious views are or seem to be in conformity with his, we have other ideas about the beginning of the world, because we have other ideas about the world itself, and see in the heavens no vault, in the stars no lamps, nor in the earth the foundation of the universe. But this must not prevent us from recognising what the theoretical aim of the writer of Gen. i. really was. He seeks to deduce things as they are from each other: he asks how they are likely to have issued at first from the primal matter, and the world he has before his eyes in doing this is not a mythical world but the present and ordinary one.

The pale colour which generally marks the productions of the earliest reflection about nature, when they are not mythical theories, is characteristic of Gen. i. also. We are indeed accustomed to regard this first leaf of the Bible as surrounded with all the charm that can be derived from the combination of high antiquity and childlike form. It would be vain to deny the exalted ease and the uniform greatness that give the narrative its character. The beginning especially is incomparable: "The earth was without form and void, and darkness lay upon the deep, and the Spirit of God moved upon the water. Then God said: Let there be light, and there was light." But chaos being given, all the rest is spun out of it: all that follows is reflection, systematic construction; we can easily follow the calculation from point to point. The considerations are very simple which lead the writer to

[p. 299]

make first what is great appear, and then what is small; first the foundation and then that which exists upon it, the water before the fishes, heaven before the birds of heaven, land and plants before the animals. The arrangement of the things to be explained stands here for the explanation; there is nothing more than a succession which proceeds from the simple to the complicated; there is no effort of fancy to describe the process more closely; everywhere cautious consideration which shrinks from going beyond generalities. Only the framework of creation, in fact, is given; it is not filled up. Hence also the form of the whole, the effect of which cannot be reproduced in an epitome; the formula gets the better of the contents, and instead of descriptions our ears are filled with logical definitions. The graduated arrangement in separating particular things out of chaos indicates the awakening of a "natural" way of looking at nature, and of a reasoned reflection about natural objects, just as this is manifest in the attempts of Thales and his successors, which are also remarkable as beginnings of the theory of nature and of an objective interest in the things of the outer world, but further than this do not exactly rouse us to enthusiasm. [*1]

The first sentence of the Jehovistic account of the beginning of the world's history has been cut off by the reviser. [It was all a dry waste] when Jehovah formed the earth, and nowhere did the green herb spring up, for Jehovah had not yet caused it to rain upon the earth, and there was not a man to till the ground. But a mist (?) went up out of the earth, and watered the face of the ground. And Jehovah formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life. Then he planted a garden far to the eastward in Eden, in the place where the four chief rivers of the earth part asunder from their common source; there grow among other fine trees the tree of life and the tree of knowledge. In this garden Jehovah placed the man, to dress it and keep it and to eat of all the trees, forbidding him to eat of the fruit of the tree of knowledge only. But the man is utterly alone in his garden: he must have company that is suitable for him. So Jehovah first forms the beasts, if perchance the man will associate with them and make friends with them. He brings them to him one after another to see what impression they make on him, and what the man will call them. He calls them by their right names, ox, ass, bear,

[p. 300]

thus expressing his feeling that he finds in them nothing relate to himself, and Jehovah has to seek other counsel. Then he forms the woman out of a rib of the sleeping man, and causes him to awake. Wearied as it were by all the fruitless experiments with the beasts, the man cries out delighted when he looks at the woman: This surely is flesh of my flesh and bone of my bone; she may be called wo-man.

Thus the scene is drawn, the persons introduced, and an action secretly prepared: now the tragedy begins, which ends with the expulsion of man from the garden. Seduced by the serpent, man stretches out his hand after the food which is forbidden him, in order to become like God, and eats of the tree of knowledge. The first consequence of this is the beginning of dress, the first step in civilisation; other and sadder consequences soon follow. In the evening the man and his wife hear Jehovah walking in the garden; they hide before Him, and by doing so betray themselves. It is useless to think of denying what has taken place, and as each of them puts the blame on the other, they show themselves one after the other to be guilty. The sentence of the judge concludes the investigation. The serpent is to creep on its belly, to eat dust, and to perish in the unequal contest with man. The woman is to bear many children with sorrow, and to long for the man, who yet will be her tyrant. The principal curse is directed against the man. "Cursed be the ground for thy sake: in sorrow shalt thou eat of it all the days of thy life. Thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth to, thee, and thou shalt eat the herb of the field, till thou return unto the ground, for out of it wast thou taken: for dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return." Sentence being thus spoken, Jehovah prepares the man and woman for their future life by making coats of skins to dress them with. Then turning to His celestial company, "Behold," He says, "the man is become like one of us to know good and evil; and now lest he put forth his hand, and take also of the tree of life, and eat, and live for ever." With these words he drives man out of Paradise, and places before it the cherubs, and the flaming sword, which turns every way, to keep the way of the tree of Life (Gen. i. 4b-iii. 24).

The gloomiest view of life as it now is, lies at the root of this story. Man's days are mere hardship and labour and task-work, a task-work with no prospect of relief, for the only reward of it is that he returns to the earth from which he was taken. No thought appears of any life after 

[p. 301]

death, and life without death might have been, but has been forfeited, now the cherub guards the approach to the tree of life, of which man might have eaten when in Paradise but did not. This actual, cheerless lot of man upon the earth is the real problem of the story. It is felt to be the very opposite of our true destiny; at first, things must have been otherwise. Man's lot now is a perversion of what it was at first, it is the punishment of primeval guilt now resting on us all. At first man lived in Paradise; he had a happy existence, and one worthy of his nature, and held familiar intercourse with Jehovah; it was his forbidden striving after the knowledge of good and evil that drove him out of Paradise and brought all his miseries upon him.

What is the knowledge of good and evil? The commentators say it is the faculty of moral distinction,--conscience, in fact. They assume accordingly that man was in Paradise morally indifferent, in a state which allowed of no self-conscious action and could not be called either good or evil. A state like this not being an ideal one, some of them consider that man gained more than he lost by the fall, while others admit that it could not be the divine intention to keep him always at this stage of childish irresponsibility, and that this cannot be the view of the narrator either.

But it is plain that the narrator is not speaking of a relative prohibition of knowledge, but an absolute one: he means that it is only for God, and that when man stretches out his hand towards it he is transcending his limits and seeking to be as God. On the other side he cannot of course mean to say that conscience is a doubtful blessing, and its possession to be deplored, or that it is a thing that God in fact refuses to men and reserves to Himself alone. The knowledge spoken of cannot be moral knowledge. What could the assertion mean that God would have no one but Himself know the difference between good and evil, and would deny to man this knowledge? One would think that conscience is a thing belonging specifically to man and not to God.

And what could be the sense of representing Adam and Eve as so intent to know what was sin and what was virtue? No one is curious about that, and sin never came into existence in the way of ethical experiment, by men's desiring to know what it is. And it is manifestly assumed that men knew in paradise that obedience to Jehovah was good and disobedience evil. And finally, it conflicts with the common tradition of all peoples to represent the first man as a sort of beast; he

[p. 302]

is regarded as undeveloped only in point of outward culture. The knowledge which is here forbidden is rather knowledge as such, general knowledge, or getting the eyes opened, as it is afterwards called. This is what transcends, in the writer's view, the limits of our nature; prying out the secret of things, the secret of the world, and overlooking, as it were, God's hand to see how He goes to work in His living activity, so as, perhaps, to learn His secret and imitate Him. For knowledge is to the ancient world also power, and no mere metaphysic. This knowing in the highest sense is the attribute of God alone, who stands in the creative centre of things and penetrates and surveys the whole; it is sealed to man, who has to labour and weary himself at little things. And yet the forbidden good has the most powerful attraction for him; he burns to possess it, and instead of resigning himself in trust and reverence he seeks to steal the jewel which is jealously guarded from him, and so to become like God--to his own sorrow.

This explanation is not new; it is the old and popular one, for which reason also Goethe adopted it in Faust. One objection certainly may be taken to it; the words are not merely knowledge, but knowledge of good and evil. But good and evil in Hebrew mean primarily nothing more than salutary and hurtful; the application of the words to virtue and sin is a secondary one, these being regarded as serviceable or hurtful in their effects. Good and evil as spoken of in Gen. ii. iii. point to no contrast of some actions with others according to their moral distinctions: the phrase is only a comprehensive one for things generally, according to the contradictory attributes which constitute their interest to man, as they help or injure him: for, as said, he desires to know not what things are metaphysically, but what is the use of them. [*1] Besides the lengthier expression we have the shorter one, knowledge, simply (iii. 6); and it must also be remarked that the phrase is not: know the good and the evil, but know good and evil.

But more, we must regard this knowledge not as it affects the individual, but in the light of history; what is meant is what we call civilisation. As the human race goes forward in civilisation, it goes backward in the fear of God. The first step in civilisation is clothing; and here this is the first result of the fall. The story is continued in chapter iv. Adam's sons begin to found cities, Jubal is the first musician,

[p. 303]

[paragraph continues] Cain discovers the oldest and the most important of the arts, that of the smith--hence the sword and bloody vengeance. Of the same tendency is the connected story of the city and the tower of Babel, in which is represented the foundation of the great empires and cities of the world, which concentrate human strength and seek to use it to press into heaven itself. In all this we have the steps of man's emancipation; with his growing civilisation grows also his alienation from the highest good; and--this is evidently the idea, though it is not stated--the restless advance never reaches its goal after all; it is a Sisyphus-labour; the tower of Babel, which is incomplete to all eternity, is the proper symbol for it. The strain is that strain of unsatisfied longing which is to be heard among all peoples. On attaining to civilisation they become aware of the value of those blessings which they have sacrificed for it. [*1]

It was necessary to discuss the notion of knowledge at some length, because the misunderstanding of this point on the part of philosophers and theologians has cast over our story an appearance of modernness, which has, in its turn, done something to influence general opinion as to the age of this story compared with the other. Having got rid of this impression we turn to those features of Gen. ii. iii. which help to determine positively its relation to chapter i.

What has been untruly asserted of Gen. i. is true of Gen. ii. iii. The Jehovist narrative does shine by the absence of all efforts after rationalistic explanation, by its contempt for every kind of cosmological speculation. The earth is regarded as being at first not moist and plastic but (as in Job xxxviii. 38) hard and dry: it must rain first in order that the desert may be turned into a green meadow, as is the case still every year when the showers of spring come. The ground further requires cultivation by man that the seed may spring forth. No regard is paid to any natural sequence of the acts of creation: man, the most helpless of all beings, appears first, and finds himself placed on a world entirely bare, without tree or bush, without the animals, without woman. Man is confessedly the exclusive object of interest, the other creatures are accounted for by their importance to him, as if this only conferred on them a right to exist. The idea explains matter: mechanical possibility is never consulted, and we do not think of asking about it. Want of taste could find no lower deeps than when this or

[p. 304]

that scholar goes from Gen. ii. 21 to count his ribs, or comes to the conclusion that the first man was hermaphrodite.

In the first account we stand before the first beginnings of sober reflection about nature, in the second we are on the ground of marvel and myth. Where reflection found its materials we do not think of asking; ordinary contemplation of things could furnish it. But the materials for myth could not be derived from contemplation, at least so far as regards the view of nature which is chiefly before us here; they came from the many-coloured traditions of the old world of Western Asia. Here we are in the enchanted garden of the ideas of genuine antiquity; the fresh early smell of earth meets us on the breeze. The Hebrews breathed the air which surrounded them; the stories they told on the Jordan, of the land of Eden and the fall, were told in the same way on the Euphrates and the Tigris, on the Oxus and the Arius. The true land of the world, where dwells the Deity, is Eden. It was not removed from the earth after the fall; it is there still, else whence the need of cherubs to guard the access to it? The rivers that proceed from it are real rivers, all well known to the narrator, they and the countries they flow through and the products that come from these countries. Three of them, the Nile, the Euphrates, and the Tigris, are well known to us also; and if we only knew how the narrator conceived their courses to lie, it would be easy to determine the position of their common source and the situation of Paradise. Other peoples of antiquity define the situation of their holy land in a similar manner; the streams have different names, but the thing is the same. The wonderful trees also in the garden of Eden have many analogies even in the Germanic mythology. The belief in the cherubs which guard Paradise is also widely diffused. Krub is perhaps the same name, and certainly represents the same idea, as Gryp in Greek, and Greif in German. We find everywhere these beings wonderfully compounded out of lion, eagle, and man. They are everywhere guardians of the divine and sacred, and then also of gold and of treasures. The ingredients of the story seem certainly to have parted with some of their original colour under the influence of monotheism. The Hebrew people no doubt had something more to tell about the tree of life than now appears. It is said to have been in the midst of the garden, and so it seems to have stood at the point whence the four streams issued, at the fountain of life, which was so important to the faith of the East, and which

[p. 305]

[paragraph continues] Alexander marched out to discover. Paradise, moreover, was certainly not planted originally for man, it was the dwelling of the Deity Himself. Traces of this may still be recognised. Jehovah does not descend to it from heaven, but goes out walking in the garden in the evening as if He were at home. The garden of Deity is, however, on the whole somewhat naturalised. A similar weakening down of the mythic element is apparent in the matter of the serpent; it is not seen at once that the serpent is a demon. Yet parting with these foreign elements has made the story no poorer, and it has gained in noble simplicity. The mythic background gives it a tremulous brightness: we feel that we are in the golden age when heaven was still on earth; and yet unintelligible enchantment is avoided, and the limit of a sober chiaroscuro is not transgressed.

The story of the creation in six days played, we know, a great part in the earlier stages of cosmological and geological science. It is not by chance that natural science has kept off Gen. ii. iii. There is scarcely any nature there. But poetry has at all times inclined to the story of Paradise. Now we do not require to ask at this time of day, nor to argue the question, whether mythic poetry or sober prose is the earlier stage in the contemplation of the world.

Intimately connected with the advanced views of nature, which we find in Gen. i., is the "purified" notion of God found there. The most important point is that a special word is employed, which stands for nothing else than the creative agency of God, and so dissociates it from all analogy with human making and shaping--a word of such exclusive significance that it cannot be reproduced either in Latin, or in Greek, or in German. In a youthful people such a theological abstraction is unheard of; and so with the Hebrews we find both the word and the notion only coming into use after the Babylonian exile; they appear along with the emphatic statement of the creative omnipotence of Jehovah with reference to nature, which makes its appearance, we may say suddenly, in the literature of the exile, plays a great part in the Book of Job, and frequently presents itself in Isa. xl.-lxvi. In Gen. ii. iii., not nature but man is the beginning of the world and of history; whether a creation out of nothing is assumed there at all, is a question which only the mutilation of the commencement (before ii. 4b) makes it not quite impossible to answer in the affirmative. At any rate it is not the case here that the command of the Creator sets things in

[p. 306]

motion at the first so that they develop themselves to separate species out of the universal chaos; Jehovah Himself puts His hand to the work, and this supposes that the world in its main features was already in existence. He plants and waters the garden, He forms man and breathes life into his nostrils, He builds the woman out of the man's rib, having made a previous attempt, which was unsuccessful, to provide him with company; the beasts are living witnesses of the failure of His experiments. In other respects, too, He proceeds like a man. In the evening when it grows cool He goes to walk in the garden, and when there discovers by chance the transgression which has taken place, and holds an investigation in which He makes not the least use of His omniscience. And when He says: "Behold, the man is become like one of us to know good and evil: and now lest he stretch forth his hand, and take of the tree of life, and eat and live for ever," that is not said in irony, any more than when He expresses Himself on the occasion of the building of Babel; "Behold, the people is one, and they have all one language, and this is only the beginning of their doings, and now nothing will be too difficult for them that they have imagined to do; go to, let us go down and confound their language." That at the same time the majesty of Jehovah is in no way compromised is the mystery of poetic genius. How would the colourless God of abstraction fare in such a situation?

The treatment, finally, of the microcosm in the two accounts, reflects the difference between them. In chap. i. man is directed at the very outset to the ground on which he moves to this day: "Replenish the earth, and subdue it," he is told; a perfectly natural task. In chaps. ii. iii. he is placed in Paradise, and his sphere of activity there, nestled, as he may be said still to be, in the lap of the Deity, is very limited. The circumstances of his life as it now is, the man's toil in the fields, the woman's toil in bearing children, do not answer to his original destiny; they are not a blessing, but a curse. In the Jehovistic narrative man is as wonderful to himself as the external world; in the other he is as much a matter of course as it is. In the one he sees astonishing mysteries in the difference of the sexes, in marriage, in child-birth (iv. 1); in the other these are physiological facts which raise no questions or reflections: "He made them male and female, and said, Be fruitful and multiply." There his attitude towards the beasts is one of mixed familiarity and bewilderment; he does not know exactly what to make of them; they are allied to him and yet not quite suitable

[p. 307]

society for him; here they are beings not related to him, over which he rules.

The chief point in which the difference between the two accounts comes to a head is this. In Gen. ii. iii., man is virtually forbidden to lift the veil of things, and to know the world, represented in the tree of knowledge. In Gen. i. this is the task set him from the beginning; he is to rule over the whole earth, and rule and knowledge come to the same thing--they mean civilisation. There nature is to him a sacred mystery: here it is a mere fact, an object; he is no longer bewildered over against nature, but free and superior. There it is a robbery for man to seek to be equal with God: here God makes him at first in His own image and after His own likeness, and appoints him His representative in the realm of nature. We cannot regard it as fortuitous that in this point Gen. i. asserts the opposite of Gen. ii. iii.; the words spoken with such emphasis, and repeated i. 27, v. 1, ix. 6, sound exactly like a protest against the view underlying Gen. ii. iii., a protest to be explained partly by the growth of moral and religious cultivation, but partly also no doubt due to the convulsive efforts of later Judaism to deny that most firmly established of all the lessons of history, that the sons suffer for the sins of the fathers. [*1]

What are generally cited as points of superiority in Gen. i. over Gen. ii. iii. are beyond doubt signs of progress in outward culture. The mental individuality of the two writers, the systematiser and the genius, cannot be compared, and the difference in this respect tells nothing of their respective dates; but in its general views of God, nature, and man, Gen. i. stands on a higher, certainly on a later, level. To our way of thinking its views are more intelligible, simpler, more natural, and on this account they have been held to be also older. But this is on the one hand to identify naturalness with originality, two things which every one knows not to be the same, and on the other hand it is applying a standard to prehistoric tradition which applies to historical tradition only: freedom from miracle and myth count in favour of the latter, but not of the former. But the secret root of the manifest preference long shown by

[p. 308]

historic-critical theology for Gen. i. appears to lie in this, that scholars felt themselves responsible for what the Bible says, and therefore liked it to come as little as possible in conflict with general culture. [*1]

2. After the beginning of the world we have in Gen. i.-xi., both in the Priestly Code and in the Jehovist, the transition from Adam to Noah (cap. iv. v.), then the flood (vi.-ix.), then the transition from Noah to Abraham (cap. x. xi.).

In the dry names, which are enumerated in Gen. v. and Gen. iv. Buttmann recognised the remains of an historical connection once woven together out of primitive stories. These narratives were evidently mythological: their original contents are destroyed both in Gen. v. (Q) and in Gen. iv. (JE), but only the list of the Jehovist now bears the appearance of a ruin. In the other the fragments have been used for a careful new building in which they no longer look like fragments. Here they are made to serve as the pillars of a chronology which descends from Adam to Moses, computing the period from the one to the other as 2666 years. These 2666 years represent 26 2/3 generations of a hundred years each: namely, 1-20 Adam to Abraham, 21 Isaac, 22 Jacob, 23 Levi, 24 Kohath, 25 Amram, 26 Aaron; the last  2/3 of a generation is Eleazar, who was a man of mature years at the time of the Exodus. [*2]

Such a chronology is totally at variance with the simplicity

[p. 309]

of the legend. [*1] It is also evident, that if even in the case of the historical books the systematic chronology is no older than the period of the exile, that of the Pentateuch must be of still later origin. For the historical period there were certain fixed points for chronology to lay hold of; it cannot have begun with the patriarchs and gone on to the kings, it must have begun with the kings and then gone higher up to the patriarchs; it must have begun at the lower end, where alone it had any firm ground to stand on. The belief that the men of the early world lived to a great age is no doubt old, but the settled chronology, based on the years in which each patriarch begat his son, is an artifice in which we manifestly see the doctrinaire treatment of history which was coming into vogue for later periods, attempting to lay hold of the earliest legends as well. Only when the living contents of the legend had completely disappeared could its skeleton be used as a framework of chronology.

Buttmann has also shown that the elements of the ten-membered genealogy of Q (Gen. v.) and of the seven-membered of JE (Gen. iv.) are identical. In Q, Noah comes after Lamech at the end, and at the beginning Adam Cain is doubled and becomes Adam Seth Enos Cainan. Adam and Enos being synonymous, this amounts to Adam Seth Adam Cainan: that is to say Adam Seth are prefixed, and the series begins anew with Enos Cainan, just as in JE. The Priestly Code itself offers a remarkable testimony to the superior originality of the Jehovist genealogy, by ascribing to Lamech, here the ninth in order, the age of 777 years. This can only be explained from JE, where Lamech is seventh in order, and moreover specially connects himself with the number seven by his speech. Cain is avenged seven times, and Lamech seventy times seven. Another circumstance shows Q to be posterior to E. The first man is called here not Ha Adam as in JE, but always Adam, without the article (v. 1-5), a difference which Kuenen pertinently compares with that between o Khristos and Khristos. But in Q itself (Gen. i.) the first man is only the generic man; if in spite of this he is called simply Adam (Gen. v.), as if that were his proper name, the only way to account for this is to suppose a reminiscence of Gen. ii. iii., though here the personification does not as yet extend to the name.

[p. 310]

We come to the story of the flood, Gen. vi.-ix. In JE the flood is well led up to: in Q we should be inclined to ask in surprise how the earth has come all at once to be so corrupted, after being so far in the best of order, did we not know from JE. In omitting the fall, the fratricide of Cain, the sword-song of Lamech, the intercourse of the sons of God with the daughters of men, and parting with the distinctive gloomy colouring which is unmistakably spread over the whole early history of man in JE, the Priestly Code has entirely lost the preparation for the flood, which now appears in the most abrupt and unaccountable way. As to the contents of the story, the priestly version here agrees to an unusual extent with the Jehovistic one; differing from it chiefly in the artificial, mathematical marking out of the framework. The flood lasts twelve months and ten days, i.e., exactly a solar year. It begins in the six hundredth year of Noah, on the seventeenth of the second month, rises for one hundred and fifty days, and begins to fall on the seventeenth of the seventh month. On the first month the tops of the mountains become visible; in the six hundred and first year, on the first of the first month, the water has abated; on the twenty-seventh of the second month the earth is dry. God Himself gives instructions and measurements for the building of the ark, as for the tabernacle: it is to be three stories high, and divided throughout into small compartments; three hundred cubits long, fifty cubits broad, thirty cubits high; and Noah is to make it accurately according to the cubit. When the water is at its height, on the seventeenth of the second month, the flood is fifteen cubits above the highest mountains--Noah having apparently not forgotten, in spite of his anxiety, to heave the lead and to mark the date in his log-book. This prematurely modern measuring and counting cannot be thought by any one to make the narrative more lifelike; it simply destroys the illusion. All that is idyllic and naive is consistently stripped off the legend as far as possible. As the duration of the flood is advanced from forty days (JE) to a whole year, its area also is immeasurably increased. The Priestly Code states with particular emphasis that it was quite universal, and went over the tops of the highest mountains; indeed it is compelled to take this view by its assumption that the human race was diffused from the first over the whole earth. Such traits as the missions of the birds and the broken-off olive-leaf are passed over: poetic legend is smoothed down into historic prose. But the value and the charm of the story depend on such little traits as these; they are not mere incidents, to

[p. 311]

poetry they are the most important thing of all. These are the features which are found just in the same way in the Babylonian story of the flood; and if the Jehovist has a much greater affinity with the Babylonian story than the Priestly Code, that shows it to have preserved more faithfully the international character of those early legends. This appears most plainly in his accounting for the flood by the confounding of the boundaries between spirit and flesh, and the intercourse of the sons of God and the daughters of men: the Jehovist here gives us a piece, but little adulterated, of mythical heathenism--a thing quite inconceivable in Q.

The Priestly Code has the rainbow, which the Jehovist, as we now have him, wants. But we have to remember that in Genesis vi.-ix. the Jehovist account is mutilated, but the priestly one preserved entire. If the rainbow occurred both in JE and in Q, one of the accounts of it had to be omitted, and according to the editor's usual procedure the omission had to be from JE. It is accordingly very possible that it was not at first wanting in JE; it agrees better, indeed, with the simple rain, which here brings about the flood, than with the opening of the sluices of heaven and the fountains of the deep, which produce it in Q, and it would stand much better after viii. 21, 22 than after ix. 1-7. In the Priestly Code, moreover, the meaning of the rainbow is half obliterated. On the one hand, the story is clumsily turned into history, and we receive the impression either that the rainbow only appeared in the heavens at this one time after the flood, or that it had been there ever since; on the other hand, it is made the token of the covenant between Elohim and Noah, and the use of language in other passages, with the analogy of Gen. xvii., would point to the covenant described in ix. 1-7: the rainbow would then be the counterpart of circumcision. [*1] The covenant, i.e., the law of ch. ix. 1-7, a modification

[p. 312]

of the first ordinance given to Adam (i. 229, 30) for the world after the flood which still subsists, is for the Priestly Code the crown, the end, the substance, of the whole narrative. Its interest in the law always completely absorbs the simple interest of its story.

We have also to remark that in this source vengeance for the spilling of blood is not the affair of the relatives but the affair of God; and that it is demanded for man as man, whether master or slave, and no money compensation allowed. The words sound simple and solemn: "Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed: for in the image of God made He man." Yet the religious notion of humanity underlying this sentence is not ancient with the Hebrews any more than with other nations; cf. Gen. iv. 15, 24, and Exod. xxi. 20 seq. [*1]

The ark lands, according to Q, on Mount Ararat. In JE, as we have it, no landing-place is named. But this is not original, as mythic geography belongs to the Jehovist in all other passages where it occurs. In Q the primitive history is never localised, the whole earth is given to man for a dwelling from the first. In JE, on the contrary, they live first in the land of Eden far to the East, and presumably high up in the North; expelled from Eden they come to the land of Nod, where Cain builds the town of Enoch, and departing from this district, which is still far to the East, they settle in the land of Shinar, at the mouths of the Euphrates and Tigris, where they build the town of Babel. Shinar is the point of departure of that history of the world which is no longer merely mythical, it is the home of the present human race. In this point the contrast is very noticeable between the local definiteness of the Jehovist legend, which lends it the character of the idyllic, and the vague generalness of the other. In Shinar, according to JE, Gen. xi. 1-9, men are still all together, and they desire to remain together there. Not to be scattered, they build a great city, which is to hold them all; and to make themselves a name, they add to it a high tower which is to reach heaven. Jehovah, perceiving in these attempts the danger of further progress in the same direction, comes down to confound their language, and by such violent means brings about the dispersion of the human race by the unity of which He feels himself threatened. In Q it is understood that men are scattered over the whole earth; they are never represented as all living at one point, and pains are accordingly

[p. 313]

taken to describe the flood as quite universal. The division of the people comes about quite simply in the way of genealogy, and the division of the languages is not the cause but the result of it. Accompanying this we find once more a notable difference in point of mental attitude; what JE regards as unnatural, and only to be understood as a violent perversion of the original order, is in Q the most natural thing in the world.

The period between the flood and Abraham is filled up in Q by another ten-membered genealogy, which, to judge from the analogy of Genesis iv., had probably only seven members in JE. It cannot have been wanting there, and may have passed straight from Shem to Heber, and left out the grandfather Nahor (x. 21, 24, xxiv. 15, xxix. 5), who is even less to be distinguished from his grandson of the same name than Adam from Enos. The original dwelling-place of the Terahites is, according to Q, not the Mesopotamian Haran (Carrhae), as in JE (xii. 1, xxiv. 4), but Ur Casdim, which can only mean Ur of the Chaldees. From there Terah, the father of Abraham, Nahor, and Haran, is said to have emigrated with Abraham and Lot, the son of Haran, who was already dead. If this was so, Nahor must have stayed at Ur Casdim, and Haran must have died there. But neither of these assumptions is consistent with the indications of the narrative. The different aspirates notwithstanding, it is scarcely allowable to separate the man Haran from the town Haran and to make him die elsewhere. It is equally impossible to regard Ur in Chaldaea as the residence of Nahor, whether the grandfather or the grandson of the same name matters nothing; for it is obviously not without relation to real facts that the place, which in any case must be in Syria, where the Nahorides Laban and Rebecca dwell, is called in J the town of Nahor, and in E Haran. Even in Q though Nahor stays in Ur, Laban and Rebecca do not live in Chaldaea, but in Padan Aram, i.e., in Mesopotamian Syria. What helps to show that Ur Casdim does not belong to the original form of the tradition, is that even in Serug the father of Nahor, we are far away from Babylon towards the West. Serug is the name of a district which borders Haran on the North; how can the son of Serug all at once leap back to Ur Casdim? What the reasons were for making Babylon Abraham's point of departure, we need not now consider; but after having left Ur Casdim with Terah, it is curious how he only gets as far as Haran, and stays there till his father's death. In Q also it is from Haran that he

[p. 314]

enters Palestine. Here, if anywhere, we have in the doubling of the point of departure an attempt to harmonise and to gain a connection with JE.

3. The view is happily gaining ground that, in the mythical universal history of mankind in Gen. i.-xi., the Jehovist version is more primitive than the priestly one. And we are, in fact, compelled to adopt this view when we observe that the materials of the narratives in question have not an Israelite, but a universal ethnic origin. The traces of this origin are much more distinctly preserved in the Jehovist, whence it comes that comparative mythology occupies itself chiefly with his narratives, though without knowing that it is doing so. The primitive legend has certainly undergone alterations in his hands too; its mythic character is much obliterated, and all sorts of Israelite elements have crept in. Even the fratricide of Cain, with the contrast in the background between the peaceful life of the Hebrews in the land of Canaan and the restless wanderings of the Cainites (Kenites) in the neighbouring desert, quite falls out of the universal historical and geographical framework. Still more does the curse of Canaan do so; here the trait is evidently old, that Noah was the first to make wine, but this has been made a merely subordinate feature of a pronouncedly national Israelite narrative. But in the Jehovist the process of emptying the primitive legend of its true meaning and contents has not gone nearly so far as in the Priestly Code, where it actually creates surprise when some mythic element shines through, as in the cases of Enoch, and of the rainbow.

The mythic materials of the primitive world-history are suffused in the Jehovist with a peculiar sombre earnestness, a kind of antique philosophy of history, almost bordering on pessimism: as if mankind were groaning under some dreadful weight, the pressure not so much of sin as of creaturehood (vi. 1-4). We notice a shy, timid spirit, which belongs more to heathenism. The rattling of the chains at intervals only aggravates the feeling of confinement that belongs to human nature; the gulf of alienation between man and God is not to be bridged over. Jehovah does not stand high enough, does not feel Himself secure enough, to allow the earth-dwellers to come very near Him; there is almost a suggestion of the notion of the jealousy of the gods. This mood, though in many ways softened, is yet recognisable enough in Gen. ii. iii., in vi. 1-4, and xi. 1-9. In the Priestly Code it has entirely disappeared; here man no longer feels himself under a

[p. 315]

secret curse, but allied to God and free, as lord of nature. True, the Priestly Code also recognises in its own fashion the power of sin--this we saw in the chapter on sacrifice; but sin as the root of ruin, explaining it and capable of being got rid of, is the very opposite of blind, not-to-be-averted fate. The slavery of sin and the freedom of the children of God are in the Gospel correlated. The mythical mode of view is destroyed by the autonomy of morality; and closely connected with this is the rational way of looking at nature, of which we find the beginnings in the Priestly Code. This view of nature presupposes that man places himself as a person over and outside of nature, which he regards as simply a thing. We may perhaps assert that were it not for this dualism of Judaism, mechanical natural science would not exist.

The removal of colour from the myths is the same thing as the process of Hebraising them. The Priestly Code appears to Hebraise less than the Jehovist; it refrains on principle from confounding different times and customs. But in fact it Hebraises much more: it cuts and shapes the whole of the materials so that they may serve as an introduction to the Mosaic legislation. It is true that the Jehovist also placed these ethnic legends at the entrance to his sacred legend, and perhaps selected them with a view to their forming an introduction to it; for they are all ethical and historical in their nature, and bear on the problems of the world of man, and not the world of nature. [*1] But with the Jehovist justice was yet done to some extent to the individuality of the different narratives: in the Priestly Code their individuality is not only modified to suit the purpose of the whole, but completely destroyed. The connection leading up to the Torah of Moses is everything, the individual pieces have no significance but this. It follows of course from this mode of treatment that the connection itself loses all living reality; it consists, apart from the successive covenants, in mere genealogy and chronology. De Wette thinks all this beautiful because it is symmetrical and intelligible, and leads well up to a conclusion. But this will not be every one's taste; there is such a thing as poetical material without manufacture.

How loosely the narratives of the primitive history are connected

[p. 316]

with each other in the Jehovist we see very clearly in the section dealing with the flood. It disagrees both with what goes before and with what follows it. The genealogy Gen. iv. 16-24 issues not in Noah but in Lamech; instead of Shem, Ham, and Japhet, the sons of Noah, we have Jabal, Jubal, Tubal, the sons of Lamech, as the inaugurators of the second period. We have also the characteristic difference, that Shem, Ham, and Japhet give us a division of mankind according to nations, while Jabal, Jubal, Tubal give a division according to guilds, which are necessarily those of the same people, as no people consists entirely of musicians or entirely of smiths. And it is undoubtedly the aim of chapter iv. 16 seq. to describe the origin of the present civilisation, not of that which is extinct, having been destroyed by the flood. Tubal-Cain is the father of the smiths of the present, not of those before the flood; Jubal the father of the musicians, Jabal of the shepherds of the narrator's own period; hence they stand at the end of the genealogy and open the second period. But as Gen. iv. 16-24 does not look forward to the flood, so neither does Gen. xi. 1-9 (the building of the tower of Babel) look back to it. This piece is obviously not the continuation of chapter x. That chapter brought us to a point at which the earth was occupied by different peoples and different tongues; and here (xi. 1) we are suddenly carried back to a time when the whole earth was of one language and one speech. Can this have been the time when Noah's family made up the whole population of the earth? or in other words, does xi. 1-9 go back before chap x. and join on to vi.-ix.? Manifestly not: "the whole earth" (xi. 1) is not merely Shem and Ham and Japhet; the multitude of men who seek by artificial means to concentrate themselves, and are then split up into different peoples, cannot consist of only one family. The point of view is quite different from what it would be if chaps. vi.-ix. were taken into account; the narrator knows nothing of the flood, which left Noah's family alone surviving out of the whole world. Nor would it avail to place xi. 1 at a period so long subsequent to the flood that the family might have increased again to a great people; even this would not give the requisite connection with the idea of Noah and his three sons. If the latter united themselves afterwards in one family, and one coherent people thus grew out of them, which was then split up by a higher power into different languages, then Shem, Ham, and Japhet entirely lose their significance as the great heads of the nations.

[p. 317]

The fact is simply this, that the whole section of the flood (Gen. vi.-ix.) is an isolated piece without any connection with the rest of the narrative of the Jehovist. Another strange erratic boulder is the intercourse of the sons of God with the daughters of men (Gen. vi. 1-4). [*1] The connection between this piece and the story of the flood which follows it, is of the loosest; and it is in entire disagreement with the preceding part of the Jehovist narrative, as it tells of a second fall of man, with a point of view morally and mentally so different from that of the first, that this story can in no wise be regarded as supplementing or continuing that one. In Gen. vi. 1-4 morality has nothing to do with the guilt that is incurred. We have further examples which illustrate the fragmentary character of the Jehovist primitive history as we have it, in the story of the fratricide of Cain, and the curse of Canaan, which indeed ought not to be here at all, but belong by rights to the history of the patriarchs.

We may close this section by reproducing the words in which Buttmann (i. 208 seq.) indicates his disagreement with De Wette in regard to the treatment of the early legends of the Bible: they are well worth noting. "Thoroughly familiar with the antiquities of the race in whose sacred writings these monuments have been preserved to us, De Wette recognises and follows the national spirit of that race in their most ancient records. In this way he discovers amidst these ruins the thread of an old connection, a kind of epos, the theme of which was the glorification of the people of Israel, a theme which finds a prelude even in the primitive history of the human race. This view is of the first importance for the object he has before him, which is the true criticism of these books; and for the moment other considerations must necessarily yield to it. My object in this whole investigation is only to find the universal element in the legends of different nations, and especially to discover what is common property in the myths of the different branches of the great family of nations to which the Hebrews and the Greeks and we ourselves alike belong. Thus each myth reveals itself to me as existing for itself, having a basis and completeness of its own, and even when I find it in other nations I at once assert for it its character as already known to me. Thus De Wette and I come to differ in the view we take of individual myths. To him they commonly appear as spontaneous free inventions of individual men for their own purposes;

[p. 318]

not in the ignoble sense in which the vulgar view speaks of the religious narratives of ancient peoples, but free inventions in which there is no intention to deceive. I, on the contrary, can allow no invention in these oldest portions of mythology. A true myth is never invented; it is handed down. It is not true, but it is honest. From small elements which fancy offered as true, these myths arose and grew, without any contributor to their growth feeling that he had of himself added to them. Those only had any conscious intention in the matter, who touched up the oldest pure myths, and drew them into the great circle of their national history; and their intention, though conscious, was quite innocent and harmless, as De Wette describes it. Now De Wette sees the chief traces of that unity, or of that national epos which winds its way through the Mosaic history, in the Elohim document. For his critical purpose, therefore, this document is the most important, and it he for the most part follows. My aim forbids me to attend to anything but the inner completeness of the stories taken one by one, and this I see most clearly in the Jehovah fragments; whence I have had to yield the preference to them in the foregoing discussions. Should each of us attain his end, our views will excellently supplement each other."

We may add that just that linked unity of its narrative, which has procured for the Priestly Code the title of the "main stock," shows that it presents us with a more developed form of the myths; while the Jehovist, just because of the defective connection (in form) of his "fragments," which long caused him to be regarded as a mere filler-up of the fundamental work, must be judged to stand nearer to the fountain.

  

II.

1. In the history of the patriarchs also, the outlines of the narrative are the same in Q and in JE. We find in both Abraham's immigration into Canaan with Sarah and Lot, his separation from Lot, the birth of Ishmael by Hagar, the appearance of God for the promise of Isaac, Isaac's birth, the death of Sarah and Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac's marriage with Rebecca, Jacob and Esau, Jacob's journey to Mesopotamia and the foundation of his family there, his return, Esau, Joseph in Egypt, Jacob in Egypt, Jacob's blessing on Joseph and his other sons, his death and burial. The materials here are not mythical but national, and therefore more transparent, and in a certain sense more historical. It is true, we attain to no historical knowledge of the

[p. 319]

patriarchs, but only of the time when the stories about them arose in the Israelite people; this later age is here unconsciously projected, in its inner and its outward features, into hoar antiquity, and is reflected there like a glorified mirage. The skeleton of the patriarchal history consists, it is well known, of ethnographic genealogy. The Leah-tribes are connected with the Rachel-tribes under the common father Jacob-Israel: then entire Israel is connected with the people of Edom under the old name of Isaac (Amos vii. 9, 16). Isaac again is connected under Abraham with Lot, the father of Moab and Ammon. All these nearly related and once closely allied Hebrew tribes are shown to be intimately connected with the inhabitants of the Mesopotamian desert, and sharply marked off from the Canaanites, in whose land they dwelt. The narrative speaks of its characters as succeeding each other in time or contemporary; in this form it indicates logical or statistical subordination and co-ordination. As a fact the elements are generally older than the groups and the smaller groups than the greater. The migrations which are mentioned of peoples and tribes are necessary consequences of the assumed relationship. It would be quite possible to present the composition and relative position of any given people at a given time in a similar way in the form of a genealogical early history. True genealogy can scarcely represent precisely the existing relations. It cannot always be determined as a matter of fact whether a tribe is the cousin or the brother or the twin-brother of another tribe, or whether there is any affinity at all between the two; the affinity can be understood and interpreted in different ways, the grouping always depends to some extent on the point of view of the genealogist, or even on his likings and antipathies. The reason why the Arameans are made so nearly related to the Israelites is probably that the patriarchal legend arose in Middle and North Israel; as indeed the pronounced preference shown for Rachel and Joseph clearly proves to have been the case. Did the legend belong originally to Judah, it is likely that more prominence would be given to the Cainite (Kenite) tribes of the peninsula of Sinai, which, as it is, are too much thrust into the background; for there can be no doubt that in the earliest history of Israel these tribes were of no small importance. Nor are apparent contradictions wanting in the ethnographic genealogy. Ishmael, Edom, and the Cainite tribes first mentioned, come into mutual contact in different ways, which may be quite naturally explained from different views and

[p. 320]

arrangements of their mutual relationships. And lastly we may add that the genealogical form lends itself to the reception of every sort of materials. In the patriarchal legend, however, the ethnographic element is always predominant. Abraham alone is certainly not the name of a people like Isaac and Lot: he is somewhat difficult to interpret. That is not to say that in such a connection as this we may regard him as a historical person; he might with more likelihood be regarded as a free creation of unconscious art. He is perhaps the youngest figure in the company, and it was probably at a comparatively late period that he was put before his son Isaac. [*1]

In the Jehovist this skeleton of ethnographic genealogy is found covered throughout with flesh and blood. The patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, are not mere names, but living forms, ideal prototypes of the true Israelite. They are all peace-loving shepherds, inclined to live quietly beside their tents, anxious to steer clear of strife and clamour, in no circumstances prepared to meet force with force and oppose injustice with the sword. Brave and manly they are not, but they are good fathers of families, a little under the dominion of their wives, who are endowed with more temper. They serve Jehovah in

[p. 321]

essentially the same way as their descendants in historical times; religion with them does not consist of sacrifice alone, but also of an upright conversation and trustful resignation to God's providence. Jacob is sketched with a more realistic touch than the other two; he has a strong dash of artifice and desire of gain, qualities which do not fail to secure the ends he aims at. He escapes from every difficulty and danger, not only safely but with profit: Jehovah helps him, but above all he helps himself, without showing, as we should judge, any great scruple in his choice of means. The stories about him do not pretend to be moral, the feeling they betray is in fact that of undissembled joy in all the successful artifices and tricks of the patriarchal rogue. Of the subordinate figures Esau is drawn with some liking for him, then Laban, and the weak-kneed saint, Lot. Ishmael is drawn as the prototype of the Bedouin, as a wild ass of a man, whose hand is against every man, and every man's hand against him.

It is remarkable that the heroes of Israelite legend show so little taste for war, and in this point they seem to be scarcely a true reflection of the character of the Israelites as known from their history. Yet it is not difficult to understand that a people which found itself incessantly driven into war, not only dreamed of an eternal peace in the future, but also embodied the wishes of its heart in these peaceful forms of the golden age in the past. We have also to consider that the peaceful shepherd life of the patriarchs is necessary to the idyllic form in which the early history of the people is cast; only peoples or tribes can make war, not single men. [*1] This also must serve to explain why the historical self-consciousness of the nation finds so little expression in the personal character of the patriarchs. It makes vent for itself only in the inserted prophecies of the future; in these we trace that national pride which was the fruit of the exploits of David, yet always in a glorified form, rising to religious exaltation.

In the traits of personal character ascribed to the patriarchs they represent substantially the nature and the aspirations of the individual Israelite. The historic-political relations of Israel are reflected with

[p. 322]

more life in the relations borne by the patriarchs to their brothers; cousins, and other relatives. The background is never long concealed here, the temper of the period of the kings is everywhere discernible. This is the case most clearly perhaps in the story about Jacob and Esau. The twins are at variance, even in the womb; even in the matter of his birth the younger refuses precedence to the elder, and tries to hold him back by the heel. This is interpreted to the anxious mother by the oracle at Beersheba as follows: "Two nations are in thy womb, and two peoples are separated from thy bowels, and the one people shall be stronger than the other, and the elder shall serve the younger." The boys grow up very different. Esau is a rough and sunburnt hunter, ranges about in the desert, and lives from day to day without care: Jacob, a pious, smooth man, stays at home beside the tents, and understands the value of things which his unsophisticated brother disregards. The former is the favourite of his father, the autochthonous Isaac, the latter is preferred by the mother, the Aramaean Rebecca; the former stays in his own land and takes his wives from the original population of south Canaan and the Sinaitic peninsula, the latter emigrates, and brings his wives from Mesopotamia. Thus the contrast is distinctly prefigured, which at a later time appeared, between the rough Edom, sprung from the soil and having his roots in it, and smoother, more civilised Israel, which had more affinity with the great powers of the world. By means of deceit and trickery the younger brother succeeds in depriving the elder of the paternal blessing and of the right of the first-born; the elder, in consequence of this, determines to kill him, and the situation becomes strained. Edom was a people and a kingdom before Israel, but was then overshadowed by Israel, and even subjugated at last by David: hence the fierce hatred between the brother nations, of which Amos speaks. The words of the blessing of Jacob show this quite distinctly to be the historical basis of the legend, a basis of which the Jews were perfectly conscious: we hear in the blessing of repeated attempts of the Edomites to cast off the yoke of Israel, and it is predicted that these efforts will be at last successful. Thus the stories about Jacob and Esau cannot have taken form even in outline, before the time of David; in their present form (Gen. xxvii. 40) their outlook extends to times still later. The roots of the legend being thus traceable in later history, a circumstance which the Jehovist does not attempt to conceal, it is no more than an apparent anachronism

[p. 323]

when he takes occasion to give a complete list of the Edomite kings down to David, interspersing it with historical notes, as, for example, that Hadad ben Bedad (possibly a contemporary of Gideon) defeated the Midianites on the plains of Moab. In the story of Jacob and Laban, again, the contemporary background shines through the patriarchal history very distinctly. The Hebrew, on his half-migration, half-flight from Mesopotamia to the land of Jordan, is hotly pursued by his Aramean father-in-law, who overtakes him at Gilead. There they treat with each other and pile up a heap of stones, which is to be the boundary between them, and which they mutually pledge themselves not to overstep with hostile intentions. This answers to the actual state of the facts. The Hebrew migration into Canaan was followed by the Aramaean, which threatened to overwhelm it. Gilead was the boundary between the two peoples, and the arena, during a long period, of fierce conflicts which they waged with each other. The blessing of Jacob, in the oracle on Joseph, also mentions the Syrian wars: the archers who press Joseph hard, but are not able to overcome him, can be no other than the Arameans of Damascus, to whose attacks he was exposed for a whole century. Joseph here appears always as the pillar of the North-Israelite monarchy, the wearer of the crown among his brethren, a position for which he was marked out by his early dreams. The story of Joseph, however, in so far as historical elements can be traced in it at all, and not merely the free work of poetry, is based on much earlier events, from a time when the union was just being accomplished of the two sections which together became the people of Israel. The trait of his brother's jealousy of him points perhaps to later events. [*1]

The historical associations which form the groundwork of the stories of the other sons of Jacob are also comparatively old. They afford us almost the only information we possess about the great change which must have taken place in the league of the tribes soon after Moses. This change principally affected the group of the four old Leah tribes

[p. 324]

which were closely connected with each other. Reuben assumes the rights of his father prematurely and loses the leadership. Simeon and Levi make, apart from the others, a faithless attack on the Canaanites, and collective Israel lets them suffer the consequences alone, so that they succumb to the vengeance of their enemies and cease to be tribes. Hence the primogeniture is transferred to Judah. Judah also suffers great losses, no doubt in the conflict which accompanied the settlement in the land of Canaan, and is reduced to a fraction of his former importance. But this breach is made good by fresh accessions from the mother-stock of the Leah tribes, by the union of Pharez and Zarah, i.e. of Caleb, Kenaz, Cain (Ken), Jerahmeel, with the remnant of ancient Judah. The Jehovist narratives about Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah, are undoubtedly based on occurrences connected with the period of the conquest of the holy land; but this is not the place to trace the historical interpretation of the stories further. [*1]

It may, however, be remarked, and it is important to do so, that even where true historic motives are indisputably present in the patriarchal legend, it is not exactly a reproduction of the facts as they occurred. In reality Edom always kept up his hatred against Israel and suppressed his feeling of relationship (Amos i. 11); in Genesis he meets his brother returning from Mesopotamia, and trembling with anxiety at the encounter, in a conciliatory temper which is quite affecting. The touch is one to reflect no small honour on the ancient Israelite. To set against this we have the touch, manifestly inspired by hatred, of Gen. xix. 30-38. No one can fail to wonder why the daughters of Lot are nameless, but this shows that they are inserted between Lot and his sons Moab and Ammon purely for the sake of the incest. Sympathies and antipathies are everywhere at work, and the standpoint is throughout that of Northern Israel, as appears most evidently from the circumstance that Rachel is the fair and the beloved wife of Jacob, whom alone in fact he wished to marry, and Leah the ugly and despised one who was imposed on him by a trick. [*2] On the whole, the rivalries which really existed are

[p. 325]

rather softened than exaggerated in this poetical illustration of them; what tends to unity is more prominent and is more carefully treated than what tends to separation. There is no trace of any side glances at persons and events of the day, as, e.g., at the unseemly occurrences at the court of David, and as little of any twisting or otherwise doctoring the materials to make them advance this or that tendency.

But these stories would be without point were it not for other elements which enter into them and attach them to this and that particular locality. In this aspect we have first of all to consider that the patriarchs are regarded as the founders of the popular worship at Shechem, Bethel, Beersheba, and Hebron, as we saw above, <page 30>. A whole series of stories about them are cultus-myths; in these they discover by means of a theophany that a certain spot of earth is holy ground; there they erect an altar, and give it the name of the place. They dwell exclusively at places which were afterwards regarded as primeval sanctuaries and inaugurate the sacrifices which are offered there. The significance of these stories is entirely bound up with the locality; they possess an interest only for those who still sacrifice to Jehovah on the same altar as Abraham once did, under the same sacred oak of Moreh or Mamre. In the same way the patriarchs discover or excavate the caves, or springs, or wells, and plant the trees, which their posterity still count sacred or at least honourable, after the lapse of thousands of years. In some cases also striking or significant formations of the earth's surface receive a legendary explanation from the patriarchal age. Were the Dead Sea not there, Sodom and Gomorrha would not have perished; were there not a small flat tongue of land projecting into the marsh from the south-east, Lot would have directed his flight straight to the mountains of his sons Moab and Ammon, and would not have made the detour by Zoar, which only serves to explain why this corner was not included in the ruin to the area of which it properly belongs. The pillar of salt into which Lot's wife was turned was still pointed out in the days of Josephus; perhaps the smoke of the furnace which Abraham saw from the Jewish shore the morning after the catastrophe has some connection with the town of the same name which was situated there. [*1] The origin of Mount Gilead is explained from its historical

[p. 326]

significance: it is an immense mound which was once heaped up by Laban and Jacob in order to serve as a boundary between Aram and Israel. In many instances the names of places gave rise to a legend which does not always hit upon the true reason of the name. The spring of Lahai Roi, for example, is an instance of this. The discovery of this spring saved Hagar and Ishmael from dying of thirst. Hagar called the name of Jehovah who spoke with her, El Roi (God of Seeing), for she said, "Have I seen God, and am I kept in life after my seeing?" Wherefore the well is called Beer Lahai Roi (he lives who sees me); it is between Kadesh and Berdan. According to Judges xv. 18-20, 2 Sam. xxiii. 11, a more correct interpretation of Lahai Roi would be "jawbone of the antelope"--this being the appearance presented by a series of rocky teeth standing close together there. [*1]

The original motive of the legend, however, as we have now indicated it, appears in the Jehovist always and everywhere covered over with the many-coloured robe of fancy. The longer a story was spread by oral tradition among the people, the more was its root concealed by the shoots springing from it. For example, we may assume with regard to the story of Joseph that, just because it has almost grown into a romance, its origin stretches back to a remote antiquity. The popular fancy plays as it will; yet it does not make such leaps as to make it impossible to trace its course. Miracles, angels, theophanies, dreams, are never absent from the palette. When Rachel eats the mandrakes which Reuben had found, and which Leah had given up to her, and they remove her barrenness so that she becomes the mother of Joseph, we have a story based on a vulgar superstition. Purely mythical elements are found isolated in the story of Jacob's wrestling with the Deity at the ford of the Jabbok. Etymology and proverbs are a favourite motive, and often give rise to lively and diversified tales. Even in pieces which we should be inclined to attribute to the art of individuals, old and characteristic themes may be involved. The story of Jacob and Laban, for example, is entirely composed of such materials. The courtship at the well is twice repeated with no great variation. The trait of the father-in-law's wish to get his oldest daughter first off his hands and craftily bringing

[p. 327]

her to the son-in-law after the wedding-feast, is scarcely due to the invention of an individual. The shepherd's tricks, by which Jacob colours the sheep as he likes, have quite the flavour of a popular jest. The observance of hospitality or transgressions against it, occupy a prominent place in the Genesis of the Jehovist; Lot's entertainment, and the Sodomites' insulting maltreatment, of the Deity who comes among them in disguise, is an incident that appears in the legends of many races. There is little psychological embellishment, little actual making-up; for the most part we have the product of a countless number of narrators, unconsciously modifying each other's work. How plastic and living the materials must have been even in the ninth and eighth century, we see from the manifold variants and repetitions of the same stories, which, however, scarcely change the essential character of the themes.

One more trait must be added to the character of the Jehovist. Each of his narratives may be understood by itself apart from the rest; the genealogy serves merely to string them together; their interest and significance is not derived from the connection in which they stand. Many of them have a local colour which bespeaks a local origin; and how many of them are in substance inconsistent with each other, and stand side by side only by compulsion! The whole literary character and loose connection of the Jehovist story of the patriarchs reveals how gradually its different elements were brought together, and how little they have coalesced to a unity. In this point the patriarchal history of the Jehovist, stands quite on the same footing with his legend of the origins of the human race, the nature of which we have already demonstrated.

 

2. It is from the Jehovistic form of the legends that we derive our picture of the patriarchs, that picture which children learn at school and which they find it easy to retain. To compare the parallel of the Priestly Code it is necessary to restore it as a whole, for few are aware of the impression it produces.

"And Abram was seventy-five years old when he departed out of Haran. And Abram took Sarai his wife, and Lot his brother's son, and all their substance that they had gathered, and the souls that they had gotten in Haran, and they went forth to go into the land of Canaan, and into the land of Canaan they came (xii. 4b, 5). And the land was not able to bear them that they might dwell together, for their

[p. 328]

substance was great so that they could not dwell together. And they separated themselves the one from the other; Abram dwelled in the land of Canaan, and Lot dwelled in the cities of the Kikkar. [*1] And it came to pass when God destroyed the cities of the Kikkar, that God remembered Abram, and sent Lot out of the midst of the overthrow, when he overthrew the cities in which Lot dwelt. . . (xiii. 6, 11b, 12ab, xix. 29). And Sarai was barren: she had no child. And Sarai, Abram's wife, took Hagar the Egyptian, her maid, after Abram had dwelt ten years in the land of Canaan, and gave her to her husband Abram to be his wife. And Hagar bare Abram a son; and Abram called his son's name which Hagar bare, Ishmael. And Abram was eighty-six years old when Hagar bare Ishmael to Abram" (xi. 30, xvi. 3, 15, 16) Then follows the covenant of God with Abram, whose name he now changes to Abraham, and the institution of circumcision as the mark of those who belong to the covenant; then the announcement of the birth of Isaac by Sarai, now ninety years old, who is henceforth to be called Sarah, and Isaac's nomination as heir of the covenant in place of Ishmael (chap. xvii.). "And Sarah bore Abraham a son at the set time of which God had spoken to him. And Abraham called the name of his son that was born unto him, whom Sarah bare to him, Isaac. And Abraham circumcised his son Isaac, after eight days, as God had commanded him. And Abraham was an hundred years old when Isaac his son was born unto him (xxi. 2-5). And the life of Sarah was an hundred and twenty seven years; these were the years of the life of Sarah. And Sarah died in Kirjath-Arba, the same is Hebron in the land of Canaan" (xxiii. 1, 2). Then comes the treaty of Abraham, reported with all due legal accuracy, with Ephron the Hittite, from whom he purchases the cave of Machpelah, which is over against Mamre, for a family burying-place (xxiii.). "And these are the days of the years of Abraham's life which he lived, a hundred and seventy five years. And Abraham gave up the ghost, and died in a good old age, an old man and full of years; and was gathered to his fellow tribesmen. And his sons Isaac and Ishmael buried him in the cave of Machpelah, in the field of Ephron ben Zohar the Hittite, which is before Mamre; the field which Abraham purchased of the sons of Heth; there was Abraham buried and Sarah his wife. And after Abraham was dead, God blessed his son Isaac" (xxv. 7-11a). Next come the

[p. 329]

[paragraph continues] Toledoth (generations) of Ishmael according to the regular practice of first exhausting the collaterals (xxv. 12-17). "These are the Toledoth of Isaac the son of Abraham. Abraham begat Isaac. . .and Isaac was 40 years old when he took Rebecca to wife, the daughter of Bethuel the Syrian of Padan Aram, the sister to Laban the Syrian. . . .And Isaac was 60 years old when Esau and Jacob were born (xxv. 19, 20, 26c). And Esau was 40 years old when he took to wife Judith the daughter of Beeri the Hittite, and Bashemath, the daughter of Elon the Hittite, and they were a grief of mind unto Isaac and to Rebekah. And Rebekah said to Isaac, I am weary of my life because of the daughters of Heth; if Jacob also take such wives of the daughters of Heth, of the daughters of the land, what good shall my life do to me? Then Isaac called Jacob and blessed him and charged him, saying, Thou shalt not take a wife of the daughters of Canaan; arise, go to Padan-Aram to the house of Bethuel thy mother's father, and take thee a wife from thence of the daughters of Laban thy mother's brother. And El Shaddai will bless thee, and make thee fruitful and multiply thee, and give thee the blessing of Abraham, to thee and to thy seed with thee, that thou mayest inherit the land wherein thou art a stranger, which God gave unto Abraham. And Isaac sent away Jacob, and he went to Padan-Aram unto Laban ben Bethuel, the Syrian, the brother of Rebecca, Jacob and Esau's mother. And Esau saw that Isaac blessed Jacob, and sent him to Padan-Aram to take him a wife from thence, and that as he blessed him, he gave him a charge, saying, Thou shalt not take a wife of the daughters of Canaan. Now Jacob hearkened to his father, and went to Padan-Aram. But Esau saw that the daughters of Canaan pleased not Isaac his father; then went Esau unto Ishmael, and took unto the wives which he had Mahalath the sister of Nebaioth to be his wife (xxvi. 34 seq., xxvii. 46, xxviii. 1-9). And Laban gave unto his daughter Leah Zilpah his maid for her handmaid. And he gave him Rachel his daughter to wife. And Laban gave to Rachel his daughter Bilhah his handmaid to be her maid (xxix. 24, 28b, 29). And the sons of Jacob were twelve. The sons of Leah: Reuben, Jacob's firstborn, Simeon, Judah, Issachar, Zebulun. The sons of Rachel: Joseph and Benjamin. The sons of Bilhah, Rachel's handmaid: Dan and Naphtali. The sons of Zilpah, Leah's handmaid: Gad and Asher; these are the sons of Jacob, which were born to him in Padan-Aram (xxxv. 23-26) . . . . [and Jacob took] all his goods which he had gotten, the gear

[p. 330]

of his property which he had gotten in Padan-Aram, to go home to Isaac his father in the land of Canaan (xxx). 18). And God appeared unto Jacob when he was coming home from Padan-Aram, and blessed him; and God said unto him, Thy name is Jacob; thy name shall not be called any more Jacob, but Israel shall be thy name. And God said unto him; I am El Shaddai; be fruitful and multiply; a nation and a company of nations shall be of thee, and kings shall come out of thy loins; and the land which I gave Abraham and Isaac, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed after thee will I give the land. And God went up from him in the place where He talked with him. And Jacob called the name of the place where God spake with him Bethel (xxxv. 9-13, 15). And they departed from Bethel; and when there was but a little way to come unto Ephrath, Rachel died, and was buried there in the way to Ephrath; the same is Bethlehem (xxxv. 16a, 19, cf. xlviii. 7, xlix. 31). And Jacob came unto Isaac his father unto Mamre, unto Kirjath-Arba, which is Hebron, where Abraham and Isaac dwelt as strangers. And the days of Isaac were a hundred and eighty years. And Isaac gave up the ghost, and died, and was gathered unto his people, being old and full of days; and his sons Esau and Jacob buried him" (xxxv. 27-29.) Then follow the generations of Esau in chapter xxxvi. [*1] "And Esau took his wives, and his sons, and his daughters, and all the souls of his house, and his cattle, and all his beasts, and all his substance, which he had got in the land of Canaan, and went into the land of Seir from the face of his brother Jacob. For their riches were more than that they might dwell together, and the land of their sojourn could not bear them because of their cattle. And Esau dwelt in Mount Seir; Esau is Edom. And Jacob dwelt in the land of the sojourn of his father, in the land of Canaan (xxxvi. 6-8, xxxvii. 1). These are the Toledoth of Jacob . . . (xxxxvii. 2). And they took their cattle, and their goods, which they had gotten in the land of Canaan, and came into Egypt, Jacob and all his seed with him, his sons, and his sons' sons, and all his seed, brought he with him into Egypt" (xlvi. 6, 7). Then follows the enumeration of the seventy souls of which his seed was then composed. "And Jacob and his sons came to Egypt to Joseph; and Pharaoh the king of Egypt heard it. And Pharaoh said to Jacob, How many are the days of the years of thy life? And Jacob said to Pharaoh, The days of the years of my sojourning are

[p. 331]

a hundred and thirty years; few and evil have the days of the years of my life been, and have not attained unto the days of the years of the life of my fathers, in the days of their sojourning. And Joseph placed his father and his brethren, and gave them a possession in the land of Egypt, in the best part of the land, in the land of Rameses, as Pharaoh had commanded (xlvii. 5b, 6, LXX, xlvii. 7-11). And they settled there, and grew and multiplied exceedingly. And Jacob lived in the land of Egypt seventeen years, and the whole age of Jacob was 7 years and 140 years (xlvii. 27b, 28). . . .And Jacob said unto Joseph, El Shaddai appeared unto me at Luz, in the land of Canaan, and blessed me, and said unto me, Behold, I will make thee fruitful and multiply thee, and I will make of thee a multitude of peoples; and will give this land to thy seed after thee for an everlasting possession. And now thy two sons which were born unto thee in Egypt, before I came unto thee in Egypt, are mine; Ephraim and Manasseh shall be mine, as Reuben and Simeon. And the issue which thou begettest after them shall be thine, and shall be called after the name of their brethren in their inheritance. And when I came from Padan, Rachel died to me in the land of Canaan, in the way, when there was but a little way to come into Ephrath, and I buried her there, in the way to Ephrath; the same is Bethlehem (xlviii. 3-7, and v. 7, cf. xlix. 31). . .[and his other sons also] he blessed; and he charged them, and said unto them, I am to be gathered unto my people, bury me with my fathers in the cave of the field of Machpelah, which is before Mamre, in the land of Canaan, which field Abraham bought from Ephron the Hittite, for a hereditary burying-place-there they buried Abraham and Sarah his wife, there they buried Isaac and Rebekah his wife, and there I buried Leah--the possession of the field and of the cave that is therein from the children of Heth. And Jacob made an end of commanding his sons, and he gathered up his feet into the bed, and yielded up the ghost, and was gathered unto his fellow-tribesmen (xlix. 28b-33). And his sons carried him into the land of Canaan, and buried him in the cave of the field of Machpelah, which Abraham had bought for a hereditary burying-place from Ephron the Hittite, over against Mamre (l. 12, 13). And these are the names of the children of Israel which came into Egypt, with Jacob they came, every one with his house; Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar, Zebulon, Benjamin, Dan, Naphtali, Gad, Asher. And all the souls that came out of Jacob's loins were seventy souls; and Joseph was in

[p. 332]

[paragraph continues] Egypt. And the children of Israel were fruitful and increased abundantly, and the land was filled with them, and the Egyptians made the children of Israel their servants with rigour, in all their work which they wrought by them with rigour, and they made their lives bitter with hard bondage (Exod. i. 1-7, 13, 14). And the children of Israel sighed by reason of the bondage; and they cried, and their cry because of the bondage came up unto God, and God heard their groaning, and God remembered His covenant with Abraham, with Isaac, and with Jacob, and God took notice (ii. 23-25). And God spake unto Moses, and said unto him, I am Jehovah. I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob by the name of El Shaddai; but by my name Jehovah was I not known unto them; and I made a covenant with them to give them the land of Canaan, the land of their pilgrimage, wherein they were strangers. And I have heard the groaning of the children of Israel, that the Egyptians keep them in bondage, and I have remembered my covenant" (vi. 2 seq.).

That is the whole of it. As a rule nothing more is aimed at than to give the mere links and articulations of the narrative. It is as if Q were the scarlet thread on which the pearls of JE are hung. In place of the somewhat loose connections of the Jehovist, the narrative of the Priestly Code shows a firmly jointed literary form; one remarkable feature of which is to be seen in the regular titles which stand at the head of the various sections. Each section begins with the words 'lh thwldwth (hae sunt generationes), from which Genesis derives its name. [*1] In the rest of the historical literature of the Old Testament nothing like this as yet appears. It is also characteristic that whenever the title occurs, introducing a new, section, the contents of the preceding section are first of all briefly recapitulated so as to show the place of the link upon the chain.

The Priestly Code enters as little as possible on the contents of the various narratives. The predicates are stripped off, so far as they admit of such treatment, and the subjects duly entered in a catalogue with connecting text. In this way the history almost shrinks to the compass of a genealogy with explanations--the genealogy at least forms the principal contents of the history, and here appears in such proportions

[p. 333]

and such systematic fashion as nowhere else. This has been regarded as a proof that Q belongs to an older stage of development of Hebrew historiography than JE. There can be no doubt, it is said, [*1] that the oldest Hebrew, or indeed Oriental, history began with the historical notices and traditions inserted in the tribal or family catalogues. Yet we know positively that in the Books of Judges, Samuel, and Kings, there are no genealogical statistics at all, while Chronicles, and what belongs to Chronicles, is full of them. We know also that songs such as those in Josh. x. 12, 13; Jud. v.; 2 Sam. i. 19 seq., iii. 33 seq. are the oldest historical monuments, and that a number of them are found in JE and not a single one in Q. Herder's theory of the development of history out of genealogy will not apply here, [*2] but indeed what we have to do with here is not history proper at all, but folklore.

It is true that with the Jehovist also the genealogy underlies the narrative as its skeleton. It is the natural chain to link the different stories together, and even at a time when the latter were still separate and only circulated orally, the genealogy was not unknown to the people. When stories were told of Isaac and Ishmael, and Lot and Esau, every one knew at once who these personages were, and how they were related to Israel and to one another. But this was merely the presupposition of the narratives, known as a matter of course to the hearers; the interesting element in them consisted in those traits which the Priestly Code omits. Stories of this kind compel attention because they set forth the peculiarities of different peoples as historically and really related to each other, not according to an empty embryological relation. It is the temper displayed by different races, not the stem of their relationship, that makes the point of the stories; their charm and their very life depend on their being transparent and reflecting the historic attitude of the time which gave them birth. The clearer the traces they display of love and hatred, jealousy of rivals and joy in their fall, the nearer are we to the forces which originated the tradition about early times. In the Priestly Code all those stories are absent in which there is anything morally objectionable,

[p. 334]

[paragraph continues] --those for example in which the cowardice of the patriarchs endangers the honour of their wives, those of Sarah's cruel jealousy of Hagar, and of the unlovely contention of Leah and Rachel for husband and children, of the incest of Lot's daughters, of the violation of Dinah. All hatred, and strife, and deceit in the patriarchal family disappear: Lot and Abraham, Isaac and Ishmael, Jacob and Esau, agree to separate: of the tricks of Laban and Jacob to each other, of the treachery of Simeon and Levi to Shechem, of the enmity Joseph's brethren bore to him, there is not a word in the Priestly Code. It is not merely that "psychological decorations," as they have been called, are left out; the very heart of the business has been cut out. That Moab and Ammon, Ishmael and Edom, were Hebrew peoples, all more nearly or more distantly related to the Israelites, that the Aramaeans too were closely connected with the Hebrews by blood and by marriage, that this tribe lives in one district contiguous to Palestine, that in another--this is what the Priestly Code has to tell. Dry ethnographical and geographical facts like these are presented in a genealogical form; all we learn of the patriarchs is their marriages and births and how they separated to the various dwelling-places of their descendants. And folklore could not possibly be directed to such facts as these at a period when these relations were all matters of fact and familiar to every child. The Priestly Code, moreover, strips the legends of the patriarchs of their local as well as their historical colour; they are kept at a distance from all the places of the sacredness of which the Jehovist makes them the founders. [*1] No historical geography is needed in order to understand the narrative of the Priestly Code in Genesis: but that is only to say

[p. 335]

that it stands quite away from the soil out of which oral tradition arises. It deals in no etymology, no proverbs nor songs, no miracles, theophanies nor dreams, and is destitute of all that many-coloured poetic charm which adorns the Jehovistic narratives. But this proves not its original simplicity but its neglect of the springs from which legend arises, and of its most essential elements. [*1] What remains is anything but historical objectivity: it is the formula and nothing more.

As with the legend of the beginnings of things, so with the legend of the patriarchs: what is essential and original is the individual element in the several stories; the connection is a secondary matter, and only introduced on the stories being collected and reduced to writing. But

[p. 336]

in the Priestly Code the individuality of the several stories is simply destroyed: to such an extent is the connection dwelt on. What meaning is there in the statement that Jacob was all at once called Israel, i.e., Fight-God (xxxv. 10), if no mention is made of his wrestling with El, which was the occasion of his change of name? Have we anything like the true history of Joseph in the Priestly Code? Can we regard it as the original history, when the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah is dismissed in a subordinate clause, as is done in xix. 29? The remarkable admission has been made, [*1] that it is plain from the summary manner of reporting of the Priestly Code, that the author could have told his story at much greater length, had it been consistent with the plan of his work to do so, and that this certainly points to sources where greater detail was used. The more detailed source, however, which is thus taken for granted, need by no means, it is said, have been a written one, and least of all the Jehovistic narrative before us; on the contrary, we are told, the state of the case is best satisfied by the assumption that the author held a more detailed narrative to be unnecessary, because the oral tradition, living in the mouth of the people, was quite able to fill in the colours in his outlines and to convert his chronistic notices into living pictures. But this is merely an attempt to elude the necessity for exactly comparing the Priestly Code and the Jehovist. The question is, which of the two writings stands nearest to the starting-point? Is it the one which attaches most importance to elements which are foreign to the nature of oral tradition altogether and only added in literary composition? It would be a curious thing if the writing down of the tradition began with writing down what the legend did not contain. What is set before us in the Priestly Code is the quintessence not of the oral tradition, but of the tradition when already written down. And the written account of the primitive history which it employs is the Jehovistic narrative. The order in which the popular legends are there placed here becomes the very kernel of the narrative. There the plan was hidden behind the execution, but here it comes forward not indeed essentially changed, but sharp and accentuated, as the principal feature of the whole.

 

3. The Jehovist still lives in the spirit of the legend, but the Priestly Code is strange to that spirit, and does violence to the legend, by treating

[p. 337]

it from its own point of view, which is quite different from the old one. Moral and religious culture is further advanced; and hence the removal of real or apparent offences against morality and of notions which are too childish, or superstitious, or even mythical. If the Godhead appears, it must not be patent to the senses, at least it must not be seen in visible form. Jehovah speaks with Jacob, but not in a dream from the heavenly ladder; He reveals Himself to Moses, but not in the burning bush; the notion of revelation is retained, but the subsidiary incidents which must be added to make a concrete of the abstract, are stripped off. It is a matter of indifference under what forms or through what media a man receives revelation, if only the fact stands sure; in other words, revelation is no longer a living reality of the present, but a dead dogma for the past. The progress of culture in the Priestly Code is most of all evident in the learned historical treatment with which the legend is overlaid. First of all there is the chronology, which we encountered even in the legend of the origins of mankind, and which is naturally continued in the patriarchal legend. Here indeed we see with special plainness how foreign learned calculation is to the poetical materials; in some instances the facts lead to quite a different view from that of the numbers. Following the numbers of the Priestly Code we may, with the Rabbis, regard Shem and Eber as the venerable heads of the Jewish school in which the child Jacob learned his letters and the Torah. Then Jacob's sojourn in Mesopotamia lasts about eighty years, and all this time Isaac is lying on his death-bed; after being long dead for us, he suddenly appears again, but only to die. And hand in hand with the chronology there goes the general predilection of the Priestly Code for numbers and names, which displays itself even in Genesis, though not nearly so marked there as in the later books of the Pentateuch. Oral folklore can very well contain round numbers, such as the twelve sons and the seventy souls of the family of Jacob, the twelve wells and the seventy palm trees at Elim, the seventy elders and the twelve spies; but a chronological system, whole lists of exact and considerable numbers, bare catalogues of personal names, none of them having any significance, dates and measurements such as those in the account of the flood in the Priestly Code, require writing even to originate, not to speak of transmitting them. These art-products of pedantry toke the place of the living poetic detail of the Jehovist narrative; the element of episode has to give way to the seriousness of dry history.

[p. 338]

[paragraph continues] It is also a mark of historical pedantry that the mixing up of the period of the patriarchs with a later period is avoided as anachronistic. In the Jehovist the present everywhere shines through, he in no way conceals his own age; we are told that Babylon is the great world-city, that the Assyrian Empire is in existence, with the cities of Niniveh and Calah and Resen; that the Canaanites had once dwelt in Palestine, but had long been absorbed in the Israelites. The writer of the Priestly Code is very careful not to do anything like this. [*1] He brushes up the legend and makes history of it according to the rules of art; he kills it as legend, and deprives it of all real value, such as it possesses, not indeed for the history of primitive times, but for that of the age of the kings.

The history of the first men and of the patriarchs is divided by the Priestly Code into three periods, each of them opened by a covenant. The covenant with Adam (Gen. i. 28-ii. 4) is the simplest; it is not called a covenant, but it is the basis of the second covenant with Noah (ix. 1-17), which modifies it in important particulars, and brings it nearer to the present age. The covenant with Abraham (Gen. xvii.), which alone is ratified with the succeeding patriarchs, does not apply to the whole of mankind, but only to Abraham's seed, and especially to Israel. The first sign of the covenant is the Sabbath (Gen. ii. 3; comp. Exod. xxxi. 12 seq.; Ezek. xx. 12, 20), the second the rainbow (Gen. ix. 12), the third circumcision (xvii. 10). The first parent of mankind is enjoined to use a purely vegetable diet, the father of mankind after the, flood receives permission to slaughter animals; but he is expressly ordered not to eat flesh in the blood, and besides, to shed the blood of no man. What is said to Noah remains good for Abraham; but to the latter God promises that his posterity by Sarah shall possess the land of Canaan, and this is further assured by the purchase of the cave of Machpelah for a family burying-place, the purchase being executed according to all the forms of law, with prolonged negotiations. Further, God reveals Himself to Abraham as El Shaddai, and under this name He also manifests Himself to Isaac (xxviii. 3) and Jacob (xxxv. 11), repeating to them the promise of the possession of the land. It is pointed out with emphasis that God was not known to the pre-Mosaic time under His Israelite name, that He revealed Himself to the patriarchs only as El Shaddai, and as Jehovah first to Moses (Exod. vi. 2, 3). With a similar intention,

[p. 339]

which is not far to seek, the time of the patriarchs is kept free of the other Mosaic forms of worship; hence we have here no sacrifices nor altars, no distinction of clean and unclean beasts, nor anything of the kind. Now till within a short time ago, there was a great inclination (no one will be found at this date to acknowledge that he felt it) to admire the sobriety and faithfulness of the Priestly Code, as shown in this observance of the different religious stages. But in fact we can only admire these advantages in it, if we believe that the religion was at first naturalistic, that then all at once it became a good deal more positive, and then quite positive in the year 1500 B.C. How can we regard it as showing historical faithfulness, that the patriarchs were allowed to slaughter, but not to sacrifice, and that first the Sabbath was introduced, then the rainbow, then circumcision, and at last sacrifice, under Moses? It is natural that Jacob at Bethel should give tithes of all that he possesses, unnatural that the eponymous hero should not in worship above all things have left a good example to his posterity. What is it but a theory, that the name Jehovah was first revealed to Moses, and through him to the Israelites, and that it was quite unknown before?--a theory which certainly cannot be upheld, for Moses could have done nothing more irrational than to introduce a new name for the God of their fathers, to whom he directed his people,--and yet a theory which, from the correlation between Jehovah the God of Israel and Israel the people of Jehovah, readily suggests itself, and is not altogether peculiar to the author of the Priestly Code. [*1] He had a pattern which suggested certain lines, and these he traces strongly and with a system; and he even goes so far as to avoid the name of Jehovah even in his own narrative of the pre-Mosaic period. Even when speaking in his own person, he says Elohim, not Jehovah, down to Exodus vi.

The three periods and the three corresponding covenants of the early age are preliminaries to the fourth period and the fourth covenant.

[p. 340]

[paragraph continues] The narrator everywhere has an eye to the Mosaic law, and the thought of it determined the plan which comes so prominently into view in his representation of the origins of human history. The great features of this plan are the great official transactions of Jehovah with the patriarchs. In these we have not a narrative but only speeches and negotiations; the preliminary laws are given in them, which, as they advance step by step, prepare the way for the great Law, namely, the Mosaic. The law of worship has taken the place of the legend of worship. In the legend the sacred usages and customs arise, as it were, spontaneously, in connection with any occasion, placed in the early sacred time, which may serve to account for them. Jehovah does not make it statutory that the sinew of the thigh may not be eaten; but He wrestles with Israel, and injures the sinew of his thigh during the wrestling, and for this reason the children of Israel do not eat thereof. In the following story it is explained how it came about that the Israelites circumcise young boys (Exod. iv. 25 seq.). As Moses was returning from Midian to Goshen, he spent a night on the road, and Jehovah fell upon him with the intention of killing him. His wife, Zipporah, however, took a flint and cut off the foreskin of her son, and touched Moses luranulayw with it, saying, Thou art a blood-bridegroom to me. Then Jehovah let him go. Thus Zipporah circumcises her son instead of her husband, makes the latter symbolically a blood-bridegroom, and thereby delivers him from the wrath of Jehovah to which he is exposed, because he is not a blood-bridegroom, i.e., because he has not submitted to circumcision before his marriage. In other words, the circumcision of male infants is here explained as a milder substitute for the original circumcision of young men before marriage. [*1] Compare with this the style in which in Gen. xvii. the Priestly Code institutes the circumcision of male children on the eighth day after birth. This institution completely throws into the shade and spoils the story out of which it arose, namely, the promise of the birth of Isaac as a reward to Abraham of the hospitality he showed Jehovah at Hebron. But there is more than a difference in form, there is a material contradiction between the Jehovistic legend and the priestly

[p. 341]

law. The law purifies the legend, that is to say, denies all its main features and motives. As we saw in the first chapter there is a conscious polemic at work in the representation in the Priestly Code that Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob erect no altars, and practice no religious rites, and that they have no connection with the sacred places with which in JE they are inseparably associated. The popular religious book preserved to us in the Jehovistic Genesis, not corrected to any great extent, though certainly to some extent, tells how the ancestors and representatives of Israel founded the old popular worship at the principal sites at which it was kept up. The law of the legitimate cultus of Jerusalem, as it lies before us in the Priestly Code, reforms and destroys the old popular worship on the basis of Mosaic, i.e., prophetical ideas. The tabernacle does not harmonize with the sanctuaries of Hebron, Beersheba, Shechem, Kadesh, Mahanaim, Lahai-Roi, Bethel; the patriarchs live at Hebron only because they are to be buried there, not to entertain the Deity under the oak of Mamre and to build an altar there. The heretical maccebas, trees and wells, disappear, and with them the objectionable customs: that God should have summoned Abraham to offer up to Him his only son is an idea the Priestly Code could not possibly entertain. The whole material of the legend is subordinated to legislative designs: the modifying influence of the law on the narrative is everywhere apparent.

The attitude of Judaism to the old legend is on the whole negative, but it added some new elements. While the patriarchs are not allowed to sacrifice, only to slaughter, they have, on the other hand, the Sabbath [*1] and circumcision. In this they are like the Jews in Babylon, who were deprived of the national cultus, and replaced it with these two symbols of religious membership and union, which were independent of the temple of Jerusalem. In the exile, after the cessation of the service of the altar, the Sabbath and circumcision attained that significance as symbols--in the genuine old meaning of the Greek word--as practical symbols of Judaism, which they retain to the present day. The emphasis is noteworthy with which the Priestly Code always insists on the fact that the patriarchs sojourned in a strange land, that they were

[p. 342]

[paragraph continues] Gerim. If we also consider that Abraham is said to have migrated into Palestine from Ur, from Chaldaea, it is hardly possible to reject the idea that the circumstances of the exile had some influence in moulding the priestly form of the patriarchal legend. In spite of all the efforts of the historian, and all the archaic appearance of his work, it may in that case still be the fact that the surroundings of the narrator found positive expression in his description of the patriarchal times.

  

III.

In the Jehovistic history-book Genesis is a most important part, and occupies at least a half of the whole work: in the Priestly Code, Genesis quite disappears in comparison with the later books. Only with the Mosaic legislation does this work arrive at its own ground, and it at once stifles the narrative under a mass of legislative matter. Here also there is a thin historical thread running parallel to the Jehovist, but we constantly lose sight of it from the repeated interruptions made by extensive ritual laws and statistical statements.

"These last four books of Moses have been made quite unreadable by a most melancholy, most incomprehensible, revision. The course of the history is everywhere interrupted by the insertion of innumerable laws, with regard to the greater part of which it is impossible to see any reason for their being inserted where they are." The dislocation of the narrative by these monstrous growths of legislative matter is not, as Goethe thinks, to be imputed to the editor; it is the work of the unedited Priestly Code itself, and is certainly intolerable; nor can it be original; the literary form of the work at once shows this. It is still possible to trace how the legal matter forces its way into the narrative, and once there spreads itself and takes up more and more room. In the Jehovist, one form of the tradition may still be discerned, according to which the Israelites on crossing the Red Sea at once proceeded towards Kadesh, without making the detour to Sinai. We only get to Sinai in Exod. xix., but in Exod. xvii. we are already at Massah and Meribah, i.e., on the ground of Kadesh. That is the scene of the story of Moses striking water out of the rock with his staff: there the fight with the Amalekites took place--they lived there and not at Sinai--there also the visit of Jethro, which requires a locality at some distance from his home (at Sinai), a place where the people had not merely a temporary

[p. 343]

encampment, but their permanent seat of justice. [*1] Hence the narratives which are told before the arrival at Sinai are repeated after the departure from it, because the locality is the same before and after, namely, the wilderness of Kadesh, the true scene of the Mosaic history. The institution of judges and elders concludes the narrative before the great Sinai section, and begins the narrative after it (Ex. xviii., Num. xi). The story of the manna and the quails occurs not only in Exod. xvi., but also in Num. xi; and the rocky spring called forth by Moses at Massah and Meribah is both in Exod. xvii. and Num. xx. In other words, the Israelites arrived at Kadesh, the original object of their wanderings, not after the digression to Sinai but immediately after the Exodus, and they spent there the forty years of their residence in the wilderness. Kadesh is also the original scene of the legislation. "There He made them statute and judgment, and there He proved them," we read in a poetical fragment, before the Sinai section (Exod. xv. 25), which is now placed in the narrative of the healing of the waters at Marah, but stands there quite isolated and without bearing on its context. The curious conjunction of judgment and trial points unmistakably to Massah and Meribah (i.e., judgment and trial-place), that is, to Kadesh, as the place spoken of. But the legislation at the seat of judgment at Kadesh is not represented as a single act in which Moses promulgates to the Israelites once for all a complete and comprehensive body of laws; it goes on for forty years, and consists in the dispensation of justice at the sanctuary, which he begins and the priests and judges carry on after him according to the pattern he set. This is the idea in the extremely instructive narrative in Exod. xviii., of which Kadesh is the scene. And in this way the Torah has its place in the historical narrative, not in virtue of its matter as the contents of a code, but from its form as constituting the professional activity of Moses. It is in the history not as a result, as the sum of the laws and usages binding on Israel, but as a process; it is shown how it originated, how the foundation was laid for the living institution of that Torah which still exists and is in force in Israel.

The true and original significance of Sinai is quite independent of the legislation. It was the seat of the Deity, the sacred mountain, doubtless not only for the Israelites, but generally for all the Hebrew

[p. 344]

and Cainite (Kenite) tribes of the surrounding region. The priesthood of Moses and his successors was derived from the priesthood there: there Jehovah appeared to him in the burning bush when he was keeping the sheep of the priest of Midian, from there He sent him to Egypt. There, to the Israelites, Jehovah still dwelt long after they had settled in Palestine; in the song of Deborah He is summoned to come from Sinai to succour His oppressed people and to place Himself at the head of His warriors. According to the view of the poet of Deut. xxxiii. the Israelites did not go to Jehovah to Sinai, but the converse; He came to them from Sinai to Kadesh: "Jehovah came from Sinai and shone from Seir unto them; He lightened from Mount Paran and came to Meribath Kadesh." [*1] But it is not difficult to see how it came to be thought more seemly that the Israelites should undertake the journey to Jehovah. This was at first put in the form that they appeared there before the face of Jehovah to worship Him and offer Him a sacrifice (Exod. iii. 12), and at their departure they received the ark instead of Jehovah Himself, who continued to dwell on Sinai (Exod. xxxiii.); for the ark represents Jehovah, that constitutes its significance, and not the tables of the law, which were not in it at first. It was a further step to make Sinai the scene of the solemn inauguration of the historical relation between Jehovah and Israel. This was done under the poetic impulse to represent the constituting of the people of Jehovah as a dramatic act on an exalted stage. What in the older tradition was a process which went on quietly and slowly, occupied completely the whole period of Moses, and was at the beginning just such as it still continued to be, was now, for the sake of solemnity and vividness, compressed into a striking scene of inauguration. If this were done, the covenant between Jehovah and Israel must receive a positive (as well as a negative) character, that is to say, Jehovah Himself must announce to the people the basis and the conditions of it. Thus the necessity arose to communicate in this place the contents of the fundamental laws, and so the matter of the legislation made its way into the historical narrative. But that it did not belong originally to this place we see from the confusion which obtains even in the Jehovistic Sinai section (Exod. xix.-xxiv., xxxii.-xxxiv.). The small

[p. 345]

bodies of laws which are here communicated may in themselves be old enough, but they are forced into the narrative. It is only of what is relatively the most recent corpus, the Decalogue (in E), that this cannot be asserted.

As the Jehovistic work was originally a pure history-book, so Deuteronomy, when it was first discovered, was a pure law-book. [*1] These two works, the historical and legal, were at first quite independent of each other; only afterwards were they conjoined, perhaps that the new law might share in the popularity of the old people's book, and at the same time infuse into it its own spirit. It made it the easier to do this, that, as we have just seen, a piece of law had already been taken up into the Jehovistic history-book. To the Decalogue, at the beginning of the period of the forty years, was now added Deuteronomy at the close of that period. The situation--of which the law itself knows nothing--is very well chosen, not only because Moses is entitled when making his testament to anticipate the future and make a law for the time to come, but also because, the law being placed at the close of his life, the thread of the narrative is not further interrupted, the law being simply inserted between the Pentateuch and the Book of Joshua. This combination of Deuteronomy with the Jehovist was the beginning of the combination of narrative and law; and the fact that this precedent was before the author of the Priestly Code explains how, though his concern was with the Torah alone, he yet went to work from the very outset and comprised in his work the history of the creation, as if it also belonged to the Torah. This manner of setting forth the Torah in the form of a history book is not in the least involved in the nature of the case; on the contrary, it introduces the greatest amount of awkwardness. How it came about can only be explained in the way above described; an antecedent process of the same nature in literary history led the way and made the suggestion. [*2]

As from the literary point of view, so also from the historical, the Moses of the Jehovist appears more original than the Moses of the Priestly Code. To prove this is, it is true, the aim of the entire

[p. 346]

present work: yet it will not on that account be thought out of place if we take advantage of this convenient opportunity for a brief sketch and criticism of the conflicting historical views of Moses and his work in the two main sources of the Pentateuch. According to the Priestly Code Moses is a religious founder and legislator, as we are accustomed to think of him. He receives and promulgates the Torah, [*1] perhaps not as a book--though, when we come to think of it, we can hardly represent the transaction to ourselves in any other way--but certainly fixed and finished as an elaborate and minutely organised system, which comprises the sacred constitution of the congregation for all time to come. The whole significance of Moses consists in the office of messenger which he holds as mediator of the law; what else he does is of no importance. That the law is given once for all is the great event of the time, not that the people of Israel begins to appear on the stage of the world. The people is there for the sake of the law, not the law for the sake of the people. With the Jehovist, on the contrary, Moses' work consists in this, that he delivers his people from the Egyptians and cares for it in every way in the wilderness. In the prelude scene from his youth, when he smites the Egyptian and seeks to adjust the dispute of his brethren (Exod. ii. 11 seq.), his whole history is prefigured. His care for the Israelites embraces both catering for their sustenance, and making and preserving peace and order among them (Num. xi.). The Torah is but a part of his activity, and proceeds from his more general office as the guardian of the young people, who has, as it were, to teach the fledgling to fly (Num. xi. xii.). According to Exod. xviii. his Torah is nothing but a giving of counsel, a finding the way out of complications and difficulties which had actually arisen. Individuals bring their different cases before him; he pronounces judgment or gives advice, and in so doing teaches the people the way they should go. Thus he is the beginner of the teaching of Jehovah which lives on after him in priest and prophet. Here all is life and movement: as Jehovah Himself, so the man of God, is working in a medium which is alive; is working practically, by no means theoretically, in history, not in literature. His work and activity may be told in a narrative, but the contents of it are more than a system, and are not to be reduced to a compendium; it is

[p. 347]

not done and finished off, it is the beginning of a series of infinite activities. In the Priestly Code the work of Moses lies before us clearly defined and rounded off; one living a thousand years after knows it as well as one who saw it with his eyes. It is detached from its originator and from his age: lifeless itself, it has driven the life out of Moses and out of the people, nay, out of the very Deity. This precipitate of history, appearing as law at the beginning of the history, stifles and kills the history itself. Which of the two views is the more historical, we can accordingly be at no loss to decide. It may be added that in the older Hebrew literature the founding of the nation and not the giving of the law is regarded as the theocratic creative act of Jehovah. The very notion of the law is absent: only covenants are spoken of, in which the representatives of the people undertake solemn obligations to do or leave undone something which is described in general terms.

Another point of difference must be mentioned here, though indeed it is a matter which has been before us more than once already. That which is in the Priestly Code the subject-matter of the Torah of Moses, namely, the institution of the cultus, the Jehovist traces to the practice of the patriarchs--one more result of the difference between law and legend. The Moses of the Priestly Code conflicts not only with the future, but with the past; he comes into collision with history on every side. That view is manifestly the only natural one according to which the worship is not specifically Israelite, not a thing instituted by Moses in obedience to a sudden command of the Deity, but an ancestral tradition. But at the time when the Priestly Code was drawn up the worship was certainly the one thing that made Israel Israel. In it the church, the one congregation of worship, takes the place of the people even in the Mosaic age--sorely against history, but characteristically for the author's point of view.

Now even such authorities as Bleek, Hupfeld, and Knobel have been misled by the appearance of historical reality which the Priestly Code creates by its learned art here as well as in the history of the patriarchs. They have regarded the multiplicity of numbers and names, the minute technical descriptions, the strict keeping up of the scenery of camp-life, as so many signs of authentic objectivity. Noldeke made an end of this critical position once for all, but Colenso is properly entitled to the

[p. 348]

credit of having first torn the web asunder. [*1] The boldness with which numbers and names are stated, and the preciseness of the details about indifferent matters of furniture, do not prove them to be reliable: they are not drawn from contemporary records, but are the fruit solely of late Jewish fancy, a fancy which, it is well known, does not design nor sketch, but counts and constructs, and produces nothing more than barren plans. Without repeating the description of the tabernacle in Exod. xxv. word for word, it is difficult to give an idea how circumstantial it is; we must go to the source to satisfy ourselves what the narrator can do in this line. One would imagine that he was giving specifications to measurers for estimates, or that he was writing for carpet-makers and upholsterers; but they could not proceed upon his information, for the incredibly matter-of-fact statements are fancy all the same, as was shown in chap. i. The description of the tabernacle is supplemented in the Book of Numbers by that of the camp; the former being the centre, this is the circle drawn about it, and consists of an outer ring, the twelve secular tribes, a middle ring, the Levites, and an innermost one, the sons of Aaron: a mathematical demonstration of the theocracy in the wilderness. The two first chapters contain the census of the twelve tribes, and their allocation in four quarters, nothing but names and numbers. To this first census chap. xxxiv. adds another at the close of the forty years, in which the various detailed figures are different, but the total is about the same. This total, 600,000 warriors, comes from the older tradition, but is proved to be quite worthless by the fact that in a really authentic document the levy of Israel in the time of Deborah is stated to be 40,000 strong. Still, the Priestly Code is entitled to the credit of having made the total a little less round, and of having broken it up into artificial component parts. The muster of the people is followed in Num. iii. iv. by the dedication of the tribe of Levi to the sanctuary, in compensation for the firstborn males of the Israelites who up to that time had not been sacrificed nor yet redeemed. There are 22,273 firstborn males to be provided for, and there are 22,000 male Levites above a month old. The 273 extra firstborn males are specially redeemed at five shekels a head. What accuracy! But what of the fact that a people of at least two millions has only 22,273 firstborn males, or say 50,000 firstborn of both sexes? This gives an average of forty children to every woman, for the

[p. 349]

firstborn in the sense of the law is that which first opens the womb. The continuation of Num. iii. iv. is in chapter viii. As the Levites are an offering of firstlings to the sanctuary on the part of the people, which, however, is not to be sacrificed but made over to the priests, the characteristic rite of this sort of sacred due has to be gone through with them, namely, an act imitating that of throwing into the flame of the altar (Aristeas 31, l. 5). To think of Moses and Aaron heaving the 22,000 men! Not less striking as an example of this kind of fiction is the story of Num. xxxi. Twelve thousand Israelites, a thousand from each tribe, take the field against Midian, extirpate without any fighting--at least nothing is anywhere said of this important point--the whole people, slay all the men and a part of the women, take captive the unmarried girls, and suffer themselves no loss whatever. The latter point is asserted very definitely. "The captains of thousands and the captains of hundreds came to Moses, and said to him, Thy servants have taken the sum of the men of war which are under our charge, and there lacketh not one of us." Of the immeasurable booty of men and cattle Jehovah assigns half to those who took the field and took part in the battle, the other half to the congregation; and the former are to give the 500th part to the priests, the latter the 50th part to the Levites. The execution of this order is especially reported as follows: "The booty which the men of war had taken was 675,000 sheep, 72,000 beeves, 61,000 asses, and 32,000 women that had not lain by man. And the half which was the portion of them that went out to war was 337,500 sheep, and Jehovah's tribute of the sheep was 675; 36,000 beeves, tribute to Jehovah 72; 30,500 asses, tribute to Jehovah 61; 16,000 persons, tribute to Jehovah 32. And Moses gave the tribute to Jehovah to Eleazar the priest. But the other half, which Moses divided to the children of Israel, the half due to the congregation, was 337,500 sheep, 36,000 beeves, 30,500 asses, 16,000 persons, and of the children of Israel's half Moses took one of fifty and gave them to the Levites." The calculation of the contribution to Jehovah was quite easy for Moses, as the 500th part of the half is equivalent to the 1000th part of the whole; he had only to leave off the thousands from the first totals. In conclusion, the captains brought offerings to Jehovah of golden dishes, chains, bracelets, rings, and earrings, altogether 16,750 shekels weight, as atonement for their souls "But that was only the gold which the captains had taken as booty, for the men of war had

[p. 350]

taken spoil, every man for himself." We may perhaps be allowed to speculate as to the relation between these 16,750 shekels which in this passage the captains alone offer to the tabernacle of the gold ornaments of the Midianites, and the 1700 shekels which in Judges viii. the whole people dedicate of the gold ornaments of the Midianites to set up an image in Ophra.

It is less easy to account on the theory of pure fiction for the numerous names sometimes arranged together like a catalogue than for reported circumstances and numbers. There can certainly be no doubt that the forty places which are mentioned in the list of encampments in the wanderings, really existed in the region the Israelites are reported to have traversed. But he who is satisfied with this as evidence that we have before us here a historical document of primitive antiquity, will never be disturbed by criticism. Was it such a difficult matter to find out forty definite stations in the wilderness for the forty years of the wanderings? Even if the elements of the composition are not fictitious, that is far from proving the composition itself to be authentic. And in the case of lists of the names of persons, the elements are often of an extremely doubtful nature; and here it is well to keep in view the principle of Vatke (op. cit. p. 675) that no confidence is to be placed in subjects devoid of predicates, and that persons are not to be taken for real who have nothing to do. The dozens of names in Num. i. vii. x. are almost all made to the same pattern, and have no similarity whatever to the names genuinely old. The fact that the name of Jehovah does not enter into their composition only shows that the composer was not forgetful of his religio-historical theory.

By its taste for barren names and numbers and technical descriptions, the Priestly Code comes to stand on the same line with the Chronicles and the other literature of Judaism which labours at an artificial revival of the old tradition (p. <page 180>, seq., <page 214>, seq., <page 226>). Of a piece with this tendency is an indescribable pedantry, belonging to the very being of the author of the Priestly Code. He has a very passion for classifying and drawing plans; if he has once dissected a genus into different species, we get all the species named to us one by one every time he has occasion to mention the genus. The subsuming use of the prepositions Lamed and Beth is characteristic of him. He selects a long-drawn expression wherever he can; he does not weary of repeating for the hundredth time what is a matter of course (Num. viii.), he hates

[p. 351]

pronouns and all abbreviating substitutes. What is interesting is passed over, what is of no importance is described with minuteness, his exhaustive clearness is such as with its numerous details to confuse our apprehension of what is in itself perfectly clear. This is what used to be described in the phraseology of historical criticism as epic breadth. [*1]

2. Having thus attempted to describe the general contrast of the Priestly Code and the Jehovist in the Mosaic period, it remains for us to compare the several stories in the two works. The Exodus from Egypt is everywhere regarded as the commencement of Israelite history. In the Priestly Code it is made the epoch of an era (Exod. xii. 2), which is afterwards dated from, not only in years but even in months and days. It is unquestionable that this precise style of dating only came into use among the Hebrews at a very late period. We find in the historical books only one statement of the month in which an event took place (1 Kings vi. 38), and in that case the day is not given. To the prophetic writers dates were of some importance, and the growth of the practice may to some extent be traced with them. Amos first came forward "two years before the earthquake." [*2] The most precise date in Isaiah is "the year in which king Uzziah died." Numbers of years are first found in Jeremiah, "the thirteenth year of king Josiah," and a few more instances. All at once there was a change: Haggai and Zechariah, prophets who grew up in the Babylonian exile, always give dates, not only the year and month, but the day of the month as well. In the Priestly Code this precise reckoning, which the Jews obviously learned from the Chaldeans, is in use from the age of Moses onwards.

In the Jehovist the ostensible occasion of the Exodus is a festival which the children of Israel desire to hold in honour of their God in the wilderness. In the Priestly Code this occasion disappears; there can

[p. 352]

be no pre-Mosaic festivals. But with this the reason falls away for which Jehovah kills the firstborn of the Egyptians, He does it because the king of Egypt is keeping from Him the firstborn of the Israelites, which ought to be offered to Him at the festival; for the celebration in question is the sacrificial festival of the first-fruits of cattle in spring. In the older tradition the festival is the first thing; it explains the circumstances of the Exodus and the time of year at which it took place: in the later one the relation is reversed--the killing of the firstborn of the Egyptians leads to the sacrifice of the firstborn of Israel, the Exodus in spring is followed by the festival in spring as its consequence. The Priestly Code follows this younger tradition, and deviates from the original account still more widely in the view it gives of the passover. It obliterates completely the connection between the passover and the sacrifice of the firstborn, and represents it not as a giving of thanks to Jehovah for having slain the firstborn of Egypt, but as instituted at the moment of the Exodus to induce Jehovah to spare the firstborn of Israel. How all this is to be understood and judged of we have discussed more at large in the chapter on the festivals (p. <page 87>, <page 100>, <page 102>.).

As to the accounts given in the two sources of the crossing of the Red Sea, all we can say is that that of the Jehovist (J) is the more complicated. According to him the sea is dried up by a strong wind, and the Egyptians succeed at first in crossing it, and encounter the Hebrews on the eastern shore during he night. "But in the morning watch Jehovah turned, in the pillar of fire and of the cloud, against the host of the Egyptian, and overthrew the host of the Egyptian, and hindered the wheels of his chariot and caused him to drive heavily. Then the Egyptian said: I will flee before Israel, for Jehovah fighteth for them against Egypt. But the sea turned back towards morning to its ordinary level, and the Egyptians fled against it, and Jehovah shook them into the midst of the sea" (Exod. xiv. 24, 25, 27). According to the Priestly Code [*1] the waves meet over the pursuers, before they reach the further shore; the idea is much simpler, but poorer in incidental features.

The miracle of the manna (Exod. xvi.) is taken advantage of in the Priestly Code as a very suitable occasion for urging on the people a

[p. 353]

strict sanctification of the Sabbath: none falls on the seventh day, but what is gathered on the sixth keeps two days, while at other times it requires to be eaten quite fresh. This pursuit of a legal object destroys the story and obscures its original meaning, as no one can help seeing. Nor is it any sign of originality, rather of senility, that in the Priestly Code the manna is not eaten raw, but boiled and baked.

At Mount Sinai Moses receives, according to the Priestly Code, the revelation of--the model of the tabernacle, and he follows the pattern thus presented to him in the construction, down below, of the real tabernacle. All further revelation takes place, even in Moses' time, as far as possible in the tabernacle (Exod. xxv. 22). Even Sinai must not stand any longer than necessary by the side of the one legitimate seat of Deity. [*1] The tables of the law, it appears, are silently presupposed without being mentioned beforehand, it being of course assumed that the readers would know all about them from the old tradition. The outside of the ark, however, is furnished in the most extravagant style, and with a splendour which other descriptions of the chest of acacia-wood are far from suggesting. The ark in the Priestly Code differs indeed in every way from the appearance of it in 1 Kings vii. 23 seq. We are reminded of the Haggada by the covering which Moses has to put before his face, which is shining with the reflection of the glory of Jehovah (Exod. xxxiv. 29-35), and by the making of the brazen laver of the looking-glasses of the women who serve the temple (Exod. xxxviii. 8, cf. Num. xvii. 1, 9); these traits do not, it is true, belong to the original contents of the Priestly Code, but they belong to its circle.

From Sinai the old tradition takes us by this and that station, mentioned by name, without delay to Kadesh. Here the chief part of the forty years' sojourn in the wilderness is spent; this, as we said before, is the true scene of all the stories that are told about Moses. The Priestly Code takes us in this period, as in the legend of the patriarchs, not to definite places, but up and down in the wilderness of Sinai, in the wilderness of Paran, in the wilderness of Sin. Kadesh is with evident intention thrust as far as possible into the background--no doubt on account of the high sanctity the place originally had as the encampment for many years of the Israelites under Moses.

The spies are sent out according to the Jehovist from Kadesh,

[p. 354]

according to the Priestly Code from the wilderness of Paran. In the former authority they penetrate to Hebron, whence they bring back with them fine grapes, but they find that the land where these grow is not to be conquered. In the latter they proceed without any difficulty throughout the whole of Palestine to Lebanon, but have nothing to bring back with them, and advise against attacking the land because they have not found it particularly desirable, as if its advantages had been accessible to faith alone and not to be discovered by unbelieving eyes, as was actually the case in the time of Haggai and Zechariah, and at the time of Ezra and Nehemiah. To the genuine Israelite of old, however, the goodness of his beloved land was not a mere point of faith which he could ever have doubted. In the former source, as we judge from Deut. i. 23, only the number of the spies was given; in the latter all the twelve are named. In the former Caleb is the only good spy, in the latter Caleb and Joshua. At first probably neither the one nor the other belonged to this story; but Caleb easily came to be named as an exception, because he actually conquered the district from Kadesh to Hebron, which the spies had declared it impossible to take, and which the Israelites, alarmed by their account, had not ventured to attack. Joshua, again, was added from the consideration that, according to the principle enunciated by the Jehovist in Num. xiv. 23, 24, he must have shared the merit of Caleb, because he partook of the same exceptional reward with him.

In the Jehovist Moses alone instructs the spies and receives their report on their return; in the Priestly Code Moses and Aaron do so. In the oldest source of the Jehovist (J) Aaron has not yet made his appearance; in the Priestly Code Moses must not do any public act without him. [*1] Moses is still the moving spirit here as well as there, but Aaron is the representative of the theocracy, and pains are taken to secure that he shall never be absent where the representatives of the theocracy are brought face to face with the community. The desire to introduce the leader of the hierocracy, and with its leader the hierocracy itself, into the Mosaic history, has borne the most remarkable fruits in the so-called story of the rebellion of the company of Korah. According to the Jehovistic tradition the rebellion proceeds from the Reubenites, Dathan, and Abiram, prominent members of the firstborn tribe of Israel, and

[p. 355]

is directed against Moses as leader and judge of the people. According to the version of the main-stock of the Priestly Code (Q), the author of the agitation is Korah, a prince of the tribe of Judah, and he rebels not only against Moses, but against Moses and Aaron as representing the priesthood. In a later addition, which, to judge from its style, belongs likewise to the Priestly Code, but not to its original contents, the Levite Korah appears at the head of a revolt of the Levites against Aaron as high priest, and demands the equalisation of the lower with the higher clergy. Starting from the Jehovistic version, the historical basis of which is dimly discerned to be the fall of Reuben from its old place at the head of the brother-tribes, we have no difficulty in seeing how the second version arose out of it. The people of the congregation, i.e., of the church, having once come on the scene, the spiritual heads, Moses and Aaron, take the place of the popular leader Moses, and the jealousy of the secular grandees is now directed against the class of hereditary priests, instead of against the extraordinary influence on the community of a heaven-sent hero. All these changes are the natural outcome of the importation of the hierocracy into Mosaic times. From the second version we can go further and understand the origin of the third. In the earlier version the princes of the tribe of Reuben were forced to give way to a prince of the tribe of Judah. In the progress of time Korah the prince of the tribe of Judah is replaced by the eponymous head of a post-exilic Levitical family, of the same name. The contest between clergy and aristocracy is here transformed into a domestic strife between the higher and the inferior clergy, which was no doubt raging in the time of the narrator. Thus the three versions are developed, the origin and collocation of which appears from every other point of view to be an insoluble enigma. The one arises out of the other in the direct line of descent: the metamorphoses took place under the influence of great historical changes which are well known to us; and in the light of Jewish history from Josiah downwards they are by no means unintelligible. [*1]

We come to the migration of the Israelites to the land east of the Jordan. According to the Jehovist the neighbouring tribes place obstacles in their way, and the land in which they desire to settle has to

[p. 356]

be conquered with the sword. The Priestly Code tells us as little of all this as in an earlier instance of the war with Amalek; from all it says we should imagine that the Israelites went straight to their mark and met with no difficulty in the region in question; the land is ownerless, and the possession of it is granted by Moses and Eleazar to the two tribes Reuben and Gad (Num. xxxii.). But that war may not be completely wanting under Moses, we have afterwards the war with the Midianites, on which we have already commented (Num. xxxi.). There is not much story about it, only numbers and directions; and in verse 27 there is a suspicion of 1 Sam. xxx. 24, as if that passage were the groundwork of the whole. The passage is extremely interesting as showing us the views taken of war by the Jews of the later time who had grown quite unaccustomed to it. The occasion of the war also is noticeable; it is undertaken not for the acquisition of territory, nor with any other practical object, but only to take vengeance on the Midianites for having seduced some of the Israelites to uncleanness.

The elders of Midian, so the story goes, went to the soothsayer Balaam to ask his advice as to what should be done against the Israelite invaders. He suggested a means by which the edge of the invasion might be broken; the Midianites should give their daughters to the Israelites for wives, and so deprive the holy people of their strength, the secret of which lay in their isolation from other peoples. The Midianites took Balaam's advice and succeeded in entangling many of the Israelites with the charms of their women; in consequence of which Jehovah visited the faithless people with a severe plague. The narrative of the Priestly Code up to this point has to be pieced together from Num. xxxi. 8, 16 and Joshua xiii. 22, and from what is implied in the sequel of it; at this point the portion of it begins which is preserved to us (Num. xxv. 6 seq.), and we are told how the plague was ultimately stayed. A certain man coolly brings a Midianitish woman into the camp before the very eyes of Moses and the weeping children of Israel: then the young hereditary priest Phinehas takes a spear, transfixes the godless pair, and by this zeal averts the anger of Jehovah. This narrative is based on the Jehovistic one, which is also preserved to us only in part (Num. xxv. 1-5), about the backsliding of Israel in the camp of Shittim to the service of Baal-Peor, to which they were seduced by the daughters of Moab. In the Priestly Code the idolatry has

[p. 357]

quite disappeared, all but some unconscious reminiscences, and no sin is alleged but that of whoredom, which in the original story merely led up to the main offence. This is done manifestly with the idea that marriage with foreign women is in itself a falling away from Jehovah, a breach of the covenant. This change was extremely suitable to the circumstances of exilic and post-exilic Judaism, for in these later days there was no immediate danger of gross idolatry, but it took a good deal of trouble to prevent heathenism from making its way into the midst of the people under the friendly form of mixed marriages. The version of the Priestly Code, however, mixes up with the Baal-Peor story of the Jehovist the figure of Balaam, which is also borrowed from the Jehovist but entirely transformed in the process. In the form under which he appears in the early history he transgresses all the ideas of the Priestly Code. An Aramaean seer, who is hired for money and makes all sorts of heathen preparations to prophesy, but who yet is not an impostor, but a true prophet as much as any in Israel, who even stands in the most intimate relations with Jehovah, though cherishing the intention of cursing Jehovah's people--that is too much for exclusive Judaism. The correction is effected by the simple device of connecting Balaam with the following section, and making him the intellectual instigator of the devilry of the Midianitish women; and in this new form which he assumes in the Priestly Code he lives on in the Haggada. The reason for changing the Moabites into Midianites is not made clear; but the fact is undoubted that the Midianites never lived in that part of the world.

In the Book of Numbers the narrative sections, which are in the style and colour of the Priestly Code, have more and more the character of mere additions and editorial supplements to a connection which was already there and had a different origin. The independent main stock of the Priestly Code, the Book of the Four Covenants, or the Book of Origins (Q), more and more gives way to later additions, and ceases altogether, it appears, at the death of Moses. It is at least nowhere to be traced in the first half of the Book of Joshua, and so we cannot reckon as part of it those extensive sections of the second half, belonging to the Priestly Code, which treat of the division of the land. Without a preceding history of the conquest these sections are quite in the air; they cannot be taken as telling a continuous story of their own, but presuppose the Jehovistic-Deuteronomic work. In spite of

[p. 358]

distaste to war and to records of war (1 Chron. xxii. 8, xxviii. 3), an independent work like the Book of the Four Covenants could not possibly have passed over the wars of Joshua in silence.

A comparison of the different accounts of the entry of the Israelite tribes into the occupation of the conquered land may close this discussion. The Priestly Code, agreeing in this with the Deuteronomistic revision, represents the whole of Canaan as having been made a tabula rasa, and then, masterless and denuded of population, submitted to the lot. First the tribe of Judah receives its lot, then Manasseh and Ephraim, then the two tribes which attached themselves to Ephraim and Judah, Benjamin and Simeon, and lastly the five northern tribes, Zebulon, Issachar, Asher, Naphtali, Dan. "These are the inheritances which Eleazar the priest, and Joshua ben Nun, and the heads of the tribes of the children of Israel divided for an inheritance by lot in Shiloh before Jehovah at the door of the tabernacle."

According to the Jehovist, Judah and Joseph appear to have had their territory allocated to them at Gilgal (xiv. 6), and not by lot, and to have entered into occupation of it from there. A good while afterwards the land remaining over is divided by lot among the seven small tribes still unprovided for, from Shiloh, or perhaps originally from Shechem (xviii. 2-10). Joshua alone casts the lot and gives instructions; Eleazar the priest does not act with him. Even here the general principle of the Priestly Code, which knows no differences among the tribes, is somewhat limited; but it is much more decidedly contradicted by the important chapter, Judges i.

The chapter is, in fact, not a continuation of the Book of Joshua at all, but a parallel to it, which, while it presupposes the conquest of the east-Jordan lands, does not speak of the west-Jordan lands as conquered, but tells the story of the conquest, and that in a manner somewhat differing from the other source. From Gilgal, where the "Angel of Jehovah" first set up his tent, the tribes march out one by one to conquer their "lot" by fighting; first Judah, then Joseph. We hear only of these two, and with regard to Joseph we only hear of the very beginning of the conquest of his land. There is no mention of Joshua; nor would his figure as commander-general of Israel suit the view here given of the situation; though it would very well admit of him as leader of his tribe. The incompleteness of the conquest is acknowledged unreservedly; the Canaanites lived on quietly in the

[p. 359]

cities of the plain, and not till the period of the monarchy, when Israel had grown strong, were they subdued and made tributary. This chapter, as well as the main stem of the Book of Judges, corresponds to the Jehovistic stratum of the tradition, to which also passages in Joshua, of an identical or similar import, may be added without hesitation. The Angel of Jehovah is enough to tell us this. The difference which exists between it and the Jehovistic main version in the Book of Joshua is to be explained for the most part by the fact that the latter is of Ephraimite origin, and in consequence ascribes the conquest of the whole land to the hero of Ephraim or of Joseph, while Judges i. leans more to the tribe of Judah. Moreover, we find in the Book of Joshua itself the remnant of a version (ix. 4-7, 12-14) in which, just as in Judges i., the actors are the "men of Israel," who "ask counsel of the mouth of Jehovah," while elsewhere Joshua alone has anything to say, being the successor of Moses, and drawing his decisions from no source but the authority of his own spirit. And finally, we have to consider Exod. xxiii., 20 seq., where also there is a correspondence with Judges i., in the fact that not Joshua but the Angel of Jehovah (Judges v. 23) is the leader of Israel, and that the promised land is not conquered all at once but gradually, in the process of time.

Judges i. presents certain anachronisms, and is partly made up of anecdotes, but these should not prevent us from acknowledging that the general view given in this chapter of the process of the conquest, is, when judged by what we know of the subsequent period of Israel, incomparably more historical than that in the Book of Joshua, where the whole thing is done at once with systematic thoroughness, the whole land being first denuded of its inhabitants, and then divided by lot among the different tribes. The latter view may have come about partly from a literal interpretation of "lot" (Jud. xviii. 1), an expression which properly applies to the farm of a family but is here used for the territory of a tribe. It was also favoured no doubt by the tendency to compress a long development into its first great act; and as this tendency is carried out with the greatest thoroughness in the Priestly Code, that document stands furthest from the origin of the tradition. [*1] The same conclusion is led up to by the circumstance that

[p. 360]

the tribe of Joseph is never mentioned, one of the two tribes, Ephraim and Manasseh, being always spoken of instead, and that these two tribes are almost put out of sight by Judah. And yet Joshua, the leader of Ephraim, is leader here also of all Israel, having been preserved from the old original tradition, which was Ephraimitic.

It involves no contradiction that, in comparing the versions of the tradition, we should decline the historical standard in the case of the legend of the origins of mankind and of the legend of the patriarchs, while we employ it to a certain extent for the epic period of Moses and Joshua. The epic tradition certainly contains elements which cannot be explained on any other hypothesis than that there are historical facts underlying them; its source is in the period it deals with, while the patriarchal legend has no connection whatever with the times of the patriarchs. [*1] This justifies the difference of treatment. Our last result is still the same: whether tried by the standard of poetry or by that of history, the Priestly Code stands both in value and in time far below the Jehovist.

 

3. In rough strokes I have sought to place before the reader's view the contrast between the beginning and the end of the tradition of the Hexateuch. It would not be impossible to trace the inner development of the tradition in the intermediate stages between the two extremities. To do this we should have to make use of the more delicate results of the process of source-sifting, and to call to our aid the hints, not numerous indeed, but important, which are to be found in Deuteronomy and in the historical and prophetical books, especially Hosea. It would appear that legend from its very nature causes those who deal with it to strike out variations, that it cannot be represented

[p. 361]

objectively at all. Even at the first act of reducing it to writing the discolouring influences are at work, without any violence being done to the meaning which dwells in the matter. We can trace first of all the influence on the tradition of that specific prophetism which we are able to follow from Amos onwards. This is least traceable in the old main source of the Jehovist, in J; and yet it is remarkable that the Asheras never occur in the worship of the patriarchs. The second Jehovistic source, E, breathes the air of the prophets much more markedly, and shows a more advanced and thorough-going religiosity. Significant in this view are the introduction of Abraham as a Nabi, Jacob's burying the teraphim, the view taken of the macceba at Shechem (Jos. xxiv. 27), and above all the story of the golden calf. The Deity appears less primitive than in J, and does not approach men in bodily form, but calls to them from heaven, or appears to them in dreams. The religious element has become more refined, but at the same time more energetic, and has laid hold even of elements heterogeneous to itself, producing on occasion such strange mixtures as that in Gen. xxxi. 10-13. Then the law comes in and leavens the Jehovistic narrative, first the Deuteronomic (in Genesis even, and then quite strongly in Exodus and Joshua), while last of all, in the Priestly Code, under the influence of the legislation of the post-exile restoration, there is brought about a complete metamorphosis of the old tradition. The law is the key to the understanding even of the narrative of the Priestly Code. All the distinctive peculiarities of the work are connected with the influence of the law: everywhere we hear the voice of theory, rule, judgment. What was said above of the cultus may be repeated word for word of the legend: in the early time it may be likened to the green tree which grows out of the ground as it will and can; at a later time it is dry wood that is cut and made to a pattern with compass and square. It is an extraordinary objection to this when it is said that the post-exile period had no genius for productions such as the tabernacle or the chronology. It certainly was not an original age, but the matter was all there in writing, and did not require to be invented. What great genius was needed to transform the temple into a portable tent? What sort of creative power is that which brings forth nothing but numbers and names? In connection with such an age there can be no question at least of youthful freshness. With infinitely greater justice may it be maintained that such theoretical modelling and adaptation of

[p. 362]

the legend as is practiced in the Priestly Code, could only gain an entrance when the legend had died away from the memory and the heart of the people, and was dead at the root.

The history of the pre-historic and the epic tradition thus passed through the same stages as that of the historic; and in this parallel the Priestly Code answers both as a whole, and in every detail, to the Chronicles. The connecting link between old and new, between Israel and Judaism, is everywhere Deuteronomy.

The Antar-romance says of itself, that it had attained an age of 670 years, 400 years of which it had spent in the age of ignorance (i.e. old Arabic heathenism), and the other 270 in Islam. The historical books of the Bible might say something similar, if they were personified, and their life considered to begin with the reduction to writing of the oldest kernel of the tradition and to close with the last great revision. The time of ignorance would extend to the appearance of "the book," which, it is true, did not in the Old Testament come down from heaven all at once like the Koran, but came into existence during a longer period, and passed through various phases.

Footnotes

^296:1 The agreement extends not only to the thread of the narrative, but also to particulars, and even to expressions. I do not speak of mabbul (flood), or tebah (ark), but the following examples have struck me:--In Q Gen. vi. 9, Noah is said to be righteous in his generations, in JE vii. 1 he is righteous in his generation--an unusual form of speech, which gave a vast amount of trouble to the Rabbins and to Jerome. Similarly Q Gen. xvii. 21, the son whom Sarah shall bear at this set time next year, and JE xviii. 14: at the same time I will come to thee again next year, and then Sarah shall have a son. In the same way Q Exod. vi. 12 vii. 1. (Moses) I am of uncircumcised lips. (Jehovah) See, I make thee a god to Pharaoh, and Aaron thy brother shall be thy prophet; compared with JE iv. 10, 16. (Moses) I am slow of speech, and of a slow tongue; (Jehovah) Aaron shall be to thee instead of a mouth, and thou shalt be to him instead of God. Comp. Gen. xxvii. 46, with xxv: 22.

^296:2 The line indicated by Buttmann was first taken up again by Th. Noldeke in his Essay on the main-stock of the Pentateuch, which opened the way to a proper estimate of the narrative part of the work.

^299:1 "There is nothing whatever in the piece that merits the name of invention but the chronological order of the various creations." Buttmann, p. 133.

^302:1 Sur. 20, 91. Hudh. 22, 10 (Agh. xv. 105, 12). Hamasa, 292, 8 seq. Tabari i. 847, 18.

^303:1 Dillmann thinks this idea insipid: Genesis (1882), p. 44.

^307:1 A coarser counterpart to Gen. ii. iii, is Gen. vi. 1-4. Here also there is a kind of fall of man in an attempt to overpass the boundary between the human race and the divine. In the priestly narrative (Q) the gulf between spirit, which is divine substance, and flesh, which is human substance, is bridged over by the doctrine of man's creation in the image of God.

^308:1 I merely assert that Gen. ii. iii. is prior to Gen. i.; I do not believe the story of Paradise and of the Fall to be very old with the Israelites. We are led to think so by the fact that the man and the woman stand at the head of the genealogy of the human race; a place we should rather expect to be assigned to the serpent (according to primitive Semitic belief the serpent was by no means opposed to God). This is the case in the Chronicon Edessenum and in Abyssinian legend, and a trace of this is perhaps preserved in the name of Eve, as Noldeke thinks. The name certainly receives this interpretation in Philo (de agric. Noe,  section 21) and in the Midrash Rabba on Gen. iii. 20 (D. M. Z. 1877, p. 239, 326). Moreover, the true seat of God to the Hebrews was Mount Sinai, and the original Hebrew life was the nomadic life of the patriarchs, not gardening or agriculture. And finally we cannot believe barbarians to have indulged in reflections on the advantages and disadvantages of civilisation. The materials of Genesis ii. iii. can hardly have been imported before the time of Solomon. Where they came from we can scarcely guess; it would be most natural to think of the Phoenicians or the Canaanites generally, and this theory is favoured by Gen. iv. But in JE Babel is regarded as the last home of the primitive human race, Eden and Nod having preceded it; and the Hebrews probably derived the legend in the last instance from Babylon. But this does not prove that this or that parallel brought forward by Assyriologists is necessarily of value.

^308:2 So Noldeke in the Jahrbb. fur protest. Theol., 1875, p. 344. Genesis  xv. 13-16 expressly states that the generation is reckoned as 100 years in this period.

^309:1 "Exact chronological dates are a sure sign of later working up of old poetical legends." Buttmann, I. p. 181.

^311:1 The celestial bow is originally the instrument of the arrow-darting God, and therefore a symbol of His hostility; but He lays it out of His hand to signify that He has laid aside His wrath, and it is a token of His reconciliation and favour. When there has been such a storm that one might dread a repetition of the flood, the rainbow appears in heaven, the sun, and grace, breaking forth again. In the O. T. qshth has not the meaning of a mere arc, it always means the war-bow. And what is most important of all, the Arabs also always take the iris to be the war-bow of God; Kuzah shoots arrows from his bow, and then hangs it up in the clouds (D. M. Z. 1849, p. 200 seq.). With the Jews and their kin, the rainbow has retained far into Christian times a remarkably near relation to the Deity. It is singular that the Edomites have a God named Kaus, as well as Kuzah.

^312:1 De Wette, Beitrage, p. 57. The religious notion of the people is old.

^315:1 Yet it is possible the selection presented him with no difficulty, since cosmological myths were not popular tales, but priestly speculations, with which he was quite unacquainted.

^317:1 See <page 307>, note [*1].

^320:1 The stories about Abraham and those about Isaac are so similar, that they cannot possibly be held to be independent of each other. The stories about Isaac, however, are more original, as may be seen in a striking way on comparing Gen. xx. 2-16 with xxvi 6-12. The short and profane version, of which Isaac is the hero, is more lively and pointed; the long and edifying version in which Abraham replaces Isaac, makes the danger not possible but actual, thus necessitating the intervention of the Deity and so bringing about a glorification of the patriarch, which he little deserved. All the commentators on Genesis indeed, regard chap. xx. as the original of xxvi.; they do not base their judgment, however, on a comparison of the parallel passages, but merely consider that as the father is older than the son, the story about the father is older than the corresponding story about the son; and they regard Isaac generally as a mere echo of Abraham. The obviousness of this principle is too great, and against it we have to consider that the later development of the legend shows a manifest tendency to make Abraham the patriarch par excellence and cast the others into the shade. In the earlier literature, on the other hand, Isaac is mentioned even by Amos, Abraham first appears in Isa. xl.-lxvii. Micah vii 20 belongs to the exile, and the words "who redeemed Abraham" in Isaiah xxix. 22 are not genuine; they have no possible position in the sentence, and the idea of the salvation of Abraham (from the fire of the Chaldaeans) is of late occurrence. I certainly do not mean to maintain that Abraham was not yet known when Amos wrote; but he scarcely stood by this time at the same stage as Isaac and Jacob. As a saint of Hebron he might he of Calibite ordain, and have something to do with Ram (1 Chron. ii.). Abram may stand for Abiram, as Abner for Abiner and Ahab for Ahiab. The name Abu Ruham occurs in the Hadith as nomen proprium viri.

^321:1 This consideration is certainly less decisive than the foregoing one. Jacob is a peaceful shepherd, not only because of the idyllic form of the narrative, but in his own being and character. He forms the strongest contrast to his brother Esau, who in spite of the idyllic form is a man of war. Such exceptions as Gen. xiv. and xlviii. 22 (chap. xxxiv.) only prove the rule.

^323:1 It deserves to be considered that at first Joseph is in Egypt alone, and that his brothers came after, at his request. When the notion of united Israel was transferred to the distant past, one consequence was that the fortunes of the part could not be separated from those of the whole. In the same way, Rachel being an Aramaean, Leah must be one too. Perhaps the combination of Rachel and Leah in a national unity was only accomplished by Moses. Moses came from the peninsula of Sinai (Leah) to lead the Israelites there from Goshen (Joseph). The designation of Levite he could not receive in Joseph, only in Leah.

^324:1 See "Israel," sec. 2, infra. Gen. iv. 1-15 is a similar tribal history. The old tribe of Cain, the name of which is indicative of settlement and culture, appears to have been broken up and scattered to the four winds in very early times (Jud. v. 24) in the same way as Levi, with which it appears to have divided the priesthood. We have already said that Gen. iv. 1-l5 can only have found its way into the primitive legend by interpolation.

^324:2 This, however, only warrants us to conclude that these legends first arose in [p. 325] Ephraim, not that they were written down there in the form in which we have them.

^325:1 Joshua hnbshn xv. 62 is no doubt more correctly hkbshn: the name, having the article prefixed to it, must be susceptible of a clear meaning.

^326:1 Compare Onugnathos and the camel's jawbone in Vakidi, op. cit. p. 298, note 2: Jakut iv. 353, 9 seq. r'y is an obsolete name of an animal. For hlm, Gen. xvi. 15, we should read 'lhym (cf. 1 Sam. iii. 13), and before 'chry we should probably insert w'chy.

^328:1 Where the Dead Sea was afterwards.

^330:1 Only part of this chapter, however, belongs to the Priestly Code.

^332:1 Ayte e biblos geneseus ii. 4 LXX. Hence Ewald's name for the Priestly Code, which is very appropriate for Genesis, or perhaps generally for the book of the four covenants--the Book of Origins.

^333:1 Riehm, "die s.g. Grundschrift des Pentateuchs" in Studien und Kritiken, 1872, p. 296.

^333:2 Nor in the case of the Arabs, as has been well shown by Sprenger against Caussin de Perceval (Essai, preface, p. ix.).

^334:1 Hupfeld gives a curious turn to this, saying that in the Priestly Code Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob have much more permanent settlements. But it is this work that insists so often on the fact that the patriarchs were pilgrims and had nowhere a fixed residence: it only says that Abraham dwelt in the land of Canaan, and names no particular place even as the scene of the theophany in chap. xvii. It is only when the question of burying Sarah and Abraham arises that there is a change. Something must be done, and the field of Machpelah near Hebron is acquired (no doubt JE reported this, but the account of it in that source is lost) as a possession of the patriarchal family, where it now settles more permanently. That Isaac and Jacob continue to dwell at the grave of Abraham is a statement of which the significance is negative rather than positive, and on the other hand the patriarchal journeys up and down in JE are not designed to represent them as wandering nomads, but serve to bring them in contact with all the sacred places with which they had special associations.

^335:1 Riehm (op. cit. p. 302 seq.) thinks it is made out that the religious tradition of remote antiquity is distinguished by its "modest simplicity", and by a "style suited to its exalted subject." Only in the course of time was it adorned with all sorts of miraculous and mysterious elements, and that by the "fancy of the people," which, however, does not so easily gain entrance into serious literature(!) He appeals to the fact that the conception of angels, though certainly long developed with the people, occurs in the earlier prophets only in isolated instances, and in the later prophets, as Ezekiel, Zechariah, Daniel, more frequently. It is difficult to sift out what is true and what is false in this confused argument. In the Priestly Code there are, it is true, no angels, but on the other hand we have Azazel and Seirim (2 Chron. xi. 15; Isa. xiii. 21, xxxiv. 14, comp. supra, <page 51>), for where the gods are not, the ghosts have sway. In one of the two main sources of the Jehovist (J), we find chiefly the Mal'ak Jahve (message of Jehovah); that is Jehovah Himself in so far as He appears and manifests Himself, whether in a natural phenomenon or in human form. Different are the B'ne Elohim, beings of divine substance: they perhaps are indicated in the 1st plural in the mouth of Jehovah (Gen. iii. 22, xi. 7). Both of these are doubtless very old. In the other principal source (E) a mixture appears to have taken place: the heavenly hosts are not only the children and companions of Deity, but also its messengers, conductors of the communication between heaven and earth (xviii. 12); here we have the Mal'akim beside God and in the plural. This view also is not exactly a late one, as we see from the vision of Micaiah (1 Kings xxii. 19). What does Riehm mean by high antiquity? A period from which no monuments are preserved to us? Why does he limit his attention to the prophetic literature? He concedes that the idea of angels was early present "in the fancy of the people," and he should have been equal to the further concession that those who wrote down the folklore occupied a somewhat different position to popular belief from that of the prophetic preachers of repentance. Not even the historical books admit of being measured by the same standard in this matter as the pre-historic tradition. And which is the more original--that the angels use a ladder as in Genesis, or that they have wings as in Isaiah? And finally as for the reference to Ezekiel (?), Zechariah, and Daniel, the difference appears to me to be tolerably plain between a systematic angelology which operates always with numbers and names and the childlike belief in angels. The former removes God to a distance, the latter brings Him near.

^336:1 Riehm, op. cit. p. 292.

^338:1 Hence also archaisms such as Kirjath-Arba, Luz, Ephrath. Compare the antiquarian lore in Deuteronomy i.-iv. and in Gen. xiv.

^339:1 Exod. vi. 2, 3 (Q) = iii. 13, 14 (JE). The burning bush shows the theophany in the Jehovist to be the earlier. In the Priestly Code it almost loses the character of a theophany entirely. But this is also quite clear on a comparison of Exodus vii. 1 (Q) and iv. 16 (JE). The phrase vii. 1, "Behold, I make thee a god to Pharaoh, and Aaron thy brother shall be thy prophet," is a degradation of the corresponding passage, iv. 16 "Aaron shall be to thee for a mouth, and thou shalt be to him for a god." For if Aaron is the prophet or the mouth of Moses, then in the original and only appropriate way of thinking of the matter, Moses is a god for Aaron, not for Pharaoh. By the way: is there anything in the similarity between Sene and Sinai?

^340:1 That this is in fact the original custom is clear from the word chthn, which signifies both circumcision and bridegroom (or in Arabic, son-in-law). This explains the meaning of chthn dmym in Exod. iv. 25. The original usage is still in force with some Arab tribes. In Gen. xxxiv. Shechem has to submit to circumcision before marriage.

^341:1 The Sabbath is not a Mosaic institution according to the Priestly Code. But it is presupposed in Exod. xvi., and according to Gen. ii. 3, it was in force from the beginning of the world. With the old Israelites the Sabbath was much less important in relation to worship than the festivals: in Judaism the opposite was the case.

^343:1 Kadesh is also called Meribah, the seat of justice, or Meribath Kadesh, the seat of justice at the holy spring. Meribah is in its meaning the same as Midian.

^344:1 We do not know where Sinai was situated, and the Bible is scarcely at one on the subject. Only dilettanti care much for controversy on the matter. The Midian of Exod. ii. tells us most: it is probably Madian on the Arabic shore of the Ked sea. In our passage Sinai seems to be S.E. of Edom; the way from Sinai to Kadesh is by Seir and Paran.

^345:1 Chap. xii.-xxvii. The two historical introductions, chap. i.-iv. and chap. v.-xi. were added later, as well as the appendices, chapter xxviii. seq.

^345:2 That the author of the Priestly Code had before him the combination of the Sinai legislation of the Jehovist and Deuteronomy is shown further by the circumstance that he has both a legislation at Mount Sinai and a legislation in the Arboth Moab, and in addition to these one in the wilderness of Sinai.

^346:1 The law might accordingly be called Moses, as with the Ethiopians the Psalter is called David.

^348:1 See Kuenen in the Theol. Tijdschrift, 1870, p. 393-401.

^351:1 Riehm, p. 292. "The style is quiet, simple, free from all rhetorical and poetical ornament, and the expression in speaking of similar objects has an epic uniformity. Impressive as many pieces are, just from their unassuming simplicity and objectivity, there is nowhere any apparent effort to produce effect or to raise the interest of the reader by the resources of literary art." For an opposite opinion compare Lichtenberg, Werke, ii. 162.

^351:2 Agh. xv. 11, 17: when al-Walid b. al-Mughira was dead, the Arabs dated after his death to the year of the elephant, which thereafter was made an epoch. According to others they reckoned nine years after the death of Hisham b. al-Mughira, to the time when they built the Caaba, and then they dated from the building of the Caaba. Comp. the 'Am al Ramada and the 'Am al Ru 'af.

^352:1 And the younger tradition generally: also according to the song Exod. xv., which apart from the beginning, which is old, is a psalm in the manner of the Psalms and has no similarity with the historical songs, Jud. v., 2 Sam. i., Num. xxi.

^353:1 Compare, however, Jahrbb. fur Deutsche Theologie, 1877, p. 453, note 1.

^354:1 In the same way, in the former source Joshua always acts alone; in the latter, he always has the priest Eleazar at his side. Compare notes on pp. <page 142>, <page 143>.

^355:1 The details of the demonstration will be found in the Jahrbb. fur Deutsche Theologie, 1776, p. 572 seq., 1877, p. 454, note, and in the Leyden Theol. Tijdschrift, 1878, p. 139 seq.

^359:1 In the Deuteronomistic revision (Josh. xxi, 43-45) there is still a trace of hesitation, a certain difficulty in parting with the old view altogether (Deut. vii. 22; [p. 360] Judg. iii. 1, 2); and besides the motives for the change are much plainer here: the Canaanites are extirpated to guard against the infection of the new settlers with their idolatry.

^360:1 Some isolated statements there are here also to which the historical standard may be applied. We may call it a more accurate representation that Hebron was inhabited in the time of Abraham by the, Canaanites and Perizzites, than that the Hittites dwelt there at that time. The latter, according to 2 Sam. xxiv. 6 (Bleek, Einleitung, 4th edition, pp. 228, 597), dwelt in Coele-Syria, and according to 2 Kings vii. 6, in the neighbourhood of the Aramaeans of Damascus. The statement that the Israelites received from Pharaoh because they were shepherds the pasture-land of Goshen on the north-east frontier of Egypt and there dwelt by themselves, is to be preferred to the statement that they were settled among the Egyptians in the best part of the land.

      
Prolegomena to the History of Ancient Israel, by Julius Wellhausen, [1885], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 363]

  

III. ISRAEL AND JUDAISM.

"The Law came in between."--VATKE, p. 183.

[p. 364] [p. 365]

  

CHAPTER IX.

  

CONCLUSION OF THE CRITICISM OF THE LAW.

OBJECTIONS have been made to the general style of the proof on which Graf's hypothesis is based. It is said to be an illicit argument ex silentio to conclude from the fact that the priestly legislation is latent in Ezekiel, where it should be in operation, unknown where it should be known, that in his time it had not yet come into existence. But what would the objectors have? Do they expect to find positive statements of the non-existence of what had not yet come into being? Is it more rational, to deduce ex silentio, as they do, a positive proof that it did exist?--to say, that as there are no traces of the hierocracy in the times of the judges and the kings it must have originated in the most remote antiquity, with Moses? The problem would in this case still be the same, namely, to explain how it is that with and after the exile the hierocracy begins to come into practical activity. What the opponents of Graf's hypothesis call its argument ex silentio, is nothing more or less than the universally valid method of historical investigation.

The protest against the argument ex silentio takes another form. It is pointed out that laws are in many cases theories, and that it is no disproof of the existence of a theory that it has not got itself carried out into practice. Deuteronomy was really nothing more than a theory during the pre-exile period, but who would argue from this that it was not there at all? Though laws are not kept, this does not prove they are not there,--provided, that is to say, that there is sufficient proof of their existence on other grounds. But these other proofs of the existence of the Priestly Code are not to be found--not a trace of them. It is, moreover, rarely the case with laws that they are theory and nothing more: the possibility that a thing may be mere theory is not to be asserted generally, but only in particular cases. And even where law is

[p. 366]

undoubtedly theory, the fact does not prevent us from fixing its position in history. Even legislative fancy always proceeds upon some definite presupposition or other; and these presuppositions, rather than the laws themselves, must guide the steps of historical criticism. [*1]

An argument which is the very opposite of this is also urged. The fact is insisted on that the laws of the Priestly Code are actually attested everywhere in the practice of the historical period; that there were always sacrifices and festivals, priests and purifications, and everything of the kind in early Israel. These statements must, though this seems scarcely possible, proceed on the assumption that on Graf's hypothesis the whole cultus was invented all at once by the Priestly Code, and only introduced after the exile. But the defenders of Graf's hypothesis do not go so far as to believe that the Israelite cultus entered the world of a sudden,--as little by Ezekiel or by Ezra as by Moses,--else why should they be accused of Darwinism by Zockler and Delitzsch? They merely consider that the works of the law were done before the law, that there is a difference between traditional usage and formulated law, and that even where this difference appears to be only in form it yet has a material basis, being connected with the centralisation of the worship and the hierocracy which that centralisation called into existence. Here also the important point is not the matter, but the spirit which is behind it, and may everywhere be recognised as the spirit of the age at one period or another. [*2]

All these objections, meanwhile, labour under the same defect, namely, that they leave out of view that which is the real point at issue. The point is not to prove that the Mosaic law was not in force in the period before the exile. There are in the Pentateuch three strata of law and three strata of tradition, and the problem is to place them in their true historical order. So far as the Jehovist and Deuteronomy are concerned, the problem has found a solution which may be said to be accepted universally, and all that remains is to apply to the Priestly Code also the procedure by which the succession and the date of these two works has been determined--that procedure consisting in the comparison of them with the ascertained facts of Israelite history. [*3]

[p. 367]

[paragraph continues] One would imagine that this could not be objected to. But objections have been raised; the procedure which, when applied to Deuteronomy, is called historico-critical method, is called, when applied to the Priestly Code, construction of history. But history, it is well known, has always to be constructed: the order, Priestly Code, Jehovist, Deuteronomy, is not a thing handed down by tradition or prescribed by the nature of the case, but a hypothesis as yet only a score of years old or thereby, the reasons for which were somewhat incomprehensible, so that people have forgotten them and begun to regard the hypothesis as something objective, partaking of the character of dogma. The question is whether one constructs well or ill. Count Baudissin thinks a grave warning necessary of a certain danger, that, namely, of an exaggerated application of logic: that the laws follow each other in a certain order logically, he says, does not prove that they appeared in the same order in history. But it is not for the sake of logical sequence that we consider the development which began with the prophets to have issued finally in the laws of cultus; and those who set out from "sound human reason" have generally forced the reverse process of this on the history, in spite of the traces which have come down to us, and which point the other way. [*1]

After laboriously collecting the data offered by the historical and prophetical books, we constructed a sketch of the Israelite history of worship; we then compared the Pentateuch with this sketch, and recognised that one element of the Pentateuch bore a definite relation to this phase of the history of worship, and another element of the Pentateuch to that phase of it. This is not putting logic in the place of historical investigation. The new doctrine of the irrationality of what exists is surely not to be pushed so far, as that we should regard the correspondence between an element of the law and a particular phase of the history as a reason for placing the two as far as possible asunder. At least this principle would have to be applied to the Jehovist and Deuteronomy too, and not to the Priestly Code only. What is right in the one case is fair in the other too; a little logic unfortunately is almost unavoidable.

Not everything that I have brought forward in the history of the

[p. 368]

cultus and the tradition, is a proof of the hypothesis; there is much that serves merely to explain phenomena at the basis of the hypothesis, and cannot be used as proving it. This is a matter of course. My procedure has intentionally differed from that of Graf in this respect. He brought forward his arguments somewhat unconnectedly, not seeking to change the general view which prevailed of the history of Israel. For this reason he made no impression on the majority of those who study these subjects; they did not see into the root of the matter, they could still regard the system as unshaken, and the numerous attacks on details of it as unimportant. I differ from Graf chiefly in this, that I always go back to the centralisation of the cultus, and deduce from it the particular divergences. My whole position is contained in my first chapter: there I have placed in a clear light that which is of such importance for Israelite history, namely, the part taken by the prophetical party in the great metamorphosis of the worship, which by no means came about of itself. Again I attach much more weight than Graf did to the change of ruling ideas which runs parallel with the change in the institutions and usages of worship; this has been shown mostly in the second part of the present work. Almost more important to me than the phenomena themselves, are the presuppositions which lie behind them.

Not everything that we have hitherto discussed proves, or is meant to prove, Graf's hypothesis. On the other hand, however, there is abundance of evidence, which has not yet been noticed. To discuss it all in detail, would take another book: in this work only a selection can be with all brevity indicated, if the limits are not to be transgressed which are imposed by the essentially historical character of these prolegomena. In these discussions the Pro will as a rule naturally suggest itself in the refutation of the Contra.

  

I.

1. Eberhard Schrader mentions, in his Introduction to the Old Testament, that Graf assigns the legislation of the middle books of the Pentateuch to the period after the exile; but he does not give the least idea of the arguments on which that position is built up, simply dismissing it with the remark, that "even critical analysis enters its veto" against it. Even critical analysis? How does it manage that? How can it prove that the one and sole cultus, worked out on every side to a great system,

[p. 369]

the denaturalising of the sacrifices and festivals, the distinction between the priests and Levites, and the autonomous hierarchy, are older than the Deuteronomic reform? Schrader's meaning is perhaps, that while the signs collected by a comparison of the sources as bearing on the history of worship show the order of succession to be Jehovist, Deuteronomy, Priestly Code, other signs of a more formal and literary nature would show the Priestly Code to be entitled to the first place, or at any rate not the last, and that the latter kind of evidence is of as much force as the former. Were this so, the scales would be equally balanced, and the question would not admit of a decision. But this awkward situation would only occur if the arguments of a literary nature to be urged on that side really balanced those belonging to the substance of the case which plead for Graf's hypothesis. In discussing the composition of the Hexateuch, [*1] I have shown, following in the steps of other scholars, that this is by no means the case; and for the sake of completeness I will here repeat the principal points of that discussion.

2. It is asserted that the historical situation of Deuteronomy is based not only on the Jehovistic, but also on the Priestly narrative. Deuteronomy proper (chaps. xii.-xxvi.) contains scarcely any historical matter, but before Moses comes to the business in hand, we have two introductions, chap. v.-xi. and chap. i.-iv., to explain the situation in which he promulgates "this Torah" shortly before his death. We are in the Amorite kingdom, east of the Jordan, which has already been conquered. The forty years' wanderings are about to close: the passage to the land of Canaan, for which this legislation is intended, is just approaching. Till this time, we hear in chapter v. 9, 10, the only law was that which is binding in all circumstances, and was therefore promulgated by God Himself from Horeb, the Law of the Ten Words on that occasion. The people deprecated any further direct revelation by Jehovah, and commissioned Moses to be their representative; and he accordingly betook himself to the sacred mount, stayed there forty days and forty nights, and received the two tables of the decalogue, and besides them the statutes and laws which now, forty years after, he is on the point of publishing, as they will come into force at the settlement. In the meantime the golden calf had been made down below; and when Moses descended from the mount, in his anger he broke the tables and destroyed the idol. Then he betook himself for

[p. 370]

a second period of forty days and nights to the mount, pleaded for mercy for the people and for Aaron; and after he had made, according to divine command, two new tables and a wooden chest for them, Jehovah once more wrote down exactly what stood on the tables which were broken. On this occasion, it is remarked in x. 8 seq., the Levites received their appointment as priests.

This is evidently a reproduction of the Jehovistic narrative, Exod. xix. xx. xxiv. xxxii-xxxiv. The Priestly Code, on the contrary, is entirely ignored. Deuteronomy knows only two laws, the decalogue, which the people received, and the statutes and judgments which Moses received, at Mount Horeb. They were both given at the same time, one directly after the other: but only the decalogue had till now been made public. Where is the whole wilderness-legislation as given from the tabernacle? Is it not denying the very notion of its existence, that Moses only publishes the Torah at the passage into the Holy Land, because it has application and force for that land, and not for the wilderness? Apart from the fact that the Deuteronomist, according to chapter xii., knew nothing of a Mosaic central sanctuary, can he have read what we now read between Exodus xxiv. and xxxii.? He passes over all that is there inserted from the Priestly Code. Noldeke finds, it is true, [*1] a reminiscence of that code in the ark of acacia wood, Deut. x. 1. But the ark is here spoken of in a connection which answers exactly to that of the Jehovist (Exod. xxxii. xxxiii.), and is quite inconsistent with that, of the Priestly Code (Exod. xxv. seq.). It is only instituted after the erection of the golden calf, not at the very beginning of the divine revelation, as the foundation-stone of the theocracy. True, the ark is not mentioned in JE, Exod. xxxiii., as we now have it, but in the next Jehovistic piece (Num. x. 33) it suddenly appears, and there must have been some statement in the work as to how it came there. The tabernacle also appears ready set up in xxxiii. 7, without any foregoing account of its erection. The institution of the ark as well as the erection of the tabernacle must have been narrated between xxxiii. 6 and 7, and then omitted by the present editor of the Pentateuch from the necessity of paying some regard to Q, Exod. xxv.; that this is the case many other considerations also tend to prove. [*2]

That the Deuteronomist

[p. 371]

found JE in a more complete form, before it was worked up with Q, than that in which we have it after the working up, is not such a difficult assumption that one should be driven into utter impossibilities in order to avoid it. For according to Noldeke either the author of Deut. v.-xi. had before him the Pentateuch as it now is, and was enabled, very curiously, to sift out JE from it, or he used JE as an independent work, but read Q as well, only in such a way that his general view was in no way influenced by that of the priestly work, but on the contrary contradicts it entirely and yet unconsciously--since his work leaves no opening for a ritual legislation given side by side with the Decalogue, and that ritual legislation is the whole sum and substance of the Priestly Code. To such a dilemma are we to make up our minds, because one trait or another of the Deuteronomic narrative cannot be traced in JE as we now have it, and is preserved in Q? Does this amount, in the circumstances, to a proof that such traits were derived from that source? Must not some regard in fairness be paid to the ensemble of the question?

We may, further, remember in this connection Vatke's remark, that the wooden ark in Deut. x. 1, is by no means very similar to that of Exod. xxv., which, to judge by the analogy of the golden table and altar, must rather have been called a golden ark. It takes even more good will to regard the statement about Aaron's death and burial in Mosera and the induction of Eleazar in his place (Deut. x. 6, 7) as a reminiscence of Q (Num. xx. 22 seq.), where Aaron dies and is buried on Mount Hor. In JE also the priests Aaron and Eleazar stand by the side of Moses and Joshua (cf. Josh. xxiv. 33). The death and burial of Aaron are certainly no longer preserved in JE; but we cannot require of the editor of the Pentateuch that he should make a man die twice, once according to Q and once according to JE. And it must further be said that Deut. x. 6, 7 is an interpolation; for the following verses x. 8 seq., in which not only Aaron and Eleazar, but all the Levites are in possession of the priesthood, are the continuation of x. 5, and rest on Exod. xxxii. Here we are still in Horeb, not in Mosera.

The historical thread which runs through Deut. v. ix. x. may be traced further in chaps. i.-iv. After their departure from Horeb the

[p. 372]

[paragraph continues] Israelites come straight to Kadesh Barnea, and from this point, being commanded to invade the hill-land of Judaea, they first send twelve spies to reconnoitre the country, guided thereto by their own prudence, but also with the approval of Moses. Caleb is one of the spies, but not Joshua. After penetrating as far as the brook Eshcol they return; and though they praise the goodness of the land, yet the people are so discouraged by their report, that they murmur and do not venture to advance. Jehovah is angry at this, and orders them to turn back to the wilderness, where they are to wander up and down till the old generation is extinct and a new one grown up. Seized with shame they advance after all, but are beaten and driven back. Now they retreat to the wilderness, where for many years they march up and down in the neighbourhood of Mount Seir, till at length, 38 years after the departure from Kadesh, they are commanded to advance towards the north, but to spare the brother-peoples of Moab and Ammon. They conquer the territory of the Amorite kings, Sihon of Heshbon and Og of Bashan. Moses assigns it to the tribes of Reuben and Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh, on condition that their army is to yield assistance in the remaining war. The continuous report comes to an end with the nomination of Joshua as future leader of the people.

This same narrative, with the addition of some scattered particulars in the Book of Deuteronomy, [*1] will serve perfectly well as a thread to understand JE. What, on the contrary, is peculiar to the Priestly Code is passed over in deep silence, and from Exod. xxxiv. Deuteronomy takes us at once to Num. x. While not a few of the narratives which Deuteronomy repeats or alludes to, occur only in JE and not in Q, the converse does not occur at all. And in those narratives which are found both in JE and in Q, Deuteronomy follows, in every case in which there is a distinct divergence, the version of JE. The spies are sent out from Kadesh, not from the wilderness of Paran; they only reach Hebron, not the neighbourhood of Hamath; Caleb is one of them, and not Joshua. The rebels of Numbers xvi. are the Reubenites Dathan and Abiram, not Korah and the Levites. After the settlement in the

[p. 373]

land east of Jordan the people have to do with Moab and Ammon, not with Midian: Balaam is connected with the former, not with the latter. The same of Baal-peor: Deut. iv. 3 agrees with JE (Num. xxv. 1-5), not with Q (Num. xxv. 6 seq.). Things being so, we cannot, with Noldeke, see in the number of the spies (Deut. i. 23) an unmistakable sign of the influence of Q (Num. xiii. 2). Had the author read the narrative as it is now before us in Num. xiii. xiv., it would be impossible to understand how, as we have seen, the Jehovist version alone made any impression on him. He must, accordingly, have known Q as a separate work, but it is a bold step to argue from such a small particular to the use of a source which everywhere else is entirely without influence and unknown, especially as the priority of this source is by no means established on independent grounds, but is to be proved by this alleged use of it. lf there were a palpable difference between JE and Q in this point, if we could say that in Q there were twelve spies sent out, and in JE; three, the case would be different; but in Num. xiii. the beginning of the narrative of JE has been removed and that of Q put in place of it, so that we do not know how the narrative of JE began, and what number, if any, was given in it. In such a state of matters the only reasonable course is to supply what is lacking in JE from Deuteronomy, which generally follows the Jehovist alone, and to conclude that the spies were twelve in number in this source also.

The instance in which the proof would be strongest that Deuteronomy was acquainted with the narrative of the Priestly Code, is x. 22. For the seventy souls which make up the whole of Israel at the immigration into Egypt, are not mentioned in JE, and there is no gap that we are aware of in the Jehovist tradition at this point. But they are by no means in conflict with that tradition, and even should we not take Deut. x. 22 for a proof that the seventy souls found a place in it also, yet it must at least be acknowledged, that that passage is by no means sufficient to break down the evidence that the priestly legislation has the legislation of Deuteronomy for its starting-point. [*1]

[p. 374]

3. As a further objection to Graf's hypothesis, the Deuteronomistic revision of the Hexateuch is brought into the field. That revision appears most clearly, it is said, in those parts which follow the Deuteronomic Torah and point back to it. It used to be taken for granted that it extends over the Priestly portions as well as the Jehovistic; but since the occasion arose to look into this point, it is found that it is not so. The traces which Noldeke brings together on the point are trifling, and besides this do not stand the test. He says that the Deuteronomistic account of the death of Moses (Deut. xxxii. 48 seq., xxxiv. 1 seq.) cannot be regarded as anything else than an amplification of the account of the main stem (Q), which is preserved almost in the same words. But Deut. xxxiv. 1b-7 contains nothing of Q and xxxii. 48-52 has not undergone Deuteronomistic revision. He also refers to Josh. ix. 27: "Joshua made the Gibeonites at that day hewers of wood and drawers of water for the congregation and for the altar of Jehovah even unto this day, in the place which He should choose." The second part of this sentence, he says, is a Deuteronomistic addition to the first, which belongs to the Priestly narrative. But Noldeke himself acknowledges that the Deuteronomistically-revised verses ix. 22 seq. are not the continuation of the priestly version 15c, 17-21, but of the Jehovistic version 15ab, 16; and between verse 16 and verse 22 there is nothing wanting but the circumstance referred to in verse 26. The phrase hewer of wood and drawer of water is not enough to warrant us to separate verse 27 from 22-26; the phrase occurs not only in verse 21 but also in JE verse 23. The words for the congregation do certainly point to the Priestly Code, but are balanced by the words which follow, for the altar of Jehovah, which is according to the Jehovistic view. The original statement is undoubtedly that the Gibeonites are assigned to the altar or the house of Jehovah. But according to Ezek. xliv. the hierodulic services in the temple were not to be undertaken by foreigners, but by Levites; hence in the Priestly Code the servants of the altar appear as servants of the congregation. From this it results that lmzbch is to be preferred in verse 27 to l`dh w, the latter being a later correction. As such it

[p. 375]

affords a proof that the last revision of the Hexateuch proceeded from the Priestly Code, and not from Deuteronomy. As for Josh. xviii. 3-10, where Noldeke sees in the account of the division of the land another instance of Deuteronomistic addition, I have already indicated my opinion, . The piece is Jehovistic, and if the view were to be found in the Priestly Code at all, that Joshua first allotted their territory to Judah and Ephraim, and then, a good while after, to the other seven tribes, that source must have derived such a view from JE, where alone it has its roots. [*1] And lastly, Noldeke considers Josh. xxii. to speak quite decidedly for his view; but in the narrative of the Priestly Code, xxii. 9-34, to which the verses 1-8 do not belong, there is no sign of Deuteronomistic revision to be found. [*2]

There is a more serious difficulty only in the case of the short chapter, Josh. xx., of which the kernel belongs to the Priestly Code, though it contains all sorts of additions which savour strongly of the Deuteronomistic revision. Kayser declares these awkward accretions to be glosses of quite a late period. This may seem to be pure tendency-criticism; but it is reinforced by the confirmation of the Septuagint, which did not find any of those alleged Deuteronomistic additions where they now are. [*3]

But were it the case that some probable traces of Deuteronomistic revision were actually to be found in the Priestly Code, we must still ask for an explanation of the disproportionately greater frequency of such traces in JE. Why, for example, are there none of them in the mass of laws of the middle books of the Hexateuch? This is undoubtedly and everywhere the fact, and this must dispose us a priori to attach less weight to isolated instances to the contrary: the more so, as Joshua xx. shows that the later retouchings of the canonical text often imitate the tone of the Deuteronomist.

[p. 376]

  

II.

1. I have said that in the l`dh w of Josh. ix. 27, we have the addition of a final priestly revision. Such a revision must be assumed to have taken place, if the Priestly Code is younger than Deuteronomy. But the assumption of its existence does not depend on deduction merely: Kuenen argued for it inductively, even before he became a supporter of Graf's hypothesis. [*1] This may be best demonstrated by examining the chapters Lev. xvii.-xxvi. At present they are incorporated in the Priestly Code, having undergone a revision with that view, which in some places adds little, in others a good deal. Viewed, however, as they originally were, they form a work of a peculiar character by themselves, a work pervaded by a somewhat affected religious hortatory tone, which harmonises but little with the Priestly Code. The author worked largely from earlier authorities, which explains, for example, how chap. xviii. and chap. xx. both find a place in his production. Lev. xvii.-xxvi is incomparably instructive for the knowledge it affords of literary relationships: it is a perfect compendium of the literary history of the Pentateuch. [*2]

As with Deuteronomy, so with this legislation; it is clear that it goes back to the Jehovistic legislation of Sinai (Exod. xx.-xxiii.) as its source. It also bears to have been given on Mount Sinai (xxv. 1, xxvi. 46). It is addressed to the people, and is popular in its contents, which are chiefly of a civic and moral character. It is meant only for the promised land and for settled life, not for the wilderness as well. The festivals are three in number, and have not quite parted with their

[p. 377]

character as feasts of harvest. Among the sacrifices the sin-offering and the trespass-offering are wanting. The legislation does deal with the cultus to a disproportionate extent, but the directions about it do not go into technical details, and are always addressed to the people. Even in those directions which concern the priests the people are addressed, and the priests are spoken of in the third person. Nor are palpable points of contact wanting. Lev. xix. 2-8, 9-18, may be regarded as counterparts of the first and second tables of the decalogue. The precept, "Thou shalt not respect the person of the poor, nor honour the person of the mighty," xix. 15, is a development of that in Exod. xxiii. 3, and a number of other precepts in Lev. xix. could stand with equal appropriateness in Exod. xxii. 17 seq. The directions in Lev. xxii. 27-29 are similar to those of Exod. xxii. 29, xxiii. 18, 19. In the same way those of Lev. xxiv. 15-22 are based both in contents and form on Exod. xxi. 12. [*1] In xxiv. 22 we notice a polemical reference to Exod. xxi. 20 seq., 26 seq. In xxv. 1-7 the whole of the expressions of Exod. xxiii. 10, 11 are repeated. In xx. 24, we have the Jehovistic phrase, "a land flowing with milk and honey."

Yet Lev. xvii.-xxvi. only takes its starting-point from the Jehovistic legislation, and modifies it very considerably, somewhat in the manner of Deuteronomy. There is a demonstrable affinity with Deuteronomy both in the ideas and in the expressions. Common to both is the care for the poor and the undefended: to both humanity is a main object of legislation. "If a stranger sojourn with thee in your land, ye shall not vex him; he shall be unto you as one born among you, and thou shalt love him as thyself; for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt" (xix. 34).

Lev. xvii. seq. attaches great importance to unity of worship. It is still a demand, not a presupposition (xvii. 8 seq., xix. 30, xxvi. 2); the motive of it is to guard against heathen influences and to secure the establishment of a monotheism without images. [*2] This is quite recognisable, and forms an important point of contact with Deuteronomy. The same contact may be observed in the prohibition of certain observances

[p. 378]

of mourning (xix. 27 seq.), the calculation of Pentecost from the beginning of barley harvest (xxiii. 15), the seven days' duration of the feast of tabernacles, and the cheerful sacrificial feasts which are to accompany its observance. Add to this a similarity by no means slight in the colour of the language, e.g., in xviii. 1-5, 24-30, xix. 33-37, xx. 22 seq., xxv. 35 seq. Some of the phrases may be mentioned. "When ye are come into the land that I shall give you." "Ye shall rejoice before Jehovah." "I am Jehovah that brought you up out of the land of Egypt." "Ye shall keep my commandments and statutes and laws, to do them."

But the legislation we have here is further advanced than Deuteronomy. In the festivals the joint sacrifice of the congregation is already prominent (xxiii. 9-22). The priests are not the Levites, but the sons and brothers of Aaron, their income has grown materially, their separate holiness has reached a higher point. Stricter demands are also made on the laity for personal holiness, especially as regards continence from the sins of the flesh, and the marriage of relatives (Lev. xviii. xx.). Marriage with an uncle's wife is forbidden (xviii. 14, xx. 20), whereas in Deuteronomy it is still legal. The work dates from a time when exile was a familiar idea: xviii. 26 seq.: "Ye shall keep my statutes and my judgments, and shall not commit any of those abominations; for the men that were in the land before you did these things, and the land vomited them out. Take care that the land spue not you out also as it spued out the nations that were before you." Similarly xx. 23 seq.: and in a legislative work such utterances prove more than they would in a prophecy. Now as our section departs from Deuteronomy, it approaches to Ezekiel. This is its closest relationship, and that to which attention has been most drawn. It appears in the peculiar fusion of cultus and morality, in the notion of holiness, in a somewhat materialistic sense, as the great requirement of religion, and in the fact that the demand of holiness is made to rest on the residence of the people near the sanctuary and in the holy land. [*1] But the affinity is still more striking in the language: many unusual phrases, and even whole sentences, from Ezekiel, are repeated in Lev. xvii. seq. [*2] The 10th of the 7th month is in Lev. xxv. 9 as in Ezekiel, new-year's day, not, as in the

[p. 379]

[paragraph continues] Priestly Code, the great day of atonement. This led Graf to regard Ezekiel himself as the author of this collection of laws in Leviticus; and Colenso and Kayser followed him. But this is out of the question; notwithstanding the numerous points of contact both in linguistic and material respects, the agreement is by no means complete. Ezekiel knows no seed of Aaron, and no wine at the sacrifices (Lev. xxiii. 13); his festival legislation shows considerable differences, and in spirit is more akin to the Priestly Code. And if he were the author he would have said something about the proper place in the cultus of the Levites and of the prince.

The corpus in question, which Klostermann called, not inappropriately, the Law of Holiness, inclines from Ezekiel towards the Priestly Code: in such pieces as xvii. xxi. xxii. it takes some closeness of attention to see the differences from the latter, though in fact they are not inconsiderable. It stands between the two, somewhat nearer, no doubt, to Ezekiel. How are we to regard this fact? Jehovist, Deuteronomy, Ezekiel, are a historical series; Ezekiel, Law of Holiness, Priestly Code, must also be taken as historical steps, and this in such a way as to explain at the same time the dependence of the Law of Holiness on the Jehovist and on Deuteronomy. To assume that Ezekiel, having the Pentateuch in all other respects as we have it, had a great liking for this piece of it, and made it his model in the foundation of his style of thought and expression--such an assumption does not free us from the necessity of seeking the historical order, and of assigning his natural place in that order to Ezekiel; we cannot argue on such a mere chance. Now the question is not a complicated one, whether in the Law of Holiness we are passing from the Priestly Code to Ezekiel or from Ezekiel to the Priestly Code. The Law of Holiness underwent a last revision, which represents, not the views of Ezekiel, but those of the Priestly Code, and by means of which it is incorporated in that code. This revision has not been equally incisive in all parts. Some of its corrections and supplements are very considerable, e.g., xxiii. 1-8, 23-38; xxiv. 1-14, 23. Some of them are quite unimportant, e.g., the importation of the Ohel Moed (instead of the Mikdash or the Mishkan), xvii. 4, 6, 9, xix. 21 seq.; the trespass-offering, xix. 21 seq.; the Kodesh Kodashim, xxi. 22. Only in xxv. 8 seq. is the elimination of the additions difficult. But the fact that the last edition of the Law of Holiness proceeds from the Priestly Code, is universally acknowledged.

[p. 380]

[paragraph continues] Its importance for the literary history of Israel cannot be over-estimated. [*1]

 

2. The concluding oration, Lev. xxvi. 3-46, calls for special consideration. Earlier scholars silently assumed that this piece belonged to Lev. xvii. 1-XXVI. 2; but many critics, Noldeke for example, now regard it as an interpolation in Leviticus of a piece which from its character should be elsewhere. At any rate the oration is composed with special reference to what precedes it. If it is not taken as a peroration, such as Exod. xxiii. 30-33, Deut. xxviii., its position in such a part of the Priestly Code is quite incomprehensible. It has, moreover, a palpable connection with the laws in xvii.-xxv. The land, and agriculture, have here the same significance for religion as in chaps. xix. xxiii. xxv.; the threat of vomiting out (xviii. 25 seq., xx. 22) is repeated here more circumstantially; the only statute actually named is that of the fallow of the seventh year (xxvi. 34, xxv. 1-7). The piece begins with the expression, which is so characteristic of the author of chapter xvii. seq. "If ye walk in my statutes, and keep my commandments, and do them," and the same phrase recurs, with slight alteration, in vers. 15 and 43. The conclusion, verse 46, is, "These are the statutes and judgments and laws which Jehovah gave, to regulate the relation between Him and Israel on Mount Sinai, by Moses." This is obviously the subscription of a preceding corpus of statutes and judgments, such as we have in, xvii. 1-xxvi. 2. Mount Sinai is mentioned also in xxv. 1 as the place of revelation.

If Lev. xxvi. is incontestably intended to form the conclusion of chaps. xvii.-xxv., it would be natural to suppose that the author of that collection was also the author of the oration. Noldeke thinks, however, that the language differs too much from that of xvii.-xxv. Yet he is obliged to acknowledge several resemblances, and these not unimportant; while some of the differences which he adduces (Bamoth, Gillulim, Hammanim, xxvi. 30) are really examples of similarity. Rare and original words may be found in the preceding chapters also. It may

[p. 381]

be that in chap. xxvi they are more frequent in proportion: yet this does not entitle us to say that the language generally is very original. On the contrary, it is everywhere characterised by borrowed expressions. So much of linguistic difference as actually remains is sufficiently accounted for by the difference of subject: first come laws in a dry matter-of-fact style, then prophecy in a poetical pathetic style. The idiosyncrasy of the writer has no scope in the former case, from the nature of the materials, some of which had already assumed their form before he made use of them. In the latter case he can express himself freely; and it is fair that this should not be overlooked.

The arguments brought forward by Noldeke against the probability that Lev. xxvi. belongs to chaps. xvii.-xxv. and is not merely tacked on to them, disappear completely on a closer comparison of the literary character of the two pieces. Chap. xxvi. reminds us most strongly of Ezekiel's style, both in thought and language. The most significant passage is Lev. xxvi. 39. The threat has been uttered that Israel is to be destroyed as a people, and that the remnant which escapes the destroying sword of the enemy is to be carried into exile, to sink under the weight of past calamity and present affliction. Then the speech goes on: "And they that are left of you shall pine away in their iniquity in your enemies' land; and also in the iniquities of their fathers shall they pine away. Then they will confess their own sin and the sin of their fathers." In Ezekiel, this confession actually occurs in the mouth of one of his fellow-exiles: they say (xxxiii. 10), "Our transgressions and our sins are heavy upon us, and we pine away in them, and cannot live." In the same strain the prophet says (xxiv. 23) that in his dull sorrow for the death of his wife he will be an emblem of the people: "ye shall not mourn nor weep, but ye shall pine away in your iniquities."

Nor are the other traits wanting in the oration which, as we say, accompanied the Ezekielic colouring of the preceding chapters. We do not expect to find traces of the influence of the Jehovist legislation (further than that Exod. xxiii. 20 seq. formed the model both for Deut. xxviii. and Lev. xxvi.); but to make up for this we find very distinct marks of the influence of the prophets, the older prophets too, as Amos (verse 31). We can as little conceive the existence of the Book of Ezekiel as of this chapter without the prophetic literature having preceded it and laid the foundation for it.

As for the relation to Deuteronomy, the resemblance of Lev. xxvi.

[p. 382]

to Deut. xxviii. is very great, in the arrangement as well as in the ideas. True, there are not many verbal coincidences, but the few which do occur are important. The expressions of xxvi. 16 occur nowhere in the Old Testament but in Deut. xxviii. 22, 65: similarly r'shnym with the meaning it has in verse 45 only occurs in Deut. xix. 14 and in the later literature (Isaiah lxi. 6). The metaphor of the uncircumcised heart (verse 41) only occurs in one other passage in the law, in Deuteronomy; the other instances of it are in prophecy, of contemporary or later date (Jer. iv. 4, ix. 24, 25, Ezek. xliv. 7, 9). There are several more reminiscences of Jeremiah, most of them, however, not very distinct. We may remark on the relation between Jer. xvi. 18 in one respect to verse 30, and in another to verse 18 of our chapter. Here the sin is punished sevenfold, in Jeremiah double. The same is said in Isa. xl. 2, lx. 7; and our chapter has also in common with this prophet the remarkable use of r`h (with sin or trespass as object). Did not the chapter stand in Leviticus, it would, doubtless, be held to be a reproduction, some small part of it of the older prophecies, the most of it of those of Jeremiah and Ezekiel: Lev. xxvi. 34 is actually quoted in 2 Chron. xxxvi 22 as a word of the prophet Jeremiah.

Lev. xxvi. has points of contact, finally, with the Priestly Code, in prh wrbh, hqym bryth, hthwdh, 'by, (never 'bky), in the excessive use of the accusative participle and avoidance of verbal suffixes, and in its preferring the colourless nthn to verbs of more special meaning.

The only reason for the attempt to separate Lev. xxvi. from xvii.-xxv. lies in the fact, that the exilic or post-exilic origin of this hortatory and denunciatory oration is too plain to be mistaken. To us, this circumstance can only prove that it belongs to xvii.-xxv., providing a weighty confirmation of the opinion we have already formed on other grounds as to the period which produced these laws. "If ye will not for all this hearken unto me, but walk contrary to me, then I will also walk contrary to you in fury; and I will chastise you seven times for your sins. Ye shall eat the flesh of your sons and daughters, and I will destroy your high places, and cast down your sun-pillars' and cast your carcasses upon the carcasses of your idols, and my soul shall abhor you. And I will make your cities waste, and bring your sanctuaries into desolation, and I will not smell the savour of your sweet odours. And I will bring the land into desolation, and your enemies who settle therein shall be astonished at it; and I will scatter you

[p. 383]

among the peoples, and will draw out the sword after you, and your land shall be desolate and your cities ruins. Then shall the land pay her sabbaths all the years of the desolation when you are in your enemies' land: even then shall the land rest and pay her sabbaths. As long as it lieth desolate it shall make up the celebration of the sabbaths which it did not celebrate as long as you dwelt in it. And upon them that are left alive of you I will send a faintness into their hearts in the land of their enemies, and the sound of a shaken leaf shall chase them, and they shall flee as fleeing from a sword, and they shall fall when none pursueth. And they shall fall one upon another as it were before a sword when none pursueth, and there shall be no stopping in the flight before your enemies. And ye shall lose yourselves among the peoples, and the land of your enemies shall eat you up. And they that are left of you shall pine away in their iniquity in your enemies' lands, and also in the iniquities of their fathers shall they pine away. And they shall confess their iniquity and the iniquity of their fathers in regard to their unfaithfulness which they committed against me, and that because they have walked contrary to me, I also walk contrary to them, and bring them into the land of their enemies. Then their uncircumcised heart is humbled, and then they pay their penalty, and I remember my covenant with Jacob, and also my covenant with Isaac, and also my covenant with Abraham, and I remember the land. The land also, left by them, pays its sabbaths, while she lieth without inhabitant and waste, and they themselves pay the penalty of their iniquity because, even because, they despised my judgments, and their soul abhorred my statutes. And yet for all that, when they be in the land of their enemies, I have not rejected them, neither have I abhorred them to destroy them utterly, and to break my covenant with them: for I am Jehovah their God. And I will for their sakes remember the covenant of their ancestors whom I brought forth out of the land of Egypt in the sight of the peoples, that I might be their God: I am Jehovah" (xxvi. 27-45).

These words undoubtedly cannot have been written before the Babylonian exile. It is said that the Assyrian exile will explain the passage: but where is there any similarity between the oration before us and the old genuine Isaiah? In Ezekiel's day such thoughts, feelings, and expressions as we have here can be shown to have prevailed: but it would be difficult to show that the fall of Samaria gave rise to such

[p. 384]

depression at Jerusalem: and Lev. xxvi. was not written outside Jerusalem, for it presupposes unity of worship. The Jews are addressed here, as in Deut. xxix., xxx., and they had no such lively feeling of solidarity with the deported Israelites as to think of them in connection with such threats. I even think it certain that the writer lived either towards the end of the Babylonian exile or after it, since at the close of the oration he turns his eyes to the restoration. In such prophets as Jeremiah and Ezekiel there is a meaning in such forecasting of the joyful future but here it contradicts both the historical position and the object of the threats, and appears to be explained most naturally as the result of an accident, i.e., of actuality. That in a comparison of Lev. xxvi. with Jeremiah and Ezekiel, the former cannot claim priority, appears distinctly from the comparative use of the phrase uncircumcised heart. That phrase originates in Jeremiah (iv. 4, ix. 24 seq.), but in Lev. xxvi. it is used as a well-known set term. In the same way the phrase pine away in their iniquity is repeated by Ezekiel as he heard it in the mouth of the people. He is its originator in literature; in Lev. xxvi. it is borrowed. [*1]

The criticism of Lev. xvii. seq. leads us to the result, that a collection of laws which took form during the period of the exile was received into the Priestly Code, and there clothed with fresh life. We need not then tremble at Schrader's threatening us with "critical analysis," and Graf's hypothesis will not be thereby overturned.

 

3. Two or three further important traces of the final priestly revision of the Hexateuch may here find mention. In the story of the flood the verses vii. 6-9 are an editorial addition, with the object of removing a contradiction between JE and Q; it shares the ideas and speaks the language of the Priestly Code. In the title of Deuteronomy the verse, "It came to pass in the fortieth year, in the eleventh (`shthy) month, on the first day of the month, that Moses spake unto the children of Israel according to all that Jehovah had given him in commandment

[p. 385]

unto them" (i. 3) is shown by the most undoubted signs to belong to the Priestly Code, and is intended to incorporate Deuteronomy in that work. We have already shown that the Priestly Code in the Book of Joshua is simply a filling-up of the Jehovistic-Deuteronomistic narrative.

That the Priestly Code consists of elements of two kinds, first of an independent stem, the Book of the Four Covenants (Q), and second, of innumerable additions and supplements which attach themselves principally to the Book of the Four Covenants, but not to it alone, and indeed to the whole of the Hexateuch--this assertion has not, strange to say, met with the opposition which might have been expected. Ryssel has even seen in the twofold nature of the Priestly Code a means to maintain the position of the Book of the Four Covenants before the exile: he sacrifices the additions, and places the necessary interval between them and the main body of the work. He thinks the close affinity between the two parts is sufficiently explained by the supposition that they both issued from the same circle, that of the priesthood of Jerusalem. Were it the case that the temple of Jerusalem was as autonomous and as solely legitimate in the days of Solomon as in those of the foreign domination, that the priests had as much to say under Ahaz, Hezekiah, and Josiah as after the exile, if it were allowable to represent them according as it suits one's views, and not according to the historical evidence, if, in short, there were no Israelite history at all, such an explanation might be allowed to stand. The secondary part of the Priestly Code of necessity draws the primary part with it. The similarity in matter and in form, the perfect agreement in tendencies and ideas, in expressions and ways of putting things, all compel us to think that the whole, if not a literary, is yet a historical, unity.

  

III.

It has lately been the fashion to regard the language of the Priestly Code as an insuperable barrier to the destructive efforts of tendency criticism. But it is unfortunate that this veto of language is left as destitute of detailed proof, by Delitzsch, Riehm, and Dillmann, as the veto of critical analysis by Schrader; and we cannot be called upon to show proof against a contention which is unsupported by evidence. But I take advantage of the opportunity to communicate some detached observations, which I may perhaps remark did not occur to me in

[p. 386]

connection with the investigation of the Pentateuch, but on a quite different occasion. In the passage 2 Sam. vi. 12 I was exceedingly struck with l`mth, and not less with br' in the two passages Isa. iv. 5, Amos iv. 13, and while following out the distribution of these two words I came on the traces of similar phenomena.

The language of the pre-exilic historical books is in general much akin to that of the Jehovistic work; that of the Priestly Code, on the contrary, is quite different. It is common enough to interpret this fact, as if the latter belonged to an earlier period. But not to mention that in that case the Code must have been entirely without influence on the history of the language, it agrees ill with this view, that on going back to the oldest documents preserved to us of the historical literature of the Hebrews we find the difference increasing rather than diminishing. Take Judges v. and 2 Sam. i.; the poetical pieces in JE may be compared with them, but in Q there is nothing like them. And on the other hand, it is in the narratives which were introduced very late into the history, such as Judges xix.-xxi.; 1 Sam. vii. viii. x. 17 seq. xii.; 1 Kings xiii., and the apocryphal additions in 1 Kings vi.-viii. that we recognise most readily some linguistic approximation to the Priestly Code. And as in the historical so also in the prophetical literature. The speech of Amos, Isaiah, Micah, answers on the whole to that of the Jehovist, not to that of the priestly author.

Deuteronomy and the Book of Jeremiah first agree with the Priestly Code in certain important expressions. In Ezekiel such expressions are much more numerous, and the agreement is by no means with Lev. xvii.-xxvi. alone. [*1] In the subsequent post-exilic prophets down to Malachi the points of contact are limited to details, but do not cease to occur; they occur also in the Psalms and in Ecclesiastes. Reminiscences of the Priestly Code are found nowhere but in the Chronicles and some of the Psalms. For that Amos iv. 11 is borrowed from Gen. xix. 29 is not a whit more clear than that the original of Amos i. 2 must be sought in Joel iv. 19 [iii. 16].

The Priestly Code maintains its isolated literary character as against the later literature also. This is the result partly of the use of a number of technical terms, partly of the incessant repetition of the same formulae,

[p. 387]

and of its great poverty of language. But if we neglect what is due to the stiff and hard idiosyncrasy of the author, it is undoubtedly the case that he makes use of a whole series of characteristic expressions which are not found before the exile, but gradually emerge and come into use after it. The fact is not even denied, it is merely put aside. To show what weight is due to it we may find room here for a short statement of the interesting points for the history of language to be found in Gen. i.

Gen. i. 1, r'shyth means in the older Hebrew, not the commencement of a process which goes forward in time, but the first (and generally the best) part of a thing. In the sense of a beginning in time, as the contrary to 'chryth, it is first found in a passage of Deut., xi. 12; then in the titles in the Book of Jeremiah, xxvi. 1, xxvii. 1, xxviii. 1, xlix. 34, and in Isa. xlvi. 10, and lastly in the Hagiographa, Job viii. 7, xlii. 12; Pr. xvii. 14; Eccles. vii. 8. In Gen. x. 10 r'shyth mmlkthw has a different meaning from that in Jer. xxvi. 1 in the one it is the principal part of the kingdom; in the other it is the beginning of the reign. In the beginning was in the early time, if absolute, bar'shnh, bathuchlh; if relative, bthchlth thchlth. [*1]

We have already spoken of the word br', a word remarkable for its specific theological import. Apart from Amos iv. 13 and Isa. iv. 5 it is first found outside the Priestly Code in the Deuteronomist in Exod. xxxiv. 10, Num. xvi. 30 (?), Deut. iv. 32, and in the Book of Jeremiah, xxxi. 22: then in Ezek. xxi. 35, xxviii. 13, 15; Mal. ii. 10; in Psalms li. 12, lxxxix. 13, 48, cii. 19, civ. 30, cxlviii. 5; Eccles. xii. 1. It occurs, however, most frequently, 20 times in fact, in Isa. xl.-lxvi.; and curiously enough, never in Job, where we should expect to find it. It has nothing to do with bere' (cut down wood) and bry' (fat). [*2]

[p. 388]

Gen. i. 2, thhw wbhw occurs also in Jeremiah iv. 23; Isa. xxxiv. 11. thhw alone is not so rare, but it also occurs, Isaiah xxix. 21 excepted, only in the later literature Deut. xxxii. 10; 1 Sam. xii. 21; Isa. xxiv. 10, xl. 17, 23, xli. 29, xliv. 9, xlv. 18 seq., xlix. 4, lix. 4; Job vi. 18, xii. 24, xxvi. 7; Ps. cvii. 40. The verb rchp (brood), which is common in Aramaic, only recurs in a single passage in the Old Testament, and that a late one, Deut. xxxii. 11. Yet the possibility must be conceded that there was no occasion for its more frequent employment.

Gen. i. 4, hbdyl and nbdl (divide and divide one's self), common in the Priestly Code, is first used by Deuteronomy and the Deuteronomist (Deut. iv. 41, x. 8, xix. 7, xxix. 10; 1 Kings viii. 53), then by Ezekiel (xxii. 26, xxxix. 14, xlii. 10) and the author of Isa. xl. seq. (lvi. 3, lix. 2). It is most used by the writer of Chronicles, (1 Chron. xii. 8, xxiii. 13, xxv. 1; 2 Chron. xxv. 10; Ezra vi. 21, viii. 24, ix. 1, x. 8, 11, 16; Neh. x. 2, 29, xiii. 3). On ywm 'chd Gen. i. 5 compare Josephus, Antiq. I. i. 1: "That now would be the first day, but Moses says one day; I could give the reason of this here, but as I have promised (in the Introduction) to give such reasons for everything in a separate work, I shall defer the exposition till then." The Rabbis also, in Genesis Rabba, feel the difficulty of the expression, which, however, has its parallel in the 'chd lchdsh, which belongs to the later way of speaking. In Syriac the ordinary expression is chd bshb'; hence in the New Testament mia sabbatun for the first day of the week.

Gen. i. 6, rqy` (firmament) is found, outside the Priestly Code, only in Ezek. (i. 22-26, x. 1), and in still later writers; Ps. xix. 2, cl. 1; Dan. xii. 3; cf. Job xxxviii. 18. [*1] Gen. i. 10 ymym (the sea, singular, see i. 22; Lev. xi. 9, 10), is rare in older times, and belongs to lofty poetical language; it is, on the contrary, frequent in Ezekiel (ten times), and in the Psalms (seven times); and occurs besides in Job vi. 3; Neh.

[p. 389]

ix. 6; Jon. ii. 4; Dan. xi. 45. Gen. i. 11 myn (kind), a very peculiar word, especially in the form Jeminehu, is found outside of this chapter and Lev. xiv., Gen. vi. 20, vii. 14, only in Deut. xiv. and Ezek. xlvii. 10.

Gen. i. 26, dmwth (likeness, verses 1, 3) does not occur in the earlier literature. It first appears in 2 Kings xvi. 10, in a post-Deuteronomic passage, for the writer is that of chapter xi. seq., xxi. seq. Then in Ezekiel (15 times), Isa. xiii. 4, xl. 18; 2 Chron. iv. 3; Ps. lxviii. 5. It is a borrowed word from Aramaic; and the corresponding verb only came into use in the period when Aramaic began to find its way in.

Gen. i. 27 zakar (male) is in earlier times zakwur; for this is the vocalization in Exod. xxiii. 17, xxxiv. 23; Deut. xvi. 16, xx. 13; and if it is right in these passages, as we cannot doubt it is, it must be introduced in Exod. xxxiv. 19; Deut. xv. 19; 1 Kings xi. 15 seq. as well. In the Priestly Code zakar occurs with great frequency, and elsewhere only in the later literature, Deut. iv. 16; Jer. xx. 15, xxx. 6; Ezek. xvi. 17; Isa. lxvi. 7; Mal. i. 14; Judges xxi. 11, 12; 2 Chron. xxxi. 16; Ezra viii. As for nqbh (female), matters are even worse. Outside the Priestly Code it is only found in Jeremiah (xxxi. 22) and the Deuteronomist (iv. 16). The Jehovist, it is well known, always says 'ysh, w'shh even of the lower animals: the editor of the Hexateuch, on the contrary, always follows the usage of the Priestly Code.

Gen. i. 28 chych hrmshth attracts attention by the omission of the article with the substantive and its being merely prefixed to the following adjective; as if one should say in Greek, aner o agathos instead of o aner agathos. In the same way i. 21 ywm hshshy, and ii. 3 ywm hshby`w. In Arabic there are some analogies for this, but on seeking one in Hebrew we have to come down to the period when it was usual to say knsth hgdwlh, kbsh and rdh are Aramaisms. In kbshwh we find the only verbal suffix in Gen. i. Instead we have always the forms 'thm 'thw; this is so in the Priestly Code generally. In the Jehovistic main work, in J, these substitutes with 'th are only used sometimes and for special reasons: it may be generally asserted that they are more used the later we come down. Parallel with this is the use of 'nky in J and 'ny in the Priestly Code; the latter form grows always more frequent in later times.

These remarks carry us beyond Gen. i.; for the Priestly Code generally I am now able to refer to F. Giesebrecht's essay on the criticism of the Hexateuch. Such words as qrbn, `tzm, l`mth, `shthy are each,

[p. 390]

by itself, strong arguments for assuming a late date for the production of the Priestly Code. We cannot believe that such everyday words should never have come into use in the other literature before the exile, if they were in existence. They cannot be counted technical terms: qrbn used in Hebrew for sacrifice and offering is simply as if an English writer should say priere instead of worship. In such comparisons of the vocabulary we have, however, to consider first the working up and revision which has been at work in every part of the books of the Bible, and secondly the caprice of the writers in apparent trifles, such as 'nky and 'ny, especially outside the Pentateuch. These two agencies have so dislocated the original facts in this matter, that in general we can only deal in proportions, and must be content with showing that a word occurs say 3 times in the other literature and 27 times in an equal extent of the later. [*1]

2. The study of the history of language is still at a very elementary stage in Hebrew. In that which pertains to the lexicographer it would do well to include in its scope the proper names of the Old Testament; when it would probably appear that not only Parnach (Num. xxxiv. 25) but also composite names such as Peda-zur, Peda-el, Nathana-el, Pazi-el, Eli-asaph, point less to the Mosaic than to the Persian period, and have their analogies in the Chronicles. On the other hand, the prepositions and particles would have to be examined the use of the prepositions Beth and Lamed in the Priestly Code is very peculiar. That would lead further, to syntax; or better still, to rhetoric and style--a difficult and little cultivated field of study, but one of great importance and lending itself readily to comparative treatment. This treatment yields the most far-reaching results in the case of those parallels which have an undoubted and direct relation to each other. The dependence of the Priestly Code on the Jehovist cannot be more strikingly demonstrated than by comparing its tzdyq bdrthyw, Gen. vi. 9, with the tzdyq bdwr hzh, of Gen. vii. 1 (JE.). The plural drwth is quite on a line with the mynwm, and the `my h'rtz, of the Rabbis, and the spermata of Gal. iii. 15; it does not

[p. 391]

denote the successive generations, but contemporaries, the contemporaneous individuals of one and the same generation.

From words we are brought back to things again by noting that the age of the word depends in many cases on the introduction of the thing. The name bthr in the Song of Songs, for example, presupposes the cultivation of the malobathron in Syria and Palestine. The Priestly Code enumerates colours, stuffs, goldsmiths' work and jewels, which nowhere occur in the older literature: along with the Book of Ezekiel it is the principal quarry in the Old Testament for the history of art; and this is the less likely to be due to chance, as the geographical horizon of the two works is also the same. There is also some contact in this respect, though to a less degree, between the Priestly Code and Isa. xl.-lxvi., and this must doubtless receive a historical explanation in the circumstances of the Babylonian age. [*1]

Footnotes

^366:1 Cf. p. <page 50>, <page 149> seq. <page 161> seq. <page 254> seq. This is the reason why the strata of the tradition require to be compared as carefully as those of the law.

^366:2 Comp. p. <page 76> seq. <page 103> seq.

^366:3 The method is stated in the introduction (<page 1> seq.): and special pains are taken to bring it out distinctly in the first chapter, that about the place of worship.

^367:1 And it would not be surprising when we consider the whole character of the polemic against Graf's hypothesis, if the next objection should be the very opposite of the above, viz. that it is not able to construct the history.

^369:1 Jahrb. Deutsche Theol., 1876, p. 392 seq., 531 seq.; 1877,  p. 407 seq.

^370:1 Jahrbb. fur prot. Theologie, 1875, p. 350.

^370:2 Without the ark there is no use of the tabernacle, and the distinction in Exod. xxxiii. which is treated as one of importance, between the representation (Mal'ak) of [p. 371] Jehovah and Jehovah Himself, has no meaning. By making an image the Israelites showed that they could not do without a sensible representation of the Deity, and Jehovah therefore gave them the ark instead of the calf.

^372:1 Appointment of judges and wardens shwmrym = peace-officials, who, according to xx. 9, are in war replaced by the captains), i. 9-18, Taberah, Massah, Kibroth Taavah (ix. 22), Dathan and Abiram (xi. 6), Balaam (xxiii. 5), Baal-peor (iv. 3). Only the Jehovist narrative of Numbers xii. seems to be nowhere referred to. In Deut. i. 9-18 the scene is still at Horeb, but this passage shows acquaintance with Num. xi. and uses both versions for a new and somewhat different one.

^373:1 Noldeke frequently argues from such numbers as 12 and 70, as if they only occurred in Q. But that is not the case. As Q in the beginning of Genesis has groups of 10, JE has groups of 7; 12 and 40 occur in JE as frequently as in Q, and 70 not less frequently. It is therefore surprising to find the story of the 12 springs of water and the 70 palm-trees of Elim ascribed to Q for no other reason than because of the 12 and the 70. Not even the statements of the age of the patriarchs--except so far as they serve the chronological system--are a certain mark of Q: compare Gen. xxxi. 18, xxxvii. 2, xli. 26, l. 26; Deut. xxxiv. 7; Josh. xxiv. 29. Only the names of the 12 spies and the 70 souls are incontestably the property of the Priestly Code, but it is by no means difficult to show (especially in Gen. xlvi. 8-27) that they are far less original than the figures. The numbers are round numbers, and in fact do not admit of such a recital of the items of which they are made up.

^375:1 Jahrbb. fur Deutsche Theol., 1876, p. 596 seq.

^375:2 Joh. Hollenberg in Stud. und Krit., 1874, p. 462 seq.

^375:3 Aug. Kayser, Das vorexilische Buch der Urgeschichte Israels (Strassburg, 1874), p. 147, seq.; Joh. Hollenberg, der Character der Alex. Uebersetzung des B. Josua (Programm des Gymn. zu Mors, 1876), p. 15.

^376:1 Historisch-Kritisch Onderzoek I. (Leyden, 1861), p. 165; the reviser of the Pentateuch must be sought in the same circles in which the Book of Origins (Q) arose and was gradually extended and modified, i.e., among the priests of Jerusalem, p. 194; it is generally thought that the Deuteronomist is the reviser of the whole Book of Joshua, but his hand is not to be traced everywhere,--not, for example, in the priestly sections; the last reviser is to be distinguished from the Deuteronomist. In certain narratives of Numbers and Joshua, Kuenen detected very considerable additions by the last reviser, and the results of his investigation have now been published in the first part of the second edition of his great isagogic work (Leyden, 1885).

^376:2 Compare Jahrbb. fur Deutsche Theol., 1877, p. 422-444, especially on the elimination of the additions of the reviser. In the present discussion I shall not take these into account. In chapter xxiii., for example, I only take account of verses 9-22, 39-44, in chapter xxiv. only of vers. 15-22.

^377:1 Compare xxiv. 15 seq. with Exod. xxii. 27 (xxi. 17); xxiv. 18 with Exod. xxi. 28 seq.; xxiv. 19, 20 with Exod. xxi. 33, 34; xxiv. 21 with Exod. xxi. 28 seq.

^377:2 xvii. 7 (cf. 2 Chron. xi. 15), xviii. 21, xix. 4, 19, 26, 29, 31, xx. 2 seq. 6, xxvi. 1, 30. With regard to the date we have to note the stern prohibition of the service of Moloch. On Lev. xvii. see above, <page 376>.

^378:1 On Lev. xxii. 24, 25, compare Kuenen's Hibbert Lectures.

^378:2 Compare Colenso, Pentateuch and Joshua, vi. p. 3-23. Kayser, op. cit. p. 177-179. Smend on Ezekiel, p. xxv.

^380:1 L. Horst, in his discussion on Lev. xvii.-xxxi, and Ezekiel (Colmar, 1881), has strikingly shown that the mechanical style of criticism in which Dillmann even surpasses his predecessor Knobel, is not equal to the problem presented by the Law of Holiness. He goes on, however, to an attempt to save, by modifying it, the old Strassburg view of Ezekiel's authorship; and as Kuenen justly remarks, he makes ship-wreck on Lev. xxvi. (Theol. Tijdschr. 1882, p. 646). Cf. <page 384> note.

^384:1 Horst tries to find a place for Lev. xxvi. in the last years of king Zedekiah (op. cit. p. 65, 66), but in this he is merely working out his theory that the author was the youthful Ezekiel; and the theory is sufficiently condemned if it leads to this consequence. Delitzsch (Zeitschr. fur Kirchl. Wissench. 1880, p. 619) thinks it a piece of impertinence in me to read out of Ezekiel xxxiii. what that passage says. On Deut. x. 16, xxx. 6, and generally on the color Hieremianus in Deuteronomy, see Jahrb. fur D. Theol., 1877, p. 464.

^386:1 Especially noticeable is p'th ngb thymnh in Ezekiel and the Priestly Code. In the latter Negeb, even when it refers to the actual Negeb, yet is used as denoting south (Num. xxxiv. 3, xxv. 2-4), i.e., it has completely lost its original meaning.

^387:1 The vocalisation ber'shyth is very curious: we should expect bar'shyth. It has been attempted to do justice to it by translating: "In the beginning, when God created heaven and earth--but the earth was without form and void, and darkness lay upon the deep, and the spirit of God brooded over the water--then God spake: Let there be light." But this translation is desperate, and certainly not that followed by the punctuators, for the Jewish tradition (Septuagint, Aquila, Onkelos) is unanimous in translating: "In the beginning God created heaven and earth." In Aramaic, on the contrary, such adverbs take, as is well known, the form of the status constructus. Cf. rbth Psalm lxvv. 10, cxx. 6.

^387:2 I do not speak of the use of Elohim and the application of the names of God in the Priestly Code: the matter is not yet clear to me. Very curious is thshm, Lev. xxiv. 11.

^388:1 It does not mean, as is generally assumed, that which is beaten out thin, is stretched out. For, firstly, the heaven is never considered to be made of sheet-metal; secondly, the meaning in question only belongs to the Piel, and the substantive derived from it is requu`q. The Kal, with which rqy` must be connected, is found in Isa. xiii. 5, xliv. 24; Ps. cxxxvi. 6. It is generally translated spread out, but quite unwarrantably. Parallel with it are ysd and kznn (compare Ps. xxiv. 2 with cxxxvi. 6); the Septuagint translates in all three passages with stereoun, and accordingly renders rqy` with stereuma (firmamentum). This rendering, which alone is supported by tradition, and which is very satisfactory, is confirmed by the Syriac, where the verb rq` is frequent in the sense of fortify.

^390:1 Too much importance must not be attached to Aramaisms: even when they admit of clear demonstration they prove little while occurring merely in single instances. We early find remarkable phenomena, such as ndr for nzr (hence nzyr = vovens), ntr for ntzr (Amos i. 11, ymr for ymrp?), comp. Arabic lata for laisa, Sur. 38, 2. Hudh. 84, 1. And yet such an Aramaism as nth shunthh in Num. xv. 27, or even qrbn, is very remarkable.

^391:1 On Canticles cf. Schurer's Theol. Lit. Z., 1879, p. 31. It also, by the names of plants and similar details mentioned in it, is an important source for the history of external civilisation. In Isa. liv. 11, read with the Sept. npku instead of the meaningless pwku, and 'dnyk instead of 'bnyk.

      
Prolegomena to the History of Ancient Israel, by Julius Wellhausen, [1885], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 392]

  

CHAPTER X.

  

THE ORAL AND THE WRITTEN TORAH.

WHAT importance the written letter, the book of the law, possessed for the Jews, we all know from the New Testament. Of ancient Israel, again, it is said in the introductory poem of Goethe's West-Oestlicher Divan, that the word was so important there, because it was a spoken word. The contrast which Goethe evidently perceived is really characteristic, and deserves some further attention.

  

I.

1. Even if it be the case that Deuteronomy and the Priestly Code were only reduced to writing at a late period, still there remains the Jehovistic legislation (Exod. xx.-xxiii. xxxiv.) which might be regarded as the document which formed the starting-point of the religious history of Israel. And this position is in fact generally claimed for it; yet not for the whole of it, since it is commonly recognised that the Sinaitic Book of the Covenant (Exod. xx.-xxiii. 19) was given to a people who were settled and thoroughly accustomed to agriculture, and who, moreover, had passed somewhat beyond the earliest stage in the use of money. [*1]

The Decalogue alone is commonly maintained to be in the strictest sense Mosaic. This is principally on account of the statement that it was written down on the two stone tables of the sacred ark. Yet of Deuteronomy also we read, both that it was written on twelve stones and that it was deposited in the sacred ark (Deut. xxxi. 26). We cannot therefore place implicit reliance on such statements. What is attested in this way of the Decalogue seems to find confirmation in 1 Kings viii. 9. But the authority of this statement is greatly weakened by the fact that it occurs in a passage which has undergone the Deuteronomistic

[p. 393]

revision, and has been, in addition to this, subjected to interpolation. The more weight must we therefore allow to the circumstance, which makes for a different conclusion, that the name "The Ark of the Covenant" (i.e., the box of the law) [*1] is peculiar to the later writers, and, when it occurs in older narratives, is proved by its sporadic appearance, as well as by a comparison of the Septuagint with the Massoretic text, to be a correction. In early times the ark was not a mere casket for the law; the "the ark of Jehovah" was of itself important, as we see clearly enough from 1 Sam. iv.-vi. Like the twelve maccebas which surrounded the altar on the holy hill of Shechem, and which only later assumed the character of monuments of the law, so the ark of the covenant no doubt arose by a change of meaning out of the old idol. If there were stones in it at all, they probably served some other purpose than that of writing materials, otherwise they would not have been hidden as a mystery in the darkness of the sanctuary; they must have been exposed to public view. Add to this that the tradition is not agreed as to the tenor of the ten words said to have been inserted on the two tables; two decalogues being preserved to us, Exod. xx. and Exod. xxxiv., which are quite different from each other. It results from this that there was no real or certain knowledge as to what stood on the tables, and further that if there were such stones in the ark--and probably there were--there was nothing written on them. This is not the place to decide which of the two versions is prior to the other; the negative result we have obtained is sufficient for our present purpose.

 

2. Ancient Israel was certainly not without God-given bases for the ordering of human life; only they were not fixed in writing. Usage and tradition were looked on to a large extent as the institution of the Deity. Thus, for example, the ways and rules of agriculture. Jehovah had instructed the husbandman and taught him the right way. He it was whose authority gave to the unwritten laws of custom their binding power. "It is never so done in Israel," "that is folly in Israel," and similar expressions of insulted public conscience are of frequent occurrence,

[p. 394]

and show the power of custom: the fear of God acts as a motive for respecting it. "Surely there is no fear of God in this place, and they will slay me for my wife's sake," so Abraham says to himself in Gerar. "How shall I do such great wrong and sin against God?" says Joseph to the woman in Egypt. "The people of Sodom were wicked and sinned grievously against Jehovah," we read in Gen. xiii. 13. Similarly Deut. xxv. 18: "The Amalekites attacked Israel on the march, and killed the stragglers, all that were feeble and fell behind, and feared not God." We see that the requirements of the Deity are known and of force, not to the Israelites only, but to all the world; and accordingly they are not to be identified with any positive commands. The patriarchs observed them long before Moses. "I know Abraham," Jehovah says, xviii. 19, "that he will command his children to keep the way of Jehovah, to do justice and judgment."

Much greater importance is attached to the special Torah of Jehovah, which not only sets up laws of action of universal validity, but shows man the way in special cases of difficulty, where he is at a loss. This Torah is one of the special gifts with which Israel is endowed (Deut. xxxiii. 4); and it is intrusted to the priests, whose influence, during the period of the Hebrew kings, of which we are now speaking, rested much more on this possession than on the privilege of sacrifice. The verb from which Torah is derived signifies in its earliest usage to give direction, decision. The participle signifies giver of oracles in the two, examples gibeath moreh and allon moreh. The latter expression is explained by another which alternates with it, "oak of the soothsayers." Now we know that the priests in the days of Saul and David gave divine oracles by the ephod and the lots connected with it, which answered one way or the other to a question put in an alternative form. Their Torah grew no doubt out of this practice. [*1] The Urim and Thummim are regarded, according to Deut. xxxiii. 8, as the true and universal insignia of the priesthood; the ephod is last mentioned in the historical

[p. 395]

books in 1 Kings ii. 26, [*1] but appears to have remained in use down to the time of Isaiah (Hos. iii. 4; Isa. xxx. 22). The Torah freed itself in the process of time, following the general mental movement, from such heathenish media and vehicles (Hab. ii. 19). But it continued to be an oral decision and direction. As a whole it is only a power and activity of God, or of the priests. Of this subject there can be no abstract; the teaching; is only thought of as the action of the teacher. There is no torah as a ready-made product, as a system existing independently of its originator and accessible to every one: it becomes actual only in the various utterances, which naturally form by degrees the basis of a fixed tradition. "They preserve Thy word, and keep Thy law; they teach Jacob Thy judgments and Israel Thy statutes" (Deut. xxxiii. 9, 10).

The Torah of the priests appears to have had primarily a legal character. In cases which there was no regular authority to decide, or which were too difficult for human decision, the latter was brought in the last instance before God, i.e., before the sanctuary or the priests (Exod. xviii. 25 seq.). The priests thus formed a kind of supreme court, which, however, rested on a voluntary recognition of its moral authority, and could not support its decisions by force. "If a man sin against another, God shall judge him," 1 Sam. ii. 25 says, very indefinitely. Certain legal transactions of special solemnity are executed before God (Exod. xxi. 6). Now in proportion as the executive gained strength under the monarchy, jus--civil justice--necessarily grew up into a separate existence from the older sacred fas. The knowledge of God, which Hosea (chap. iv.) regards as the contents of the torah, has as yet a closer connection with jurisprudence than with theology; but as its practical issue is that God requires of man righteousness, and faithfulness, and good-will, it is fundamentally and essentially morality, though morality at that time addressed its demands less to the conscience than to society. A ritual tradition naturally developed itself even before the exile (2 Kings xvii. 27, 28). But only those rites were included in the Torah which the priests had to teach others, not those which they discharged themselves; even in Leviticus this distinction may be traced; the instructions characterised as toroth being chiefly those as to animals which might or might not be eaten, as to clean and unclean states, as to leprosy and its marks (cf. Deut. xxiv. 8).

[p. 396]

So it was in Israel, to which the testimony applies which we have cited: and so it was in Judah also. There was a common proverb in the days of Jeremiah and Ezekiel, "The Torah shall not perish from the priest, nor counsel from the ancient, nor the word from the prophet:" but no doubt the saying was not new in their time, and at any rate it will apply to the earlier time as well. Not because they sacrifice but because they teach, do the priests here appear as pillars of the religious order of things; and their Torah is a living power, equal to the occasion and never-failing. Micah reproaches them with judging for reward (iii. 11), and this shows their wisdom to have been based on a tradition accessible to them alone; this is also shown by some expressions of Deuteronomy (xvii. 10 seq., xxiv. 8). We have the counterpart to the proverb above cited (Jer. xviii. 18; Ezek. vii. 26) in the complaint in Lamentations (ii. 9): "Jerusalem is destroyed; her king and her princes are among the Gentiles: the Torah is no more; the prophets obtain no vision from Jehovah;" after the ruin of the sanctuary and the priests there is no longer any Torah; and if that be so, the axe is laid to the root of the life of the people. In the post-exile prophets the torah, which even in Deuteronomy (xvii. 11) was mainly legal in its nature, acquires a strong savour of ritual which one did not notice before; yet even here it is still an oral teaching of the priests (Hag. ii. 11).

The priests derived their Torah from Moses: they claimed only to preserve and guard what Moses had left (Deuteronomy xxxiii 4, 9 seq.). He counted as their ancestor (xxxiii. 8; Judges xviii. 30); his father in-law is the priest of Midian at Mount Sinai, as Jehovah also is derived in a certain sense from the older deity of Sinai. But at the same time Moses was reputed to be the incomparable originator and practicer of prophecy (Num. xii. 6 seq.; Deut. xxxiv. 10; Hos. xii. 14), as his brother Aaron also is not only a Levite (Exod. iv. 14), but also a prophet (iv. 15; Num. xii. 2). There is thus a close relation between priests and prophets, i.e., seers; as with other peoples (1 Sam. vi. 3; 1 Kings xviii. 19, compare with 2 Kings x. 19), so also with the Hebrews. In the earliest time it was not knowing the technique of worship, which was still very simple and undeveloped, but being a man of God, standing on an intimate footing with God, that made a man a priest, that is one who keeps up the communication with heaven for others; and the seer is better qualified than others for the office (1 Kings xviii. 30 seq.).

[p. 397]

[paragraph continues] There is no fixed distinction in early times between the two offices; Samuel is in 1 Sam. i.-iii. an aspirant to the priesthood; in ix. x. he is regarded as a seer.

In later times also, when priests and prophets drew off and separated from each other, they yet remained connected, both in the kingdom of Israel (Hos. iv. 5) and in Judah. In the latter this was very markedly the case (2 Kings xxiii. 2; Jer. xxvi. 7 seq., v. 31; Deut. xviii. 1-8, 9-22; Zech. vii. 3). What connected them with each other was the revelation of Jehovah which went on and was kept alive in both of them. It is Jehovah from whom the torah of the priest and the word of the prophet proceeds: He is the true director, as Isaiah calls Him in the passage xxx. 20 seq., where, speaking of the Messianic time, he says to the people, "Then thy director (mwryk) is no more concealed, but thine eyes see thy director, and thine ears hear the words of One calling behind thee; this is the way, walk ye in it; when ye are turning to the right hand or to the left." Torah and word are cognate notions, and capable of being interchanged (Deut. xxxiii. 9; Isa. i. 10, ii. 3, v. 24, viii. 16, 20). This explains how both priests and prophets claimed Moses for their order: he was not regarded as the founder of the cultus.

The difference, in the period when it had fully developed itself, may be said to be this: the Torah of the priests was like a spring which runs always, that of the prophets like a spring which is intermittent, but when it does break forth, flows with all the greater force. The priests take precedence of the prophets when both are named together; they obviously consolidated themselves earlier and more strongly. The order, and the tradition which propagates itself within the order, are essential to them: they observe and keep the torah (Deut. xxxiii. 9). For this reason, that they take their stand so entirely on the tradition, and depend on it, their claim to have Moses for their father, the beginner and founder of their tradition, is in itself the better founded of the two. [*1] In the ordinary parlance of the Hebrews torah always meant first, and

[p. 398]

chiefly the Priestly Torah. The prophets have notoriously no father (1 Sam. x. 12), their importance rests on the individuals; it is characteristic that only names and sketches of their lives have reached us. They do indeed, following the tendency of the times, draw together in corporations; but in doing so they really renounce their own distinctive characteristics: the representative men are always single, resting on nothing outside themselves. We have thus on the one side the tradition of a class, which suffices for the occasions of ordinary life, and on the other the inspiration of awakened individuals, stirred up by occasions which are more than ordinary. After the spirit of the oldest men of God, Moses at the head of them, had been in a fashion laid to sleep in institutions, it sought and found in the prophets a new opening; the old fire burst out like a volcano through the strata which once, too, rose fluid from the deep, but now were fixed and dead.

The element in which the prophets live is the storm of the world's history, which sweeps away human institutions; in which the rubbish of past generations with the houses built on it begins to shake, and that foundation alone remains firm, which needs no support but itself. When the earth trembles and seems to be passing away, then they triumph because Jehovah alone is exalted. They do not preach on set texts; they speak out of the spirit which judges all things and itself is judged of no man. Where do they ever lean on any other authority than the truth of what they say; where do they rest on any other foundation than their own certainty? It belongs to the notion of prophecy of true revelation, that Jehovah, overlooking all the media of ordinances and institutions, communicates Himself to the individual, the called one, in whom that mysterious and irreducible rapport in which the deity stands with man clothes itself with energy. Apart from the prophet, in abstracto, there is no revelation; it lives in his divine-human ego. This gives rise to a synthesis of apparent contradictions: the subjective in the highest sense, which is exalted above all ordinances, is the truly objective, the divine. This it proves itself to be by the consent of the conscience of all, on which the prophets count, just as Jesus does in the Gospel of John, in spite of all their polemic against the traditional religion. They are not saying anything new: they are only proclaiming old truth. While acting in the most creative way they feel entirely passive: the homo tantum et audacia which may with perfect justice be applied to such men as Elijah, Amos, and Isaiah, is with them equivalent

[p. 399]

to deus tantum et servitus. But their creed is not to be found in any book. It is barbarism, in dealing with such a phenomenon, to distort its physiognomy by introducing the law.

 

3. It is a vain imagination to suppose that the prophets expounded and applied the law. Malachi (circa 450 B.C.) says, it is true, iv. 4, "Remember ye the torah of Moses my servant;" but where shall we look for any second expression of this nature? Much more correctly than modern scholars did these men judge, who at the close of the pre-exilic history looked back on the forces which had moulded it, both the divine and those opposed to God. In their eyes the prophets are not the expounders of Moses, but his continuators and equals; the word of God in their mouth is not less weighty than in the mouth of Moses; they, as well as he, are organs of the spirit of Jehovah by which He is present in Israel. The immediate revelation to the people, we read in Deuteronomy xviii., ceased with the ten commandments: from that point onwards Jehovah uses the prophets as His mouth: "A prophet like unto thee," He says to Moses, "will I raise up to them from among their brethren, and will put my words in his mouth, and he shall speak unto them all that I shall command him; and whosoever shall not hearken unto my words which he shall speak in my name, I will require it of him." We find it the same in Jeremiah; the voice of the prophets, always sounding when there is need for it, occupies the place which, according to the prevailing view, should have been filled by the law: this living command of Jehovah is all he knows of, and not any testament given once for all. "This only I commanded your fathers when I brought them up out of Egypt: Obey my voice, and walk ye in all the ways that I will command you. Since the day that your fathers came forth out of Egypt, I have sent unto you all my servants the prophets, daily rising up early and sending them; but ye would not hear." And even after the exile we meet in Zechariah (520 B.C.) the following view of the significance of the prophets: "Thus spake Jehovah of hosts [to the fathers before the exile], Speak true judgment, and show mercy and compassions every man to his brother, and oppress not the widow nor the fatherless, the stranger nor the poor: and let none of you imagine evil against his brother in his heart. But they refused to hearken, and shrugged the shoulder, and stopped their ears, that they should not hear. Yea, they made their hearts as a flint, lest they should hear the Torah and the

[p. 400]

words which Jehovah Sebaoth hath sent by His Spirit through the old prophets: therefore came a great wrath from Jehovah Sebaoth. And as He cried and they would not hear, so now shall they cry and I will not hear, and I will blow them away among the peoples. . . . Thus saith Jehovah Sebaoth [after the exile to the present generation], As I thought to punish you without pity because your fathers provoked me to anger, so again have I thought in these days to do well to the house of Judah: fear ye not. These are the things that ye shall do: Speak ye every man the truth to his neighbour; execute the judgment of truth and peace in your gates; and let none of you imagine evil in your hearts against his neighbour, and love no false oath, for all these are things which I hate, saith Jehovah" (Zech. vii. 9-11, viii. 14-16). The contents of the Torah, on obedience to which the theocracy is here based, are very suggestive, as also its derivation from the "old" prophets. Even Ezra can say (ix. 10, 11): "We have forsaken Thy commandments which Thou hast commanded by the servants the prophets, saying, The land unto which ye go to possess it is an unclean land with the filthiness of the people of the land, which have filled it from one end to another with their uncleanness." He is thinking of Deuteronomy, Ezekiel, and Levit. xvii.-xxvi.

Of those who at the end reflected on the meaning of the development which had run its course, the writer of Isaiah xl.-lxvi. occupies the first place. The Torah, which he also calls mishpat, right (i.e., truth), appears to him to be the divine and imperishable element in Israel. With him, however, it is inseparable from its mouthpiece, the servant of Jehovah, xlii. 1-4, xlix. 1-6, l. 4-9, lii. 13-liii. 12. The name would denote the prophet, but here it stands for the people, a prophet on a large scale. Israel's calling is not that of the world-monarchies, to make sensation and noise in the streets (xiii. 1-4), but the greater one of promulgating the Torah and getting it received. This is to be done both in Israel and among the heathen. What makes Israel a prophet is not his own inner qualities, but his relation to Jehovah, his calling as the depository of divine truth: hence it involves no contradiction that the servant should begin his work in Israel itself. [*1] Till now he has

[p. 401]

spent his strength only in the bosom of his own people, which is always inclined to fall away from Jehovah and from itself: heedless of reproach and suffering he has laboured unweariedly in carrying out the behests of his Master and has declared His word. All in vain. He has not been able to avert the victory of heathenism in Israel, now followed by its victory over Israel. Now in the exile Jehovah has severed His relation with His people; the individual Hebrews survive, but the servant, the people of Jehovah, is dead. Then is the Torah to die with him, and truth itself to succumb to falsehood, to heathenism? That cannot be; truth must prevail, must come to the light. As to the Apostle Paul the Spirit is the earnest of the resurrection of those who are born again, so to our author the Torah is the pledge of the resurrection of Israel, the justification of the servant of Jehovah. The final triumph of the cause, which is God's, will surpass all expectations. Not only in Israel itself will the Torah, will the servant of Jehovah prevail and bring about a regeneration of the people: the truth will in the future shine forth from Israel into the whole world, and obtain the victory among all the Gentiles (xlix. 6). Then it will appear that the work of the servant, resultless as it seemed to be up to the exile, has yet not been in vain.

It is surely unnecessary for me to demonstrate how uncommonly vivid, I might say how uncommonly historical, the notion of the Torah is as here set forth, and how entirely incompatible that notion is with "the Torah of Moses." It might most fitly be compared with the Logos of the prologue of John, if the latter is understood in accordance with John x. 35, an utterance certainly authentic, and not according to Philo. As Jesus is the revelation of God made man, so the servant of Jehovah is the revelation of God made a people. The similarity of their nature and their significance involves the similarity of their work and of their sufferings, so that the Messianic interpretation of Isa. lii. 13-liii. 12 is in fact one which could not fail to suggest itself. [*1]

[p. 402]

  

II.

1. In the 18th year of King Josiah (621 B.C.) Deuteronomy was found and published. In the account of the discovery, 2 Kings xxii. xxiii., it is always called simply the book of the Torah; it was accordingly the first, and in its time the only book of the kind. It is certainly the case that the prophets had written down some of their speeches before this, and the priests also may before this time have written down many of their precepts: it appears in fact, as Vatke surmises, that we have a monument of their spirit, e.g., in the Sinaitic Book of the Covenant. Deuteronomy presupposes earlier attempts of this kind, and borrows its materials largely from them; but on the other hand it is distinguished from them not only by its greater compass but also by its much higher claims. It is written with the distinct intention not to remain a private memorandum, but to obtain public authority as a book. The idea of making a definite formulated written Torah the law of the land, is the important point: [*1] it was a first attempt and succeeded at the outset beyond expectation. A reaction set in afterwards, it is true; but the Babylonian exile completed the triumph of the law. Extraordinary excitement was at that time followed by the deepest depression (Amos viii. 11 seq.). At such a time those who did not despair of the future clung anxiously to the religious acquisitions of the past. These had been put in a book just in time in Deuteronomy, with a view to practical use in the civil and religious life of the people . The book of the Torah did not perish in the general ruin, but remained in existence, and was the compass of those who were shaping their course for a new Israel. How thoroughly determined they were to use it as their rule we see from the revision of the Hexateuch and of the historical books which was taken in hand during the exile.

With the appearance of the law came to an end the old freedom, not only in the sphere of worship, now restricted to Jerusalem, but in the sphere of the religious spirit as well. There was now in existence an authority as objective as could be; and this was the death of prophecy.

[p. 403]

[paragraph continues] For it was a necessary condition of prophecy that the tares should be at liberty to grow up beside the wheat. The signs given in Deuteronomy to distinguish the true from the false prophet, are no doubt vague and unpractical: still they show the tendency towards control and the introduction of uniformity; that is the great step which is new. [*1] It certainly was not the intention of the legislator to encroach upon the spoken Torah or the free word. But the consequence, favoured by outward circumstances, was not to be avoided: the feeling that the prophets had come to an end did not arise in the Maccabean wars only. In the exile we hear the complaint that the instruction of the priests and the word of the prophets are silent (Lam. ii. 9); it is asked, where he is who in former times put his spirit in Israel (Isa. lxiii. 11); in Nehemiah's time a doubtful question is left unsettled, at least theoretically, till the priest with Urim and Thummim, i.e., with a trustworthy prophecy, shall appear (Neh. vii. 69). We may call Jeremiah the last of the prophets: [*2] those who came after him were prophets only in name. Ezekiel had swallowed a book (iii. 1-3), and gave it out again. He also, like Zechariah, calls the pre-exilic prophets the old prophets, conscious that he himself belongs to the epigoni: he meditates on their words like Daniel and comments on them in his own prophecy (xxxviii. 17, xxxix. 8). The writer of Isa. xl. seq.

[p. 404]

might with much more reason be called a prophet, but he does not claim to be one; his anonymity, which is evidently intentional, leaves no doubt as to this. He is, in fact, more of a theologian: he is principally occupied in reflecting on the results of the foregoing development, of which prophecy had been the leaven; these are fixed possessions now secured; he is gathering in the harvest. As for the prophets after the exile, we have already seen how Zechariah speaks of the old prophets as a series which is closed, in which he and those like him are not to be reckoned. In the writing of an anonymous contemporary which is appended to his book we find the following notable expression: "In that (hoped-for) day, saith Jehovah, I will cut off the names of the idols out of the land, that they be no more remembered, and also I will cause to cease the prophets and the unclean spirit; and if a man will yet prophesy, his parents shall say unto him, Thou shalt not live, for thou speakest lies in the name of Jehovah, and his parents shall thrust him through when he prophesieth" (xiii. 2-3).

 

2. Deuteronomy was the programme of a reform, not of a restoration. It took for granted the existence of the cultus, and only corrected it in certain general respects. But the temple was now destroyed and the worship interrupted, and the practice of past times had to be written down if it was not to be lost. Thus it came about that in the exile the conduct of worship became the subject of the Torah, and in this process reformation was naturally aimed at as well as restoration. We have seen (<page 59>) that Ezekiel was the first to take this step which the circumstances of the time indicated. In the last part of his work he made the first attempt to record the ritual which had been customary in the temple of Jerusalem. Other priests attached themselves to him (Lev. xvii.-xxvi.), and thus there grew up in the exile from among the members of this profession a kind of school of people who reduced to writing and to a system what they had formerly practiced in the way of their calling. After the temple was restored this theoretical zeal still continued to work, and the ritual when renewed was still further developed by the action and reaction on each other of theory and practice: the priests who had stayed in Babylon took as great a part, from a distance, in the sacred services, as their brothers at Jerusalem who had actually to conduct them. The latter indeed lived in adverse circumstances and do not appear to have conformed with great

[p. 405]

strictness or accuracy to the observances which had been agreed upon. The last result of this labour of many years is the Priestly Code. It has indeed been said that we cannot ascribe the creation of such a work to an age which was bent on nothing but repristination. Granted that this is a correct description of it, such an age is peculiarly fitted for an artificial systematising of given materials, and this is what the originality of the Priestly Code in substance amounts to. [*1]

The Priestly Code, worked into the Pentateuch as the standard legislative element in it, became the definite "Mosaic law." As such it was published and introduced in the year 444 B.C., a century after the exile. In the interval, the duration of which is frequently under-estimated, Deuteronomy alone had been known and recognised as the written Torah, though as a fact the essays of Ezekiel and his successors may have had no inconsiderable influence in leading circles. The man who made the Pentateuch the constitution of Judaism was the Babylonian priest and scribe, Ezra. He had come from Babylon to Jerusalem as early as the year 458 B.C., the seventh of Artaxerxes Longimanus, at the head of a considerable company of zealous Jews, provided it is said with a mandate from the Persian king, empowering him to reform according to the law the congregation of the temple, which had not yet been able to consolidate itself inwardly nor to shut itself off sufficiently from those without.

"Thou art sent of the king and of his seven counsellors to hold an inquiry concerning Judah and Jerusalem according to the law of thy God which is in thine hand. . . . And thou Ezra, according to the wisdom of thy God which is in thine hand, set magistrates and judges which may judge all the people that are beyond the river, all such as acknowledge the laws of thy God, and teach ye them that know them not. And whosoever will not do the law of thy God and the law of the king, let him be prosecuted." So we read in

[p. 406]

the commission of the Persian king to Ezra, vii. 12-26; which, even should it be spurious, must yet reflect the views of his contemporaries. The expression taken from Ezra's own memoirs, vii. 27, leaves no doubt that he was assisted by Artaxerxes in the objects he had in view. [*1]

But Ezra did not, as we should expect, at once introduce the law on his arrival in Judah. In concert with the heads of the people, and proceeding on the existing Torah, that, namely, of , he ordained and relentlessly carried out a strict separation of the returned exiles from the heathen and half-heathen inhabitants of the land. This was done a few months after his arrival in Jerusalem. But a long time, at least fourteen years, elapsed before he produced the law which he had brought with him. Why he delayed so long we can at the best only surmise, as no accounts have reached us of what he did in the interval; there is a great gap in the narrative of the Books of Ezra and Nehemiah between the 7th and the 20th year of Artaxerxes. Perhaps the outward circumstances of the young community, which, probably in consequence of the repellent attitude taken up to the surrounding peoples, were not of the happiest, made it unadvisable at once to introduce a legislative innovation; perhaps, too, Ezra desired to wait to see the correcting influence of the practice of Jerusalem on the product of Babylonian scholarship, and moreover to train up assistants for the work. The principal reason, however, appears to have been, that in spite of the good-will of the king he did not enjoy the energetic support of the Persian authorities on the spot, and could not without it get the authority of the new law recognised.

But in the year 445 it came about that a Jew and a sympathiser of Ezra, Nehemiah ben Hakkelejah, cup-bearer and favourite of Artaxerxes, appeared in Judea as Persian governor. With straightforward earnestness he first addressed himself to the task of liberating the Jewish community from outward pressure and lifting them up from their depressed condition; and, this being accomplished, the time had come to go forward

[p. 407]

with the introduction of the Pentateuch. Ezra and Nehemiah were manifestly in concert as to this. On the 1st day of the 7th month--we do not know the year, but it cannot have been earlier than 444 B.C.--the whole people came together as one man before the water-gate, and Ezra was called on to produce the book of the law of Moses, which Jehovah had commanded Israel. The scribe mounted a wooden pulpit; seven priests stood beside him on the right hand, and seven on the left. When he opened the book all present stood up, both men and women; with loud Amen they joined in the opening blessing, lifted up their heads, and cast themselves on the ground. Then he read the book, from early morning till mid-day, in small sections, which were repeated and expounded by a number of Levites dispersed throughout the crowd. The effect was that a general weeping arose, the people being aware that they had not till then followed the commandments of God. Nehemiah and Ezra and the Levites had to allay the excitement, and said: "This day is holy unto Jehovah your God; mourn not nor weep. Go your way, eat the fat and drink the sweet, and give unto them that have brought nothing with them." The assembled people then dispersed and set on foot a "great mirth," because they had understood the words which had been communicated to them. The reading was continued the next day, but before the heads of families only, and a very appropriate section was read, viz., the ordinances as to festivals, and particularly that about the feast of tabernacles, which was to be kept under branches of trees on the 15th day of the 7th month, the month then just beginning. The matter was taken up with the greatest zeal, and the festival, which had not been kept rite since the days of Joshua ben Nun, was now instituted in accordance with the precepts of Leviticus xxiii. and celebrated with general enthusiasm from the 15th to the 22nd of the month. [*1] On the 24th, however, a great day of humiliation was held, with sackcloth and ashes. On this occasion also the proceedings began with reading the law, and then followed a confession of sins spoken by the Levites in the name of the people, and concluding with a prayer for mercy and compassion. This was preparatory to the principal and concluding act, in which the secular and spiritual officials and elders, 85 in number, bound themselves in writing to the Book of the Law, published by Ezra, and all the rest undertook an obligation, with oath and curse, to walk in the Torah of God, given by His servant Moses, and to keep

[p. 408]

all the commandments of Jehovah and His statutes and laws. Special attention was directed to such provisions of the Pentateuch as were of immediate importance for the people in the circumstances of the day--the greater part of the whole work is about the ritual of the priests--and those were in particular insisted on which refer to the contributions of the laity to the priesthood, on which the very existence of the hierocracy depended. [*1]

Lagarde expresses great surprise--and the surprise is reasonable--that so little importance is attributed to this narrative by Old Testament critics; only Kuenen had rightly appreciated its significance.  [*2] It is obvious that Neh. viii.-x. is a close parallel to 2 Kings xxii. xxiii., especially to xxiii. 1-3. There we read that Josiah caused all the elders of Judah and Jerusalem to come together, and went up with the men of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, with the priests and the prophets and all the people, high and low, to the house of Jehovah; where he read to the assemblage all the words of the Book of the Law, and bound himself with all the people before Jehovah to keep all the words of the book. Just as it is in evidence that Deuteronomy became known in the year 621, and that it was unknown up to that date, so it is in evidence that the remaining Torah of the Pentateuch--for there is no doubt that the law of Ezra was the whole Pentateuch--became known in the year 444 and was unknown till then. This shows in the first place, and puts it beyond question, that Deuteronomy is the first, and the priestly Torah the second, stage of the legislation. But in the second place, as we are accustomed to infer the date of the composition of Deuteronomy from its publication and introduction by Josiah, so we must infer the date of the composition of the Priestly Code from its publication and introduction by Ezra and Nehemiah. It would require very strong internal evidence to destroy the probability, thus based on a most positive statement of facts, that the codification of the ritual only

[p. 409]

took place in the post-exile period. We have already seen of what nature the internal evidence is which is brought forward with this view. [*1]

3. Ezra and Nehemiah, and the eighty-five men of the great assembly (Nehemiah viii. seq.), who are named as signatories of the covenant, are regarded by later tradition as the founders of the canon. And not without reason: only King Josiah has a still stronger claim to this place of honour. The introduction of the law, first Deuteronomy, and then the whole Pentateuch, was in fact the decisive step, by which the written took the place of the spoken word, and the people of the word became a "people of the book." To the book were added in course of time the books; the former was formally and solemnly introduced in two successive acts, the latter acquired imperceptibly a similar public authority for the Jewish church. The notion of the canon proceeds entirely from that of the written Torah; the prophets and the hagiographa are also called Torah by the Jews, though not Torah of Moses.

The origin of the canon thus lies, thanks to the two narratives 2 Kings xxii. xxiii., Neh. viii.-x. in the full light of history; but the traditional science of Biblical introduction has no clear or satisfactory account to give of it. Josiah, the ordinary notion is, introduced the law, but not the canon; Ezra, on the other hand, the canon and not the law. An analogy drawn from the secondary part of the canon, the prophets and hagiographa, is applied without consideration to the primary part, the Torah of Moses. The historical and prophetical books were, in part at least, a long time in existence before they became canonical, and the same, it is thought, might be the case with the law. But the case of the law is essentially different. The law claims to have public authority, to be a book of the community; the difference between law and canon, does not exist. Hence it is easy to understand that the Torah, though as a literary product later than the historical and prophetical books, is yet as law older than these writings,

[p. 410]

which have originally and in their nature no legal character, but only acquired such a character in a sort of metaphorical way, through their association with the law itself.

When it is recognised that the canon is what distinguishes Judaism from ancient Israel, it is recognised at the same time that what distinguishes Judaism from ancient Israel is the written Torah. The water which in old times rose from a spring, the Epigoni stored up in cisterns.

Footnotes

^392:1 Exod. xxi. 35: compare xxi. 33 with Judges ix. 4.

^393:1 Compare 1 Kings viii. 21, "the ark wherein is the covenant of Jehovah," and viii 9, "there was nothing in the ark save the two tables of stone, which Moses put there at Horeb, the tables of the covenant which Jehovah had made with the children of Israel." The Deuteronomistic expression "tables of the covenant", alternates in the Priestly Code with that of "tables of testimony"; i e., likewise of the law. For h`rwth, "the testimony," 2 Kings xi. 12, read htz`dwth, "the bracelets," according to 2 Sam. i. 10.

^394:1 1 Sam. xiv. xxiii. xxx. In connection with 1 Sam. xxxi. 3 I have conjectured that the verb of which Torah is the abstract means originally to throw the lot-arrows. The Thummim have been compared in the most felicitous way by Freytag, and by Lagarde independently of him (Proph. Chald. p. xlvii.) with the Arabian Tamaim, which not only signifies children's amulets but any means of "averruncatio". Urim is probably connected with `rr "to curse" (cf. Iliad i. 11 and Num. xxiii. 23): the two words of the formula seem mutually to supplement each other.

^395:1 Bleek, Einleitung in das A. T., 1878, p. 642.

^397:1 It is also more firmly rooted in history; for if Moses did anything at all, he certainly founded the sanctuary at Kadesh and the torah there, which the priests of the ark carried on after him, thus continuing the thread of the history of Israel, which was taken up again in power by the monarchy. The prophets only appeared among the Hebrews from the time of Samuel onwards, but the seers were older than Moses, and can scarcely have had such a close connection with his tradition as the priests at the sanctuary of the ark of Jehovah.

^400:1 This is as if one were to say that there is much to be done before we Evangelicals are truly evangelical. Yet the distinction as worked out in Isaiah xl. seq. is certainly very remarkable, and speaks for a surprising degree of profound meditation.

^401:1 The personification is carried further in this passage than anywhere else, and it is possible that the colours of the sketch are borrowed from some actual instance of a prophet-martyr: yet the Ebed Jahve cannot have a different meaning here from that which it has everywhere else. It is to be noted that the sufferings and death of the servant are in the past, and his glorification in the future, a long pause lying between them in the present. A resurrection of the individual could not be in the mind [p. 402] of the writer of Isa. xl seq., nor do the details of the description, lii. 12 seq., at all agree with such an idea. Moreover, it is clear that liv. 1-lvi. 8 is a kind of sermon on the text lii. 13-liii. 12; and there the prophecy of the glorification of the servant has reference to Zion. See Vatke, p. 528 seq.

^402:1 Duhm, op. cit. p. 201.

^403:1 The difference between Deut. xviii. 22 and 1 Kings xxii. 19-23 may be thought to throw light on the two positions. In the former passage we read that if a prophet says something in the name of Jehovah which does not come to pass, it is a word which Jehovah has not spoken. Here, on the contrary, Micaiah ben Imlah, when the prophets of Jehovah promise the king of Israel a happy issue of the campaign against the Syrians, regards the prediction as contrary to the truth, but as none the less on that account inspired by the spirit of prophecy; Jehovah, he said, had made his spirit a lying spirit in the mouth of all his prophets. It may be that this difference reflects to us the interval between two different ages: but on the whole Micaiah's view appears to be rather a piece of ingenuity which might have been resorted to in later times as well. In the seventh century the command, "every firstborn is mine," was held to apply to the human firstborn as well, the sacrifice of which Jehovah was thought to require: this appears from Jeremiah's protest, "I commanded them not, neither came it into my mind," vii. 31, xix. 5. With reference to this Ezekiel says that because the Israelites despised the wholesome commandments of Jehovah, He gave them laws which were not good and statutes by which they could not live. That is a similar ingenious escape from a difficulty, without deeper meaning. See the converse, Koran, Sura ii. 174.

^403:2 In his early years Jeremiah had a share in the introduction of the law: but in later times he shows himself little edified by the effects it produced: the lying pen of the scribes, he says, has written for a lie. People despised the prophetic word because they had the Torah in black and white (viii. 7-9).

^405:1 Dillmann arrives at the conclusion that the assumption is the most natural one in the world, and still capable of proof from ACD (!) that the priesthood of the central sanctuary wrote down their toroth even in early times; and that it is absurd to suppose that the priestly and ceremonial laws were first written down, or even made, in the exile and in Babylon, where there was no worship. We will let it be absurd, if it is true. It is not progress, though it is a fact, that the kings were succeeded by the high-priests, and the prophets by the Rabbis. Yet it is a thing which is likely to occur, that a body of traditional practice should only be written down when it is threatening to die out, and that a book should be, as it were, the ghost of a life which is closed.

^406:1 With regard to his relation to the law, we have to consider the following points: he was a scribe (swpr = literatus), at home in the Torah of Moses, vii. 6. He had directed his mind to study the Torah of Jehovah, and to do and to teach in Israel judgment and statute, vii. 10. "The priest Ezra, the master of the law of the God of heaven," vii. 21. The most important expression, however, is that which states that the law (the wisdom) of his God was in his hand: thus it was his private property, though it claimed authority for all Israel. With this agree the statements as to the object of the learned priest's mission.

^407:1 For eight days, according to Lev. xxiii. 39: as against Deut. xvi. 13-15.

^408:1 Neh. viii. 1-x. 40. The credibility of the narrative appears on the face of it. The writer of Chronicles did not write it himself, but took it from his main source, from which also he drew the fragments he gives us of the memoirs of Ezra and Nehemiah. This we see from the fact that while copying Neh. vii. in Ezra ii. he unconsciously goes on with the beginning of Neh. viii. (= Ezra iii. 1). That shows that he found Neh. vii. and viii. in their present connection, and did not write viii. seq. himself, as we might suppose.

^408:2 Gottinger Gel. Anzeigen, 1870, p. 1557 seq. Kuenen, Religion of Israel, vol. ii. chapter viii.

^409:1 It is not, however, necessary, and it can scarcely be correct, to make Ezra more than the editor, the real and principal editor, of the Hexateuch: and in particular he is not likely to have been the author of Q. Nor on the other hand is it meant to deny that many new features may have been added and alterations made after Ezra. A body of customs is a subject which can scarcely be treated quite exhaustively. There are no directions about the nervus ischiadicus, about the priests having their feet bare, about shutting up before Jehovah (1 Sam. xxi. cf. Jer. xxxvi. 5), or about the stoning of adulterers.

      
Prolegomena to the History of Ancient Israel, by Julius Wellhausen, [1885], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 411]

  

CHAPTER XI.

  

THE THEOCRACY AS IDEA AND AS INSTITUTION.

WRITERS of the present day play with the expressions "theocracy," and "theocratic" without making it clear to themselves what these words mean and how far they are entitled to use them. But we know that the word theokratia was only coined by Josephus; [*1] and when this writer speaks of the Mosaic constitution, he has before his eyes, it is well known, the sacred community of his own day as it existed down to the year 70 A.D. In ancient Israel the theocracy never existed in fact as a form of constitution. The rule of Jehovah is here an ideal representation; only after the exile was it attempted to realise it in the shape of a Rule of the Holy with outward means. It is perhaps the principal merit of Vatke's Biblical Theology to have traced through the centuries the rise of the theocracy and the metamorphosis of the idea to an institution.

  

I.

1. The upholders of the prevailing view do not assert that Moses wrote the Pentateuch, but they maintain all the more firmly that he organised the congregation of the tabernacle in the wilderness after the fashion described in the Priestly Code. They seem to think that Moses had no importance further than this; as if it were an act of no moment to cast

[p. 412]

into the field of time a seed which the action and reaction thence arising bring an immeasurable time after to maturity (Mark iv. 26 seq.). In fact Moses is the originator of the Mosaic constitution in about the same way as Peter is the founder of the Roman hierarchy. Of the sacred organisation supposed to have existed from the earliest times, there is no trace in the time of the judges and the kings. It is thought to have been a sort of pedagogic strait-waistcoat, to subdue the ungovernable obstinacy of the Hebrews and to guard them from evil influences from without. But even should it be conceded that a constitution could come into existence in ancient times which was so utterly out of relation to the peculiar life and temper of the people, the history of the ancient Israelites shows us nothing so distinctly as the uncommon freshness and naturalness of their impulses. The persons who appear always act from the constraining impulse of their nature, the men of God not less than the murderers and adulterers: they are such figures as could only grow up in the open air. Judaism, which realised the Mosaic constitution and carried it out logically, left no free scope for the individual; but in ancient Israel the divine right did not attach to the institution but was in the Creator Spirit, in individuals. Not only did they speak like the prophets, they also acted like the judges and kings, from their own free impulse, not in accordance with an outward norm, and yet, or just because of this, in the Spirit of Jehovah. The different view of different times is seen very characteristically in the views taken of Saul by the two versions above sifted and compared (<page 250> seq.).

 

2. It is a simple and yet a very important remark of Vatke, that the sacred constitution of the congregation, so circumstantially described to us in the Priestly Code, is after all very defective, and presupposes the existence of that which it was the chief task of the age of Moses to bring about, namely the state, in the absence of which the church cannot have any subsistence either. To maintain an elaborate and expensive worship, and an immense swarm of clergy, must have required considerable rates and taxes: and to raise these, as well as to uphold the authority of the sacred persons and institutions, and most of all to enforce the strict centralization and uniformity of the legitimate worship, all this among a people not yet very civilised, must have required an executive power which embraced and was able to control, the whole people. But where

[p. 413]

is this central authority in the period of the judges? Judicial competence resided at that time chiefly in the smallest circles, the families and houses. These were but little controlled, as it appears, by the superior power of the tribe, and the very notion of the state or of the kingdom did not as yet exist. Houses related to each other sometimes united for common undertakings, as no doubt also did neighbouring tribes; but this was not on the basis of any constitutional order, but from necessity, when it happened that a well-known man came forward to take the command and his summons to the levy was obeyed. These transient combinations under generals were the forerunners of a permanent union under a king: and even at the time of the Midianite war an attempt seems to have been made in this direction, which, however, was not quite successful. In the severe and protracted struggle with the Philistines the necessity for a solid union of the tribes was cryingly manifest, and the man came forward to meet the hour. Saul, a distinguished Benjamite of Gibeah, was overcome by anger at the scornful challenge which even the Ammonites ventured at such a time to cast in the teeth of his people: he called his fellow-countrymen to battle, not in virtue of any office he held, but on the strength of his own impulses; his enthusiasm proved contagious, none dared to say him nay. He began his career just like one of the earlier judges, but after he had led his people to victory they did not let him retire again. The person sought for, the king, was found.

Out of such natural beginnings did the state at that time arise: it owed nothing to the pattern of the "Mosaic theocracy," but bears all the marks of a new creation. Saul and David first made out of the Hebrew tribes a real people in the political sense (Deut. xxxiii. 5). David was in the eyes of later generations inseparable from the idea of Israel: he was the king par excellence: Saul was thrown into the shade, but both together are the founders of the kingdom, and have thus a much wider importance than any of their successors. It was they who drew the life of the people together at a centre, and gave it an aim; to them the nation is indebted for its historical self-consciousness. All the order of aftertimes is built up on the monarchy; it is the soil out of which all the other institutions of Israel grow up. In the time of the judges, we read, every man did that which was right in his own eyes, not because the Mosaic constitution was not in force, but because there was no king in those days. The consequences were very important in

[p. 414]

the sphere of religion as well: since the political advance of the people brought the historic and national character of Jehovah to the front again. During the time of the judges the Canaanite festival cultus had gradually been coming to be embodied in the worship of Jehovah, a process which was certainly necessary; but in this process there was for some time a danger that Jehovah would become a God of husbandry and of cattle, like Baal-Dionysus. The festivals long continued to be a source of heathenism, but now they were gradually divested of their character as nature-festivals, and forced at length to have reference to the nation and to its history, if they were not to disappear completely. The relation of Jehovah to people and kingdom remained firm as a rock: even to the worst idolaters He was the God of Israel; in war no one thought of looking for victory and success to any other God. This was the result of Israel's becoming a kingdom: the kingship of Jehovah, in that precise sense which we associate with it, is the religious expression of the fact of the foundation of the kingdom by Saul and David. The theocracy was the state of itself; the ancient Israelites regarded the civil state as a miracle, or, in their own words, a help of God. When the later Jews thought or spoke of the theocracy, they took the state for granted as already there, and so they could build the theocracy on the top of it as a specially spiritual feature: just as we moderns sometimes see the divine element in settled ordinances, such as marriage, not in their own nature, but in the consecration added to them by the church.

 

3. The kingdom of Saul and David did not long remain at its height. Decay set in even at the separation, and when once the Assyrians were heard at the door, it advanced with steps not to be arrested. But the memory of the period of glory and power was all the greener, and the hope arose of its return. From the contrast between the sorrowful present and the brilliant past there arose the picture of the state as it should be; when ruin was seen without and anarchy within, the prophets set against this the pattern of the theocracy. The theocracy as the prophets represent it to themselves is not a thing essentially different from the political community, as a spiritual differs from a secular power; rather, it rests on the same foundations and is in fact the ideal of the state. Isaiah gave this ideal its classical form in those pictures of the future which we are accustomed to call Messianic prophecies. These passages

[p. 415]

are not predictions of this or that occurrence, but announcements of the aims which, it is true, the prophet only expects the future to realise, but which are of force or ought to be of force in the present, and towards which the community, if true to its own nature, must strive.

The first feature of these Messianic descriptions is the expulsion of the Assyrians; but most emphasis is laid on the restoration of the inner bases of the state, the rottenness of which has brought about and rendered inevitable the present crisis. The collapse of the government, the paralysis fallen on the law, the spoliation of the weak by the strong, these are the evils that call for redress. "How is the honourable city become a harlot; it was full of judgment, righteousness lodged in it--but now murderers! Thy princes are rascals and companions of thieves, every one loveth gifts and followeth after bribes; they judge not the fatherless, neither cloth the cause of the widow come unto them. Therefore saith the Lord: Ah, I will ease me of mine adversaries, and avenge me of mine enemies! And I will turn my hand against thee, Zion, and as with lye I will purge away thy dross, and I will restore thy judges as at the first, and thy counsellors as at the beginning; afterwards thou shalt be called a righteous and honourable city. Zion shall be redeemed by judgment and her inhabitants by righteousness" (Isa. i. 21-27). The state the prophet has before his eye is always the natural state as it exists, never a community distinguished by a peculiar holiness in its organisation. The kingdom of Jehovah is with him entirely identical with the kingdom of David; the tasks he sets before it are political in their nature, similar, we might say, to the demands one would address to the Turkish Empire in our own days. He is unconscious of any difference between human and divine law: law in itself, jurist's law in the proper juristic sense of the word, is divine, and has behind it the authority of the Holy One of Israel. In that day shall Jehovah of hosts be for a crown of glory and a diadem of beauty unto the residue of His people, and for a spirit of judgment to him that sitteth in judgment, and a spirit of strength to them that drive back the battle from the borders" (xxviii. 5, 6). Jehovah is a true and perfect King, hence justice is His principal attribute and His chief demand. And this justice is a purely forensic or social notion: the righteousness of the Sermon on the Mount can only come into consideration when civil justice and order have come to be a matter of course--which at that time they had not yet done.

[p. 416]

The representative of Jehovah is the human king. The earthly ruler is not in the way of the heavenly: even the glorious kingdom of the future cannot dispense with him. "Then a king shall reign in righteousness and princes shall rule in judgment; each of them shall be as an hiding-place from the wind and as a covert from the tempest; as rivers of waters in a dry place, as the shadow of a great rock in a weary land" (xxxii. 1, 2). As the reigning king is in general unsatisfactory, Isaiah hopes for a new one who will answer the pattern of David of old, the Messiah. "There shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a branch shall grow out of his roots: and the spirit of Jehovah shall rest upon Him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and of warlike might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the Lord; and His breath shall be drawn in the fear of Jehovah. And He shall not judge after the sight of His eyes, nor decide by hearsay: but with righteousness shall He judge the poor, and give sentence with equity for the meek of the earth; but He shall smite the scorners with the rod of His mouth, and with the breath of His lips shall He slay the wicked, so that righteousness shall be the girdle of His loins, and faithfulness the girdle of His reins. Then the wolf shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid: and the calf and the young lion together, and a little child shall lead them. And the cow and the bear shall feed, their young ones shall lie down together; and the lion shall eat straw like the ox: and the sucking child shall stroke the head of the adder, and the weaned child shall put his hand on the eye-ball of the basilisk. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain" (xi. 1-9) This is generally considered to be a prediction of a universal golden age on earth; but Isaiah only speaks of the holy mountain as the scene, meaning by this the whole city of David as the centre of his kingdom. The just and strict government of the descendant of David is to bring it about that righteousness and truth kiss each other, and that the strong do not dare to injure the weak. Fear of the severity of the law engenders general confidence; the lamb is no longer afraid of the wolf. The opposite of this ideal is lawlessness and anarchy within, not war without; the hope is not that of international peace, as we see both from verse 1-5 and from verse 9. The Messiah is adorned just with the virtues which befit a ruler; and this shows sufficiently what is the nature of

[p. 417]

the kingdom of which he is to be the head, i.e., what is the notion of the theocracy.

The other prophets of this period agree with Isaiah (Lam. iv. 20), only Hosea is peculiar in this as in other points. He appears to have regarded the kingdom as such as an evil; in more than one expression he makes it the antithesis of the rule of Jehovah. But we have to remember that this judgment of his is based entirely on his historical experience. In the kingdom of the ten tribes the supreme power was constantly being seized by usurpers, so that instead of being the pillar of order and law it was the plaything of parties and the occasion of incessant disturbances. It is this North-Israelite kingdom that Hosea has in view; and he reprobates it for no other reason than that, in the three hundred years of its existence, it has not approved itself, and does not approve itself in the present time of need. He does not proceed as on a priori theory, he does not apply as his rule a pattern of the theocratic constitution given antecedently to any historical development. There can be no doubt that it never entered his head that the form God desired the community to take was not a thing to be determined by circumstances, but had been revealed at Mount Sinai. [*1]

4. Nor did the theocracy exist from the time of Moses in the form of the covenant, though that was afterwards a favourite mode of regarding it. The relation of Jehovah to Israel was in its nature and origin a natural one; there was no interval between Him and His people to call for thought or question. Only when the existence of Israel had come to be threatened by the Syrians and Assyrians, did such prophets as Elijah and Amos raise the Deity high above the people, sever the natural bond between them, and put in its place a relation depending on conditions, conditions of a moral character. To them Jehovah was the God of righteousness in the first place, and the God of Israel in the second place, and even that only so far as Israel came up to the righteous demands which in His grace He had revealed to him. They inverted the order of these two fundamental articles of faith. "If your sins are as scarlet, how should they be reckoned white as snow? If they are red like crimson, how should they be as wool? If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land,

[p. 418]

but if ye refuse and rebel, ye must eat the sword, for the mouth of Jehovah hath spoken it." Thus the nature of the conditions which Jehovah required of His people came to the very front in considering His relations with them: the Torah of Jehovah, which originally, like all His dealings, fell under the category of divine aid, especially in the doing of justice, of divine guidance in the solution of difficult questions, was now conceived of as incorporating the demands on the fulfilment of which His attitude towards Israel entirely depended. In this way arose, from ideas which easily suggested it, but yet as an entirely new thing, the substance of the notion of covenant or treaty. The name Berith, however, does not occur in the old prophets, not even in Hosea, who certainly presents us as clearly as possible with the thing, in his figure of the marriage of Jehovah and Israel (Isa. i. 21). That he was unacquainted with the technical usage of Berith is strikingly proved by ii. 20 and vi. 7; and these passages must decide the view we take of viii. 1, a passage which is probably interpolated.

The name Berith comes, it is likely, from quite a different quarter. The ancient Hebrews had no other conception of law nor any other designation for it than that of a treaty. A law only obtained force by the fact of those to whom it was given binding themselves to keep it. So it is in Exod. xxiv. 3-8, and in 2 Kings xxiii. 1-3; so also in Jeremiah xxxiv. 8 seq.--curiously enough just as with the people of Mecca at the time of Mohammed (Ibn Hisham, p. 230 seq.). Hence also the term Sepher Berith for the Deuteronomic as well as the Jehovistic Book of the Law.

This use of the phrase Berith (i.e., treaty) for law, fitted very well with the great idea of the prophets, and received from it in turn an interpretation, according to which the relation of Jehovah to Israel was conditioned by the demands of His righteousness, as set forth in His word and instruction. In this view of the matter Jehovah and Israel came to be regarded as the contracting parties of the covenant by which the various representatives of the people had originally pledged each other to keep, say, the Deuteronomic law. [*1]

After the solemn and far-reaching act

[p. 419]

by which Josiah introduced this law, the notion of covenant-making between Jehovah and Israel appears to have occupied the central position in religious thought: it prevails in Deuteronomy, in Jeremiah, Ezekiel, in Isaiah  xl.-lxvi., Lev. xvii.-xxvi., and most of all in the Book of the Four Covenants. The Babylonian exile no doubt helped, as the Assyrian exile had previously done, to familiarise the Jewish mind with the idea that the covenant depended on conditions, and might possibly be dissolved.

  

II.

1. The tabernacle of David fell at last, and no king was born to set it up again. The state suffered not a crisis, but destruction. And the result was that such of the religious hopes of the people as they still held fast, were no longer limited to existing political conditions, but now took a freer flight, became tinged with enthusiasm, and cast off all restrictions. In former times there was always an enemy threatening in the background, a danger really approaching, to give rise to the expectation of a great conflagration, the materials for which had long been collected in the nation itself: but after the exile fancy dealt in general coalitions of God knows what peoples against the New Jerusalem, vaticinations for which there was no ground whatever in reality. [*1] In earlier times the national state as it had existed under David was the goal of all wishes. Now a universal world empire was erected in imagination, which was to lift up its head at Jerusalem over the ruins of the heathen powers. Prophecy was no longer tied to history, nor supported by it.

But the extravagant hopes now built on Jehovah were balanced on the other side by sober and realisable aims which the course of history presented. Those who waited for the consolation of Israel were then confronted from the nature of their situation with practical tasks. The old prophets were satisfied with expressing their ideas, with criticising existing evils; as to practical points they had nothing to say, the leadership of the people was in other hands. But the old community being now gone and its heads having fallen with it, the godly both had the power and felt the obligation to place themselves at the head of the Israel now to be anew created, after which they had long been striving, and

[p. 420]

their faith in which was still unshaken. In former times the nation had not been so seriously threatened as that its continued existence, notwithstanding the dangerous crises it might have to pass through, should ever cease to be regarded as natural, as a thing of course. But now this was by no means a thing of course, the danger was a pressing one that the Jewish exiles, like the Samaritan exiles before them, would be absorbed by the heathens among whom they dwelt. In that case the Messianic hopes also would have lost their point of application, for, however true it was that the realising of them was Jehovah's concern, the men must still be there to whom they were to be fulfilled. Thus everything depended on getting the sacred remnant safe across this danger, and giving it so solid an organisation that it might survive the storms and keep alive the expectation of the promise.

But in the eyes of those whose words had weight in the restoration the old community, as it had existed formerly, was not in good repute. They could not but allow Jehovah's sentence of condemnation to be just which He had spoken by the mouth of His servants and through the voice of history. The utterances of the prophets, that fortresses and horses and men of war, that kings and princes, cannot help, were called to mind and turned into practical principles: the sole rule of Jehovah was to be carried out in earnest. Circumstances favoured the design, and this was the great point. As matters then were, the reconstitution of an actual state was not to be thought of, the foreign rule would not admit of it (Ezra iv. 19 seq.). What plan was to be taken, what materials to be used for such a building as the times allowed? The prophetic ideas would not serve as building stones; they were not sufficiently practical. Then appeared the importance of institutions, of traditional forms, for the conservation even of the spiritual side of the religion.

The Jewish royal temple had early overshadowed the other sanctuaries, and in the course of the seventh century they were extinct or verging on extinction. Under the shelter of the monarchy the priests of Jerusalem had grown great and had at last attained, as against their professional brethren elsewhere, a position of exclusive legitimacy. The weaker the state grew, the deeper it sank from the fall of Josiah onwards, the higher became the prestige of the temple in the eyes of the people, and the greater and the more independent grew the power of its numerous priesthood; how much more do we feel it in Jeremiah's time than in that of Isaiah! This advance of the priesthood indicates

[p. 421]

unmistakably the rise into prominence of the cultus in the seventh century, a rise rather helped than hindered by the long reign of Manasseh, evil as is the reputation of that reign. It shows itself not only in the introduction of more luxurious materials, incense, for example, but even more in the importance given to great and striking services, e.g., the sacrifice of children, and the expiatory offering. Even after the abolition of the horrid atrocities of Manasseh's time, the bloody earnestness remained behind with which the performance of divine service was gone about.

So closely was the cultus of Jerusalem interwoven with the consciousness of the Jewish people, and so strongly had the priesthood established their order, that after the collapse of the kingdom the elements still survived here for the new formation of a "congregation" answering to the circumstances and needs of the time. Around the ruined sanctuary the community once more lifted up its head (1 Kings viii.; Hagg. i. seq.; Zech. i. seq.). The usages and ordinances were, though everywhere changes in detail, yet not created afresh. Whatever creating there was lay in this, that these usages were bound together in a system and made the instruments of restoring an organisation of "the remnant."

Ezekiel first pointed out the way which was suited for the time. He is the connecting link between the prophets and the law. He claims to be a prophet, and starts from prophetic ideas: but they are not his own ideas, they are those of his predecessors which he turns into dogmas. He is by nature a priest, and his peculiar merit is that he enclosed the soul of prophecy in the body of a community which was not political, but founded on the temple and the cultus. The chapters xl.-xlviii. are the most important in his book, and have been called by J. Orth, not incorrectly, the key of the Old Testament.

Thus arose that artificial product, the sacred constitution of Judaism. In the Priestly Code we have the picture of it in detail. [*1] The distinction, drawn with such pains between the Mosaic theocracy and the post-exilic hierocracy, is too fine. Theocracy as a constitution is hierocracy. If Moses founded such a constitution, he did it prophetically, with a view

[p. 422]

to circumstances which only arose a thousand years after his day, (pp. <page 163>, <page 270>). Old Israel had not shrunk to a religious congregation, public life was not quite absorbed in the service of the sanctuary; the high priest and the dwelling of Jehovah were not the centre round which all revolved (pp. <page 170>, <page 227>). These great changes were wrought by the destruction of the political existence first of Samaria, then of Judah. In this way the people became "a kingdom of priests and a holy nation," as we read in a Deuteronomistic passage, Exod. xix. 6. If the divine rule was formerly a belief supporting the natural ordinances of human society, it was now set forth in visible form as a divine state, in an artificial sphere peculiar to itself and transcending the ordinary life of the people. The idea had formerly informed and possessed the natural body, but now, in order that it might be thoroughly realised, it was to have spiritual body of its own. There arose a material, external antithesis of a sacred and profane; men's minds came to be full of this, and it was their great endeavour to draw the line as sharply as possible and to repress the natural sphere more and more. Holiness is the ruling idea in Ezekiel, in Lev. xvii.-xxvi., and in the Priestly Code. The notion is a somewhat empty one, expressing rather what a thing is not than what it is; at first it meant the same as divine, but now it is used mainly in the sense of spiritual, priestly, as if the divine could be distinguished from the worldly, the natural, by outward visible marks of that kind.

The Mosaic theocracy, the residuum of a ruined state, is itself not a state at all, but an unpolitical artificial product created in spite of unfavourable circumstances by the impulse of an ever-memorable energy: and foreign rule is its necessary counterpart. In its nature it is intimately allied to the old Catholic church, which was in fact its child. As a matter of taste it may be objectionable to speak of the Jewish church, but as a matter of history it is not inaccurate, and the name is perhaps preferable to that of theocracy, which shelters such confusion of ideas.

 

2. The Mosaic theocracy appears to show an immense retrogression. The law of Jehovah should denote what is characteristic of His people over against the heathen. But this certainly did not consist in the cultus of Israel: it would be vain labour to seek in this and that slight variation between the Hebrew and the Greek ritual a difference of principle between them. The cultus is the heathen element in the Israelite religion--the word heathen not being understood, of course, in

[p. 423]

an ignoble or unworthy sense. If the Priestly Code makes the cultus the principal thing, that appears to amount to a systematic decline into the heathenism which the prophets incessantly combated and yet were unable to eradicate. It will be readily acknowledged that at the constitution of the new Jerusalem the prophetic impulses were deflected by a previously existing natural tendency of the mass on which they had to operate. Yet in every part of the legal worship we see the most decided traces of their influence. We have seen to what a large extent that worship is everywhere marked by a centralising tendency. This tendency is not connected in the Priestly Code with opposition to improper or foreign worship; yet it must be interpreted as a polemical measure; and if it be regarded as an axiom necessary in the Priestly Code from the nature of the case, that is only saving that the demands of the prophets had prevailed most completely in a field where they had the greatest obstacles to contend with. Exclusive monolatry is by no means innate in the cultus; it can only be deduced from considerations which are foreign to the nature of the cultus: it is the antitype of strict monotheism. The prohibition of images, too, in the worship of the Deity, is not expressly insisted on, as in Deuteronomy, but is a provision which is taken for granted; so little is this position in danger of question that even doubtful and repugnant elements are embodied in the worship and assimilated by it without hesitation. The golden ephod, denounced by Isaiah, has become an insignificant decoration of the high-priest: talismans, forbidden even by Ezekiel, are allowed (Num. xv. 37-41), but the object of them is "that ye may look upon them and remember all the commandments of Jehovah, and do them, and that ye follow not after your own heart and your own eyes, after which ye used to go a whoring." The gross idolatry, with which the expression znh is always connected in other passages, is by this time out of the question: the heart itself with its lawless motions is the strange God, whose service is forbidden.

We may go further and say that by the cultus-legislation the cultus is estranged from its own nature, and overthrown in its own sphere. That is most unmistakably the case with regard to the festivals. They have lost their reference to harvest and cattle, and have become historical commemorations: they deny their birth from nature, and celebrate the institution of supernatural religion and the gracious acts of Jehovah therewith connected. The broadly human, the indigenous element falls

[p. 424]

away, they receive a statutory character and a significance limited to Israel. They no longer draw down the Deity into human life on all important occasions, to take part in its joys and its necessities: they are not human attempts with such naive means as are at command to please the Deity and render Him favourable. They are removed from the natural sphere, and made divine means of grace, which Jehovah has instituted in Israel as sacraments of the theocracy. The worshipper no longer thinks that in his gift he is doing God a pleasure, providing Him with an enjoyment: what pleases Him and is effectual is only the strict observance of the rite. The sacrifices must be offered exactly according to prescription: at the right place, at the right time, by the right individuals, in the right way. They are not based on the inner value of what is done, on the impulse arising out of fresh occasions, but on the positive command of a will outside the worshipper, which is not explained, and which prescribes every particular. The bond between cultus and sensuality is severed: no danger can arise of an admixture of impure immoral elements, a danger which was always present in Hebrew antiquity. Worship no longer springs from an inner impulse, it has come to be an exercise of religiosity. It has no natural significance; its significance is transcendental, incomparable, not to be defined; the chief effect of it, which is always produced with certainty, is atonement. For after the exile the consciousness of sin, called forth by the rejection of the people from the face of Jehovah, was to a certain extent permanent: even when the hard service of Israel was accomplished and the wrath really blown over, it would not disappear.

If then the value of the sacred offerings lay not in themselves but in obedience to the commandments of God, the centre of gravity of the cultus was removed from that exercise itself and transferred to another field, that of morality. The consequence was that sacrifices and gifts gave way to ascetic exercises, which were more strictly and more simply connected with morality. Precepts given originally in reference to the consecration of the priests for their religious functions were extended to the laity: the observance of these laws of physical cleanliness was of much more radical importance in Judaism than the great public cultus, and led by the straightest road towards the theocratic ideal of holiness and of universal priesthood. The whole of life was compressed into a certain holy path; there was always a divine command to be fulfilled, and by thinking of it a man kept himself from following after the desires

[p. 425]

and lusts of his own heart. On the other hand this private cultus, which constantly required attention, kept alive and active the individual sense of sin.

The great pathologist of Judaism is quite right: in the Mosaic theocracy the cultus became a pedagogic instrument of discipline. It is estranged from the heart; its revival was due to old custom, it would never have blossomed again of itself. It no longer has its roots in childlike impulse, it is a dead work, in spite of all the importance attached to it, nay, just because of the anxious conscientiousness with which it was gone about. At the restoration of Judaism the old usages were patched together in a new system, which, however, only served as the form to preserve something that was nobler in its nature, but could not have been saved otherwise than in a narrow shell that stoutly resisted all foreign influences. That heathenism in Israel against which the prophets vainly protested was inwardly overcome by the law on its own ground; and the cultus, after nature had been killed in it, became the shield of supernaturalistic monotheism.

Footnotes

^411:1 Oykoun apeiroi men ai kata meros tun ethun kai tun nomun para tois apasin anthrupois diaforai. oi men gar monarxiais, oi de tais oligun dynasteiais, alloi de tois plethesin epetrepsan ten exoysian tun politeymatun?=. O d' emeteros nomothetes eis men toutun oyd' otioun apeiden, us d' an tis eipoi biasamenos ton logon theokratian apedeixe to politeyma, theui ten arxen kai to kratos anatheis (contra Apion. ii. 17). ("There are innumerable differences in the particular customs and laws that are among mankind; some have intrusted the power of their states to monarchies, some to oligarchies, and some to democracies: but our legislator had no regard to any of these forms, but he ordered our government to be what I may call by a strained expression a theocracy, attributing the power and the authority to God." Compare also, on this whole chapter, Die Pharisaer und die Sadducaer, Greifswald, 1874.

^417:1 He even speaks with favour of David and the kingdom of Judah, but I consider all such references in Hosea (as well as in Amos) to, be interpolations. In i. 7 there is a reference to the deliverance of Jerusalem under Hezekiah.

^418:1 This variation gained entrance the more easily as Berith is used in various applications, e.g., of the capitulation, the terms of which are imposed by the stronger on the weaker party: that the contracting parties had equal rights was by no means involved in the notion of the Berith. See the wavering of the notion in Jer. xxxiv. 13-18.

^419:1 Ezek. xxxviii. xxxix.; Isa. lxvi. 18-24; Joel iv.; Zech. xii. xiv. In Isa. v. 26, on the other hand, we must, of course, read gwy, for gwym, the singular instead of the plur.

^421:1 It is not the case that the hierocracy is based on the Priestly Code: that code was only introduced after the hierocracy was already in existence, but helped, no doubt, to consolidate and legalise it. The written law afterwards undermined the rule of the priests; and the scriptures played into the hands of the scribes and Pharisees. (Compare the case of the Parsees and Sabians, and <page 157>, note.)

      
Prolegomena to the History of Ancient Israel, by Julius Wellhausen, [1885], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 426] [p. 427]

  

ISRAEL

Reprinted from the "Encyclopaedia Britannica"

[p. 428] [p. 429]

  

1. THE BEGINNINGS OF THE NATION.

ACCORDING to the Book of Genesis, Israel was the brother of Edom, and the cousin of Moab and Ammon. These four petty peoples, which may be classed together as the Hebrew group, must at one time have formed some sort of a unity and have passed through a common history which resulted in their settlement in south-eastern Palestine. The Israelites, or rather that section of the Hebrew group which afterwards developed into Israel, appear at first to have been the immediate neighbours of Edom, and to have extended westwards towards the border of Egypt. As regards the ethnological position of the Hebrews as a whole, tradition has it that they had connexions not only with the Aramaeans of Osrhoene (Nahor), but also with certain of the old half-Arab inhabitants of the Sinaitic peninsula (Kenites, Amalek, Midian). To the Canaanites, whose language they had adopted, their relation was that of foreign conquerors and lords to a subject race (Gen. ix, 26).

Some fifteen centuries before our era a section of the Hebrew group left its ancient seat in the extreme south of Palestine to occupy the not distant pasture lands of Egypt (Goshen), where they carried on their old calling, that of shepherds and goatherds. Although settled within the territory of the Pharaohs, and recognising their authority, they continued to retain all their old characteristics,--their language, their patriarchal institutions, their nomad habits of life.

But in course of time these foreign guests were subjected to changed treatment. Forced labour was exacted of them for the construction of new public works in Goshen, an exaction which was felt to be an assault upon their freedom and honour, and which in point of fact was fitted to take away all that was distinctive of their nationality. But they had no remedy at hand, and had submitted in despair, until Moses at last saw a favourable opportunity of deliverance. Reminding his oppressed

[p. 430]

brethren of the God of their fathers, and urging that their cause was His, he taught them to regard self-assertion against the Egyptians as an article of religion; and they became once more a united people in a determination to seek refuge from oppression in the wilderness which was the dwelling-place of their kindred and the seat of their God. At a time when Egypt was scourged by a grievous plague, the Hebrews broke up their settlement in Goshen one night in spring, and directed their steps towards their old home again. According to the accounts, the king had consented to the exodus, and latterly had even forced it on, but it was none the less a secret flight.

To a not very numerous pastoral people such an undertaking presented no great difficulty. Nevertheless its execution was not to be carried out unimpeded. The Hebrews, compelled to abandon the direct eastward road (Exod. xiii. 17, 18), turned towards the south-west and encamped at last on the Egyptian shore of the northern arm of the Red Sea, where they were overtaken by Pharaoh's army. The situation was a critical one; but a high wind during the night left the shallow sea so low that it became possible to ford it. Moses eagerly accepted the suggestion, and made the venture with success. The Egyptians, rushing after, came up with them on the further shore, and a struggle ensued. But the assailants fought at a disadvantage, the ground being ill suited for their chariots and horsemen; they fell into confusion and attempted a retreat. Meanwhile the wind had changed; the waters returned, and the pursuers were annihilated [*1]

After turning aside to visit Sinai as related in Exodus, the emigrants settled at Kadesh, eastwards from Goshen, on the southern borders of Palestine, [*2] where they remained for many years, having at the well of Kadesh their sanctuary and judgment-seat only, while with their flocks they ranged over an extensive tract. In all probability their stay at Kadesh was no involuntary detention; rather was it this locality they

[p. 431]

had more immediately had in view in setting out. For a civilised community of from two to three millions such a settlement would, of course, have been impossible; but it was quite sufficient for the immediate requirements of the Goshen shepherds, few in number as they were and inured to the life of the desert. That attempts may have been made by them to obtain possession of the more fertile country to the north is very likely; but that from the outset they contemplated the conquest of the whole of Palestine proper, and that it was only in expiation of a fault that they were held back at the gate of the promised land until the whole generation of the disobedient had died out, is not historically probable.

We can assign a definite reason for their final departure from Kadesh. In the district to the east of Jordan the (Canaanite) Amorites had, sometime previously, driven the Ammonites from the lower Jabbok and deprived the Moabites of all their territory to the north of the Arnon; on the plateau opposite Jericho Heshbon had become the capital of Sihon, the Amorite king. This sovereign now set himself to subdue southern Moab also, and not without success. "Fire went out from Heshbon, flame from the stronghold of Sihon, devoured the cities of Moab upon the heights of Arnon. Woe to thee, O Moab! thou art undone, O people of Chemosh!" From these straits the Moabites were rescued by their cousins, the nomads of the wilderness of Kadesh. The Israelites came forward on behalf of what was at once the common Hebrew cause and their own particular interest; they took the field against the Amorites, vanquished them in battle, and broke up the kingdom of Sihon. The consequence was that the land to the south of the Arnon remained in the undisputed possession of Moab, while the victors themselves became masters of the territory immediately to the north. Settled thus between Moab and Ammon their kinsmen, the Israelites supplied the link that was wanting in the chain of petty Hebrew nationalities established in the south of eastern Palestine.

The army that went out against the Amorites from Kadesh was certainly not exclusively composed of men who, or whose fathers, had accomplished the passage of the Red Sea Israel was not a formed nation when it left Egypt; and throughout the whole period of its sojourn in the wilderness it continued to be in process of growth. Instead of excluding the kindred elements which offered themselves to

[p. 432]

it on its new soil, it received and assimilated them. The life they had lived together under Moses had been the first thing to awaken a feeling of solidarity among the tribes which afterwards constituted the nation; whether they had previously been a unity in any sense of the word is doubtful. On the other hand, the basis of the unification of the tribes must certainly have been laid before the conquest of Palestine proper; for with that it broke up, though the memory of it continued. At the same time it must not be supposed that all the twelve tribes already existed side be side in Kadesh. The sons of the concubines of Jacob--Dan and Naphtali, Gad and Asher--manifestly do not pertain to Israel in the same sense as do those of Leah and Rachel; probably they were late arrivals and of very mixed origin. We know, besides, that Benjamin was not born until afterwards, in Palestine. If this view be correct, Israel at first consisted of seven tribes, of which one only, that of Joseph, traced its descent to Rachel, though in point of numbers and physical strength it was the equal of all the others together, while in intellectual force it surpassed them. The remaining six were the sons of Leah:--Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Judah; Issachar, Zebulon. They are always enumerated in this order; the fact that the last two are also invariably mentioned apart from the rest and after Joseph has its explanation in geographical considerations.

The time of Moses is invariably regarded as the properly creative period in Israel's history, and on that account also as giving the pattern and norm for the ages which followed. In point of fact the history of Israel must be held to have begun then, and the foundations of a new epoch to have been laid. The prophets who came after gave, it is true, greater distinctness to the peculiar character of the nation, but they did not make it; on the contrary, it made them. Again, it is true that the movement which resulted in the establishment of the monarchy brought together for the first time into organic unity the elements which previously had existed only in an isolated condition; but Israel's sense of national personality was a thing of much earlier origin, which even in the time of the judges bound the various tribes and families together, and must have had a great hold on the mind of the nation, although there was no formal and binding constitution to give it support. When the Israelites settled in Palestine they found it inhabited by a population superior to themselves both in numbers and in civilisation, which they did not extirpate, but on the contrary gradually subdued and absorbed.

[p. 433]

[paragraph continues] The process was favoured by affinity of race and similarity of speech; but, however far it went, it never had the effect of making Israelites Canaanites; on the contrary, it made Canaanites Israelites. Notwithstanding their inferiority, numerical and otherwise, they maintained their individuality, and that without the support of any external organisation. Thus a certain inner unity actually subsisted long before it had found any outward political expression; it goes back to the time of Moses, who is to be regarded as its author.

The foundation upon which, at all periods, Israel's sense of its national unity rested was religious in its character. It was the faith which may be summed up in the formula, Jehovah is the God of Israel, and Israel is the people of Jehovah. Moses was not the first discoverer of this faith, but it was through him that it came to be the fundamental basis of the national existence and history. [*1] The exigencies of their position severe a number of kindred clans from their customary surroundings, and drove them into his arms. He undertook the responsibilities of their leader, and the confidence of success which he manifested was justified by the result. But it was not through any merit of his that the undertaking (of which he was the soul) prospered as it did; his design was aided in a wholly unlooked-for way, by a marvellous occurrence quite beyond his control, and which no sagacity could possibly have foreseen. One whom the wind and sea obeyed had given him His aid. Behind him stood One higher than he, whose spirit wrought in him and whose arm wrought for him,--not for his personal aggrandisement indeed, but for the weal of the nation. It was Jehovah. Alike what was done by the deliberate purpose of Moses and what was done without any human contrivance by nature and by accident came to be regarded in one great totality as the doing of Jehovah for Israel. Jehovah it was who had directed each step in that process through which these so diverse elements, brought together by the pressure of necessity, had been caused to pass, and in the course

[p. 434]

of which the first beginnings of a feeling of national unity had been made to grow.

This feeling Moses was the first to elicit; he it was also who maintained it in life and cherished its growth. The extraordinary set of circumstances which had first occasioned the new national movement continued to subsist, though in a less degree, throughout the sojourn of the people in the wilderness, and it was under their pressure that Israel continued to be moulded. To Moses, who had been the means of so brilliantly helping out of their first straits the Hebrews who had accompanied him out of Egypt, they naturally turned in all subsequent difficulties; before him they brought all affairs with which they were not themselves able to cope. The authority which his antecedents had secured for him made him as matter of course the great national "Kadhi" in the wilderness. Equally as matter of course did he exercise his judicial functions, neither in his own interest nor in his own name, but in the interest of the whole community and in the name of Jehovah. By connecting them with the sanctuary of Jehovah, which stood at the well of Kadesh, he made these functions independent of his person, and thus he laid a firm basis for a consuetudinary law and became the originator of the Torah in Israel. In doing this he succeeded in inspiring the national being with that which was the very life of his own soul; through the Torah he gave a definite positive expression to their sense of nationality and their idea of God. Jehovah was not merely the God of Israel; as such he was the God at once of law and of justice, the basis, the informing principle, and the implied postulate of their national consciousness.

The relationship was carried on in precisely the same manner as that in which it had been begun. It was most especially in the graver moments of its history that Israel awoke to full consciousness of itself and of Jehovah. Now, at that time and for centuries afterwards, the highwater marks of history were indicated by the wars it recorded. The name "Israel" means "El does battle," and Jehovah was the warrior El, after whom the nation styled itself. The camp was, so to speak, at once the cradle in which the nation was nursed and the smithy in which it was welded into unity; it was also the primitive sanctuary. There Israel was, and there was Jehovah. If in times of peace the relations between the two had become dormant, they were at once called forth into fullest activity when the alarm of danger was

[p. 435]

raised; Israel's awakening was always preceded by the awakening of Jehovah. Jehovah awakened men who under the guidance of His spirit placed themselves at the nation's head; in them His proper leadership was visibly expressed. Jehovah went forth with the host to battle, and in its enthusiasm His presence was seen (Judg. v. 13, 23). With signs and wonders from heaven Jehovah decided the struggle carried on upon earth. In it He was always upon Israel's side; on Israel was His whole interest concentrated, although His power (for He was God) reached far beyond their local limits.

Thus Jehovah was in a very real sense a living God; but the manifestations of His life in the great crises of His people's history were of necessity separated by considerable intervals of time. His activity had something abrupt and tumultuary about it, better suited for extraordinary occasions than for ordinary daily life. Traces of this feeling appear very prominently in the later stages of the development. But although the relations between Israel and Israel's God came most strongly into prominence in times of excitement, yet it did not altogether die out in the periods of comparative repose. It was in the case of Jehovah just as in the case of the human leaders of the people, who did not in times of peace wholly lose the influence they had gained in war. Jehovah had His permanent court at the places of worship where in times of quietude men clung to Him that they might not lose Him in times of trouble. His chief, perhaps in the time of Moses His only, sanctuary was with the so-called ark of the covenant. It was a standard, adapted primarily to the requirements of a wandering and warlike life; brought back from the field, it became, as symbol of Jehovah's presence, the central seat of His worship. The cultus itself was more than a mere paying of court to Jehovah, more than a mere expedient for retaining His sympathies against times of necessity; the Torah of Jehovah, the holy administration of law, was conjoined with it. This had first of all been exercised, at the instance of the priest of Midian, by Moses at the well of Kadesh; it was continued after him, at the sanctuary, within the circle of those who had attached themselves to him and were spiritually his heirs. In cases where the wisdom or the competency of the ordinary judges failed, men turned direct to the Godhead, i.e., to the sanctuary and those who served it. Their decisions, whether given according to their own lights or by lot (according to the character of the question), were not derived from any law,

[p. 436]

but were received direct from Jehovah. [*1]

The execution of their decisions did not lie with them; they could only advise and teach. Their authority was divine, or, as we should say, moral, in its character; it rested upon that spontaneous recognition of the idea of right which, though unexpressed, was alive and working among the tribes--upon Jehovah Himself, who was the author of this generally diffused sense of right, but revealed the proper determinations on points of detail only to certain individuals. The priestly Torah was an entirely unpolitical or rather prepolitical institution; it had an existence before the state had, and it was one of the invisible foundation pillars on which the state rested.

War and the administration of justice were regarded as matters of religion before they became matters of obligation and civil order; this is all that is really meant when a theocracy is spoken of. Moses certainly organised no formal state, endowed with specific holiness, upon the basis of the proposition "Jehovah is the God of Israel;" or, at all events, if he did so, the fact had not in the slightest degree any practical consequence or historical significance. The old patriarchal system of families and clans continued as before to be the ordinary constitution, if one can apply such a word as constitution at all to an unorganised conglomeration of homogeneous elements. What there was of permanent official authority lay in the hands of the elders and heads of houses; in time of war they commanded each his own household force, and in peace they dispensed justice each within his own circle. But this obviously imperfect and inefficient form of government showed a growing tendency to break down just in proportion to the magnitude of the tasks which the nation in the course of its history was called upon to undertake. Appeal to Jehovah was always in these circumstances resorted to; His court was properly that of last resort, but the ordinary authorities were so inadequate that it had often enough to be applied to. Theocracy, if one may so say, arose as the complement of anarchy. Actual and legal existence (in the modern sense) was predicable only of each of the many clans; the unity of the nation was realised in the first instance only through its religion. It was out of the religion of Israel that the commonwealth of Israel unfolded itself,--not a holy state, but the state. And the state continued to be, consciously, rooted

[p. 437]

in religion, which prevented it from quitting or losing its rapport with the soil from which it had originally sprung. With the intermediate and higher stages of political organisation, with the building of the upper structure, however, religion had no concern; they were too far removed from the foundation. The derivative, which did not carry immediately in itself its own title to exist, was a matter of indifference to it; what had come into being it suffered to go its own way as soon as it was capable of asserting its independence. For this reason it always turned by preference to the future, not in a utopian but in a thoroughly practical way; by a single step only did it keep ahead of the present. It prepared the way for such developments as are not derived from existing institutions, but spring immediately from the depths in which human society has its secret and mysterious roots.

The expression "Jehovah is the God of Israel," accordingly, meant that every task of the nation, internal as well as external, was conceived as holy. It certainly did not mean that the almighty Creator of heaven and earth was conceived of as having first made a covenant with this one people that by them He might be truly known and worshipped. It was not as if Jehovah had originally been regarded as the God of the universe who subsequently became the God of Israel; on the contrary, He was primarily Israel's God, and only afterwards (very long afterwards) did He come to be regarded as the God of the universe. For Moses to have given to the Israelites an "enlightened conception of God" would have been to have given them a stone instead of bread; it is in the highest degree probable that, with regard to the essential nature of Jehovah, as distinct from His relation to men, he allowed them to continue in the same way of thinking with their fathers. With theoretical truths, which were not at all in demand, He did not occupy himself, but purely with practical questions which were put and urged by the pressure of the times. The religious starting-point of the history of Israel was remarkable, not for its novelty, but for its normal character. In all ancient primitive peoples the relation in which God is conceived to stand to the circumstances of the nation--in other words, religion--furnishes a motive for law and morals; in the case of none did it become so with such purity and power as in that of the Israelites. Whatever Jehovah may have been conceived to be in His essential nature-God of the thunderstorm or the like--this fell more and more into the background as mysterious and transcendental; the subject was not one for inquiry. All stress was laid upon His activity within the

[p. 438]

world of mankind, whose ends He made one with His own. Religion thus did not make men partakers in a divine life, but contrariwise it made God a partaker in the life of men; life in this way was not straitened by it, but enlarged. The so-called "particularism" of Israel's idea of God was in fact the real strength of Israel's religion; it thus escaped from barren mythologisings, and became free to apply itself to the moral tasks which are always given, and admit of being discharged, only in definite spheres. As God of the nation, Jehovah became the God of justice and of right; as God of justice and right, He came to be thought of as the highest, and at last as the only, power in heaven and earth.

In the preceding sketch the attempt has been made to exhibit Mosaism as it must be supposed to have existed on the assumption that the history of Israel commenced with it, and that for centuries it continued to be the ideal root out of which that history continued to grow. This being assumed, we cannot treat the legislative portion of the Pentateuch as a source from which our knowledge of what Mosaism really was can be derived; for it cannot in any sense be regarded as the starting-point of the subsequent development. If it was the work of Moses, then we must suppose it to have remained a dead letter for centuries, and only through King Josiah and Ezra the scribe to have become operative in the national history (compare sections 8 and 10). The historical tradition which has reached us relating to the period of the judges and of the kings of Israel is the main source, though only of course in an indirect way, of our knowledge of Mosaism. But within the Pentateuch itself also the historical tradition about Moses (which admits of being distinguished, and must carefully be separated, from the legislative, although the latter often clothes itself in narrative form) is in its main features manifestly trustworthy, and can only be explained as resting on actual facts.

From the historical tradition, then, it is certain that Moses was the founder of the Torah. But the legislative tradition cannot tell us what were the positive contents of his Torah. In fact it can be shown that throughout the whole of the older period the Torah was no finished legislative code, but consisted entirely of the oral decisions and instructions of the priests, as a whole it was potential only; what actually existed were the individual sentences given by the priesthood as they were asked for. Thus Moses was not regarded as the promulgator once for all of a national constitution, but rather as the first to call into activity the actual sense for law and justice, and to begin the series of oral decisions which were continued after him by the priests. He was the founder of the nation out of which the Torah and prophecy came as later growths. He laid the basis of Israel's subsequent peculiar individuality, not by any one formal act, but in virtue of his having

[p. 439]

throughout the whole of his long life been the people's leader, judge, and centre of union.

A correct conception of the manner in which the Torah was made by him can be derived from the narrative contained in Exod. xviii., but not from the long section which follows, relating to the Sinaitic covenant (chap. xix. seq.). The giving of the law at Sinai has only a formal, not to say dramatic, significance. It is the product of the poetic necessity for such a representation of the manner in which the people was constituted Jehovah's people as should appeal directly and graphically to the imagination. Only so can we justly interpret those expressions according to which Jehovah with His own mouth thundered the ten commandments down from the mountain to the people below, and afterwards for forty days held a confidential conference with Moses alone on the summit. For the sake of producing a solemn and vivid impression, that is represented as having taken place in a single thrilling moment which in reality occurred slowly and almost unobserved. Why Sinai should have been chosen as the scene admits of ready explanation. It was the Olympus of the Hebrew peoples, the earthly seat of the Godhead, and as such it continued to be regarded by the Israelites even after their settlement in Palestine (Judg. v. 4, 5). This immemorial sanctity of Sinai it was that led to its being selected as the ideal scene of the giving of the law, not conversely. If we eliminate from the historical narrative the long Sinaitic section which has but a loose connection with it, the wilderness of Kadesh becomes the locality of the preceding and subsequent events. It was during the sojourn of many years here that the organisation of the nation, in any historical sense, took place. "There He made for them statute and ordinance, and there He proved them," as we read in Exod. xv. 26 in a dislocated poetical fragment. "Judgment and trial," "Massa and Meribah," point to Kadesh as the place referred to; there at all events is the scene of the narrative immediately following (Exod. xvii. = Num. xx.), and doubtless also of Exod. xviii.

If the legislation of the Pentateuch cease as a whole to be regarded as an authentic source for our knowledge of what Mosaism was, it becomes a somewhat precarious matter to make any exception in favour of the Decalogue. In particular, the following arguments against its authenticity must be taken into account. (1) According to Exod. xxxiv. the commandments which stood upon the two tables were quite different. (2) The prohibition of images was during the older period quite unknown; Moses himself is said to have made a brazen serpent which down to Hezekiah's time continued to be worshipped at Jerusalem as an image of Jehovah. (3) The essentially and necessarily national character of the older phases of the religion of Jehovah completely disappears in the quite universal code of morals which is given in the Decalogue as the fundamental law of Israel; but the entire series of religious personalities throughout the period of the judges and the kings--from Deborah, who praised Jael's treacherous act of murder, to David, who treated his prisoners of war with the utmost cruelty--make it very difficult to believe that the religion of Israel was from the outset one of a specifically

[p. 440]

moral character. The true spirit of the old religion may be gathered much more truly from Judg. v. than from Exod. xx. (4) It is extremely doubtful whether the actual monotheism which is undoubtedly pre-supposed in the universal moral precepts of the Decalogue could have formed the foundation of a national religion. It was first developed out of the national religion at the downfall of the nation, and thereupon kept its hold upon the people in an artificial manner by means of the idea of a covenant formed by the God of the universe with, in the first instance, Israel alone (compare sects. 6-10).

As for the question regarding the historical presuppositions of Mosaism, there generally underlies it a misunderstanding arising out of theological intellectualism-an attribute found with special frequency among non-theologians. Moses gave no new idea of God to his people. The question whence he could have derived it therefore need not be raised. It could not possibly be worse answered, however, than by a reference to his relations with the priestly caste of Egypt and their wisdom. It is not to be believed that an Egyptian deity could inspire the Hebrews of Goshen with courage for the struggle against the Egyptians, or that an abstraction of esoteric speculation could become the national deity of Israel. It is not inconceivable indeed, although at the same time quite incapable of proof, that Moses was indebted to the Egyptian priests for certain advantages of personal culture, or that he borrowed from them on all hands in external details of organisation or in matters of ritual. But the origin of the germ which developed into Israel is not to be sought for in Egypt, and Jehovah has nothing in common with the colourless divinity of Penta-ur or with the God-forsaken dreariness of certain modern Egyptologists. That monotheism must have been a foreign importation, because it is contrary to that sexual dualism of Godhead which is the fundamental characteristic of Semitic religion, is an untenable exaggeration which has recently become popular out of opposition to the familiar thesis about the monotheistic instinct of the Semites (Noldeke, Literar. Centralbl., 1877, p. 365). Moab, Ammon, and Edom, Israel's nearest kinsfolk and neighbours, were monotheists in precisely the same sense in which Israel itself was; but it would be foolish surely in their case to think of foreign importation.

Manetho's statements about the Israelites are for the most part to be regarded as malicious inventions: whether any genuine tradition underlies them at all is a point much needing to be investigated. The story of Exod. ii. 1 seq. is a mythus of frequent recurrence elsewhere, to which no further significance is attached, for that Moses was trained in all the wisdom of the Egyptians is vouched for by no earlier authorities than Philo and the New Testament. According to the Old Testament tradition his connexion is with Jethro's priesthood or with that of the Kenites. This historical presupposition of Mosaism has external evidence in its favour, and is inherently quite probable.

Footnotes

^430:1 Exod. xvi. 21, 24, 25, 27, 30, 31. According to the Old Testament the exodus took place 480 years before the building of Solomon's temple, and 960 years before the end of the Babylonian captivity. These figures are "systematic" or at least systematised, but even so they are certainly more trustworthy than the combinations of the Egyptologists.

^430:2 The site of Sinai (= Horeb?) hardly admits of ascertainment. The best datum would be the sanctuary of Jethro, if we could identify it with Midian (Jakut, iv. 451), which lies on the Arabian coast of the Red Sea obliquely facing the traditional Sinai. With regard to Kadesh, see Quarterly Statement of the Palestine Exploration Fund (1871), pp. 20, 21.

^433:1 Jehovah is to be regarded as having originally been a family or tribal god, either of the family to which Moses belonged or of the tribe of Joseph, in the possession of which we find the ark of Jehovah, and within which occurs the earliest certain instance of a composite proper name with the word Jehovah for one of its elements (Jeho-shua, Joshua). No essential distinction was felt to exist between Jehovah and El, any more than between Asshur and El; Jehovah was only a special name of El which had become current within a powerful circle, and which on that account was all the more fitted to become the designation of a national god.

^436:1 They were consulted chiefly on points of law, but also on all sorts of difficulties as to what was right and to be done, or wrong and to be avoided.

      
Prolegomena to the History of Ancient Israel, by Julius Wellhausen, [1885], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 441]

  

2. THE SETTLEMENT IN PALESTINE.

THE kingdom of Sihon did not permanently suffice the Israelites, and the disintegration of the Canaanites to the west of Jordan in an endless number of kingdoms and cities invited attack. The first essay was made by Judah in conjunction with Simeon and Levi, but was far from prosperous. Simeon and Levi were annihilated; Judah also, though successful in mastering the mountain land to the west of the Dead Sea, was so only at the cost of severe losses which were not again made up until the accession of the Kenite families of the south (Caleb). As a consequence of the secession of these tribes, a new division of the nation into Israel and Judah took the place of that which had previously subsisted between the families of Leah and Rachel; under Israel were included all the tribes except Simeon, Levi, and Judah, which three are no longer mentioned in Judg. v., where all the others are carefully and exhaustively enumerated. This half-abortive first invasion of the west was followed by a second, which was stronger and attended with much better results. It was led by the tribe of Joseph, to which the others attached themselves, Reuben and Gad only remaining behind in the old settlements. The district to the north of Judah, inhabited afterwards by Benjamin, was the first to be attacked. It was not until after several towns of this district had one by one fallen into the hands of the conquerors that the Canaanites set about a united resistance. They were, however, decisively repulsed by Joshua in the neighbourhood of Gibeon; and by this victory the Israelites became masters of the whole central plateau of Palestine. The first camp, at Gilgal, near the ford of Jordan, which had been maintained until then, was now removed, and the ark of Jehovah brought further inland (perhaps by way of Bethel) to Shiloh, where henceforward the headquarters were fixed, in a position which seemed as if it had been expressly made to favour attacks upon the fertile tract lying beneath it on the north. The Bne Rachel now occupied the new territory which up to that time had been acquired,--Benjamin, in immediate contiguity with the frontier of Judah, then Ephraim, stretching to beyond Shiloh, and lastly Manasseh, furthest to the north, as far as to the plain of Jezreel. The centre of gravity, so to speak, already lay in Ephraim, to which belonged Joshua and the ark.

It is mentioned as the last achievement of Joshua that at the waters

[p. 442]

of Merom he defeated Jabin, king of Hazor, and the allied princes of Galilee, thereby opening up the north for Israelitish settlers. It is quite what we should expect that a great and united blow had to be struck at the Canaanites of the north before the new comers could occupy it in peace; and King Jabin, who reappears at a later date, certainly does not suit the situation described in Judg. iv. v.

 

The Book of Joshua represents the conquest of western Palestine as having been the common undertaking of all the tribes together, which, after the original inhabitants have been extirpated, are exhibited as laying the ownerless country at Joshua's feet in order that he may divide it by lot amongst them. But this is a "systematic" generalisation, contradicted by the facts which we otherwise know. For we possess another account of the conquest of Palestine, that of Judg. i., which runs parallel with the Book of Joshua. It is shorter indeed and more superficial, yet in its entire mode of presenting the subject more historical. According to its narrative, it appears that Joshua was the leader of Joseph and Benjamin only, with whom indeed Issachar, Zebulon, Dan, Naphtali, and Asher made common cause. But before his time the tribe of Judah had already crossed the Jordan and effected a lodgment in the territory which lay between the earlier seat of the nation in the wilderness of Kadesh and its then settlement on the plateau of Moab, forming in some degree a link of connection between the two. It might be supposed that the tribe of Judah had not taken the longer route to the eastward of the Dead Sea at all, but had already at Kadesh broken off from the main body and thence turned its steps directly northward. But the representation actually given in Judges i., to the effect that it was from the direction of the Jordan and not from that of the Negeb that they came to take possession of their land, finds its confirmation in the fact that the southern portion of their territory was the last to come into their possession. The tradition is unwavering that Hebron was taken not by Judah but by Caleb, a family which stood in friendly relations with Israel, but had no connexion with it by blood. It was only through the policy of David that Caleb, Othniel, Jerachmeel, and the rest of the Kenites who had their homes in the Negeb became completely incorporated with Judah, so that Hebron became at last the capital of that tribe. Its oldest seats, however, lay further to the north, in the region of Tekoa, Bethlehem, Baal Judah.

It harmonises well with this view to suppose that Simeon and Levi must have made at the same time their attempt to effect a settlement in the hill country of Ephraim. One of their families, Dinah bath Leah, met with a favourable reception in the town of Shechem, and began to mix freely with its population, and thus the way was paved for the establishment of peaceable relations between the old inhabitants of the land and the new importations. But these relations were brought to an end by the two brothers who, in concert it must be supposed with their sister, fell upon the Shechemites and massacred them. The final result proved disastrous. The Canaanites

[p. 443]

of the surrounding country united against them and completely destroyed them. There can be no doubt as to the trustworthiness of the somewhat enigmatical records of those events which are given in Gen. xlix. and xxxiv.; in no other way is it possible to explain why Simeon and Levi, which originally came upon the stage of history on an equal footing with Reuben and Judah, should have already disappeared as independent tribes at the very beginning of the period of the judges. Now, that the destruction of Shechem by the Manassite Abimelech is quite distinct from the attack made by Simeon and Levi need hardly be said. On the other hand, the occurrence cannot be regarded as pre-Mosaic, but must be assigned to a time previous to the conquest of the hill country of Ephraim by Joseph; for after Joseph's settlement there the two sons of Leah had manifestly nothing more to hope for in that locality. We are shut up, therefore, to the conclusion that they crossed the Jordan at the same time as Judah separated himself from the main body in search of a suitable territory. That Simeon accompanied Judah in the first westward attempt is expressly stated in Judg. i. The fate of Levi, again, cannot be separated from that of Simeon (Gen. xlix. 5-7); that he is not expressly mentioned in Judg. i. ought not to cause surprise, when it is considered that later generations which regarded Levi as neither more nor less than a priest would have some difficulty in representing him as a thoroughly secular tribe. Such nevertheless he must have been, for the poet in Gen. xlix. 5-7 puts him on a footing of perfect equality with Simeon, and attributes to both brothers a very secular and bloodthirsty character; he has no conception that Levi has a sacred vocation which is the reason of the dispersion of the tribe; the dispersion, on the contrary, is regarded as a curse and no blessing, an annihilation and not the means of giving permanence to its tribal individuality. The shattered remains of Simeon, and doubtless those of Levi also, became incorporated with Judah, which thenceforward was the sole representative of the three sons of Leah, who according to the genealogy had been born immediately after Reuben the first-born. Judah itself seems at the same time to have suffered severely. Of its three older branches, Er, Onan, and Shelah, one only survived, and only by the accession of foreign elements did the tribe regain its vigour,--by the fresh blood which the Kenites of the Negeb brought. For Zarah and Pharez, which took the place of Er and Onan after these had disappeared, belonged originally, not to Israel, but to Hezron or the Kenites; under this designation are included families like those of Othniel, Jerachmeel, and Caleb, and, as has been already remarked, even in David's time these were not reckoned as strictly belonging to Judah. Thus the depletion which the tribe had to suffer in the struggle with the Canaanites at the beginning of the period of the judges was the remote cause of the prominence which, according to 1 Chron. ii., the Bne Hezron afterwards attained in Judah. The survivors of Simeon also appear to have been forced back upon these Hezronites in the Negeb; the cities assigned to them in the Book of Joshua all belong to that region.

[p. 444]

Even after the united resistance of the Canaanites had been broken, each individual community had still enough to do before it could take firm hold of the spot which it had searched out for itself or to which it had been assigned. The business of effecting permanent settlement was just a continuation of the former struggle, only on a diminished scale; every tribe and every family now fought for its own land after the preliminary work had been accomplished by a united effort. Naturally, therefore, the conquest was at first but an incomplete one. The plain which fringed the coast was hardly touched; so also the valley of Jezreel with its girdle of fortified cities stretching from Acco to Bethshean. All that was subdued in the strict sense of that word was the mountainous land, particularly the southern hill country of "Mount Ephraim;" yet, even here the Canaanites retained possession of not a few cities, such as Jebus, Shechem, Thebez. It was only after the lapse of centuries that all the lacunae were filled up, and the Canaanite enclaves made tributary.

The Israelites had the extraordinarily disintegrated state of the enemy to thank for the ease with which they had achieved success. The first storm subsided comparatively soon, and conquerors and conquered alike learned to accommodate themselves to the new circumstances. Then the Canaanites once more collected all their energies to strike a blow for freedom. Under the hegemony of Sisera a great league was formed, and the plain of Jezreel became the centre of the reorganised power which made itself felt by its attacks both northwards and southwards. The Israelites were strangely helpless; it was as if neither shield nor spear could be found among their 40,000 fighting men. But at last there came an impulse from above, and brought life and soul to the unorganised mass; Deborah sent out the summons to the tribes, Barak came forward as their leader against the kings of Canaan who had assembled under Sisera's command by the brook of Kishon. The cavalry of the enemy was unable to withstand the impetuous rush of the army of Jehovah, and Sisera himself perished in the flight. From that day the Canaanites, although many strong towns continued to be held by them, never again raised their heads.

After these occurrences some further changes of a fundamental character took place in the relations of the tribes. The Danites proved unable to hold against the forward pressure of the Philistines their territory on the coast to the west of Benjamin and Ephraim; they accordingly

[p. 445]

sought a new settlement, which was found in the north at the foot of Hermon. In this way all the secondary tribes westward of Jordan (Asher, Naphtali, Dan) came to have their seats beside each other in the northern division of the land. Eastward of Jordan, Reuben rapidly fell from his old prominence, sharing the fate of his next eldest brethren Simeon and Levi. When Eglon of Moab took Jericho, and laid Benjamin under tribute, it is obvious that he must previously have made himself master of Reuben's territory. This territory became thenceforward a subject of constant dispute between Moab and Israel; the efforts to recover it, however, did not proceed from Reuben himself, but from Gad, a tribe which knew how to assert itself with vigour against the enemies by which it was surrounded. But if the Hebrews lost ground in the south, they materially enlarged their borders in the north of the land eastward of Jordan. Various Manassite families, finding their holdings at home too small, crossed the Jordan and founded colonies at Bashan and northern Gilead. Although this colonisation, on account of the rivalry of the Aramaeans, who were also pressing forward in this direction, was but imperfectly successful, it nevertheless was of very great importance, inasmuch as it seemed to give new strength to the bonds that united the eastern with the western tribes. Not only was Gilead not lost; it even became a very vigorous member of the body politic. [*1]

The times of agitation and insecurity which followed upon the conquest of Palestine invited attacks by the eastern nomads, and once more the Israelite peasantry showed all its old helplessness, until at last the indignation of a Manassite of good family, Gideon or Jerubbaal, was roused by the Midianites, who had captured some of his brothers and put them to death. With his family, that of Abiezer, he gave pursuit, and, overtaking the enemy on the borders of the wilderness,

[p. 446]

inflicted on them such chastisement as put an end to these incursions. His heroism had consequences which reached far beyond the scope of his original purpose. He became the champion of the peasantry against the freebooters, of the cultivated land against the waste; social respect and predominance were his rewards. In his native town of Ophrah he kept up a great establishment, where also he built a temple with an image of Jehovah overlaid with the gold which he had taken from the Midianites. He transmitted to his sons an authority, which was not limited to Abiezer and Manasseh alone, but, however slightly and indirectly, extended over Ephraim as well.

On the foundations laid by Gideon Abimelech his son sought to establish a kingship over Israel, that is, over Ephraim and Manasseh. The predominance, however, which had been naturally accorded to his father in virtue of his personal merits, Abimelech looked upon as a thing seized by force and to be maintained with injustice; and in this way he soon destroyed those fair beginnings out of which even at that time a kingdom might have arisen within the house of Joseph. The one permanent fruit of his activity was that Shechem was destroyed as a Canaanite city and rebuilt for Israel. [*1]

The most important change of the period of the judges went on gradually and in silence. The old population of the country, which, according to Deuteronomy, was to have been exterminated, slowly became amalgamated with the new. In this way the Israelites received a very important accession to their numbers. In Deborah's time the fighting men of Israel numbered 40,000; the tribe of Dan when it migrated to Laish, counted 600 warriors; Gideon pursued the Midianites with 300. But in the reigns of Saul and David we find a population reckoned by millions. The rapid increase is to be accounted for by the incorporation of the Canaanites.

At the same time the Hebrews learned to participate in the culture of the Canaanites, and quietly entered into the enjoyment of the labours of their predecessors. From the pastoral they advanced to the agricultural stage; corn and wine, the olive and the fig, with them are habitually spoken of as the necessaries of life. It was not strange that this change in the manner of their everyday life should be attended with

[p. 447]

certain consequences in the sphere of religion also. It is inconceivable that the Israelites should have brought with them out of the desert the cultus they observed in the time of the kings (Exod. xxii. xxiii. xxiv.), which throughout presupposed the fields and gardens of Palestine; they borrowed it from the Canaanites. [*1]

This is confirmed by the fact that they took over from these the "Bamoth" or "high places" also, notwithstanding the prohibition in Deuteronomy xii.

It was natural enough that the Hebrews should also appropriate the divinity worshipped by the Canaanite peasants as the giver of their corn, wine, and oil, the Baal whom the Greeks identified with Dionysus. The apostasy to Baal, on the part of the first generation which had quitted the wilderness and adopted a settled agricultural life, is attested alike by historical and prophetical tradition. Doubtless Baal, as the god of the land of Canaan, and Jehovah, as the God of the nation of Israel, were in the first instance co-ordinated. [*2]

But it was not to be expected that the divinity of the land should permanently be different from the God of the dominant people. In proportion as Israel identified itself with the conquered territory, the divinities also were identified. Hence arose a certain syncretism between Baal and Jehovah, which had not been got over even in the time of the prophet Hosea. At the same time the functions of Baal were more frequently transferred to Jehovah than conversely. Canaan and Baal represented the female, Israel and Jehovah the male, principle in this union.

Had the Israelites remained in the wilderness and in barbarism, the historical development they subsequently reached would hardly have been possible; their career would have been like that of Amalek, or, at best, like those of Edom, Moab, and Ammon. Their acceptance of civilisation was undoubtedly a step in the forward direction; but as certainly did it also involve a peril. It involved an overloading, as it were, of the system with materials which it was incapable of assimilating at once. The material tasks imposed threatened to destroy the religious basis of the old national life. The offensive and defensive alliances among the tribes gradually dissolved under the continuance of peace;

[p. 448]

the subsequent occupation of the country dispersed those whom the camp had united. The enthusiastic elan with which the conquest had been achieved gave way to the petty drudgery by which the individual families, each in its own circle, had to accommodate themselves to their new surroundings. Yet under the ashes the embers were still aglow; and the course of history ever fanned them anew into flame, bringing home to Israel the truths that man does not live by bread alone, and that there are other things of worth than those which Baal can bestow; it brought ever again into the foreground the divineness of heroical self sacrifice of the individual for the good of the nation.

Footnotes

^445:1 It is probable that Manasseh's migration to the territory eastward of Jordan took place from the west, and later than the time of Moses. The older portions of the Hexateuch speak not of two and a half but only of two trans-Jordanic tribes, and exclude Manasseh; according to them the kingdom of Sihon alone was subdued by Moses, not that of Og also, the latter, indeed, being a wholly legendary personage. In the song of Deborah, Machir is reckoned among the western tribes, and it was not until much later that this became the designation of the Manassites eastward of Jordan. It is also worth noticing that Jair's colonisation of northern Gilead did not take place until the time of the judges (Judg. x. 3 seq.), but is related also in Num. xxxii. 39-42.

^446:1 On the narratives contained in the Book of Judges see Bleek, Einl. ins Alte Testament (4th ed.),  section section 88-98, and especially the sections on Barak and Sisera, Gideon, Jephthah, Samson, the Danite migration, and the Benjamites of Gibeah ( section section 93-98).

^447:1 In the earliest case where the feast of the ingathering, afterwards the chief feast of the Israelites, is mentioned, it is celebrated by Canaanites of Shechem in honour of Baal (Judg. ix. 27).

^447:2 In Judges v. Jehovah retains his original abode in the wilderness of Sinai, and only on occasions of necessity quits it to come to Palestine.

      
Prolegomena to the History of Ancient Israel, by Julius Wellhausen, [1885], at sacred-texts.com

  

3. THE FOUNDATION OF THE KINGDOM, AND THE FIRST THREE KINGS.

THE Philistines were the means of arousing from their slumber Israel and Jehovah. From their settlements by the sea on the low-lying plain which skirts the mountains of Judah on the west, they pressed northwards into the plain of Sharon, and thence into the plain of Jezreel beyond, which is connected with that of Sharon by the upland valley of Dothan. Here, having driven out the Danites, they came into direct contact with the tribe of Joseph, the chief bulwark of Israel, and a great battle took place at Aphek, where the plain of Sharon merges into the valley of Dothan. The Philistines were victorious and carried off as a trophy the Israelite standard, the ark of Jehovah. Their further conquests included, not only the plain of Jezreel and the hill country bordering it on the south, but also the proper citadel of the country, "Mount Ephraim." The old sanctuary at Shiloh was destroyed by them; its temple of Jehovah thenceforward lay in ruins. Their supremacy extended as far as to Benjamin; the Philistines had a necib in Gibeah. [*1] But the assertion that they had confiscated all weapons and removed all smiths must be regarded as an unhistorical exaggeration; under their regime at all events it was possible for the messengers of a beleaguered city on the east of Jordan to summon their countrymen in the west to their relief.

[p. 449]

The shame of the Israelites under the reproach of Philistine oppression led, in the first instance, to a widespread exaltation of religious feeling. Troops of ecstatic enthusiasts showed themselves here and there, and went about with musical accompaniments in processions which often took the shape of wild dances; even men of the most sedate temperament were sometimes smitten with the contagion, and drawn into the charmed circle. In such a phenomenon, occurring in the East, there was nothing intrinsically strange; among the Canaanites, such "Nebiim"--for so they were styled--had long been familiar, and they continued to exist in the country after the old fashion, long after their original character, so far as Israel was concerned, had been wholly lost. The new thing at this juncture was that this spirit passed over upon Israel, and that the best members of the community were seized by it. It afforded an outlet for the suppressed excitement of the nation.

The new-kindled zeal had for its object, not the abolition of Baal worship, but resistance to the enemies of Israel. Religion and patriotism were then identical. This spirit of the times was understood by an old man, Samuel ben Elkanah, who lived at Ramah in south-western Ephraim. He was not himself one of the Nebiim; on the contrary, he was a seer of that old type which had for a long time existed amongst the Hebrews much as we find it amongst the Greeks or Arabs. Raised by his foreseeing talent to a position of great prominence, he found opportunity to occupy himself with other questions besides those which he was professionally called on to answer. The national distress weighed upon his heart; the neighbouring peoples had taught him to recognise the advantages which are secured by the consolidation of families and tribes into a kingdom. But Samuel's peculiar merit lay, not in discovering what it was that the nation needed, but in finding out the man who was capable of supplying that need. Having come to know Saul ben Kish, a Benjamite of the town of Gibeah, a man of gigantic form, and swift, enthusiastic nature, he declared to him his destiny to become king over Israel.

Saul very soon had an opportunity for showing whether Samuel had been a true seer or no. The city of Jabesh in Gilead was besieged by the Ammonites, and the inhabitants declared themselves ready to surrender should they fail in obtaining speedy succour from their countrymen. Their messengers had passed through all Israel without

[p. 450]

meeting with anything more helpful than pity, until at last tidings of their case reached Saul as he was returning with a yoke of oxen from the field. Hewing his cattle in pieces, he caused the portions to be sent in all directions, with the threat that so should it be done with the oxen of every one who should refuse to help in relieving Jabesh. The people obeyed the summons, fell suddenly one morning upon the Ammonites, and delivered the beleaguered city.

Having thus found Saul the man for their need, they refused to let him go. In Gilgal, Joshua's old camp, they anointed him king. The act was equivalent to imposing upon him the conduct of the struggle against the Philistines, and so he understood it. The first signal for the attack was given by his son Jonathan, when he slew the necib of the Philistines at Gibeah. These in consequence advanced in force towards the focus of the revolt, and took up a position opposite Gibeah on the north, being divided from it only by the gorge of Michmash. Only a few hundred Benjamites ventured to remain with Saul. The struggle opened with a piece of genuine old heroic daring. While the Philistines were dispersed over the country in foraging expeditions, Jonathan, accompanied by his armour-bearer only, and without the knowledge of Saul, made an attack upon the weak post which they had left behind at the pass of Michmash. After the first had been surprised and overmastered, the others took to flight, no doubt in the belief that the two assailants were supported. They carried their panic with them into the half-deserted camp, whence it spread among the various foraging bands. The commotion was observed from Gibeah opposite, and, without pausing to consult the priestly oracle, King Saul determined to attack the camp. The attempt was completely successful, but involved no more than the camp and its stores; the Philistines themselves effected an unmolested retreat by the difficult road of Bethhoron.

Saul was no mere raw stripling when he ascended the throne; he already had a grown-up son at his side. Nor was he of insignificant descent, the family to which he belonged being a widespread one, and his heritage considerable. His establishment at Gibeah was throughout his entire reign the nucleus of his kingdom. The men on whom he could always reckon were his Benjamite kinsmen. He recognised as belonging to him no other public function besides that of war; the internal affairs of the country he permitted to remain as they had been before his accession. War was at once the business and the resource

[p. 451]

of the new kingdom. It was carried on against the Philistines without interruption, though for the most part not in the grand style but rather in a series of border skirmishes. [*1]

It is not without significance that the warlike revival of the nation proceeded from Benjamin. By the battle of Aphek Ephraim had lost at once the hegemony and its symbols (the camp-sanctuary at Shiloh, the ark of the covenant). The centre of Israel gravitated southward, and Benjamin became the connecting link between Ephraim and Judah. It would appear that there the tyranny of the Philistines was not so much felt. Their attacks never were made through Judah, but always came from the north; on the other hand, people fled from them southwards, as is instanced by the priests of Shiloh, who settled in Nob near Jerusalem. Through Saul Judah entered definitely into the history of Israel; it belonged to his kingdom, and it more than most others supplied him with energetic and faithful supporters. His famous expedition against the Amalekites had been undertaken purely in the interests of Judah, for it only could possibly suffer from their marauding hordes.

Among the men of Judah whom the war brought to Gibeah, David ben Jesse of Bethlehem took a conspicuous place; his skill on the harp brought him into close relations with the king. He became Saul's armour-bearer, afterwards the most intimate friend of his son, finally the husband of his daughter. While he was thus winning the affections of the court, he at the same time became the declared favourite of the people, the more so because unexampled good fortune attended him in all he undertook. This excited the jealousy of Saul, naturally enough in an age in which the king always required to be the best man. Its first outburst admitted of explanation as occasioned by an attack of illness; but soon it became obtrusively clear that the king's love for his son-in-law had changed into bitter hatred. Jonathan warned his friend and facilitated his flight, the priests of Nob at the same time providing him with arms and food. He went into the wilderness of Judah, and became the leader of a miscellaneous band of outlaws who had been

[p. 452]

attracted by his name to lead a roving life under his leadership. His kinsmen from Bethlehem were of their number, but also Philistines and Hittites. Out of this band David's bodyguard subsequently grew, the nucleus of his army. They reckoned also a priest among them, Abiathar ben Ahimelech ben Ahitub ben Phinehas ben Eli, the solitary survivor of the massacre of the sons of Eli at Nob which Saul had ordered on account of suspected conspiracy with David. Through him David was able to have recourse to the sacred lot before the ephod. In the end he found it impossible to hold his own in Judah against Saul's persecutions, especially as his countrymen for the most part withheld their assistance. He therefore took the desperate step of placing his services at the disposal of Achish the Philistine king of Gath, by whom he was received with open arms, the town of Ziklag being assigned him as a residence. Here with his band he continued to follow his old manner of life as an independent prince, subject only to an obligation to render military service to Achish.

Meanwhile the Philistines had once more mustered their forces and marched by the usual route against Israel. Saul did not allow them to advance upon Gibeah, but awaited their attack in the plain of Jezreel. A disastrous battle on Mount Gilboa ensued; after seeing his three eldest sons fall one after another at his side, Saul threw himself upon his sword, and was followed by his armour-bearer. The defeat seemed to have undone the work of his life. The immediate consequence at least was that the Philistines regained their lost ascendancy over the country to the west of Jordan. Beyond Jordan, however, Abner, the cousin and generalissimo of Saul, made his son Ishbaal, still a minor, king in Mahanaim, and he was successful in again establishing the dominion of the house over Jezreel, Ephraim, and Benjamin, of course in uninterrupted struggle with the Philistines.

But he did not regain hold of Judah. David seized the opportunity  set up for himself, with the sanction of the Philistines, and, it may safely be presumed, as their vassal, a separate principality which had its centre of gravity in the south, which was inhabited, not by the tribe of Judah properly so called, but by the Calebites and Jerachmeelites. This territory Abner disputed with him in vain. In the protracted feud between the houses of Saul and David, the fortunes of war declared themselves ever increasingly for the latter. Personal causes at last brought matters to a crisis. Abner, by taking to himself a concubine

[p. 453]

of Saul's called Rizpah, had roused Ishbaal's suspicions that he was aiming at the inheritance, and was challenged on the point. This proved too much for his patience, and forthwith he abandoned the cause of his ward (the hopelessness of which had already perhaps become apparent), and entered into negotiations with David at Hebron. When about to set out on his return he fell by the hand of Joab in the gate of Hebron, a victim of jealousy and blood-feud. His plans nevertheless were realised. His death left Israel leaderless and in great confusion; Ishbaal was personally insignificant, and the people's homage continued to be rendered to him only out of grateful fidelity to his father's memory. At this juncture he also fell by assassins' hands. As he was taking his midday rest, and even the portress had gone to sleep over her task of cleaning wheat, two Benjamite captains introduced themselves into his palace at Mahanaim and murdered him in the vain hope of earning David's thanks. The elders of Israel no longer hesitated about offering David the crown, which he accepted.

His residence was immediately transferred from Hebron to Jebus, which until then had remained in possession of the Canaanites, and first derives historical importance from him. It lay on the border between Israel and Judah,--still within the territory of Benjamin, but not far from Bethlehem; near also to Nob, the old priestly city. David made it not only the political but also the religious metropolis by transferring thither from Kirjathjearim the ark of the covenant, which he placed within his citadel on what afterwards became the temple hill.

Still the crown was far from being a merely honorary possession; it involved heavy responsibilities, and doubtless what contributed more than anything else to David's elevation to the throne was the general recognition of the fact that he was the man best fitted on the whole to overtake the labour it brought with it, viz., the prosecution of the war with the Philistines, a war which was as it were the forge in which the kingdom of Israel was welded into one. The struggle began with the transference of the seat of royalty to Jerusalem; unfortunately we possess only scanty details as to its progress, hardly anything more indeed than a few anecdotes about deeds of prowess by individual heroes. The result was in the end that David completed what Saul had begun, and broke for ever the Philistine yoke. This was undoubtedly the greatest achievement of his reign.

From the defensive against the Philistines David proceeded to

[p. 454]

aggressive war, in which he subjugated the three kinsfolk of Israel,--Moab, Ammon, and Edom. He appears to have come into conflict first with the Moabites, whom he vanquished and treated with savage atrocity. Not long afterwards the king of Ammon died, and David sent an embassy of condolence to Hanun his successor. Hanun suspected in this a sinister design,--a suspicion we can readily understand if David had already, as is probable, subjugated Moab,--and with the utmost contumely sent back the messengers to their master forthwith, at the same time making preparations for war by entering into alliance with various Syrian kings, and particularly with the powerful king of Soba. [*1] David took the initiative, and sent his army under command of Joab against Rabbath-Ammon. The Syrians advanced to the relief of the besieged city; but Joab divided his forces, and, leaving his brother Abishai to hold the Ammonites in the town in check, proceeded himself against the Syrians and repulsed them. On their afterwards threatening to renew the attack in increased force, David went against them in strength and defeated them at Helam "on the river." It seems that as a result of this the kingdom of Soba was broken up and made tributary to Damascus. Rabbath-Ammon could not now hold out any longer, and the Ammonites shared the fate of their Moabite brethren. Finally, Edom was about the same time coerced and depopulated; and thus was fulfilled the vision of Balaam,--the youngest of the four Hebrew nationalities trod the three elder under his feet.

So far as external foes were concerned, David henceforward had peace; but new dangers arose at home within his own family. At once by ill-judged leniency and equally ill-timed severity he had completely alienated his son Absalom, who, after Amnon's death, was heir-apparent to the throne. Absalom organised a revolt against his father, and to foster it availed himself of a misunderstanding which had arisen between David and the men of Judah, probably because they thought they were not treated with sufficient favour. The revolt had its focus in Hebron; Ahithophel, a man of Judah, was its soul; Amasa, also of Judah, its arm; but the rest of Israel was also drawn into the rebellion, and only

[p. 455]

the territory to the east of Jordan remained faithful. Thither David betook himself with precipitancy, for the outbreak had taken him completely by surprise. At Mahanaim, which had once before been the centre from which the kingdom was regained, he collected his faithful followers around him with his 600 Cherethites and Pelethites for a nucleus, Absalom against Ahithophel's advice allowing him time for this. In the neighbourhood of Mahanaim, in the wood of Ephraim, the decisive blow was struck. Absalom fell, and with his death the rebellion was at an end. It was Joseph that, in the first instance, penitently sent a deputation to the king to bring him back. Judah, on the other hand, continued to hold aloof. Ultimately a piece of finesse on the king's part had the effect of bringing Judah also to its allegiance, though at the cost of kindling such jealousy between Israel and Judah that Sheba the Benjamite raised a new revolt, this time of Israelites, which was soon, however, repressed by Joab.

David seems to have died soon afterwards. His historical importance is very great. Judah and Jerusalem were wholly his creation, and, though the united kingdom of Israel founded by him and Saul together soon fell to pieces, the recollection of it nevertheless continued in all time to be proudly cherished by the whole body of the people. His personal character has been often treated with undue disparagement. For this we must chiefly blame his canonisation by the later Jewish tradition which made a Levitical saint of him and a pious hymn-writer. It then becomes a strange inconsistency that he caused military prisoners to be treated with barbarity, and the bastard sons of Saul to be hanged up before the Lord in Gibeon. But if we take him as we find him, an antique king in a barbarous age, our judgment of him will be much more favourable. The most daring courage was combined in him with tender susceptibility; even after he had ascended the throne be continued to retain the charm of a pre-eminent and at the same time child-like personality. Even his conduct in the affair of Uriah is not by any means wholly to his discredit; not many kings can be mentioned who would have shown repentance public and deep such as he manifested at Nathan's rebuke. Least to his credit was his weakness in relation to his sons and to Joab. On the other hand, the testament attributed to him in 1 Kings ii. cannot be justly laid to his charge; it is the libel of a later hand seeking to invest him with a fictitious glory. In like manner it is unjust to hold him responsible for the deaths of Abner and

[p. 456]

[paragraph continues] Amasa, or to attribute to him any conspiracy with the hierocracy for the destruction of Saul, and thus to deprive him of the authorship of the elegy in 2 Sam. i, which certainly was not the work of a hypocrite.

Solomon had already reached the throne, some time before his father's death, not in virtue of hereditary right, but by palace intrigue which had the support of the bodyguard of the Six Hundred. His glory was not purchased on the battlefield. So far was he from showing military capacity that he allowed a new Syrian kingdom to arise at Damascus, a far more dangerous thing for Israel than that of Soba which had been destroyed, and which it succeeded. During this reign Edom also regained its independence, nothing but the port of Elath remaining in Solomon's hands. As regards Moab and Ammon we have no information; it is not improbable that they also revolted. But if war was not Solomon's forte, he certainly took much greater pains than either of his predecessors in matters of internal administration; according to tradition, the wisdom of the ruler and the judge was his special "gift." Disregarding the tribal system, he divided his kingdom into twelve provinces, over each of which he placed a royal governor, thus making a beginning of vigorous and orderly administration. [*1]

Judah alone he exempted from this arrangement, as if to show special favour. For his aim was less the advantage of his subjects than the benefit of his exchequer, and the same object appears in his horse traffic (1 Kings ix. 19), his Ophir trade (1 Kings x. 11), and his cession of territory to Hiram (1 Kings ix. 11). His passions were architecture, a gorgeous court, and the harem, in which he sought to rival other Oriental kings, as for example his Egyptian father-in-law. For this he required copious means-forced labour, tribute in kind, and money. He had especially at heart the extension and improvement of Jerusalem as a strong and splendid capital; the temple which he built was only a portion of his vast citadel, which included within its precincts a number of private and public buildings designed for various uses.

It is plain that new currents were introduced into the stream of the nation's development by such a king as this. As formerly, after the occupation, Canaanite culture had come in, so now, after the establishment of the kingdom, the floodgate was open for the admission of

[p. 457]

[paragraph continues] Oriental civilisation in a deeper and wider sense. Whatever the personal motives which led to it may have been, the results were very important, and by no means disadvantageous on the whole. On the basis of the firmer administration now introduced, stability and order could rest; Judah had no cause to regret its acceptance of this yoke. Closer intercourse with foreign lands widened the intellectual horizon of the people, and at the same time awakened it to a deeper sense of its own peculiar individuality. If Solomon imported Phoenician and Egyptian elements into the worship of Jehovah at his court temple, the rigid old Israelite indeed might naturally enough take offence (Ex. xx. 24-26), but the temple itself nevertheless ultimately acquired a great and positive importance for religion. It need not be denied that mischievous consequences of various kinds slipped in along with the good. The king, moreover, can hardly be blamed for his conduct in erecting in the neighbourhood of Jerusalem altars to deities of Ammon and Egypt. For those altars remained undisturbed until the time of Josiah, although between Solomon and him there reigned more than one pious king who would certainly have destroyed them had he found them as offensive as did the author of Deuteronomy.

Footnotes

^448:1 Necib is an Aramaic word of uncertain meaning. In the name of the town Necibin (Nisibis) it certainly seems to mean "pillars;" according to 1 Kings iv. 5 and xxii. 48 (where it is pointed niccab), "governor", seems the best translation, and this is the only rendering consistent with the expression in 1 Sam. xiii. 3 ("Jonathan slew the necib," &c.).

^451:1 As regards the position of Samuel in the theocracy and the relation in which the stood to Saul, the several narratives in the Book of Samuel differ widely. The preceding account, so far as it relates to Samuel, is based upon 1 Sam. ix., x. 1-15, xi., where he appears simply as a Roeh at Ramah, and has nothing to do either with the administration of the theocracy or with the Nebiim. Compare Prolegomena above, chap. VII.

^454:1 Soba appears to have been situated somewhat to the north of Damascus, and to have bordered on the west with Hamath. The Aramaeans were beginning even at that period to press westwards; the Hittites, Phoenicians, and Israelites had common interests against them. To the kingdom of Soba succeeded afterwards that of Damascus.

^456:1 Very possibly the Canaanites, whose complete absorption falls within this period, were an element that helped to loosen the bonds of tribal unity, and consolidate a state in its place.

      
Prolegomena to the History of Ancient Israel, by Julius Wellhausen, [1885], at sacred-texts.com

  

4. FROM JEROBOAM I. TO JEROBOAM II.

AFTER the death of Solomon the discontent which had been aroused by his innovations, and especially by the rigour of his government, openly showed itself against his successor; and when Rehoboam curtly refused the demands which had been laid before him by an assembly of the elders at Shechem, they withdrew from their allegiance and summoned to be their king the Ephraimite Jeroboam ben Nebat, who already had made an abortive attempt at revolt from Solomon, and afterwards had taken refuge in Egypt. Only Judah and Jerusalem remained faithful to the house of David. Among the causes of the revolt of the ten tribes, jealousy of Judah must certainly be reckoned as one. The power of Joseph had been weakened by the Philistines, and by the establishment of the monarchy the centre of gravity had been shifted from the north where it naturally lay. But now it was restored to its old seat; for once more it was situated, not in Judah, but in Joseph. Monarchy itself, however, was not abolished by the revolting tribes, conclusively showing how unavoidable and how advantageous that

[p. 458]

institution was now felt to be; but at the same time they did not refrain from attempts to combine its advantages with those of anarchy, a folly which was ultimately the cause of their ruin. As for their departure from the Mosaic cultus observed at Jerusalem on the other hand, it was first alleged against them as a sin only by the later Jews. At the time religion put no obstacle in the way of their separation; on the contrary, it actually suggested and promoted it (Ahijah of Shiloh). The Jerusalem cultus had not yet come to be regarded as the alone legitimate; that instituted by Jeroboam at Bethel and at Dan was recognised as equally right; images of the Deity were exhibited in all three places, and indeed in every place where a house of God was found. So far as the religious and intellectual life of the nation was concerned, there was no substantial difference between the two kingdoms, except indeed in so far as new displays of vigorous initiative generally proceeded from Israel. [*1]

Rehoboam did not readily accept the situation; he sought to reduce the revolt by force of arms, with what degree of success is shown by the fact that his rival found himself constrained to take up his residence at Peniel (near Mahanaim) on the other side of Jordan. The invasion of Shishak, however, who took Jerusalem and burnt it, gave Jeroboam at last a breathing space. The feud continued indeed, but Rehoboam could no longer dream of bringing back the ten tribes. The scale by and by turned in Israel's favour. King Baasha, who had seated himself on the throne in place of Nadab, Jeroboam's son, took the offensive, and Asa ben Rehoboam had no help for it but to call in Benhadad of Damascus against his adversary. In this way he gained his immediate purpose, it is true, but by the most dangerous of expedients.

Baasha's son Elah was supplanted by his vizier Zimri, who, however, was in his turn unable to hold his own against Omri, who had supreme command of the army. Against Omri there arose in another part of the country a rival, Tibni ben Ginath, who succeeded in maintaining some footing until his death, when Omri became supreme. Omri must be regarded as the founder of the first dynasty, in the proper sense of

[p. 459]

that word, in Israel, and as the second founder of the kingdom itself, to which he gave a permanent capital in Samaria. The Bible has hardly anything to tell us about him, but his importance is evident from the fact that among the Assyrians "the kingdom of Omri" [*1] was the ordinary name of Israel. According to the inscription of Mesha, it was he who again subjugated Moab, which had become independent at the death of David or of Solomon. He was not so successful against the Damascenes, to whom he had to concede certain privileges in his own capital (1 Kings xx. 34) [*2]

Ahab, who succeeded Omri his father, seems during the greater part of his reign to have in some sort acknowledged Syrian suzerainty. In no other way can we account for the fact that in the battle of Karkar against the Assyrians (854 B.C.) a contingent was contributed by him. But this very battle made the political situation so clear that he was led to break off his relations with Damascus. With this began a series of ferocious attacks on Israel by Benhadad and Hazael. They were met by Ahab with courage and success, but in the third year of that fifty years' war he fell in the battle at Ramoth Gilead (c. 851).

After the events recorded in 1 Kings xx., a forced alliance with Damascus on the part of Samaria is incredible; but the idea of spontaneous friendly relations is also inadmissible. Schrader indeed finds support for the latter theory in 1 Kings xx. 34; but in that passage there is no word of any offensive or defensive alliance between the rival kings; all that is stated is that Ahab releases the captive Benhadad on condition (bbryth) that the latter undertakes certain obligations, particularly those of keeping the peace and restoring the cities which had been taken. By this arrangement no change was made in the previously strained relations of the two kingdoms; and, moreover, the bryth was not kept (xxii. 1 seq.). Not much nearer the truth than the preceding is the view that the danger threatened by Assyria drove the kings of Syria and Palestine into one another's arms, and so occasioned an alliance between Ahab and Benhadad also. For if feelings of hostility existed at all between the two last named, then Ahab could not do otherwise than congratulate himself that in the person of Shalmaneser II. there had arisen against Benhadad an enemy who would be able to keep him effectually in check. That Shalmaneser might prove dangerous to himself probably

[p. 460]

did not at that time occur to him; but if it had he would still have chosen the remote in preference to the immediately threatening evil. For it was the political existence of Israel that was at stake in the struggle with Damascus; in such circumstances every ally would of course be welcome, every enemy of the enemy would be hailed as a friend, and the political wisdom which Max Duncker attributes to Ahab would have been nothing less than unpardonable folly. The state of matters was at the outset in this respect just what it continued to be throughout the subsequent course of events; the Assyrian danger grew in subsequent years, and with it grew the hostility between Damascus and Samaria. This fact admits only of one explanation,--that the Israelites utilised to the utmost of their power for their own protection against the Syrians the difficulties into which the latter were thrown by Shalmaneser II., and that these in their turn, when the Assyrians gave them respite, were all the fiercer in their revenge. On the evidence of the monuments and the Bible we may even venture to assert that it was the Assyrian attacks upon Damascus which at that time preserved Israel from becoming Aramaic,--of course only because Israel made the most of them for her political advantage.

Assuming that Ahab the Israelite (Ahabu Sirlaai) fought in the battle of Karkar (854) on the side of the king of Damascus, it was only because he could not help himself; but if it is actually the case that he did so, the battle of Karkar must have taken place before the events recorded in 1 Kings xx.

The Moabites took advantage of an accession under such critical circumstances to shake off the yoke imposed by Omri forty years before; an accurate account of their success, obviously written while the impression of it was still fresh, [*1] has come down to us in the famous inscription of King Mesha. Ahaziah, Ahab's immediate successor, was obliged to accept the situation; after his early death a futile attempt again to subjugate them was made by his brother Joram. Such a campaign was possible to him only in the event of the Syrians keeping quiet, and in point of fact it would appear that they were not in a position to follow up the advantage they had gained at Ramoth; doubtless they were hampered by the inroads of the Assyrians in 850 and 849. As soon as they got a little respite, however, they lost no time in attacking Joram, driving him into his capital, where they besieged him. Samaria had already been brought to the utmost extremities of famine, when suddenly the enemy raised the siege on account of a report of an invasion of their own land by the "Egyptians and Hittites." Possibly we ought to understand by these the Assyrians

[p. 461]

rather, who in 846 renewed their attacks upon Syria; to ordinary people in Israel the Assyrians were an unknown quantity, for which it would be natural in popular story to substitute something more familiar. This turn of affairs relieved Joram from his straits; it would even seem that, favoured by a change of dynasty at Damascus, he had succeeded in taking from the Syrians the fortress of Ramoth in Gilead, which had been the object of Ahab's unsuccessful endeavours, when suddenly there burst upon the house of Omri the overwhelming catastrophe for which the prophets had long been preparing.

When the prophets first made their appearance, some time before the beginning of the Philistine war, they were a novel phenomenon in Israel; but in the interval they had become so naturalised that they now had a recognised and essential place in connection with the religion of Jehovah. They had in the process divested themselves of much that had originally characterised them, but they still retained their habit of appearing in companies and living together in societies, and also that of wearing a peculiar distinctive dress. These societies of theirs had no ulterior aims; the rabbinical notion that they were schools and academies in which the study of the Torah and of sacred history was pursued imports later ideas into an earlier time. First-rate importance on the whole cannot be claimed for the Nebiim, but occasionally there arose amongst them a man in whom the spirit which was cultivated within their circles may be said to have risen to the explosive pitch. Historical influence was exercised at no time save by these individuals, who rose above their order and even placed themselves in opposition to it, but always at the same time had their base of operations within it. The prototype of this class of exceptional prophets, whom we not unjustly have been accustomed to regard as the true, is Elijah of Thisbe, the contemporary of Ahab.

ln compliment to Jezebel his wife, Ahab had set up in Samaria a temple with richly endowed religious services in honour of the Syrian Baal. In doing so he had no intention of renouncing Jehovah; Jehovah continued to be the national God after whom he named his sons Ahaziah and Jehoram. The destruction of Jehovah's altars or the persecution of His prophets was not at all proposed, or even the introduction of a foreign cultus elsewhere than in Samaria. Jehovah's sovereignty over Israel being thus only remotely if at all imperilled, the popular faith found nothing specially offensive in a course of action

[p. 462]

which had been followed a hundred years before by Solomon also. Elijah alone was strenuous in his opposition; the masses did not understand him, and were far from taking his side. To him only, but not to the nation, did it seem like a halting between two opinions, an irreconcilable inconsistency, that Jehovah should be worshipped as Israel's God and a chapel to Baal should at the same time be erected in Israel.

In solitary grandeur did this prophet tower conspicuously over his time; legend, and not history, could alone preserve the memory of his figure. There remains a vague impression that with him the development of Israel's conception of Jehovah entered upon a new stadium, rather than any data from which it can be ascertained wherein the contrast of the new with the old lay. After Jehovah, acting more immediately within the political sphere, had established the nation and kingdom, he now began in the spiritual sphere to operate against the foreign elements, the infusion of which previously had been permitted to go on almost unchecked. [*1] The Rechabites, who arose at that time, protested in their zeal for Jehovah altogether against all civilisation which presupposes agriculture, and in their fundamental principles aimed at a recurrence to the primitive nomadic life of Israel in the wilderness; the Nazarites abstained at least from wine, the chief symbol of Dionysiac civilisation. In this indeed Elijah was not with them; had he been so, he would doubtless have been intelligible to the masses. But, comprehending as he did the spirit from which these demonstrations proceeded, he thought of Jehovah as a great principle which cannot coexist in the same heart with Baal. To him first was it revealed that we have not in the various departments of nature a variety of forces worthy of our worship, but that there exists over all but one Holy One and one Mighty One, who reveals Himself not in nature but in law and righteousness in the world of man. The indignation he displayed against the judicial murder at Jezreel was as genuine and strong as that which he manifested against the worship of Baal in Samaria; the one was as much a crime against Jehovah as the other.

Elijah ascended to heaven before he had actually achieved much in

[p. 463]

the world. The idea which his successors took from him was that it was necessary to make a thorough clearance from Samaria of the Baal worship and of the house of Ahab as well. For this practical end Elisha made use of practical means. When Elijah, after the murder of Naboth, had suddenly appeared before Ahab and threatened him with a violent end, an officer of high command had been present, Jehu ben Nimshi, and he had never forgotten the incident. He now found himself at the head of the troops at Ramoth Gilead after the withdrawal to Jezreel of Joram ben Ahab from the field to be healed of his wound. To Elisha the moment seemed a suitable one for giving to Jehu in Jehovah's name the command now to carry out Elijah's threat against the house of Ahab. Jehu gained over the captains of the army, and carried out so well the task with which the prophet had commissioned him that not a single survivor of Ahab's dynasty or of his court was left. He next extirpated Baal and his worshippers in Samaria. From that date no worship of foreign gods seems ever to have recurred in Israel. Idolatry indeed continued to subsist, but the images, stones, and trees, even the seraphim apparently, belonged to the cultus of Jehovah, or were at least brought into relation with it.

Jehu founded the second and last dynasty of the kingdom of Samaria His inheritance from the house of Omri included the task of defending himself against the Syrians. The forces at his disposal being insufficient for this, he resorted to the expedient of seeking to urge the Assyrians to renew their hostilities against the Aramaeans. For this end his ambassadors carried presents to Shalmaneser II.; these were not of a regular but only of an occasional character, but the vanity of the great king represents them as the tribute of a vassal. In the years 842 and 839 Assyrian campaigns against Hazael of Damascus actually took place; then they were intermitted for a long time, and the kings of Samaria, Jehu and his two successors, were left to their own resources. These were evil times for Israel. With a barbarity never intermitted the frontier war went on in Gilead, where Ammon and Moab showed themselves friendly to the Syrian cause (Amos i.); occasionally great expeditions took place, one of which brought King Hazael to the very walls of Jerusalem. It was only with the greatest difficulty that Israel's independence was maintained. Once more religion went hand in hand with the national cause; the prophet Elisha was the main stay of the kings in the struggle with the Syrians, "the

[p. 464]

chariot and horsemen of Israel." Joash ben Joahaz ben Jehu at last succeeded in inflicting upon Syria several blows which proved decisive. Thenceforward Israel had nothing to fear from that quarter. Under Joash's son, Jeroboam II., the kingdom even reached a height of external power which recalled the times of David. Moab was again subdued; southwards the frontier extended to the brook of the wilderness (Amos vi. 14), and northward to Hamath.

Footnotes

^458:1 Even in the Deuteronomic redaction of the Book of Kings indeed, and still more by the Chronicler, the political rebellion of Israel is regarded as having been ecclesiastical and religious in its character. The Book of Chronicles regards Samaria as a heathen kingdom, and recognises Judah alone as Israel. But in point of fact Judah takes up the history of Israel only after the fall of Samaria; see  section section 6, 7.

^459:1 Bit Humri, like oikos Lysanioy, and similar territorial names in Syriac.

^459:2 Omri's accession is to be placed somewhere about 900 B.C. It is a date, and the first, that can be determined with some precision, if we place the battle of Karkar (854) near the end of Ahab's reign, and take the servitude of Moab, which lasted forty years and ended with Ahab's death, to begin in Omri's first decade

^460:1 It is obvious that Mesha's narrative is to be taken with 2 Kings i. 1, and not with 2 Kings iii.

^462:1 It is worth noticing how much more frequent from this period onwards proper names compounded with the word Jehovah become. Among the names of the judges and of the kings before Ahab in Israel and Asa in Judah, not a single instance occurs; thenceforward they become the rule.

      
Prolegomena to the History of Ancient Israel, by Julius Wellhausen, [1885], at sacred-texts.com

  

5. GOD, THE WORLD, AND THE LIFE OF MEN IN OLD ISRAEL.

BEFORE proceeding to consider the rise of those prophets who were the makers of the new Israel, it will not be out of place here to cast a glance backwards upon the old order of things which perished with the kingdom of Samaria. With reference to any period earlier than the century 850-750 B.C., we can hardly be said to possess any statistics. For, while the facts of history admit of being handed down with tolerable accuracy through a considerable time, a contemporary literature is indispensable for the description of standing conditions. But it was within this period that Hebrew literature first flourished--after the Syrians had been finally repulsed, it would seem. Writing of course had been practiced from a much earlier period, but only in formal instruments, mainly upon stone. At an early period also the historical sense of the people developed itself in connection with their religion; but it found its expression in songs, which in the first instance were handed down by word of mouth only. Literature began with the collection and writing out of those songs; the Book of the Wars of the Lord and the Book of Jashar were the oldest historical books. The transition was next made to the writing of prose history with the aid of legal documents and family reminiscences; a large portion of this early historiography has been preserved to us in the Books of Judges, Samuel, and Kings. Contemporaneously also certain collections of laws and decisions of the priests, of which we have an example in Ex. xxi. xxii., were committed to writing. Somewhat later, perhaps, the legends about the patriarchs and primitive times, the origin of which cannot be assigned to a very early date, [*1] received literary shape. Specially

[p. 465]

remarkable is the rise of a written prophecy. The question why it was that Elijah and Elisha committed nothing to writing, while Amos a hundred years later is an author, hardly admits of any other answer than that in the interval a non-literary had developed into a literary age. How rapid the process was may be gathered from a comparison between the singularly broken utterances of the earlier oracle contained in Isa. xv. xvi. with the orations of Isaiah himself.

We begin our survey with that of the family relations. Polygamy was rare, monogamy the rule; but the right of concubinage was unlimited. While a high position was accorded both by affection and custom to the married wife, traces still existed of a state of society in which she was regarded as property that went with the inheritance. The marriage of relations was by no means prohibited; no offence was taken at the circumstance that Abraham was the husband of his sister (by a different mother). Parents had full power over their children; they had the right to sell and even to sacrifice them. In this respect, however, the prevailing usage was mild, as also in regard to slaves, who socially held a position of comparative equality with their masters, and even enjoyed some measure of legal protection. Slavery, it is plain, had not the same political importance as with the Greeks and Romans; it could have been abolished without any shock to the foundations of the state.

Throughout this period agriculture and gardening continued to be regarded as man's normal calling (Gen. iii. iv.); the laws contained in Exod. xxi.-xxiii. rest entirely upon this assumption. To dwell in peace under his vine and under his fig-tree was the ideal of every genuine Israelite. Only in a few isolated districts, as in the country to the east of Jordan and in portions of Judah, did the pastoral life predominate. Art and industry were undeveloped, and were confined to the production of simple domestic necessaries.

Commerce was in old time followed exclusively by the Canaanite towns, so that the word "Canaanite" was used in the general sense of "trader." But by and by Israel began to tread in Canaan's footsteps (Hos. xii. 8, 9), [*1] The towns grew more influential than the

[p. 466]

country; money notably increased; and the zeal of piety was quite unable to arrest the progress of the change which set in. The kings themselves, from Solomon onwards, were the first to set the bad example; they eagerly sought to acquire suitable harbours, and in company or in competition with the Syrians entered upon large commercial transactions. The extortions of the corn-market, the formation of large estates, the frequency of mortgages, all show that the small peasant proprietorship was unable to hold its own against the accumulations of wealth. The wage-receiving class increased, and cases in which free Hebrews sold themselves into slavery were not rare.

On all hands the material progress of the commonwealth made itself felt, the old simplicity of manners disappeared, and luxury increased. Buildings of hewn stone began to be used even by private individuals. The towns, especially the chief ones, were fortified; and in time of war refuge was sought in them, and not as formerly in woods and caves. Even in the time of David the Israelites always fought on foot; but now horses and chariots were regarded as indispensable. The bow came to be the principal weapon of offence, and a military class appears to have sprung up.

The monarchy retained in the kingdom of the ten tribes its military character; the commander-in-chief was the first person in the kingdom. In internal affairs its interference was slight; with systematic despotism it had little in common, although of course within its narrow sphere it united executive and legislative functions. It was little more than the greatest house in Israel. The highest official was called "master of the household." The court ultimately grew into a capital, the municipal offices of which were held by royal officials. The provinces had governors who, however, in time of war withdrew to the capital (1 Kings xx.); the presumption is that their sole charge was collection of the revenue.

The state was not charged with affairs of internal administration; all parties were left free to maintain their own interests. Only in cases in which conflicts had emerged in consequence could the king be approached. Ruling and judging were regarded as one and the same; there was but one word for both (2 Kings xv. 5). Still, the king was not altogether the only judge; there were, in fact, a number of independent

[p. 467]

jurisdictions. Wherever within a particular circle the power lay, there the right of judging was also found, whether exercised by heads of families and communities or by warriors and powerful lords. It was only because the king was the most powerful that he was regarded as the judge of last resort; but it was equally permitted to apply to him from the first. Of method and rule in these things there was but little; a man was glad to find any court to receive his complaint. Of course without complaint one got no justice. The administration of justice was at best but a scanty supplement to the practice of self-help. The heir of the murdered man would not forego the right of blood revenge; but his family or the commune gave him aid, and in case of need took his place, for bloodshed had at all hazards to be atoned for.

The firm establishment of civil order was rendered all the more difficult by the continual wars and violent changes of dynasty which ever and anon made its very existence problematical. Power, which is more important than righteousness to a judicatory, was what the government was wanting in. In the simpler social conditions of the earlier time a state which was adapted merely for purposes of war might easily be found to work satisfactorily enough, but a more complex order of things had now arisen. Social problems had begun to crop up; for the poor and the proletariat the protection of a thoughtful government had come to be required, but was not forthcoming.

But these defects did not check all progress. The weakness of the government, the want of political consolidation, were insufficient to arrest intellectual advance or to corrupt the prevailing moral tone and feeling for justice; in fact it was precisely in this period (the period in which the main part of the Jehovistic history must have been written) that the intellectual and moral culture of the people stood at its highest. Even when the machinery of the monarchy had got out of order, the organisation of the families and communes continued to subsist; the smaller circles of social life remained comparatively untouched by the catastrophes that shook the greater. Above all, the national religion supplied the spiritual life with an immovable basis.

The favourite illustrations of the power of religion in the Israel of that period are drawn from the instances of great prophets who raised kings out of the dust and smote them to it again. But the influence and importance of these is generally exaggerated in the accounts we

[p. 468]

have. That among them there occasionally occurred manifestations of such power as to give a new turn in history is indeed true; a figure like that of Elijah is no mere invention. But such a man as he was a prophecy of the future rather than an actual agent in shaping the present. On the whole, religion was a peaceful influence, conserving rather than assailing the existing order of things. The majority of the prophets were no revolutionists; rather in fact were they always too much inclined to prophesy in accordance with the wishes of the party in power. Besides, in ordinary circumstances their influence was inferior to that of the priests, who were servants of royalty at the chief sanctuaries, but everywhere attached to the established order.

The Torah of Jehovah still continued to be their special charge. It was not even now a code or law in our sense of the word; Jehovah had not yet made His Testament; He was still living and active in Israel. But the Torah appears during this period to have withdrawn itself somewhat from the business of merely pronouncing legal decisions and to have begun to move in a freer field. It now consisted in teaching the knowledge of God, in showing the right God-given way where men were not sure of themselves. Many of the counsels of the priests had become a common stock of moral convictions, which, indeed, were all of them referred to Jehovah as their author, yet had ceased to be matters of direct revelation. Nevertheless the Torah had still occupation enough, the progressive life of the nation ever affording matter for new questions.

Although in truth the Torah and the moral influence of Jehovah upon the national life were things much weightier and much more genuinely Israelitic than the cultus, yet this latter held on the whole a higher place in public opinion. To the ordinary man it was not moral but liturgical acts that seemed to be truly religious. Altars of Jehovah occurred everywhere, with sacred stones and trees--the latter either artificial (Asheras) or natural--beside them; it was considered desirable also to have water in the neighbourhood (brazen sea). In cases where a temple stood before the altar it contained an ephod and teraphim, a kind of images before which the lot was cast by the priest. Of the old simplicity the cultus retained nothing; at the great sanctuaries especially (Bethel, Gilgal, Beersheba) it had become very elaborate. Its chief seasons were the agricultural festivals--the passover, the feast of weeks, and most especially the feast of the ingathering at the close

[p. 469]

of the year. These were the only occasions of public worship properly so called, at which every one was expected to attend; in other cases each worshipper sought the presence of God only in special circumstances, as for example at the beginning and at the end of particular undertakings. The cultus, as to place, time, matter, and form, belonged almost entirely to the inheritance which Israel had received from Canaan; to distinguish what belonged to the worship of Jehovah from that which belonged to Baal was no easy matter. [*1] It was the channel through which also paganism could and did ever anew gain admittance into the worship of Jehovah. Yet that publicity of the cultus which arose out of the very nature of Jehovah, and in consequence of which the teraphim even were removed from the houses to the temples, cannot but have acted as a corrective against the most fatal excesses.

As for the substance of the national faith, it was summed up principally in the proposition that Jehovah is the God of Israel. But "God" was equivalent to "helper;" that was the meaning of the word. "Help," assistance in all occasions of life,--that was what Israel looked for from Jehovah, not "salvation" in the theological sense. The forgiveness of sins was a matter of subordinate importance; it was involved in the "help," and was a matter not of faith but of experience. The relation between the people and God was a natural one as that of son to father; it did not rest upon observance of the conditions of a pact. But it was not on that account always equally lively and hearty; Jehovah was regarded as having varieties of mood. To secure and retain His favour sacrifices were useful; by them prayer and thanksgiving were seconded.

Another main article of faith was that Jehovah judges and recompenses, not after death (then all men were thought to be alike), but upon the earth. Here, however, but little account was taken of the individual; over him the wheel of destiny remorselessly rolled; his part was resignation and not hope. Not in the career of the individual but in the fate of families and nations did the righteousness of Jehovah find scope for its manifestation; and this is the only reason why the religion could dispense with the conceptions of heaven and hell. For the rest, it was not always easy to bring the second article into correlation with the first; in practice the latter received the superior place.

[p. 470]

It need hardly be said that superstition of every kind also abounded. But the superstition of the Israelites had as little real religious significance as had that poetical view of nature which the Hebrews doubtless shared in greater or less degree with all the other nations of antiquity.

Footnotes

^464:1 Even the Jehovistic narratives about the patriarchs belong to the time when Israel had already become a powerful kingdom; Moab, Ammon,, and Edom had been subjugated (Gen. xxvii. 29), and vigorous frontier wars were being carried on [p. 466] with the Syrians about Gilead (Gen. xxxi. 52). In Gen. xxvii. 40 allusion is made to the constantly repeated subjugations of Edom by Judah, alternating with successful revolts on the part of the former; see Delitzsch on k'shr.

^465:1 "Canaan (i.e., Ephraim Canaanised) has deceitful balances in his hand, and [p. 466] loves to overreach. Ephraim indeed saith, I am become rich, I have gained wealth; but all his profits will not suffice for (expiation of) the guilt which he has incurred."

^469:1 The description of the cultus by the Prophet Hosea shows this very clearly. It is obvious enough, however, that the object was to serve Jehovah, and not any foreign deity, by this worship.

      
Prolegomena to the History of Ancient Israel, by Julius Wellhausen, [1885], at sacred-texts.com

  

6. THE FALL OF SAMARIA.

UNDER King Jeroboam II., two years before a great earthquake that served ever after for a date to all who had experienced it, there occurred at Bethel, the greatest and most conspicuous sanctuary of Jehovah in Israel, a scene full of significance. The multitude were assembled there with gifts and offerings for the observance of a festival, when there stepped forward a man whose grim seriousness interrupted the joy of the feast. It was a Judaean, Amos of Tekoa, a shepherd from the wilderness bordering on the Dead Sea. Into the midst of the joyful tones of the songs which with harp and tabor were being sung at the sacred banquet he brought the discordant note of the mourner's wail. For over all the joyous stir of busy life his ear caught the sounds of death: "the virgin of Israel is fallen, never more to rise; lies prostrate in her own land with no one to lift her up." He prophesied as close at hand the downfall of the kingdom which just at that moment was rejoicing most in the consciousness of power, and the deportation of the people to a far-off northern land.

There was something rotten in the state of Israel in spite of the halcyon days it enjoyed under Jeroboam II. From the indirect results of war, from changes in the tenure and in the culture of the soil, from defective administration of justice, the humbler classes had much to suffer; they found that the times were evil. But it was not this that caused Amos to foresee the end of Israel, not a mere vague foreboding of evil that forced him to leave his flocks; the dark cloud that threatened on the horizon was plain enough--the Assyrians. Once already at an earlier date they had directed their course south-westwards, without, however, on that occasion becoming a source of danger to the Israelites. But now that the bulwark against the Assyrians, Aram of Damascus, was falling into ruins, a movement of these against Lebanon in the time of Jeroboam II. opened to Israel the alarming prospect that sooner or later they would have to meet the full force of the irresistible avalanche.

[p. 471]

What then? The common man was in no position truly to estimate the danger; and, so far as he apprehended it, he lived in the firm faith that Jehovah would not abandon His people in their straits. The governing classes prided themselves on the military resources of Israel, or otherwise tried to dismiss from their minds all thought of the gravity of the situation. But Amos heard the question distinctly enough, and did not hesitate to answer it: the downfall of Israel is imminent. It was nothing short of blasphemy to utter anything of this kind, for everything, Jehovah Himself included, depended on the existence of the nation. But the most astounding thing has yet to come; not Asshur, but Jehovah Himself, is bringing about the overthrow of Israel; through Asshur it is Jehovah that is triumphing over Israel. A paradoxical thought--as if the national God were to cut the ground from under His own feet! For the faith in Jehovah as the God of Israel was a faith that He intervenes on behalf of His people against all enemies, against the whole World; precisely in times of danger was religion shown by staying oneself upon this faith. Jehovah might indeed, of course, hide His face for a time, but not definitively; in the end He ever arose at last against all opposing powers. "The day of the Lord" was an object of hope in all times of difficulty and oppression; it was understood as self-evident that the crisis would certainly end in favour of Israel. Amos took up the popular conception of that day; but how thoroughly did he change its meaning! "Woe to them who long for the day of the Lord!--What to you is the day of the Lord,? It is darkness, not light." His own opposition to the popular conception is formulated in a paradox which he prefixes as theme to the principal section of his book:--"Us alone does Jehovah know," say the Israelites, drawing from this the inference that He is on their side, and of course must take their part. "You only do I know," Amos represents Jehovah as saying, "therefore do I visit upon you all your sins."

If the question, Whereon did Jehovah's relation to Israel ultimately rest? be asked, the answer, according to the popular faith, must substantially be that it rested on the fact that Jehovah was worshipped in Israel and not among the heathen, that in Israel were His altars and His dwelling. His cultus was the bond between Him and the nation; when therefore it was desired to draw the bond still closer, the solemn services of religion were redoubled. But to the conception of Amos Jehovah is no judge capable of accepting a bribe; with the utmost indignation

[p. 472]

he repudiates the notion that it is possible to influence Him by gifts and offerings. Though Israel alone has served Him he does not on that account apply any other standard to it than to other nations (chaps. i. ii.). If Israel is better known to Him, it does not follow that on that account He shuts His eyes and blindly takes a side. Neither Jehovah nor His prophet recognises two moral standards; right is everywhere right, wrong always wrong, even though committed against Israel's worst enemies (ii. 1). What Jehovah demands is righteousness,--nothing more and nothing less; what He hates is injustice. Sin or offence to the Deity is a thing of purely moral character; with such emphasis this doctrine had never before been heard. Morality is that for the sake of which all other things exist; it is the alone essential thing in the world. It is no postulate, no idea, but at once a necessity and a fact, the most intensely living of personal powers-Jehovah the God of Hosts. In wrath, in ruin, this holy reality makes its existence known; it annihilates all that is hollow and false.

Amos calls Jehovah the God of Hosts, never the God of Israel. The nation as such is no religious conception to him; from its mere existence he cannot formulate any article of faith. Sometimes it seems as if he were denying Israel's prerogative altogether. He does not really do so, but at least the prerogative is conditional and involves a heavy responsibility. The saying in iii. 2 recalls Luke xii. 47. The proposition "Jehovah knows Israel" is in the mouth of Amos almost the same thing as "Israel knows Jehovah;" save only that this is not to be regarded as any merit on Israel's part, but as a manifestation of the grace of Jehovah, who has led His people by great deeds and holy men, and so made Himself known. Amos knows no other truth than that practical one which he has found among his own people and nowhere else, lying at the foundation of life and morality, and which he regards as the product of a divine providential ordering of history. From this point of view, so thoroughly Israelitish, he pronounces Israel's condemnation. He starts from premisses generally conceded, but he accentuates them differently and draws from them divergent conclusions.

Amos was the founder, and the purest type, of a new phase of prophecy. The impending conflict of Asshur with Jehovah and Israel, the ultimate downfall of Israel, is its theme. Until that date there had subsisted in Palestine and Syria a number of petty kingdoms and nationalities, which had their friendships and enmities with one another,

[p. 473]

but paid no heed to anything outside their own immediate environment, and revolved, each on its own axis, careless of the outside world, until suddenly the Assyrians burst in upon them. These commenced the work which was carried on by the Babylonians, Persians, and Greeks, and completed by the Romans. They introduced a new factor, the conception of the world,--the world of course in the historical sense of that expression. In presence of that conception the petty nationalities lost their centre of gravity, brute fact dispelled their illusions, they flung their gods to the moles and to the bats (Isa. ii.). The prophets of Israel alone did not allow themselves to be taken by surprise by what had occurred, or to be plunged in despair; they solved by anticipation the grim problem which history set before them. They absorbed into their religion that conception of the world which was destroying the religions of the nations, even before it had been fully grasped by the secular consciousness. Where others saw only the ruin of everything that is holiest, they saw the triumph of Jehovah over delusion and error. Whatever else might be overthrown, the really worthy remained unshaken. They recognised ideal powers only, right and wrong truth and falsehood; second causes were matters of indifference to them, they were no practical politicians. But they watched the course of events attentively, nay, with passionate interest. The present, which was passing before them, became to them as it were the plot of a divine drama which they watched with an intelligence that anticipated the denouement. Everywhere the same goal of the development, everywhere the same laws. The nations are the dramatis personae, Israel the hero, Jehovah the poet of the tragedy. [*1]

The canonical prophets, the series of whom begins with Amos, were separated by an essential distinction from the class which had preceded them and which still continued to be the type of the common prophet. They did not seek to kindle either the enthusiasm or the fanaticism of the multitude; they swam not with but against the stream. They were not patriotic, at least in the ordinary acceptation of that word; they prophesied not good but evil for their people (Jer. xxviii. 8). Until their time the nation had sprung up out of the conception of Jehovah; now the conception of Jehovah was casting the nation into the shade. The natural bond between the two was severed, and the

[p. 474]

relation was henceforward viewed as conditional. As God of the righteousness which is the law of the whole universe, Jehovah could be Israel's God only in so far as in Israel the right was recognised and followed. The ethical element destroyed the national character of the old religion. It still addressed itself, to be sure, more to the nation and to society at large than to the individual; it insisted less upon a pure heart than upon righteous institutions; but nevertheless the first step towards universalism had been accomplished, towards at once the general diffusion and the individualisation of religion. Thus, although the prophets were far from originating a new conception of God, they none the less were the founders of what has been called "ethical monotheism." But with them this ethical monotheism was no product of the "self-evolution of dogma," but a progressive step which had been called forth simply by the course of events. The providence of God brought it about that this call came at an opportune period, and not too suddenly. The downfall of the nation did not take place until the truths and precepts of religion were already strong enough to be able to live on alone; to the prophets belongs the merit of having recognised the independence of these, and of having secured perpetuity to Israel by refusing to allow the conception of Jehovah to be involved in the ruin of the kingdom. They saved faith by destroying illusion.

The event which Amos had foreseen was not long in coming. The Israelites flew spontaneously, like "silly doves," into the net of the Assyrians. Zechariah ben Jeroboam was overthrown after a short reign, Shallum his murderer and successor was also unable to hold his own, and was followed after the horrors of a civil war by Menahem ben Gadi (745 B.C.). But Menahem, in the presence of domestic (and perhaps also foreign) assailants, [*1] had no other resort than to purchase

[p. 475]

by payment of a great tribute the assistance of King Tiglath-pileser II., who at that time was giving new force to the Assyrian predominance in these regions. By such means he succeeded in attaining his immediate end, but the further consequence was that the rival party in the state turned for support to Egypt, and Palestine now became the arena of conflict between the two great world-powers.

Menahem transmitted his kingdom to Pekahiah; Pekahiah was murdered about 735 B.C. by Pekah, and Pekah himself shortly afterwards was overthrown. All this happened within a few years. It would have been possible to conjecture the state of the country in these circumstances, even if we had not been informed of it by means of the prophetical book of Hosea, which dates from the time when the Assyrians had begun indeed to tamper with the country, but had not yet shown their full design. After the death of Jeroboam II. there had been wild outbursts of partisan war; none of the kings who in quick succession appeared and disappeared had real power, none established order. It was as if the danger from without, which was only too obviously threatening the existence of the kingdom, had already dissolved all internal bonds; every one was at war with his neighbour. Assyrians and Egyptians were called in to support this or that government; by such expedients the external confusion was, naturally, only increased. Was there any other quarter in which help could yet be sought? The people, led by the priests, turned to the altars of Jehovah, and outdid itself in pious works, as if by any such illusory means, out of all relation to the practical problem in hand, the gangrene of anarchy could possibly be healed. Still more zealous than Amos against the cultus was Hosea, not merely on the ground that it had the absurd motive of forcing Jehovah's favour, but also because it was of heathenish character, nature-worship and idolatry. That Jehovah is the true and only helper is certainly not denied by Hosea. But His help is coupled with the condition that Israel shall undergo a complete change, and of such a change he sees no prospect. On this account the downfall of the state is in Hosea's view inevitable, but not final ruin, only such an overthrow as is necessary for the transition to a new and fair recommencement. In Hosea's prophecies the relation between Jehovah and

[p. 476]

[paragraph continues] Israel is conceived of as dissoluble, and as actually on the point of being dissolved, but it has struck its roots so deep that it must inevitably at last establish itself again.

The first actual collision between Israel and Assyria occurred in 734. Resin, king of Damascus, and Pekah, king of Samaria, had united in an expedition against Judah, where at that time Ahaz ben Jotham occupied the throne. But Ahaz parried the blow by placing himself under the protection of the Assyrians, who perhaps would in any case have struck in against the alliance between Aram and Israel. Tiglath-pileser made his first appearance in 734, first on the sea-coast of Palestine, and subsequently either in this or in the following year took up his quarters in the kingdom of the ten tribes. After he had ravaged Galilee and Gilead, he finally concluded a peace with Samaria conditionally on his receiving the head of King Pekah and a considerable yearly tribute. Hosea ben Elah was raised to the throne in Pekah's place and acknowledged by the Assyrian as a vassal For some ten years he held his position quietly, regularly paying his dues. But when at the death of Tiglath-pileser the Syro-Palestinian kingdoms rebelled en masse, Samaria also was seized with the delirium of patriotic fanaticism (Isaiah xxviii.). Relying upon the help of Seve, king of Ethiopia and Egypt, Hosea ventured on a revolt from Assyria. But the Egyptians left him in the lurch as soon as Shalmaneser IV., Tiglath-pileser's successor, invaded his territory. Before his capital had fallen, Hosea himself fell into the hands of the Assyrians. Samaria offered a desperate resistance, and succumbed only to Sargon, Shalmaneser's successor (721). Energetic measures were adopted by the victor for the pacification of the country; he carried all the inhabitants of mark into captivity to Calachene, Gozanitis, and Armenia. Much light is thrown upon the conditions of the national religion then and upon its subsequent development by the single fact that the exiled Israelites were absorbed by the surrounding heathenism without leaving a trace behind them, while the population of Judah, who had the benefit of a hundred years respite, held their faith fast throughout the period of the Babylonian exile, and by means of it were able to maintain their own individuality afterwards in all the circumstances that arose. The fact that the fall of Samaria did not hinder but helped the religion of Jehovah is entirely due to the prophets. That they had foreseen the downfall of the state, and declared in the name of religion that it was inevitable, was a

[p. 477]

matter of much greater historical importance than the actual downfall itself.

Footnotes

^473:1 In very much the same way the threatened and actual political annihilation of Ionia led to the rise of Greek philosophy (Xenophanes, Heraclitus).

^474:1 It is not inconceivable that the wars carried on by Tiglath-pileser II. against Hamath had some connection with his interventions in favour of Menahem. The kingdom of Hamath, which may have been threatened by Jeroboam II., may have availed itself of the state of matters which followed his death to secure its own aggrandisement at Israel's expense; in correspondence with this attack from the northern side another by Judah in concert with Hamath may well have been made from the south. In this way, though not without the aid of pure hypothesis, it might be possible to fit into the general historical connection the fragmentary Assyrian notices about Azariah of Judah and his relations to Hamath; the explanations suggested by the Assyriologists have hitherto been total failures. But in that case it would certainly be necessary to assume that the Assyrians were badly informed as to [p. 475] the nature of the relations between Hamath and Judah, and also as to the individual who at that time held the throne of Judah. Uzziah (= Azariah), who in his old age had become a leper, could only nominally at best have been king of Judah then.

      
Prolegomena to the History of Ancient Israel, by Julius Wellhausen, [1885], at sacred-texts.com

  

7. THE DELIVERANCE OF JUDAH.

HITHERTO the small kingdom of Judah had stood in the background. Its political history had been determined almost exclusively by its relation to Israel. Under the dynasty of Omri the original enmity had been changed into a close but perhaps not quite voluntary friendship. Judah found itself drawn completely into the train of the more powerful neighbouring state, and seems even to have rendered it military service. The fall of the house of Omri was an ominous event for Judah as well as Israel; Jehu, as he passed to the throne, put to death not only Ahaziah the king but also two and forty other members of the royal house of David who had fallen into his hands; and those who still survived, children for the most part, were murdered wholesale by the regent Athaliah for reasons that are unknown. Only one little boy, Joash, was concealed from her fury, and by a successful conspiracy six years afterwards was placed upon the throne of his ancestors. At that time the Syrians were extending their incursions to Judah and Philistia, and Joash bought them off from Jerusalem with the temple treasures. Perhaps it was this disgrace that he expiated with his death; in like manner perhaps the assassination of his successor Amaziah is to be accounted for by the discredit he had incurred by a reckless and unsuccessful war against Israel. Just as Israel was beginning to recover itself after the happy termination of the Syrian wars, Judah also experienced its period of highest prosperity. What Jeroboam II. was to the northern kingdom, Uzziah was to that of the south. He appears to have obtained possession of Edom, and for a considerable time to have held that one province of David's conquests which fell to Judah; and at the trading port of Elath he revived the commerce which Solomon had created. The prosperity of his long reign was uninterrupted till in his later years he was smitten with leprosy, and found it necessary to hand over the affairs of the kingdom to his son Jotham. But Jotham appears to have died about the same time as his father,--his successor, still in very early youth (Isa. iii. 12), being Ahaz ben Jotham ben Uzziah.

If Judah could not compare with Israel in political and general

[p. 478]

historical importance, it nevertheless enjoyed more than one considerable advantage over the larger kingdom. It was much safer from foreign foes; for the Egyptians, as a rule, were not dangerous neighbours. But its chief advantage consisted in the stability of its dynasty. It was David who had elevated Judah and Jerusalem to a position of historical significance, and the prosperity of his house was most intimately connected with that of the town and territory, and even with that of religion. On two separate occasions it occurred that a king of Judah was murdered by subjects, but in both cases the "people of the land" rose up against the assassins and once more placed a member of the Davidic family upon the throne. The one actual recorded revolution was that against Athaliah, which had for its object the restoration of the throne to the legitimate heir. Under shelter of the monarchy the other institutions of the state also acquired a measure of permanency such as was not found at all in Israel, where everything depended on the character of individuals, and the existing order of things was ever liable to be subjected to fresh dispute. Life in Judah was a much more stable affair, though not so exciting or dramatic. Possibly the greater isolation of the little kingdom, its more intimate relations with the neighbouring wilderness, and the more primitive modes of life which resulted, were also factors which contributed to this general result.

In the capital of course the life was not primitive, and its influence was undoubtedly greater than that of the country. Successive kings exerted themselves for its external improvement, and in this respect Hezekiah ben Ahaz was specially distinguished. Above all they manifested sincere interest in the temple, which from an early period exerted a powerful force of attraction over the entire mass of the population. They regulated the cultus according to their individual tastes, added to it or curtailed it at their pleasure, and dealt with the sacred treasures as they chose. Although the priests had in a certain sense great power--the conspiracy against Athaliah was led not by a prophet but by a priest,--they were nevertheless subjects of the king, and had to act according to his orders. That the cultus of Jehovah at Jerusalem was purer than that at Bethel or at Samaria is an assertion which is contradicted by more than one well-attested fact. In this respect there was no essential difference between Israel and Judah. It was in Israel that the reaction against Baal-worship originated which afterwards passed over into Judah; the initiative in all such matters was Israel's. There

[p. 479]

the experiments were made from which Jerusalem learned the lesson. How deep was the interest felt in the affairs of the larger kingdom by the inhabitants even of one of the smaller provincial towns of Judah is shown in the instance of Amos of Tekoah.

Step by step with the decline of Israel after the death of Jeroboam II. did Judah rise in importance; it was already preparing to take the inheritance. The man through whom the transition of the history from Israel to Judah was effected, and who was the means of securing for the latter kingdom a period of respite which was fruitful of the best results for the consolidation of true religion, was the Prophet Isaiah. The history of his activity is at the same time the history of Judah during that period.

Isaiah became conscious of his vocation in the year of King Uzziah's death; his earliest discourses date from the beginning of the reign of Ahaz. In them he contemplates the imminent downfall of Samaria, and threatens Judah also with the chastisement its political and social sins deserve. In chap. ix., and also in chaps. ii.-v., he still confines himself on the whole to generalities quite after the manner of Amos. But on the occasion of the expedition of the allied Syrians and Ephraimites against Jerusalem he interposed with bold decision in the sphere of practical politics. To the very last he endeavoured to restrain Ahaz from his purpose of summoning the Assyrians to his help; he assured him of Jehovah's countenance, and offered him a token in pledge. When the king refused this, the prophet recognised that matters had gone too far, and that the coming of the Assyrians could not be averted. He then declared that the dreaded danger would indeed be obviated by that course, but that another far more serious would be incurred. For the Egyptians would resist the westward movement of Assyria, and Judah as the field of war would be utterly laid waste; only a remnant would remain as the basis of a better future.

The actual issue, however, was not yet quite so disastrous. The Egyptians did not interfere with the Assyrians, and left Samaria and Damascus to their fate. Judah became indeed tributary to Assyria, but at the same time enjoyed considerable prosperity. Henceforward the prophet's most zealous efforts were directed to the object of securing the maintenance, at any price, of this condition of affairs. He sought by every means at his command to keep Judah from any sort of intervention

[p. 480]

in the politics of the great powers, in order that it might devote itself with undivided energies to the necessities of internal affairs. He actually succeeded in maintaining the peace for many years, even at times when in the petty kingdoms around the spirit of revolt was abroad. The ill success of all attempts elsewhere to shake off the yoke confirmed him in the conviction that Assyria was the rod of chastisement wielded by Jehovah over the nations, who had no alternative but to yield to its iron sway.

While thirty years passed thus peacefully away so far as foreign relations were concerned, internal changes of all the greater importance were taking place. Hezekiah ben Ahaz undertook for the first time a thoroughgoing reformation in the cultus of Jehovah. "He removed the high places, and brake the pillars, and cut down the Ashera, and brake in pieces the brazen serpent that Moses had made;" so we are told in 2 Kings xviii. 4, with a mixture of the general and the special that does not inspire much confidence. For, e.g., the "high places" which Solomon had raised on the Mount of Olives were not removed by Hezekiah, although they stood quite close to Jerusalem, and moreover were consecrated to foreign deities. But in every respect there must have been a wide difference between the objects and results of the reformations of Hezekiah and Josiah. Undoubtedly Hezekiah undertook his reforms in worship under the influence of Isaiah. Following in the footsteps of Hosea, who had been the first to take and to express offence at the use of images in the worship of Jehovah, this prophet, utilising the impression which the destruction of Samaria had produced in Jerusalem (Isa. xvii., cf. Jer. iii.), strove to the utmost against the adoration of the work of men's hands in the holy places, against the Asheras and pillars (sun-pillars), and above all against the ephods, i.e., the idols of silver and gold, of which the land was full. But against the high places in and by themselves, against the multiplicity of the altars of Jehovah, he made no protest. "(In the Messianic time) ye shall loathe and cast away as an unclean thing your graven images with silver coverings and your molten images overlaid with gold," he says (xxx. 22); and the inference is that he contemplated the purification of the high places from superstitious excesses, but by no means their abolition. To this one object [*1]

[p. 481]

[paragraph continues] Hezekiah's reformation seems to have confined itself,--an object of much greater primary importance than the destruction of the altars themselves. Their destruction was a measure which arose simply out of despair of the possibility of cleansing them.

Sargon, king of Assyria, was succeeded in 705 by Sennacherib. The opportunity was seized by Merodach Baladan of Babylon to secure his independence; and by means of an embassy he urged Hezekiah also to throw off the yoke. The proposal was adopted, and the king of Judah was joined by other petty kingdoms, especially some of the Philistine towns. Relations with Egypt were established to secure its support in case of need. Sennacherib's more immediate and pressing business in Babylon enabled Palestine to gain some time; but the issue of that revolt made self-deception impossible as to the probable result of the other movement.

This was the period at which Isaiah, already far advanced in life, wielded his greatest influence. The preparations for revolt, the negotiations with Egypt, were concealed from him,--a proof how greatly he was feared at court. When he came to know of them, it was already too late to undo what had been done. But he could at least give vent to his anger. With Jerusalem, it seemed to him, the story of Samaria was repeating itself; uninstructed by that sad lesson, the capital was giving itself up to the mad intoxication of leaders who would inevitably bring her to ruin. "Quietness and rest" had been the motto given by Jehovah to Judah, powerless as it was and much in need of a period of peace; instead of this, defiance based on ignorance and falsehood expressed the prevailing temper. But those who refused to listen to the intelligible language of Jehovah would be compelled to hear Him speak in Assyrian speech in a way that would deafen and blind them. Isaiah shows himself no less indignant against the crowd that stupidly stared at his excitement than against the God-forsaken folly of the king, with his counsellors, his priests, and his prophets. They do not suffer themselves to be shaken out of their ordinary routine by the gravity of such a crisis as this; the living work of Jehovah is to them a sealed book; their piety does not extend beyond the respect they show for certain human precepts learnt by rote.

Meanwhile Sennacherib, at the head of a great army, was advancing against Philistia and Judah along the Phoenician coast (701). Having captured Ascalon, he next laid siege to Ekron, which, after the combined

[p. 482]

[paragraph continues] Egyptian and Ethiopian army sent to its relief had been defeated at Eltheke, fell into the enemy's hand, and was severely dealt with. Simultaneously various fortresses of Judah were occupied, and the level country was devastated (Isaiah i.). The consequence was that Hezekiah, in a state of panic, offered to the Assyrians his sub-mission, which was accepted on payment of a heavy penalty, he being permitted, however, to retain possession of Jerusalem. He seemed to have got cheaply off from the unequal contest.

The way being thus cleared, Sennacherib pressed on southwards, for the Egyptians were collecting their forces against him. The nearer he came to the enemy the more undesirable did he find it that he should leave in his rear so important a fortress as Jerusalem in the hands of a doubtful vassal. Notwithstanding the recently ratified treaty, therefore, he demanded the surrender of the city, believing that a policy of intimidation would be enough to secure it from Hezekiah. But there was another personality in Jerusalem of whom his plans had taken no account. Isaiah had indeed regarded the revolt from Assyria as a rebellion against Jehovah Himself, and therefore as a perfectly hopeless undertaking which could only result in the utmost humiliation and sternest chastisement for Judah. But still more distinctly than those who had gone before him did he hold firm as an article of faith the conviction that the kingdom would not be utterly annihilated; all his speeches of solemn warning closed with the announcement that a remnant should return and form the kernel of a new commonwealth to be fashioned after Jehovah's own heart. For him, in contrast to Amos, the great crisis had a positive character; in contrast to Hosea, he did not expect a temporary suspension of the theocracy, to be followed by its complete reconstruction, but in the pious and God-fearing individuals who were still to be met with in this Sodom of iniquity, he saw the threads, thin indeed yet sufficient, which formed the links between the Israel of the present and its better future. Over against the vain confidence of the multitude Isaiah had hitherto brought into prominence the darker obverse of his religious belief, but now he confronted their present depression with its bright reverse; faint-heartedness was still more alien to his nature than temerity. In the name of Jehovah he bade King Hezekiah be of good courage, and urged that he should by no means surrender. The Assyrians would not be able to take the city, not even to shoot an arrow into it nor to bring up their siege train

[p. 483]

against it. "I know thy sitting, thy going, and thy standing," is Jehovah's language to the Assyrian, "and also thy rage against me. And I will put my ring in thy nose, and my bridle in thy lips, and I will turn thee back by the way by which thou camest." And thus it proved in the issue. By a still unexplained catastrophe, the main army of Sennacherib was annihilated on the frontier between Egypt and Palestine, and Jerusalem thereby freed from all danger. The Assyrian king had to save himself by a hurried retreat to Nineveh; Isaiah was triumphant. A more magnificent close of a period of influential public life can hardly be imagined.

 What Sennacherib himself relates of his expedition against his rebellious vassals in Palestine (George Smith, Assyrian Eponym Canon, p. 67, 68, 131-136) runs parallel with 2 Kings xviii. 14-16, but not with the rest of the Bible narrative. These three verses are peculiar, and their source is different from that of the context. After having captured various Phoenician cities, and received tribute from a number of kings, his first measure is forcibly to restore the Assyrian governor who had been expelled from Ascalon, and next he turns his arms against Ekron. This city had put in irons its own king, Padi (who remained loyal to the suzerain), and handed him over to Hezekiah, who appears as the soul of the rebellion in these quarters. The Egyptians, who as usual have a hand in the matter, advance with an army for the relief of the beleaguered city, but are defeated near Eltheke in the immediate neighbourhood; Ekron is taken, remorselessly chastised, and forced to take Padi back again as its king. For Hezekiah in the meantime has delivered up his prisoner, and, terrified by the fall of his fortresses and the devastation of his territory, has accepted the position of a vassal once more, paying at the same time a heavy fine, inclusive of 30 talents of gold and 800 of silver. Such is the Assyrian account. If we treat the 300 talents mentioned in 2 Kings xviii. 14 as Syrian (=800 Babylonian), it completely fills in the vague outlines given in 2 Kings xviii. 14-16, and, while confirming in their place immediately after ver. 13 these verses, unrelated as they are to the main connection of the Biblical narrative, corrects them only in one point, by making it probable that the subjection of Hezekiah (which is not equivalent to the surrender of his city) took place while Sennacherib was still before Ekron, and not at later date when he had gone further south towards Libnah. As regards his further advance towards Egypt, and the reasons of his sudden withdrawal (related by Herodotus also from Egyptian tradition), the great king is silent, having nothing to boast of in it. The battle of Eltheke, which is to be regarded only as an episode in the siege of Ekron, being merely the repulse of the Egyptian relieving army, was not an event of great historical importance, and ought not to be brought into any connection either with 2 Kings xix. 7 or with xix. 35; Sennacherib's inscription speaks only of

[p. 484]

the first and prosperous stage of the expedition, not of the decisive one which resulted so disastrously for him, as must be clear from the words themselves to every unprejudiced reader.

Footnotes

^480:1 That is, to the abolition of the images. Jeremiah's polemic is directed no longer against the images, but against wood and stone, i.e., Asheras and pillars. The date of the reformation under Hezekiah is uncertain; perhaps it ought to be placed after Sennacherib's withdrawal from Jerusalem.

      
Prolegomena to the History of Ancient Israel, by Julius Wellhausen, [1885], at sacred-texts.com

  

8. THE PROPHETIC REFORMATION.

ISAIAH was so completely a prophet that even his wife was called the prophetess after him. No such title could have been bestowed on the wife of either Amos or Hosea. But what distinguished him more than anything else from those predecessors was that his position was not, like theirs, apart from the government; he sat close to the helm, and took a very real part in directing the course of the vessel. He was more positive and practical than they; he wished to make his influence felt, and when for the moment he was unsuccessful in this so far as the great whole of the state was concerned, he busied himself in gathering round him a small circle of like-minded persons on whom his hope for the future rested. Now that Israel had been destroyed, he wished at all events to save Judah. The lofty ideality of his faith (ii. 1 seq.) did not hinder him from calling in the aid of practical means for this end. But the current of his activities was by the circumstances of the case directed into a channel in which after his death they continued to flow towards a goal which had hardly been contemplated by himself.

The political importance of the people of Jehovah was reduced to a minimum when Judah only was left. Already at an earlier period in that kingdom the sacred had come to be of more importance than the secular; much more was this the case under the suzerainty of Assyria. The circumstances of the time themselves urged that the religion of Israel should divest itself of all politico-national character; but Isaiah also did his best to further this end. It was his most zealous endeavour to hold king and people aloof from every patriotic movement; to him the true religious attitude was one of quietness and sitting still, non-intervention in political affairs, concentration on the problems of internal government. But he was compelled to leave over for the coming Messiah (xi. 1 seq.) that reformation in legal and social matters which seemed to him so necessary; all that he could bring the secular rulers of his country to undertake was a reform in worship. This was the most easily solved of the problems alluded to above, and it was also that which most closely corresponded to the character of the kingdom of Judah. Thus it came about that the reform of the theocracy which

[p. 485]

had been contemplated by Isaiah led to its transformation into an ecclesiastical state. No less influential in effecting a radical change in the old popular religion was Isaiah's doctrine which identified the true Israel with the holy remnant which alone should emerge from the crisis unconsumed. For that remnant was more than a mere object of hope; it actually stood before him in the persons of that little group of pious individuals gathered around him. Isaiah founded no "ecclesiola in ecclesia" indeed, but certainly an "ecclesia in civitate Dei." Now began that distinction between the true Israel and the Israel according to the flesh, that bipartite division of the nation which became so important in later times. As head and founder of the prophetic party in Judah, Isaiah was, involuntarily, the man who took the first steps towards the institution of the church.

The catastrophe which befell the army of Sennacherib had no very great effect upon the external affairs of Judah. Sennacherib indeed, being busy in the east, was unable to retrieve the loss he had sustained, but his son Esarhaddon, who succeeded him in 681, resumed the Egyptian war with better success. He made himself master of the Nile valley, and brought the Ethiopians into submission. That the petty kingdoms of Palestine returned to the old relations of dependence is to be taken as a matter of course. Judah appears to have resumed the yoke voluntarily, but the Samaritans only after force had been applied; they were afterwards deported, whereupon the deserted country was occupied by foreign colonists, who, however, accepted the cultus of the god of the land.

That Manasseh ben Hezekiah should have again come under Assyrian suzerainty appears at that time to have made but little impression; since the time of Ahaz Judah had been accustomed to this relation. The Book of Kings speaks only of internal affairs under the reign of Manasseh. According to it, he was a bad ruler, who permitted, and even caused, innocent blood to flow like water. But what was of greater consequence for the future, he took up an attitude of hostility towards the prophetic party of reform, and put himself on the side of the reaction which would fain bring back to the place of honour the old popular half-pagan conception of Jehovah, as against the pure and holy God whom the prophets worshipped. The revulsion manifested itself as the reform had done, chiefly in matters of worship. The old idolatrous furniture of the sanctuaries was reinstated in its place, and new

[p. 486]

frippery was imported from all quarters, especially from Assyria and Babylon, to renovate the old religion; with Jehovah was now associated a "queen of heaven." Yet, as usual, the restoration did more than merely bring back the old order of things. What at an earlier period had been mere naivete now became superstition, and could hold its ground only by having imparted to it artificially a deeper meaning which was itself borrowed from the prophetical circle of ideas. Again, earnestness superseded the old joyousness of the cultus; this now had reference principally to sin and its atonement. Value was attached to services rendered to the Deity, just in proportion to their hardness and unnaturalness; at this period it was that the old precept to sacrifice to Jehovah the male that opens the matrix was extended to children. The counter-reformation was far from being unaffected by the preceding reformation, although it understood religious earnestness in quite another sense, and sought, not to eliminate heathenism from the cultus, but to animate it with new life. On the other hand, the reaction was, in the end, found to have left distinct traces of its influence in the ultimate issue of the reformation.

We possess one document dating from Manasseh's time in Micah vi. 1-vii. 6. Here, where the lawlessness and utter disregard of every moral restraint in Judah are set in a hideous light, the prophetic point of view, as contrasted with the new refinements in worship, attains also its simplest and purest expression. Perhaps to this period the Decalogue also, which is so eloquently silent in regard to cultus, is to be assigned. Jehovah demands nothing for Himself, all that He asks is only for men; this is here the fundamental law of the theocracy.

Manasseh's life was a long one, and his son Amon walked in his ways. The latter died after a brief reign, and with his death a new era for Judah began. It was introduced by the great catastrophe in which the Assyrian empire came to an end. The sovereignty of the world was beginning to pass out of the hands of the Semites into those of the Aryans. Phraortes of Media indeed was unsuccessful in his attempt against the Assyrians, but Cyaxares beat them and proceeded to besiege their capital. The Scythian invasion of Media and Western Asia (c. 630) at this juncture gave them another respite of more than twenty years; but even it tended to break in pieces the great, loosely-compacted monarchy.

[p. 487]

[paragraph continues] The provinces became gradually disintegrated, and the kingdom shrivelled up till it covered no more than the land of Asshur. [*1]

The inroad of the Scythians aroused to energy again the voice of prophecy which had been dumb during the very sinful but not very animated period of Manasseh's reign. Zephaniah and Jeremiah threatened with the mysterious northern foe, just as Amos and Hosea had formerly done with the Assyrians. The Scythians actually did invade Palestine in 626 (the 13th year of Josiah), and penetrated as far as to Egypt; but their course lay along the shore line, and they left Judah untouched. This danger that had come so near and yet passed them by, this instance of a prophetic threatening that had come to pass and yet been mercifully averted, made a powerful impression upon the people of Judah; public opinion went through a revolution in favour of the reforming party which was able to gain for itself the support also of the young king Josiah ben Amon. The circumstances were favourable for coming forward with a comprehensive programme for a reconstruction of the theocracy. In the year 621 (the eighteenth of Josiah) Deuteronomy was discovered, accepted, and carried into effect.

The Deuteronomic legislation is designed for the reformation, by no means of the cultus alone, but at least quite as much of the civil relations of life. The social interest is placed above the cultus, inasmuch as everywhere humane ends are assigned for the rites and offerings. In this it is plainly seen that Deuteronomy is the progeny of the prophetic spirit. Still more plainly does this appear in the motifs of the legislation; according to these, Jehovah is the only God, whose service demands the whole heart and every energy; He has entered into a covenant with Israel, but upon fundamental conditions that, as contained in the Decalogue, are purely moral and of absolute universality. Nowhere does the fundamental religious thought of prophecy find clearer expression than in Deuteronomy,--the thought that Jehovah

[p. 488]

asks nothing for Himself, but asks it as a religious duty that man should render to man what is right, that His will lies not in any unknown height, but in the moral sphere which is known and understood by all. [*1]

But the result of the innovation did not correspond exactly to its prophetic origin. Prophecy died when its precepts attained to the force of laws; the prophetic ideas lost their purity when they became practical. Whatever may have been contemplated, only provisional regulations actually admitted of being carried, and even these only in co-operation with the king and the priests, and with due regard to the capacity of the masses. The final outcome of the Deuteronomic reformation was principally that the cultus of Jehovah was limited to Jerusalem and abolished everywhere else,--such was the popular and practical form of prophetic monotheism. The importance of the Salomonic temple was thereby increased in the highest degree, and so also the influence of the priests of Jerusalem, the sons of Zadok, who now in point of fact got rid entirely of their rivals, the priests of the country districts.

Footnotes

^487:1 Our knowledge of the events of the second half of the 7th century has remained singularly imperfect hitherto, notwithstanding the importance of the changes they wrought on the face of the ancient world. The account given above is that of Herodotus (i. 103-106), and there the matter must rest until really authentic sources shall have been brought to light. With regard to the final siege of Nineveh, our chief informant is Ctesias as quoted by Diodorus (ii. 26, 27). Whether the prophecy of Nahum relates to the last siege is doubtful (in spite of ii. 7, and the oracle given in Diodorus, oti ten Ninon oydeis elei kata kratos ean me proteron o potamos tei polei genetai polemios, inasmuch as Nahum (i. 9) expressly speaks of the siege alluded to by him as the first, saying, "the trouble shall not rise up the second time."

^488:1 The commandments which I command thee are not unattainable for thee, neither are they far off; not in heaven so that one might say, Who can climb up into heaven and bring them down, and tell us them that we might do them! not beyond the sea so that one might say, Who shall go over the sea, and fetch them, and tell us them that we might do them!--but the matter lies very near thee, in thy mouth and in thy heart, so that thou canst do it (Deut. xxx. 11-14).

      
Prolegomena to the History of Ancient Israel, by Julius Wellhausen, [1885], at sacred-texts.com

  

9. JEREMIAH AND THE DESTRUCTION OF JERUSALEM.

JOSIAH lived for thirteen years after the accomplishment of his great work. It was a happy period of external and internal prosperity. The nation possessed the covenant, and kept it. It seemed as if the conditions had been attained on which, according to the prophets, the continuance of the theocracy depended; if their threatenings against Israel had been fulfilled, so now was Judah proving itself the heir of their promises. Already in Deuteronomy is the "extension of the frontier" taken into consideration, and Josiah actually put his hand to the task of seeking the attainment of this end.

Jehovah and Israel, religion and patriotism, once more went hand in hand. Jeremiah alone did not suffer himself to be misled by the general feeling. He was a second Amos, upon a higher platform--but, unlike his predecessor, a prophet by profession; his history, like

[p. 489]

[paragraph continues] Isaiah's, is practically the history of his time. In the work of introducing Deuteronomy he had taken an active part, and throughout his life he showed his zeal against unlawful altars and against the adoration of wood and stone (Asheras and pillars). But he was by no means satisfied with the efforts of the reformation that had been effected; nothing appeared to him more sinful or more silly than the false confidence produced by it in Jehovah and in the inviolability of His one true temple. This confidence he maintained to be delusive; Judah was not a whit better than Israel had been, Jerusalem would be destroyed one day like the temple of Shiloh. The external improvements on which the people of Judah prided themselves he held to leave this severe judgment unaffected; what was needed was a quite different sort of change, a change of heart, not very easy positively to define.

An opportunity for showing his opposition presented itself to the prophet at the juncture when King Josiah had fallen at Megiddo in the battle with Pharaoh Necho (608), and when the people were seeking safety and protection by cleaving to Jehovah and His holy temple. At the instance of the priests and the prophets he had almost expiated with his blood the blasphemies he had uttered against the popular belief; but he did not suffer himself to be driven from his course. Even when the times had grown quiet again, he persisted, at the risk of his life and under universal reproach and ridicule, in his work as a prophet of evil. Moments of despair sometimes came to him; but that he had correctly estimated the true value of the great conversion of the nation was speedily proved by the facts. Although Deuteronomy was not formally abolished under Jehoiakim, who as the vassal of Egypt ascended the throne of his father Josiah, nevertheless it ceased to have practical weight, the battle of Megiddo having shown that in spite of the covenant with Jehovah the possibilities of non-success in war remained the same as before. Jehoiakim tended to return to the ways of Manasseh, not only as regarded idolatry, but also in his contempt for law and the private rights of his subjects;--the two things seem to stand in connection.

The course of events at last brought upon the theocracy the visible ruin which Jeremiah had been so long expecting. After the Egyptians had, with comparative ease, subjugated Syria at the time when the Medes and Chaldaeans were busied with the siege of Nineveh, Nebuchadnezzar,

[p. 490]

that task accomplished, came upon them from Babylon and routed them on the Euphrates near Carchemish (605-4). The people of Judah rejoiced at the fall of Nineveh, and also at the result of Carchemish; but they were soon undeceived when the prospect began to open on them of simply exchanging the Egyptian for the Chaldaean yoke. The power of the Chaldaeans had been quite unsuspected, and now it was found that in them the Assyrians had suddenly returned to life. Jeremiah was the only man who gained any credit by these events. His much ridiculed "enemy out of the north," of whom he had of old been wont to speak so much, now began to be talked of with respect, although his name was no longer "the Scythian" but "the Babylonian." It was an epoch,--the close of an account which balanced in his favour. Therefore it was that precisely at this moment he received the Divine command to commit to writing that which for twenty-three years he had been preaching, and which, ever pronounced impossible, had now showed itself so close at hand.

After the victory of Carchemish the Chaldaeans drove Pharaoh out of Syria, and also compelled the submission of Jehoiakim (c. 602). For three years he continued to pay his tribute, and then he withheld it; a mad passion for liberty, kindled by religious fanaticism, had begun to rage with portentous power amongst the influential classes, the grandees, the priests, and the prophets. Nebuchadnezzar satisfied himself in the first instance with raising against Judah several of the smaller nationalities around, especially the Edomites; not till 597 did he appear in person before Jerusalem. The town was compelled to yield; the more important citizens were carried into exile, amongst them the young king Jechoniah, son of Jehoiakim, who had died in the interval; Zedekiah ben Josiah was made king in his stead over the remnant left behind. The patriotic fanaticism that had led to the revolt was not broken even by this blow. Within four years afterwards new plans of liberation began to be again set on foot; but on this occasion the influence of Jeremiah proved strong enough to avert the danger. But when a definite prospect of help from Pharaoh Hophra (Apries) presented itself in 589, the craving for independence proved quite irrepressible. Revolt was declared; and in a very short time the Chaldaean army, with Nebuchadnezzar at its head, lay before Jerusalem. For a while everything seemed to move prosperously; the Egyptians came to the rescue, and the Chaldaeans were compelled to raise the

[p. 491]

siege in order to cope with them. At this there was great joy in Jerusalem; but Jeremiah continued to express his gloomy views. The event proved that he was right; the Egyptians were repulsed and the siege resumed. The city was bent on obstinate resistance; in vain did Jeremiah, at continual risk of his life, endeavour to bring it to reason. The king, who agreed with the prophet, did not venture to assert his opinion against the dominant terrorism. The town in these circumstances was at last taken by storm, and along with the temple, reduced to ruins. Cruel vengeance was taken on the king and grandees, and the pacification of the country was ensured by another and larger deportation of the inhabitants to Babylon. Thus terminated in 586 the kingdom of Judah.

The prophets had been the spiritual destroyers of the old Israel. In old times the nation had been the ideal of religion in actual realisation; the prophets confronted the nation with an ideal to which it did not correspond. Then to bridge over this interval the abstract ideal was framed into a law, and to this law the nation was to be conformed. The attempt had very important consequences, inasmuch as Jehovah continued to be a living power in the law, when He was no longer realised as present in the nation; but that was not what the prophets had meant to effect. What they were unconsciously labouring towards was that religious individualism which had its historical source in the national downfall, and manifested itself not exclusively within the prophetical sphere. With such men as Amos and Hosea the moral personality based upon an inner conviction burst through the limits of mere nationality; their mistake was in supposing that they could make their way of thinking the basis of a national life. Jeremiah saw through the mistake; the true Israel was narrowed to himself. Of the truth of his conviction he never had a moment's doubt; he knew that Jehovah was on his side, that on Him depended the eternal future. But, instead of the nation, the heart and the individual conviction were to him the subject of religion. On the ruins of Jerusalem he gazed into the future filled with joyful hope, sure of this that Jehovah would one day pardon past sin and renew the relation which had been broken off-though on the basis of another covenant than that laid down in Deuteronomy. "I will put my law upon their heart, and write it on their mind; none shall say to his neighbour, Know the Lord, for all shall have that knowledge within them."

      
Prolegomena to the History of Ancient Israel, by Julius Wellhausen, [1885], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 492]

  

10. THE CAPTIVITY AND THE RESTORATION.

THE exiled Jews were not scattered all over Chaldaea, but were allowed to remain together in families and clans. Many of them, notwithstanding this circumstance, must have lapsed and become merged in the surrounding heathenism; but many also continued faithful to Jehovah and to Israel. They laboured under much depression and sadness, groaning under the wrath of Jehovah, who had rejected His people and cancelled His covenant. They were lying under a sort of vast interdict; they could not celebrate any sacrifice or keep any feast; they could only observe days of fasting and humiliation, and such rites as had no inseparable connection with the holy land. The observance of the Sabbath, and the practice of the rite of circumcision, acquired much greater importance than they formerly possessed as signs of a common religion. The meetings on the Sabbath day out of which the synagogues were afterwards developed appear to have first come into use during this period; perhaps also even then it had become customary to read aloud from the prophetic writings which set forth that all had happened in the providence of God, and moreover that the days of adversity were not to last for ever.

Matters improved somewhat as Cyrus entered upon his victorious career. Was he the man in whom the Messianic prophecies had found their fulfilment? The majority were unwilling to think so. For it was out of Israel (they argued) that the Messiah was to proceed who should establish the kingdom of God upon the ruins of the kingdoms of the world; the restitution effected by means of a Persian could only be regarded as a passing incident in the course of an historical process that had its goal entirely elsewhere. This doubt was met by more than one prophetical writer, and especially by the great anonymous author to whom we are indebted for Isa. xl.-lxvi. "Away with sorrow; deliverance is at the door! Is it a humiliating thing that Israel should owe its freedom to a Persian? Nay, is it not rather a proof of the world-wide sway of the God of Jacob that He should thus summon His instruments from the ends of the earth? Who else than Jehovah could have thus sent Cyrus? Surely not the false gods which he has destroyed? Jehovah alone it was who foretold and foreknew the things which are now coming to pass,--because long ago He had prearranged and predetermined them, and they are now being executed in accordance

[p. 493]

with his plan. Rejoice therefore in the prospect of your near deliverance; prepare yourselves for the new era; gird yourselves for the return to your homes." It is to be observed, as characteristic in this prophecy, how the idea of Jehovah as God alone and God over all--in constantly recurring lyrical parenthesis he is praised as the author of the world and of all nature--is yet placed in positive relation to Israel alone, and that upon the principle that Israel is in exclusive possession of the universal truth, which cannot perish with Israel, but must through the instrumentality of Israel, become the common possession of the whole world. "There is no God but Jehovah, and Israel is his prophet."

For many years the Persian monarch put the patience of the Jews to the proof; Jehovah's judgment upon the Chaldaeans, instead of advancing, seemed to recede. At length, however, their hopes were realised; in the year 538 Cyrus brought the empire of Babylon to an end, and gave the exiles leave to seek their fatherland once more. This permission was not made use of by all, or even by a majority. The number of those who returned is stated at 42,360; whether women and children are included in this figure is uncertain. On arriving at their destination, after the difficult march through the desert, they did not spread themselves over the whole of Judah, but settled chiefly in the neighbourhood of Jerusalem. The Calebites, for example, who previously had had their settlements in and around Hebron, now settled in Bethlehem and in the district of Ephrath. They found it necessary to concentrate themselves in face of a threatened admixture of doubtful elements. From all sides people belonging to the surrounding nations had pressed into the depopulated territory of Judah. Not only had they annexed the border territories--where, for example, the Edomites or Idumaeans held the whole of the Negeb as far as to Hebron; they had effected lodgments everywhere, and--as the Ammonites, Ashdodites, and especially the Samaritans--had amalgamated with the older Jewish population, a residue of which had remained in the country in spite of all that had happened. These half-breed "pagani" (Amme haarec, oxloi) gave a friendly reception to the returning exiles (Bne haggola); particularly did the Samaritans show themselves anxious to make common cause with them. But they were met with no reciprocal cordiality. The lesson of religious isolation which the children of the captivity had learned in Babylon, they did not forget on their return to

[p. 494]

their home. Here also they lived as in a strange land. Not the native of Judaea, but the man who could trace his descent from the exiles in Babylon, was reckoned as belonging to their community.

The first decennia after the return of the exiles, during which they were occupied in adjusting themselves to their new homes, were passed under a variety of adverse circumstances and by no means either in joyousness or security. Were these then the Messianic times which, it had been foretold, were to dawn at the close of their captivity? They did not at all events answer the expectations which had been formed. A settlement had been again obtained, it was true, in the fatherland; but the Persian yoke pressed now more heavily than ever the Babylonian had done. The sins of God's people seemed still unforgiven, their period of bond-service not yet at an end. A slight improvement, as is shown by the prophecies of Haggai and Zechariah, followed when in the year 520 the obstacles disappeared which until then had stood in the way of the rebuilding of the temple; the work then begun was completed in 516. Inasmuch as the Jews were now nothing more than a religious community, based upon the traditions of a national existence that had ceased, the rebuilding of the temple, naturally, was for them an event of supreme importance.

The law of the new theocracy was the Book of Deuteronomy; this was the foundation on which the structure was to be built. But the force of circumstances, and the spirit of the age, had even before and during the exile exerted a modifying influence upon that legislative code; and it continued to do so still. At first a "son of David" had continued to stand at the head of the Bne haggola, but this last relic of the old monarchy soon had to give way to a Persian governor who was under the control of the satrap of trans-Euphratic Syria, and whose principal business was the collection of revenue. Thenceforward the sole national chief was Joshua the high priest, on whom, accordingly, the political representation also of the community naturally devolved. In the circumstances as they then were no other arrangement was possible. The way had been paved for it long before in so far as the Assyrians had destroyed the kingdom of Israel, while in the kingdom of Judah which survived it the religious cultus had greater importance attached to it than political affairs, and also inasmuch as in point of fact the practical issue of the prophetic reformation sketched in Deuteronomy had been to make the temple the national centre still

[p. 495]

more than formerly. The hierocracy towards which Ezekiel had already opened the way was simply inevitable. It took the form of a monarchy of the high priest, he having stepped into the place formerly occupied by the theocratic king. As his peers and at his side stood the members of his clan, the Levites of the old Jerusalem, who traced their descent from Zadok (Sadduk); the common Levites held a much lower rank, so far as they had maintained their priestly rank at all and had not been degraded, in accordance with Ezekiel's law (chap. xliv.), to the position of mere temple servitors. "Levite," once the title of honour bestowed on all priests, became more and more confined to members of the second order of the clergy.

Meanwhile no improvement was taking place in the condition of the Jewish colonists. They were poor; they had incurred the hostility of their neighbours by their exclusiveness; the Persian Government was suspicious; the incipient decline of the great kingdom was accompanied with specially unpleasant consequences so far as Palestine was concerned (Megabyzus). All this naturally tended to produce in the community a certain laxity and depression. To what purpose (it was asked) all this religious strictness, which led to so much that was unpleasant? Why all this zeal for Jehovah, who refused to be mollified by it? It is a significant fact that the upper ranks of the priesthood were least of all concerned to counteract this tendency. Their priesthood was less to them than the predominance which was based upon it; they looked upon the neighbouring ethnarchs as their equals, and maintained relations of friendship with them. The general community was only following their example when it also began to mingle with the Amme haarec.

The danger of Judaism merging into heathenism was imminent. But it was averted by a new accession from without. In the year 458 Ezra the scribe, with a great number of his compatriots, set out from Babylon, for the purpose of reinforcing the Jewish element in Palestine. The Jews of Babylon were more happily situated than their Palestinian brethren, and it was comparatively easy for them to take up a separatist attitude, because they were surrounded by heathenism not partial but entire. They were no great losers from the circumstance that they were precluded from participating directly in the life of the ecclesiastical community; the Torah had long ago become separated from the people, and was now an independent abstraction following a career of

[p. 496]

its own. Babylonia was the place where a further codification of the law had been placed alongside of Deuteronomy. Ezekiel had led the way in reducing to theory and to writing the sacred praxis of his time; in this he was followed by an entire school; in their exile the Levites turned scribes. Since then Babylon continued to be the home of the Torah; and, while in Palestine itself the practice was becoming laxer, their literary study had gradually intensified the strictness and distinctive peculiarities of Judaism. And now there came to Palestine a Babylonian scribe having the law of his God in his hand, and armed with authority from the Persian king to proceed upon the basis of this law with a reformation of the community.

Ezra did not set about introducing the new law immediately on his arrival in Judaea In the first instance he concentrated his attention on the task of effecting a strict separation between the Bne haggola and the heathen or half-heathen inhabitants. So much he could accomplish upon the basis of Deuteronomy, but it was long before he gave publicity to the law which he himself had brought. Why he hesitated so long it is impossible to say; between the seventh and the twentieth year of Artaxerxes Longimanus (458-445 B.C.) there is a great hiatus in the narrative of the books of Ezra and Nehemiah. The main reason appears to have been that, in spite of the good will of the Persian king, Ezra had not the vigorous support of the local authorities. But this was indispensably necessary in order to secure recognition for a new law.

At last, in 445, it fell to the lot of a Jew, who also shared the views of Ezra, Nehemiah ben Hakkelejah, [*1] the cupbearer and the favourite of Artaxerxes, to be sent as Persian governor to Judaea. After he had freed the community from external pressure with vigour and success, and brought it into more tolerable outward circumstances, the business of introducing the new law-book was next proceeded with; in this Ezra and Nehemiah plainly acted in concert.

On the first of Tisri--the year is unfortunately not given, but it cannot have been earlier than 444 B.C.--the promulgation of the law began at a great gathering in Jerusalem; Ezra, supported by the Levites, was present. Towards the end of the month, the concluding act took place, in which the community became solemnly bound by the contents

[p. 497]

of the law. Special prominence was given to those provisions with which the people were directly concerned, particularly those which related to the dues payable by the laity to the priests.

The covenant which hitherto had rested on Deuteronomy was thus expanded into a covenant based upon the entire Pentateuch. Substantially at least Ezra's law-book, in the form in which it became the Magna Charta of Judaism in or about the year 444, must be regarded as practically identical with our Pentateuch, although many minor amendments and very considerable additions may have been made at a later date.

The character of the post-Deuteronomic legislation (Priestly Code) is chiefly marked, in its external aspects, by the immense extension of the dues payable to the priests, and by the sharp distinction made between the descendants of Aaron and the common Levites; this last feature is to be traced historically to the circumstance that after the Deuteronomic reformation the legal equality between the Levites who until then had ministered at the "high places" and the priests of the temple at Jerusalem was not de facto recognised. Internally, it is mainly characterised by its ideal of Levitical holiness, the way in which it everywhere surrounds life with purificatory and propitiatory ceremonies, and its prevailing reference of sacrifice to sin. Noteworthy also is the manner in which everything is regarded from the point of view of Jerusalem, a feature which comes much more boldly into prominence here than in Deuteronomy; the nation and the temple are strictly speaking identified. That externalisation towards which the prophetical movement, in order to become practical, had already been tending in Deuteronomy finally achieved its acme in the legislation of Ezra; a new artificial Israel was the result; but, after all, the old would have pleased an Amos better. At the same time it must be remembered that the kernel needed a shell. It was a necessity that Judaism should incrust itself in this manner; without those hard and ossified forms the preservation of its essential elements would have proved impossible. At a time when all nationalities, and at the same time all bonds of religion and national customs, were beginning to be broken up in the seeming cosmos and real chaos of the Graeco-Roman empire, the Jews stood out like a rock in the midst of the ocean. When the natural conditions of independent nationality all failed them, they nevertheless artificially maintained it with an energy truly marvellous, and thereby

[p. 498]

preserved for themselves, and at the same time for the whole world, an eternal good.

As regards the subsequent history of the Jewish community under the Persian domination, we have almost no information. The high priest in Nehemiah's time was Eliashib, son of Joiakim and grandson of Joshua, the patriarchal head of the sons of Zadok, who had returned from Babylon; he was succeeded in the direct line by Joiada, Johanan, and Jaddua (Neh. xii. 10, 11, 22); the last-named was in office at the time of Alexander the Great (Josephus, Ant., xi. 8). Palestine was the province which suffered most severely of all from the storms which marked the last days of the sinking Persian empire, and it is hardly likely that the Jews escaped their force; we know definitely, however, of only one episode, in which the Persian general Bagoses interfered in a disagreeable controversy about the high-priesthood (cir. 375).

To this period also (and not, as Josephus states, to the time of Alexander) belongs the constitution of the Samaritan community on an independent footing by Manasseh, a Jewish priest of rank. He was expelled from Jerusalem by Nehemiah in 432, for refusing to separate from his alien wife. He took shelter with his father-in-law Sanballat, the Samaritan prince, who built him a temple on Mount Gerizim near Shechem, where he organised a Samaritan church and a Samaritan worship, on the Jerusalem model, and on the basis of a but slightly modified Jerusalem Pentateuch. If the Samaritans had hitherto exerted, themselves to the utmost to obtain admission into the fellowship of the Jews, they henceforward were as averse to have anything to do with these as these were to have any dealings with them; the temple on Mount Gerizim was now the symbol of their independence as a distinct religious sect. For the Jews this was a great advantage, as they had no longer to dread the danger of syncretism. They could now quite confidently admit the Amme haarec into their communion, in the assurance of assimilating them without any risk of the opposite process taking place. The Judaizing process began first with the country districts immediately surrounding Jerusalem, and then extended to Galilee and many portions of Peraea. In connection with it, the Hebrew language, which hitherto had been firmly retained by the Bne haggola, now began to yield to the Aramaic, and to hold its own only as a sacred speech.

Footnotes

^496:1 According to the present punctuation this name is Hakalja (Hachaljah), but such a pronunciation is inadmissible; it has no possible etymology, the language having no such word as hakal. The name in its correct form means "Wait upon Jehovah."

      
Prolegomena to the History of Ancient Israel, by Julius Wellhausen, [1885], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 499]

  

11. JUDAISM AND CHRISTIANITY.

THE post-Deuteronomic legislation is not addressed to the people, but to the congregation; its chief concern is the regulation of worship. Political matters are not touched upon, as they are in the hands of a foreigner lord. The hierocracy is taken for granted as the constitution of the congregation. The head of the cultus is the head of the whole; the high priest takes the place of the king. The other priests, though his brothers or his sons, are officially subordinate to him, as bishops to the supreme pontiff. They, again, are distinguished from the Levites not only by their office but also by their noble blood, though the Levites belong by descent to the clergy, of which they form the lowest grade. The material basis of the hierarchical pyramid is furnished by the contributions of the laity, which are required on a scale which cannot be called modest. Such is the outward aspect of the rule of the holy in Israel. Inwardly, the ideal of holiness governs the whole of life by means of a net of ceremonies and observances which separate the Jew from the natural man. "Holy" means almost the same as "exclusive." Originally the term was equivalent to divine, but now it is used chiefly in the sense of religious, priestly, as if the divine were to be known from the worldly, the natural, by outward marks.

It had so fallen out, even before the exile, that the reform of the theocracy which the prophets demanded began in the cultus; and after the exile this tendency could not fail to be persisted in. The restoration of Judaism took place in the form of a restoration of the cultus. Yet this restoration was not a relapse into the heathen ways which the prophets had attacked. The old meaning of the festivals and of the sacrifices had long faded away, and after the interruption of the exile they would scarcely have blossomed again of themselves; they had become simply statutes, unexplained commands of an absolute will. The cultus had no longer any real value for the Deity; it was valuable only as an exercise of obedience to the law. If it had been at first the bond connecting Israel with heathenism, now, on the contrary, it was the shield behind which Judaism retreated to be safe from heathenism. There was no other means to make Judaism secure; and the cultus was nothing more than a means to that end. It was the shell around the faith and practice of the fathers, around the religion of moral monotheism, which it alone preserved until it could become the

[p. 500]

common property of the world. The great public worship gave the new theocracy a firm centre, thus keeping it one and undivided, and helped it to an organisation. But of more importance was the minor private cultus of pious exercises, which served to Judaize the whole life of every individual. For the centre of gravity of Judaism was in the individual. Judaism was gathered from scattered elements, and it depended on the labour of the individual to make himself a Jew. This is the secret of the persistence of Judaism, even in the diaspora. The initiatory act of circumcision, which conferred an indelible character, was not the only safeguard; the whole of the education which followed that act went to guard against the disintegrating effects of individualism. This is the real significance of the incessant discipline, which consisted mainly in the observance of laws of purity and generally of regulations devised to guard against sin. For what holiness required was not to do good, but to avoid sin. By the sin and trespass offerings, and by the great day of atonement, this private cultus was connected with that of the temple; hence it was that all these institutions fitted so admirably into the system. The whole of life was directed in a definite sacred path; every moment there was a divine command to fulfil, and this kept a man from following too much the thoughts and desires of his own heart. The Jews trained themselves with an earnestness and zeal which have no parallel to create, in the absence of all natural conditions, a holy nation which should answer to the law, the concrete embodiment of the ideals of the prophets.

In the individualism thus moulded into uniformity lay the chief difference which separated the new period from the old. The aim was universal culture by the law, that the prophecy should be fulfilled which says: "They shall all be taught of God." This universal culture was certainly of a peculiar kind, and imposed more troublesome observances than the culture of our day. Yet the strange duties which the law imposed were not universally felt to be a heavy burden. Precepts which were plain and had to do with something outward were very capable of being kept; the harder they seemed at first, the easier were they when the habit had been formed. A man saw that he was doing what was prescribed, and did not ask what was the use of it. The ever-growing body of regulations even came to be felt as a sort of emancipation from self. Never had the individual felt himself so responsible for all he did and left undone, but the responsibility was oppressive, and it was well

[p. 501]

that there should be a definite precept for every hour of his life, thus diminishing the risk of his going astray. Nor must we forget that the Torah contained other precepts than those which were merely ceremonial. The kernel did not quite harden into wood inside the shell; we must even acknowledge that moral sentiment gained very perceptibly in this period both in delicacy and in power. This also is connected with the fact that religion was not, as before, the custom of the people, but the work of the individual. A further consequence of this was, that men began to reflect upon religion. The age in question saw the rise of the so-called "Wisdom," of which we possess examples in the Book of Job, in the Proverbs of Solomon and of the Son of Sirach, and in Ecclesiastes. This wisdom flourished not only in Judah, but also at the same time in Edom; it had the universalistic tendency which is natural to reflection. The Proverbs of Solomon would scarcely claim attention had they arisen on Greek or Arabian soil; they are remarkable in their pale generality only because they are of Jewish origin. In the Book of Job, a problem of faith is treated by Syrians and Arabians just as if they were Jews. In Ecclesiastes religion abandons the theocratic ground altogether, and becomes a kind of philosophy in which there is room even for doubt and unbelief. Speculation did not on the whole take away from depth of feeling; on the contrary, individualism helped to make religion more intense. This is seen strikingly in the Psalms, which are altogether the fruit of this period. Even the sacrificial practice of the priests was made subjective, being incorporated in the Torah, i.e., made a matter for every one to learn. Though the laity could not take part in the ceremony, they were at least to be thoroughly informed in all the minutiae of the system; the law was a means of interesting every one in the great public sacrificial procedure. Another circumstance also tended to remove the centre of gravity of the temple service from the priests to the congregation. The service of song, though executed by choirs of singers, was yet in idea the song of the congregation, and came to be of more importance than the acts of worship which it accompanied and inspired. The Holy One of Israel sat enthroned, not on the smoke-pillars of the altar, but in the praises of the congregation pouring out its heart in prayer; the sacrifices were merely the external occasion for visiting the temple, the real reason for doing so lay in the need for the strength and refreshment to be found in religious fellowship.

[p. 502]

By the Torah religion came to be a thing to be learned. Hence the need of teachers in the church of the second temple. As the scribes had codified the Torah, it was also their task to imprint it on the minds of the people and to fill their life with it; in this way they at the same time founded a supplementary and changing tradition, which kept pace with the needs of the time. The place of teaching was the synagogue; there the law and the prophets were read and explained on the Sabbath. The synagogue and the Sabbath were of more importance than the temple and the festivals; and the moral influence of the scribes transcended that of the priests, who had to be content with outward power and dignity. The rule of religion was essentially the rule of the law, and consequently the Rabbis at last served themselves heirs to the hierarchs. At the same time, while the government of the law was acknowledged in principle, it could at no time be said to be even approximately realised in fact. The high-born priests who stood at the head of the theocracy, cared chiefly, as was quite natural, for the maintenance of their own supremacy. And there were sheep in the flock not to be kept from breaking out, both in the upper and in the lower classes of society; the school could not suppress nature altogether. It was no trifle even to know the six hundred and thirteen commandments of the written law, and the incalculable number of the unwritten. Religion had to be made a profession of, if it was to be practiced aright. It became an art, and thereby at the same time a matter of party:, the leaders of the religious were of course the scribes. The division became very apparent in the time of the Hellenization which preceded the Maccabaean revolt; at that period the name of Pharisees, i.e., the Separated, came into vogue for the party of the religious. But the separation and antipathy between the godly and the ungodly had existed before this, and had marked the life of the congregation after the exile from the very first.

It was the law that gave the Jewish religion its peculiar character. But, on the other hand, a hope was not wanting to that religion; the Jews cherished the prospect of a reward for the fulfilling of the law. This hope attached itself to the old prophecies, certainly in a very fantastic way. The Jews had no historical life, and therefore painted the old time according to their ideas, and framed the time to come according to their wishes. They stood in no living relation with either the past or the future; the present was not with them a bridge from the

[p. 503]

one to the other; they did not think of bestirring themselves with a view to the kingdom of God. They had no national and historical existence, and made no preparations to procure such a thing for themselves; they only hoped for it as a reward of faithful keeping of the law. Yet they dreamed not only of a restoration of the old kingdom, but of the erection of a universal world-monarchy, which should raise its head at Jerusalem over the ruins of the heathen empires. They regarded the history of the world as a great suit between themselves and the heathen. In this suit they were in the right; and they waited for right to be done them. If the decision was delayed, their sins were the reason; Satan was accusing them before the throne of God, and causing the judgment to be postponed. They were subjected to hard trials, and if tribulation revived their hopes, with much greater certainty did it bring their sins into sorrowful remembrance. Outward circumstances still influenced in the strongest way their religious mood.

But the old belief in retribution which sought to justify itself in connection with the fortunes of the congregation proved here also unequal to the strain laid upon it. Even in Deuteronomy it is maintained that the race is not to suffer for the act of an individual. Jeremiah's contemporaries thought it monstrous that because the fathers had eaten sour grapes the teeth of the children should be set on edge. Ezekiel championed in a notable way the cause of individualism on this ground. He denounced the Jews who had remained in Palestine, and who regarded themselves as the successors of the people of Jehovah because they dwelt in the Holy Land and had maintained some sort of existence as a people. In his view only those souls which were saved from the dispersion of the exile were to count as heirs of the promise; the theocracy was not to be perpetuated by the nation, but by the individual righteous men. He maintained that each man lived because of his own righteousness, and died because of his own wickedness; nay more, the fate of the individual corresponded even in its fluctuations to his moral worth at successive times. The aim he pursued in this was a good one; in view of a despair which thought there was nothing for it but to pine and rot away because of former sins, he was anxious to maintain the freedom of the will, i.e., the possibility of repentance and forgiveness. But the way he chose for this end was not a good one; on his showing it was chance which ultimately decided who was good and who was wicked. The old view

[p. 504]

of retribution which allowed time for judgment to operate far beyond the limit of the individual life had truth in it, but this view had none. Yet it possessed one merit, that it brought up a problem which had to be faced, and which was a subject of reflection for a long time afterwards.

The problem assumed the form of a controversy as to the principle on which piety was rewarded--this controversy taking the place of the great contest between Israel and the heathen. Were the wicked right in saying that there was no God, i.e., that He did not rule and judge on earth? Did He in truth dwell behind the clouds, and did He not care about the doings of men? In that case piety would be an illusion. Piety cannot maintain itself if God makes no difference between the godly and the wicked, and has nothing more to say to the one than to the other; for piety is not content to stretch out its hands to the empty air, it must meet an arm descending from heaven. It must have a reward, not for the sake of the reward, but in order to be sure of its own reality, in order to know that there is a communion of God with men and a road which leads to it. The usual form of this reward is the forgiveness of sins; that is the true motive of the fear of God. That is to say, as long as it is well with him, the godly man does not doubt, and so does not require any unmistakable evidence by which he may be justified and assured of the favour of God. But misfortune and pain destroy this certainty. They are accusers of sin, God's warnings and corrections. Now is the time to hold fast the faith that God leads the godly to repentance, and destroys the wicked, that He forgives the sin of the former, but punishes and avenges that of the latter. But this faith involves a hope of living to see better things; the justification of which the good man is sure must at last be attested by an objective judgment of God before the whole world, and the godly delivered from his sufferings. Hence the constant anxiety and restlessness of his conscience; the judgment passed upon him is ultimately to be gathered from the external world, and he can never be sure how it is to turn out. And a principle is also at stake the whole time, namely, the question whether godliness or ungodliness is right in its fundamental conviction. Each individual case at once affects the generality, the sufferings of one godly person touch all the godly. When he recovers and is saved, they triumph; when he succumbs, or seems to succumb, to death, they are cast down, unless in this case they should change their

[p. 505]

minds about him and hold him to be a hypocrite whom God has judged and unmasked. In the same way, they are all hurt at the prosperity of an ungodly man, and rejoice together at his fall, not from jealousy or pleasure in misfortune for its own sake, but because in the one case their faith is overturned, while in the other it is confirmed.

The tortures incident to this curious oscillation between believing and seeing are set forth in the most trenchant way in the Book of Job. Job, placed in an agonizing situation, condemned without hope to the death of sinners, and yet conscious of his godliness, demands vengeance for his blood unjustly shed. But the vengeance is to be executed on God, and in such a case who can be the avenger? There is no one but God Himself, and thus the striking thought arises, that God will be the champion against God of his innocence, after having first murdered it. From the God of the present he appeals to the God of the future; but the identity between these two is yet maintained, and even now the God who slays him is the sole witness of his innocence, in which the world and his friends have ceased to believe. God must be this now if He is to avenge him in the future. An inner antinomy is in this way impersonated; the view of the friends is one of which the sufferer himself cannot divest himself; hence the conflict in his soul. But, supported by the unconquerable power of his good conscience, he struggles till he frees himself from the delusion; he believes more firmly in the direct testimony of his conscience than in the evidence of facts and the world's judgment about him, and against the dreadful God of reality, the righteous God of faith victoriously asserts Himself.

Job in the end reaches the conclusion that he cannot understand God's ways. This is a negative expression of the position that he holds fast, in spite of all, to himself and to God; that is to say, that not outward experience, but inner feeling, is to decide. This inner feeling of the union of God with the godly meets us also in some of the Psalms, where, in spite of depression arising from untoward circumstances, it maintains itself as a reality which cannot be shaken, which temptations and doubts even tend to strengthen. It was a momentous step when the soul in its relations to God ventured to take its stand upon itself, to trust itself. This was an indirect product of prophecy, but one of not less importance than its direct product, the law. The prophets declared the revelation of God, which had authority for all, but along with this they had their own personal experience, and the subjective truth of

[p. 506]

which they thus became aware proved a more powerful solvent and emancipator than the objective one which formed the subject of their revelation. They preached the law to deaf ears, and laboured in vain to convert the people. But if their labour had produced no outward result, it had an inner result for them. Rejected by the people, they clung the more closely to Jehovah, in the conviction that the defeated cause was favoured by Him, that He was with them and not with the people. Especially with Jeremiah did prophecy, which is designed primarily to act on others, transform itself into an inner converse with the Deity, which lifted him above all the annoyances of his life. In this relation, however, there was nothing distinctively prophetical, just because it was a matter of the inner life alone, and was sufficient for itself; it was just the essence of the life of religion that the prophets thus brought to view and helped to declare itself. The experience of Jeremiah propagated itself and became the experience of religious Israel. This was the power by which Israel was enabled to rise again after every fall; the good conscience towards God, the profound sentiment of union with Him, proved able to defy all the blows of outward fortune. In this strength the servant, despised and slain, triumphed over the world; the broken and contrite heart was clothed and set on high with the life and power of the Almighty God. This divine spirit of assurance rises to its boldest expression in the 73rd Psalm: "Nevertheless I am continually with Thee; Thou holdest me by my right hand; Thou guidest me with Thy counsel, and drawest me after Thee by the hand. If I have Thee, I desire not heaven nor earth; if my flesh and my heart fail, Thou, God, art for ever the strength of my heart, and my portion."

The life surrendered is here found again in a higher life, without any expression of hope of a hereafter. In the Book of Job we do indeed find a trace of this hope, in the form that even after the death of the martyr, God may still find opportunity to justify him and pronounce him innocent; yet this idea is only touched on as a distant possibility, and is at once dropped. Certainly the position of that man is a grand one who can cast into the scale against death and devil his inner certainty of union with God--so grand indeed that we must in honesty be ashamed to repeat those words of the 73d Psalm. But the point of view is too high. The danger was imminent of falling from it down into the dust and seeking comfort and support in the first earthly experience

[p. 507]

that might offer, or, on the other hand, sinking into despair. Subjective feeling was not enough of itself to outbid the contradictions of nature; the feeling must take an objective form, a world other than this one, answering the demands of morality, must build itself up to form a contrast to the world actually existing. The merit of laying the foundations for this religious metaphysic which the time called for belongs, if not to the Pharisees themselves, at least to the circles from which they immediately proceeded. The main features of that metaphysic first appear in the Book of Daniel, where we find a doctrine of the last things. We have already spoken of the transition from the old prophecy to apocalypse. With the destruction of the nation and the cessation of historical life, hope was released from all obligation to conform to historical conditions; it no longer set up an aim to which even the present might aspire, but ran riot after an ideal, at the advent of which the historical development would be suddenly broken off. To be pious was all the Jews could do at the time; but it caused them bitter regret that they had no part in the government of the world, and in thought they anticipated the fulfilment of their wishes. These they raised to an ever-higher pitch in proportion as their antagonism to the heathen became more pronounced, and as the world became more hostile to them and they to the world. As the heathen empires stood in the way of the universal dominion of Israel, the whole of them together were regarded as one power, and this world-empire was then set over against the kingdom of God, i.e., of Israel. The kingdom of God was entirely future; the fulfilling of the law did not prepare the way for it, but was only a statutory condition for its coming, not related to it inwardly as cause to effect. History was suddenly to come to a stop and cease. The Jews counted the days to the judgment; the judgment was the act by which God would at once realise all their wishes. The view thus taken of the world's history was a very comprehensive one and well worked out from its principle, yet of an entirely negative character; the further the world's history went wilfully away from its goal, the nearer did it unintentionally approach its goal. In this view, moreover, the earth always continued to be the place of hope; the kingdom of God was brought by the judgment into earthly history; it was on earth that the ideal was to be realised. A step further, and the struggle of the dualism of the earth was preluded in the skies by the angels, as the representatives of the different powers and nations. In this struggle a place was assigned to Satan; at first he

[p. 508]

was merely the accuser whom God Himself had appointed, and in this character he drew attention to the sins of the Jews before God's judgment-seat, and thereby delayed the judicial sentence in their favour; but ultimately (though this took place late, and is not met with in the Book of Daniel) he came to be the independent leader of the power opposed to God, God's cause being identified with that of the Jews. But as this prelude of the struggle took place in heaven, its result was also anticipated. The kingdom of God is on earth a thing of the future, but even now it is preserved in heaven with all its treasures, one day to descend from there to the earth. Heaven is the place where the good things of the future are kept, which are not and yet must be; that is its original and true signification. But the most important question came at last to be, how individuals were to have part in the glory of the future? How was it with the martyrs who had died in the expectation of the kingdom of God, before it came? The doctrine of the zakuth was formed: if their merit was not of service to themselves, it was yet of service to others. But this was a solution with which individualism could not rest content. And what of the ungodly? Were they to escape from wrath because they died before the day of judgment? It was necessary that the departed also should be allowed to take some part in the coming retribution. Thus there arose--it is remarkable how late and how slowly--the doctrine of the resurrection of the dead, that the kingdom of God might not be of service only to those who happened to be alive at the judgment. Yet at first this doctrine was only used to explain particularly striking cases. The Book of Daniel says nothing of a general resurrection, but speaks in fact only of a resurrection of the martyrs and a punishment of the wicked after death. With all this the resurrection is not the entrance to a life above the earth but to a second earthly life, to a world in which it is no longer the heathen but the Jews who bear rule and take the lead. Of a general judgment at the last day, or of heaven and hell in the Christian sense, the Jews know nothing, though these ideas might so easily have suggested themselves to them.

It is not easy to find points of view from which to pronounce on the character of Judaism. It is a system, but a practical system, which can scarcely be set forth in relation to one leading thought, as it is an irregular product of history. It lives on the stores of the past, but is not simply the total of what had been previously acquired; it is full of new impulses, and has an entirely different physiognomy from that of Hebrew antiquity,

[p. 509]

so much so that it is hard even to catch a likeness. Judaism is everywhere historically comprehensible, and yet it is a mass of antinomies. We are struck with the free flight of thought and the deep inwardness of feeling which are found in some passages in the Wisdom and in the Psalms; but, on the other hand, we meet with a pedantic asceticism which is far from lovely, and with pious wishes the greediness of which is ill-concealed; and these unedifying features are the dominant ones of the system. Monotheism is worked out to its furthest consequences, and at the same time is enlisted in the service of the narrowest selfishness; Israel participates in the sovereignty of the One God. The Creator of heaven and earth becomes the manager of a petty scheme of salvation; the living God descends from His throne to make way for the law. The law thrusts itself in everywhere; it commands and blocks up the access to heaven; it regulates and sets limits to the understanding of the divine working on earth. As far as it can, it takes the soul out of religion and spoils morality. It demands a service of God, which, though revealed, may yet with truth be called a self-chosen and unnatural one, the sense and use of which are apparent neither to the understanding nor the heart. The labour is done for the sake of the exercise; it does no one any good, and rejoices neither God nor man. It has no inner aim after which it spontaneously strives and which it hopes to attain by itself, but only an outward one, namely, the reward attached to it, which might as well be attached to other and possibly even more curious conditions. The ideal is a negative one, to keep one's self from sin, not a positive one, to do good upon the earth; the morality is one which scarcely requires for its exercise the existence of fellow-creatures. Now pious exercises can dam up life and hold it in bounds, they may conquer from it more and more ground, and at last turn it into one great Sabbath, but they cannot penetrate it at the root. The occupation of the hands and the desire of the heart fall asunder. What the hands are doing has nothing in common with the earth, and bears no reference to earthly objects; but with the Jews the result of this is that their hope assumes a more worldly complexion. There is no connection between the Good One and goodness. There are exceptions, but they disappear in the system.

The Gospel develops hidden impulses of the Old Testament, but it is a protest against the ruling tendency of Judaism. Jesus understands monotheism in a different way from his contemporaries. They

[p. 510]

think in connection with it of the folly of the heathen and their great happiness in calling the true God their own; He thinks of the claims, not to be disputed or avoided, which the Creator makes on the creature. He feels the reality of God dominating the whole of life, He breathes in the fear of the Judge who requires an account for every idle word, and has power to destroy body and soul in hell. "No man can serve two masters; ye cannot serve God and Mammon; where your treasure is, there will your heart be also." This monotheism is not to be satisfied with stipulated services, how many and great soever; it demands the whole man, it renders doubleness of heart and hypocrisy impossible. Jesus casts ridicule on the works of the law, the washing of hands and vessels, the tithing of mint and cummin, the abstinence even from doing good on the Sabbath. Against unfruitful self-sanctification He sets up another principle of morality, that of the service of one's neighbour. He rejects that lofty kind of goodness, which says to father and mother, If I dedicate what I might give to you, that will be best even for you yourselves; He contends for the weightier matters in the law, for the common morality which sees its aim in the furtherance of the well-being of others, and which commends itself at once to the heart of every one. Just this natural morality of self-surrender does He call the law of God; that supernatural morality which thinks to outbid this, He calls the commandment of men. Thus religion ceases to be an art which the Rabbis and Pharisees understand better than the unlearned people which know nothing of the law. The arrogance of the school fares ill at the hands of Jesus; He will know nothing of the partisanship of piety or of the separateness of the godly; He condemns the practice of judging a man's value before God. Holiness shrinks from contact with sinners, but He helps the world of misery and sin; and there is no commandment on which He insists more than that of forgiving others their debts as one hopes for forgiveness himself from heaven. He is most distinctly opposed to Judaism in His view of the kingdom of heaven, not as merely the future reward of the worker, but as the present goal of effort, it being the supreme duty of man to help it to realise itself on earth, from the individual outwards. Love is the means, and the community of love the end.

Self-denial is the chief demand of the Gospel; it means the same thing as that repentance which must precede entrance into the kingdom of God. The will thereby breaks away from the chain of its own acts,

[p. 511]

and makes an absolutely new beginning not conditioned by the past. The causal nexus which admits of being traced comes here to an end, and the mutual action, which cannot be analysed, between God and the soul begins. Miracle does not require to be understood, only to be believed, in order to take place. With men it is impossible, but with God it is possible. Jesus not only affirmed this, but proved it in His own person. The impression of His personality convinced the disciples of the fact of the forgiveness of their sins and of their second birth, and gave them courage to believe in a new divine life and to live it. He had in fact lost His life and saved it; He could do as he would. He had escaped the limits of the race and the pains of self-seeking nature; He had found freedom and personality in God, who alone is master of Himself, and lifts those up to Himself who seek after Him.

Jesus works in the world and for the world, but with His faith He stands above the world and outside it. He can sacrifice Himself for the world because He asks nothing from the world, but has attained in retirement with God to equanimity and peace of soul. And further, the entirely supra-mundane position, at which Jesus finds courage and love to take an interest in the world, does not lead Him to anything strained or unnatural. He trusts God's Providence, and resigns Himself to His will, He takes up the attitude of a child towards Him, and loves best to call Him the Heavenly Father. The expression is simple, but the thing signified is new. He first knows Himself, not in emotion but in sober quietness, to be God's child; before Him no one ever felt himself to be so, or called himself so. He is the first-born of the Father, yet, according to His own view, a first-born among many brethren. For He stands in this relation to God not because His nature is unique, but because He is man; He uses always and emphatically this general name of the race to designate His own person. In finding the way to God for Himself He has opened it to all; along with the nature of God He has at the same time discovered in Himself the nature of man.

Eternity extends into the present with Him, even on earth He lives in the midst of the kingdom of God; even the judgment He sees inwardly accomplished here below in the soul of man. Yet He is far from holding the opinion that he who loves God aright does not desire that God should love him in return. He teaches men to bear the

[p. 512]

cross, but he does not teach that the cross is sweet and that sickness is sound. A coming reconciliation between believing and seeing, between morality and nature, everywhere forms the background of His view of the world; even if He could have done without it for His own person, yet it is a thing He takes for granted, as it is an objective demand of righteousness. So much is certain; for the rest the eschatology of the New Testament is so thoroughly saturated with the Jewish ideas of the disciples, that it is difficult to know what of it is genuine.

Jesus was so full of new and positive ideas that He did not feel any need for breaking old idols, so free that no constraint could depress Him, so unconquerable that even under the load of the greatest accumulations of rubbish He could still breathe. This ought ye to do, He said, and not to leave the other undone; He did not seek to take away one iota, but only to fulfil. He never thought of leaving the Jewish community. The Church is not His work, but an inheritance from Judaism to Christianity. Under the Persian domination the Jews built up an unpolitical community on the basis of religion. The Christians found themselves in a position with regard to the Roman Empire precisely similar to that which the Jews had occupied with regard to the Persian; and so they also founded, after the Jewish pattern, in the midst of the state which was foreign and hostile to them, and in which they could not feel themselves at home, a religious community as their true fatherland. The state is always the presupposition of the Church; but it was at first, in the case both of the Jewish and of the Christian Church, a foreign state. The original meaning of the Church thus disappeared when it no longer stood over against the heathen world-power, it having become possible for the Christians also to possess a natural fatherland in the nation. In this way it became much more difficult to define accurately the spheres of the state and the Church respectively, regarding the Church as an organisation, not as an invisible community of the faithful. The distinction of religious and secular is a variable one; every formation of a religious community is a step towards the secularisation of religion; the religion of the heart alone remains an inward thing. The tasks of the two competing organisations are not radically different in their nature; on the one side it may be said that had not the Christian religion found civil order already in existence, had it come, like Islam, in contact with the anarchy of Arabia instead of the Empire of Rome it must have founded not the Church, but the state; on the other side

[p. 513]

it is well known that the state has everywhere entered into possession of fields first reclaimed to cultivation by the Church. Now we must acknowledge that the nation is more certainly created by God than the Church, and that God works more powerfully in the history of the nations than in Church history. The Church, at first a substitute for the nation which was wanting, is affected by the same evils incident to an artificial cultivation as meet us in Judaism. We cannot create for ourselves our sphere of life and action; better that it should be a natural one, given by God. And yet it would be unjust to deny the permanent advantages of the differentiation of the two. The Church will always be able to work in advance for the state of the future. The present state unfortunately is in many respects only nothing more than a barrier to chaos; if the Church has still a task, it is that of preparing an inner unity of practical conviction, and awakening a sentiment, first in small circles, that we belong to each other.

Whether she is to succeed in this task is certainly the question. The religious individualism of the Gospel is, and must remain for all time, the true salt of the earth. The certainty that neither death nor life can separate us from the love of God drives out that fear which is opposed to love; an entirely supra-mundane faith lends courage for resultless self-sacrifice and resigned obedience on earth. We must succeed: sursum corda! 

      
Prolegomena to the History of Ancient Israel, by Julius Wellhausen, [1885], at sacred-texts.com

  

12. THE HELLENISTIC PERIOD.

PALESTINE fell into Alexander's possession in 332; after his death it had an ample share of the troubles arising out of the partition of his inheritance. In 320 it was seized by Ptolemy I., who on a Sabbath-day took Jerusalem; but in 315 he had to give way before Antigonus. Even before the battle of Ipsus, however, he recovered possession once more, and for a century thereafter Southern Syria continued to belong to the Egyptian crown, although the Seleucidae more than once sought to wrench it away.

In the priestly dynasty during the period of the Ptolemies, Onias I. ben Jaddua was succeeded by his son Simon I., after whom again came first his brothers Eleazar and Manasseh, and next his son Onias II.;

[p. 514]

the last-named was in his turn followed by his son Simon II., whose praises are sung by the son of Sirach (xlix. 14-16). At the side of the high priest stood the gerusia of the town of Jerusalem, as a council of state, including the higher ranks of the priesthood. The new sovereign power was at once stronger and juster than the Persian,--at least under the earlier Ptolemies; the power of the national government increased; to it was intrusted the business of raising the tribute.

As a consequence of the revolutionary changes which had taken place in the conditions of the whole East, the Jewish dispersion (diaspora) began vigorously to spread. It dated its beginning indeed from an earlier period,--from the time when the Jews had lost their land and kingdom, but yet, thanks to their religion, could not part with their nationality. They did not by any means all return from Babylon; perhaps the majority permanently settled abroad. The successors of Alexander (diadochi) fully appreciated this international element, and used it as a link between their barbarian and Hellenic populations. Everywhere they encouraged the settlement of Jews,--in Asia Minor, in Syria, and especially in Egypt. Alongside of the Palestinian there arose a Hellenistic Judaism which had its metropolis in Alexandria. Here, under Ptolemy I. and II., the Torah had already been translated into Greek, and around this sprung up a Jewish-Greek literature which soon became very extensive. At the court and in the army of the Ptolemies many Jews rose to prominent positions; everywhere they received the preference over, and everywhere they in consequence earned the hatred of, the indigenous population.

After the death of Ptolemy IV. (205) Antiochus III. attained the object towards which he and his predecessors had long been vainly striving; after a war protracted with varying success through several years, he succeeded at last in incorporating Palestine with the kingdom of the Seleucidae. The Jews took his side, less perhaps because they had become disgusted with the really sadly degenerate Egyptian rule, than because they had foreseen the issue of the contest, and preferred to attach themselves voluntarily to the winning side. In grateful acknowledgment, Antiochus confirmed and enlarged certain privileges of the "holy camp," i.e., of Jerusalem (Josephus, Ant., xii. 3, 3). It soon, however, became manifest that the Jews had made but a poor bargain in this exchange. Three years after his defeat at Magnesia, Antiochus III.

[p. 515]

died (187), leaving to his son Seleucus IV. an immense burden of debt, which he had incurred by his unprosperous Roman war. Seleucus, in his straits, could not afford to be over-scrupulous in appropriating money where it was to be found: he did not need to be twice told that the wealth of the temple at Jerusalem was out of all proportion to the expenses of the sacrificial service. The sacred treasure accordingly made the narrowest possible escape from being plundered; Heliodorus, who had been charged by the king to seize it, was deterred at the last moment by a heavenly vision. But the Jews derived no permanent advantage from this.

It was a priest of rank, Simon by name, who had called the attention of the king to the temple treasure; his motive had been spite against the high priest Onias III., the son and successor of Simon II. The circumstance is one indication of a melancholy process of disintegration that was at that time going on within the hierocracy. The high-priesthood, although there were exceptional cases, such as that of Simon II., was regarded less as a sacred office than as a profitable princedom; within the ranks of the priestly nobility arose envious and jealous factions; personal advancement was sought by means of the favour of the overlord, who had something to say in the making of appointments. A collateral branch of the ruling family, that of the children of Tobias, had by means of the ill-gotten wealth of Joseph ben Tobias attained to a position of ascendancy, and competed in point of power with the high priest himself. It appears that the above-mentioned Simon, and his still more scandalous brother Menelaus, also belonged to the Tobiadae, and, relying upon the support of their powerful party (Josephus, Ant., xii. 5, 1), cherished the purpose of securing the high-priesthood by the aid of the Syrian king.

The failure of the mission of Heliodorus was attributed by Simon to a piece of trickery on the part of Onias the high priest, who accordingly found himself called upon to make his own justification at court and to expose the intrigues of his adversary. Meanwhile Seleucus IV. died of poison (175), and Antiochus IV. Epiphanes did not confirm Onias in his dignity, but detained him in Antioch, while he made over the office to his brother Jason, who had offered a higher rent. Possibly the Tobiadae also had something to do with this arrangement; at all events, Menelaus was at the outset the right hand of the new high priest. To secure still further the favour of the king, Jason held himself out to be an enlightened

[p. 516]

friend of the Greeks, and begged for leave to found in Jerusalem a gymnasium and an ephebeum, and to be allowed to sell to the inhabitants there the rights of citizenship in Antioch,--a request which was readily granted.

The malady which had long been incubating now reached its acute phase. Just in proportion as Hellenism showed itself friendly did it present elements of danger to Judaism. From the periphery it slowly advanced towards the centre, from the diaspora to Jerusalem, from mere matters of external fashion to matters of the most profound conviction. [*1] Especially did the upper and cultivated classes of society begin to feel ashamed, in presence of the refined Greeks, of their Jewish singularity, and to do all in their power to tone it down and conceal it. In this the priestly nobility made itself conspicuous as the most secular section of the community, and it was the high priest who took the initiative in measures which aimed at a complete Hellenising of the Jews. He outdid every one else in paganism. Once he sent a considerable present for offerings to the Syrian Hercules on the occasion of his festival; but his messenger, ashamed to apply the money to such a purpose, set it apart for the construction of royal ships of war.

The friendship shown by Jason for the Greek king and for all that was Hellenic did not prevent Antiochus IV. from setting pecuniary considerations before all others. Menelaus, intrusted with the mission of conveying to Antioch the annual Jewish tribute, availed himself of the opportunity to promote his own personal interests by offering a higher sum for the high-priesthood, and having otherwise ingratiated himself with the king, gained his object (171). But though nominated, he did not find it quite easy to obtain possession of the post. The Tobiadae took his side, but the body of the people stuck to Jason, who was compelled to give way only when Syrian troops had been brought upon the scene. Menelaus had immediately, however, to encounter another difficulty, for he could not at once pay the amount of tribute which he had promised. He helped himself so far indeed by robbing the temple, but this landed him in new embarrassments. Onias III., who was living out of employment at Antioch, threatened to make compromising revelations to the king; he was, however, opportunely assassinated. The rage of the people against the priestly temple-plunderer now broke out

[p. 517]

in a rising against a certain Lysimachus, who at the instance of the absent Menelaus had made further inroads upon the sacred treasury. The Jews' defence before the king (at Tyre) on account of this uproar resolved itself into a grievous complaint against the conduct of Menelaus. His case was a bad one, but money again helped him out of his straits, and the extreme penalty of the law fell upon his accusers.

The feelings of the Jews with reference to this wolfish shepherd may easily be imagined. Nothing but fear of Antiochus held them in check. Then a report gained currency that the king had perished in an expedition against Egypt (170); and Jason, who meanwhile had found refuge in Ammanitis, availed himself of the prevailing current of feeling to resume his authority with the help of one thousand men. He was not able, however, to hold the position long, partly because he showed an unwise vindictiveness against his enemies, partly (and chiefly) because the rumour of the death of Antiochus turned out to be false. The king was already, in fact, close at hand on his return from Egypt, full of anger at an insurrection which he regarded as having been directed against himself. He inflicted severe and bloody chastisement upon Jerusalem, carried off the treasures of the temple, and restored Menelaus, placing Syrian officials at his side. Jason fled from place to place, and ultimately died in misery at Lacedaemon.

The deepest despondency prevailed in Judaea; but its cup of sorrow was not yet full. Antiochus, probably soon after his last Egyptian expedition (168), sent Apollonius with an army against Jerusalem. He fell upon the unsuspecting city, disarmed the inhabitants and demolished the walls, but on the other hand fortified Acra, and garrisoned it strongly, so as to make it a standing menace to the whole country. Having thus made his preparations, he proceeded to carry out his main instructions. All that was religiously distinctive of Judaism was to be removed; such was the will of the king. The Mosaic cultus was abolished, Sabbath observance and the rite of circumcision prohibited, all copies of the Torah confiscated and burnt. In the desecrated and partially-destroyed temple pagan ceremonies were performed, and upon the great altar of burnt-offering a small altar to Jupiter Capitolinus was erected, on which the first offering was made on 25th Kislev 168. In the country towns also heathen altars were erected, and the Jews compelled, on pain of death, publicly to adore the false gods and to eat swine's flesh that had been sacrificed to idols.

[p. 518]

The princes and grandees of the Jews had represented to Antiochus that the people were ripe for Hellenisation; and inasmuch as, apart from this, to reduce to uniformity the extremely motley constituents of his kingdom was a scheme that lay near his heart, he was very willing to believe them. That the very opposite was the case must of course have become quite evident very soon; but the resistance of the Jews taking the form of rebellious risings against his creatures, he fell upon the hopeless plan of coercion,--hopeless, for he could attain his end only by making all Judaea one vast graveyard. There existed indeed a pagan party; the Syrian garrison of Acra was partly composed of Jews who sold themselves to be the executioners of their countrymen. Fear also influenced many to deny their convictions; but the majority adhered firmly to the religion of their fathers. Jerusalem, the centre of the process of Hellenisation, was abandoned by its inhabitants, who made their escape to Egypt, or hid themselves in the country, in deserts and caves. The scribes in especial held fast by the law; and they were joined by the party of the Asidaeans (i.e., pious ones).

Footnotes

^516:1 The Hellenising fashion is amusingly exemplified in the Grecising of the Jewish names; e.g., Alcimus = Eljakim, Jason = Jesus, Joshua; Menelaus = Menahem.

      
Prolegomena to the History of Ancient Israel, by Julius Wellhausen, [1885], at sacred-texts.com

  

13. THE HASMONAeANS.

AT first there was no thought of meeting violence with violence; as the Book of Daniel shows, people consoled themselves with thoughts of the immediate intervention of God which would occur in due time. Quite casually, without either plan or concert, a warlike opposition arose. There was a certain priest Mattathias, of the family of the Hasmonaeans, a man far advanced in life, whose home was in Modein, a little country town to the west of Jerusalem. Hither also the Syrian soldiers came to put the population to a positive proof of their change of faith; they insisted upon Mattathias leading the way. But he was steadfast in his refusal; and, when another Jew addressed himself before his eyes to the work of making the heathen offering, he killed him and the Syrian officer as well, and destroyed the altar. Thereupon he fled to the hill country, accompanied by his sons (Johannes Gaddi, Simon Thassi, Judas Maccabaeus, Eleazar Auaran, Jonathan Apphus) and other followers. But he resolved to defend himself to the last, and not to act as some other fugitives had done, who about the same time had allowed

[p. 519]

themselves to be surrounded and butchered on a Sabbath-day without lifting a finger. Thus he became the head of a band which defended the ancestral religion with the sword. They traversed the country, demolished the altars of the false gods, circumcised the children, and persecuted the heathen and heathenishly disposed. The sect of the Asidaeans also intrusted itself to their warlike protection (1 Macc. ii. 42).

Mattathias soon died and left his leadership to Judas Maccabaeus, by whom the struggle was carried on in the first instance after the old fashion; soon, however, it assumed larger dimensions, when regular armies were sent out against the insurgents. First Apollonius, the governor of Judaea, took the field; but he was defeated and fell in battle. Next came Seron, governor of Coelesyria, who also was routed near Bethhoron (166). Upon this Lysias, the regent to whom Antiochus IV., who was busied in the far east, had intrusted the government of Syria and the charge of his son, Antiochus Philopator, a minor, sent a strong force under the command of three generals. Approaching from the west, it was their design to advance separately upon Jerusalem, but Judas anticipated their plan and compelled them to quit the field (166). The regent now felt himself called on to interpose in person. Invading Judaea from the south, he encountered the Jews at Bethsur, who, however, offered an opposition that was not easily overcome; he was prevented from resorting to the last measures by the intelligence which reached him of the death of the king in Elymais (165).

The withdrawal of Lysias secured the fulfilment of the desires of the defenders of the faith in so far as it now enabled them to restore the Jerusalem worship to its previous condition. They lost no time in setting about the accomplishment of this. They were not successful indeed in wresting Acra from the possession of the Syrians, but they so occupied the garrison as to prevent it from interfering with the work of restoration. On 25th Kislev 165, the very day on which, three years before, "the abomination of desolation" had been inaugurated, the first sacrifice was offered on the new altar, and in commemoration of this the feast of the dedication was thenceforth celebrated.

As it was easy to see that danger still impended, the temple was put into a state of defence, as also was the town of Bethsur, where Lysias had been checked. But the favourable moment presented by the change of sovereign was made use of for still bolder attempts. Scattered over the whole of Southern Syria there were a number of Jewish

[p. 520]

localities on which the heathens now proceeded to wreak their vengeance.

For the purpose of rescuing these oppressed co-religionists, and of bringing them in safety to Judaea, the Maccabees made a series of excursions, extending in some cases as far as to Lebanon and Damascus. Lysias had his hands otherwise fully occupied, and perhaps did not feel much disposed to continue the fight on behalf of the cultus of Jupiter Capitolinus. Daily gaining in boldness, the Jews now took in hand also to lay regular siege to Acra. Then at last Lysias yielded to the pressure of Syrian and Jewish deputations and determined to take serious steps (162). With a large force he entered Judaea, again from the south, and laid siege to Bethsur. Judas vainly attempted the relief of the fortress; he sustained near Bethzachariah a defeat in which his brother Eleazar perished. Bethsur was unable to hold out, being short of provisions on account of the sabbatic year. The Syrians advanced next to Jerusalem and besieged the temple; it also was insufficiently provisioned, and would soon have been compelled to surrender, had not Lysias been again called away at the critical moment by other exigencies. A certain Philip was endeavouring to oust him from the regency; as it was necessary for him to have his hands free in dealing with this new enemy, he closed a treaty with the temple garrison and the people at large, in accordance with which at once the political subjection and the religious freedom of the Jews were to be maintained; Thus the situation as it had existed before Antiochus IV. was restored. Only no attempt was made to replace Menelaus as high priest and ethnarch; this post was to be filled by Alcimus.

The concessions thus made by Lysias were inevitable; and even King Demetrius I., son of Seleucus IV., who towards the end of 162 ascended the throne and caused both Lysias and his ward to be put to death, had no thought of interfering with their religious freedom. But the Maccabees desired something more than the status quo ante; after having done their duty they were disinclined to retire in favour of Alcimus, whose sole claim lay in his descent from the old heathenishly-disposed high-priestly family. Alcimus was compelled to invoke the assistance of the king, who caused him to be installed by Bacchides. He was at once recognised by the scribes and Asidaeans, for whom, with religious liberty, everything they wished had been secured; the claims to supremacy made by the Hasmonaeans were of no consequence to

[p. 521]

them. Doubtless the masses also would ultimately have quietly accepted Alcimus, who of course refrained from interference with either law or worship, had he not abused the momentary power he derived from the presence of Bacchides to take a foolish revenge. But the consequence of his action was that, as soon as Bacchides had turned his back, Alcimus was compelled to follow him. For the purpose of restoring him a Syrian army once more invaded Judaea under Nicanor (160), but first at Kapharsalama and afterwards at Bethhoron was defeated by Judas, and almost annihilated in the subsequent flight, Nicanor himself being among the slain (13th Adar = Nicanor's day). Judas was now at the acme of his prosperity; about this time he concluded his (profitless) treaty with the Romans. But disaster was impending. In the month of Nisan, barely a month after the defeat of Nicanor, a new Syrian army under Bacchides entered Judaea from the north; near Elasa, southward from Jerusalem, a decisive battle was fought which was lost by Judas, and in which he himself fell.

The religious war properly so called had already been brought once for all to an end by the convention of Lysias. If the struggle continued to be carried on, it was not for the faith but for the supremacy,--less in the interests of the community than in those of the Hasmonaeans. After the death of Judas the secular character which the conflict had assumed ever since 162 continually became more conspicuous. Jonathan Apphus fought for his house, and in doing so used thoroughly worldly means. The high-priesthood, i.e., the ethnarchy, was the goal of his ambition. So long as Alcimus lived, it was far from his reach. Confined to the rocky fastnesses beside the Dead Sea, he had nothing for it but, surrounded by his faithful followers, to wait for better times. But on the death of Alcimus (159) the Syrians refrained from appointing a successor, to obviate the necessity of always having to protect him with military force. During the interregnum of seven years which followed, Jonathan again came more and more to the front, so that at last Bacchides concluded an armistice with him on the basis of the status quo (1 Macc. ix. 13). From his residence at Michmash Jonathan now exercised a de facto authority over the entire nation.

When accordingly Alexander Balas, a reputed son of Antiochus IV., rose against Demetrius, both rivals exerted themselves to secure the alliance of Jonathan, who did not fail to benefit by their competition. First of all, Demetrius formally recognised him as prince of Judah; in

[p. 522]

consequence of this he removed to Jerusalem, and expelled the heathen and heathenishly disposed, who continued to maintain a footing only in Acra and Bethsur. Next Alexander Balas conferred on him the title of "high priest of the nation and friend of the king;" in gratitude for which Jonathan went over to his side (152). He remained loyal, although Demetrius now made larger offers; he was justified by the event, for Demetrius I. had the worst of it and was slain (150). The victorious Balas heaped honours upon Jonathan, who maintained his fidelity, and fought successfully in his interests when in 147 Demetrius II., the son of Demetrius I., challenged a conflict. The high priest was unable indeed to prevent the downfall of Alexander in 145; but Demetrius II., won by presents, far from showing any hostility, confirmed him in his position in consideration of a tribute of 300 talents.

Jonathan was grateful to the king, as he showed by going with 3000 men to his aid against the insurgent Antiochenes. But when the latter drew back from his promise to withdraw the garrison from Acra, he went over to the side of Trypho, who had set up a son of Alexander Balas (Antiochus) as a rival. In the war which he now waged as Seleucid-strategus against Demetrius he succeeded in subduing almost the whole of Palestine. Meanwhile his brother Simon remained behind in Judaea, mastered the fortress of Bethsur, and resumed with great energy the siege of Acra. All this was done in the names of Antiochus and Trypho, but really of course in the interests of the Jews themselves. There were concluded also treaties with the Romans and Lacedaemonians, certainly not to the advantage of the Syrians.

Trypho sought now to get rid of the man whom he himself had made so powerful. He treacherously seized and imprisoned Jonathan in Ptolemais, and meditated an attack upon the leaderless country. But on the frontier Simon, the last remaining son of Mattathias, met him in force. All Trypho's efforts to break through proved futile; after skirting all Judaea from west to south, without being able to get clear of Simon, he at last withdrew to Peraea without having accomplished anything. On the person of Jonathan, whom he caused to be executed, he vented the spleen he felt on the discovery that the cause for which that prince had fought was able to gain the victory even when deprived of his help. Simon, in point of fact, was Jonathan's equal as a soldier and his superior as a ruler. He secured his frontier by means of fortresses, made himself master of Acra (141), and understood how to enable the

[p. 523]

people in time of peace to reap the advantages that result from successful war; agriculture, industry, and commerce (from the haven of Joppa) began to flourish vigorously. In grateful recognition of his services the high-priesthood and the ethnarchy were bestowed upon him as hereditary possessions by a solemn assembly of the people, "until a trustworthy prophet should arise."

Nominally the Seleucidae still continued to possess the suzerainty. Simon naturally had detached himself from Trypho and turned to Demetrius II., who confirmed him in his position, remitted all arrears of tribute, and waived his rights for the future (142). The friendship of Demetrius II. and of his successor Antiochus Sidetes with Simon, however, lasted only as long as Trypho still remained in the way. But, he once removed, Sidetes altered his policy. He demanded of Simon the surrender of Joppa, Gazara, and other towns, besides the citadel of Jerusalem, as well as payment of all tribute resting due. The refusal of these demands led to war, which in its earlier stages was carried on with success, but the scales were turned after the murder of Simon, when Sidetes in person took the field against John Hyrcanus, Simon's son and successor. Jerusalem capitulated; in the negotiations for peace the surrender of all the external possessions of the Jews was insisted upon; the suzerainty of the Syrians became once more a reality (135). But in 130 the powerful Antiochus Sidetes fell in an expedition against the Parthians, and the complications anew arising in reference to the succession to the Syrian throne placed Hyrcanus in a position to recover what he had lost and to make new acquisitions. He subjugated Samaria and Idumaea, compelling the inhabitants of the latter to accept circumcision. Like his predecessors, he too sought to secure the favour of the Romans, but derived no greater benefit from the effort than they had done. After a prosperous reign of thirty years he died in 105. By Josephus he is represented as a pattern of all that a pious prince ought to be; by the rabbins as representing a splendid high-priesthood. The darkness of the succeeding age lent a brighter colour to his image.

The external splendour of the Hasmonaean kingdom did not at once die away,--the downfall of the Seleucidae, which was its negative condition, being also a slow affair. Judah Aristobulus, the son of Hyrcanus, who reigned for only one year, was the first to assume the Greek title of royalty; Ituraea was subdued by him, and circumcision forced upon the inhabitants. His brother Jonathan (Jannaeus) Alexander (104-79),

[p. 524]

in a series of continual wars, which were never very prosperous, nevertheless succeeded in adding the whole coast of Philistia (Gaza) as well as a great portion of Peraea to his hereditary dominions. [*1] But the external enlargement of the structure was secured at the cost of its internal consistency.

From the time when Jonathan, the son of Mattathias, began to carry on the struggle no longer for the cause of God but for his own interests, the scribes and the Asidaeans, as we have seen, had withdrawn themselves from the party of the Maccabees There can be no doubt that from their legal standpoint they were perfectly right in contenting themselves, as they did, with the attainment of religious liberty, and in accepting Alcimus. The Hasmonaeans had no hereditary right to the high-priesthood, and their politics, which aimed at the establishment of a national monarchy, were contrary to the whole spirit and essence of the second theocracy. The presupposition of that theocracy was foreign domination; in no other way could its sacred--i.e., clerical--character be maintained. God and the law could not but be forced into the background if a warlike kingdom, retaining indeed the forms of a hierocracy, but really violating its spirit at every point, should ever grow out of a mere pious community. Above all, how could the scribes hope to retain their importance if temple and synagogue were cast into the shade by politics and clash of arms? But under the first great Hasmonaeans the zealots for the law were unable to force their way to the front; the enthusiasm of the people was too strong for them; they had nothing for it but to keep themselves out of the current and refuse to be swept along by it. Even under Hyrcanus, however, they gained more prominence, and under Jannaeus their influence upon popular opinion was paramount. For under the last-named the secularisation of the hierocracy no longer presented any attractive aspects; it was wholly repellent. It was looked upon as a revolting anomaly that the king, who was usually in the field with his army, should once and again assume the sacred mantle in order to perform the sacrifice on some high festival, and that his officers, profane persons as they were, should at the same time be holders of the highest spiritual offices. The danger which in all this threatened "the idea of Judaism" could not in these circumstances

[p. 525]

escape the observation of even the common people; for this idea was God and the law, not any earthly fatherland. The masses accordingly ranged themselves with ever-growing unanimity on the side of the Pharisees (i.e., the party of the scribes) as against the Sadducees (i.e., the Hasmonaean party). [*1]

On one occasion, when Alexander Jannaeus had returned to Jerusalem at the feast of tabernacles, and was standing in his priestly vestments before the altar to sacrifice, he was pelted by the assembled crowd of worshippers with citrons from the green branches they carried. By the cruelty with which he punished this insult he excited the populace to the highest pitch, and, when he lost his army in the disaster of Gadara, rebellion broke out. The Pharisees summoned the Syrian king Demetrius Eucaerus; Jannaeus was worsted and fled into the desert. But as he wandered in helplessness there, the patriotism of the people and sympathy for the heir of the Maccabees suddenly awoke; nature proved itself stronger than that consistency which in the cause of the Divine honour had not shrunk from treason. The insurgents for the most part went over to the side of the fugitive king; the others he ultimately overpowered after a struggle which lasted through several years, Demetrius having withdrawn his intervention. The vengeance which he took on the Pharisees was a bloody one; their only escape was by voluntary exile. Thenceforward he had peace so far as they were concerned. His last years were occupied with the reacquisition of the conquests which he had been compelled to yield to the Arabs during the civil war. He died in the field at the siege of Ragaba in Peraea (79).

Under Queen Salome, his widow, matters were as if they had been specially arranged for the satisfaction of the Pharisees. The high-priesthood passed to Salome's son, Hyrcanus II.; she herself was only queen. In the management of external affairs her authority was absolute (Ant., xiii. 16, 6); in home policy she permitted the scribes to wield a paramount influence. The common assertion, indeed, that the

[p. 526]

synedrium was at that time practically composed of scribes, is inconsistent with the known facts of the case; the synedrium at that time was a political and not a scholastic authority. [*1] In its origin it was the municipal council of Jerusalem (so also the councils of provincial towns are called synedria, Mark xiii. 9), but its authority extended over the entire Jewish community; alongside of the elders of the city the ruling priests were those who had the greatest number of seats and votes. John Hyrcanus appears to have been the first to introduce some scribes into its composition; it is possible that Salome may have increased their number, but even so this high court was far from being changed into a college of scribes like that at Jamnia. If the domination of the Pharisees at this time is spoken of, the expression cannot be understood as meaning that they already held all the public offices, but only at most that the holders of those offices found it necessary to administer and to judge in their spirit and according to their fundamental principles.

The party of the Sadducees (consisting of the old Hasmonaean officers and officials, who were of priestly family indeed, but attached only slight importance to their priestly functions) at length lost all patience. Led by Aristobulus, the second son of Jannaeus, the leaders of the party came to the palace, and begged the queen to dismiss them from the court and to send them into the provinces. There they were successful in securing possession of several fortresses [*2] in preparation for insurrection, a favourable opportunity for which they were watching. Such an opportunity occurred, it seemed to Aristobulus, as his mother lay on her death-bed. The commandants of the fortresses were at his orders, and by their assistance an army also, with which he accordingly advanced upon Jerusalem, and, on the death of Salome, made himself master of the situation (69). Hyrcanus was compelled to resign office. With this event the good understanding between the civil government and the Pharisees came to an end; the old antagonisms became active once more, and now began to operate for the advantage of a third party, the Idumaean Antipater, Hyrcanus's confidential friend. After the latter, aided by Antipater, had at length with great difficulty got himself into a position for asserting his rights against Aristobulus,

[p. 527]

the Pharisees could not do otherwise than rank themselves upon his side, and the masses joined them against the usurper. With the help of the Nabataean monarch the effort to restore the elder brother to the supreme authority would doubtless have succeeded had not the Romans procured relief for Aristobulus, besieged as he was in Jerusalem (65), though without thereby recognising his claims. Pompey continued to delay a decision on the controversy in 64 also when the rival claimants presented themselves before him at Damascus; he wished first to have the Nabataeans disposed of, and to have free access to them through Judaea. This hesitation roused the suspicions of Aristobulus; still he did not venture to take decisive action upon them. He closed the passes (to Mount Ephraim) against the Romans, but afterwards gave them up; he prepared Jerusalem for war, and then went in person to the Roman camp at Jericho, where he promised to open the gates of the city and also to pay a sum of money. But the Roman ambassadors found the gates barred, and had to return empty-handed. Aristobulus thereupon was arrested, and siege was laid to Jerusalem. The party of Hyrcanus, as soon as it had gained the upper hand, surrendered the town; but the supporters of Aristobulus took their stand in the temple, and defended it obstinately. In June 63 the place was carried by storm; Pompey personally inspected the Holy of Holies, but otherwise spared the religious feelings of the Jews. But he caused the chief promoters of the war to be executed, and carried Aristobulus and his family into captivity. He abolished the kingship, but restored the high-priestly dignity to Hyrcanus. The territory was materially reduced in area, and made tributary to the Romans; the city was occupied by a Roman garrison.

Footnotes

^524:1 A number of half-independent towns and communes lay as tempting subjects of dispute between the Seleucidae, the Nabathaaeans or Arabs of Petra, and the Jews. The background was occupied by the Parthians and the Romans.

^525:1 prwsh means "separated," and refers perhaps to the attitude of isolation taken by the zealots for the law during the interval between 162 and 105. tzdwqy (Saddoykaios) comes from tzdwq (Saddouk, LXX.) the ancestor of the higher priesthood of Jerusalem (1 Kings ii. 35; 1 Sam. ii. 35; Ezek. xliv. 15), and designates the governing nobility. The original character of the opposition, as it appeared under Jannaeus, changed entirely with the lapse of time, on account of the Sadducees' gradual loss of political power, till they fell at last to the condition of a sort of "fronde."

^526:1 Kuenen, "Over de Samenstelling van het Sanhedrin," in Proceedings of Royal Netherl. Acad., 1866.

^526:2 Alexandrium, Coreae, and similar citadels, which were at that time of great importance for Palestine and Syria.

      
Prolegomena to the History of Ancient Israel, by Julius Wellhausen, [1885], at sacred-texts.com

  

14. HEROD AND THE ROMANS.

HENCEFORWARD Roman intervention forms a constant disturbing factor in Jewish history. The struggle between the Pharisees and the Sadducees continued indeed to be carried on, but only because the momentum of their old feud was not yet exhausted. The Pharisees in a sense had been victorious. While the two brothers were pleading their rival claims before Pompey, ambassadors from the Pharisees had made their appearance in Damascus to petition for the abolition of the kingship; this object had now to some extent been gained. Less

[p. 528]

ambiguous than the victory of the Pharisees was the fall of the Sadducees, who in losing the sovereignty of the Jewish state lost all real importance. But the intervention of the foreign element exercised its most powerful influence upon the temper of the lower classes. Though in times of peace the masses still continued to accept the guidance of the rabbins, their patriotism instantly burst into flame as soon as a pretender to the throne, belonging to the family of Aristobulus, appeared in Palestine. During the decennia which immediately followed, Jewish history was practically absorbed in vain attempts to restore the old Hasmonaean kingdom. Insurrections of steadily increasing dimensions were made in favour of Aristobulus, the representative of the national cause. For Hyrcanus was not regarded as a Hasmonaean at all, but merely as the creature of Antipater and the Romans. First, in the year 57, Alexander the son of Aristobulus broke into rebellion, then in 56 Aristobulus himself and his son Antigonus, and in 55 Alexander again. Antipater was never able to hold his own; Roman intervention was in every case necessary. The division of the Hasmonaean state into five "aristocracies" by Gabinius had no effect in diminishing the feeling of national unity cherished by the Jews of Palestine. Once again, after the battle of Carrhae, a rising took place, which Cassius speedily repressed.

In 49 the great Roman civil war broke out; Caesar instigated Aristobulus against Antipater, who in common with the whole East had espoused the cause of Pompey. But Aristobulus was poisoned by the opposite party while yet in Italy, and about the same time his son Alexander was also put to death at Antioch; thus the danger to Antipater passed away. After the battle of Pharsalus he went over to Caesar's side, and soon after rendered him an important service by helping him out of his difficulties at Alexandria. By this means he earned the good-will of Caesar towards the whole body of the Jews and secured for himself (or Hyrcanus) a great extension of power and of territory. The five "synedria" or "aristocracies" of Gabinius were superseded, the most important conquest of the Hasmonaeans restored, the walls of Jerusalem, which Pompey had razed, rebuilt.

However indisputable the advantages conferred by the rule of Antipater, the Jews could not forget that the Idumaean, in name of Hyrcanus, the rightful heir of the Hasmonaeans, was in truth setting up an authority of his own. The Sadducaean aristocracy in particular, which

[p. 529]

formerly in the synedrium had shared the supreme power with the high priest, endeavoured to restore reality once more to the nominal ascendancy which still continued to be attributed to the ethnarch and the synedrium. "When the authorities (oi en telei) of the Jews saw how the power of Antipater and his sons was growing, their disposition towards him became hostile" (Josephus, Ant., xiv. 9, 3). They were specially jealous of the youthful Herod, to whom Galilee had been entrusted by his father. On account of the arbitrary execution of a robber chief Ezechias, who perhaps had originally been a Hasmonaean partisan, they summoned him before the synedrium, under the impression that it was not yet too late to remind him that he was after all but a servant. But the defiant demeanour of the culprit, and a threatening missive which at the same time arrived from Sextus Caesar demanding his acquittal, rendered his judges speechless, nor did they regain their courage until they had heard the stinging reproaches of Sameas the scribe. Yet the aged Hyrcanus, who did not comprehend the danger that was threatening himself, postponed judgment upon Herod, and gave him opportunity to withdraw. Having been appointed strategus of Coelesyria by Sextus Caesar in the meanwhile he soon afterwards appeared before Jerusalem at the head of an army, and the authorities were compelled to address themselves in a conciliatory manner to his father and to Phasael his brother in order to secure his withdrawal.

The attempt to crush the serpent which had thus effected a lodgment in the Hasmonaean house came too late. The result of it simply was that the Herodians had now the advantage of being able to distinguish between Hyrcanus and his "evil counsellors." From that moment the downfall of the Sadducaean notables was certain. It was of no avail to them that after the battle of Philippi (42) they accused Herod and Phasael (Antipater having been murdered in 43) before Antony of having been helpful in every possible way to Cassius; Antony declared himself in the most decisive manner for the two brothers. In their despair--for properly speaking they were not national fanatics but only egoistic politicians--they ultimately made common cause with Antigonus the son of Aristobulus, and threw themselves into the arms of the Parthians, perceiving the interests of the Romans and of Herod to be inseparable (40). Fortune at first seemed to have declared in favour of the pretender. The masses unanimously took his side; Phasael committed suicide in

[p. 530]

prison; with a single blow Herod was stripped of all his following and made a helpless fugitive. He took refuge in Rome, however, where he was named king of Judaea by the senate, and after a somewhat protracted war he finally, with the help of the legions of Sosius, made himself master of Jerusalem (37). The captive Antigonus was beheaded at Antioch.

King Herod began his reign by reorganising the synedrium; he ordered the execution of forty-five of its noblest members, his most zealous opponents. These were the Sadducaean notables who long had headed the struggle against the Idumaean interlopers. Having thus made away with the leaders of the Jerusalem aristocracy, he directed his efforts to the business of corrupting the rest. He appointed to the most important posts obscure individuals, of priestly descent, from Babylon and Alexandria, and thus replaced with creatures of his own the old aristocracy. Nor did he rest content with this; in order to preclude the possibility of any independent authority ever arising alongside of his own, he abolished the life-tenure of the high-priestly office, and brought it completely under the control of the secular power. By this means he succeeded in relegating the Sadducees to utter insignificance. They were driven out of their native sphere--the political--into the region of theoretical and ecclesiastical discussion, where they continued, but on quite unequal terms, their old dispute with the Pharisees.

It was during the period of Herod's activity that the Pharisees, strictly speaking, enjoyed their greatest prosperity (Sameas and Abtalion, Hillel and Shammai); in the synedrium they became so numerous as almost to equal the priests and elders. Quite consistently with their principles they had abstained from taking any part in the life and death struggle for the existence of the national state. Their leaders had even counselled the fanatical defenders of Jerusalem to open the gates to the enemy; for this service they were treated with the highest honour by Herod. He made it part of his general policy to favour the Pharisees (as also the sect of the Essenes, insignificant though it was), it being his purpose to restrict the national life again within those purely ecclesiastical channels of activity which it had abandoned since the Maccabaean wars. However reckless his conduct in other respects, he was always scrupulously careful to avoid wounding religious susceptibilities (Ant., xiv. 16, 3). But although the Pharisees might be quite pleased that the high-priesthood and the kingship were no longer united in one and the

[p. 531]

same person, and that interest in the law again overshadowed interest in politics, the populace for their part could never forgive Herod for overthrowing the old dynasty. That he himself, at least in religious profession, was a Jew did not improve his position, but rather made it worse. It was not easy for him to stifle the national feeling after it had once been revived among the Jews; they could not forget the recent past, and objected to being thrust back into the time when foreign domination was endured by them as a matter of course. The Romans were regarded in quite a different light from that in which the Persians and the Greeks had been viewed, and Herod was only the client of the Romans.

His greatest danger seemed to arise from the still surviving members of the Hasmonaean family, to whom, as is easily understood, the national hopes clung. In the course of the earlier years of his reign he removed every one of them from his path, beginning with his youthful brother-in-law Aristobulus (35), after whom came his old patron Hyrcanus II. (30), then Mariamne his wife (29), and finally his stepmother Alexandra (28), the daughter of Hyrcanus and the widow of Alexander Aristobuli. Subsequently, in 25, he caused Costobarus and the sons of Babas to be executed. While thus occupied with domestic affairs, Herod had constant trouble also in his external relations, and each new phase in his political position immediately made itself felt at home. In the first instance he had much to suffer from Cleopatra, who would willingly have seen Palestine reduced under Egyptian domination once more, and who actually succeeded in inducing Antony to take from Herod several fair and valuable provinces of his realm. Next, his whole position was imperilled by the result of the battle of Actium; he had once more ranged himself upon the wrong side. But his tact did not fail him in winning Octavianus, as before it had made Antony his friend. In fact he reaped nothing but advantage from the great overturn which took place in Roman affairs; it rid him of Cleopatra, a dangerous enemy, and gave him in the new imperator a much better master than before.

During the following years he had leisure to carry out those splendid works of peace by which it was his aim to ingratiate himself with the emperor. He founded cities and harbours (Antipatris, Caesarea), constructed roads, theatres, and temples, and subsidised far beyond his frontier all works of public utility. He taxed the Jews heavily, but in compensation promoted their material interests with energy and discretion,

[p. 532]

and built for them, from 20 or 19 B.C. onwards, the temple at Jerusalem. To gain their sympathies he well knew to be impossible. Apart from the Roman legions at his back his authority had its main support in his fortresses and in his system of espionage.

But just as the acme of his splendour had been reached, he himself became the instrument of a terrible vengeance for the crimes by which his previous years had been stained; as executioner of all the Hasmonaeans, he was now constrained to be the executioner of his own children also. His suspicious temper had been aroused against his now grown-up sons by Mariamne, whose claims through their mother to the throne were superior to his own; his brother Pheroras and his sister Salome made it their special business to fan his jealousy into flame. To show the two somewhat arrogant youths that the succession was not so absolutely secure in their favour as they were supposing, the father summoned to his court Antipater, the exiled son of a former marriage. Antipater, under the mask of friendship, immediately began to carry on infamous intrigues against his half brothers, in which Pheroras and Salome unconsciously played into his hands. For years he persevered alike in favouring and unfavouring circumstances with his part, until at last, by the machinations of a Lacedemonian, Eurycles, who had been bribed, Herod was induced to condemn the sons of Mariamne at Berytus, and cause them to be strangled (Samaria, 7-6 B.C.). Not long afterwards a difference between Antipater and Salome led to the exposure of the former. Herod was compelled to drain the cup to the dregs; he was not spared the knowledge that he had murdered his children without a cause. His remorse threw him into a serious illness, in which his strong constitution wrestled long with death. While he lay at Jericho near his end he gave orders for the execution of Antipater also; and to embitter the joy of the Jews at his removal he caused their elders to be shut up together in the hippodrome at Jericho with the injunction to butcher them as soon as he breathed his last, that so there might be sorrow throughout the land. The latter order, however, was not carried out.

His death (4 B.C.) gave the signal for an insurrection of small beginnings which gradually spread until it ultimately infected all the people; it was repressed by Varus with great cruelty. Meanwhile Herod's connexions were at Rome disputing about the inheritance. The deceased king (who was survived by several children of various marriages) had

[p. 533]

made a will, which was substantially confirmed by Augustus. By it his son Philip received the northern portion of the territory on the east of the Jordan along with the district of Paneas (Caesarea Philippi); his thirty-seven years' reign over this region was happy. Another son, Herod Antipas, obtained Galilee and Peraea; he beautified his domains with architectural works (Sepphoris, Tiberias; Livias, Machaerus), and succeeded by his fox-like policy in ingratiating himself with the emperors, particularly with Tiberius, for that very cause, however, becoming odious to the Roman provincial officials. The principal heir was Archelaus, to whom Idumaea, Judaea, and Samaritis were allotted; Augustus at first refused him the title of king. Archelaus had experienced the greatest difficulty in carrying through his claims before the emperor in face of the manifold oppositions of his enemies; the vengeance which he wreaked upon his subjects was so severe that in 6 A.D. a Jewish and Samaritan embassy besought the emperor for his deposition. Augustus assented, banishing Archelaus to Vienne, and putting in his place a Roman procurator. Thenceforward Judaea continued under procurators, with the exception of a brief interval (41-44 A.D.), during which Herod Agrippa I. united under his sway all the dominions of his grandfather. [*1]

The termination of the vassal kingship resulted in manifest advantage to the Sadducees. The high priest and synedrium again acquired political importance; they were the responsible representatives of the nation in presence of the suzerain power, and conceived themselves to be in some sort lords of land and people (John xi. 48). For the Pharisees the new state of affairs appears to have been less satisfactory. That the Romans were much less oppressive to the Jews than the rulers of the house of Herod was a consideration of less importance to them than the fact that the heathen first unintentionally and then deliberately were guilty of the rudest outrages upon the law,

[p. 534]

outrages against which those sly half-Jews had well understood how to be on their guard. It was among the lower ranks of the people, however, that hatred to the Romans had its proper seat. On the basis of the views and tendencies which had long prevailed there, a new party was now formed, that of the Zealots, which did not, like the Pharisees, aim merely at the fulfilment of all righteousness, i.e., of the law, and leave everything else in the hands of God, but was determined to take an active part in bringing about the realisation of the kingdom of God (Josephus, Ant., xviii. 1, 1).

As the transition to the new order of things was going on, the census of Quirinius took place (6-7 A.D.); it occasioned an immense excitement, which, however, was successfully allayed. On the withdrawal of Quirinius, Coponius remained behind as procurator of Judaea; he was followed, under Augustus, by Marcus Ambivius and Annius Rufus; under Tiberius, by Valerius Gratus (15-26 A.D.) and Pontius Pilatus (26-36 A.D.); under Caligula, by Marcellus (36-37) and Marullus (37-41 A.D.). The procurators were subordinate to the imperial legati of Syria; they resided in Caesarea, and visited Jerusalem on special occasions only. They had command of the military, and their chief business was the maintenance of the peace and the care of the revenue. They interested themselves in affairs of religion only in so far as these had a political side; the temple citadel Antonia was constantly garrisoned with a cohort. The administration of justice appears to have been left to a very considerable extent in the hands of the synedrium, but it was not allowed to give effect to any capital sentence. At the head of the native authorities stood at this time not so much the actual high priest as the college of the chief priests. The actual office of high priest had lost its political importance in consequence of the frequency with which its holders were changed; thus, for example, Annas had more influence than Caiaphas.

The principle of interfering as little as possible with the religious liberty of the Jews was rudely assailed by the Emperor Caius, who like a second Antiochus, after various minor vexations, gave orders that his image should be set up in the temple of Jerusalem as in others elsewhere. It was entirely through the courage and tact of the Syrian governor P. Petronius that the execution of these orders was temporarily postponed until the emperor was induced by Agrippa I. to withdraw them. Caius soon afterwards died, and under the rule of Agrippa I., to whom the government of the entire kingdom of his grandfather was committed

[p. 535]

by Claudius, the Jews enjoyed much prosperity; in every respect the king was all they could wish. This very prosperity seems, however, to have caused them fresh danger. For it made them feel the government by procurators, which was resumed after the death of Agrippa I., to be particularly hard to bear, whatever the individual characters of these might be. They were Cuspius Fadus (from 44, under whom Theudas), Tiberius Alexander (the Romanised nephew of Philo, till 48), Cumanus (48-52, under whom the volcano already began to give dangerous signs of activity), and Felix (52-60). Felix, who has the honour to be pilloried in the pages of Tacitus, contrived to make the dispeace permanent. The influence of the two older parties, both of which were equally interested in the maintenance of the existing order, and in that interest were being drawn nearer to each other, diminished day by day. The masses broke loose completely from the authority of the scribes; the ruling nobility adapted itself better to the times; under the circumstances which then prevailed, it is not surprising that they became thoroughly secular and did not shrink from the employment of directly immoral means for the attainment of their ends. The Zealots became the dominant party. It was a combination of noble and base elements; superstitious enthusiasts (Acts xxi. 38) and political assassins, the so-called sicarii, were conjoined with honest but fanatical patriots. Felix favoured the sicarii in order that he might utilise them; against the others his hostility raged with indiscriminating cruelty, yet without being able to check them. The anarchy which he left behind him as a legacy was beyond the control of his able successor Porcius Festus (60-62), and the last two procurators, Albinus (62-64) and Gessius Florus, acted as if it had been their special business to encourage and promote it. All the bonds of social order were dissolved; no property was secure; the assassins alone prospered, and the procurators went shares with them in the profits.

It was inevitable that deep resentment against the Romans should be felt in every honest heart. At last it found expression. During his visit to Jerusalem in May 66 Florus laid hands upon the temple treasure; the Jews allowed themselves to go so far as to make a joke about it, which he avenged by giving over a portion of the city to be plundered, and crucifying a number of the inhabitants. He next insisted upon their kissing the rod, ordering that a body of troops which was approaching should be met and welcomed. At the persuasion of their leaders the Jews forced

[p. 536]

themselves even to this; but a constant succession of fresh insults and cruelties followed, till patience was quite exhausted at last, and in a violent street fight the Romans were so handled that the procurator withdrew from the town, leaving only the cohort in Antonia. Once again was an attempt at pacification made by Agrippa II., who hastened from Alexandria with this purpose, but the Jews could not bring themselves to make submission to Gessius Florus. It so happened that at this juncture the fortress of Masada on the Dead Sea fell into the hands of the Zealots; the courage of the party of action rose, and at the instance of the hot-headed Eleazar the son of Ananias, a man, still young, of highest priestly family, the sacrifice on behalf of the emperor was discontinued, i.e., revolt was declared. But the native authorities continued opposed to a war. At their request King Agrippa sent soldiers to Jerusalem; at first they appeared to have some effect, but ultimately they were glad to make their escape in safety from the city. The cohort in Antonia was in like manner unable to hold its own; freedom was given it to withdraw; but, contrary to the terms of capitulation, it was put to the sword. The war party now signalised its triumph over all elements of opposition from within by the murder of the high priest Ananias.

A triumph was gained also over the outer foe. The Syrian legate, Cestius Gallus, appeared before Jerusalem in the autumn of 66, but after a short period raised the siege; his deliberate withdrawal was changed into a precipitate flight in an attack made by the Jews at Bethhoron. The revolt now spread irresistibly through all ranks and classes of the population, and the aristocracy found it expedient itself to assume the leadership. An autonomous government was organised, with the noblest members of the community at its head; of these the most important was the high priest Ananus.

Meanwhile Nero entrusted the conduct of the Jewish war to Vespasian, his best general. In the spring of 67 he began his task in Galilee, where the historian Josephus had command of the insurgents. The Jews entirely distrusted him and he them; in a short time the Romans were masters of Galilee, only a few strong places holding out against them. Josephus was besieged in Jotapata, and taken prisoner; the other places also were unable to hold out long. Such of the champions of freedom in Galilee as escaped betook themselves to Jerusalem; amongst these was the Zealot leader John of Giscala. There they told

[p. 537]

the story of their misfortunes, of which they laid the blame upon Josephus, and upon the aristocratic government as having no heart for the common cause and having treachery for their motto. The Zealots now openly aimed at the overthrow of the existing government, but Ananus bravely withstood them, and pressed so hard on them that they summoned the Idumaeans into the city to their aid. These honourable fanatics indeed withdrew again as soon as they had discovered that they were being used for sinister designs; but in the meanwhile they had accomplished the work of the Zealots. The old magistracy of Jerusalem was destroyed, Ananus with the heads of the aristocracy and very many other respectable citizens put to death. The radicals, for the most part not natives of the city, came into power; John of Giscala at their head tyrannized over the inhabitants.

While these events were taking place in Jerusalem, Vespasian had subdued the whole country, with the exception of one or two fortresses. But as he was setting about the siege of the capital, tidings arrived of the death of Nero, and the offensive was discontinued. For almost two years (June 68 to April 70), with a short break, war was suspended. When Vespasian at the end of this period became emperor, he entrusted to Titus the task of reducing Jerusalem. There in the interval the internal struggle had been going on, even after the radicals had gained the mastery. As a counterpoise to John of Giscala the citizens had received the guerilla captain Simon bar Giora into the city; the two were now at feud with each other, but were alike in their rapacity towards the citizens. John occupied the temple, Simon the upper city lying over against it on the west. For a short time a third entered into competition with the two rivals, a certain Eleazar who had separated from John and established himself in the inner temple. But just as Titus was beginning the siege (Easter, 70) John contrived to get rid of this interloper.

Titus attacked from the north. After the lower city had fallen into his hands, he raised banks with a view to the storm of the temple and the upper city. But the defenders, who were now united in a common cause, taught him by their vigorous resistance that his object was not to be so quickly gained. He therefore determined to reduce them by famine, and for this end completely surrounded the city with a strong wall. In the beginning of July he renewed the attack, which he directed in the first instance against the temple. The tower of Antonia fell on the 5th, but the temple continued to beheld notwithstanding; until the 17th the

[p. 538]

daily sacrifice continued to be offered. The Romans succeeded in gaining the outer court in August only. To drive them out, the Jews in the night of August 10-11 made a sortie, but were compelled to retire, the enemy forcing their way behind them into the inner court. A legionary flung a firebrand into an annexe of the temple, and soon the whole structure was in flames. A terrible slaughter of the defenders ensued, but John with a determined band succeeded in cutting his way out, and by means of the bridge over the Tyropoeon valley made his escape into the upper city.

No attack had as yet been directed against this quarter; but famine was working terrible ravages among the crowded population. Those in command, however, refused to capitulate unless freedom to withdraw along with their wives and children were granted. These terms being withheld, a storm, after the usual preparations on the part of the Romans, took place. The resistance was feeble; the strong towers were hardly defended at all; Simon bar Giora and John of Giscala now thought only of their personal safety. In the unprotected city the Roman soldiers spread fire and slaughter unchecked (September 7, 70).

Of those who survived also some were put to death; the rest were sold or carried off to the mines and amphitheatres. The city was levelled with the ground; the tenth legion was left behind in charge. Titus took with him to Rome for his triumphal procession Simon bar Giora and John of Giscala, along with seven hundred other prisoners, also the sacred booty taken from the temple, the candlestick, the golden table, and a copy of the Torah. He was slightly premature with his triumph; for some time elapsed, and more than one bloody battle was necessary before the rebellion was completely stifled. It did not come wholly to an end until the fall of Masada (April 73).

Footnotes

^533:1 Agrippa was the grandson of Mariamne through Aristobulus. Caligula, whose friendship he had secured in Rome, bestowed upon him in 37 the dominions of Philip with the title of king, and afterwards the tetrarchy of Antipas, whom he deposed and banished to Lugdunum (39). Claudius added the possessions of Archelaus. But the kingdom was again taken away from his son Agrippa II. (44), who, however, after the death of his uncle, Herod of Chalcis, obtained that principality for which at a later period (52) the tetrarchy of Philip was substituted. His sister Berenice is known as the mistress of Titus; another sister, Drusilla, was the wife of the procurator Felix. The descendants of Mariamne through Alexander held for some time an Armenian principality.

      
Prolegomena to the History of Ancient Israel, by Julius Wellhausen, [1885], at sacred-texts.com

  

15. THE RABBINS.

EVEN now Palestine continued for a while to be the centre of Jewish life, but only in order to prepare the way for its transition into thoroughly cosmopolitan forms. The development of thought sustained no break on account of the sad events which had taken place, but was only directed once more in a consistent manner towards these objects which had been set before it from the time of the Babylonian exile. On the ruins of the city and of the temple the Pharisaic Judaism

[p. 539]

which rests upon the law and the school celebrated its triumph. National fanaticism indeed was not yet extinguished, but it burnt itself completely out in the vigorous insurrection led by Simeon bar Koziba (Bar Cochebas, 132-135). That a conspicuous rabbin, Akiba, should have taken part in it, and have recognised in Simeon the Messiah, was an inconsistency on his part which redounds to his honour.

Inasmuch as the power of the rabbins did not depend upon the political or hierarchical forms of the old commonwealth, it survived the fall of the latter. Out of what hitherto had been a purely moral influence something of an official position now grew. They formed themselves into a college which regarded itself as a continuation of the old synedrium, and which carried forward its name. At first its seat was at Jamnia, but it soon removed to Galilee, and remained longest at Tiberias. The presidency was hereditary in the family of Hillel, with the last descendants of whom the court itself came to an end. [*1] The respect in which the synedrial president was held rapidly increased; like Christian patriarchs under Mahometan rule, he was also recognised by the imperial government as the municipal head of the Jews of Palestine, and bore the secular title of the old high priests (nasi, ethnarch, patriarch). Under him the Palestinian Jews continued to form a kind of state within a state until the 5th century. From the non-Palestinian Jews he received offerings of money. (Compare Gothofredus on Codex Theod., xvi. 8, "De Judaeis;" and Morinus, Exer. Bibl., ii. exerc. 3, 4).

The task of the rabbins was so to reorganise Judaism under the new circumstances that it could continue to assert its distinctive character. What of external consistency had been lost through the extinction of the ancient commonwealth required to be compensated for by an inner centralisation proportionately stronger. The separation from everything heathenish became more pronounced than before; the use of the Greek language was of necessity still permitted, but at least the Septuagint was set aside by Aquila (Cod. Justinian., Nov. 146) inasmuch as it had now become the Christian Bible. For to this period also belongs the definitive separation between the synagogue and the church; henceforward

[p. 540]

[paragraph continues] Christianity could no longer figure as a Jewish sect. Intensified exclusiveness was accompanied by increased internal stringency. What at an earlier period had still remained to some extent fluid now became rigidly fixed; for example, an authentic text of the canon was now established, and at the same time the distinction between canon and apocrypha sharply drawn. The old tendency of the scribes to leave as little as possible free to the individual conscience, but to bring everything within the scope of positive ordinance, now celebrated its greatest triumphs. It was only an apparent movement in the direction of liberty, if regulations which had become quite impossible were now modified or cancelled. The most influential of the rabbins were indeed the least solicitous about the maintenance of what was old, and had no hesitation in introducing numerous and thoroughgoing innovations; but the conservatives R. Eliezer ben Hyrcanus and R. Ishmael ben Elisha were in truth more liberal-minded than the leaders of the party of progress, notably than R. Akiba. Even the Ultramontanes have never hesitated at departures from the usage of the ancient and mediaeval church; and the Pharisaic rabbins were guided in their innovations by liberal principles no more than they. The object of the new determinations was simply to widen the domain of the law in a consistent manner, to bring the individual entirely under the iron rule of system. But the Jewish communities gave willing obedience to the hierarchy of the rabbins; Judaism had to be maintained, cost what it might. That the means employed were well adapted to the purpose of maintaining the Jews as a firmly compacted religious community even after all bonds of nationality had fallen away cannot be doubted. But whether the attainment of this purpose by incredible exertion was a real blessing to themselves and the world may very well be disputed.

One consequence of the process of intellectual isolation and of the effort to shape everything in accordance with hard and fast rules and doctrines was the systematisation and codification of juristic and ritual tradition, a work with which a beginning was made in the century following the destruction of Jerusalem. Towards the end of the 2nd century the Pharisaic doctrine of Hillel as it had been further matured by Akiba was codified and elevated to the position of statute law by the patriarch Rabban Judah the Holy (Mishna). [*1] But this was only the

[p. 541]

first stage in the process of systematising and fixing tradition. The Mishna became itself the object of rabbinical comment and supplement; the Tannaim, whose work was registered in the Mathnetha (Mishna, deyterusis = doctrine), were followed by the Amoraim, whose work in turn took permanent shape in the Gemara (= doctrine). The Palestinian Gemara was reduced to writing in perhaps the 4th or 5th century; unfortunately it has been preserved to us only in part, but appears to have reached the Middle Ages in a perfect state (compare Schiller-Szinessy in the Academy, 1878, p. 170 seq.). Even thus the process which issued in the production of the Talmud was not yet completed; the Babylonian Amoraim carried it forward for some time longer, until at last at the rise of Islam the Babylonian Gemara was also written down.

In the 5th century Palestine ceased to be the centre of Judaism. Several circumstances conspired to bring this about. The position of the Jews in the Roman Empire had changed for the worse with the elevation of Christianity to be the religion of the state; the large autonomy which until then they had enjoyed in Palestine was now restricted; above all, the family of the Patriarchs, which had come to form a veritable dynasty, became extinct. [*1] But this did not make an end of what may be called the Jewish church-state; henceforward it had its home in Babylonia. From the period of the exile, a numerous and coherent body of Jews had continued to subsist there; the Parthians and Sassanidae granted them self-government; at their head was a native prince (Resh Galutha,--can be clearly traced from 2nd century A.D. onwards) who, when the Palestinian patriarchate came to an end, was left without a rival. This remarkable relic of a Jewish commonwealth continued to exist until the time of the Abassides. [*2] Even as early as the beginning of the 3rd century A.D. certain rabbins, at their head Abba Areka (Rab), had migrated from Palestine and founded a settlement for learning in the law in Babylonia. The schools there (at Pumbeditha,

[p. 542]

[paragraph continues] Sora, Nahardea) prospered greatly, vied with those of Palestine, and continued to exist after the cessation of the latter, when the patriarchate became extinct; thus they had the last word in the settlement of doctrine.

Alongside of the settlement of tradition went another task, that of fixing the letters of the consonantal text of the Bible (by the Massora), its vowel pronunciation (by the punctuation), and its translation into the Aramaic vernacular (Targum). Here also the Babylonians came after the Palestinians, yet of this sort of erudition Palestine continued to be the headquarters even after the 5th century.

With this task--that of attaining to the greatest possible conformity to the letter and of continuing therein--the inner development of Jewish thought came to an end. [*1] The later Hebrew literature, which does not fall to be considered here, contributed very few new elements; in so far as an intellectual life existed at all among the Jews of the Middle Ages, it was not a growth of native soil but proceeded from the Mahometan or Latin culture of individuals. The Kabbala at most, and even it hardly with justice, can be regarded as having been a genuine product of Judaism. It originated in Palestine, and subsequently flourished chiefly in the later Middle Ages in Spain, and, like all other methodised nonsense, had strong attractions for Christian scholars.

Footnotes

^539:1 The following is the genealogy of the first Nasi:--Gamaliel ben Simeon (Josephus, Vita, 38) ben Gamaliel (Acts v. 34, xxii. 3) ben Simeon ben Hillel. The name Gamaliel was that which occurred most frequently among the patriarchs; see Codex Theod. xvi. 8, 22.

^540:1 The Mishna succeeded almost, but not quite, in completely doing away with all conflicting tendencies. At first the heterodox tradition of that time was also committed [p. 541] to writing (R. Ishmael ben Elisha) and so handed down,--in various forms (collection of the Baraithas, that is, of old precepts which had not been received into the Mishna, in the Tosephtha). Nor did the active opposition altogether die out even at a later period; under favouring circumstances it awoke to new life in Karaism, the founder of which, Anan ben David, lived in Babylonia in the middle of the 8th century.

^541:1 Compare Gothofredus on Cod. Theod., xvi. 8, 29, ad voc. "post excessum patriarcharum."

^541:2 See Noldeke, Tabari; 68, 118, and Kremer, Culturgeschichte des Orients unter den Chalifen, i. 188, ii. 176.

^542:1 Compare F. Weber, System der altsynagogalen palastinischen Theologie, Leipsic, 1880.

      
Prolegomena to the History of Ancient Israel, by Julius Wellhausen, [1885], at sacred-texts.com

  

16. THE JEWISH DISPERSION.

SOMETHING still remains to be said with reference to the diaspora. We have seen how it began; in spite of Josephus (Ant., xi. 5, 2), it is to be carried back not to the Assyrian but merely to the Babylonian captivity; it was not composed of Israelites, but solely of citizens of the southern kingdom. It received its greatest impulse from Alexander, and then afterwards from Caesar. In the Graeco-Roman period Jerusalem at the time of the great festival presented the appearance of a veritable Babel (Acts ii. 9-11); with the Jews themselves were mingled the proselytes (Acts ii. 11), for even already that religion was gaining considerable conquests among the heathen; as King Agrippa I. writes to the Emperor Caius (Philo, Legat. ad Gaium, sec. 36), "Jerusalem is the metropolis not only of Judaea but of very many lands, on account of the colonies which on various occasions (epi kairun) it has sent out into the adjoining countries of Egypt, Phoenicia, Syria, and

[p. 543]

[paragraph continues] Coelesyria, and into the more remote Pamphylia, Cilicia, the greater part of Asia Minor as far as to Bithynia and the remotest parts of Pontus; likewise into Europe--Thessaly, Boeotia, Macedonia, Aetolia, Attica, Argos, Corinth, most parts (and these the fairest) of the Peloponnesus. Nor are the Jewish settlements confined to the mainland only; they are found also in the more important islands, Euboea, Cyprus, Crete. I do not insist on the countries beyond the Euphrates, for with few exceptions all of them, Babylon and the fertile regions around it, have Jewish inhabitants." In the west of Europe also they were not wanting; many thousands of them lived in Rome. In those cities where they were at all numerous they, during the imperial period, formed separate communities; Josephus has preserved a great variety of documents in which the Roman authorities recognise their rights and liberties (especially as regards the Sabbath rest and the observance of festivals). Of greatest importance was the community in Alexandria; according to Philo a million of Jews had their residence there under an ethnarch for whom a gerusia was afterwards substituted by Augustus (In Flac., secs. 6, 10). The extent to which this diaspora was helpful in the diffusion of Christianity, the manner in which the mission of the apostles everywhere attached itself to the synagogues and proseuchai, is well known from the New Testament. That the Christians of the 1st century had much to suffer along with the Jews is also a familiar fact. For at this period, in other respects more favourable to them than any other had previously been, the Jews had occasionally to endure persecution. The emperors, taking umbrage at their intrusiveness, more than once banished them from Rome (Acts xviii. 2). The good will of the native population they never secured; they were most hated in Egypt and Syria, where they were strongest. [*1]

The position of the Jews in the Roman Empire was naturally not improved by the great risings under Nero, Trajan (in Cyrene, Cyprus, Mesopotamia), and Hadrian. The East strictly so called, became

[p. 544]

more and more their proper home. The Christianization of the empire helped still further in a very special way to detach them from the Western world. [*1] They sided with the Persians against the Byzantines; in the year 614 they were even put in possession of Jerusalem by Chosroes, but were not long able to hold their own against Heraclius. [*2] With Islam also they found themselves in greater sympathy than with Christianity, although they were cruelly treated by Mahomet in Arabia, and driven by Omar out of the Hejaz, and notwithstanding the facts that they were as matter of course excluded from citizenship, and that they were held by Moslems as a whole in greater contempt than the Christians. They throve especially well on what may be called the bridge between East and West, in Mauretania and Spain, where they were the intellectual intermediaries between the Arab and the Latin culture. In the Sephardim and Ashkenazim the distinction between the subtler Oriental and the more conservative Western Jews has maintained itself in Europe also. From the 8th century onwards Judaism put forth a remarkable side shoot in the Khazars on the Volga; if legend is to he believed, but little was required at one time to have induced the Russians to accept the Jewish rather than the Christian faith.

In the West the equal civil rights which Caracalla had conferred on all free inhabitants of the empire came to an end, so far as the Jews were concerned, in the time of Constantine. The state then became the secular arm of the church, and took action, though with less severity, against Jews just as against heretics and pagans. As early as the

[p. 545]

year 315, Constantine made conversion from Christianity to Judaism a penal offence, and prohibited Jews, on pain of death, from circumcising their Christian slaves. These laws were re-enacted and made more severe by Constantius, who attached the penalty of death to marriages between Jews and Christians. Theodosius I. and Honorius, indeed, by strictly prohibiting the destruction of synagogues, and by maintaining the old regulation that a Jew was not to be summoned before a court of justice on a Sabbath-day, put a check upon the militant zeal of the Church, by which even Chrysostom, for example, allowed himself to be carried away at Antioch. But Honorius rendered them ineligible for civil or military service, leaving open to them only the bar and the decurionate, the latter being a privilegium odiosum. Their liberty to try cases by their own law was curtailed; the cases between Jews and Christians were to be tried by Christian judges only. Theodosius II. prohibited them from building new synagogues, and anew enforced their disability for all state employments. Most hostile of all was the orthodox Justinian, who, however, was still more severe against Pagans and Samaritans. [*1] He harassed the Jews with a law enjoining them to observe Easter on the same day as the Christians, a law which it was of course found impossible to carry out. [*2]

In the Germanic states which arose upon the ruins of the Roman empire, the Jews did not fare badly on the whole. It was only in cases where the state was dominated by the Catholic Church, as, for example; among the Spanish Visigoths, that they were cruelly oppressed; among the Arian Ostrogoths, on the other hand, they had nothing to complain of. One thing in their favour was the Germanic principle that the law to be applied depended not on the land but on the nationality, as now in the East Europeans are judged by the consuls according to the law of their respective nations. The autonomy of the Jewish communities, which had been curtailed by the later emperors, was now enlarged once more under the laxer political and legal conditions. The Jews fared remarkably well under the Frankish monarchy; the Carolingians helped them in every possible way, making no account of the complaints of the bishops. They were allowed to hold property in land, but showed no

[p. 546]

eagerness for it; leaving agriculture to the Germans, they devoted them selves to trade. The market was completely in their hands; as a specially lucrative branch of commerce they still carried on the traffic in slaves, which had engaged them even in ancient times. [*1]

Meanwhile the Church was not remiss in seeking constantly repeated re-enactments of the old imperial laws, in the framing of which she had had paramount influence, and which she now incorporated with her own canon law. [*2] Gradually she succeeded in attaining her object. In the later Middle Ages the position of the Jews in the Christian society deteriorated. Intercourse with them was shunned; their isolation from being voluntary became compulsory; from the 13th century onwards they were obliged to wear, as a distinctive mark (more necessary in the East than in the West), a round or square yellow badge on their breast. [*3] The difference of religion elicited a well-marked religious hate with oft-repeated deadly outbreaks, especially during the period of the crusades, and afterwards when the Black Death was raging (1348-50). Practical consequences like these the Church of course did not countenance; the popes set themselves against persecutions of the Jews, [*4] but with imperfect success. The popular aversion rested by no means exclusively on religious considerations; worldly motives were also present. The Jews of that period had in a still higher degree than now the control of financial affairs in their hands; and they used it without scruple. The Church herself had unintentionally given them a monopoly of the money market, by forbidding Christians to take interest. [*5] In this way the Jews became

[p. 547]

rich indeed, but at the same time made themselves still more repugnant to the Christian population than they previously were by reason of their religion.

Having, according to the later mediaeval system, no rights in the Christian state, the Jews were tolerated only in those territories where the sovereign in the exercise of free favour accorded them protection. This protection was granted them in many quarters, but never for nothing; numerous and various taxes, which could be raised or changed in a perfectly arbitrary way, were exacted in exchange. But in countries where the feeling of nationality attained to a vigorous development, the spirit of toleration was speedily exhausted; the Jews were expelled by the act of the state. England was the first kingdom in which this occurred (1290); France followed in 1395, Spain and Portugal in 1492 and 1495. In this way it came about that the Holy Roman Empire--Germany, Italy, and adjoining districts--became the chief abode of the Jews. [*1] In the anarchy which here prevailed they could best maintain their separate attitude, and if they were expelled from one locality they readily found refuge in some other. The emperor had indeed the right of extirpating them altogether (with the exception of a small number to be left as a memorial); but, in the first place, he had in various ways given up this right to the states of the empire, and, moreover, his pecuniary resources were so small that he could not afford to want the tax which the Jews as his "servi camerae" paid him for protecting their persons and property. In spite of many savage persecutions the Jews maintained their ground, especially in those parts of Germany where the political confusion was greatest. They even succeeded in maintaining a kind of autonomy by means of an arrangement in virtue of which civil processes which they had against each other were decided by their own rabbins in accordance with the law of the Talmud. [*2]

[p. 548]

The Jews, through their having on the one hand separated themselves, and on the other hand been excluded on religious grounds from the Gentiles, gained an internal solidarity and solidity which has hitherto enabled them to survive all the attacks of time. The hostility of the Middle Ages involved them in no danger; the greatest peril has been brought upon them by modern times, along with permission and increasing inducements to abandon their separate position. It is worth while to recall on this point the opinion of Spinoza, who was well able to form a competent judgment (Tract. Theol. polit., c. 4, ad fin.):--"That the Jews have maintained themselves so long in spite of their dispersed and disorganised condition is not at all to be wondered at, when it is considered how they separated themselves from all other nationalities in such a way as to bring upon themselves the hatred of all, and that not only by external rites contrary to those of other nations, but also by the sign of circumcision, which they maintain most religiously. Experience shows that their conservation is due in a great degree to the very hatred which they have incurred. When the king of Spain compelled the Jews either to accept the national religion or to go into banishment, very many of them accepted the Roman Catholic faith, and in virtue of this received all the privileges of Spanish subjects, and were declared eligible for every honour; the consequence was that a process of absorption began immediately, and in a short time neither trace nor memory of them survived. Quite different was the history of those whom the king of Portugal compelled to accept the creed of his nation; although converted, they continued to live apart from the rest of their fellow-subjects, having been declared unfit for any dignity. So great importance do I attach to the sign of circumcision also in this connection, that I am persuaded that it is sufficient by itself to maintain the separate existence of the nation for ever." The persistency of the race may of course prove a harder thing to overcome than Spinoza has supposed; but nevertheless he will be found to have spoken truly in declaring that the so-called emancipation of the Jews must inevitably lead to the extinction of Judaism wherever the process is extended beyond the political to the social sphere. For the accomplishment of this centuries may be required.

 

Footnotes

^543:1 Compare Schurer, Neutest. Zeitgeschichte (1874), sec. 31. The place taken by the Jewish element in the world of that time is brilliantly set forth by Mommsen in his History of Rome (book v. chapter ii.; English translation iv. p. 538 seq., 1866):--"How numerous even in Rome the Jewish population was already before Caesar's time, and how closely at the same time the Jews even then kept together as fellow-countrymen, is shown by the remark of an author of this period, that it was dangerous for a governor to offend the Jews in his province, because he might then certainly reckon on being hissed after his return, by the populace of the capital. Even at this time the predominant business [p. 544] of the Jews was trade. . . . At this period too we encounter the peculiar antipathy of the Occidentals towards this so thoroughly Oriental race and their foreign opinions and customs. This Judaism, although not the most pleasing feature in the nowhere pleasing picture of the mixture of nations which then prevailed, was, nevertheless, an historical element developing itself in the natural course of things,. . . which Caesar just like his predecessor Alexander fostered as far as possible. . . .They did not, of course, contemplate placing the Jewish nationality on an equal footing with the Hellenic or Italo-Hellenic. But the Jew who has not, like the Occidental, received the Pandora's gift of political organisation, and stands substantially in a relation of indifference to the state, who, moreover, is as reluctant to give up the essence of his national idiosyncrasy as he is ready to clothe it with any nationality at pleasure and to adapt himself up to a certain degree to foreign habits--the Jew was, for this very reason, as it were, made for a state which was to be built on the ruins of a hundred living polities, and to be endowed with a somewhat abstract and, from the outset, weakened nationality. In the ancient world also Judaism was an effective leaven of cosmopolitanism and of national decomposition."

^544:1 For a brief time only were they again favoured by Julian the Apostate; compare Gibbon, chapter xxiii.

^544:2 Gibbon, chapter xlvi.

^545:1 Cod. Theod., xvi. 8: "De Judaeis, Coelicolis, et Samaritanis;" Cod. Just., i. 9: "De Judaeis et Coelicolis." With regard to these coelicolae, see Gothofredus on Cod. Theod., xvi. 8, 9, and also J. Bernays, "Ueber die Gottesfurchtigen bei Juvenal," in the Comm. Philol in hon. Th. Mommsen, 1877, p. 163.

^545:2 Gibbon, ch. xlvii.

^546:1 Agobardus Lugdunensis, Die Insolentia Judaeorum, De Judaicis superstitionibus. Agobard was no superstitious fanatic, but one of the weightiest and most enlightened ecclesiastics of the Middle Ages.

^546:2 Compare Decret. i., dist. 45, c. 3; Decr. ii., caus. 23, qaest. 8, c. 9, caus. 28, qu. 1, c. 10-12; Decr. iii., de consecr., dist. 4, c. 93; Decretal. Greg. 5, 6 ("De Judaeis, Sarracenis, et eorum servis"), 5, 19, 18; Extrav. commun. 5, 2.

^546:3 Compare Du Cange, s. v. "Judaei;" also Reuter, Gesch. d. Aufklarung im Mittelalter, i. 154 seq. In spite of all the legal restrictions laid upon them, the Jews still continued to have great influence with the princes, and more especially with the popes, of the Middle Ages.

^546:4 Decr. ii. 23, 8, 9. Alexander II. omnibus episcopis Hispaniae: Dispar . . . est Judaeorum et Sarracenorum causa; in illos enim, qui Christianos persequuntur et ex urbibus et propriis sedibus pellunt, juste pugnatur, hi vero ubique servire parati sunt.

^546:5 Decretal. Greg. v. 19, 18. Innocent III. in name of the Lateran Council: Quanto amplius Christiana religio ab exactione compescitur usurarum, tanto gravisu super his Judaeorum perfidia insolescit, ita quod brevi tempore Christianorum exhauriunt [p. 547] facultates. Volentes igitur in hac parte prospicere Christianis, ne a Judaeis immaniter aggraventur, synodali decreto statuimus, ut, si de caetero quocunque praetextu Judaei a Christianis graves immoderatasve usuras extorserint, Christianorum eis participium subtrahatur, donec de immoderato gravamine satisfecerint competenter. . . . Principibus autem injungimus, ut propter hoc non sint Christianis infesti, sed potius a tanto gravamine studeant cohibere Judaeos.

^547:1 The Polish Jews are German Jews who migrated in the Middle Ages to Poland, but have maintained to the present day their German speech, a mediaeval South-Frankish dialect, of course greatly corrupted. In Russian "German" and "Jew" mean the same thing.

^547:2 Stobbe, Die Juden in Deutschl. wahr. d. Mittelalt., Brunsw., 1866.

     
Prolegomena to the History of Ancient Israel, by Julius Wellhausen, [1885], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 549]

  

INDEX OF PASSAGES DISCUSSED.

          GENESIS.

        

     
       

       PAGES

     
      i. 1-ii. 4a

       <page 297>, <page 305>

     
      i. 1-4, 6, 26-28

       <page 387>-<page 389>

     
      i. 4b-iii. 24

       <page 299>

     
      i. 28-ii. 4

       <page 338>

     
      ii. 3

       <page 116>

     
      iii. iv

       <page 465>

     
      ii. 22

       <page 335>

     
      iv. v.

       <page 308>

     
      iv. 1-15

       <page 324>

     
      iv. 14, 16

       <page 22>

     
      iv. 16-24

       <page 316>

     
      vi.-ix.

       <page 310>

     
      vi. 1-4

       <page 307>, <page 314>

     
      vii. 6-9

       <page 384>

     
      viii. 20, 21

       <page 62>, <page 69>

     
      ix. 1-17

       <page 338>

     
      x.

       <page 313>

     
      xi. 1-19

       <page 316>

     
      xi. 7

       <page 335>

     
      xii. seq.

       <page 319>

     
      xvii.

       <page 338>

     
      xvii. 10, 11

       <page 116>

     
      xviii.

       <page 31>

     
      xx.

       <page 320>

     
      xxi.

       <page 326>

     
      xxii. 2

       <page 69>

     
      xxv.

       <page 322>

     
      xxvi.

       <page 320>

     
      xxvi. 24

       <page 31>

     
      xxvii. 29

       <page 464>

     
      xxvii. 40

       <page 322>

     
      xxviii. 12

       <page 335>

     
      xxviii. 22

       <page 156>

     
      xxix.-xxxi.

       <page 326>

     
      xxxiii. 20

       <page 29>

     
      xxxiv. 30

       <page 144>

     
      xxxv. 10

       <page 336>

     
      xlvi. 4

       <page 22>

     
      xlix. 5-7

       <page 144>, <page 443>

     
      
   EXODUS.

        

     
      ii. 11

       <page 346>

     
      iii. 13, 14

       <page 339>

     
      iv. 14

       <page 141>, <page 142>

     
      iv. 16

       <page 339>

     
      iv. 25

       <page 340>

     
      vi. 2, 3

       <page 338>

     
      vii. 1

       <page 339>

     
      viii. 26

       <page 143>

     
      ix. 31, 32

       <page 90>

     
      x. 9

       <page 88>

     
      xii.

       <page 100> seq., <page 352>

     
      xiii. 3 seq.

       <page 102>

     
      xiii. 12

       <page 87>

     
      xiii. 17, 18

       <page 430>

     
      xiv.

       <page 352>

     
      xv. 17

       <page 22>

     
      xv. 25

       <page 343>, <page 439>

     
      xvi.-xix.

       <page 342>

     
      xvi.

       <page 115>, <page 352>

     
      xvi. 21-31

       <page 430>

     
      xvii.

       <page 439>

     
      xvii. xviii.

       <page 53>

     
      xviii. 12

       <page 71>

     
      xviii. 25 seq.

       <page 395>

     
      xix. 6

       <page 422>

     
      xx. 3-17

       <page 392>

     
      xx. 10

       <page 114>

     
      xx. 23

       <page 105>

     
      xx. 24-26

       <page 29>, <page 141>, <page 457>

     
      xx. 28, 29

       <page 88>

     
      xxi -xxiii.

       <page 465>

     
      xxi. 2-6

       <page 116>, <page 395>

     
      xxi. 13, 14

       <page 33>

     
      xxii.-xxiv.

       <page 447>

     
      xxii. 29, 30

       <page 93>

     
      xxiii. 3-8

       <page 141>

     
      xxiii. 10, 11

       <page 116> seq.

     
      xxiii. 12

       <page 114>

     
      xxiii. 14-17

       <page 81>

     
      xxiii. 16

       <page 108>

     
      xxiii. 18

       <page 91>, <page 99>

     
      xxiii. 20

       <page 359>

     
      xxiv. 3-8

       <page 418>

     
      xxiv. 4

       <page 29>

     
      xxiv. 11

       <page 71>

     
      xxv.-Levit. x.

       <page 34>, <page 52>

     
      xxv. 22

       <page 353>

     
      xxvii. 40

       <page 465>

     
      xxviii. 42

       <page 29>

     
      xxx.

       <page 65>

     
      xxx. 11

       <page 80>

     
      xxx. 15

       <page 159>

     
      xxxi. 13

       <page 116>

     
      xxxi. 52

       <page 465>

     
      xxxii. 6

       <page 71>

     
      xxxii. 26-29

       <page 152>

     
      xxxiii. 7-11

       <page 130>, <page 142>

     
      xxxiv.

       <page 439>

     
      xxxiv. 12 seq.

       <page 17>

     
      xxxiv. 22

       <page 108>

     
      xxxiv. 23

       <page 83>, <page 86>, <page 95>

     
      xxxiv. 29-35

       <page 353>

     
      xxxv. 3

       <page 115>

     
      xxxviii. 8

       <page 353>

     
      
   LEVITICUS.

        

     
      i. seq.

       <page 52>

     
      ii. 11

       <page 68>

     
      iv. 1-35

       <page 75>

     
      v,

       <page 75>

     
      vi. 12-16

       <page 79>

     
      vi. 20

       <page 63>

     
      vii. 12, 13

       <page 69>

     
      vii. 22-27

       <page 51>

     
      x.

       <page 66>

     
      xv. 37-41

       <page 423>

     
      xvi.

       <page 62>

     
      xvi. 12, 18-20

       <page 66>

     
      xvii.-xxvi.

       <page 86>, <page 376> seq.

     
      xviii.

       <page 35>

     
      xvii. 4

       <page 46>, <page 50>

     
      xvii. 8

       <page 75>

     
      xix. 21

       <page 75>

     
      xxi. 22

       <page 62>

     
      xxii. 18, 21

       <page 75>

     
      xxiii.

       <page 99>, <page 105>, <page 108>

     
      xxiii. 9-22

       <page 86>

     
      xxv. 1-7

       <page 117> seq.

     
      xxv. 9

       <page 110>

     
      xxv. 10

       <page 120>

     
      xxvi.

       <page 380>

     
      xxvi. 34, 35

       <page 119>, <page 279>

     
      
   NUMBERS.

        

     
      i. ii.

       <page 348>

     
      i. 47, 49

       <page 146>

     
      ii.

       <page 121>

     
      iii. iv

       <page 348>

     
      iii. 4

       <page 149>

     
      iii. 6

       <page 146>

     
      iii. 9

       <page 121>

     
      v. 5-10

       <page 76>

     
      viii.

       <page 122>, <page 349>

     
      xi. xii.

       <page 346>

     
      xi.

       <page 343>

     
      xiii. xiv.

       <page 353>

     
      xvi. 37-41

       <page 423>

     
      xvi. 46

       <page 66>

     
      xvi. 47

       <page 62>

     
      xviii. 1, 9

       <page 353>

     
      [p. 550]

        

     
      xvii. 3

       <page 146>

     
      xviii. 2

       <page 146>

     
      xviii. 12, 53

       <page 158>

     
      xviii. 20, 23

       <page 161>

     
      xviii. 22

       <page 121>

     
      xviii. 35

       <page 159>

     
      xx. xxi.

       <page 343>, <page 356>

     
      xxi. 21-30

       <page 431>

     
      xxii.-xxiv.

       <page 356>

     
      xxiii. 1 seq.

       <page 69>

     
      xxv.

       <page 356>, <page 373>

     
      xxv. 1-7

       <page 117>

     
      xxviii. xxix.

       <page 99>, <page 108>

     
      xxxi.

       <page 349>

     
      xxxii.

       <page 356>

     
      xxxii. 39-42

       <page 445>

     
      xxxiii. 52

       <page 17>

     
      xxxiv.

       <page 348>

     
      
   DEUTERONOMY.

        

     
      i. seq.

       <page 32>, <page 345>, <page 387>

     
      i.-iv.

       <page 371>

     
      i. 3

       <page 109>, <page 384>

     
      iv. 42-43 

       <page 162>

     
      v.,-xi.

       <page 369>

     
      xii. seq.

       <page 32>

     
      xii. 2, 30

       <page 17>

     
      xii. 10

       <page 19>, <page 447>

     
      xiv. 22

       <page 156>

     
      xv.

       <page 117>

     
      xv. 19 seq.

       <page 87>

     
      xvi.

       <page 81>

     
      xvi. 1

       <page 87>, <page 109>

     
      xvi. 4-8

       <page 104>

     
      xvi. 7

       <page 89>

     
      xvii 4

       <page 62>

     
      xviii.

       <page 399>

     
      xviii. 1-7

       <page 153>, <page 155>

     
      xviii. 4

       <page 157>

     
      xviii. 22

       <page 403>

     
      xxvi.

       <page 157>

     
      xxvi. 3

       <page 77>

     
      xxx. 11-14 

       <page 488>

     
      xxxii. 48-52

       <page 374>

     
      xxxiii. 4

       <page 394>

     
      xxxiii. 5

       <page 413>

     
      xxxiii.

       <page 8>-<page 11>, <page 65>, <page 135>,   <page 143>, <page 394>

     
      xxxiv. 1-7

       <page 374>

     
      xxxiv. 10

       <page 396>

     
      
   JOSHUA.

        

     
      1 seq.

       <page 442>

     
      vi. 19, 24

       <page 42>

     
      ix. 4-7, 22-14

       <page 359>

     
      ix. 22-27

       <page 374> seq.

     
      ix. 27

       <page 42>

     
      xiii. 14

       <page 145>

     
      xiv.

       <page 358>

     
      xiv. 33

       <page 142>

     
      xviii. 2-10

       <page 358>

     
      xx.

       <page 375>

     
      xxi.

       <page 146>, <page 159>

     
      xxii.

       <page 38>

     
      xxii. 9-34

       <page 375>

     
      xxiv. 24, 33

       <page 40>, <page 371>

     
      
   JUDGES.

        

     
      i. seq.

       <page 229>, <page 446> seq.

     
      i.

       <page 233>, <page 358>, <page 443>

     
      i. 20

       <page 94>

     
      ii.

       <page 229>

     
      iii. 17

       <page 61>

     
      iv. v.

       <page 240> seq.

     
      v.

       <page 435>, <page 439>

     
      vi.-viii.

       <page 237>

     
      vi. 7-10

       <page 234>

     
      vi. 20

       <page 29>, <page 55>, <page 62>, <page 68>

     
      viii. 26, 27

       <page 130>

     
      viii. 33

       <page 234>

     
      ix.

       <page 245>

     
      x. 3 seq.

       <page 445>

     
      xi. 24

       <page 235>

     
      xi. 31

       <page 69>

     
      xiii.-xvi.

       <page 245>

     
      xiii. 16, 23

       <page 69>

     
      xiii. 19-24

       <page 29>

     
      xvii. xviii.

       <page 129>, <page 132>, <page 233>

     
      xvii. 4

       <page 130>

     
      xviii. 30

       <page 142>

     
      xix.-xxi.

       <page 233>, <page 235> seq.

     
      xx. 26

       <page 72>

     
      xxi. 4

       <page 72>

     
      xxi. 19

       <page 94>

     
      
   1 SAMUEL.

        

     
      i.-iii.

       <page 270>, <page 397>

     
      i.

       <page 128>

     
      i. 1

       <page 78>

     
      i. 4

       <page 99>

     
      i. 9

       <page 131>

     
      i. 20, 21

       <page 108>

     
      i. 24

       <page 64>, <page 68>

     
      i. 28

       <page 136>

     
      ii. 12-17

       <page 68>, <page 153>

     
      ii. 18

       <page 136>

     
      ii. 22

       <page 41>

     
      ii. 27-36

       <page 19>, <page 49>, <page 126>

     
      iii. 14

       <page 73>

     
      iv.-vi.

       <page 41> seq.

     
      iv. 18

       <page 245>

     
      vi. 3, 4, 8

       <page 73>

     
      vi. 13 seq.

       <page 29>, <page 128>

     
      vii. 1

       <page 130>

     
      vii. 2-4

       <page 246>

     
      vii. 2-17

       <page 248>

     
      vii. 9 seq.

       <page 69>

     
      viii.

       <page 248>

     
      ix. x.

       <page 19>, <page 251>, <page 270>, <page 397>, <page 413>

     
      ix. 9

       <page 268>

     
      ix. 13

       <page 77>

     
      ix. 22

       <page 71>

     
      x. 3

       <page 68>

     
      x. 12

       <page 268>, <page 398>

     
      x. 17-xii. 25

       <page 248>

     
      x. 27

       <page 61>

     
      xii.

       <page 246>

     
      xiii.

       <page 256>

     
      xiii. 1

       <page 246>

     
      xiii. 3

       <page 448>

     
      xiii, 9-12

       <page 72>

     
      xiv. 18

       <page 133>

     
      xiv. 33

       <page 29>

     
      xiv. 34

       <page 131>

     
      xiv. 35

       <page 18>, <page 55>

     
      xv.

       <page 258>, <page 261>

     
      xvi.

       <page 76>, <page 78>

     
      xvi. 14-23

       <page 263>

     
      xvii. 1-xviii. 5

       <page 263>

     
      xviii. 6 seq.

       <page 267>

     
      xix.

       <page 264>

     
      xix. 18-24

       <page 267>

     
      xx. 5, 6

       <page 78>, <page 113>, <page 264>-<page 266>

     
      xxi.

       <page 40>, <page 131>

     
      xxii.

       <page 41>, <page 132>

     
      xxii. 11

       <page 128>

     
      xxiii.-xxvii.

       <page 264>

     
      xxviii.

       <page 259>

     
      xxviii. 24

       <page 87>

     
      
   2 SAMUEL.

        

     
      ii. 8-13

       <page 246>

     
      vi. 14, 18

       <page 133>

     
      10. 17

       <page 44>

     
      vii. 20.

       <page 20>, <page 44>

     
      viii. 18

       <page 132>

     
      xiv. 26

       <page 110>

     
      xv. 11

       <page 71>

     
      xx. 8

       <page 29>

     
      xxi. 6, 9

       <page 40>

     
      xxiii. 17

       <page 63>

     
      xxiv. 21

       <page 29>

     
      
   1 KINGS.

        

     
      i. 9

       <page 29>, <page 71>, <page 76>

     
      i. 39

       <page 43>

     
      ii. 28-30

       <page 33>, <page 43>

     
      iii. 1-4

       <page 40>, <page 69>

     
      iii. 2

       <page 19>, <page 43>, <page 49>, <page 277>, <page 280>

     
      iv. 5

       <page 132>, <page 134>, <page 448>

     
      iv. 21

       <page 61>

     
      v. 18

       <page 20>

     
      vi. 1

       <page 229>

     
      vi. 37, 38

       <page 109>

     
      vii. 48

       <page 67>

     
      viii. ix.

       <page 274>

     
      viii.

       <page 421>

     
      viii. 2

       <page 109>

     
      viii. 4

       <page 43>

     
      viii. 9

       <page 392>

     
      viii. 22, 54, 55

       <page 133>

     
      viii. 27

       <page 77>

     
      viii. 66

       <page 106>

     
      ix. 11, 19

       <page 456>

     
      x. 11

       <page 456>

     
      xi. 27

       <page 126>

     
      xi. 31-39

       <page 275>

     
      xi. 41

       <page 287>

     
      [p. 551]

        

     
      xii. 26-30

       <page 282>

     
      xii. 28

       <page 133>

     
      xiii. 33

       <page 133> seq. <page 282>

     
      xiv. 22

       <page 283>

     
      xv. 5

       <page 466>

     
      xvi. 1

       <page 285>

     
      xvii.-xix.

       <page 287>

     
      xviii. 29, 36

       <page 79>

     
      xviii. 34, 38

       <page 70>

     
      xix. 21

       <page 55>

     
      xx.-xxii.

       <page 289>

     
      xx. 1 seq.

       <page 459>, <page 460>

     
      xx. 34

       <page 459>

     
      xxii. 19

       <page 335>, <page 403>

     
      
   2 KINGS.

        

     
      i. 1

       <page 460>

     
      iii. 27

       <page 22>, <page 69>

     
      iv. 22, 23

       <page 112>, <page 113>

     
      v. 17

       <page 22>

     
      ix. x.

       <page 292>

     
      ix. 7

       <page 285>

     
      x. 11

       <page 134>

     
      x. 30

       <page 285>

     
      xii. 16

       <page 73>

     
      xvi. 14

       <page 37>

     
      xvi. 15

       <page 79>

     
      xvii.

       <page 275>

     
      xvii. 13

       <page 285>

     
      xvii. 25

       <page 22>

     
      xvii. 27, 28

       <page 395>

     
      xviii. 4

       <page 46>, <page 47>, <page 480>

     
      xviii. 14-16

       <page 483>

     
      xviii. 22

       <page 46>, <page 47>

     
      xix. 7, 35-37

       <page 280>, <page 401>, <page 409>, <page 483>, <page 487>

     
      xxi. 10

       <page 285>

     
      xxii. xxiii.

       <page 280>, <page 401>, <page 409>, <page 487>

     
      xxii.

       <page 26>

     
      xxiii.

       <page 27>

     
      xxiii. 1-3

       <page 418>

     
      xxiii. 9

       <page 124>, <page 140>, <page 147>, <page 154>

     
      xxiii. 13

       <page 284>

     
      xxiii. 21

       <page 93>, <page 105>

     
      
   1 CHRONICLES.

        

     
      i.-ix.

       <page 211>

     
      x. 1-xi. 3

       <page 172>

     
      xi. 10-xii. 40

       <page 173>

     
      xiii.-xvi.

       <page 175>

     
      xvi. 39

       <page 40>

     
      xvii.

       <page 177>

     
      xvii. 5

       <page 41>

     
      xviii.-xx.

       <page 177>

     
      xxi.

       <page 179>

     
      xxi. 29

       <page 40>

     
      xxii,-xxix

       <page 180>

     
      
   2 CHRONICLES.

        

     
      i.-ix.

       <page 182>

     
      i. 3 seq.

       <page 40>

     
      vii. 9

       <page 106>

     
      x. xi.

       <page 187>

     
      xii. 1-16

       <page 193>

     
      xxi.

       <page 194>

     
      xxiii.

       <page 196>

     
      xxxiv.

       <page 198>

     
      xxxiv.

       <page 200>

     
      
   EZRA.

        

     
      iii. 3

       <page 29>

     
      iv. 19

       <page 420>

     
      ix. 10, 11

       <page 400>

     
      See also

       <page 405>, <page 496>

     
      
   NEHEMIAH.

        

     
      i.1-ii. 1

       <page 109>

     
      viii.-x.

       <page 408>

     
      viii. 14 seq.

       <page 106>

     
      ix. 7

       <page 279>

     
      x. 33-38

       <page 63>, <page 157>, <page 159>, <page 166>

     
      xiii. 15

       <page 166>

     
      See also

       <page 496>

     
      
   JOB.

        

     
      Book of

       <page 505>

     
      xxxviii. 38

       <page 303>

     
      
   PSALMS.

        

     
      lxxiii

       <page 506>

     
      
   PROVERBS.

        

     
      vii. 14

       <page 76>

     
      xv. 8

       <page 77>

     
      xxviii. 9

       <page 65>

     
      
   ISAIAH.

        

     
      i.

       <page 482>

     
      i. 8

       <page 85>

     
      i. 10, 11

       <page 58>, <page 65>

     
      i. 13

       <page 65>, <page 113>

     
      i. 15

       <page 77>

     
      i. 21-27

       <page 415>, <page 418>

     
      ii. 3

       <page 58>

     
      ii. 20

       <page 418>

     
      iii. 12

       <page 477>

     
      v. 24

       <page 58>

     
      v. 26

       <page 419>

     
      vi. 7

       <page 418>

     
      viii. 1

       <page 418>

     
      viii. 16,20

       <page 58>

     
      viii. 28

       <page 72>

     
      ix. 2

       <page 95>

     
      xi. 1-9

       <page 25>, <page 416>, <page 484>

     
      xvii.

       <page 480>

     
      xxviii.

       <page 476>

     
      xxviii. 5, 6

       <page 415>

     
      xxxix. 1

       <page 95>, <page 108>

     
      xxx. 9, 20

       <page 58>

     
      xxx. 22

       <page 25>

     
      xxx. 29

       <page 89>

     
      xxx. 32

       <page 81>

     
      xxxii. 1, 2

       <page 416>

     
      xxxii. 9

       <page 95>

     
      xxxii. 10

       <page 108>

     
      xxxii. 22

       <page 395>, <page 480>

     
      xl.-lxvi.

       <page 400> seq. <page 492>

     
      xlii. 1-4

       <page 400>

     
      xlii. 24

       <page 279>

     
      xliii. 27

       <page 279>

     
      xlix. 1-6

       <page 400>

     
      l. 4-9

       <page 400>

     
      lii. 13-liii. 12

       <page 400>

     
      liii. 10

       <page 73>

     
      lvi. 2

       <page 116>

     
      lviii.

       <page 111>

     
      lviii. 13

       <page 116>

     
      lxvi. 18-24

       <page 419>

     
      
   JEREMIAH.

        

     
      ii. 28

       <page 27>

     
      iii.

       <page 480>

     
      v. 24

       <page 86>

     
      vi. 19 seq.

       <page 58>

     
      vi. 20

       <page 65>

     
      vii.

       <page 25>

     
      vii. 12-19

       <page 42>

     
      vii. 21

       <page 58>

     
      xi. 13

       <page 27>

     
      xiv. 12

       <page 77>, <page 111>

     
      xv. 1

       <page 249>

     
      xvi. 13

       <page 22>

     
      xvii. 21, 22

       <page 115>

     
      xvii. 26

       <page 59>

     
      xix. 5

       <page 69>, <page 89>

     
      xxx. 21

       <page 139>

     
      xxxi. 31

       <page 491>

     
      xxxii. 30

       <page 279>

     
      xxxiii. 17-22

       <page 141>, <page 279>

     
      xxxiv. 13-18

       <page 418>

     
      xxxiv. 14

       <page 119>

     
      xxxv. 2

       <page 71>

     
      xxxv. 19

       <page 140>

     
      xxxvi. 6-9

       <page 111>

     
      
   LAMENTATIONS.

        

     
      ii. 6

       <page 116>

     
      ii. 9

       <page 396>, <page 403>

     
      ii. 20

       <page 26>

     
      iv. 20

       <page 417>

     
      
   EZEKIEL.

        

     
      iv. 4

       <page 273>

     
      iv. 13

       <page 22>, <page 98>

     
      viii. 11

       <page 65>

     
      xvi.

       <page 279>

     
      xvi. 18

       <page 65>

     
      xx.

       <page 279>

     
      xx. 16

       <page 116>

     
      xx. 26

       <page 89>

     
      xxii. 26

       <page 116>

     
      xxiii. 41

       <page 65>

     
      xxxviii., xxxix.

       <page 419>

     
      xl.-xlviii.

       <page 59>, <page 421>

     
      xl. 1

       <page 110>

     
      [p. 552]

        

     
      xli. 21

       <page 67>

     
      xliii. 26

       <page 152>

     
      xliv.

       <page 495>

     
      xliv. 6-16

       <page 122>

     
      xliv. 28-32

       <page 156>, <page 157>

     
      xlv. 2-5

       <page 163>

     
      xlv. 18-20

       <page 110>

     
      xlv. 21-25

       <page 106>

     
      xlvi. 1

       <page 114>

     
      xlvi. 17

       <page 120>

     
      xlvi. 20

       <page 68>

     
      
   DANIEL.

        

     
      ii. 13

       <page 80>

     
      
   HOSEA.

        

     
      i. 4

       <page 292>

     
      i. 7

       <page 417>

     
      ii.

       <page 96>

     
      ii. 5, 9

       <page 62>

     
      ii. 13

       <page 113>

     
      iii. 4

       <page 81>, <page 395>

     
      iv. 1-10

       <page 137>

     
      iv. 6

       <page 57>

     
      iv. 8

       <page 73>

     
      iv. 15

       <page 29>

     
      v. 1, 2

       <page 162>

     
      v. 6

       <page 77>

     
      vi. 9

       <page 137>

     
      viii. 1

       <page 22>, <page 97>

     
      viii. 5

       <page 114>

     
      viii. 11

       <page 57>

     
      ix.

       <page 98>

     
      ix. 1

       <page 81>, <page 96>

     
      ix. 3-5

       <page 22>

     
      ix. 4

       <page 81>

     
      ix. 65

       <page 39>

     
      ix. 15

       <page 22>, <page 97>

     
      xii. 8, 9

       <page 465>

     
      xiii. 2

       <page 89>

     
         
JOEL.

        

     
      i. 14

       <page 111>

     
      ii. 12, 15

       <page 111>

     
      iv.

       <page 419>

     
      
   AMOS.

        

     
      i.

       <page 463>, <page 472>

     
      i. 2

       <page 24>

     
      i. 11

       <page 324>

     
      ii. 4

       <page 55>

     
      ii. 7

       <page 71>

     
      ii. 11

       <page 135>

     
      iii. 2

       <page 471>

     
      iv. 4

       <page 46>, <page 156>

     
      iv. 5

       <page 69>

     
      v. 18-20

       <page 471>

     
      v. 21

       <page 55>

     
      v. 23

       <page 81>

     
      vi. 10

       <page 81>

     
      vi. 14

       <page 464>

     
      vii. 9-23

       <page 23>, <page 133>, <page 319>

     
      viii. 3

       <page 81>

     
      viii. 5

       <page 112>

     
      viii. 14

       <page 30>, <page 46>, <page 65>

     
      ix.

       <page 23>

     
      
   JONAH.

        

     
      i. 3-10

       <page 22>

     
      
   MICAH.

        

     
      vi. 2-vii. 6

       <page 436>

     
      vi. 6 seq.

       <page 58>, <page 63>, <page 65>, <page 73>, <page 81>

     
      
   HAGGAI.

        

     
      ii. 11

       <page 421>

     
      
   ZECHARIAH.

        

     
      i. seq.

       <page 421>

     
      i. 7

       <page 109>

     
      vii. 5

       <page 110>

     
      vii. 9-11

       <page 400>

     
      viii. 8

       <page 279>

     
      viii. 14-16

       <page 400>

     
      viii. 19

       <page 110>

     
      ix. 7 seq.

       <page 279>

     
      xii.-xiv.

       <page 419>

     
      xiii. 2, 3

       <page 404>

     
      xiv. 20, 21

       <page 16>, <page 71>, <page 97>, <page 123>

     
      
   MALACHI.

        

     
      i. 8

       <page 61>

     
      ii. 11

       <page 22>

     
      iv. 4

       <page 399>

     
    

    


===== BOOK: phc.txt =====



The Philistines, by R.A.S. Macalister, [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Philistines

  

Their History and Civilization

  

By

  

R. A. Stewart Macalister, MA., FS.A.

  

(Professor of Celtic Archaeology, University College, Dublin)

  

The Schweich Lectures

  

London: Published for the British Academy by Humphrey Milford

  

[1913]

Welche Ironie der Weltgeschichte, dass die so wenig 'philisterhafte' Nation in mehreren Sprachen Europas jetzt ihren Namen zur Bezeichnung des feigen und langweiligen Spiessburgers hergeben muss!

W. MAX MuLLER

'Philistinism', after all, stands for two great habits, decency and order.

The Quarterly Review, 1899

The Philistines, by R.A.S. Macalister, [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xv]

  

PREFACE

AMONG the Nations that came within the purview of the Old Testament Writers--nations seldom mentioned without stricture, whether for idolatry, immorality, or cruelty--perhaps none were the object of so concentrated an aversion as were the Philistines. The licentiousness of the Amorites, the hard-heartedness of the Egyptian taskmasters, the fiendish savagery of the Assyrian warriors, each of these in turn receives its due share of condemnation. But the scornful judgement passed by the Hebrews on the Philistines has made a much deeper impression on the Bible-reading West than have their fulminations against other races and communities with which they had to do. In English, from at least the time of Dekker, [*1] the word 'Philistine' has been used in one or other of the senses of the modern colloquialism 'outsider'; and, especially since the publication of the essays of Mr. Matthew Arnold, it has become almost a technical term for a person boorish or bucolic of mind, impervious to the higher influences of art or of civilization. In French and German--probably, indeed, in most of the languages of Europe--the word is used in familiar speech with a greater or less approximation to the same meaning.

The following little book is an attempt to collect in a convenient form the information so far available about the Philistine people. It is an expansion of a course of three lectures, delivered in 1911 before the British Academy under the Schweich Fund. In preparing it for publication, the matter has been revised and re-written throughout; and the division into lectures--primarily imposed by the exigencies of time-allowance--has been abandoned for a more systematic and convenient division into chapters and sections.

It is hoped that the perusal of these pages will at least suggest

[p. xvi]

a doubt as to the justice of the colloquial use of the name of this ancient people.

As it may be well to preserve a record of the syllabus of the original lectures, a copy of it is subjoined.

Lecture I (15 December, 1911). The evil reputation of the Philistines. Recent researches and discoveries. A sketch of the development of Cretan civilization. The Keftiu in the Egyptian records. The sack of Cnossos and subsequent developments. The 'Peoples of the Sea'. Their raid on Egypt. Its repulse. Recovery of the 'Peoples of the Sea' from their reverse. The adventures of Wen-Amon. The earliest reference to the Philistines in the Old Testament. The Abraham and Isaac stories. The references in the history of the Exodus. Shamgar. Samson.

Lecture II (18 December, 1911). The domination of the Philistines. The capture of the Ark and the outbreak of plague. Samuel and Saul. Relative culture of Philistines and Hebrews during the reign of Saul. The incidents of David's outlawry. Achish, king of Gath. Gilboa. The Philistine domination broken by David. The various versions of the story of Goliath. The Philistines under the later monarchy. The Philistines in the Assyrian records. Nehemiah. The Maccabees. Traditions of the Philistines among the modern peasants of Palestine. Theories of the origin of the Philistines. Caphtor and the Cherethites.

Lecture III (22 December, 1911). The Organization of the Philistines. Their country and cities. The problem of the site of Ekron. The language of the Philistines. Alleged traces of it in Hebrew. Their religion and deities. Their art. Recent discoveries. The place of the Philistines in History and civilization.

I have to express my acknowledgements to my friends and colleagues, the Rev. P. Boylan, Maynooth, and the Rev. Prof. Henry Browne, S. J.; also to the Very Rev. Principal G. A. Smith, Aberdeen, and Mr. E. H. Alton, of Dublin University, for allowing me to consult them on various points that arose in the course of this work. The first and last named have most kindly read through proof-sheets of the work and have made many valuable suggestions, but they have no responsibility for any errors that the discerning critic may detect.

The figures on pp. 118, 119 are inserted by permission of the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge.

R. A. S. M.

    DUBLIN,
 New Year, 1913.

Footnotes

^xv:1 The New English Dictionary quotes, inter alia, 'Silke and satten, you mad Philistines, silke and satten' (Dekker, 1600): 'They say, you went to Court last Night very drunk; nay, I'm told for certain you had been among Philistines' (Swift, 1738): 'The obtuseness of a mere English Philistine we trust is pardonable' (The Examiner, 1827): 'Philistinism! we have not the expression in English. Perhaps we have not the word because we have so much of the thing' (M. Arnold. 1863): and the quotation from the Quarterly Review, which is printed on the title-page.

The Philistines, by R.A.S. Macalister, [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xvii]

  

CONTENTS

          CHAPTER I

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
      THE ORIGIN OF THE PHILISTINES

       <page 1>

     
      
   CHAPTER II

        

     
      THE HISTORY OF THE PHILISTINES

       <page 29>

     
          1. The Adventures of Wen-Amon among them

       <page 29>

     
          2. Their Struggle with the Hebrews

       <page 38>

     
          3. Their Decline and Disappearance

       <page 62>

     
      
   CHAPTER III

        

     
      THE LAND OF THE PHILISTINES

       <page 68>

     
      
   CHAPTER IV

        

     
      THE CULTURE OF THE PHILISTINES

       <page 79>

     
          1. Their Language

       <page 79>

     
          2. Their Organization: (A) Political, (B)   Military, (C) Domestic.

       <page 87>

     
          3. Their Religion

       <page 90>

     
          4. Their Place in History and Civilization

       <page 114>

     
   [p. xviii] [p. xix]

  

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

          FIG.

        

       PAGE:

     
      1.

       A Keftian from the Tomb of Rekhmara and a Cretan from Knossos

       <page 9>

     
      2.

       Sketch-neap to illustrate the Battle of Geba

       <page 50>

     
      3.

       Sketch-map of Philistia

       <page 77>

     
      4.

       The Phaestos Disk

       <page 84>, <page 85>

     
      5.

       Coins of Gaza and Ashkelon

       <page 112>

     
      6.

       The Characters on the Phaestos Disk

       <page 116>

     
      7.

       Wagons of the Pulasati

       <page 118>

     
      8.

       The Head-dress of the Pulasati

       <page 118>

     
      9.

       The Sea-fight between Ramessu III and the Allies

       <page 119>

     
      10.

       A Bird, as painted on an Amorite and a Philistine Vase respectively

       <page 121>

     
      11.

       Sketch-plans and Elevations of the Marneion at Gaza and of Solomon's   Temple

       <page 124>

     
   

The Philistines, by R.A.S. Macalister, [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

THE PHILISTINES

  

THEIR HISTORY AND CIVILIZATION

  

CHAPTER I

  

THE ORIGIN OF THE PHILISTINES

THE Old Testament history is almost exclusively occupied with Semitic tribes. Babylonians, Assyrians, Canaanites, Hebrews, Aramaeans--all these, however much they might war among themselves, were bound by close linguistic and other ties, bespeaking a common origin in the dim, remote recesses of the past. Even the Egyptians show evident signs of having been at least crossed with a Semitic strain at some period early in their long and wonderful history. One people alone, among those brought conspicuously to our notice in the Hebrew Scriptures, impresses the reader as offering indications of alien origin. This is the people whom we call 'Philistines'.

If we had any clear idea of what the word 'Philistine' meant, or to what language it originally belonged, it might throw such definite light upon the beginnings of the Philistine people that further investigation would be unnecessary. The answer to this question is, however, a mere matter of guess-work. In the Old Testament the word is regularly written Peli###353###tim (puulishuthuiym), singular Peli###353###ti (puulishuthuiy), twice [*1] Peli###353###tiyim (puulishuthuiyiym), The territory which they inhabited during the time of their struggles with the Hebrews is known as 'eres Peli###353###tim ('eretz puulishuthuiym) 'the Land of Philistines', or in poetical passages, simply Pele###353###eth (puelesheth) 'Philistia'. Josephus regularly calls them Palaistinoi, except once, in his version of the Table of Nations in Genesis x (Ant. I. vi. 2) where we have the genitive singular Fylistinoy.

[p. 2]

Various conjectures as to the etymology of this name have been put forward from time to time. One of the oldest, that apparently due to Fourmont, [*1] connects it with the traditional Greek name Pelasgoi; an equation which, however, does no more than move the problem of origin one step further back. This theory was adopted by Hitzig, the author of the first book in modern times on the Philistines, [*2] Who connected the word with Sanskrit valaksa 'white', and made other similar comparisons, as for instance between the name of the deity of Gaza, Marna, and the Indian Varuna. On the other hand a Semitic etymology was sought by Gesenius, [*3] Movers, [*4] and others, who quoted an Ethiopic verb falasa, 'to wander, roam,' whence comes the substantive fallasi, 'a stranger.' In this etymology they were anticipated by the translators of the Greek Version, who habitually render the name of the Philistines by the Greek word allofyloi,  [*5] even when it is put into the mouths of Goliath or Achish, when speaking of themselves. Of course this is merely an etymological speculation op the part of the translators, and proves nothing more than the existence of a Hebrew root (otherwise apparently unattested) similar in form and meaning to the Ethiopic root cited. And quite apart from any questions of linguistic probability, there is an obvious logical objection to such an etymology. In the course of the following pages we shall find the court scribes of Ramessu III, the historians of Israel, and the keepers of the records of the kings of Assyria, agreeing in applying the same name to the nation in question. These three groups of writers, belonging to as many separate nations and epochs of time, no doubt worked independently of each other--most probably in ignorance of each other's productions. This being so, it follows almost conclusively that the name 'Philistine' must have been derived from Philistine sources, and in short must have been the native designation. Now a word meaning 'stranger' or the like, while it might well be applied by foreigners to a nation deemed by them

[p. 3]

intruders, would scarcely be adopted by the nation itself, as its chosen ethnic appellation. This Ethiopic comparison it seems therefore safe to reject. The fantasy that Redslob [*1] puts forward, namely, that plshth 'Philistia' was an anagram for shplh, the Shephelah or foot-hills of Judea, is perhaps best forgotten: place-names do not as a rule come to be in this mechanical way, and in any case 'the Shephelah' and 'Philistia' were not geographically identical.

There is a peculiarity in the designation of the Philistines in Hebrew which has often been noticed, and which must have a certain significance. In referring to a tribe or nation the Hebrew writers as a rule either (a) personified an imaginary founder, making his name stand for the tribe supposed to derive from him--e. g. 'Israel' for the Israelites; or (b) used the tribal name in the singular, with the definite article--a usage sometimes transferred to the Authorized Version, as in such familiar phrases as 'the Canaanite was then in the land' (Gen. xii. 6); but more commonly assimilated to the English idiom which requires a plural, as in 'the iniquity of the Amorite[s] is not yet full' (Gen. xv. 16). But in referring to the Philistines, the plural of the ethnic name is always used, and as a rule the definite article is omitted. A good example is afforded by the name of the Philistine territory above mentioned, 'eres Peli###353###tim, literally 'the land of Philistines': contrast such an expression as 'eres hak-Kena'ani, literally 'the land of the Canaanite'. A few other names, such as that of the Rephaim, are similarly constructed: and so far as the scanty monuments of Classical Hebrew permit us to judge, it may be said generally that the same usage seems to be followed when there is question of a people not conforming to the model of Semitic (or perhaps we should rather say Aramaean) tribal organization. The Canaanites, Amorites, Jebusites, and the rest, are so closely bound together by the theory of blood-kinship which even yet prevails in the Arabian deserts, that each may logically be spoken of as an individual human unit. No such polity was recognized among the pre-Semitic Rephaim, or the intruding Philistines, so that they had to be referred to as an aggregate of human units. This rule, it must be admitted, does not seem to be rigidly maintained; for instance, the name of the pre-Semitic Horites might have been expected to follow the exceptional construction. But a hard-and-fast adhesion to so subtle a distinction, by all the writers who have contributed to the canon of the Hebrew scriptures and by

[p. 4]

all the scribes who have transmitted their works, is not to be expected. Even in the case of the Philistines the rule that the definite article should be omitted is broken in eleven places. [*1]

However, this distinction, which in the case of the Philistines is carefully observed (with the exceptions cited in the footnote), indicates at the outset that the Philistines were regarded as something apart from the ordinary Semitic tribes with whom the Hebrews had to do.

The name of the Philistines, therefore, does not lead us very far in our examination of the origin of this people. Our next step must be to inquire what traditions the Hebrews preserved respecting the origin of their hereditary enemies; though such evidence on a question of historical truth must obviously even under the most favourable circumstances be unsatisfactory.

The locus classicus is, of course, the table of nations in Genesis x. Here we read (vv. 6, 13, 14), 'And the sons of Ham: Cush, and Mizraim, and Put, and Canaan. . . And Mizraim begat Ludim, and 'Anamim, and Lehabim, and Naphtuhim, and Pathrusim, and Casluhim (whence went forth the Philistines) and Caphtorim.' The list of the sons of Ham is assigned to the Priestly source; that of the sons of Mizraim (distinguished by the formula 'he begat') to the Yahvistic source. The ethnical names are almost all problematical, and the part of special interest to us has been affected, it is supposed, by a disturbance of the text.

So far as the names can be identified at all, the passage means that in the view of the writer or writers who compiled the table of nations, the Hamitic or southern group of mankind were Ethiopia, Egypt, 'Put', and Canaan. Into the disputed question of the identification of the third of these, this is not the place to enter. Passing over the children assigned to Cush or Ethiopia, we come to the list of peoples supposed by the Yahvist to be derived from Egypt. Who or what most of these peoples were is very uncertain. The Ludim are supposed to have been Libyans (d in the name being looked upon as an error for b); the Lehabim are also supposed to be Libyans; the 'Anamim are unknown, as are also the Casluhim; but the Naphtuhim and Pathrusim seem to be reasonably identified with the inhabitants of Lower and Upper Egypt respectively. [*2]

[p. 5]

There remain the Caphtorim, and the interjected note 'whence went forth the Philistines'. The latter has every appearance of having originally been a marginal gloss that has crept into the text. And in the light of other passages, presently to be cited, it would appear that the gloss referred originally not to the unknown Casluhim, but to the Caphtorim. It must, however, be said that all the versions, as well as the first chapter of Chronicles, agree in the reading of the received text, though emendation would seem obviously called for. This shows us either that the disturbance of the text is of great antiquity, or else that the received text is, after all, correct, and that the Casluhim are to be considered a branch of, or at any rate a tribe nearly related to, the Caphtorim.

The connexion of the Philistines with a place called Caphtor is definitely stated in Amos ix. 7: 'Have not I brought up Israel out of the land of Egypt, and the Philistines from Caphtor, and the Syrians from Kir?' It is repeated in Jeremiah xlvii. 4, where the Philistines are referred to as 'the remnant of the 'i of Caphtor'. The word 'i is rendered in the Revised Version 'island', with marginal rendering 'sea coast': this alternative well expresses the ambiguity in the meaning of the word, which does not permit us to assume that Caphtor, as indicated by Jeremiah, was necessarily one of the islands of the sea. Indeed, even if the word definitely meant 'island', its use here would not be altogether conclusive on this point: an isolated headland might long pass for an island among primitive navigators, and therefore such a casual mention need not limit our search for Caphtor to an actual island.

Again, in Deuteronomy ii. 23, certain people called the Caphtorim, 'which came out of Caphtor', are mentioned as having destroyed the 'Avvim that dwelt in villages as far as Gaza, and established themselves in their stead. The geographical indication shows that the Caphtorim must be identified, generally speaking, with the Philistines: the passage is valuable as a record of the name of the earlier inhabitants, who, however, were not utterly destroyed: they remained in the south of the Philistine territory (Joshua xiii. 4).

The question of the identification of Caphtor must, however, be postponed till we have noted the other ethnic indications which the Hebrew scriptures preserve. Chief of these is the application of the word Cerethi (kuurethiy) 'Cherethites' to this people or to a branch of them.

Thus in 1 Samuel xxx. 14 the young Egyptian servant, describing the Amalekite raid, said 'we raided the south of the Cherethites and

[p. 6]

the property of Judah and the south of the Calebites and burnt Ziklag with fire'. In Ezekiel xxv. 16 the Philistines and the Cherethites with the 'remnant of the sea-coast' are closely bound together in a common denunciation, which we find practically repeated in the important passage Zephaniah ii. 5, where a woe is pronounced on the dwellers by the sea-coast, the nation of the Cherethites, and on 'Canaan, the land of the Philistines'; this latter is a noteworthy expression, probably, however, interpolated in the text. In both these last passages the Greek version renders this word Kreites 'Cretans '; elsewhere it simply transliterates (Khelethi, with many varieties of spelling). [*1]

In both places it would appear that the name 'Cherethites' is chosen for the sake of a paronomasia (krth = 'to cut off'). In the obscure expression 'children of the land of the covenant' (bny 'dtz hbryth Ezek. xxx. 5) some commentators [*2] see a corruption of bny hkrthy 'Children of the Cherethites'. But see the note, p. 123 post.

In other places the Cherethites are alluded to as part of the bodyguard of the early Hebrew kings, and are coupled invariably with the name puulethiy Pelethites. This is probably merely a modification of plshthy, the ordinary word for 'Philistine', the letter s being omitted in order to produce an assonance between the two names. [*3] The Semites are fond of such assonances: they are not infrequent in modern Arab speech, and such a combination as Shuppim and Huppim (1 Chron. vii. 12) shows that they are to be looked for in older Semitic writings as well. If this old explanation [*4] be not accepted, we should have to put the word 'Pelethites' aside as hopelessly unintelligible. Herodotus's Philitis, or Philition, a shepherd after whom the Egyptians were alleged to call the Pyramids, [*5] has often been quoted in connexion with this name, coupled with baseless speculations as to whether the Philistines could have been the Hyksos.

[p. 7]

With regard to the syntax of these two names, it is to be noticed that as a rule they conform to the ordinary Hebrew usage, contrary perhaps to what we might have expected. But in the two prophetic passages we have quoted, the name of the Cherethites agrees in construction with that of the Philistines.

In three passages--2 Samuel xx. 23, 2 Kings xi. 4, 19--the name of the royal body-guard of 'Cherethites' appears as kuariy 'Carians'. If this happened only once it might be purely accidental, due to the dropping of a th by a copyist; but being confirmed by its threefold repetition, it is a fact that must be noted carefully [*1] for future reference.

Here the Hebrew records leave us, and we must seek elsewhere for further light. Thanks to the discoveries of recent years, our search need not be prolonged. For in the Egyptian records we find mention of a region whose name, Keftiu, has an arresting similarity to the 'Caphtor' of Hebrew writers. It is not immediately obvious whence comes the final r of the latter, if the comparison be sound; but waiving this question for a moment, let us see what is to be made of the Egyptian name, and, above all, what indications as to its precise situation are to be gleaned from the Egyptian monuments.

The name k-f-tiw () sometimes written k-f-ty-w () first meets us on Egyptian monuments of the Eighteenth Dynasty. It is apparently an Egyptian word: at least, it is capable of being rendered behind', and assuming this rendering Mr. H. R. Hall [*2] aptly compares it with our colloquialism 'the Back of Beyond'. Unless this is to be put aside as a mere Volksetymologie, it clearly would be useless to search the maps of classical atlases for any name resembling Keftiu. It would simply indicate that the Egyptians had a sense of remoteness or uncertainty about the position of the country; and even from this we could derive no help, for as a rule they manifest a similar vagueness about other foreign places.

It is specifically under Thutmose III that 'Keftiu' first appears as the name of a place or a people. On the great stele in the Cairo Museum in which the king's mighty deeds are summarized, in the form of a Hymn to Amon, we read 'I came and caused thee to smite the west-land, and the land of Keftiu and Asi ()

[p. 8]

are terrified'. In the Annalistic Inscription on the walls of the Temple of Karnak the name appears in interesting connexion with maritime enterprise. 'The harbours of the king were supplied with all the good things which he received in Syria, namely ships of Keftiu, Byblos, and Sektu [the last-named place is not identified], cedar-ships laden with poles and masts.' 'A silver vessel of Keftiu work' was part of the tribute paid to Thutmose by a certain chieftain. [*1] Keftiu itself does not send any tribute recorded in the annals; but tribute from the associated land of Asi is enumerated, in which copper is the most conspicuous item. This in itself proves nothing, for the copper might in the first instance have been brought to Asi from somewhere else, before it passed into the coffers of the all-devouring Pharaoh: but on the Tell el-Amarna tablets a copper-producing country, with the similar name Ala###353###ia, is prominent, and as Cyprus was the chief if not the only source of copper in the Eastern Mediterranean, the balance of probability seems to be in favour of equating Asi and Ala###353###ia alike to Cyprus. In this case Keftiu would denote some place, generally speaking, in the neighbourhood of Cyprus.

The next important sources of information are the wall-paintings in the famous tombs of Sen-mut, architect to Queen Hatshepsut; of Rekhmara, vizier of Thutmose III; and of Menkheperuseneb, son of the last-named official, [*2] high priest of Amon and royal treasurer. In these wall-paintings we see processions of persons, with non-Semitic European-looking faces; attired simply in highly embroidered loincloths folded round their singularly slender waists, and in high boots or gaiters; with hair dressed in a distinctly non-Semitic manner; bearing vessels and other objects of certain definite types. The tomb of Sen-mut is much injured, but the Cretan ornaments there drawn are unmistakable. In the tomb of Rekhmara we see the official standing, with five rows of foreigners carrying their gifts, a scribe recording the inventory at the head of each row, and an inscription explaining the scene as the 'Reception by the hereditary prince Rekhmara of the tribute of the south country, with the

[p. 9]

tribute of Punt, the tribute of Retenu, the tribute of Keftiu, besides the booty of all nations brought by the fame of Thutmose III'. In the tomb of Menkheperuseneb there are again two lines of tribute-bearers, described as 'the chief of Keftiu, the chief of Kheta, the chief of Tunip, the chief of Kadesh'; and an inscription asserts that these various chiefs are praising the ruler of the Two Lands, celebrating his victories, and bringing on their backs silver, gold, lapis lazuli, malachite, and all kinds of precious stones.

Click to enlarge
(left) Fig. 1. A. A Keftian from the Tomb of Rekhmara. (right) B. A Cretan from Knossos.

Some minor examples, confirming the conclusions to which these three outstanding tomb-frescoes point, will be found in W. Max Muller's important paper, Neue Darstellungen 'mykenischer' Gesandter . . . in altagyptischen Wandgemalden (Mitt. vorderas.-Gesell., 1904, No. 2).

Recent investigations in the island of Crete have enabled us to identify with certainty the sources of the civilization which these messengers and their gifts represent. Wall-paintings have there been found representing people with the same facial type, the same costume, the same methods of dressing the hair; and as it were the originals of the costly vases they bear have been found in such profusion as to leave no doubt that they are there on their native soil. The messengers, who are depicted in the Egyptian frescoes, are introducing into Egypt

[p. 10]

some of the chefs-d'oeuvre of Cretan art; specifically, art of the periods known as Late Minoan I and II, [*1] the time of the greatest glory of the palace of Knossos; and as they are definitely described in the accompanying hieroglyphs as messengers of Keftiu, it follows that Keftiu was at least a centre of distribution of the products of Cretan civilization, and therefore a place under the influence of Crete, if it was not actually the island of Crete itself. And the clear evidence, that excavation in Crete has revealed, of a back-wash of Egyptian influence on Cretan civilization at the time of the coming to Egypt of the Keftian envoys, turns the probability into as near a certainty as it is at present possible to attain.

The next document to be noticed is a hieratic school exercise-tablet, apparently (to judge from the forms of the script) dating from the end of the Eighteenth Dynasty. It is now preserved in the British Museum, numbered 5647. [*2] On the one side are some random scribbles, like the meaningless words and phrases with which one tries a doubtful pen:

'The goddess Ubast--they are small, numerous--of precious things, when--his majesty was seen, as he turned his face there was--for the feast day, one jar of wine [this line repeated]--Ru-unti--Ru-dadama--Smdt-ty' [three names].

On the other side is

'To make names of Keftiu:

    A###353###ahurau
     Nasuy
     Aka###353###ou
     Adinai
     Pinaruta
     Rusa
     Sen-Nofer [an Egyptian name, twice repeated]
     Aka###353###ou

"a hundred of copper, aknu-axes" [reading uncertain]

    Benesasira

[two illegible names]

    Sen-nofer
     Sumrssu [Egyptian]'

[paragraph continues] Though the reading of some of the items of this list is not quite certain, it seems clear that the heading 'irt rn n keftw, 'to make names of Keftiu', indicates that this tablet is a note of names to be used

[p. 11]

in some exercise or essay. The presence of the familiar Philistine name Achish, in the form Aka###353###ou, twice over, is suggestive, but otherwise the tablet does not help forward our present inquiry into the position of Keftiu and the origin of the Philistine people.

These various discoveries of recent years make it unnecessary to discuss at any length other theories which have been presented in ancient and modern times as to the identification of the name of Keftiu or of Caphtor. The Ptolemaic Jonathan Oldbuck who translated for his master the Decree of Canopus into Hieroglyphics, revived this ancient geographical name to translate Foinikes: a piece of irresponsible pedantry which has caused nothing but confusion. Even before the discoveries of the last fifteen or twenty years it was obvious that the Keftiu of Rekhmara's tomb were as unlike Phoenicians as they could possibly be; and their gifts were also incompatible with what was known of Phoenician civilization. Endless trouble was thus given to would-be harmonists. Another antiquary of the same kind and of the same period, who drew up the inscription to be cut on the temple at Kom Ombo, has likewise made illegitimate use of the name in question. A catalogue of the places conquered by the founder of the temple, after the manner of the records of achievements of the great kings of the Eighteenth Dynasty, was de rigueur: so the obsequious scribe set down, apparently at random, a list of any geographical names that happened to come into his head. Among these is kptar, the final r of which seems to denote a Hebrew source; perhaps he learnt the name from some brother antiquary in the neighbouring Jewish colony at Aswan.

The Greek translators of the scriptures, the Peshitta, and the Targums, in Deuteronomy ii. 23, Amos ix. 7, render the name Cappadocia. This seems to be merely a guess, founded on similarity of sound.

In modern times, even before the days of scientific archaeology, the equation of Caphtor to Crete has always been the theory most in favour. Apart from Jeremiah's description of the place as an 'island'--which as we have already mentioned is not quite conclusive--the obvious equation Cherethites = Cretans would strike any student. Calmet [*1] gives a good statement of the arguments for the identification which were available before the age of excavation.

For completeness' sake we may refer here to various other theories of Philistine origin which have been put forward by modern scholars: it is, however, not necessary to give full references

[p. 12]

to all the writers who have considered the question. The favourite hypothesis among those who rejected the Caphtor-Crete identification was founded on the Greek Version and Josephus: Caphtor was by them identified with Cappadocia, and Casluhim with the Colchians. Hitzig, as stated earlier in this chapter, identified them with the Pelasgians, who came, according to his view, from Crete to North Egypt, identified with the Casluhim of the Table of Nations: their language he supposed to be cognate with Sanskrit, and by Sanskrit he interpreted many of the names of people and places. Quatremere, reviewing Hitzig's book in the Journal des Savants (1846, pp. 257, 411), suggested a rival theory, deriving them from West Africa, equating Casluhim with Sheluh, a sept of the Berbers. Stark (Gaza, p. 70) assigned them to the Phoenicians, accepting the South Semitic etymology of the name Peli###353###tim, Caphtor being the Delta, and Casluhim a name cognate with the Kasios mountain, denoting a tribe living between Kasios and Pelusium. [*1] Kohler [*2] had a complicated theory to reconcile all the various lines of Biblical evidence: he took Caphtor to be the Delta; the Philistines springing from there settled in Casluhim (between Casios and Pelusium): 'going forth' from Casluhim they sailed to Crete, and then returned to Philistia. Knobel (Die Volkertafel der Genesis, p. 215 sqq.) proposed a double origin for the Philistine people. The main body he took to be Semites who came out (geographically, not racially) from the Casluhim in North Egypt; and the Caphtorim were a southern tribe of Cretan or Carian origin. Knobel gave a very careful analysis of the evidence available at his time, but he overlooked the Medinet Habu sculptures, and, on the other hand, gave too much weight to the gossip of Herodotus about Philitis and the Pyramids.

Ebers [*3] made an elaborate attempt to find in the Delta a site for Caphtor; but this can hardly stand against later discoveries. They are no goods from the Land of Goshen which Rekhmara's visitors are carrying. W. Max Muller [*4] equates Keftiu to Cilicia, mainly on the ground of the order in which the name occurs in geographical lists: but though this is not an argument to be lightly set aside, we are confronted with the difficulty that Cilicia could hardly have been a centre of distribution of Minoan goods in the time of Rekhmara. [*5]

[p. 13]

Schwally [*1] argues thus for the Semitic origin of the Philistines: that if the Philistines were immigrants, so were the Phoenicians and Syrians (teste Amos): that the identity of Caphtor and Crete is an unproved assumption: the Greek translation twice renders 'Cherethites' by 'Cretans', it is true, but not elsewhere, showing uncertainty on the subject: and the reading 'Crete' in Zephaniah ii. 6 is wrong. All the personal names, and all the place-names (except possibly El-tekeh and Ziklag) are Semitic, and there is no trace of any non-Semitic deity. Stade [*2] asserts the Semitic origin of the people, without giving any very definite proofs; Tiele [*3] claims the Philistines as Semites on the ground of their Semitic worship. Beecher (in Hastings's Dict. of the Bible, s. v. Philistines) claims the name of the people as 'probably Semitic', but considers that most likely they were originally Aryan pirates who had become completely Semitized. The non-circumcision of the Philistines is a difficulty against assigning to them a Semitic origin; and the various Semitic elements in their names, religion, and language can most reasonably be explained by borrowing--presumably as a result of free intermarriage with Semites or Semitized aborigines.

On the other hand, it may be said at once that it is perhaps a little premature to call them Aryans. On the whole, the probability seems to be against the Philistine being an Aryan tongue--it certainly was not, if (as is not unlikely) it had affinities with Etruscan.

But these identifications are to a large extent the personal opinions of those who put them forward. The identification of Caphtor and Keftiu with Crete is so generally accepted, that there is a danger that some difficulties in the way should be overlooked. For first of all we are met with a question of philology: whence came the final r in the Hebrew word? It has been suggested that it might be a nominative suffix of the Keftian language. It would in any case be more probably a locative or prepositional suffix: for place-names are apt to get taken over into foreign languages in one or other of those cases, because they are generally referred to in contexts that require them; just as Eriu, the old Irish name of Ireland, has been taken over into English in its prepositional case, now spelt Erin. It might possibly be a plural: Mr. Alton has suggested to me a comparison with the Etruscan plural ending er, ar, ur. Letting the question of the exact case pass, however, as irrelevant, there are two points that must be indicated regarding the suggestion that r is

[p. 14]

a Keftian case-ending. In the first place, it assumes that Keftiu is, after all, not the Egyptian word it resembles, but the native 'Keftian' name for the place in question: it is incompatible with the 'Back of Beyond' theory of the meaning of the name. In the second place, it is difficult to understand how the Hebrews should have picked up a 'Keftian' case-ending or any such grammatical formative, rather than the Egyptians; for the Egyptians were brought into direct contact with Keftians, while the Hebrews arrived on the scene too late to enjoy that advantage. Ebers attempted to solve the difficulty by supposing the r to come from the Egyptian adjective wr, 'great', tacked on to the place-name. Max Muller (Asien und Europa, p. 390) and Wiedemann (Orient. Litteraturzeitung, xiii, col. 49) point out that there is no monumental evidence for such an expression, and that in any case 'Great Keftland' would be Keft-'a, not Keft-wr. The latter (loc. cit.) has an ingenious solution: in an astronomical text in the grave of Ramessu VI occurs a list of places 'iwmzr (the land of the Amorites) pb (unidentified) and  kfthr ('Upper Kefti'). 'Caphtor', he suggests, may be a corruption of this latter expression. The hypothesis may be noted in passing, though perhaps it is not altogether convincing.

Behind this problem lies another, perhaps equally difficult: why did the Hebrews call the home-land of the Philistines by this name, which even in Egypt was already obsolete?

To this question the only reasonable answer that seems to present itself is to the effect that by the time of the Hebrews Crete or Keftiu had, with its gorgeous palaces, passed into tradition. Like the I Breasail or Avallon of Celtic tradition, the place which the Hebrew writers called 'Caphtor' was no longer a tangible country, but a dreamland of folklore, the legends of which had probably filtered into Palestine from Egypt itself. Whether Caphtor was or was not the same as the island of Crete was to the ancient Hebrew historian a question of secondary interest beside the all-important practical fact that the Philistines were obstinate in their occupation of the most desirable parts of the Promised Land. When the inspired herdsman of Tekoa spoke of the Philistines being led from Caphtor, he was probably just as unconscious of the requirements of the scientific historian as a modern herdsman who told me that a certain ancient monument on a Palestinian hill-slope belonged 'to the time of the Rum'. He no doubt believed what he said: but who or what the Rum may have been, or how many years or centuries

[p. 15]

or geological aeons ago they may have flourished, he neither knew nor cared.

All, then, that the Hebrews can tell us about their hereditary enemies is, that they came from a vague traditional place called Caphtor--a place by the sea, but of which they have nothing more to say. The tradition of Caphtor seems to be a tradition of the historical glories of Crete, so far as the Egyptians knew of them, and the name seems to be a tradition of the name which, for some reason not certainly known, the Egyptians applied to the source of the desirable treasures of the Cretan civilization.

Even down to late times the tradition linking Philistia with Crete persisted in one form or another. Tacitus heard it, though in a distorted form: in the oft-quoted passage Hist. v. 2 he confuses the Jews with the Philistines, and makes the former the Cretan refugees. [*1] MEINU, Minos, is named on some of the coins of Gaza. This town was called by the name Minoa: and its god Marna was equated to 'Zeus the Crete-born.' [*2]

But did the Philistines come from Crete? That is the question which we must now consider.

The last generation saw the labours of Schliemann at Troy and elsewhere, and was startled by the discovery of the splendid pre-Hellenic civilization of Mycenae. For us has been reserved the yet greater surprise of finding that this Mycenaean age was but the latest, indeed the degenerate phase of a vastly older and higher culture. Of this ancient civilization Crete was the centre and the apex.

The course of civilization in this island, from the end of the Neolithic period onwards, is divided by Sir Arthur Evans into three periods [*3] which he has named Early, Middle, and Late 'Minoan' respectively, after the name of Minos the famous legendary Cretan king. Each of these three periods is further divided into subordinate

[p. 16]

periods, indicated by numbers; thus we have Early Minoan I, II, III, and so for the others. The general characters of these nine periods may now be briefly stated, with the approximate dates which Egyptian synchronisms enable us to assign.

Into the question of the origin of the early inhabitants of Crete we need not enter. That there was some connexion between Crete and Egypt in their stone-age beginnings seems on various grounds to be not improbable. [*1] The neolithic Cretan artists were much like neolithic artists elsewhere. They never succeeded in attaining a very high position among workers in flint; Crete has so far produced nothing comparable with the best work of the Egyptians and the Scandinavians. Their pottery was decorated with incised or pricked patterns filled in with white powdered gypsum, to make a white pattern on a black ground.

The Early Minoan I period inherited this type of ornament and ware from its predecessors, but improved it. Coloured decoration now began to be used, the old incised ornaments being imitated with a wash of paint. The ornament was restricted to simple geometrical patterns such as zigzags. The pottery was made without the wheel. In this period short triangular daggers in copper are found. In Early Minoan II the designs are more free and graceful: simple curves appear, side by side with straight lines, towards the end of the period. The potter's wheel is introduced. Rude and primitive idols in marble, alabaster, and steatite are found. The copper daggers are likewise found, but the use of flint and obsidian is not yet wholly abandoned. In Early Minoan III there is not much advance in the art of the potter. We now, however, begin to find seals with a kind of hieroglyphic signs upon them, apparently imitated (in manner if not in matter) from Egyptian seals. These seem to give us the germ of the art of writing, as practised later in Crete. Scholars differ (between 2000 and 3000 B.C.) as to the proper date to assign to the end of the Early Minoan civilization: for our present purpose it is not important to discuss the causes of disagreement, or to attempt to decide between these conflicting theories.

The next period, Middle Minoan I, takes a great step forward. We now begin to find polychrome decoration in pottery, with elaborate geometrical patterns; we also discover interesting attempts to picture natural forms, such as goats, beetles, &c. Upon the ruins of this stage of development, which seems to have been checked by some catastrophe, are founded the glories of Middle Minoan II, the period of the great palace of Phaestos and of the first palace of

[p. 17]

[paragraph continues] Knossos. To this period also belongs the magnificent polychrome pottery called Kamares ware. Another catastrophe took place: the first palace of Knossos was ruined, and the great second palace built in its place: and the period known as Middle Minoan III began. It was distinguished by an intense realism in art, speaking clearly of a rapid deterioration in taste. In this period we find the pictographic writing clearly developed, with a hieratic or cursive script derived from it, adapted for writing with pen and ink. The Middle Minoan period came to an end about 1600 B.C.

Late Minoan I shows a continuation of the taste for realism. Its pottery is distinguished from that of the preceding period by the convention that its designs as a rule are painted dark on a light background: in Middle Minoan III they are painted light on a dark background. Linear writing is now developed. The palace of Phaestos is rebuilt. Fine frescoes and admirable sculptured vases in steatite are found in this period, to which also belong the oldest remains at Mycenae, namely the famous gold deposits in the shaft tombs. In Late Minoan II the naturalistic figures become conventionalized, and a degeneration in art sets in which continues into Late Minoan III. The foreign imports found at Tell el-Amarna and thus of the time of Ikhnaton, are all of Late Minoan III; this affords a valuable hint for dating this phase of development.

Now while some of the earlier periods shade into one another, like the colours of a rainbow, so that it is difficult to tell where the one ends and the next begins, this is not the case of the latest periods, the changes in which have evidently been produced by violence. The chief manifestation is the destruction of Knossos, which took place, apparently as a result of invasion from the mainland, at the very end of the period known as Late Minoan II: that is to say about 1400 B.C. The inferior style called Late Minoan III--the style which till recent years we had been accustomed to call Mycenaean--succeeded at once and without any intermediate transition to the style of Late Minoan II immediately after this raid. It was evidently the degraded style that had developed in the mainland among the successful invaders, founded upon (or, rather, degenerated from) works of art which had spread by way of trade to the adjacent lands, in the flourishing days of Cretan civilization.

We have seen that in Egyptian tombs of about 1500 B.C. there are to be seen paintings of apparently Cretan messengers and merchants, called by the name of Keftiu, bearing Cretan goods: and in addition we find the actual tangible goods themselves, deposited with the Egyptian dead. In Palestine and elsewhere occasional scraps of

[p. 18]

the 'palace' styles come to light. But the early specimens of Cretan art found in these regions are all exotic, just as (to quote a parallel often cited in illustration) the specimens of Chinese or Japanese porcelain exhibited in London drawing-rooms are exotic; and they affect but little the inferior native arts of the places where they are found. It is not till we reach the beginning of Late Minoan III, after the sack of Knossos, that we find Minoan culture actually taking root in the eastern lands of the Mediterranean, such as Cyprus and the adjacent coasts of Asia Minor and Syria. We can hardly dissociate this phenomenon from the sack of Knossos. The very limitations of the area over which the 'Mycenaean' art has been found are enough to show that its distribution was not a result of peaceful trade. Thus, the Hittite domination of Central and Western Asia Minor was still strong enough to prevent foreign settlers from establishing themselves in those provinces: in consequence Mycenaean civilization is there absent. The spread of the debased Cretan culture over Southern Asia Minor, Cyprus, and North Syria, between 1400 and 1200 B.C. must have been due to the movements of peoples, one incident in which was the sack of Knossos [*1]: and this is true, whether those who carried the Cretan art were refugees from Crete, or were the conquerors of Crete seeking yet further lands to spoil.

In short, the sack of Knossos and the breaking of the Cretan power was an episode--it may be, was the crucial and causative episode--in a general disturbance which the fourteenth to the twelfth centuries B.C. witnessed over the whole Eastern Mediterranean basin. The mutual relations of the different communities were as delicately poised as in modern Europe: any abnormal motion in one part of the system tended to upset the balance of the whole. Egypt was internally in a ferment, thanks to the eccentricities of the crazy dilettante Ikhnaton, and was thus unable to protect her foreign possessions; the nomads of Arabia, the Sutu and Habiru, were pressing from the South and East on the Palestinian and Syrian towns; the dispossessed Cretans were crowding to the neighbouring lands on the north; the might of the Hittites, themselves destined to fall to pieces not long afterwards, blocked progress northward: it is little wonder that disorders of various kinds resulted from the consequent congestion.

It is just in this time of confusion that we begin to hear, vaguely at first, of a number of little nationalities--people never definitely

[p. 19]

assigned to any particular place, but appearing now here, now there, fighting sometimes with, sometimes against, the Egyptians and their allies. And what gives these tribelets their surpassing interest is the greatness of the names they bear. The unsatisfying and contemptuous allusions of the Egyptian scribes record for us the 'day of small things' of people destined to revolutionize the world.

We first meet these tribes in the Tell el-Amarna letters. The king of Ala###353###ia (Cyprus) complains that his coasts are being raided by the Lukku, who yearly plunder one small town after another. [*1] That indefatigable correspondent, Rib-Addi, in two letters, complains that one Bihura has sent people of the Sutu to his town and slain certain Sherdan men--apparently Egyptian mercenaries in the town guard. [*2] In a mutilated passage in another letter Rib-Addi mentions the Sherdan again, in connexion with an attempt on his own life. Then Abi-Milki reports [*3] that 'the king of Danuna is dead, and his brother has become king after him, and his land is at peace'. It is almost the only word of peace in the whole dreary Tell el-Amarna record.

Next we hear of these tribes in their league with the Hittites against Ramessu II, when he set out to recover the ground lost to Egypt during the futile reign of Ikhnaton. [*4] With the Hittites were allied people from

          

       Rk[w]

     
      

       Drdnw

     
      

       M[z]sw

     
      

       Mzwnw or irwnw

     
      

       Pdsw

     
      

       Krk###353###

     
   This was in 1333 B.C. On the side of Ramessu fought mercenaries called ###352###zrdzhz () no doubt the

[p. 20]

[paragraph continues] Sherdan of whom we have heard already in the Tell el-Amarna letters. These people were evidently ready to sell their services to whomsoever paid for them, for we find them later operating against their former Egyptian masters.

About thirty years later, when Merneptah was on the throne, there was a revolt of the Libyans, and with many allies from the 'Peoples of the Sea' they proceeded to attack Egypt. Though the Philistines do not actually appear among the names of the allies, the history of this invasion is one of the most important in the origines of that remarkable people. The details are recorded in four inscriptions set up by the king after his victory over the invaders, one of which inscriptions is the famous 'Israel' stela.

The first inscription is that of the temple of Karnak, a translation of which will be found in Breasted's Ancient Records, vol. iii, p. 241. This inscription begins with a list of the allied enemies:

          

       zkw[z]###353###w

     
      

       Tr###353###w

     
      

       Rkw

     
      

       ###352###rdnw

     
      

       ###352###kr###353###w

     
   [paragraph continues] The beginning of the inscription is lost, but the list is probably complete, as in the sequel, where the allied tribes are referred to more than once, no other names are mentioned.

Merneptah, after extolling his own valour and the military preparations he had made, tells us how he had received news that  (Maraiwi or something similar) 'the miserable chief of Libya', with his allies aforesaid, had come with his family to the western boundary of Egypt. Enraged like a lion, he assembled his officers and to them expressed his opinion of the invaders in a way that leaves nothing to the imagination. 'They spend their time going about and fighting to fill their bellies day by day: they come to Egypt to seek the needs of their mouths: their chief is like a dog, without courage . . . .' Some of the vigorous old king's expressions have been bowdlerised by the hand of Time, which has

[p. 21]

deprived us of a course of the inscribed masonry of the temple but notwithstanding we have an admirable description of restless sea-rovers, engaged in constant plunder and piracy. Then Merneptah, strengthened by a vision of his patron Ptah which appeared to him in the night, led out his warriors, defeated the Libyans--whose 'vile fallen chief' justified Merneptah's opinion of him by fleeing, and, in the words of the official report of the Egyptian general to his master, 'he passed in safety by favour of the night . . . all the gods overthrew him for the sake of Egypt: his boasting is made void: his curses have come to roost: no one knows if he be alive or dead, and even if he lives he will never rule again. They have put in his place a brother of his who fights him whenever he sees him'. The list of slain and captives is much mutilated, but is of some importance. For the slain were reckoned by cutting off and counting the phalli of circumcised, the hands of uncircumcised victims. [*1] From the classification we see that at the time of the victory of Merneptah, the Libyans were circumcised, while the Shardanu and Shekelesh and Ekwesh, as we may provisionally vocalize the names, were not circumcised. The inscription ends with the flamboyant speech of Merneptah to his court, and their reply, over which we need not linger. Nor do the other inscriptions relating to the event add anything of importance for our present purpose.

About a hundred years later we meet some of these tribes again, on the walls of the great fortified temple of Medinet Habu near Thebes, which Ramessu III, the last of the great kings of Egypt, built to celebrate the events of his reign. These events are recorded in sculptured scenes, interpreted and explained by long hieroglyphic inscriptions. It is deplorable that the latter are less informing than they might have been: we grudge bitterly the precious space wasted in grovelling compliments to the majesty of the victorious monarch, and we would have gladly dispensed with the obscure and would-be poetical style which the writer of the inscription affected. [*2]

Ramessu III came to the throne about 1200 B.C. [*3] Another Libyan invasion menaced the land in his fifth year, but the energetic monarch, who had already been careful to organize the military resources of Egypt, was successful in beating it back. War-galleys

[p. 22]

from the northern countries, especially the Purasati and the Zakkala, accompanied the invading Libyans; but this latter element in the assault was only a foretaste of the yet more formidable attack which they were destined to make on Egypt three years later--that is to say, roughly about 1192 B.C.

The inscription describing this war is engraved on the second pylon of the temple of Medinet Habu. Omitting a dreary encomium of the Pharaoh, with which it opens, and a long hymn of triumph with which it ends, we may confine our attention to the historical events recorded in the hieroglyphs, and pictured in the representations of battles that accompany them. The inscription records how the Northerners were disturbed, and proceeded to move eastward and southward, swamping in turn the land of the Hittites, Carchemish, Arvad, Cyprus, Syria, and other places in the sane region. We are thus to picture a great southward march through Asia Minor, Syria, and Palestine. Or, rather, we are to imagine a double advance, by land and by sea: the landward march, which included two-wheeled ox-carts for the women and children, as the accompanying picture indicates; and a sea expedition, in which no doubt the spare stores would be carried more easily than on the rough Syrian roads. Clearly they were tribes accustomed to sea-faring who thus ventured on the stormy Mediterranean; clearly too, it was no mere military expedition, but a migration of wanderers accompanied by their families and seeking a new home. [*1]

The principal elements in the great coalition are the following:

          

       ###352###rdnw

     
      

       Duynw

     
      

       Prstw

     
      

       Tzkrw

     
      

       W[z]###353######353###w of the Sea

     
   as well as the ###352###kr###353###zw, of which we have heard in previous documents.

'With hearts confident and full of plans', as the inscription says, they advanced by land and by sea to Egypt. But Ramessu was ready to 'trap them like wild-fowl'. He strengthened his Syrian

[p. 23]

frontier, and at the same time fortified the harbours or river mouths 'with warships, galleys, and barges'. The actual battles are not described, though they are pictured in the accompanying cartoons: but the successful issue of these military preparations is graphically recorded. 'Those who reached my boundary,' says the king, 'their seed is not: their heart and their soul are finished for ever and ever. As for those who had assembled before them on the sea . . . they were dragged, overturned, and laid low upon the beach: slain and made heaps from end to end of their galleys, while all their things were cast upon the water.'

The scenes in which the land and naval engagements are represented are of great importance, in that they are contemporary records of the general appearance of the invaders and of their equipment. The naval battle, the earliest of which any pictorial record remains, is graphically portrayed. We see the Egyptian archers sweeping the crews of the invading vessels almost out of existence, and then closing in and finishing the work with their swords; one of the northerners' vessels is capsized and those of its crew who swim to land are taken captive by the Egyptians waiting on the shore. In later scenes we see the prisoners paraded before the king, and the tale of the victims--counted by enumerating the hands chopped off the bodies.

The passage in the great Harris Papyrus, which also contains a record of the reign of Ramessu III, [*1] adds very little to the information afforded us by the Medinet Habu inscription. The 'Danaiuna' are there spoken of as islanders. We are told that the Purasati and the Zakkala were 'made ashes', while the Shekelesh (called in the Harris Papyrus Shardani, who thus once more appear against Egypt) and the Washasha were settled in strongholds and bound. From all these people the king claims to have levied taxes in clothing and in grain.

As we have seen, the march of the coalition had been successful until their arrival in Egypt. The Hittites and North Syrians had been so crippled by them that Ramessu took the opportunity to extend the frontier of Egyptian territory northward. We need not follow this campaign, which does not directly concern us: but it has this indirect bearing on the subject, that the twofold ravaging of Syria, before and after the great victory of Ramessu, left it weakened and opened the door for the colonization of its coast-lands by the beaten remnant of the invading army.

Ramessu III died in or about 1167 B.C., and the conquered tribes

[p. 24]

began to recover their lost ground. For that powerful monarch was succeeded by a series of weak ghost-kings who disgraced the great name of Ramessu which, one and all, they bore. More and more did they become puppets in the hands of the priesthood, who cared for nothing but enriching the treasures of their temples. The frontier of Egypt was neglected. Less than a hundred years after the crushing defeat of the coalition, the situation was strangely reversed, as one of the most remarkable documents that have come down to us from antiquity allows us to see. This document is the famous Golenischeff papyrus, now at St. Petersburg. But before we proceed to an examination of its contents we must review the Egyptian materials, which we have now briefly set forth, a little more closely.

The names of the tribes, with some doubtful exceptions, are easily equated to those of peoples living in Asia Minor. We may gather a list of them out of the various authorities which have been set out above, adding to the Egyptian consonant-skeleton a provisional vocalization, and remembering that r and l are interchangeable in Egyptian:

           

        

       Tell el-Amarna

       Ramessu II

       Merneptah

       Ramessu III

     
       

        

       c.   1400 B.C.

       1333 B.C.

       c.   1300 B.C.

       c.   1198 B.C.

     
      1.

       Lukku

       X

       X

       X

       -

     
      2.

       Sherdanu

       X

       X

       X

       X

     
      3.

       Danunu

       X

       -

       -

       X

     
      4.

       Dardanu

       -

       X

       -

       -

     
      5.

       Masa

       -

       X

       -

       -

     
      6.

       Mawuna or Yaruna (?)

       -

       X

       -

       -

     
      7.

       Pidasa

       -

       X

       -

       -

     
      8.

       Kelekesh

       -

       X

       -

       -

     
      9.

       Ekwesh

       -

       -

       X

       -

     
      10.

       Turisha

       -

       -

       X

       -

     
      11.

       Shekelesh

       -

       -

       X

       X

     
      12.

       Pulasati

       -

       -

       -

       X

     
      13.

       Zakkala

       -

       -

       -

       X

     
      14.

       Washasha

       -

       -

       -

       X

     
   An X denotes 'present in', a - 'absent from' the lists. The majority of these fourteen names too closely resemble names known from classical sources for the resemblance to be accidental. It will be found that almost every one of these names can be easily identified with the name of the coast dwellers of Asia Minor; and vice versa, with one significant exception, the coast-land regions of Asia Minor are all to be found in recognizable forms in the Egyptian lists. The -sha or -shu termination is to be neglected as an ethnic formative.

Thus, beginning with the Hellespont, the TROAS is represented in the Turisha, who have been correctly identified with the future TYRRHENIANS (Tursci) as are the Pulasati with the future PHILISTINES.

[p. 25]

[paragraph continues] DARDANUS in the Troad is represented by the Dardanu. They are the carriers of the Trojan traditions to Italy. [*1] MYSIA is represented by the Masa, Lydia by the Sherdanu from the town of SARDIS. These are the future SARDINIANS. And the more inland region of MAEONIA is echoed in the Mawuna, if that be the correct reading. We now come to a gap: the Carians, at the S.V. corner of Asia Minor, do not appear in any recognizable form in the list, except that the North Carian town of PEDASUS seems to be echoed by the Pidasa. To this hiatus we shall return presently. The LYCIANS are conspicuous as the Lukku.

The name of the sea-coast region of Pamphylia is clearly a later appellation, expressive of the variety of tribes and nationalities which has always characterized the Levant coast. The inland Pisidian town of SAGALASSUS finds its echo in the Shekelesh. The CILICIANS are represented by the Kelekesh, and this brings us to the corner between Asia Minor and North Syria.

The only names not represented in the foregoing analysis are the Danunu, Ekwesh, and the three tribes which first appear in the Ramessu III invasion, the Pulasati, Zakkala, and Washasha. The first two of these, it is generally agreed, are to be equated to the DANAOI and the ACHAEANS [*2]--the first appearance in historic record of these historic names. The latter do not appear in the Ramessu III lists: there were no Achaeans in the migration from Asia Minor. The Pulasati are unquestionably to be equated to the future PHILISTINES, north of whom we find later the Zakkala settled on the Palestinian coast. The Washasha remain obscure, both in origin and fate; but a suggestion will be made presently regarding them. They can hardly have been the ancestors of the Indo-European OSCANS.

The various lines of evidence which have been set forth in the preceding pages indicate Crete or its neighbourhood as the probable land of origin of this group of tribes. They may be recapitulated:

(1) The Philistines, or a branch of them, are sometimes called Cherethites or Cretans.

(2) They are said to come from Caphtor, a name more like Keftiu than anything else, which certainly denotes a place where the Cretan civilization was dominant.

[p. 26]

(3) The hieratic school-tablet mentions 'Aka###353###ou' as a Keftian name: it is also Philistine [Achish].

To this may be added the important fact that the Phaestos disk, the inscription on which will be considered later in this book, shows us among its signs a head with a plumed head-dress, very similar to that shown on the Philistine captives represented at Medinet Habu.

We must not, however, forget the fact at which we paused for a moment, that thrice the Philistine guard of the Hebrew kings are spoken of as the Carians; and that the Carians are not otherwise represented in the lists of Egyptian invaders. We are probably not to confine our search for the origin of the Zakkala-Philistine-Washasha league to Crete alone: the neighbouring strip of mainland coast probably supplied its contingent to the sea-pirates. The connexion of Caria with Crete was traditional to the time of Strabo; 'the most generally received account is that the Carians, then called Leleges, were governed by Minos, and occupied the islands; then removing to the continent, they obtained possession of a large tract of sea-coast and of the interior, by driving out the former occupiers, who were for the greater part Leleges and Pelasgi.' [*1] Further, he quotes Alcaeus's expression, 'shaking a Carian crest,' which is suggestive of the plumed head-dress of the Philistines. Again, speaking of the city Caunus, on the shore opposite Rhodes, he tells us that its inhabitants 'speak the same language as the Carians, came from Crete, and retained their own laws and customs' [*2]--which, however, Herodotus [*3] contradicts. Herodotus indeed (loc. cit.) gives us the same tradition as Strabo regarding the origin of the Carians: they

'had come from the islands to the continent. For being subjects of Minos, and anciently called Leleges, they occupied the islands without paying any tribute, so far as I can find by inquiring into the remotest times; but whenever Minos required them, they manned his ships; and as Minos subdued an extensive territory, and was successful in war, the Carians were by far the most famous of all nations in those times. They also introduced three inventions which the Greeks have adopted; of fastening crests on helmets, putting devices on shields, and putting handles on shields. . . . After a long time the Dorians and Ionians drove the Carians out of the islands and so they came to the continent. This is the account that the Cretans give of the Carians, but the Carians do not admit its correctness, considering themselves to be autochthonous inhabitants of the continent . . . and in testimony of this they show an ancient temple of Zeus Carios at Mylasa.'

[p. 27]

If then by the Pulasati we are to fill in the hiatus in the list of Asia Minor coast-dwellers, the most reasonable explanation of the name is after all the old theory that it is to be equated with Pelasgi. And if the worshippers of Zeus Carios settled in Palestine, they might be expected to bring their god with them and to erect a temple to him. Now we read in 1 Samuel vii, that the Philistines came up against the Israelites who were holding a religious ceremony in Mizpah; that they were beaten back by a thunderstorm, and chased in panic from Mizpah to a place called Beth-Car (v. 11). We may suppose that the chase stopped at Beth-Car because it was within Philistine territory; but unfortunately all the efforts to identify this place, not otherwise known, have proved futile. Very likely it was not an inhabited town or village at all, but a sanctuary: it was raised on a conspicuous height (for the chase stopped under Beth-Car): and the name means House of Car, [*1] as Beth-Dagon means House or Temple of Dagon. This obscure incident, therefore, affords one more link to the chain.

If the Cretans and the Carians together were represented by Zakkala-Pulasati-Washasha league, we might expect to find some elements from the two important islands of Rhodes and Carpathos, which lie like the piers of a bridge between Crete and the Carian mainland. And I think we may, without comparisons too far-fetched, actually find such elements. Strabo tells us [*2] that a former name of Rhodes was Ophiussa: and we can hardly avoid at least seeing the similarity between this name and that of the Washasha. [*3] And as for Carpathos, which Homer calls Crapathos, is it too bold to hear in this classical name an echo of the pre-Hellenic word, whatever it may have been, which the Egyptians corrupted to Keftiu, and the Hebrews to Caphtor? [*4]

What then are we to make of the name of the Zakkala or Zakkara? This has hitherto proved a crux. Petrie identifies it with Zakro in Crete [*5]; but as has several times been pointed out regarding this identification, we do not know how old the name Zakro may be. As we have seen that all the other tribes take their name

[p. 28]

from the coasts of Asia Minor, it is probable that the Zakkala are the Cretan contingents to the coalition: and it may be that in their name we are to see the interpretation of the mysterious Casluhim of the Table of Nations [*1] (kslchym being a mistake for skl). The most frequently suggested identification, with the TEUCRIANS (assigned by Strabo on the authority of Callinus to a Cretan origin), is perhaps the most satisfactory as yet put forward; notwithstanding the just criticism of W. Max Muller [*2] that the double k and the vowel of the first syllable are difficulties not to be lightly evaded. Clerinont-Ganneau [*3] would equate them to a Nabatean Arab tribe, the Daxarenoi, mentioned by Stephanus of Byzantium; but, as Weill [*4] points out, it is highly improbable that one of the allied tribes should have been Semitic in origin; if the similarity of names be more than an accident, it is more likely that the Arabs should have borrowed it.

The conclusion indicated therefore is that the Philistines were a people composed of several septs, derived from Crete and the southwest corner of Asia Minor. Their civilization, probably, was derived from Crete, and though there was a large Carian element in their composition, they may fairly be said to have been the people who imported with them to Palestine the memories and traditions of the great days of Minos.

Footnotes

^1:1 In Amos ix. 7 and in the Kethibh of 1 Chron. xiv. 10. The almost uniform rendering of the Greek version (Fylistieim) seems rather to favour this orthography. The spelling of the first syllable, Fy, shows, however, that the modern punctuation with the shva is of later growth, and that in the time of the Greek translation the pronunciation still approximated rather to the form of the name as it appears in Egyptian monuments (Purasati).

^2:1 Reflexions critiques sur l'origine, l'histoire et la succession des anciens peuples (1747), ii. 254.

^2:2 F. Hitzig, Urgeschichte and Mythologie der Philister, Leipzig, 1845.

^2:3 Gesenius, Thesaurus, s.v.

^2:4 Movers, Untersuchungen uber die Religion and die Gottheiten der Phonizier (1841), vol. i, p. 9.

^2:5 Except (a) in the Hexateuch, where it is always transliterated Fylistieim, sometimes Fylistiim or Filistieim; (b) in Judges x. 6, 7, 11, xiii. 1, 5, xiv. 2, where again we find the word transliterated: in some important MSS. however, including Codex Alexandrinus, allofyloi, is used in these passages; (c) in Isa. ix. 11 (English ix. 12, where we find the curious rendering Ellenas, possibly indicating a variant reading in the text that lay before the translators.

^3:1 Die alttest. Namen der Bevolkerung, p. 4; adopted by Arnold in Ersch and Gruber's Encyclopaedia, s. v. Philister.

^4:1 Namely Joshua xiii. 2; 1 Sam. iv. 7, vii. 12, xiii. 20, xvii. 51, 52; 2 Sam. v. 19, xxi. 12, 17; 1 Chron. xi. 13; 2 Chron. xxi. 16.

^4:2 For fuller particulars see Skinner's Commentary on Genesis (pp. 200-214). Sayce finds Caphtor and Kasluhet on an inscription at Kom Ombo: see Hastings's Dictionary, s. v. Caphtor; and Man, 1903, No. 77. But see also Hall's criticisms, ib. No. 92.

^6:1 Such are Kharri, Khareththi, Khelthi, Khelthei, Khelbei, Khelbes, Khelema, Kheleththi, Khellethi, Khelethii, Khelethoi, Kheloththi, Kholthei, Khollethi, Khorethi, Khoreththei, Khorri, Khorrei, Kherethei, Kherethei, Kheret, Khereththei, Kherethin, Khereoi, Khuri, Kherethe, Kherethei, Khetthei, Khettei, Oxeleththi, Oxerepi, Oxelbi, Khkelmi, Oxeleth, Reththi. The Pelethites appear under equally strange guises: Feleti, Felti, Feltei, Feletii, Felettei, Feleththi, Feleththii, Feleththei, Feletthei, Feleleththi, Oypet, Oxet, Ofelti, Ofelthi, Ofeleththii, Ofeletthei, Ufeleththei, Opelthi, Opelethin, Operet, Pelebi, Othethii, Khettaiois.

^6:2 Cornill, Das Buch des Proph. Ezek. p. 368, followed by Toy, Ezekiel (in Sacred Books of O. T.), p. 88.

^6:3 Possibly the instinct for triliteralism may also have been instrumental in the evolution of this form.

^6:4 It is given in Lakemacher, Observationes Philologicae (1729), ii. 38, and revived by Ewald in his Kritische Grammatik der hehrlaischen Sprache (1827), p. 297.

^6:5 Hdt. ii. 128.

^7:1 The Greek version has Kherethi in the first of these passages, in the others Khorri with a number of varieties of spelling, Khorrei, Khorin, &c., all of them showing o as the first vowel.

^7:2 Journal of the British School at Athens, viii (1901-2), p. 157.

^8:1 The name of this chieftain's land is mutilated (tyn'y). Mr. Hall (op. cit. p. 167, Oldest Civilisation of Greece, p. 163) restores Yantanay, and renders 'Cyprus'. W. Max Muller compares with this name the word Adinai, found in the List of Keftian names given on p. 10.

^8:2 For these tombs see Hall, British School at Athens, vol. x (1903-4), p. 154, and Proc. Soc. Bib. Arch. xxxi, Plate XVI [Sen-mut]; Wilkinson, Manners and Customs of the Ancient Egyptians, i, Plate II, AB. [Rekhmara]; Virey, Memoires de la mission en Caire, v, p. 7 [Rekhmara], p. 197 ff [Menkheperuseneb]. In the last-named, Keftiu is translated and indexed 'Phenicie'.

^10:1 See the brief summary of the various stages of Cretan culture during the Bronze Age, later in the present chapter.

^10:2 See Spiegelberg, Zeitschrift fur Assyriologie (1893), viii. 385 (where the text is published incompletely), and W. Max Muller in Mittheilungen der vorderasiatischen Gesellschaft, vol. v, p. 6, where facsimiles will be found.

^11:1 Dissertations qui peuvent servir de prolegomenes de l'ecriture sainte (1720), II. ii, p. 441.

^12:1 A place which, as has often been noticed, has the same radicals as the name of the Philistines.

^12:2 Lehrbuch d. bibl. Geschichte, vol. i.

^12:3 Aegypten and des Buch Mose, p. 127 ff.

^12:4 Asien and Europa, p. 337.

^12:5 An elaborate refutation of the Cilician hypothesis will be found in Noordtzij, De Filistijnen, p. 31.

^13:1 Zeitschr. fur wissensch. Theologie, xxxiv (1891), p. 103.

^13:2 Gesch. des Volk. Isr. i. 142.

^13:3 Geschiedenis van den Godsdienst in de Oudheid, i. pp. 214, 241.

^15:1 'Iudaeos Creta Insula profugos nouissima Libyae insedisse memorant, qua tempestate Saturnus ui Iouis pulsus cesserit regnis.'

^15:2 Stephanus of Byzantium, s. v. ....

^15:3 The bare outline statement, which is all that is necessary here, can be supplemented by reference to any of the numerous books that have appeared recently on the special subject of Cretan excavation: such as Professor Burrows's pleasantly. written work entitled The Discoveries in Crete (London, Murray, 1907), which contains a most useful bibliography.

^16:1 See Hall, Proc. Soc. Biblical Archaeology, xxxi, pp. 144-148.

^18:1 Other causes were at work producing the same result of restlessness among the peoples. Thus Mr. Alton suggests to me that the collapse of the island of Thera must have produced a considerable disturbance of population in the neighbouring lands.

^19:1 T.A. Letters, ed. Winckler, No. 28; ed. Knudtzon, No. 38.

^19:2 ib. W. 77, K. 123. See also W. 100.

^19:3 ib. W. 151, K. 151.

^19:4 For an exhaustive study of the great battle of Kadesh between Ramessu and the united tribes, see Breasted, The Battle of Kadesh (Univ. of Chicago Decennial Publications, Ser. I, No. 5.

^21:1 See W. Max Muller's important note in Proc. Soc. Bib. Arch. x, pp. 147-154, where reasons are given against the exactly opposite interpretation, followed by 1 many authorities (e. g. Breasted, Ancient Records). On the other hand the contrary practice seems to be indicated by 1 Sam. xviii. 25. The difficulty of rendering lies in the fact that we have to deal with Egyptian words not found elsewhere.

^21:2 See Breasted, Ancient Records, iv, pp. 1-85.

^21:3 Petrie says 1202, Breasted 1198.

^22:1 The details of these sculptures are more fully described later in this book.

^23:1 Breasted, op. cit. p. 201.

^25:1 Turisha has also been identified with the Cilician town of TARSUS.

^25:2 With reservations: see Weill, Revue archeologique, ser. IV, vol. iii, p. 67. And even the identification of the Danaoi is uncertain. It is at least improbable that Rib-Addi of Tyre, in the letter quoted above, should report on the peacefulness of so remote a people as the Danaoi.

^26:1 Strabo, XIV. ii. 17.

^26:2 Strabo, xiv. ii. 3.

^26:3 i. 17-1.

^27:1 Baithxorin the Greek Version (in some MSS. -kor). Cf. the first footnote on p. 7.

^27:2 xiv. ii. 7.

^27:3 Hall looks for the Washasha in Crete, and finds them in the name of the Cretan town faxos [Oldest Civilization of Greece, p. 177]. But if this comparatively obscure Cretan name were really represented in the Egyptian lists, we might reasonably look for the more important names to appear also. The name appears (in the form Oa###353###a###353###ios) in an inscription from Halicarnassus: see Weill in Revue archeologique, ser. IV, vol. iii, p. 63.

^27:4 Baur, Amos, p. 79, has already suggested this identification.

^27:5 Proc. Soc. Bib. Arch., 1941, p. 41.

^28:1 Gen. x. 14.

^28:2 Mittheil. der corderas. Gesellschaft, v, p. 3. On Teucer see Frazer, Adonis, Allis, Osiris, p. 112.

^28:3 Recueil d'Archeologie orientale, iv. 230.

^28:4 loc. cit. p. 64.

The Philistines, by R.A.S. Macalister, [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 29]

  

CHAPTER II

  

THE HISTORY OF THE PHILISTINES

  

I. THE ADVENTURES OF WEN-AMON AMONG THEM

THE Golenischeff papyrus [*1] was found in 1891 at El-Khibeh in Upper Egypt. It is the personal report of the adventures of an Egyptian messenger to Lebanon, sent on an important semi-religious, semi-diplomatic mission. The naivete of the style makes it one of the most vivid and convincing narratives that the ancient East affords.

Ramessu III is nominally on the throne, and the papyrus is dated in his fifth year. The real authority at Thebes is, however, Hrihor, the high priest of Amon, who is ultimately to usurp the sovereignty and become the founder of the Twenty-first Dynasty. In Lower Egypt, the Tanite noble Nesubenebded, in Greek Smendes, has control of the Delta. Egypt is in truth a house divided against itself.

On the sixteenth day of the eleventh month of the fifth year of Ramessu, one Wen-Amon was dispatched from Thebes to fetch timber for the barge called User-het, the great august sacred barge of Amon-Ra, king of the gods. Who Wen-Amon may have been, we do not certainly know; he states that he had a religious office, but it is not clear what this was. It speaks eloquently for the rotten state of Egypt at the time, however, that no better messenger could be found than this obviously incompetent person--a sort of Egyptian prototype of the Rev. Robert Spalding! With him was an image of Amon, which he looked upon as a kind of fetish, letters of credit or of introduction, and the wherewithal to purchase the timber.

Sailing down the Nile, Wen-Amon in due time reached Tanis, and presented himself at the court of Nesubenebded, who with his wife Tentamon, received the messenger of Amon-Ra with fitting courtesy. He handed over his letters, which (being themselves unable to decipher them) they caused to be read: and they said, 'Yea, yea,

[p. 30]

[paragraph continues] I will do all that our lord Amon-Ra saith.' Wen-Amon tarried at Tanis till a fortnight had elapsed from his first setting out from Thebes; and then his hosts put him in charge of a certain Mengebti, captain of a ship about to sail to Syria. This was rather casual; evidently Mengebti's vessel was an ordinary trading ship, whereas we might have expected (and as appears later the Syrians did expect) that one charged with an important special message should be sent in a special ship. At this point the thoughtless Wen-Amon made his first blunder. He forgot all about reclaiming his letters of introduction from Nesubenebded, and so laid up for himself the troubles even now in store for the helpless tourist who tries to land at Beirut without a passport. Like the delightful pilgrimage of the mediaeval Dominican Felix Fabri, the modernness of this narrative of antiquity is not one of its least attractions.

On the first day of the twelfth month Mengebti's ship set sail. After a journey of unrecorded length the ship put in at Dor, probably the modern Tantura on the southern coast of the promontory of Carmel. Dor was inhabited by Zakkala (a very important piece of information) and they had a king named Badyra. We are amazed to read that, apparently as soon as the ship entered the harbour, this hospitable monarch sent to Wen-Amon 'much bread, a jar of wine, and a joint of beef'. I verily believe that this was a tale got up by some bakhshish-hunting huckster. The simpleminded tourist of modern days is imposed upon by similar magnificent fables.

There are few who have travelled much by Levant steamers without having lost something by theft. Sufferers may claim Wen-Amon as a companion in misfortune. As soon as the vessel touched at Dor, some vessels of gold, four vessels and a purse of silver--in all 5 deben or about 1 1/5 lb. of gold and 31 deben or about 7 1/2 lb. of silver--were stolen by a man of the ship, who decamped. This was all the more serious, because, as appears later, these valuables were actually the money with which Wen-Amon had been entrusted for the purchase of the timber.

So Wen-Amon did exactly what he would have done in the twentieth century AD. He went the following morning and interviewed the governor, Badyra. There was no Egyptian consul at the time, so he was obliged to conduct the interview in person. 'I have been robbed in thy harbour,' he says, 'and thou, being king, art he who should judge, and search for my money. The money indeed belongs to Amon-Ra, and Nesubenebded, and Hrihor my lord: it also belongs to Warati, and Makamaru, and Zakar-Baal prince of Byblos'

[p. 31]

[paragraph continues] --the last three being evidently the names of the merchants who had been intended to receive the money. The account of Abraham's negotiations with the Hittites is not more modern than the king's reply. We can feel absolutely certain that he said exactly the words which Wen-Amon puts in his mouth: 'Thy honour and excellency! Behold, I know nothing of this complaint of thine. If the thief were of my land, and boarded the ship to steal thy treasure, I would even repay it from mine own treasury till they found who the thief was. But the thief belongs to thy ship (so I have no responsibility). Howbeit, wait a few days and I will seek for him.' Wen-Amon had to be content with this assurance. Probably nothing was done after he had been bowed out from the governor's presence: in any case, nine days elapsed without news of the missing property. At the end of the time Wen-Amon gave up hope, and made up his mind to do the best he could without the money. He still had his image of Amon-Ra, and he had a child-like belief that the foreigners would share the reverent awe with which he himself regarded it. So he sought permission of the king of Dor to depart.

Here comes a lacuna much to be deplored. A sadly broken fragment helps to fill it up, but consecutive sense is unattainable. 'He said unto me "Silence!" . . . and they went away and sought their thieves . . . and I went away from Tyre as dawn was breaking . . . Zakar-Baal, prince of Byblos. . . there I found 30 deben of silver and took it . . . your silver is deposited with me . . . I will take it . . . they went away . . . I came to . . . the harbour of Byblos and . . . to Amon, and I put his goods in it. The prince of Byblos sent a messenger to me . . . my harbour. I sent him a message . . .' These, with a few other stray words, are all that can be made out. It seems as though Wen-Amon tried to recoup himself for his loss by appropriating the silver of some one else. At any rate, the fragment leaves Wen-Amon at his destination, the harbour of Byblos. Then the continuous text begins again. Apparently Zakar-Baal has sent a message to him to begone and to find a ship going to Egypt in which he could sail. Why Zakar-Baal was so inhospitable does not appear. Indeed daily, for nineteen days, he kept sending a similar message to the Egyptian, who seems to have done nothing one way or another. At last Wen-Amon found a ship about to sail for Egypt, and made arrangements to go as a passenger in her, despairing of ever carrying out his mission. He put his luggage on board and then waited for the darkness of night to come on board with his image of Amon, being for some reason anxious that none but himself should see this talisman.

[p. 32]

But now a strange thing happened. One of the young men of Zakar-Baal's entourage was seized with a prophetic ecstasy--the first occurrence of this phenomenon on record--and in his frenzy cried, Bring up the god! Bring up Amon's messenger that has him! Send him, and let him go.' Obedient to the prophetic message Zakar-Baal sent down to the harbour to summon the Egyptian. The latter was much annoyed, and protested, not unreasonably, at this sudden change of attitude. Indeed he suspected a ruse to let the ship go off; with his belongings, and leave him defenceless at the mercy of the Byblites. The only effect of his protest was an additional order to 'hold up' the ship as well.

In the morning he presented himself to Zakar-Baal. After the sacrifice had been made in the castle by the sea-shore where the prince dwelt, Wen-Amon was brought into his presence. He was 'sitting in his upper chamber, leaning his back against a window, while the waves of the great Syrian sea beat on the shore behind him'. To adapt a passage in one of Mr. Rudyard Kipling's best-known stories, we can imagine the scene, but we cannot imagine Wen-Amon imagining it: the eye-witness speaks in every word of the picturesque description.

The interview was not pleasant for the Egyptian. It made so deep an impression upon him, that to our great gain he was able when writing his report to reproduce it almost verbatim, as follows:

'Amon's favour upon thee,' said Wen-Amon.

'How long is it since thou hast left the land of Amon?' demanded Zakar-Baal, apparently without returning his visitor's salutation. 'Five months and one day,' said Wen-Amon.

(This answer shows how much of the document we have lost. We cannot account for more than the fourteen days spent between Thebes and Tanis, nine days at Dor, nineteen days at Byblos--six weeks in all-plus the time spent in the voyage, which at the very outside could scarcely have been more than another six weeks.)

'Well then, if thou art a true man, where are thy credentials?'

We remember that Wen-Amon had left them with the prince of Tanis, and he said so. Then was Zakar-Baal very wroth. 'What! There is no writing in thy hand? And where is the ship that Nesubenebded gave thee? Where are its crew of Syrians? For sure, he would never have put thee in charge of this (incompetent Egyptian) who would have drowned thee--and then where would they have sought their god and thee?'

This is the obvious sense, though injured by a slight lacuna. Nothing more clearly shows how the reputation of Egypt had sunk

[p. 33]

in the interval since the exploits of Ramessu III. Zakar-Baal speaks of Mengebti and his Egyptian crew with much the same contempt as Capt. Davis in Stevenson's Ebb-tide speaks of a crew of Kanakas. Wen-Amon ventured on a mild protest. 'Nesubenebded has no Syrian crews: all his ships are manned with Egyptians.'

'There are twenty ships in my harbour,' said Zakar-Baal sharply, and ten thousand ships in Sidon--' The exaggeration and the aposiopesis vividly mirror the vehemence of the speaker. He was evidently going on to say that these ships, though Egyptian, were all manned by Syrians. But, seeing that Wen-Amon was, as he expresses it, 'silent in that supreme moment' he broke off, and abruptly asked--

'Now, what is thy business here?'

We are to remember that Wen-Amon had come to buy timber, but had lost his money. We cannot say anything about whether he had actually recovered the money or its equivalent, because of the unfortunate gap in the document already noticed. However, it would appear that he had at the moment no ready cash, for he tried the effect of a little bluff. 'I have come for the timber of the great august barge of Amon-Ra, king of the gods. Thy father gave it, as did thy grandfather, and thou wilt do so too.'

But Zakar-Baal was not impressed. 'True,' said he, 'they gave the timber, but they were paid for it: I will do so too, if I be paid likewise.' And then we are interested to learn that he had his father's account-books brought in, and showed his visitor the records of large sums that had been paid for timber. 'See now,' continued Zakar-Baal in a speech rather difficult to construe intelligibly, 'had I and my property been under the king of Egypt, he would not have sent money, but would have sent a command. These transactions of my father's were not the payment of tribute due. I am not thy servant nor the servant of him that sent thee. All I have to do is to speak, and the logs of Lebanon lie cut on the shore of the sea. But where are the sails and the cordage thou hast brought to transport the logs? . . . Egypt is the mother of all equipments and all civilization; how then have they made thee come in this hole-and-corner way?' He is evidently still dissatisfied with this soi-disant envoy, coming in a common passenger ship without passport or credentials.

Then Wen-Amon played his trump card. He produced the image of Amon. 'No hole-and-corner journey is this, O guilty one!' said he. 'Amon owns every ship on the sea, and owns Lebanon which thou hast claimed as thine own. Amon has sent me, and Hrihor my lord has made me come, bearing this great god. And yet, though thou didst

[p. 34]

well know that he was here, thou hadst kept him waiting twenty-nine days in the harbour. [*1] Former kings have sent money to thy fathers, but not life and health: if thou do the bidding of Amon, he will send thee life and health. Wish not for thyself a thing belonging to Amon-Ra.'

These histrionics, however, did not impress Zakar-Baal any more than the previous speech. Clearly Wen-Amon saw in his face that the lord of Byblos was not overawed by the image of his god, and that he wanted something more tangible than vague promises of life and health. So at length he asked for his scribe to be brought him that he might write a letter to Tanis, praying for a consignment of goods on account. The letter was written, the messenger dispatched, and in about seven weeks returned with a miscellaneous cargo of gold, silver, linen, 500 rolls of papyrus (this is important), hides, rope, lentils, and fish. A little present for Wen-Amon himself was sent as well by the lady Tentamon. Then the business-like prince rejoiced, we are told, and gave the word for the felling of the trees. And at last, some eight months after Wen-Amon's departure from Thebes, the timber lay on the shore ready for delivery.

A curious passage here follows in the papyrus. It contains one of the oldest recorded jokes--if not actually the oldest--in the world. When Zakar-Baal came down to the shore to give the timber over to Wen-Amon, he was accompanied by an Egyptian butler, by name Pen-Amon. The shadow of Zakar-Baal's parasol happened to fall on the envoy, whereupon the butler exclaimed, 'Lo, the shadow of Pharaoh thy lord falleth on thee!' The point of the witticism is obscure, but evidently even Zakar-Baal found it rather too extreme, for he sharply rebuked the jester. But he proceeded himself to display a delicate humour. 'Now,' said he, 'I have done for thee what my fathers did, though thou hast not done for me what thy fathers did. Here is the timber lying ready and complete. Do what thou wilt with it. But do not be contemplating the terror of the sea' (there cannot be the slightest doubt that Wen-Amon was at this moment glancing over the waters and estimating his chances of a smooth crossing). 'Contemplate for a moment the terror of Me! Ramessu IX sent some messengers to me and'--here he turned to the butler--' Go thou, and show him their graves!'

'Oh, let me not see them!' was the agonized exclamation of Wen-Amon, anxious now above all things to be off without further delay. Those were people who had no god with them! Wherefore dost thou not instead erect a tablet to record to all time "that Amon-Ra

[p. 35]

sent to me and I sent timber to Egypt, to beseech ten thousand years of life, and so it came to pass"?'

'Truly that would be a great testimony!' said the sarcastic prince, and departed.

Wen-Amon now set about loading his timber. But presently there sailed eleven ships of the Zakkala into the harbour--possibly those on whom he had made a rash attempt at piracy to recoup himself for his losses at Dor. The merchants in them demanded his arrest. The poor Egyptian sat down on the shore and wept. 'They have come to take me again!' he cried out--it would appear that he had been detained by the Zakkala before, but the record of this part of his troubles is lost in one of the lacunae of the MS. We despair of him altogether when he actually goes on to tell us that when news of this new trouble reached Zakar-Baal, that magnate wept also. However, we need not question the charming detail that he sent to Wen-Amon an Egyptian singing-girl, to console him with her songs. But otherwise he washed his hands of the whole affair. He told the Zakkala that he felt a delicacy about arresting the messenger of Amon on his own land, but he gave them permission to follow and arrest him themselves, if they should see fit. So away Wen-Amon sailed, apparently without his timber, and presumably with the Zakkala in pursuit. But he managed to evade them. A wind drove him to Cyprus. The Cypriotes came out, as he supposed, to kill him and his crew; but they brought them before Hatiba, their queen. He called out 'Does any one here understand Egyptian?' One man stepped forward. He dictated a petition to be translated to the queen--

And here the curtain falls abruptly, for the papyrus breaks off; and the rest of this curious tragi-comedy of three thousand years ago is lost to us.

We see from it that the dwellers on the Syrian coast had completely thrown off the terror inspired by the victories of Ramessu III. An Egyptian on a sacred errand from the greatest men in the country, bearing the image of an Egyptian god, could be robbed, bullied, mocked, threatened, thwarted in every possible way. Granted that he was evidently not the kind of man to command respect, yet the total lack of reverence for the royalties who had sent him, and the sneers at Egypt and the Egyptian rulers, are very remarkable.

We see also that the domain of the 'People of the Sea' was more extensive than the scanty strip of territory usually allowed them on Bible maps. Further evidence of this will meet us presently,

[p. 36]

but meanwhile it may be noted that the name 'Palestine' is much less of an extension of the name 'Philistia' than the current maps would have us suppose. In other words, the two expressions are more nearly synonymous than they are generally taken to be. We find Dor, south of Carmel, to be a Zakkala town; and Zakkala ships are busy in the ports further north.

Indeed, one is half inclined to see Zakkala dominant at Byblos itself. Wen-Amon was a person of slender education--even of his own language he was not a master--and he was not likely to render foreign names correctly. Probably he could speak nothing but Egyptian: he was certainly ignorant of the language of Cyprus, whatever that may have been: and possibly linguistic troubles are indicated by his rendering of the name of the lord of Byblos. Can it be that this was not a name at all, but a title (or rather the Semitic translation of a title, given by a Zakkala dragoman): that Zakar is not zkr 'remember', but the name of the Zakkala: and that Baal here, as frequently elsewhere, means 'lord' in a human and not a divine sense? If so, the name would mean 'the lord of the Zakkala', a phrase that recalls 'the lords of the Philistines' in the Hebrew Scriptures. The syntax assumed is of course quite un-Semitic: but it is often the case in dragomans' translations that the syntax of the original language is preserved. Something like this idea has been anticipated by M. A. J. Reinach. [*1]

Zakar-baal was no mere pirate chieftain, however. He was a substantial, civilized, and self-reliant prince, and contrasts most favourably with the weak, half-blustering, half-lacrimose Egyptian. He understood the Egyptian language; for he could rebuke the jest of his Egyptian butler, who would presumably speak his native tongue in 'chaffing' his compatriot; and no doubt the interview in the upper room was carried on in Egyptian. He was well acquainted with the use of letters, for he knew where to put his finger on the relevant parts of the accounts of his two predecessors. These accounts were probably not in cuneiform characters on clay tablets, as he is seen to import large quantities of papyrus from Egypt. He is true to his old maritime traditions: he builds his house where he can watch the great waves of the Mediterranean beat on the shore, and he is well informed about the ships in his own and the neighbouring harbours, and their crews.

There is a dim recollection of a Philistine occupation of Phoenicia

[p. 37]

recorded for us in an oft-quoted passage of Justin (xviii. 3. 5), [*1] in which he mentions a raid by the king of Ashkelon, just before the fall of Troy, on the Phoenician town of Sidon (so called from an alleged Phoenician word 'Sidon', meaning 'fish'). 'This is of course merely a saga-like tradition, and as we do not know from what authority Justin drew his information we can hardly put a very heavy strain upon it. And yet it seems to hang together with the other evidence, that in the Mycenaean period, when Troy was taken, there actually was a Philistine settlement on the Phoenician coast. As to the specific mention of Ashkelon, a suggestion, perhaps a little venturesome, may be hazarded. The original writer of the history of this vaguely-chronicled event, whoever he may have been, possibly recorded correctly that it was the Zakkala who raided Sidon. Some later author or copyist was puzzled by this forgotten name, and 'emended' a rege Sacaloniorum to a rege Ascaloniorum. Stranger things have happened in the course of manuscript transmission. [*2]

The Papyrus gives us some chronological indications of importance. The expedition of Wen-Amon took place in the fifth year of Ramessu XII, that is to say, about 1110 B.C. Zakar-Baal had already been governor of Byblos for a considerable time, for he had received envoys from Ramessu IX (1144-1129). Suppose these envoys to have come about 1130, that gives him already twenty years. The envoys of Ramessu IX were detained seventeen years; but in the first place this may have been an exaggeration, and in the second place we need not suppose that many of those seventeen years necessarily fell within the reign of the sender of these messengers. Further, Zakar-Baal's father and grandfather had preceded him in office. We do not know how long they reigned, but giving twenty-five years to each, which is probably a high estimate, we reach the date 1180, which is sufficiently long after the victory of Ramessu III for the people to begin to recover from the blow which that event inflicted on them.

Footnotes

^29:1 See Max Muller, Mittheilungen der deutschen vorderasiatischen Gesellschaft, 1900, p. 14; Erman, Zeitschrift far agyptische Sprache, xxxviii, p. 1; Breasted, Ancient Records, iv, p. 274.

^34:1 An inconsistency: he has added ten days to his former statement.

^36:1 'Byblos, ou regne un prince qui pourrait bien etre un Tchakara semitise, si l'on en croit son nom de Tchakar-baal.' Revue archeologique, ser. IV, vol. xv, p. 45.

^37:1 'Et quoniam ad Carthaginiensium mentionem uentum est, de origine eorum pauca dicenda sunt, repetitis Tyriorum paulo altius rebus, quorum casus etiam dolendi fuerunt. Tyriorum gens condita a Phoenicibus fuit, qui terraemotu uexati, relicto patriae solo, Assyrium stagnum primo, mox mari proximum littus incoluerunt, condita ibi urbe quam a piscium ubertate Sidona appellauerunt; nam piscem Phoenices sidon uocant. Post multos deinde annos a rege Ascaloniorum expugnati, nauibus appulsi, Tyron urbem ante annum Troianae cladis condiderunt.'

^37:2 On the other hand Scylax in his Periplus calls Ashkelon 'a city of the Tyrians'.

The Philistines, by R.A.S. Macalister, [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 38]

  

2. THEIR STRUGGLE WITH THE HEBREWS

We now turn to the various historical references to the Philistines in the Hebrew Scriptures.

It happens that the Zakkala, with whom the Golenischeff Papyrus is concerned, are not mentioned by name in the received text of the Old Testament. The southern Philistines were more conspicuous in the history of the Hebrews, and this name is in consequence used indifferently for all the tribal subdivisions of the hated enemy. The first appearance of the Philistines on the coast of Southern Palestine is not recorded in the Old Testament, but it may possibly be inferred indirectly. In the oldest monument of Hebrew speech, the Song of Deborah, the tribe of Dan is referred to as a maritime people who 'remained in ships' while their brethren bore the brunt of the invasion of Sisera. Towards the end of the Book of Judges, we find that certain of the tribe of Dan are compelled to seek a home elsewhere, and choose the fertile, well-watered, but hot and fever-haunted Laish, a place remote from everywhere, and where the people were 'quiet'--as they well might be in that malaria-stricken furnace. Why did the Danites leave for this unsatisfactory territory their healthy and rich land by the sea-coast? Probably because they were driven by pressure from without. The migration of the Danites can best be explained by the settlement of the Philistines. And it is suggestive that the first great champion to stand for Israel against the intruders, Samson, belonged to Zorah, whence went forth the Danite spies (Judg. xviii. 2).

The first allusion to the Philistines which we meet with in the Old Testament, that in the genealogical table of the nations in Genesis x, we have already discussed. Next we find a cycle of stories, told with but little variation both of Abraham and of Isaac (Gen. xx, xxi, xxvi), in which those heroes of old are brought into contact with a certain 'Abimelech, king of the Philistines'. In both cases the patriarch, to save himself, conceals his true relationship to his wife, which is revealed to the deceived monarch: in both, the latter displays a singular dignity and righteousness in the delicate position in which his guest's duplicity places him: and in both there is a subsequent dispute about the possession of wells. The stories are in short doublets of one another, and both echo a similar tale told of Abraham in Egypt, at an earlier stage of his career (Gen. xii). Whoever added the inept title to Psalm xxxiv evidently had these stories in his mind when he inadvertently wrote 'a Psalm of David when he changed his behaviour before Abimelech' instead of Achish: an unconscious

[p. 39]

reminiscence of the tale might possibly have been suggested by vv. 12, 13 of the Psalm in question.

The use of the word 'Philistine' in these stories has long been recognized as an anachronism. Perhaps with less harshness and equal accuracy we might characterize it as a rather free use of modern names and circumstances in telling an ancient tale. Even now we might find, for example, a popular writer on history saying that this event or that of the Early British period took place 'in Norfolk', although it is obvious that the territory of the North Folk must have received its Saxon name in later times. The tales of Abraham and Isaac were written when the land where their scenes were laid was in truth the Land of the Philistines; and the story-teller was not troubled with the question as to how far back that occupation lasted. Indeed when Abimelech first appears on the scene he is not a Philistine, but the Semitic king of the town of Gerar. The two passages in Gen. xxi, which might be understood 'they returned into [what we call] Philistia' . . . 'Abraham sojourned in [what is now] Philistia', have misled the writer (or copyist) of Gen. xxvi into supposing that Abimelech was actually king of the Philistines. In fact the Greek Version of xxvi. 8 seems to preserve an indication of older readings in which he was simply called, as in the other story, king of Gerar.

Noordtzij (Filist. p. 59) attempts to demonstrate a pre-Ramessu occupation of S. Palestine by the Philistines, principally on the ground that the time between Ramessu III and Samson or Saul is too short for the 'semitizing' process to have taken place. This seems hardly a cogent argument to me: the 'semitization' was by no means complete: the special Semitic rite of circumcision was not adopted: there is no reason to suppose that the language of the Philistines had been abandoned for a Semitic language. And we need have no difficulty in supposing such changes to take place with great rapidity. Thanks to the undermining influence of returned American emigrants, the Irish peasant has shown a change of attitude towards traditional beliefs in fairies and similar beings within the past twenty years as profound as any change that might have taken place between Ramessu III and Saul under the influence of the surrounding Semitic populations.

A similar anachronism meets us in Exodus xiii. 17, enshrining an ancient tradition that the ordinary caravan-route from Egypt by way of the coast was avoided in preference to the long and wearisome march through the desert, in order to keep clear of the Philistines and their military prowess. Likewise in the song preserved in Exodus xv, we find (v. 14) despondency attributed to the dwellers

[p. 40]

in Philistia at the news of the crossing of the Red Sea. This song, however, is probably not very ancient.

On the other hand, the writers who have contributed to the Pentateuch in its final form do not all share the indifference to chronological detail shown by the Yahwist story-teller. Often as are the tribes of Canaan enumerated in passages anticipatory of the conquest of the Promised Land, the Philistines are never mentioned: they have no share in the territory of the Hittite, the Girgashite, the Amorite, the Canaanite, and the Jebusite. In view of the prominence of the Philistines in the later history, this is a very significant fact. The solitary exception is so vague that it might almost be said to prove the rule--a reference to the Mediterranean sea by the name of 'the Sea of the Philistines' in Exodus xxxiii. 31. In Joshua xiii. 2, the 'districts' or 'circles' of the Philistines are enumerated among the places not conquered by the leader of the Hebrew immigration--the following verse, to which we shall return later, enumerates the 'districts'. But there is no reference to the Philistines in the parallel account contained in Judges i. There, in verse 19, the 'dwellers in the valley', i.e. in the low coast-land on which the Judahite territory bordered, are depicted as successfully resisting the aggression of the Hebrew tribe with the help of their iron chariots: the previous verse, which contradicts this, and which unhistorically claims that Judah captured the cities Gaza, Ashkelon, and Ekron, must necessarily be an interpolation. [*1] In Judges iii. 3 we find an agreement with the passage just cited from Joshua--the five lords of the Philistines, as well as the 'Canaanites' (whatever may be exactly meant by the name in this connexion), the Phoenicians, and the Hi[tt]ites are enumerated as being left unconquered. The curious reason assigned, that this was to practise the Hebrews in war, is at any rate concordant with the old tradition that the terror of the warlike Philistines prevented the Hebrews following the direct route into the Promised Land.

The passages examined so far have rather been concerned with the settlement of the protagonists in the great struggle for the possession of Palestine than with the course of the struggle itself. We are to picture the Hebrew tribes crossing the Jordan from the East, and some little time afterwards the Philistines (and Zakkala) establishing themselves on the rich coast-lands: this much we can see with the aid of the Egyptian records cited in the preceding pages. We now follow the history of the conflict.

At the outset we are confronted by a puzzling group of passages. In the very ancient Song of Deborah, picturing the distracted state

[p. 41]

of the country under foreign oppressors, the writer describes how travellers and caravans, from fear, abandoned the main thoroughfares and journeyed along the by-paths, of which the winding valleys of Palestine offer an endless choice. This was in the days of a certain Shamgar son of Anath [*1] (Judges v. 6). The name has a foreign appearance [*2]: a Hittite analogy (Sangar) has been sought for it. We cannot, however, conclude that he was necessarily a foreigner, even though his progenitor is said to be Anath, which happens to be a well-known goddess-name. There is not another case of a Hebrew bearing so frankly idolatrous a name in the Old Testament. But in the Aswan papyri we have a glimpse of what Jewish life was, independent of priestly influences; and these show an extraordinary tolerance of heathen names and practices. We find Hosea son of Peti-Khnum. Names like 'Athar-ili, Nebonathan, Ben-Tirash occur in the community: the daughter of one Mahseiah swears in a law-court by the goddess Sati. Shamgar son of Anath would have been quite at home in this company.

The antecedent for this reference in Deborah's Song appears to lie in a verse at the end of chapter iii (v. 31), which says that Shamgar son of Anath killed six hundred Philistines with an ox-goad, and saved Israel. It is, however, obvious that this verse is out of place. It interrupts the flow of the narrative: there is no word of Philistine oppression in the context, and the text proceeds 'When Ehud was dead . . .' certain things happened, following on the story of Ehud which the Shamgar passage interrupts. The later development of the history contains no recognition of the labours of Shamgar. There are indeed few passages in literature which are so clearly no part of the original document: and we can hardly doubt that it has been inserted from some other source, or from another part of the book, in order to provide an explanation for the allusion in Deborah's Song.

It is curious that the chief Greek MSS. read Dinax instead of 'Anath' here, but not in Deborah's Song. [*3] A number of Greek MSS. repeat the verse relating to Shamgar after xvi. 31--i.e. immediately after the story of Samson. This seems a better place for it. [*4]

[p. 42]

The Shamgar story, in short, looks like one of the floating traditions that have more particularly crystallized round Samson and the mighty men of David. A remarkable parallel to the exploit of Shamgar has been found in the deed of 'Shammah the Hararite'--a not dissimilar name--one of David's followers, who in some such rough and ready way defended a field of crops--barley or lentils--from Philistine marauders. [*1]

But can the story be so summarily dismissed? Grant all the difficulties--that Shamgar's name has a foreign aspect, that the prose account of him is an interpolation, that the Philistines seem to appear too early on the scene; yet the scanty allusion to this obscure champion may after all record a tradition of the beginnings of the great struggle.

For besides Shamgar, Deborah's Song mentions another arresting personality. The very grandeur of the paean throws a romantic halo round the person of the unfortunate Sisera, victim of a crime against the desert law of hospitality difficult to parallel even in the wild annals of Bedawin life. The heartless glee with which the poet triumphs over the chieftain's anxious, watching mother makes the latter for us one of the most pathetic figures in the whole crowded gallery of the Old Testament. Time has brought its revenge for both mother and son.

In the prose version of the combat, Sisera is represented as the general of Jabin, king of Hazor, and the latter is the head of the attack on Israel. But Jabin has an altogether secondary place in the narrative, and Sisera is the central figure. Jabin, indeed, is probably imported into the story from the source that lies at the back of Joshua xi, where there is no mention of Sisera. In Psalm lxxxiii. 9 Sisera is mentioned before Jabin. He has a town of his own, 'Harosheth of the Gentiles,' more than a day's journey from the city of Jabin; and the vignette of his mother surrounded by her court ladies gives us a picture of a more important establishment than that of a mere captain of a host. Sisera in short is an independent king, and the story as we have it is either an account of a single campaign in which two kings were in league, or, more probably, a combination of the narratives of two campaigns wholly independent.

Harosheth is generally identified with the modern Harathiyeh, in the bottle-neck which forms the mouth of the plain of Esdraelon--a region entirely in Philistine hands, at least at the end of Saul's wars. This identification seems fairly trustworthy. Not far off from Harosheth was a village with the name Beth-dagon: and Harosheth itself is distinguished

[p. 43]

by the appellation 'of the goyim' or foreigners. In Joshua xii. 23 'the king of the goyim in Gilgal' is mentioned in noteworthy juxtaposition with Dor, which figures so conspicuously in the report of Wen-Amon; but this passage has been suspected and various emendations suggested, chief of which is to read lglyl for lglgl and to translate 'king of nations belonging to Galilee'. This is of course reminiscent of the famous 'Galilee of the Gentiles' [*1]; but on the other hand we may compare glylwth plshth 'the Galilees of Philistia' in Joshua xiii. 2 and Joel iii. 4 (= Hebrew iv. 4), which in the latter passage is mentioned immediately after the Philistine territory. The word goyim is of no more specific meaning than our word 'nations': though usually applied to foreigners, it may even on occasion be applied to the nation of Israel: so it cannot be said to be very conclusive. But one wonders whether in such passages and phrases as these it might not bear the special meaning of the foreigners par excellence, the most outlandish people with whom the Hebrews came into contact--that is to say the Philistines and their cognate tribes, for whom the Greek translators reserve the name allofyloi. In the present case they would more especially be the Zakkala, of whom Wen-Amon tells us, but who are not mentioned by name in the Hebrew writings.

Sisera's enormous host of iron chariots, a possession which, as we saw, also enabled the coast-dwellers of the South to hold their own, is emphasized in the prose account of the battle, as in the speech put by Deborah's Song into his mother's mouth: and it is interesting to notice that we hear again of these iron chariots as being on the plain of Esdraelon (Joshua xvii. 16).

The name of the prince also is suggestive. It is not Semitic: and the numerous Hittite names ending in sira--Khetasira and the like--have been quoted to indicate its possible origin. But we should not forget Badyra, the Zakkala prince of the neighbouring town of Dor. And may it not be asked whether Sisera, sysr', could be a reduplicated form derived from the root of srn seren (the latter being possibly a participle), the one word of the Philistine language which we certainly know--the technical term for the 'lords of the Philistine state? This guess presupposes that the language of the Philistines was Indo-European--an assumption which it has not yet been possible either to prove or disprove. Some possible evidence of reduplication is afforded by such combinations as REREIET and perhaps KRKOKLES in the Praesos inscriptions. It is interesting to note that the name

[p. 44]

[paragraph continues] Benesasira occurs in the list of Keftian names on the Egyptian tablet described on a previous page.

If Sisera was a Philistine or at least one of cognate race, we have some use for Shamgar and his ox-goad. Otherwise, the latter must be expunged from the list of Judges, if he be not actually numbered among the oppressors, as Moore in his Commentary is inclined to do. The combination ANAIT, which ends one of the Praesos inscriptions just mentioned, has been compared to the name of Shamgar's parent Anath; but there is no probability that such a coincidence between a short inscription on the one hand, and a few proper names on the other, is of any importance.

In Judges x. 6, 7, 11 there is mention of Philistine oppression, in strange and scarcely intelligible connexion with the Amorites. This passage does not help us nearer to the solution of problems. It is in the narrative of Samson that the Philistines first come conspicuously on the scene. It is unnecessary to summarize the familiar incidents: indeed for our purpose these chapters, though of the deepest interest, are disappointing. The narrator is content to tell his tale, without troubling himself about the attendant circumstances which we would so gladly know.

In discussing this remarkable series of episodes it is unnecessary to raise the question of their historicity. [*1] Still more irrelevant would be a discussion of the pseudo-scientific hypothesis that Samson (like Achilles, Heracles, Max Muller, Gladstone, and other demonstrated characters of mythology) was a solar myth. It is sufficient for the purpose of our present discussion that the tale gives us an early tradition of the condition of affairs at the time indicated; and as I have said elsewhere, [*2] it is probably to be regarded as a prose epic concentrating into the person of a single ideal hero the various incidents of a guerrilla border-warfare.

This being postulated, one or two points of importance strike us in reading the story. The first is, that the Philistine domination was complete, and was passively accepted by the Hebrews. 'The Philistines are rulers over us' say the men of Judah, who propose to betray the champion to his enemies. As is so often the case with a nation of separate clans, even the pressure of a formidable common enemy cannot always heal their mutual jealousies. Ireland, in the face of the Vikings in the ninth century, and of the English in the twelfth, offers

[p. 45]

an instructive parallel. Only a chapter or two before the appearance of Samson, we have the distracting episode of Abimelech: a chapter or two later comes the story of the massacre of the Benjamites by the other tribes: and whatever may be the true chronological relationship of these narratives to the historical setting of the Samson epic, they at least indicate that there was a long period of inter-tribal disunion that would make it easy for a well-organized military nation to gain complete domination over the country.

But it was no mere military domination. The Philistines were accompanied by their wives and daughters, and the attractiveness of the latter in the eyes of Samson is a leading motive of his story. On this side of the narrative, however, there is one point to be noticed. There is no reason for branding the Philistines with the stigma of having produced the mercenary traitress Delilah: indeed, whatever indications there may be in her story point in an exactly opposite direction. Had tradition called her a Philistine, like Samson's first wife, the author of Judges would hardly have failed to make it clear. She is described as a woman in the Valley of Sorek; which, if it be the modern Wady es-Surar, as is generally agreed, was partly in Israelite territory. Moreover, it would scarcely have been necessary for the Philistine lords to have offered the gigantic bribe of 1,100 pieces of silver each, to a woman of their own nation, that she might betray to them the arch-enemy of her race: it would be much more likely that they would use the persuasive argument of threatening her with the fate of her unlucky predecessor. The name appears again as that of a member of the tribe of Judah, in a genealogical fragment in 1 Chronicles iv. 19, preserved by the Greek Version, but lost from the Hebrew textus receptus. It is not too much to say that if the Delilah episode be read carefully, the various steps become more natural and intelligible when we picture the central figure as a tribeswoman of the men of Judah, who in the previous chapter had attempted to anticipate her act of betrayal.

It is noteworthy that nowhere in the Samson story is there any hint that there was a barrier of language between Hebrew and Philistine. Samson and his Philistine friends at Timnah exchange their rough jests without any difficulty; Delilah, whatever her race, converses with equal ease with the Philistine lords and with her Hebrew husband. The same point is to be noticed throughout the subsequent history, with the curious and significant exception of the very last reference to the Philistines in the historical books. Indeed, it has often been observed that the services of an interpreter are but rarely called for in the Old Testament: although it is possible

[p. 46]

that such an intermediary was sometimes used without the fact being specifically stated. [*1] But probably in ancient as in modern Palestine everybody who had any position at all to maintain could speak several languages. The officers of Hezekiah and Sennacherib, for instance, could understand each the other's tongue, and could pass from one to the other with the enviable ease of a modern Levantine polyglot.

The incident of Samson's hair has often been compared to the purple hair of Nisus, plucked out by Scylla at the instigation of Minos; and to the story of Pterelaos of Taphos and his golden hair given him by Poseidon, which rendered him immortal. Both stories are to be found in that endless mine, the Bibliotheca of Apollodorus. The connexion of Minos with the former story is noteworthy. It has, I believe, been suggested (but I have no note of the reference) that the story of-the virtue inherent in Samson's locks may have been actually received by the Hebrews from Philistine sources. It may be merely a coincidence that the name of Samson's father, Manoah, resembles the name Minos.

Lastly, we notice in the Samson epic that as seen through Hebrew eyes the Philistines had already the three characteristics that marked them out from the other nations round about. The adjective 'uncircumcised', obviously the current term of abuse in all generations, already makes its appearance. Their peculiar government by 'lords' also meets us, but as it happens no particular 'lord' is named, nor does the Samson story give us any idea of their number. Thirdly, in the final scene, we are introduced to the mysterious Dagon, the chief deity of the Philistine pantheon.

For how long the Philistine domination lasted we have no means of knowing. There is no indication of the length of time supposed to elapse between the death of Samson and the appearance on the scene of Samuel. Eli, the priest of the High Place at Shiloh, may or may not have been contemporary with Samson: he appears suddenly on the scene as a man in extreme old age 'who had judged Israel forty years', and vanishes almost immediately.

The next stage of the history shows us the disunited and mutually hostile tribes of Israel gradually welding together under the pressure of their formidable enemy, and slowly but surely, though with more than one serious set-back, reversing the situation.

We begin with the unlucky battle in which for a time the Ark was lost (1 Sam. iv). The topography of the battle is uncertain: the Philistines pitched at a place quite unknown, Aphek, the Israelites

[p. 47]

at a spot of equally obscure topography, Eben-ezer, where Samuel afterwards set up a memorial pillar (vii. 12). The Philistines were the victors, and the Israelites attempted to turn the battle by fetching their national palladium from its resting-place in Shiloh. The Philistines were at first stricken with a superstitious fear; but recovering themselves they made a complete slaughter of the Israelites, and captured the Ark itself. Their rallying-cry 'Be strong and be men, that ye be not slaves to the Hebrews as they have been to you' corroborates, from the Philistine side, the evidence that the Philistines were the masters of the Hebrews at the time.

Now begins that strange story of the wanderings of the Ark. It would be natural to lay up the symbol of the deity of a vanquished people in the temple of the chief god of the conquerors: as Mesha laid up his religious trophies before Chemosh, so the Ark was deposited in the temple of Dagon at Ashdod--a temple of which we hear down to the time of the Maccabees (1 Mace. x. 84). But Dagon twice falls prostrate before the Ark, the second time being broken by the fall. At the same time a plague of mice or rats spread over the Philistine plain. There was a very similar plague over the same district in 1904, and enormous damage was done to the growing crops. Indeed, the peasants, whose fields were robbed almost as though by the prophet Joel's locusts, were reduced to tracking out the rat-holes and collecting the grain that the animals had brought down and stored: it was a curious sight to watch the women patiently engaged in this weary work, and gradually filling bags with the precious seed thus recovered. But in the Philistine experience the plague of rats had a yet more serious consequence. Not only did they 'mar the land', but as we now know to be the natural course of events, the parasites of the mice communicated to the people the disease of bubonic plague. [*1]

The disease broke out first in Ashdod, and was naturally explained as due to the presence of the Ark. They therefore dispatched it to Gath, and of course the bearers carried the plague bacilli with them: again it was sent to Ekron, and again the plague was carried thither;

[p. 48]

and as the Philistines, even before they had secured their costly prize, had associated it with outbreaks of pestilence in Egypt (1 Sam. iv. 8), they easily connected it with their own troubles. How they returned it to Beth-Shemesh, and how the bacilli (carried probably by parasites on the kine, or perhaps on the coverings of the Ark) proved to be still virulent to the cost of the villagers who too rashly approached, are tales too well known to need repetition.

It is interesting that the Philistines sent back with the Ark votive models of their twofold plague, which yet was one, as their ancestors had been wont to do when, in search of healing from the ills of human flesh, they visited the Dictaean Cave in the ancient homeland.

The following chapter (vii) apparently represents a different strand of tradition. According to this the Ark was suffered to remain in Kiriath-Jearim no less than twenty years, until, probably, it was brought up to Jerusalem at the beginning of the reign of David. [*1] Samuel held a reconciliation service, as it might be called, in which Israel renounced the various strange gods they had adopted. The Philistines came up to plunder this peaceful assembly, but were driven back by an appalling thunderstorm. The people gave chase, and smote the invaders to the unknown place called Beth-Car, to which reference has been made in the previous chapter; and a great memorial stone was set up at or near the spot where the Ark had been captured. We are then told that the Philistines restored certain cities, including Ekron and Gath (or according to the Greek text, Ashkelon and 'Azob', i.e. Gaza or Ashdod), to the Israelites, and that they never again came up to invade Israel.

It is noticeable that the narrator, with all his desire to glorify Samuel, avoids making a purely military leader of him, while emphasizing his religious functions. The victory is ascribed more to the thunderstorm, which is an answer to the 'whole burnt offering' offered by Samuel, than to military skill on the part of the Israelites or of any leader. The writer's patriotic enthusiasm (and perhaps some such record as Judges i. 18) have betrayed him into exaggeration with regard to the 'restoration' of cities that in fact had never been Israelite. But with regard to his conclusion 'that the Philistines never again invaded Israel', it is quite possible to judge him too harshly. If the Philistines were confined to the narrow strip of territory from Joppa southward, the statement would be absurd: but we have now seen that, at the time, the suzerainty of the Philistines

[p. 49]

over the whole of Palestine was complete, and that in all probability they actually occupied the Northern coast, the plain of Esdraelon as far as the Jordan, and even penetrated up the fertile valleys that wind through the Judaean mountains. This being so it may well be that the incident here recorded was actually the last case of aggression; but that in all the other cases in which the Philistines 'came up to war' the purpose was defensive, to meet Israelite encroachments on their territory. The passage therefore is not necessarily so 'extravagant' as some critics have made out.

However, there can be little doubt that the desire of the Hebrew people for a king, which now began to express itself, was the natural outcome of the growing sense of unity which under the pressure of the Philistine domination was rapidly developing. A leader was urgently needed who should be free from the specifically religious duties to which Samuel was entirely devoted; it was hoped that one who could thus give his whole attention to military matters might ultimately rid the people of the yoke that daily became more and more intolerable. Authorities differ as to how Samuel was affected by the popular demand. In one version he indignantly condemned it as a revolt against the theocracy of which he himself was at once Emperor and Pope. In another version he raised no objection to the new departure, definitely recognized it as a step towards delivery from the Philistines (1 Sam. ix. 16), chose the king and received him courteously, and declared to him the signs that testified to his election. From this programme we learn incidentally that the Philistines had a sort of mudir or governor at a place called Gibeah of God (probably to be identified with the modern village of Ram Allah about twelve miles north of Jerusalem). [*1] This fact underlines, so to speak, what has already been said about the absence of Philistine aggressions after the battle of Beth-Car. With an outpost so far east as the spot indicated, the actual territory of the Philistines included all the places where fighting took place.

Saul assumed the kingdom, and immediately the first Israelite aggression took place: Jonathan slew the Philistine governor of Geba, where, as at Gibeah, there seems to have been a Philistine mudir.

The Philistines, rightly considering this a sign of revolt, came up to quell the insurrection. The Israelites were gathered together with Saul in Michmash, [*2] but when they saw the overpowering might of the

[p. 50]

[paragraph continues] Philistines swooping down upon then) they hid themselves in the caves with which the country abounds. Saul waited anxiously for Samuel, and at last ventured himself to offer the necessary sacrifices: the denunciation, with which the stern old prophet expressed his resentment at this usurpation of his priestly functions, was apparently the first shock that disturbed Saul's delicately poised mental equilibrium, and paved the way for the insanity by which he was afterwards afflicted.

Jonathan again came to the rescue. With his armour-bearer he showed himself to the Philistines encamped at Michmash. They called to him to 'come up and see something'--note again that difference of language was no bar to intercourse--and the two young men, who had previously agreed to take such an invitation as an omen, climbed up to the camp. In some way they succeeded in throwing the camp into confusion, as Gideon had done with the Midianites. Soon the Philistines broke into a panic, which a timely earthquake intensified, and before long they were in flight, with the armies of Israel in hot pursuit. It is a remarkable story, and still more remarkable is the pendant--the tabu put by Saul on food, which had the natural result of making the victory less complete: the unconscious violation of the tabu by Jonathan: the consequent silence of the Divine oracle: his trial and condemnation: his redemption, no doubt by the substitution of another life: the pouring out of the blood when the tabu came to an end--all these are pictures of ancient religious custom and belief of the highest value.

The familiar story of the battle of Ephes-Dammim, with its central incident--the duel of David and Goliath--is the next scene in the drama. For the present, however, we pass it over: it is involved in a host of difficulties. Whatever view may be taken of the story, as we have it, it is evident that neither the spirit nor the power of the Philistines was broken by the rout at Michmash, but that they were able to meet Israel again soon after David's introduction to the court of Saul. David distinguished himself so as to arouse the jealousy of Saul, now rapidly falling into the morbid mental state that clouded his last days; and to that jealousy was due the exile of David in the wilderness.

With a madman's cunning, Saul at first attempted to work David's destruction by guile: he bribed him with the offer of his daughter's hand to go and bring him proof that he had slain a hundred of the uncircumcised--the trick was not unlike that which in later years David himself played on Uriah the Hittite. David, however, was more fortunate than his own victim, and fulfilled the task imposed on him.

[p. 51]

But Saul's jealousy still pursued him, and he became a complete outlaw. His life during this period as narrated consists of a series of episodes, more or less disconnected. On one occasion he goes to the sanctuary at Nob, on the slope of the Mount of Olives (as we learn from Isa. x. 32), and takes the sword of Goliath thence to serve him as a weapon: we are then surprised to find him fleeing with this equipment to Gath, of all places--but probably the two incidents should not follow consecutively. At Gath he is recognized, and to avoid unpleasant consequences feigns insanity. This affliction would in Semitic circles secure him a measure of inviolability--the uncanny manifestations of mental derangement or degeneracy being curiously mixed up with notions of 'holiness'. But Achish, the dignified though simple-minded lord of Gath, was not a Semite, and had no such superstitions. He is almost modern in his protests--'If you see a madman, why do you bring him to me? I want no madmen about me, and I will not have him in my house!' [*1] We almost hear an echo of the sarcasms of Zakar-Baal.

All through the story of David's outlawry raids of the Philistines run like a thread: and it must then, if never before, have been impressed upon him that when he came into his kingdom his first care must be to crush these troublesome neighbours finally and for ever. Now we read of his band saving the threshing-floors of Keilah from Philistine marauders: soon afterwards a Philistine raid breaks off negotiations between Saul and the men of Ziph for the betrayal of David.

But at last David, in despair of ever effecting a reconcilement with the insane Hebrew king, threw in his lot with the Philistines. Once more he comes to Gath--or, rather, we have probably a second version of the one incident, omitting the essential detail of the feigned madness. Here he was safe from Saul: but he did not stay very long. Probably (as in the previous version of the story) he found Gath uncomfortable as a place of residence, with his record of Philistine slaughter. So in Oriental wise he dissembled, and, flattering the king by pretending to be unworthy of living in the same city with him, he persuaded him to purchase his vassalage by putting Ziklag at his disposal. From this centre he raided various Bedawin camps, and, presenting the booty to his new master, he pretended that he

[p. 52]

had been attacking his own people. Thereby he gained the confidence of Achish, and no doubt acquired much serviceable information about Philistine military methods and resources.

Meanwhile the tragedy of Saul was working to its close. The Philistines were preparing for a final blow that would wipe off their recent reverses. Achish wished David, whom he blindly trusted, to accompany him as leader of his body-guard; but in this his wiser colleagues overruled him. They had already learnt, in the battle of Michmash, that the Hebrews that were with the Philistines' were not to be trusted when the battle went against their masters (1 Sam. xiv. 21). So Achish sent David away, with a dignified courtesy which contrasts pleasingly with the duplicity, not to say treachery, of his protege. [*1] David accordingly departed to his own quarters, and while the battle of Gilboa was being won and lost he was kept busy in avenging the raid which during his absence the Bedawin had very naturally made on Ziklag.

The armour of the dead Saul was hung in the house of Ashtoreth, and his body was fastened on the wall of Beth-Shan, the modern Beisan--a place close to the banks of the Jordan. This further corroborates the conclusion already indicated as to the wide extension of Philistine territory. For they would hardly have put the trophy where they could not reasonably have expected to retain it. [*2]

For the seven years of David's reign in Hebron the Philistines gave him no trouble. No doubt he continued to acknowledge himself as vassal of Achish, or of the Philistine oligarchy at large. Meanwhile Ish-baal (Ish-bosheth), Saul's son, guided and directed by Abner, set up a kingdom across Jordan, with its centre at Mahanaim: and the land of Ephraim remained subject to the Philistines. In the last two years of Ish-baal's life he extended his kingdom, doubtless under Philistine suzerainty, to Ephraim as well: an arrangement terminated by the defection of Abner to David and by his own assassination. This event left the way open for David to enlarge his borders, and to unite under his single sway the discordant elements of Judah and Ephraim. The ever-vigilant foes, not being willing to tolerate so

[p. 53]

large an increase in the strength of a subordinate, then came up against him. [*1]

Three battles, disastrous to the Philistines, are recorded as taking place early in David's reign over the united kingdoms. But the accounts of them are scanty and confused, and require careful examination. The following are the outline accounts of them which the author of the Book of Samuel transmits:

A. The Battle of Baal-Perazim.

And when the Philistines heard that they had anointed David king over Israel, all the Philistines went up to seek David; and David heard of it, and went down to the hold. [*2] Now the Philistines had come and spread themselves in the valley of Rephaim. And David inquired of Yahweh, saying, Shall I go up against the Philistines? Wilt thou deliver them into mine hand? And Yahweh said unto David, Go up: for I will certainly deliver the Philistines into thine hand. And David cane to Baal-Perazim, and David smote them there; and he said, Yahweh hath broken mine enemies before me, like the breach of waters. Therefore he called the name of that place Baal-Perazim. And they left their images there, and David and his men took them away.'--2 Samuel v. 17-21.

B. The Battle of Geba.

'And the Philistines came up yet again, and spread themselves in the valley of Rephaim. And when David inquired of Yahweh, he said, Thou shalt not go up: make a circuit behind them, and come upon them over against the balsams. And it shall be, when thou hearest the sound of marching in the tops of the balsams, that then thou shalt bestir thyself: for then is Yahweh gone out before thee to smite the host of the Philistines. And David did so, as Yahweh commanded him; and smote the Philistines from Geba until thou come to Gezer.'--2 Samuel v. 22-25.

C. The Battle of (        ?)

'And after this it came to pass, that David smote the Philistines, and subdued them: and David took (        ) out of the hand of the Philistines.'--2 Sam. viii. 1.

[p. 54]

These outlines may to some small extent be filled in from other sources. The priestly writer of Chronicles is careful to add to the account of the first battle that the idols of the Philistines, captured after the rout, were burnt with fire (1 Chron. xiv. 8-12). The site of Baal-Perazim is unknown. It seems to be mentioned again in Isaiah xxviii. 21, in connexion with Gibeon: perhaps this passage refers to the first two battles. In the account of the second battle the Chronicler likewise substitutes Gibeon for Geba (1 Chron. xiv. 13-16): while in the third, instead of an unintelligible expression in the version of Samuel, he has 'David took Gath and her towns out of the hand of the Philistines' (xviii. 1).

Among these battles must probably be fitted some scraps of biography that now find a place much later both in Samuel and in Chronicles. They are confused and corrupt, but are to the effect that at certain specified places, certain Philistine champions were slain by certain of the mighty men of David.

The first is the familiar tale of David and Goliath, which we passed over a while ago, and which cannot be dissociated from these fragments. David is sent by his father to the battle-field of Ephes-Dammim, to bring supplies to his elder brothers. His indignation is roused by a gigantic Philistine champion named Goliath of Gath, who challenges the Israelites to provide one who shall fight with him and decide the battle by single combat. The champion is minutely described: he was somewhere between nine and eleven feet high, with a helmet, a coat of mail weighing 5,000 shekels, greaves and a javelin, all of bronze, as well as an iron-pointed spear like a weaver's beam. How David, though a youth unable to wear armour, goes against the giant, exchanges taunting speeches with him, and brings him down with his sling, are tales too familiar to rehearse (1 Sam. xvii).

The difficulties of the passage are many. The inconsistency of David, already (ch. xvi. 21) the armour-bearer of Saul, being now totally unknown to him, has been a crux to the harmonists of all generations: though this difficulty is evaded by an important group of the Greek MSS., which omit bodily verses xvii. 12-31, 55-xviii. 5--that is, everything inconsistent with David's being already at court and known to Saul. The omitted verses are probably fragments of another parallel narrative. But even then we are not quite free from troubles. The whole machinery of the ordeal by duel recalls incidents of the Trojan war, or the tale of the Horatii and Curiatii, rather than what we are accustomed to look for in Semitic warfare; David's improbable flight to Gath soon after the battle has already been commented upon; and, as will presently be seen, we possess another account of the battle of

[p. 55]

[paragraph continues] Ephes-Dammim, which is quite inconsistent with the Goliath story, and, indeed, leaves no room for it.

The second fragmentary narration is unfortunately found in Samuel only (2 Sam. xxi. 15-17). It reads 'And the Philistines had war again with Israel; and David went down, and his servants with him, and fought against the Philistines: and David waxed faint. And (a champion) which was of the sons of Rapha, the weight of whose spear was 300 (shekels) of bronze in weight, he being girded with a new [word lost], thought to have slain David. But Abishai the son of Zeruiah succoured him and smote the Philistine and killed him. Then the men of David sware unto him, saying, "Thou shalt go no more out with us to battle, that thou quench not the lamp of Israel."'

The rendering 'a champion' is suggested for the unintelligible yshbw bnb, treated as a proper name 'Ishbi-benob' in the English version. As it stands it means 'and they dwelt in Nob', which clearly makes no sense; and the emendation that is most current--by the change of one letter, turning Nob to Gob, and moving the phrase so as to follow 'and his servants with him' in the previous sentence--is not altogether satisfactory. For 'Gob' itself is probably, as we shall see, corrupt; and it is hard to see how the sentence could have been transposed from a place where it makes passable sense to a place where it makes complete nonsense. The reading here suggested is 'ysh-hbnym, literally 'man of the betweens', apparently a technical term for a champion, which is actually applied to Goliath in 1 Samuel xvii. Though differing in detail, and transmitted in a garbled form, the general resemblance of the description of the equipment of this warrior to that of Goliath is too striking to be overlooked; and we are thus led to wonder whether this may not be a version of the Goliath story in which the issue of the duel was very nearly the reverse of that in the familiar narrative. One is also tempted to ask whether in the 'oath' of the men of David (for which compare 2 Sam. xviii. 3) we are to see an explanation of David's having stayed in Jerusalem while Joab was acting for the king in his operations against the Ammonites, with the disastrous consequence of the episode of Bath-Sheba. If this oath is to be literally understood, this incident of the champion slain by David's nephew must belong to the end of David's operations against the Philistines, all of which seem to have been directed by the king in person.

The third fragment appears in both 2 Samuel and 1 Chronicles. The Samuel version says 'And it came to pass after this, that there was again war with the Philistines at Gob: then Sibbecai the Hushathite slew Saph, which was of the sons of Rapha. And there was again war with the Philistines at Gob; and Elhanan the son of Jaare-oregim

[p. 56]

the Beth-lehemite slew Goliath the Gittite, the staff of whose spear was like a weaver's beam' (2 Sam. xxi. 18, 19).

In the parallel account (1 Chron. xx. 4), Gezer is substituted for Gob, Sippai for Saph, Jair for Jaare-oregim, and 'slew Lahmi the brother of Goliath 'for the Beth-lehemite slew Goliath'.

With regard to the first of these divergencies, it should be noticed that the place-name 'Gob' is not mentioned elsewhere. Following Clermont-Ganneau I was formerly inclined to accept Gezer as the correct reading--the change would be easy, gzr for gzb--but I now see two formidable difficulties. In the first place, it is not likely that the well-known place-name Gezer would be corrupted to a name utterly unknown: in the second, the name 'Gob' is written gbo in both places, without the mater lectionis which the emendation suggested requires. Noting that in the text in Samuel the name 'Gob' is in both places followed by a word beginning with the letter `, I would now suggest that a second ` has dropped out in both places, and that for Gob we are to read gb`, Geba. [*1] The advantage of this correction is, that it would make both the Samuel and Chronicles versions right, and would show us where to fit the fragment under discussion. For we can scarcely avoid connecting an incident, said in one version to take place at Geba, and in another version at Gezer, with a battle which is definitely stated to have begun in one of these two places and finished in the other. The deaths of Saph and of Goliath therefore took place in the second of the three battles enumerated above (p. 53).

The other divergencies need not detain us so long. The question of the spelling of the champion's name is scarcely important: yet it is tempting to inquire whether the form in Chronicles, spy, is not to be preferred, and, further, whether it may not be that it actually finds an echo to this day in the commonplace Arabic name Tell es-Safi, commonly rendered 'The clear mound', [*2] whereby the most probable site of ancient Gath is now known. Jair for Jaare-oregim is certainly right, the latter half of the name as given by Samuel being a dittography of the word 'weaver's beam' in the next line; on the other hand, the Chronicler's evolution of Goliath's brother Lahmi out of the name of Jair's native place is obviously some scribe's attempt to get rid of an evident harmonistic difficulty.

The fourth fragment follows the last in both places. 'And there was again war at Gath, where was a man of great stature, that had on

[p. 57]

every hand six fingers, and on every foot six toes, four and twenty in number; and he also was born to Rapha. And when he defied Israel, Jonathan the son of Shimei David's brother slew him. These four were born to Rapha in Gath; and they fell by the hand of David, and by the hand of his servants.' The Chronicler's version is substantially identical.

Let us now try to dovetail these seemingly incoherent fragments into a consistent narrative. Nearly all of them will be found to hang together with a logical connexion between them. We begin with the story of Jesse sending David as a youth to his brothers, and their surly reception of him, in some campaign. This story, though, as we have seen, it almost makes nonsense of the place where it is found, is so graphic and circumstantial that it cannot lightly be thrown aside. It is not improbable, however, that it was by his musical rather than his military ability that he attracted attention on this occasion, and was brought to the notice of Saul and Jonathan (1 Sam. xvi. 14-18, xviii. 1). At first he was received kindly, and made Saul's armour-bearer.

Then came the battle of Ephes-Dammim, the full account of which is lost. But by combining 2 Samuel xxiii. 9 with 1 Chronicles xi. 13, two mutilated but complementary passages, we can gain some idea of what happened. The Philistines came up to battle at Ephes-Dammim; the men of Israel fled; but David, aided by Eleazer the son of Dodo the Ahohite (whatever that may mean), held them 'in the valley between Shocoh and Azekah' and fought till their hands clave to their swords. They succeeded in turning the victory, and the people came back 'only to spoil'. Well might the maidens, after such an exhibition of valour, sing that 'Saul had slain thousands but David had slain myriads'. The folk-tale of a giant-killing shepherd-boy, coloured by some actual incident of David's later campaigns, has been substituted for the less picturesque story of the battle: a relic of the excised part may possibly be seen in the verse inserted after 1 Samuel xix. 7: 'And there was war again: and David went out, and fought with the Philistines, and slew them with a great slaughter; and they fled before him.' And when the tribes of Israel came to David to make him king, they remind him that even in Saul's lifetime it was he who used to lead them out to war (2 Sam. v. 2).

The triumph-song of the women roused the jealousy of Saul, and he drove David into exile. The other tales of Philistine routs, which meet us in the lists of David's mighty men, appear to relate to the time of the outlawry. Shammah's defence of the lentil-field, to which reference has already been made, was of the same order as the repulse of the raid on the threshing-floor of Keilah: the breaking through the

[p. 58]

[paragraph continues] Philistine camp at Rephaim by the three heroes, in quest of the Bethlehem water, is definitely assigned to the Adullam period. Finally David took service in Gath, and became thoroughly acquainted with that important city.

When the kingdoms of Judah and Israel were united, the Philistines came to break up his power; and three engagements were fought, all disastrous to the hereditary enemies of the Hebrews. The first was the battle of Baal-Perazim, of which we have no particulars save the picture of a hurried flight in which even the idols were left behind. The second, that of Geba, is more interesting. The incident of the oracle of the sacred trees is one of the many noteworthy landmarks in Old Testament religion. The topography of the battle seems at first sight difficult to follow: but it works out easily when one knows the configuration of the ground. The valley or plain of Rephaim is usually equated with the broad expanse that lies south-west of Jerusalem. Geba was some four miles to the north of the city. What must have happened was, that David's men circled behind the Philistine camp, under cover, probably, of the hills to the west of the plain (now crowned by the Greek Patriarch's summer residence Kat'emon); that is, down the picturesque valley in which stands the Convent of the Cross. Then crossing into the Wady el-Werd by the site of the modern village of Malhah, [*1] they attacked the Philistines on the rear. Finding their retreat (down the present Wady el-Werd and its western continuation, the Wady es-Surar) cut off; the Philistines fled northward, past Jerusalem, as far as the village of Geba, and then rushed down the valley of Aijalon, which opens out on the coast-plain not far from Gezer. Some time in this battle or the subsequent rout Sibbecai (or Mebunni) slew Saph, and Elhanan slew Goliath.

Contrary to most modern commentators I assume that this raid of the Philistines took place after (or perhaps during, which is not improbable) David's successful siege of Jerusalem. If David was still in Hebron at the time, I cannot conceive what the Philistines were doing in the valley of Rephaim. 'They would have come up one of the more southerly valleys to attack him.

Lastly took place the final and decisive victory which crushed for ever the Philistine suzerainty. The union at last effected among the tribes of Israel gave them a strength they had never had before; yet it is hard to understand the complete collapse of the people who had been all-powerful but a few years previously. W. Max Muller

[p. 59]

attempts to account for it [*1] by an unrecorded attack of the Egyptian king, whereby he possessed himself of the Philistine coastland: arguing that in a list of Sheshonk's conquests in his campaign

Click to enlarge
Fig. 2. Sketch-map to illustrate the Battle of Geba.

recorded in 1 Kings xiv. 25 no Philistine city is mentioned, for the simple reason that they must have been already in Egyptian hands. On this theory also he accounts for the capture of Gezer (an extension of the Egyptian territory) recorded in 1 Kings ix. 16.

[p. 60]

The site of the last battle is successfully concealed under a hopeless corruption of the text. We are told in Samuel that David took Metheg ha-ammah out of the hand of the Philistines: a phrase that means 'bridle of the cubit' or 'of the metropolis', but defies convincing explanation or emendation. The old versions all presuppose an identical or similar text: Chronicles has 'Gath and her suburbs', which is probably a guess at a reading which should be at least intelligible. It cannot be right, for we find Gath still independent under its king Achish at the beginning of Solomon's reign (1 Kings ii. 39). [*1] This, however, does not forbid our supposing the decisive battle to have taken place at or near Gath: a very likely place for David to attack, as he was no doubt familiar with its fortifications. There certainly appears to have been a battle at Gath where the unnamed polydactylous champion defied Israel and was slain by a nephew of David. Perhaps he was one and the same with the Gittite champion whom the English version calls Ishbi-benob, and from whom David, when hard pressed, was rescued likewise by one of his nephews. In this incident, on the theory here put forward, is the historical basis of the David and Goliath story. In this case 2 Samuel xxi. 22 ('these four were born to "the giant" in Gath') would be an editorial note.

Before leaving this record of the champions of the Philistines which we have thus endeavoured to put into order, we must notice that, strictly speaking, they are not to be classed as Philistines at all. The expression 'son of Rapha', translated 'giant' in the English version, implies rather that the family were of the remnant of the Rephaites or Anakim, the tall aboriginal race which the Israelites on their coming found established in Hebron and neighbouring villages, Gath, Gaza, and Ashdod. According to Joshua xi. 21 they were driven out utterly from the Hebron district, but a remnant was left in the Philistine towns, where no doubt they mingled with the western newcomers. The tall stature attributed to these 'champions'--a physical feature never ascribed in the history to the Philistines themselves [*2]--

[p. 61]

fits in with this theory of the origin of the family. By Delilah and Goliath the Philistine nation is judged: but there is no proof that there was a drop of Philistine blood in either the one or the other.

The commentators agree that the ancient psalm incorporated in Psalm lx. (8-12) and cviii. (7-10) can be as old as David. If so, it may well have been a paean of the victory over the Philistines and the other neighbouring nations.

That the Philistine power was utterly broken is shown by the significant fact that in the distractions which vexed the later years of David--the revolt of Absalom and of Sheba--they made no effort to recover their lost ground. Quite the contrary: we are surprised to find David's body-guard consisting of 'Cherethites and Pelethites', Cretans and Phili(s)tines: a Gittite called Obed-Edom houses the ark when the ill-omened incident of Uzza had interrupted the first attempt to bring it to Jerusalem: and another Gittite, Ittai by name, was one of the few people who remained faithful to David when Absalom had stolen the hearts of his followers. So their ancient kinsmen the Shardanu appear, now as enemies, now as loyal mercenaries of Egypt. And in the later history, except a few halfhearted attempts like that in the time of Jehoram, the Philistines took no decisive advantage of the internal dissensions between Judah and Israel, or of their many struggles with the Syrians and other foreign foes. From the time of David their power, and indeed their very individuality, dwindle away with a rapidity difficult to parallel. The contrast between the pre-Davidic and the post-Davidic Philistines is one of the most extraordinary in human history.

But in Palestine the Philistines were, after all, foreigners: they had come from their healthy maritime life to the fever-haunted and sirocco-blasted land of Canaan. The climate of that country guards it for its Semitic heirs, and Philistine and Crusader alike must submit to the laws of human limitations.

The Philistine body-guard above referred to was perhaps organized during David's stay in Ziklag. In the later history some traces of the organization seem to survive. The 'Carites', as they are now significantly called, help Jehoiada to put down the usurping queen Athaliah. In Ezekiel (xliv. 7 sqq.) there is a prophecy against

[p. 62]

certain uncircumcised foreigners who are introduced, apparently in some official capacity, into the Temple: and in Zephaniah i. 8, 9 'those that are clothed with foreign apparel' and 'those that leap over the threshold' in the 'day of the Lord's sacrifice' are denounced. Though suggestive, neither of these passages is as clear as we should like: the possibility of there being some connexion between the threshold rite in Zephaniah and the analogous rite in the Temple of Ashdod (1 Sam. v. 5) has often been noticed. It is an interesting possibility--we cannot say more--that there actually was a Philistine body-guard round the king and his court at Jerusalem, and that the Temple itself, built as we shall see after a Philistine model, was protected by Philistine janissaries. This might explain the unexpected reappearance of the heathenish name of Sisera among the Nethinim or Temple servitors recorded in Ezra ii. 53, Nehemiah vii. 55.

Footnotes

^40:1 See Moore's Commentary, p. 37.

^41:1 The additional note of time, 'In the days of Jael', is generally rejected as a gloss.

^41:2 See Moore's Judges, pp. 142, 143, and Journal of American Oriental Society, xix b, p. 159.

^41:3 The name Shamgar is given as Samegar, Samagar, Semegar, Semagar, Amegath, Samegath, Maigar, Emegar. His father's name in Judges iii is given as Dinax, Deinax, Anath, Enax, Aimath, Linath; in Judges v as Anath, Kenath, Enath, Enatham, Anethem.

^41:4 The verse as repeated says that 'Semegar (or Emegar) son of Anan (Ainan, Enan) arose after Samson, and slew of the Foreigners, 600 men without the cattle, and he also saved Israel'. Note the transformation of the ox-goad.

^42:1 2 Sam. xxiii. 11; 1 Chron. xi. 13.

^43:1 Isa. ix. 1 (= Hebrew viii. 23).

^44:1 For a study (from a conservative standpoint) of the historicity of the Samson narrative see Samson, eine Untersuchung des historischen Charakters von Richt. xiii-xvi, von Dr. Edmund Kalt, Freiburg i. Br., 1912. This brochure contains a very useful bibliography.

^44:2 A History of Civilization in Palestine, p. 54.

^46:1 Thus, it is only by a foot-note, as it were, that we learn that Joseph employed an interpreter in conversing with his brethren.

^47:1 Some commentators (e. g. H. P. Smith in the International Critical Commentary), while recognizing that the disease was plague, have missed the essential significance of the mice, and would remove them altogether as 'late redactional insertion'. Although in the Hebrew received text, as reproduced in the English Bible, the 'mice' come in awkwardly as though a sudden afterthought, the Greek Version makes them much more prominent throughout the narrative; and there is no possible reason why any redactor (unless he had divined some of the most recent discoveries in bacteriology) should have introduced mice into the story at all. The distorted version of the plague which destroyed Sennacherib's army, recorded in Herodotus ii. 141, also introduces mice very conspicuously.

^48:1 The data for the chronology of Saul's reign are notoriously insufficient. Note that Eli's great-grandson was priest in Shiloh at the time of the battle of Michmash (1 Sam. xiv. 3).

^49:1 In the English version (1 Sam. x. 5) the word ntzyb, which in 1 Kings iv. 19 and elsewhere means 'a prefect or officer', is translated, probably wrongly, 'camp'.

^49:2 There are some difficulties of interpretation and other critical complications in the passage, on which see the standard commentators.

^51:1 The notion of a commentator, that Achish's protest was due to his being already troubled with insanity in his family, deserves a place in the same cabinet of curiosities with the speculations of the ancient blockhead who supposed that when Our Lord wrote with His finger on the ground (John viii. 6) He was making a catalogue of the secret sins of the bystanders!

^52:1 No doubt there was a certain element of policy in Achish's hospitality: David being the known rival of the Hebrew king, it probably seemed desirable to foment the division between them. Winckler (Gesch. Isr., p. 224) says (ex cathedra!) 'Was uber Davids Aufenthalt an seinem Hofe gesagt wird, ist Fabel'. This sort of negative credulity is just as bad science as the positive credulity which swallows whole all the fancies of historical myth-makers.

^52:2 Unless, indeed, we are to identify this Beth-Shan with the unknown 'Shen', mentioned in the corrupt passage 1 Sam. vii. 12.

^53:1 For a discussion of the obscure period of the dual reign of David and Ish-baal, with special reference to the problem of the reconcilement of David's seven and a half years with Ish-bosheth's two years, see the important article by Kamphausen, Philister and Hebraer zur Zeit Davids, in Zeitsch. f. d. alttest. Wissensch. (1886, vi, p. 44.

^53:2 Hardly Adullam, as some commentators have supposed. Did the Adullam life continue after David was anointed king on Hebron?

^56:1 The Greek and Peshitta versions read Gath.

^56:2 But really meaning, if anything, 'The mound of the clear one.' 'The clear mound' would be Et-tell es-Safa.

^58:1 They must in this case have passed close by some ancient tumuli, which stand west of Malhah: possibly the sacred balsam-trees were associated with these.

^59:1 Asien and Europa, pp. 389, 390.

^60:1 It is possible that David showed kindness to Achish, in return for the kindness he had received from him, and allowed him to continue in his kingdom under vassalage. But this is perhaps hardly probable: and evidently the runaway servants of Shimei thought that they would be out of their master's reach in Gath, so that that town was most likely quite independent of Jerusalem.

^60:2 I may quote from The Excavation of Gezer, vol. i, p. 64, the descriptions of the only bones that have yet been found in Palestine which can be called 'Philistine' with reasonable probability. They 'are comparable with the types of ancient Cretan bones described by Duckworth and Hawes, and with Cretan bones in the Cambridge Museum. They represent a people of fairly tall stature (the man in grave 3 was 5' 10", that in grave 3 was 6' 3 1/2"). They were probably about or under 40 years of age. In all the femora were not pilastered and the tibiae not platycnemic. [p. 61] The skulls were ellipsoidal, mesaticephalic, orthognathous, megaseme (with wide orbits), mesorrhine (with moderately wide nose), and microdont. The female skull in grave 4 was a little wider in proportion, and though the teeth were moderately small, the incisors projected forward, though not enough to make the face prognathous. The lower teeth were also very oblique.'

The Philistines, by R.A.S. Macalister, [1913], at sacred-texts.com

III. THEIR DECLINE AND DISAPPEARANCE.

A few simple figures will show the comparative insignificance into which the Philistines fell after their wars with David. In the first book of Samuel, the name 'Philistine' or 'Philistines' occurs 125 times. In the second book it occurs only twenty-four times, and some of these are reminiscent passages, referring to earlier incidents. In the two books of the Kings together the name occurs only six times.

Achish was still 'King of Gath', as we have already seen, at the beginning of Solomon's reign, and the coast] and strip was still outside Hebrew territory. Gezer was presented to Solomon's wife as a marriage portion. After the partition of the kingdom, Nadab son of Jeroboam I besieged Gibbethon, a now unknown Philistine village, where he was killed by his successor Baasha. The siege was apparently renewed at the end of Baasha's own reign, but why this village was made a centre of attack is a question as obscure as its topography. Ahaziah sent to consult the Oracle of Ekron. The Shunammite woman who had entertained Elisha sojourned during the seven years' famine in the land of the Philistines--a testimony to the superior fertility of that part of the country. Turning to the records of the southern kingdom, we learn from the Chronicler that certain of the Philistines brought presents and silver for tribute to Jehoshaphat: but that under his son Jehoram they revolted and carried away his substance. In the parallel version in Kings the revolt is localized in the insignificant town of Libnah. The great king Uzziah, on the other hand, broke the walls of Gath--which had probably been already weakened by the raid of Hazael of Syria

[p. 63]

[paragraph continues] (2 Kings xii. 18)--as well as the walls of Jabneh and of Ashdod, and established cities of his own in Philistine territory. This is the last we hear of the important city of Gath in history: henceforth it is omitted from the enumerations of Philistine cities in prophetic denunciations of the race. In the time of Ahaz there seems to have been a revival of the old spirit among the beaten people. Profiting by the Edomite raid which already harassed Judah, they took some cities from Southern Judah, including Beth-shemesh, Aijalon, Gederoth, Shocho, Timnath, and Gimzo, which are not elsewhere reckoned as Philistine property (2 Chron. xxviii. 18); certainly the first of these was a Hebrew village even at the time of the greatest extension of Philistine power. This 'Philistine revival' seems to have inspired Isaiah in a denunciation of Ephraim (Isa. ix. 12), but whether the invasion of the northern kingdom there threatened ever took place is not recorded. Probably not, as Hezekiah once more reversed the situation, smiting the Philistines as far as Gaza (2 Kings xviii. 8).

At this point we glean some welcome details of history from the annals of the Assyrian kings. Hadad-Nirari III (812-783) enumerates the Philistines among the Palestinian states conquered by him about 803 R. c., but enters into no particulars. Tiglath-Pileser III, however, (745-727) gives us fuller details. Rezon (in the Hebrew Rezin) of Syria, and Pekah of Samaria were in league, whereas Ahaz of Jerusalem had become a vassal of the king of Assyria. The Philistines had attached themselves to the Syrian league, so that in 734 B.C. Tiglath-Pileser came up with the special purpose of sacking Gaza. Hanunu, the king of Gaza, fled to Sebako, king of Egypt; but he afterwards returned and, having made submission, was received with favour. [*1]

Some four years earlier Mitinti, king of Ashkelon, had revolted, trusting to the support of Rezon. But the death of Rezon so terrified the king that he fell sick and died--possibly he poisoned himself, knowing what punishment would be in store for him at the hands of the ferocious Assyrian. His son Rukipti, who reigned in his stead, hastened to make submission.

[p. 64]

About 713 another Philistine city comes into prominence. This is Ashdod, the king of which, Azuri, refused to pay tribute and endeavoured to stir up the neighbouring princes to revolt. Sargon, king of Assyria (722-705), came down, expelled Azuri, and established in his stead his brother Ahimiti. An attempt was made by the Philistines--Sargon's scribe calls them Hittites--to substitute one Yamani, who had no claim to the throne. But this bold usurper fled to the land of Meluhha in N. Arabia when Sargon was on his way to the city. [*1] These operations of Sargon against Ashdod are referred to in a note of time in Isaiah xx. 1.

The next king, Sennacherib (705-681), had trouble with the remnant of the Philistines. Mitinti's son Rukipti had been succeeded by his son Sarludari, but it seems as though this ruler had been deposed, and a person called Zidka reigned in his stead. Sennacherib found conspiracy in Zidka, and brought the gods of his father's house, himself, and his family into exile to Assyria, restoring Sarludari to his former throne, while of course retaining the suzerainty. In this operation he took the cities of Beth-Dagon, Joppa, Bene-Berak, and Azuri, which belonged to Zidka. These names still survive in the villages of Beit Dejan, Ibrak, and Yazur, in the neighbourhood of Jaffa.

At the same time the Ekronites had revolted against the Assyrian. Their king, Padi, had remained a loyal vassal to his overlord, but his turbulent subjects had put him in fetters and sent him to Hezekiah, king of Judah, who cast him into prison. The Ekronites summoned assistance from North Arabia and Egypt, and met Sennacherib in El-Tekeh. Here they were defeated, and Sennacherib marched against Ekron, slaying and impaling the chief officers. Padi was rescued from Jerusalem, his deliverance being no doubt part of the tribute paid by Hezekiah (2 Kings xviii. 14).

[p. 65]

[paragraph continues] Sennacherib then cut off some of the territory of Judah and divided it among his vassals, Mitinti, king of Ashdod, Padi the restored king of Ekron, and Zilbel, king of Gaza. [*1]

Sennacherib was assassinated in 681, and his son Esarhaddon (681-668) reigned in his stead. In the lists of kings in subjection to this monarch we find Mitinti, king of Ashkelon (the Assyrian records seem to confuse Ashkelon and Ashdod), and Zilbel, king of Gaza, of whom we have heard before. Padi has disappeared from Ekron, and to him has succeeded a king with the old Philistine name of Ikausu (= Achish). On the other hand a king with the Semitic name of Ahimilki (Ahimelech) is king of Ashdod. All these kings survived into the reign of Assurbanipal, who began to reign in 668. [*2]

According to Jeremiah xlvii. 1 (not the Greek Version) 'Pharaoh smote Gaza' in the time of that prophet. This most likely was Necho, on his way northward when Josiah, with fatal consequences to himself, tried to check him. Herodotus is supposed to refer to this when he says (ii. 159) that Necho took a great city of Syria called 'Kadytis', which elsewhere (iii. 5) he describes as a city in his opinion not smaller than Sardis. It is a possible, but not a convincing,

[p. 66]

hypothesis, that Kadytis may represent some form of the name of Gaza. [*1]

Here the Assyrian records leave us. We have, however, one more Biblical reference, in the last paragraph of the book of Nehemiah, which is of very great importance (xiii. 23, 24). The walls of Jerusalem had been restored; the law published and proclaimed; all the steps had been taken to establish an exclusive theocratic state in accordance with the priestly legislation; when the leader was dismayed to discover certain Jews who had married women of Ashdod, of Ammon, and of Moab, the very communities that had put so many obstacles in the way of the work of restoration. [*2] Not only so, but there were already children; and as is usual in such cases of mixed marriage, these children spoke the language of their mothers only. Nehemiah indulged in a passionate display of temper, treating the culprits with personal violence, and probably he compelled them to put away their wives, as Ezra did in a similar case. But the interest for us is not in Nehemiah's outburst, but in his reference to the speech of the children. They spoke half in the speech of Ashdod, and could not speak in the Jews' language. In spite of Sennacherib's transportations and deportations; in spite of the long and exhausting siege of twenty-nine years which the city (according to Herodotus ii. 157) sustained in the following century at the hands of Psammetichus; yet the ancient tongue of the Philistines lingered still in Ashdod, the town which probably retained exotic characteristics the longest. The distinction which Strabo (XVI. ii. 1) draws between the Gazaioi and the Azutioi ('Jews, Idumaeans, Gazaeans, and Azotii' being the four minor races of Syria which he enumerates) may possibly be founded on a reminiscence of these linguistic survivals. No doubt the language was by now much contaminated with Semitic words and idioms, but still it possessed sufficient individuality to be unintelligible without special study. It had of course lost all political importance, so that it was not as in the days of Samson and Jonathan, when every Hebrew of position was obliged to know something of the tongue of the powerful rivals of his people: it was now a despised patois, much as are the ancient Celtic languages in the eyes of the average Saxon. In the chatter of these little half-breeds the stern Jewish puritan was perhaps privileged to hear the last accents of the speech of Minos, whose written records still 'mock us, undeciphered'.

[p. 67]

It is true that some critics have explained the 'speech of Ashdod' as being the tongue of Sennacherib's colonists. If so, however, Nehemiah (himself a returned exile from a neighbouring empire to Sennacherib's) would probably have had some understanding of it and of its origin, and would have described it differently. The Semitic speech of the children of the Ammonite and Moabite mothers does not seem to have caused him so much vexation.

In Gaza, too, Philistine tradition still survived. Down to the time of the Maccabean revolt there remained here a temple of Dagon, destroyed by Jonathan Maccabaeus (1 Macc. x. 83, 84; xi. 4). But these traditional survivals of religious peculiarities are mere isolated phenomena: apart from them the absorption of Philistia in the ocean of Semitic humanity is so complete that its people ceases to have an independent history. It were profitless to trace the story of Philistia further, through the campaigns of Alexander, the wars of the Maccabees and the Seleucids, the Roman domination, and the complex later developments: the record is no longer the history of a people; it is that of a country.

Nevertheless, the tradition of the Philistines still lives, and will continue to live so long as the land which they dominated three thousand years ago continues to be called 'Palestine', and so long as its peasant parents continue to tell their children their tales of the Fenish. One accustomed to the current English pronunciation of the name of the Phoenicians might for a moment be misled into supposing that these were the people meant: but the equation is philologically impossible. There can be no doubt that this people of tradition, supposed to have wrought strange and wonderful deeds in the land, to have hewn out its great artificial caves and built its castles and even the churches and monasteries whose fast-decaying ruins dots its landscape--that this people is none other than the mighty nation of the Philistines.

Footnotes

^63:1 . . . The town of . . . over the land Beth-Omri . . . I cast its whole extent under the rule of Assyria: I put my officials as lieutenants over it. Hanunu of Gaza fled before my arms, and escaped to Egypt. Gaza I plundered, its possessions and its gods . . . and I put my royal image (?)--in his palace. I laid the service of the gods of his land under the service of Asshur. I laid tribute upon him . . . As a bird he flew hither (made submission) and I set him again to his place.'--Keilinschriftliche Bibliothek, ii, pp. 32, 33; Schrader, Keilinschriften3, p. 56. See also Rost, Keilinschr. Tiglath-Pilesers, p. 78.

^64:1 'Azuri, king of Ashdod, devised in his heart to bring no more tribute, and sent an invitation to the kings of his neighbourhood to hostility against Asshur. On account of the misdeeds he wrought, I removed him from the lordship of the people of his land and put his brother Ahimiti in lordship over them. But evil-plotting Hittites were hostile to his lordship and set over themselves Yamani, who had no claim to the throne, who like them had no respect for my lordship. In my fury I did not send the whole body of my troops. . . . I led merely the body-guard, who follows me wherever I go, to Ashdod. But Yamani fled as I approached to the border of Egypt, which lies beside Meluhha, and was seen no more. I besieged and plundered Ashdod, Gath, and Ashdodimmu ["The port of Ashdod," 'shdwd hym or, "Gath of the Ashdodites," according to some interpreters], and carried off as booty their goods, women, sons and daughters, property, the palace treasures, and the people of the land. I re-peopled those towns anew . . . and put my lieutenants over them and counted them to the people of Assyria.'--Keil. Bibl. ii, pp. 66, 67. KAT3. p. 71.

^65:1 Menahem of the town of Samaria, Ethba'al of Sidon, Mitinti of Ashdod [and a number of others] all the kings of the West brought rich presents . . . and kissed my feet. And Zidka, the king of Ashkelon, who had not submitted to my yoke, the gods of his house, himself, his wife, his sons, his daughters, his brothers, the seed of his house, I dragged off and brought them to Assyria. Sarludari, the son of Rukipti, their former king, I set again as king over the people of Ashkelon, took tribute and submission from him, and he became obedient to me. In the course of my expedition, I besieged Beth-Dagon, Joppa, Bene-Barka, Azuri, the towns of Zidka, which had not promptly submitted to me: I plundered them and dragged booty away from them. The principal men of Amkarruna (Ekron) who had cast Padi, who by the right and oath of Assyria was the king, into fetters and delivered him up to Hezekiah of Judah, who had shut him in prison--their heart feared. The kings of the land of Egypt sent archers, chariots, and horses of the king of Meluhha, a countless army, and came to help them. Their army stood against me before the town El-Tekeh, they raised their weapons. Trusting in Asshur, my Lord, I fought with them and subdued them; I took the chiefs of the chariots and the son of one of the kings of Egypt, and the chief of the chariots of the king of Meluhha prisoners with my own hand in the melee: I besieged El-Tekeh and Timnath, and plundered them and took away their booty. Then I turned before Ekron, the chief men who had done evil I slew and hung their bodies on poles round the city: the inhabitants who had done evil I led out as prisoners: with the rest, who had done no evil, I made peace. Padi their king I led from Jerusalem and put him again on the throne of his lordship. I laid the tribute of my lordship upon him. Of Hezekiah . . . I besieged forty-six fortified towns . . . his towns which I had plundered, I took from his land and gave them to Mitinti, king of Ashdod, Padi, king of Ekron, and Zilbel, king of Gaza, and I cut his land short. To the former tribute I added the tribute due to my lordship and laid it upon them.'--KB. ii, pp. 90-95.

^65:2 KB. ii, pp. 148, 149, and 238-241.

^66:1 See Meyer's History of the City of Gaza, p. 38. Noordtzij, De Filistijnen, p. 171, identifies it with Kadesh, which is reasonable.

^66:2 Neb. iv. 7. See also Ps. lxxxiii, which, according to the most likely view, was composed during the anxieties attending the restoration of Jerusalem.

The Philistines, by R.A.S. Macalister, [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 68]

  

CHAPTER III

  

THE LAND OF THE PHILISTINES

THE country of the Philistines is definitely limited, in Joshua xiii. 2, between the Shihor or 'River of Egypt', the present Wady el-Arish, on the Egyptian frontier, which joins the sea at Rhinocolura--and 'the borders of Ekron northward, which is counted to the Canaanites'. Westward it was bounded by the Mediterranean Sea: eastward by the foothills of the Judean mountains. From Deuteronomy ii. 23 we learn that this territory had previously been in the possession of a tribe called 'Avvim, of whom we know nothing but the name: from the passage in Joshua just quoted it would appear that a remnant of these aborigines still remained crowded down to the south. They may possibly have been of the same stock as the neolithic pre-Semitic people whose remains were found at Gezer. No doubt, as in the majority of cases of the kind, they survived as a substratum of the population in the rest of their ancient territory as well, engaged in the hard manual labour to which the wily Gibeonites were condemned.

We also learn from Joshua (xi. 21) that there was a Rephaite or 'Anakim' remnant left in some of the chief cities of the Philistine territory, which must have been of considerable importance, to judge from the stories of giant champions analysed on a previous page. How far the alliance of these formidable aborigines (which probably represent a pre-Canaanite immigration, later than the insignificant 'Avvim) enabled the southern Philistines to hold their ground so much longer than the northern Zakkala is an interesting question the answer to which, however, could be nothing more than speculative.

Though no ancient authority definitely states it, there can hardly be any doubt that the repulse of the great attack on Egypt, in the days of Ramessu III, was the event which led to the permanent settlement of the Cretan tribes on the coastland. It is possible, indeed, that they already occupied the country as a military base for their operations against Egypt: the description, in the Medinet Habu temple, of the advance of the invaders through the lands of the

[p. 69]

[paragraph continues] Hittites and North Syrians makes this at least not improbable. However the exact details of chronology work out, we cannot dissociate the invasion of Egypt from the contemporaneous settlement by foreigners on the sea-coast.

Israel was already, as we learn from the stela of Merneptah, established in the promised land; and the Hebrew tribes had already been reinforced by the contingent of Egyptian serfs (possibly the enslaved descendants of the Bedawin invaders known to history as the Hyksos) and Kenites, whose traditions became the received version of Hebrew origines. The tribe of Dan, situated on the seacoast, was driven inland, and forced to establish itself elsewhere: but as we have seen, the whole length of the shore was occupied by the intruders, even north of Joppa. Wen-Amon has chronicled for us the settlement of Zakkala at Dor: that Sisera belonged to this tribe is also highly probable: and the remarkable developments displayed by the Phoenicians which distinguished them from all other Semites--developments to be noted in the following chapter--make it no longer possible to doubt that a very large Philistine or Zakkala element entered into the composition of that people.

In the earlier part of the history, as we have already indicated, the empire of the Philistines was widely spread over the country. As is well known, the name Palestine is merely a corruption of Philistia; and when Zephaniah or one of his editors calls Canaan 'the land of the Philistines' (ii. 4) he is expressing little more than what was at one time a fact. Their domination over the Hebrews is insisted on in both Judges and Samuel: the early kings of the Hebrews are elected with the specific purpose of freeing the people frown the foreign yoke: a governor is established in a town close to Jerusalem: even at Beth-Shan, at the inner end of the plain Esdraelon, which once swarmed with the chariots of Sisera, the Philistines were able to fix Saul's body as a trophy: and the course of the history shows that they were there established in sufficient strength and with sufficient permanence to make the recovery of the trophy difficult.

The name of Beth-Dagon, the house of their chief god, is found among the towns enumerated to the northern coast-dwellers of the tribe of Asher (Joshua xix. 27); and there was a similarly named and better known town in the land of the southern Philistines; but these names, as we shall see in the following chapter, are older than the Philistine settlement. 'The stronghold above Jericho called Dagon

(mentioned in Josephus, Ant. xiii. 8. 1, Wars, i. 2. 3) is no doubt the same as Dok (now 'Ain ed-Duk) where Simon was murdered (1 Macc. xvi. 15): probably the form of the name in Josephus is

[p. 70]

an error. There is a modern Beit Dejan near Nablus, which marks a third place of the same name, not recorded in history.

The Northern tribe of the foreigners must have become early absorbed by their Semitic neighbours. The Southern people, however, seated on their rich coast-plain and established in their powerful metropolitan cities, were longer able to maintain their ethnic independence. The wars of David drove them back on the coast, and reduced them to a subordinate position; and, as the names of the kings recorded in the Assyrian records show, they rapidly became semitized as time went on. As we have seen in the last chapter, however, their national traditions fought a long fight against absorption and oblivion. The pride of the Philistines--their persistent refusal to submit to Hebrew prejudices, such as the tabu against eating flesh with the blood and forbidden meats--was as offensive to Deutero-Zechariah (ix. 7) as is the pride of the Irish or Welsh nationalist to the average Englishman. Though in the later history we hear so little about them, they must still have been troublesome neighbours; otherwise there would not be such a constant chain of prophetic denunciations. Amos first, then Isaiah, Zephaniah, Joel, and the later prophets Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and Zechariah all pronounce woes upon them. One of Ezekiel's strongest denunciations of the corruptions of his own people well expresses the national hatred--even the daughters of the Philistines are ashamed at contemplating them (Ezek. xvi. 27). The son of Sirach says that 'his heart abhorreth them that sit upon the mountains of Samaria, and them that dwelt among the Philistines' (Ecclus. l. 26). Except for the naturalized Philistines in David's entourage, there is but one lull in the storm of war between the two nations throughout the Old Testament. This is in the charming poem, Psalm lxxxvii, written apparently under some one of the later kings. The psalmist pictures Yahweh enthroned upon His best-loved seat, the holy mountains of Zion, and reading, as it were, a census-roll of His people. This one was born in Egypt or Babylon--that one in Philistia or Tyre--yet all own Zion as their common Mother. The psalm is a miniature edition of the Book of Jonah: the poet's large-hearted universalism looks forward to an abolition of national jealousies.

Their cities all existed from pre-Philistine days. They are all, except the Beth-Dagons, mentioned in the Tell el-Amarna correspondence, and were then already communities of importance: how much farther back their history may go it is impossible to tell. Like the Hebrews, who appear to have added only one city--Samaria--to those which they inherited in the Promised Land, the Philistines

[p. 71]

were not city builders. Indeed we hardly would expect this of the 'Peoples of the Sea'. Ziklag, somewhere in the south of the Philistine territory, but not yet identified satisfactorily, may have been a new foundation: this, however, rests merely upon the vague circumstance that it has been impossible to find a satisfactory Semitic etymology for the name, which conceivably echoes the name of the Zakkala. If so, we understand better how the southern sept of the Philistines comes to be specifically called 'Cherethites'. or 'Cretans'. On the other hand, we elsewhere find the Zakkala in the north.

The five metropolitan cities of the Philistines were Gaza, Ashkelon, Gath, Ashdod, and Ekron. The first-mentioned is the only one of the five that still retains anything of its former importance. It is a modern, well-watered, and populous town, standing on the ancient site, and in the form Ghuzzeh retaining the ancient name. It is prominent in the Samson epic. We have already noticed the revolt of its leader, Hanunu, against the king of Assyria--a revolt that led to the battle of Raphia (710 B.C.), the first struggle between Egypt and Assyria. From Amos i. 6 we learn that Gaza was the centre of a slave-trade, which added bitterness to the relations between the Philistines and their Israelite neighbours. In 332 B.C. the city was besieged for two months by Alexander the Great. Its later history but slightly concerns us, though we may mention its total destruction by Alexander Jannaeus. It recovered even from this catastrophe, and we find it in the second and third centuries A. D. as the centre of worship of a deity peculiar to itself, called Marna, the ritual of whose service recalls in some respects that of the rites of Dagon. This cult, indeed, was probably the last relic of the Philistines, apart from the vague modern traditions to which we have already referred.

The city was surrounded by a wall, and watch-towers were erected at a distance from it, to give warning as early as possible of the approach of an enemy (2 Kings xviii. 8). [*1] A neighbouring harbour town, called Maioyma Gazes, was of considerable importance and for a time was the site of a bishopric.

Ashkelon was the only city of the five that stood on the seacoast, though other maritime cities, such as Joppa, were (at least from time to time) also in Philistine hands. Its harbour, though inadequate for modern use, was sufficient for the small ships of antiquity. Samson visited Ashkelon to seize the wager he was obliged to pay after his riddle had been solved. [*2] It is, however, from

[p. 72]

much later times--Maccabean, early Arab, and Crusader--that the chief historical importance of the city dates. These lie outside our present scope. We need not do more than mention the etymological speculations of Stephanus of Byzantium, who tells us that this city was founded by Askalos, brother of Tantalos and son of Hymenaios; and the statement of Benjamin of Tudela that Ezra re-founded Ashkelon under the name Benebrah. [*1]

Gath, reasonably identified with the enormous mound known as Tell es-Safi at the embouchure of the Valley of Elah, had a different history from the rest. It seems in the time of the greatest extension of the Philistine power to have been the principal city of the five: at least the application to its ruler Achish of the title melek, 'king' (rather than the technical term seren, applied normally to the 'lords' of the Philistines), if not a mere inadvertence, suggests that at least he was primus inter pares. He has, however, to bow to the wishes of his colleagues in the matter of David's alliance with him. In David's lament over Saul and Jonathan, Gath and Ashkelon are the two prominent cities specially mentioned; and (probably through the influence of that popular lay) 'tell it not in Gath' became a current catchword, which we meet once again in Micah i. 10. It is not infrequently used as such among ourselves; but in Hebrew it has a further aid to popularity in an alliteration, as though one should say 'gad not in Gath'.

But as we have already noticed, the name drops out from all references to the Philistines in the later literature: the Pentapolis becomes a Tetrapolis, and the hegemony passes over to Ashdod, which in time becomes the last typical Philistine city. This cannot be explained, however, by a total destruction of the city of Gath. For the excavations carried on by the Palestine Exploration Fund in 1900 at Tell es-Safi showed that the site had been continuously occupied from very early times to the days of a modern village, whose houses and extensive graveyards seal up the secrets of the greater part of this important mound from the curiosity of the explorer. The true explanation is, that from the time of its conquest by Uzziah, Gath was reckoned a city of Judah by the Hebrew prophets. In the gradual shrinking of the Philistine border it would be one of the first to fall into Hebrew hands.

A destruction of Gath--probably the sacking by Uzziah--was still

[p. 73]

fresh in memory when Amos prophesied, and was used by hint as an illustration to enforce his denunciation of Samaria (vi. 2); in his first chapter we already find Gath omitted from the list of Philistine cities; and the reference immediately afterwards to 'the remnant of the Philistines' (i. 8) suggests that that people had shortly before suffered loss. In iii. 9 the words 'publish in the palaces at Ashdod' may possibly be an adaptation of the proverbial catchword already mentioned, modified to suit the altered circumstances. It likewise is assonantal in Hebrew.

Sargon, it is true, shortly after Uzziah's time, calls the city 'Gath of the Ashdodites' (if this be the correct translation of the phrase); but no doubt it was a matter of indifference in the eyes of the great king which of two trumpery communities claimed the possession of a town, so long as he himself had a satisfying share of the plunder.

It is unfortunate that the city had such a commonplace name. Its meaning, 'winepress,' was applicable to many sites, and it was evidently used for snore places than one. This makes the reconstruction of the history of Gath rather difficult. Thus, the Gath fortified by Rehoboam (2 Chron. xi. 8) can hardly be the Philistine city of that name; and certain other places such as Gath-hepher, Gath-rimmon, and Moresheth-gath, must be carefully distinguished therefrom. The same word appears in the Gethsemane of the New Testament.

Ashdod, the city to which the ark was first taken, is now represented by an insignificant village, whose only object of interest is the ruin of a large Saracenic khan: but ruins of more important buildings seem to have been seen here by seventeenth-century travellers. [*1] Yet it must have been a city of special importance in the Pentapolis. Like Gaza, it had its 'palaces' (Amos iii. 9). As we have seen, Ashdod longest preserved the Philistine national tradition. 'The speech of Ashdod' lasted down to the time of Nehemiah. The temple of Dagon stood there till destroyed by the Maccabees (1 Macc. x. 83, 84). But the 'altars and gods' of the city, destroyed by Judas a few years before (1 Macc. v. 68), were perhaps objects rather of Hellenic cult, which at this date was well established in Western Palestine.

The great siege of Ashdod by Psammeticus, already referred to, is unknown to us except from Herodotus. It seems almost incredibly protracted, and probably there is something wrong with Herodotus' figures. Jeremiah's references to the remnant of Ashdod (xxv. 20) and Zephaniah's emphasis on a siege which shall drive out Ashdod at

[p. 74]

the noonday (ii. 4)--i.e. which shall last half a day only--are plausibly supposed to imply allusion to this event. A small inlet in the neighbouring coastline served Ashdod for a harbour: it is now called Minet el-Kal'ah, 'the harbour of the fortress': a tradition of some fortification of the harbour is thus preserved, as well as the Greek name limne which has been transformed into the Arabic El-Mineh; the initial l having been mistaken for the Arabic article.

Ekron, since the time of Robinson, has always been equated to the village of 'Akir, now the site of a flourishing Jewish colony, whose red roofs are conspicuous on the seaward side of the Jerusalem railway soon after leaving Ramleh. But there are no remains of any ancient occupation here commensurate with the importance of the place. 'There are a few local traditions in 'Akir, but they are quite vague. Bauer (Mittheilungen d. deutsch. Pal. Vereins, 1899, p. 43) describes a visit he paid to the old mosque, the one stone building in the fellah village, erected on its highest point. There is a forecourt and portico with two rows of pillars. The thresholds are of marble. An old sheikh told him that the mosque was as old as the time of Abraham; but many such tales are told in Palestine of comparatively modern buildings. Ekron, if the place of the ancient oracle of Baal-zebub were really at 'Akir, has vanished utterly, leaving scarcely a potsherd behind. This is not what usually happens to ancient Palestine cities. With some hesitation I venture on the following suggestions.

To me there seems to be a confusion between two places of the same name. In Joshua xiii. 1-3, where the land not possessed by Joshua is detailed, we find mention made of the region of the Philistines and of the little southern tribe of the Geshurites, to 'the border of Ekron-Saphonah, which is counted to the Canaanites', and also the five lords of the Philistines, among which by contrast are enumerated the Ekronites. This expression 'Ekron-Saphonah' is correctly translated 'Ekron northward' in the English Bible; but it can also mean 'Northern Ekron', which to me seems here to give a more intelligible sense.

Again, in Joshua xv. 11 we find the border of the territory of Judah as running 'unto the side of Ekron-Saphonah'; an expression which I take to mean that this city, though adjoining the territory of Judah, was actually beyond its border. If so, it would be in the tribe of Dan; and in Joshua xix. 43 we actually find an Ekron enumerated among the Danite towns. Here, as there is no ambiguity, the qualifying adjective 'Northern' is omitted. The Southern Ekron

[p. 75]

would then belong to the tribe of Judah, in the theoretical scheme elaborated in the book of Joshua; and we find it duly mentioned, between Mareshah and Ashdod.

Again, the story of the rout after the battle of Ephes-Daminim (1 Sam. xvii. 52-54) is suggestive. The pursuit went 'by the way to the two gates, to Gath and to Ekron'. 'Akir, the usual site given for Ekron, cannot be spoken of a gate, in the sense that Gath, commanding as it does the mouth of the valley of Elah, can be so termed; and a chase of the Philistines prolonged through Philistine territory for such a long distance as from Gath to 'Akir is not very probable. We seem to find the other gate at a subsidiary outlet of the Valley of Elah, to the south of Gath, where stands a village called Dhikerin. And Dhikerin lies exactly in a straight line between Beit Jibrin and 'Esdud, the modern representatives of Mareshah and Ashdod.

Written in English letters, 'Dhikerin' is not unlike 'Ekron' in general appearance. But philologically there can be no direct connexion between them, and my arguments in favour of the identification here suggested rest on grounds different from the superficial similarity of name. The single letter k in English represents two entirely different sounds in Hebrew and Arabic; one of these (k) appears in 'Dhikerin', the other (q) in Ekron, as in 'Akir. These letters can be treated as interchangeable in one case only. As in English, so in Greek, one sound and one character represent these two letters: and if for a while a district had become thoroughly Hellenized, the Greek k might have been (so to speak) as a 'bridge' for the passing of one sound into the other. When the Semitic speech reasserted itself, it might have taken up the name with the wrong k. There is thus a possibility that a different word has become substituted for a half-forgotten and wholly misunderstood Hebrew name. But no stress can be laid upon this possible accident.

Dhikerin presents obvious signs of antiquity. Great artificial caves and huge cisterns are cut in the rock, testifying to its former importance, and it has never been finally identified with any other ancient site, though some of the earlier explorers have thought to find here no less a place than Gath itself. The Talmuds have nothing to say about it save that the name is derived from dkr' 'male', because the women there all bear male children. [*1] Clermont-Ganneau (Recueil d'arch. orient. iv. 254) suggests a connexion between this place-name and that of the Zakkala.

Let us now look back for a moment to the story of the wanderings of the Ark. Suppose that the Gittites, when the plague broke out

[p. 76]

among them, sent the Ark, not to 'Akin, but to Dhikerin--which way much nearer and more convenient--we have then an immediate answer to an obvious difficulty. Why did the Philistines expect the ark to go anywhere near Beth-Shemesh at all? We must remember that they were not merely trying to get rid of the ark: they were on the look-out for a sign that the pestilence was a manifestation of the wrath of the God of the Hebrews. They must therefore have expected the Ark to return whence it had come, to the sanctuary at Shiloh, of whose existence and importance they could not have been ignorant. This was the natural goal of the sacred symbol, north of the great Canaanite wedge that centred in Jerusalem and separated the northern Israelites from their brethren in the south. From Shiloh the Ark had been taken: Shiloh was the chief centre of Hebrew religious life at the time: and to Shiloh the Ark should be expected to find its way back. [*1] Therefore, if it was at the time in 'Akir, it ought to have gone by the northern valley route, into the Valley of Aijalon, so striking into the road for Shiloh some ten miles north of Jerusalem. If from 'Akir it went southward it would be shunted off south of the Canaanites into the southern territory, where no specially important shrine of the period is recorded. From 'Akir, therefore, it should not go within miles of Beth-Shemesh. But from Dhikerin, the only way toward Shiloh, avoiding Jerusalem, is by a valley route that leads straight to Beth-Shemesh and perforce passes that town.

Further evidence is given us by the story of the march of Sennacherib. That monarch was engaged in reducing places easily identified as the modern Jaffa, Yazur, Ibn Berak, and Beit Dejan, when the Ekrouites leagued themselves with the North Arabians and the Egyptians. Sennacherib met the allies at El-Tekeh, a place unfortunately not identified: it presumably was near the Northern Ekron, as the two places are mentioned together as border towns in Dan, Joshua xix. 40. This Northern Ekron, we may agree, might well be represented by 'Akir, whose poverty in antiquities accords with the apparent insignificance of the Danite town. Close to 'Akir is a village in the plain, called Zernukah, a name which may possibly echo the name of El-Tekeh. In any case Sennacherib was victorious and then went straight to Timnath, which he reduced, after which he proceeded to attack Ekron. This order of proceedings is inconsistent

[p. 77]

with 'Akir as the site of Ekron. Sennacherib's successful progress against the south we should expect to proceed steadily southward, involving an attack on 'Akir before the reduction of Timnath. Ekron must therefore have been south from Tibneh, which fits the conditions of the site now suggested.

Click to enlarge
Fig 3. Sketch-map of Philistia.

The denunciations of Ekron in the prophetic books help us very little in the solution of the problem. But there is a suggestive hint in the opening verses of 2 Kings. Ahaziah having met with an accident sent to inquire of Baal-zebub 'lord of flies', the god of Ekron, as to his prospects of recovery. When we find that less than a couple of miles from Dhikerin there is a village bearing the name of Deir edh-Dhubhan, 'the convent of the flies', we feel some

[p. 78]

justification in asking, can it be that Baal-zebub still rules his ancient lordship?

The land of the Philistines, dominated by these five cities, has been so often described that it is needless to waste space in an account of it. Briefly, we may say that whoever held that part of the country was at an enormous advantage. With the possible exception of the plain of Esdraelon, it is the most fertile land in Western Palestine. Though there are few perennial streams, water can be found wherever one chooses to dig for it. Through it runs the great trade-route from Egypt by Damascus to Babylon. The mart of Gaza is the natural rendezvous of all who have commerce with Arabia. The seaports of Southern Palestine are all commanded, as are the valleys which are the doorways to the Hinterland: so that the coast dwellers can engage in commerce on their own account, while at the same time they can control the progress and civilization among the aliens in the interior. When we stand on some eminence that commands this rich strip of territory we find it easy to understand the bitterness with which through the centuries the Hebrews regarded the Philistines.

Footnotes

^71:1 So a sentry-station was established on a hill some way S. of Gezer: see my Excavation of Gezer, vol. ii, p. 365.

^71:2 It has been suggested that this took place not at Ashkelon, but at a small site [p. 72] in the valley of Elah called Khurbet (= ruin) 'Askalan. This is certainly nearer to Timnath, but there are here no traceable remains older than the Roman period.

^72:1 A description of the remains at Ashkelon, with a plan, will be found in the Quarterly Statement of the Palestine Exploration Fund for January 1913.

^73:1 See Sepp, Jerusalem and das heilige Land, vol. ii, p. 598.

^75:1 Neubauer, Geog. d. Talm. p. 71.

^76:1 Meyer, Gesch. d. Alterthums, i, p. 358, suggests from Jer. vii. 14, that Shiloh was destroyed. But the space of time between Samuel and Jeremiah is so long, that many unrecorded events might have taken place in the meanwhile: and, indeed, Shiloh is still an important sanctuary in 1 Sam. xiv. 3.

The Philistines, by R.A.S. Macalister, [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 79]

  

CHAPTER IV

  

THE CULTURE OF THE PHILISTINES

  

I. THEIR LANGUAGE.

OF the language of the Philistines we are profoundly ignorant. An inscription in their tongue, written in an intelligible script, would be one of the greatest rewards that an explorer of Palestine could look for. As yet, the only materials we have for a study of the Philistine language are a few proper names, and possibly some words, apparently non-Semitic, embedded here and there in the Hebrew of the Old Testament. Thus, our scanty information is entirely drawn from foreign sources. We are exactly in the same position as a student of some obscure Oriental language would be, if his only materials were the names of natives as reported in English newspapers. Now, we are all familiar with the barbarous and meaningless abbreviation 'Abdul', applied with various depreciatory epithets to a certain ex-potentate. Some time ago a friend called my attention to a paragraph in, I think, a Manchester paper, describing how a certain Arab 'named Sam Seddon' had been prosecuted for some offence: though the 'Arabian Nights' is almost an English classic, the reporter had failed to recognize the common name Shems ed-Din! If we were obliged to reconstruct the Arabic language from materials of this kind, we could hardly expect to get very far; but in attempting to recover something of the Philistine language we are no better off.

The one common noun which we know with tolerable certainty is seren, the regular word in the Hebrew text for the 'lords' by which the Philistines were governed: a word very reasonably compared with the Greekturannos. [*1] This, however, does not lead us very far. It happens that no satisfactory Indo-European etymology has been found for turannos, so that it may be a word altogether foreign to the Indo-European family. In any case, one word could hardly decide the relationship of the Philistine language any more than

[p. 80]

could 'benval' (sic!) decide the relationship of Pictish in the hands of Sir Walter Scott's amateur philologists.

The word seren is once used (1 Kings vii. 30) as a technical term for some bronze objects, part of the 'bases' made for the temple (wheel-axles?). This is probably a different word with different etymological connexions. The word mekonah in the list cited below, is found in the same verse.

Renan, in his so-called Histoire du peuple d'Israel, has collected a list of words which he suggests may have been imported into Hebrew from Philistine sources. That there should be such borrowing is a priori not improbable: we have already shown that the leaders among Hebrew speakers must have understood the Philistine tongue down to the time of David at least. But Renan's list is far from convincing. It is as follows:

parbar or parvar, 'a suburb': compare peribolus.

mekonah, something with movable wheels: compare machina.

mekherah, 'a sword': compare maxaira.

caphtor, 'a crown, chaplet': compare capital.

pilegesh, 'a concubine': compare pellex.

A further comparison of the name of Araunah the Jebusite, on whose threshing-floor the plague was stayed (and therefore 'the place in Jerusalem from which pestilential vapours arose'!), with the neuter plural form Averna, need hardly he taken seriously.

But since Renan wrote, the discovery of the inscription on the Black Stone of the Forum has shown us what Latin was like, as near as we can get to the date of the Philistines, and gives us a warning against attempts to interpret supposed Philistine words by comparison with Classical Latin. And, even if the above comparisons be sound, the borrowing, as Noordtzij [*1] justly remarks, might as well have taken place the other way; as is known to have happened in several cases which he quotes.

There is a word kwb` or qwb` meaning a 'helmet', the etymology of which is uncertain. [*2] It may possibly be a Philistine word: the random use of k and q suggests that they are attempts to represent a foreign initial guttural (cf. ante, p. 75). Both forms are used in 1 Samuel xvii, the one (k) to denote the helmet of the foreigner Goliath, the other (q) that of the Hebrew Saul. No stress can, however, be laid on this distinction. The form q is used of the helmets of the foreigners named in Ezekiel xxiii. 24, while k is used of those of Uzziah's Hebrew army, 2 Chronicles xxvi. 14.

[p. 81]

Of the place-names mentioned in the Old Testament there is not one, with the possible exception of Ziklag, which can be referred to the Philistine language. All are either obviously Semitic, or in any case (being mentioned in the Tell el-Amarna letters) are older than the Philistine settlement. Hitzig has made ingenious attempts to explain some of them by various Indo-European words, but these are not successful.

The persons known to us are as follows:

(1) Abimelech, the king who had dealings with Abraham. A Semitic name.

(2) Ahuzzath, Counsellor of No. (1): Semitic name.

(3) Phicol, General of No. (1). Not explained as Semitic: possibly a current Philistine name adopted by the narrator.

(4) Badyra, king of Dor, in Wen-Amon's report. Probably not Semitic.

(5) Warati, a merchant, mentioned by Wen-Amon.

(6) Makamaru, a merchant, mentioned by Wen-Amon.

(7) Dagon, chief god of the Philistines.

(8) Delilah, probably not Philistine. See ante, p. 45.

(9) Sisera, king of Harosheth. See ante, p. 41, and compare Benesasira on the tablet of Keftian names.

(10) Achish or Ekosh, [*1] apparently the standard Philistine name, like 'John' among ourselves. It seems to reappear in the old Aegean home in the familiar form Anchises. It occurs twice in the tablet of Keftian names (ante, p. 10) and in the Assyrian tablets it appears in the form Ikausu. [*2]

(11) Maoch, father of Achish, king of Gath. Unexplained and probably Philistine.

(12) Ittai, David's faithful Gittite friend, perhaps Philistine.

(13) Obed-Edom, a Gittite who sheltered the Ark: a pure Semitic name.

(14) Goliath, a Rephaite, and therefore not Philistine.

(15) Saph, a Rephaite, and therefore not Philistine.

(16) Zaggi, a person signing as witness an Assyrian contract tablet of the middle of the seventh century B.C. found at Gezer. The name is not explained, and may be Philistine.

[p. 82]

(17-26) The ten Philistine kings mentioned on the Assyrian tablets, who without exception bear Semitic names. Sarludari is an Assyrian name, which may possibly have been adopted by its bearer as a compliment to his master.

This list is so meagre that it is scarcely worth discussing. It will be observed that at the outside not more than eight of these names can be considered native Philistine.

Down to about the time of Solomon the Philistines preserved their linguistic individuality. A basalt statuette of one Pet-auset was found somewhere in the Delta, [*1] in which he is described as an interpreter  'for Canaan and Philistia'. There would be no point in mentioning the two places if they had a common language. Ashdod, we have seen, preserved a patois down to the time of Nehemiah; but it is clear that the Philistines had become semitized by the time of the operations of the Assyrian kings. It is likely that the Rephaite element in the population was the leaven through which the Philistines became finally assimilated in language and other customs to the surrounding Semitic tribes, as soon as their supremacy had been destroyed by David's wars. The Rephaites, of course, were primarily a pre-Semitic people: but probably they had themselves already become thoroughly semitized by Amorite influence before the Philistines appeared on the scene.

We have, besides, a number of documents which, when they have been deciphered, may help us in reconstructing the 'speech of Ashdod'. The close relationship of the Etruscans to the Philistines suggests that the Etruscan inscriptions may some time be found to have a bearing on the problem. It is also not inconceivable that some of the obscure languages of Asia Minor, specimens of which are preserved for us in the Hittite, Mitannian, Lycian, and Carian inscriptions may have light to contribute. The inscriptions of Crete, in the various Minoan scripts, and the Eteocretan inscriptions of Praesos [*2] may also prove of importance in the investigation. Two other alleged fragments of the 'Keftian' language are at our service: the list of names already quoted on p. 10, which suggestively contains Aka###353###ou and Benesasira: and a magical formula in a medical MS. of the time of Thutmose III, published by Birch in 1871, [*3] which contains

[p. 83]

inter alia the following--copied here from a corrected version published by Ebers. [*1]

'Conjuration in the Amu language which people call Keftiu--senutiukapuwaimantirek' or something similar. This is not more intelligible than such formulae usually are. Mr. Alton calls my attention to the tempting resemblance of the last letters to trke, turke, thrke, a verb (?) common in the Etruscan inscriptions.

There is one document of conspicuous importance for our present purpose, although it is as yet impossible to read it. This is the famous disk of terra-cotta found in the excavation of the Cretan palace of Phaestos, and dated to the period known as Middle Minoan III--that is to say, about 1600 B.C. It is a roughly circular tablet of terra cotta, 15.8-16.5 cm. in diameter. On each face is a spiral band of four coils, indicated by a roughly drawn meandering line; and an inscription, in some form of picture-writing, has been impressed on this band, one by one, from dies, probably resembling those used by bookbinders. I suppose it is the oldest example of printing with movable types in the world. On one face of the disk, which I call Face I, there are 119 signs; on the other face, here called Face II, there are 123. They are divided into what appear to be word-groups, 30 in number on Face I and 31 on Face II, by lines cutting across the spiral bands at right angles. These word-groups contain from two to seven characters each. There are forty-five different characters employed. It is likely, therefore, from the largeness of this number that we have to deal with a syllabary rather than an alphabet.

I have discussed this inscription in a paper contributed to the Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy, [*2] to which I must refer the reader for the full investigation. Its special importance for our present purpose is based upon the fact that the most frequently used character, a man's head with a plumed head-dress, has from the

[p. 84]

moment of its first discovery been recognized as identical in type with the plumed head-dresses of the Philistine captives pictured at Medinet Habu. This character appears only at the beginnings of words, from which I infer that it is not a phonetic sign, but a determinative, most probably denoting personal names. Assuming this, it next appears that Face II consists of a list of personal names. Representing

Click to enlarge
Fig. 4 A. The Phaestos Disk (Face 1).

each character by a letter, which is to be regarded as a mere algebraic symbol and not a phonetic sign, we may write the inscription on the disk in this form:

[p. 85]

Click to enlarge
Fig. 4B. The Phaestos Disk (Face II).

There is just one type of ancient document which shows such a 'sediment', so to speak, of proper names at the end. This is a contract tablet, which ends with a list of witnesses, and in the paper above

[p. 86]

referred to I have put forward the conjecture that the disk is of this nature. In Face I, although not one word of the inscription can be deciphered, it will be found that, applying the clue of the proper names, everything fits exactly in its place, assuming the ordinary formula of a contract such as we find it in cuneiform documents.

The first two words would give us the name and title of the presiding magistrate: then comes the name of one of the contracting parties, uzc xes: then come six words or word-groups, quite unintelligible, but not improbably stating what this person undertakes to do: then follows what would be the name of the other contracting party.

Next come some words which ought to give some such essential detail as the date of the contract. And we find among these words just what we want, a proper name psa, denoting the officer who was eponymous of the year.

The last thirteen words we might expect to be a detailed inventory of the transaction, whatever its nature may have been. It is therefore satisfactory to notice that they arrange themselves neatly, just as they stand, in three parallel columns, having obvious mutual relations: thus--

which table not only confirms the conclusions arrived at, but illustrates a rule that may also be inferred from the list of witnesses on Face II. Words are declined by prefixes x, s, n, h, x and suffixes w, x; and words in apposition have the same prefix. See the third column of the above table, and the titles of witnesses 1, 2. We have a word bh in several forms: s-bh-w, n-bh, h-bh, s-bh-x. Further, x, prefixed to the 'name of the magistrate' and all the names of witnesses, probably means 'before, in the presence of'. The name which follows that of the two witnesses 5 and 6 is probably that of their father, and this assumed it follows that the prefix s probably has a genitive sense.

There remains one important point. At the bottom of certain characters there is a sloping line running to the left. This is always at the end of a word-group: the two apparent exceptions shown in some drawings of the disk (in word-groups 6 and 23 on Face II) being seemingly cracks in the surface of the disk. The letters marked are underlined in the transcript given above. I suggest with regard to

[p. 87]

these marks that they are meant to express a modification of the phonetic value of the character, too slight to require a different letter to express it, but too marked to allow it to be neglected altogether. And obviously the most likely modification of the kind would be the elision of the vowel of a final open syllable. The mark would thus be exactly like the virama of the Devanagari alphabet. [*1] When we examine the text, we find that it is only in certain words that this mark occurs. It is found in bh, however declined, except when the suffixes w, x are present. It is found in the word nvhf, however declined, and appears in the two similar words muhtas and Mxtas. It is found in the personal name kq (in the formula pa Mxkq). There are only one or two of the eighteen examples of its use outside these groups, and probably if we had some more examples of the script, or a longer text, these would be found to fit likewise into series. This stroke would therefore be a device to express a final closed syllable. Thus, if it was desired to write the name of the god Dagon, it would be written on this theory, let us say, DA-GO-NA, with a stroke underneath the last symbol to elide its vowel. The consequences that may follow if this assumption should at any time be proved, and the culture which the objects represented by the various signs indicate, are subjects for discussion in later sections of this chapter. For further details of the analysis of the disk I must refer to my Royal Irish Academy paper above quoted: I have dwelt on it here, because if, as is most probable, the plumed head-dress shows that in this disk we have to deal with 'proto-Philistines', we must look to this document and others of the same kind, with which excavators of the future may be rewarded, to tell us something of the language of the people with whom we have to deal.

Footnotes

^79:1 The 'Lords of the Philistines' are, however, in the Greek Version called satrapai; but in Judges (except iii. 3), Codex Vaticanus and allied MSS. have arxontes, a rendering also found sometimes in Josephus.

^80:1 De Filistijnen, p. 81.

^80:2 Cf. Latin cappa, &c. (?).

^81:1 Max Muller in his account of the school-tablet (ante, p. 10) compares the Assyrian form Ikausu and the Greek Agxous, and infers that the true pronunciation of the name was something like Ekosh.

^81:2 But in the last edition of KAT. p. 437, it is noticed that this name can possibly be read Ikasamsu or Ikasamsu.

^82:1 See the description by Chassinat, Bulletin de l'inst. franc. d'arch. au Caire, i. (1901), p. 98.

^82:2 See Conway in the Annual of the British School at Athens, vol. viii, p. 125, for an exhaustive analysis of these inscriptions.

^82:3 Zeitschr. f. agypt. Sprache (1871), p. 61.

^83:1 Zeitschr. der D. M. G. xxxi, pp. 451, 452.

^83:2 Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy, vol. xxx, section C, p. 342.

^87:1 I find that this comparison has been anticipated in an article in Harper's Magazine (European Edition, vol. lxi, p. 187), which I have read since writing the above. The rest of the article, I regret to say, does not convince me.

The Philistines, by R.A.S. Macalister, [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

II. THEIR ORGANIZATION.

  

A. Political.

From the time when the Philistines first appear in their Palestinian territory they are governed by Lords, seranim, each of whom has domination in one of the five chief cities, but who act in council together for the common good of the nation. They seem, indeed, to engage personally in duties which an Oriental monarch would certainly delegate to a messenger. They negotiate with Delilah. They convene the great triumph-feast to which Samson put so disastrous an

[p. 88]

end. There is a democratic instinct manifested by the men of Ashdod and Ekron, who peremptorily 'summoned' the council of lords to advise them what to do on the outbreak of plague: just as the merchants of the Zakkala obliged even a forceful ruler like Zakar-Baal to make an unsatisfactory compromise in the matter of Wen-Amon, and in much later times the people of Ekron deposed and imprisoned a ruler who persisted in the unpopular course of submission to Assyria. Achish makes arrangements with David, which his colleagues overrule. Of the methods of election of these officers we know absolutely nothing. From the Assyrian documents we hear of a series of rulers over Ashdod, father and son, but this does not necessarily prove that the hereditary principle was recognized. Such a political organization was quite unlike that of the nations round about: but the government of the Etruscans, who, as we have seen, were probably a related race, presents some analogy. There is a considerable similarity between the lucumones of Etruria and the Philistine seranim.

Nowhere do we read of a king of the Philistines. [*1] To infer, as has actually been done, from 1 Kings iv. 21 ('Solomon ruled over all the kingdoms from the River unto the land of the Philistines') that their territory was organized as a kingdom, displays a sad lack of a sense of humour. When Hebrew writers speak of 'a king of Gath' (1 Sam. xxvii. 2), 'him that holdeth the sceptre from Ashkelon' (Amos i. 8), 'all the kings of the land of the Philistines' (Jer. xxv. 20), 'the king [perishing] from Gaza' (Zech. ix. 5), they obviously are merely offering a Hebrew word or periphrasis as a translation of the native Philistine title. The same is true of the analogous expressions in the Assyrian tablets. The case of the Etruscan 'kings' seems exactly similar, though there appears to have been an Achish-like king in Clusium.

In Gibeah, and probably in other towns as well, a resident officer, like a Turkish mudir, was maintained at the time of their greatest power.

It is possible that, if we had before us all the documents relating to the history of the Philistines, we might be able to divide them into clans, corresponding perhaps in some degree to the threefold division of the Egyptian monuments--Zakkala, Washasha, and Pulasati, i.e. as we have tried to show already, Cretans, Rhodians, and Carians. The continually recurring phrase 'Cherethites and Pelethites' suggests some twofold division. Ezekiel xxv. 16 ('Behold, I will stretch out my hand upon the Philistines, and I will cut off the Cherethites') may

[p. 89]

or may not imply a similar division. The report of the young Egyptian (1 Sam. xxx. 14) implies that the name 'Cherethites', if it had a specific meaning apart from 'Philistines', denoted the dwellers in the extreme south of Philistine territory: and we have already made passing note of the occurrence of the name Ziklag, a possible echo of the Zakkala, in that part of the country. The almost accidental allusion to Carians in the history of the kings must not be overlooked. But our data are so slender that very little can be built upon them. All we can say is that the origin of the Philistines makes it improbable that they were a single undivided tribe, and that the scanty hints which the history affords render it still more unlikely.

Nor can we necessarily infer that the peculiar government by a council of the lords of five cities implies that they were divided into five tribes. For though there seems to have been an actual division of the territory into districts, each of them under the hegemony of one of these cities, the limits are rather indefinite; and to judge from the scanty materials at our disposal, seem to have varied from time to time. The recurrence of the phrase '[such a city] and the border thereof' [*1] seems to indicate a definite division of the country into provinces governed each by one of the cities; and this is confirmed by David's speech to Achish, [*2] 'Give me a place in one of the cities in the country (b'chth `ry hshdh), for why should thy servant dwell in the royal city (b`yr hmmlkh) with thee?' A similar polity is traceable in Etruria.

Of the division of the minor cities of the Philistine territory among the Pentapolis--perhaps Pentarchy would be a more correct term to use--we know very little. In the time of David's exile Ziklag was under the control of the king of Gath. Sargon, according to one interpretation of his inscription, supposes Gath itself to belong to Ashdod. We may compare 'Gazara that bordereth on Azotus' (1 Macc. xiv. 34), though they are about sixteen miles apart, and each only just visible on the other's horizon. Rather curiously, Joppa and the neighbouring villages depended, according to Sennacherib, on Ashkelon.

Besides these towns we hear of certain unwalled villages (1 Sam. vi. 18) which are not specified by name.

  

B. Military.

Certain functionaries called sarim meet us from time to time in the history (1 Sam. xviii. 30, xxix. 3, 9). It is the sarim whose protest

[p. 90]

prevents David from joining in the battle of Gilboa. The word is, of course, a commonplace Semitic term, and is applied in Deborah's Song to the princes of Issachar, and by Zephaniah to those of Jerusalem. Among the Philistines the officials denoted by this word were no doubt military captains.

It is obvious throughout the whole history, from the days of the Medinet Habu sculptures onwards, that the military forces of the Philistines were well organized. In 1 Samuel xiii. 5 we read of 30,000 chariots and 6,000 horsemen, which, even if the numbers are not to be taken literally, indicates a considerable wealth in war equipment. Elsewhere (ib. xxix. 2) we hear of 'hundreds and thousands', which may indicate a system of division into centuries and regiments. Of their methods of fighting we have no certain information: Judges i. 19 emphasizes their corps of war-chariots: in the account of the battle of Gilboa the archers are specially alluded to. The Medinet Habu sculptures and the description of the equipment of the champions are analysed in the following section.

  

C. Domestic.

On the subject of family life among the Philistines nothing is known. The high-minded sense of propriety attributed to Abimelech in the patriarchal narratives has already been touched upon. Samson's relations with his Timnathite wife can hardly be made to bear undue stress: a Semitic marriage of the sadika type is pictured by the storyteller. The wife remains in her father's house and is visited by her husband from time to time. Men and women apparently mingle freely in the temple of Dagon at Gaza. No further information is vouchsafed us.

Footnotes

^88:1 1 Except Abimelech, Gen. xxvi. 1. Exceptio probat regulam.

^89:1 See Judg. i. 18, 1 Sam. v. 6, 2 Kings xviii. 8.

^89:2 1 Sam. xxvii. 5.

The Philistines, by R.A.S. Macalister, [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

III. THEIR RELIGION.

Of the religion of the Philistines we know just enough to whet a curiosity that for the present seeks satisfaction in vain. The only hints given us in the Old Testament history are as follows:

(1) The closing scene of Samson's career took place in a temple of Dagon at Gaza, which must have been a large structure, as different as possible from the native High Places of Palestine.

(2) In this temple sacrifices were offered at festivals conducted by the 'Lords' of the Philistines (Judg. xvi. 23). It is not unreasonable to suppose that Samson was destined to be offered in sacrifice at the great feast of rejoicing there described. This was probably an annual festival, occurring at a fixed time of the year, and not a special celebration of the capture of Samson: because an interval of some months, during which Samson's shorn hair grew again, must have taken place

[p. 91]

between the two events. We are reminded of the Athenian Thargelia, with Samson in the role of the farmakos. Human sacrifices were offered in the temple of Marna at Gaza down to the fourth century A. D., as we learn from a passage presently to be quoted from Marcus the Deacon.

(3) There was also a temple of Dagon at Ashdod, which indicates that the deity was a universal god of the Philistines, not a local divinity like the innumerable Semitic Ba'alim. Here there were priests, and here a rite of 'leaping on (or rather stepping over) the threshold' was observed. A sculptured image of the god stood in this temple.

(4) There was somewhere a temple of Ashtaroth (Samuel) or of Dagon (Chronicles) where the trophies of Saul were suspended. It is not expressly said that this temple was in Beth-shan, to the wall of which the body of Saul was fastened.

(5) The Philistines were struck with terror when the Ark of Yahweh was brought among them. Therefore they believed in (a) the existence and (b) the extra-territorial jurisdiction of the Hebrew deity. This suggests a wider conception of the limitations of divine power than was current among the contemporary Semites.

(6) Small portable images (`tzbym) were worn by the Philistines and carried as amulets into battle (2 Sam. v. 21). 'This practice lasted till quite late (2 Macc. xii. 40).

(7) News of a victory was brought to the image-houses, probably because they were places of public resort, where they could be proclaimed (1 Sam. xxxi. 9).

(8) At Ekron there was an oracle of Baal-zebub, consulted by the Israelite king Ahaziah (2 Kings i. 2).

Let us clear the ground by first disposing of the last-named deity. This one reference is the only mention of him in the Old Testament, and indeed he is not alluded to elsewhere in Jewish literature. He must, however, have had a very prominent position in old Palestinian life, as otherwise the use of the name in the Gospels to denote the 'Prince of the Devils' (Matt. xii. 24, &c.) would be inexplicable. A hint in Isaiah ii. 6 shows us that the Philistines, like the Etruscans, were proverbial for skill in soothsaying, and it is not unlikely that the shrine of Baal-zebub should have been the site of their principal oracle. If so, we can be sure that Ahaziah was not the only Israelite who consulted this deity on occasion, and it is easy to understand that post-exilic reformers would develop and propagate the secondary application of his name in order to break the tradition of such illegitimate practices. It is, however, obvious that the Philistines who worked the oracle of Baal-zebub simply entered into an old

[p. 92]

Canaanite inheritance. This is clear from the Semitic etymology of the name. When they took over the town of Ekron and made it one of their chief cities, they naturally took over what was probably the most profitable source of emolument that the town contained. The local divinity had already established his lordship over the flies when the Philistines came on the scene.

This was no contemptible or insignificant lordship. A man who has passed a summer and autumn among the house-flies, sand-flies, gnats, mosquitoes, and all the other winged pests of the Shephelah will not feel any necessity to emend the text so as to give the Ba'al of Ekron 'a lofty house' or 'the Planet Saturn' or anything else more worthy of divinity [*1]; or to subscribe to Winckler's arbitrary judgement: 'Naturlich nicht Fliegenba'al, sondern Ba'al von Zebub, worunter man sich eine Oertlichkeit in Ekron vorzustellen hat, etwa den Hugel auf dem der Tempel stand' (Geschichte Israels, p. 224). The Greek Version lends no countenance to such euhemerisms, for it simply reads tui Baal myian. Josephus avoids the use of the word Ba'al, and says 'he sent to the Fly' (Ant. ix. 2. 1). The evidence of a form with final l is, however, sufficiently strong to be taken seriously. Although the vocalization is a difficulty, the old explanation seems to me the best, namely, that the by-form is a wilful perversion, designed to suggest zebel, 'dung.' The Muslim argot which turns kiyamah (Anastasis = the Church of the Holy Sepulchre) into kumamah (dung-heap) is a modern example of the same kind of bitter wit.

The Lord of Flies is hardly a fly-averter, like the Zeus apomyios of Pliny and other writers, with whom he is frequently compared. In fact, what evidence there is would rather indicate that the original conception was a god in the bodily form of the vermin, the notion of an averter being a later development: that, for instance, Apollo Smintheus has succeeded to a primitive mouse-god, who very likely gave oracles through the movements of mice. That Baal-zebub gave oracles by his flies is at least probable. A passage of Iamblichus (apud Photius, ed. Bekker, p. 75) referring to Babylonian divinations has often been quoted in this connexion; but I think that probably mice rather than flies are there in question. Lenormant (La divination chez les Chaldeens, p. 93) refers to an omen-tablet from which auguries are drawn from the behaviour or peculiarities of flies, but unfortunately the tablet in question is too broken to give any continuous sense. [*2]

[p. 93]

A curious parallel may he cited from Scotland. In the account of the parish of Kirkmichael, Banffshire, is a description (Statistical Account of Scotland, vol. xii, p. 464) of the holy well of St. Michael, which was supposed to have healing properties:

'Many a patient have its waters restored to health and many more have attested the efficacies of their virtues. But as the presiding power is sometimes capricious and apt to desert his charge, it now [A. D. 1794] lies neglected, choked with weeds, unhonoured, and unfrequented. In better days it was not so; for the winged guardian, under the semblance of a fly, was never absent from his duty. If the sober matron wished to know the issue of her husband's ailment, or the love-sick nymph that of her languishing swain, they visited the well of St. Michael. Every movement of the sympathetic fly was regarded in silent awe; and as he appeared cheerful or dejected, the anxious votaries drew their presages; their breasts vibrated with correspondent emotions. Like the Dalai Lama of Thibet, or the King of Great Britain, whom a fiction of the English law supposes never to die, the guardian fly of the well of St. Michael was believed to be exempted from the laws of mortality. To the eye of ignorance he might sometimes appear dead, but, agreeably to the Druidic system, it was only a transmigration into a similar form, which made little alteration in the real identity.'

In a foot-note the writer of the foregoing account describes having heard an old man lamenting the neglect into which the well had fallen, and saying that if the infirmities of years permitted he would have cleared it out and 'as in the days of youth enjoyed the pleasure of seeing the guardian fly'. Let us suppose the old man to have been eighty years of age: this brings the practice of consulting the fly-oracle of Kirkmichael down to the twenties of the eighteenth century, and probably even later.

Leaving out Baal-zebub, therefore, we have a female deity, called Ashtaroth (A###353###toreth) in the passage relating to the temple of Bethshan, and a male deity called Dagon, ascribed to the Philistines. We may incidentally recall what was said in the first chapter as to the possibility of the obscure name Beth-Car enshrining the name of an eponymous Carian deity: it seems at least as likely as the meaning of the name in Hebrew, 'house of a lamb.' Later we shall glance at the evidence which the Greek writers preserve as to the peculiar cults of the Philistine cities in post-Philistine times, which no doubt preserved reminiscences of the old worship. In the meanwhile let us concentrate our attention on the two deities named above.

I. ASHTORETH. At first sight we are tempted to suppose that the Philistines, who otherwise succeeded in preserving their originality, had from the first completely succumbed to Semitic influences in the

[p. 94]

province of religion. 'As immigrants', says Winckler in his Geschichte Israels, 'they naturally adopted the civilization of the land they seized, and with it the cultus also.' And certainly Ashtaroth or Ashtoreth was par excellence the characteristic Semitic deity, and worshippers of this goddess might well be said to have become completely semitized.

But there is evidence that makes it doubtful whether the assimilation had been more than partial. We begin by noting that Herodotus [*1] specially mentions the temple of e Oyrania Afrodite as standing at Ashkelon, and he tells us that it was the oldest of all the temples dedicated to this divinity, older even than that in Cyprus, as the Cyprians themselves admitted: also that the Scythians plundered the temple and were in consequence afflicted by the goddess with a hereditary nousos theleia. [*2] The remarkable inscription found at Delos, in which one Damon of Ashkelon dedicates an altar to his tutelary divinities, brilliantly confirms the statement of Herodotus. It runs:

'To Zeus, sender of fair winds, and Astarte of Palestine, and Aphrodite Urania, to the divinities that hearken, Damon son of Demetrios of Ashkelon, saved from pirates, makes this vow. It is not lawful to offer in sacrifice an animal of the goat or pig species, or a cow.' [*3]

[p. 95]

The Palestinian Astarte is here distinguished from the Aphrodite of Ashkelon; and though there obviously was much confusion between them, the distinction was real. From Lucian [*1] we learn that there were two goddesses, whom he keeps carefully apart, and who indeed were distinguished by their bodily form. The goddess of Hierapolis, of whose worship he gives us such a lurid description, was in human form: the goddess of Phoenicia, whom he calls Derketo (a Greek corruption of the Semitic Atargatis, `thr-`thh), had the tail of a fish, like a mermaid.

The name of this goddess, as written in Sidonian inscriptions, was long ago explained as a compound of `thr and `thh, 'Atar and 'Ate. These are two well-established divine names; the former is a variant of 'Ashtart, but the latter is more obscure: it is possibly of Lydian origin. [*2] In Syriac and Talmudic writings the compound name appears as Tar'atha.

The fish-tailed goddess was already antiquated when Lucian wrote. He saw a representation of her in Phoenicia (op. cit.  section 14), which seemed to him unwonted. No doubt he was correct in keeping the two apart; but it is also clear that they had become inextricably entangled with one another by his time. The figure of the goddess of Hierapolis was adorned with a cestus or girdle, an ornament peculiar to Urania ( section 32), who, as we learn from Herodotus, was regarded as the goddess of Ashkelon. There was another point of contact between the two goddesses--sacred fish were kept at their shrines. The fish-pond of Hierapolis is described by Lucian ( section section 45, 46) as being very deep, with an altar in the middle to which people swam out daily, and with many fishes in it, some of large size--one of these being decorated with a golden ornament on its fin.

To account for the mermaid shape of the Ashkelonite goddess a story was told of which the fullest version is preserved for us by Diodorus Siculus (ii. 4). 'In Syria is a city called Ashkelon, and not far from it is a great deep lake full of fishes; and beside it is a shrine of a famous goddess whom the Syrians called Derketo: and she has the face of a woman, and otherwise the entire body of a fish, for some reason such as this: the natives most skilful in legend fable that Aphrodite being offended by the aforesaid goddess inspired

[p. 96]

her with furious love for a certain youth among those sacrificing: and that Derketo, uniting with the Syrian, bore a daughter, and being ashamed at the fault, caused the youth to disappear and exposed the child in certain desert and stony places: and cast herself in shame and grief into the lake. The form of her body was changed into a fish: wherefore the Syrians even yet abstain from eating this creature, and honour fishes as gods.' The legend is told to the same effect by Pausanias (II. xxx. 3).

This legend is of great importance, for it helps us to detect the Philistine element in the Ashkelonite Atargatis. An essentially identical legend was told in Crete, the heroine being Britomartis or Dictynna. According to Callimachus' Hymn to Artemis Britomartis was a nymph of Gortyna beloved of Artemis, whom Minos, inflamed with love, chased over the mountains of Crete. The nymph now hid herself in the forests, now in the low-lying meadows; till at last, when for nine months she had been chased over crags, and Minos was on the point of seizing her, she leaped into the sea from the high rocks of the Dictaean mountain. But she sprang into fishers' nets (diktya) which saved her; and hence the Cydonians called the nymph Dictynna, and the mountain from which she had leaped called they Dictaean; and they set up altars to her and perform sacrifices.

The myth of the Atargatis of Ashkelon fits very badly on to the Syrian deity. She was the very last being to be troubled with shame at the events recorded by Diodorus Siculus: she had no special connexion with the sea, except in so far as fishes, on account of their extreme fertility, might be taken as typical of the departments of life over which she presided. There can surely be little question that the coyness of the Cretan nymph, her leap into the sea, and her deliverance by means of something relating to fishes, has been transferred to the Ashkelonite divinity by the immigrants. The Atargatis myth is more primitive than that of Britomartis: the union from which Britomartis was fleeing has actually taken place, and the metamorphosis into a fish is of the crudest kind; the ruder Carians of the mainland might well have preserved an earlier phase of the myth which the cultured Cretans had in a measure refined.

The cult of Britomartis was evidently very ancient. Her temple was said to have been built by Daedalus. The name is alleged to mean uirgo dulcis [*1]; and as Hesychius and the Etymologicon Magnum give us respectively glyku and agathon as meanings of britu or briton,

[p. 97]

the explanation is very likely correct. The name of the barley drink, brutos or bruton, may possibly have some connexion with this word. See also the end of the quotation from Stephanus of Byzantium, ante p. 15.

Athenaeus (viii. 37) gives us an amusing piece of etymology on the authority of Antipater of Tarsus, to the effect that one Gatis was a queen of Syria who was so fond of fish that she allowed no one to eat fish without inviting her to the feast--in fact, that no one could eat ater Gatidos: and that the common people thought her name was 'Atergatis' on account of this formula, and so abstained from fish altogether. He further quotes from the History of Asia by Mnaseus to the effect that Atargatis was originally a tyrannous queen who forbade the use of fish to her subjects, because she herself was so extravagantly fond of this article of diet that she wanted it all for herself; and therefore a custom still prevails to offer gold or silver fish, or real fish, well cooked, which the priests of the goddess eat. Another tale is told by Xanthus and repeated by Athenaeus in the same place, that Atargatis was taken prisoner by Mopsus king of Lydia, and with her son Ixthus ('fish') cast into the lake near Ashkelon (in tei peri Askaluna limnei) because of her pride, and was eaten by fishes.

Indeed, the Syrian avoidance of fish as an article of food is a commonplace of classical writers. A collection of passages on the subject will be found in Selden, De Diis Syris, II. iii.

Lucian further tells us ( section 4) that the temple at Sidon was said to be a temple of Astarte; but that one of the priests had informed him that it was really dedicated to Europa, sister of Cadmus. This daughter of King Agenor the Phoenicians honoured with a temple 'when she had vanished' (epeide te afanes egegonee), and related the legend about her that Zeus, enamoured of her, chased her, in the form of a bull, to Crete.

Here then we have distinctly a legend to the effect that a certain temple of the Syrian goddess was really dedicated to a deity who had fled from an unwelcome lover, and who was directly connected with Crete. In fact, we have here a confused version of the Britomartis legend on the Syrian coast. And when we turn to the Metamorphoses of Antoninus Liberalis, ch. 30, we find a version of the Britomartis story that is closely akin to the tale told by the Sidonian priest to Lucian. We read there that 'of Cassiepeia and Phoenix son of Agenor was born Carme: and that Zeus uniting with the latter begat Britomartis. She, fleeing from the converse of men, wished to be a perpetual virgin. And first she came to Argos from Phoenicia, with Buze, and Melite, and Maera, and Anchiroe, daughters of

[p. 98]

[paragraph continues] Erasinos; and thereafter she went up to Cephallenia from Argos; and the Cephallenians call her Laphria; and they erected a temple to her as to a deity. Thereafter she went to Crete, and Minos seeing her and being enamoured of her, pursued her; but she took refuge among fishermen, and they caused her to hide in the nets, and from this the Cretans call her Dictynna, and offer sacrifices to her. And fleeing from Minos, Britomartis reached Aegina in a ship, with a fisherman Andromedes, and he laid hands on her, being desirous to unite with her; but Britomartis, having stepped from the ship, fled to a grove where there is now her temple, and there she vanished (egeneto afanes); and they called her Aphaea, and in the temple of Artemis the Aeginetans called the place where Britomartis vanished Aphae, and offered sacrifices as to a deity.' The relationship to Agenor, the love-chase, and the curious reference to 'vanishing' can scarcely be a mere coincidence. Lucian, though careless of detail and no doubt writing from memory, from the report of a priest who being a Syrian was not improbably inaccurate, has yet preserved enough of the Britomartis legend as told in Sidon to enable us to identify it under the guise of the story of Europa.

To the same Cretan-Carian family of legends probably belongs the sea-monster group of tales which centre in Joppa and its neighbourhood. The chief among them is the story of Perseus the Lycian hero and Andromeda; and a passage in Pliny seems to couple this legend with that of Derketo. [*1] Some such story as this may have suggested to the author of the Book of Jonah the machinery of his sublime allegory; and no doubt underlies the mediaeval legends of St. George and the Dragon, localized in the neighbouring town of Lydd. We can scarcely avoid seeing in these tales literary parallels to the beautiful designs which the Cretan artists evolved from the curling tentacles of the octopus.

We are now, I think, in a position to detect a process of evolution in these tangled tales. We begin with a community dwelling somewhere on the sea-coast, probably at the low cultural level of the tribes who heaped the piles of midden refuse on the coasts of Eastern Denmark. These evolved, from the porpoises and other sea-monsters that came under their observation, the conception of a mermaid sea-goddess who sent them their food; and no doubt prayers and charms and magical formulae were uttered in her name to ensure that the creeks should he filled with fish. The sacredness of fish to the goddess would

[p. 99]

follow as a matter of course, and would be most naturally expressed by a prohibition against eating certain specified kinds. [*1] And aetiological myths would of course be developed to account for her fish-tail shape. The Dictynna legend, with a Volksetymologie connecting the name of the nymph with a fishing-net, is one version; the legend afterwards attached to Atargatis is another.

When the Carian-Cretan league, after their repulse from Egypt, settled on the Palestine coast, they of course brought their legends with them. In their new home they found a Bona Dea all powerful, to whom inter alia fish were sacred, and with her they confused their own Virgo Dulcis, patroness of fishermen. They built her temples--a thing unheard-of before in Palestine--and told of her the same tales that in their old home they had told of Britomartis. They transferred the scene of the tragedy from the eastern headland of Crete to the limne of Ashkelon, and they fashioned the legend into the form in which it ultimately reached the ears of Diodorus Siculus.

To the legend of Atargatis Diodorus adds that the exposed child was tended and fed by doves till it was a year old, when it was found by one Simma, who being childless adopted it, and named it Semiramis, a name derived from the word for 'dove' in the Syrian language. In after years she became the famous Babylonian queen: and the Syrians all honour doves as divine in consequence. The etymology is of the same order as Justin's derivation of 'Sidon' from 'a Phoenician word meaning "fish"': the tale was no doubt told primarily to account for the sacredness of doves to the Syrian goddess. The goddess of Ashkelon was likewise patroness of doves, and this bird frequently figures on coins of the city.

II. DAGON was evidently the head of the pantheon of the Philistines, after their settlement in Palestine. We hear of his temple at Gaza, Ashdod, and, possibly, according to one version of the story of the death of Saul, at Beth-Shan. [*2] Jerome in commenting on 'Bel boweth down, Nebo stoopeth', in Isaiah xlvi. 1 (where some versions of the Greek have Dagon for Nebo), says Dagon is the idol of Ashkelon, Gaza, and the other cities of the Philistines. [*3] The important temple

[p. 100]

of Gaza is mirrored for us in the graphic story of the death of Samson, as we shall see in the following section.

In the temple of Ashdod there was an image of the god--a thing probably unknown in the rude early Canaanite shrines. Josephus (Wars, v. 9. 4) calls it a xoanon, which possibly preserves a true tradition that the figure was of wood. Some interesting though obscure particulars are given us regarding it in 1 Samuel v. 1-5. The Ark, captured at Aphek, was laid up two nights in the temple. The first night the image of Dagon fell on its face before the Ark, and was replaced by 'the priests of Dagon'; the only reference we have to specifically religious functionaries among the Philistines. The second night he was fallen again, and the head of the figure and the palms of its hands were broken off and lay on the threshold.

The account of the abasement of Dagon is of considerable importance with regard to the question of the form under which he was represented. The current idea is that he was of merman form, the upper half man, the lower half fish. This theory is by modern writers derived from the mediaeval Jewish commentators: Rabbi Levi, in the third century, said that Dagon was in the figure of a man: the first statement of his half-fish form, so far as extant authorities go, is made by David Kimhi, who writes, They say that Dagon had the shape of a fish front his navel downwards, because he is called Dagon [dg = fish] and upwards from his navel the form of a man, as it is said "both the palms of his bands were cut off on the threshold".' Abarbanel appears to make the god even more monstrous by supposing that it was the upper end which was the fishy part. But the idea must have been considerably older than Kimhi. As we shall see presently, it underlies one of the readings of the Greek translation: and the attempts at etymology in the Onomastica [*1] show clearly that the idea arose out of the accident that dg means 'a fish', while the story in 1 Samuel v requires us to picture the god with hands; coupled with vague recollections of the bodily form of the Atargatis of Ashkelon.

If we examine the passage, we note, first, that he had a head and hands, so that he must have been at least partly human. Next we observe that exactly the same phrase is used in describing both falls of the idol. The first time it was unbroken, and the priests could

[p. 101]

put it in its place again. The second time it was fallen again, but the projecting parts of it were broken off. In other words, the first fall of the statue was just as bad as the second, except that it was not broken: there is no statement made that on the second occasion the image, whatever its form, snapped across in the middle. In both cases it fell as a whole, being smashed the second time, just as might happen to a china vase; this would imply that what was left standing and intact was not so much any part of the statue itself, as the pedestal or some other accessory.

The difficulty lies in the words which follow the account of the fracture of the statue--rq dgwn nsh'r `lyw. In the English version these are rendered 'only [the stump of] Dagon was left'. The words in brackets, for which the Hebrew gives no warrant, are inserted as a makeshift to make some kind of sense of the passage. Wellhausen ingeniously suggested omission of the n at the end of dgwn, supposing that it had been inserted by dittography before the initial n of the following word. This would make the word mean 'only his fish was left'. But this assumes the thesis to be proved.

When we turn to the Greek Version we find that it represents a much fuller text. It reads thus: .... The passage in brackets has no equivalent in the Hebrew text: it suggests that a line has been lost from the archetype of the extant Hebrew Version. [*1] If with some MSS. we omit the first xeirun (which makes no satisfactory sense with ixne), this lost line would imply that Dagon's feet were also fallen on the threshold (amafeth = Hebrew hmpththn). This does not accord with the 'fish-tail' hypothesis. But, on the other hand, it shows that the fishtail conception is considerably older than Kimhi, for xeirun must in the first instance have been inserted by a glossator obsessed with it.

And what are we to make of plen e rhaxis ypeleifthe? 'The backbone of Dagon was left' is as meaningless as the traditional Hebrew, if not worse. But when we look back at the Hebrew we begin to wonder whether we may not here be on the track of another Philistine word--the technical term for, let us say, the pedestal or console on which the image stood; or, it may be, some symbol associated with it. Wellhausen (Text d. Buch. Sam. p. 59) has

[p. 102]

put forward the suggestion that rhaxis really depends on rq 'only'. But the translators would presumably have understood this simple word--they have indeed rendered it correctly, by plen. We need a second rq to account for rhaxis, and such, I submit, must have stood in the Hebrew text. Some word like (let us say) rqd, especially if unintelligible to a late Hebrew copyist, would certainly drop out sooner or later from the collocation rq rqd dgwn. It would be very natural for the original author to use such a word, for the sake of the paronomasia; and it would fully account for rhaxis, which in this case is not the Greek word at all, but a transliteration of an unknown word in the Hebrew original. The word amafeth, immediately before, which has given much trouble to the copyists of the Greek text (see the numerous variants in Holmes and Parsons), is an example of an even easier word in the Hebrew being transferred to the Greek untranslated.

Further we are told that the priests and those who entered the house of Dagon--an indication that the temple was open to ordinary worshippers--did not tread on the threshold of the temple in Ashdod, in consequence, it was said, of this catastrophe; but, as the Greek translators add 'overstepping they overstepped it' (yperbainontes). That the explanation was fitted to a much more ancient rite we need not doubt: the various rites and observances relating to thresholds are widespread and this prohibition is no isolated phenomenon. [*1] It is not certain whether the threshold of the Ashdod temple only was thus reverently regarded, or whether the other Dagon temples had similar observances: the latter is probable, though evidently the writer of Samuel supposed that the former was the case. The possible connexion between the Ashdod prohibition and the 'leaping on (preferably over) the threshold' of Zephaniah i. 9, has already been noted.

We must, however, face the fact that Dagon cannot be considered as exclusively a Philistine deity, even though the Semitic etymologies which have been sought for his name are open to question. There are dg 'fish', as already mentioned, and dgn 'corn'. Philo Byblios favoured the second of these. The inscription of Eshmunazar, king of Sidon, is well known to refer to Joppa and Dor as 'ryn dgn, which seems at first sight to mean 'the land of Dagon'. But more probably this is simply a reference to that fertile region as 'the land of corn'. However we have, through Philo, references associating Dagon with the Phoenicians. In the Sanchuniathon cosmogony reported in the

[p. 103]

fragments of Philo we have an account of his birth from Ouranos and Ge, [*1] with his brethren Elos and Kronos and Baetylos; he is equated to Situn 'corn', which is apparently personified; and by virtue of this equation he is identified with a Zeus Arotrios. All this is very nebulous: and not more definite is the curious note respecting the gods Taautos, Kronos, Dagon and the rest being symbolized by sacred letters. [*2] If these passages mean anything at all, they imply that the people who taught the Phoenicians the use of letters (and possibly also of baetylic stones) also imparted to them the knowledge of the god Dagon. But stories which ostensibly reach us at third hand afford a rather unsafe apparatus criticus.

In Palestine itself there is clear evidence of the presence of Dagon before the coming of the Philistines. A certain Dagan-takala contributed two letters [*3] to the Tell el-Amarna correspondence. By ill-luck they do not mention the place of which he was apparently the chieftain, nor do they tell us anything else to the point: the one letter is merely a protestation of loyalty, the other the usual petition for deliverance from the Aramaean invaders. 'Dagan' is not here preceded by the usual determinative prefix of divinity; but neither is the name so preceded in the references to the town of Beth-Dagon in the inscriptions of Sennacherib.

This name, Beth-Dagon, appears in several Palestinian villages. They are not mentioned in the Tell el-Amarna correspondence; and we might fairly infer that they were Philistine foundations but for the fact that the name appears in the list of Asiatic towns conquered by Ramessu III at Medinet Habu--a list probably copied from an earlier list of Ramessu II. There seems no possibility of escaping the conclusion that by  Bty-Dkn which appears in this list, is meant one of the towns called Beth-Dagon. [*4]

Of these villages, one was in the tribe of Asher, another in Judah. The southern village described by Jerome [*5] as of large size,

[p. 104]

was in his time called Caferdago, between Diospolis and Jamnia (Lydd and Yebnah). Jerome's village is probably to be identified with a ruin known as Dajun, close by the present village of Beit Dejan; the latter has preserved the old name and is built on a mound which is possibly the old site.

Moreover, the name Dagan appears in Mesopotamia: there seems no longer to be any doubt that a certain group of cuneiform signs, relating to a deity, is to be read Da-gan. In Babylonia it enters into the composition of proper names of about 2400 B.C.: a king dated 2145 B.C. was Idin-Dagan and he had a son I###353###me-Dagan: a seal-cylinder exists of a certain Dagan-abi son of Ibni-Dagan. In Assyria we find it in the name of Dagan-bilu-usur, eponym of the year 879 B.C.: and the name is several times coupled with that of Anu [*1] in cosmogonies and in invocations of various Assyrian kings. The name disappears after the ninth century: the late reference to Dagon in the Hebrew version of Tobit, chap. i [*2], speaking of Sennacherib being killed bsh`h shnbnm lhchpll lpny dgwn t`wthw 'at the hour when he went in to pray to his idol Dagon', is not of any special importance.

The fragments of Berossos relate how originally the people of Babylon lived like animals, without order: but a being named Oannes rose out of the Erythraean sea, with a complete fish-body, and a man's head under the fish-head, and human feet and voice. This being was a culture-hero, teaching the knowledge of the arts, writing, building, city-dwelling, agriculture, &c., to men: he rose from the sea by day, and returned to it at sunset.

Other fragments of Berossos tell us that Oannes was followed by similar beings, who appeared from time to time under certain of the antediluvian kings. There were in all seven, the second and probably the following four being called Annedotos, and the last being called Odakon ('Udakun or Odakun). The last resembles 'Dagon' in outward form: but the elaborate discussion of Hrozny [*3] has shown that the comparison between the two cannot stand: that the -un of Udakun is a mere termination: that the names Oannes and Odakon (not however Annedotos, so far as has yet been discovered) have their prototypes in Sumerian, and cannot be equated to the Babylonian and Assyrian Dagan. The sole evidence for the fish-form of Dagan therefore disappears. The statements of Damascius (de Principiis,

[p. 105]

c. 125) about a Babylonian divine pair, Daxos and Daxe [*1] add nothing to the problem: as Rev. P. Boylan and Mr. Alton have both pointed out to me, the D is a mistake for an A in both cases, and the beings referred to are evidently Lahmu and Lahamu.

That Dagan and the pre-Philistine Dagon of Palestine are one and the same being can scarcely be questioned. Hrozny (op. cit. p. 103) points out that the difference of the vowel is no difficulty, especially as the name appears once in Assyrian as an element in a proper name in the form Daguna. But we may perhaps ask if the post-Philistine deity was identical with the pre-Philistine god, and whether there may not have been a conflation analogous to that which has taken place between Britomartis and Atargatis.

It is relevant to notice here in passing that the Philistine religion never had any attraction for the reactionary kings of the Hebrews. Only in a rather vague passage (Judges x. 6) is there any indication of the influence of Philistine worship on that of the Israelites. Elsewhere we read of altars built to the abomination of the Zidonians, of Moab, of the Ammonites, but never of the Philistines. The solitary exception is the consultation of the Ekronite oracle, which, as we have seen, was not Philistine at all. In spite of the semitization of the Philistines during the latter part of the Hebrew monarchy, their cult still remained too exotic to attract the Semitic temperament.

Now strange though it may seem, there is a possibility that the Philistines brought with them from their western home a god whose name was similar to Dagon. We have not found any trace of him in or around Crete: the decipherment of the Minoan tablets may possibly tell us something about this in the future. But the Etruscans, kinsmen of the Philistines, had a myth of a certain Tages, who appeared suddenly [*2] from the earth in the guise of a boy, and who, as they related, was their instructor in the arts of soothsaying. This took place 'when an Etruscan named Tarchon was ploughing near Tarquinii'--names which immediately recall the Tarkhu, Tarkon-demos, and similar names of Asia Minor. [*3] Festus (sub voce) describes Tages as a 'genii filius, nepos Iouis'. As the Etruscans rejected the letter D,

[p. 106]

[paragraph continues] Tages is closely comparable to a name beginning with Dag-; and indeed the -es termination is probably not part of the Etruscan name, but a nominative termination added by the foreign writers who have reported the story. If the Philistines brought such a deity with them in their Syrian home, they might well have identified him with the god Dagon, whom they found there before them.

It is difficult otherwise to explain how Dagan, whose worship seems to have been on the whole of secondary importance, should have acquired such supreme importance among the foreigners.

But after all, the Canaanite Dagon and the hypothetical Philistine Dag- may have been one--the latter having been borrowed by the 'proto-Philistines', as we may for convenience call them, at some remote period. The intercourse which led to the adoption of clay tablets as writing materials by the Cretans at the beginning of the middle Minoan period, and to the adoption of certain details of legal procedure (if there be any value in the conjectures given in this book regarding the Phaestos disk)--may well have led to the borrowing of the god of one nation by the other.

The Etymologicon Magnum calls Dagon--or rather Betagun, substituting the place Beth-Dagon for the name of the god--o Kronos ypo Foinikun.

After the collapse of the Philistine power in David's time, we hear nothing more about Dagon except the vague guesses of etymologists and mythographers. The temple, and presumably the worship of the deity, under the old name, lasted down to the time of the Maccabees in Ashdod (1 Macc. x. 83, 84). But in Gaza the case was different. Here powerful Hellenic influences introduced numerous foreign deities, which, however, there is every reason to believe were grafted on to the old local gods and numina. Josephus tells us of a temple of Apollo; but our leading source is the life of Porphyrius, bishop of Gaza at the end of the fourth and beginning of the fifth century, written by his friend the deacon Marcus.

This valuable little work gives us a picture of the last struggle of heathenism, of which Gaza was the storm-centre. The descriptions are terse but vivid. We see Porphyrius, after his appointment to the bishopric, making his way painfully from Diospolis (Lydd) because the heathen living in the villages on the way erected barriers to prevent his passing, and annoyed him by burning substances that gave forth fetid odours. After they had arrived, a drought fell in the same year, which the heathen ascribed to the wrath of Marna their god, on account of the coming of Porphyrius. For two months no rain fell, notwithstanding their prayers to Marna ('whom they say

[p. 107]

is Zeus') in his capacity of lord of rain. There was a place of prayer outside the city, and the whole of the heathen population frequented this for intercession to the kurios tun ombrun. This place was no doubt a sanctuary with an ancient tradition; most probably to be identified with the Aldioma, or place of Zeus Aldemios. This, according to the Etymologicon Magnum, was the name of the chief god of Gaza, and a god of fertility; probably therefore identical with Marna. [*1] We hear of the same sanctuary in the Talmud: near Gaza was a place called Yerid or 'Ithoza (`tlwzh, also written 'tlyz and 'tlym) outside the city where an idol was worshipped. [*2] In the sequel we learn that Porphyrius took from the Aldioma the stones with which he built the church erected by him on the site of the Marneion.

Near modern Gaza is a hill, crowned by the shrine of a Muslim saint called Sheikh Muntar. As usual, this true believer has succeeded to the honours of a pagan divinity. Muntar means 'a watch tower'; but possibly the name is a corruption of Marna or [Brito]martis.

The name Marna is capable of being rendered in Aramaic, Mar-na, [*3] Our Lord,' and not improbably this is its actual meaning. If so, it is probably an illustration of the widespread dislike to, or actual prohibition of, the mention of the real name of a divinity. [*4] At some time a hesitation to name the god--who can hardly be other than Dagon--had arisen: the respectful expression 'Our Lord' had by frequent use become practically the personal name of the divinity, and had assumed a Greek form Marnas, with a temple called the Marneion, the chief temple of Gaza.

It is likely that Gaza at the time claimed to be a sacred city: the rigidness of the tabu against carrying a dead body into it suggests that such an act would pollute it. The Christians had serious trouble, soon after the coming of Porphyrius, on account of the case of one Barochus, a zealous young Christian, who was set upon by heathen outside the city and beaten, as was thought, to death. His friends happening to find him lying unconscious, wished to carry him

[p. 108]

home; but only succeeded in doing so with the greatest difficulty, owing to the uproar caused by their carrying the apparent corpse into the city.

Stirred by events of this kind, Porphyrius determined to invoke the civil power to aid him in his struggle with heathendom, and sending Marcus to Constantinople obtained an order for the closing of the temples of Gaza. As usual, however, in the East, the official responsible for the carrying out of the order did so with one hand, allowing the other hand to be 'greased' to undo the work surreptitiously. In other words, Hilarios, the adjutant sent to carry out the order, and especially charged to close the Marneion and to put a stop to the consultation of the oracle, while appearing to execute the duty committed to him, secretly took bribes to permit the rites of heathen religion to be carried on as before. Porphyrius therefore went in person to Constantinople; interviewed the empress Eudoxia; obtained her favour by the prophecy of the birth of a son to her, which was fulfilled by the birth of Theodosius; and obtained her intercession with the emperor to secure the closing of the temples. So Porphyrius returned with his suite, and was received at Gaza with jubilation on the part of the Christians, and corresponding depression on that of the Pagans.

Some valuable hints are preserved to us by Marcus of the nature of the worship thus destroyed. A few excerpts from his work may be here given.

'As we entered the city, about the place called the Four Ways, there was standing a marble pillar, which they said was Aphrodite; and it was above a stone altar, and the form of the pillar was that of an undraped woman, exoyses ola ta asxema fainomena, [*1] and they all of the city used to honour the pillar, especially the women, lighting lamps and burning incense. For they used to say of her that she used to answer in a dream those who wished to enter into matrimony; and telling falsehoods they used to deceive one another.' The worship of this statue evidently retained some of the most lurid details of the High Place worship. This statue was the first to be destroyed--by a miracle, Marcus says, on the exhibition of the Cross. He is probably mindful of the prostration of Dagon on the Ark being brought into his presence.

Ten days afterwards Cynegius, the emperor's messenger, arrived with a band of soldiers, to destroy the temples, of which there were eight--of the Sun, Aphrodite, Apollo, Kore (Persephone), Hekate,

[p. 109]

the Heroeion, the Tychaion or temple of the Luck (tuxe) of the city, and the Marneion, or temple of the Crete-born Zeus, the most honourable of all the temples, which has already been mentioned. Besides these there were a countless number of minor deities in the houses and the villages. The destroying party first made its way to the Marneion. The priests, however, had been forewarned, and blocked the doors of the inner chamber with great stones. In the inner chamber or adytum they stored the sacred furniture of the temple and the images of the god, and then fled by other exits, of which it was said there were several, opening out of the adyta of the temple in various directions. Baffled therefore for the time, the destroying party made their way to the other temples, which they demolished; Porphyrius, like another Joshua, laying under an anathema any of the Christians who should take to himself any plunder from the treasuries. This work occupied ten days, and the question of the fate of the Marneion was then discussed. Some were for razing it, some for burning it, others again wished to preserve it and after purifying it, to dedicate it for Christian worship. Porphyrius therefore proclaimed a fast with prayer for Divine guidance in the difficulty. The Divine guidance came in strange wise; and though it has nothing to do with the Philistines, the story is so curious that it is well worth relating exactly as Marcus himself tells it. As the people, fasting and praying, were assembled in the church, a child of seven years, standing with his mother, suddenly cried out in the Syrian tongue, 'Burn the temple to the ground: for many hateful things have taken place in it, especially human sacrifices. And in this manner burn ye it. Bring liquid pitch and sulphur and lard, and mix them together and smear the brazen doors therewith, and lay fire to them, and so the whole temple will burn; it is impossible any other way. And leave the outer part (ton ezuteron) with the enclosing wall (peribolos). And after it is burnt, cleanse the place and there build a holy church. I witness to you before God, that it may not be otherwise: for it is not I who speak, but Christ that speaketh in me.' And when they all heard they wondered, and glorified God. And this portent came to the ears of the holy bishop (Porphyrius), who stretching his hands to heaven gave glory to God and said, 'Glory to Thee, Holy Father, who hast hidden from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed even these things to babes.' When the people were dismissed from the church he summoned the child and his mother to him in the bishop's house, and setting the child apart he said to the woman, 'I adjure thee by the Son of the Living God to say if it was on thy suggestion or of some other known to thee that

[p. 110]

thy son spoke as he did concerning the Marneion.' The woman said, 'I deliver myself to the dread and awful judgement-seat of Christ, if I had fore-knowledge of any of those things that my son spoke this day. But if it seem fit to thee, behold the boy, take him and examine him with threats, and if he said these things on the suggestion of any, he will confess it in fear; if he says nothing else it will be clear that he was inspired by the Holy Spirit.' So to make a long story short, the boy was brought in, and the bishop bade him speak and say who had put these words in his mouth--brandishing a whip as he spoke. The poor bewildered child kept silence, even though 'We who were around him '--Marcus speaks as an eye-witness--repeated the questions likewise with threats. At last the child opened his mouth and made exactly the same utterance as before, but this time in Greek--a language of which, as appeared on inquiry from the mother, he was ignorant. This settled the matter, and sealed the fate of the Marneion. The bishop gave three pieces of money to the mother, but the child, seeing them in her hand, said in the Syrian tongue, 'Take it not, mother, sell not thou the gift of God for money!' So the woman returned the money, saying to the bishop, 'Pray for me and my son, and recommend us to God.' And the bishop dismissed them in peace. It is a strange coincidence that the first and last events in the recorded history of Philistia have a mantic prodigy as their central incident!

The reference to human sacrifices is for our immediate purpose the most noteworthy point in this remarkable story. The sequel was equally remarkable. The method approved by the oracle was applied, and immediately the whole temple, which on the first occasion had resisted their assaults, was wrapped in flames. It burnt for many days, during which there was a good deal of looting of treasures; in the course of this at least one fatal accident occurred. At the same time a house-to-house search for idols, books of sorcery, and the like relics of heathenism, was effected, and anything of the kind discovered was destroyed.

When the plan of the new church came to be discussed some were for rebuilding it after the fashion of the old temple; others for making a complete break with heathen tradition by erecting a building entirely different. The latter counsel ultimately prevailed. Important for us is the fact of the dispute, because, a propos thereof Marcus has given us a few words of description which tell us something of what the building was like. It was cylindrical, with two porticoes, one inside the other; in the middle like a ciborium (the canopy above an altar) 'puffed out' (i.e. presumably domed) but stretched upwards (= stilted),

[p. 111]

and it had other things fit for idols and suited to the horrible and lawless concomitants of idolatry. [*1]

This clearly takes us far away from the megaron plan of the old Dagon temple. We have to do with a peristyle circular building, not unlike the Roman Pantheon, but with a stilted dome and surrounded by two rows of columns (see the sketch, p. 124). The 'other things' suitable for idol-worship were presumably the adyta of which we have already heard, which must have been either recesses in the wall or else underground chambers. The apparently secret exits made use of by the priests seem to favour the latter hypothesis. Not improbably they were ancient sacred caves. I picture the temple to myself as resembling the Dome of the Rock at Jerusalem, substituting the double portico for the aisle that runs round that building.

In clearing off the ashes and debris of the Marneion, Porphyrius came upon certain marbles, or a 'marble incrustation'--marmarusis--which the Marna-worshippers considered holy and not to be trodden upon, especially by women. We are of course reminded of the threshold of Dagon at Ashdod, but as we have no information as to the part of the temple to which the marbles belonged, we cannot say if there was any very close analogy. Porphyrius, we are told, paved the street with these sacred stones, so that not only men, but 'women, dogs, pigs, and beasts' should be compelled to tread upon them--a proceeding which we learn caused more pain to the idolaters than even the destruction of their temple. 'But yet to this day', says Marcus, 'most of them, especially the women, will not tread on the marbles.'

On coins of Gaza of the time of Hadrian a different temple is represented, with an ordinary distyle front. This type bears the inscription GAZA MARNA, with figures of a male and female divinity, presumably Marna and Tyche. The coin is evidence that the distyle temple--the old megaron type--survived in Gaza till this time, and it is not improbable that the Marneion destroyed by Porphyrius was built immediately afterwards. The resemblance to the Dome of the Rock at Jerusalem may be more than merely superficial. This structure was built on the ruins of Hadrian's temple of Jupiter, the Dodecapylon, which he erected over the sacred Rock, when he made his determined effort to paganize the Holy City. We have no description of this building, which was already in ruins in AD. 333; but its situation seems to require a round or symmetrically polygonal structure, and the name dodecapylon suggests a twelve-sided

[p. 112]

building. The Dome of the Rock (an octagon) may well have been built after this model; and the Pantheon, which has also been compared with the building indicated by the account of Marcus, is likewise of the time of Hadrian. The Marneion, therefore, might have been erected under the auspices of that enthusiastic builder, or at least after the model of other buildings which he had left behind

Click to enlarge
Fig. 5. Coins of Gaza and Ashkelon

Fig. 5. Coins of Gaza and Ashkelon:--1. Coin of Gaza showing Temple of Marna. 2. Coin of Gaza bearing the figure and name of Io, and a debased Phoenician M, the symbolic initial of Marna. [*1] 3. Coin of Gaza bearing the figure and name of Minos. 4. Coin of Gaza bearing the initial of Marna. 5. Coin of Ashkelon, with the sacred fishpond. 6. Coin of Ashkelon, with figure of Astarte. 7. Coin of Ashkelon, with figure bearing a dove: below, a sea-monster. 8. Coin of Ashkelon, with figure of a dove.

him in Palestine. This would give a date for the break with the tradition of the old building. The sacred marbles might well have been some stones preserved from the old structure, and on that account of peculiar sanctity.

The rest of the acts of Porphyrius do not concern us, though we may note that there was a well in the courtyard of the Marneion,

[p. 113]

as we learn from the account of a miracle performed by him soon after the erection of the church.

Jerome, in his Life of Hilarion, [*1] narrates sundry miraculous events, especially a remarkable victory in the circus by a Christian combatant, in which even the pagans were compelled to acknowledge Marnas victus a Christo. Epiphanius of Constantia in his Ancoratus, p. 109, [*2] enumerating a number of persons who have been deified, speaks of Marnas the slave of Asterios of Crete as having so been honoured in Gaza. Here again the persistent Cretan tradition appears, but what the value or even the meaning of this particular form of it may be we cannot say. Mr. Alton has ingeniously suggested to me that Epiphanios saw and misunderstood a dedicatory inscription from the old sanctuary inscribed MARNAi ACTERIui KRETAGENEi.

Outside Gaza there is scarcely any hint of Marna-worship. The name is used as an expletive in Lampridius's Life of Alexander Severus: and Waddington [*3] reports an inscription from Kanata (Kerak), built into a modern wall, and reading ANNEL[O]C KAMACANOY EPOECE DII MARNAi Tui KYRIui. But Annelos very likely was a native of Gaza. A well-known statue found many years ago near Gaza, and now in the Imperial Ottoman Museum at Constantinople, has been supposed to represent Marna; but there is no evidence of this. The eccentric Lady Hester Stanhope found a similar statue at Ashkelon, but destroyed it.

Certain heathenized Jews of Constantia adored as deities Marthus (or Marthys) and Marthana, the daughters of a certain false prophet of the time of Trajan, by name Elzai [*4]: but this is hardly more than a coincidence.

In Ashkelon, also, there was a special deity in late Pagan times. This was Asklepios leontouxos, once referred to by Marinus, writing in the fifth century A. D. [*5] It may be that this is the deity spoken of in the Talmud, which mentions a temple of Saripa (tzryp') at Ashkelon, evidently a form of Serapis. [*6] But we know nothing of 'Asclepius the lion-holder' but his name. Probably the name of the town suggested a dedication to the similarly sounding Asclepius, just as it suggested the word ACFALEC on the coins of the city. Asclepius does not appear, so far as I can find, on any coins of Ashkelon. Mars, Neptune,

[p. 114]

the genius of the city, and Aphrodite Urania, are the deities generally found on the coins: once or twice the latter is represented standing on lions. [*1] On other coins an erection is represented which may be the limn or fish-pond for which the sanctuary was famous (see fig. 5, p. 112).

Footnotes

^92:1 Neither will he feel any necessity to picture John the Baptist feeding on locust-pods instead of locusts, which the fellahin still eat with apparent relish.

^92:2 For Babylonian omens derived from various insects see Hunger, Babylonische Tieromina in Mitt. vorderas. Gesell. (1909), 3.

^94:1 i. 105.

^94:2 Some have compared with this the outbreak of disease consequent on the capture of the Ark. But the two are entirely independent. The Scythian disease, whatever it may have been, was not bubonic plague, and the Philistine disease was not a hereditary curse. (The Scythian disease is much more like the cess noinden or 'childbirth pangs' with which the men of Ulster were periodically afflicted in consequence of the curse of Macha, according to the Irish legend of the Tain Bo Cuailnge. This is supposed to be a distorted tradition of the custom of the couvade, a theory which only adds difficulties to the original obscurity of the myth.)

^94:3 Clermont-Ganneau, discussing this inscription (Acad. des Inscriptions, 1909), acutely points out that aigeion, yikon are neuter adjectives, depending on some such word as zuion, so that all animals of these species are forbidden: whereas female animals of the cow kind alone are forbidden, so that bulls are lawful. Such limitations of the admissible sacrificial animals are well known in analogous inscriptions: [p. 95] the triple prohibition in this case probably corresponds to the triple dedication, the purpose being to secure that none of the three deities in joint ownership of the altar shall be offended by a sacrifice unlawful in his or her worship. Other inscriptions are quoted in the same article showing a considerable intercourse between the Ashkelonites and the island of Delos.

^95:1 De Dea Syria, 14.

^95:2 See a careful discussion in Baethgen, Beitr. 71 ff.

^96:1 'Cretes Dianam religiosissime venerantur, brithomarten gentiliter nominantes quod sermone nostro sonat uirginem dulcem.'--Solinus, Polyhistor. ch. xvi.

^98:1 'Iope Phoenicum, antiquior terrarum inundatione, ut ferunt. Insidet collem praeiacente saxo, in quo uinculorum Andromedae uestigia ostendunt; colitur illic fabulosa <Der>ceto.'--Hist. Nat. v. xiii. 69.

^99:1 Possibly some apparently irrational prohibition of a palatable species is at the base of the half-humorous stories of the greedy queen.

^99:2 Assuming the trophy to have been exposed in the same town as the body--which is nowhere stated--then even if it were actually hung in the temple of 'Ashtaroth' (i.e. Atargatis-Britomartis), there was probably a temple of Dagon also in the town, to give rise to the parallel tradition.

^99:3 'Nabo autem et ipsum idolum est quod interpretatur prophetia et divinatio, quam post Euangelii ueritatem in toto orbe conticuisse significat. Siue, iuxta LXX, Dagon, qui tamen in Hebraico non habetur. Et est idolum Ascalonis, Gazae, et reliquarum urbium Philisthiim.'

^100:1 ... (Vatican Onomasticon, ed. Lagarde, p. 215): 'Dagon piscis tristitiae' (Jerome, Liber interpret. hebraic. nominum, ed. Lagarde, p. 62). The analysis suggested is dg-'wn. It reminds one of Stephanus of Byzantium's story about Ashdod: ....

^101:1 Probably two adjacent lines ended thus:

dgwn wshthy

hmpthn wshthy

and the homoeoteleuton caused the scribe's eye to wander.

^102:1 On the whole subject see H. C. Trumbull, The Threshold Covenant, or the Beginning of Religious Rites (Edinburgh, 1896).

^103:1 ....--Frag. Philo Byblios 13, Muller, Fragmm. iii, p. 567.

^103:2 ....--ib. p. 569.

^103:3 Winckler, 215, 216; Knudtzon, 317, 318.

^103:4 See Max Muller, Egyptian Researches, i. 49, plate 68.

^103:5 De situ et nominibus locorum, ed. Lagarde, p. 138.

^104:1 See Jensen, Kosmologie der Babylonier, pp. 449-456, and Paton's article 'Dagan' in Hastings's Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics.

^104:2 Ed. Neubauer, p. 20, xlvii.

^104:3 Sumerisch-babylonische Mythen von dem Gotte Ninrag (Mitth. der vorderas. Gesell. (1903), 5).

^105:1 ....

^105:2 Cf. the sudden appearances of Britomartis in Aegina, Pausanias, II. xxx. 3.

^105:3 See Cic. de Divinatione, ii. 23.

^107:1 Aldemios was probably another name of Marna. The Etymologicon Magnum gives us ....--Etym. Magn. ed: Gaisford, col. 58. 20.

^107:2 Neubauer, Geog. d. Talmud. With Yerid compare 'Ain Yerdeh, the name of a spring outside the important city of Gezer.

^107:3 It is probably a mere coincidence that there was a river-god of the same name at Ephesus, mentioned on coins of that city of the time of Domitian (MARNAC or EFECIUN MARNAC), as well as in an inscription from an aqueduct at Ephesus, now in the British Museum. See Roscher, Lexicon, s.v.

^107:4 The word Mar, 'Lord,' is used in the modern Syrian church as a title of respect for saints and bishops. A pagan name mrychb (= mry ychb, 'Mar has given') illustrates its application to divinity.

^108:1 The fish-tail has now disappeared.

^111:1 ....

^112:1 ....--Damascius.

^113:1 Ed. Migne, xxiii. 27.

^113:2 Ed. Migne, xliii. 209: ....

^113:3 Inscriptions, in Le Bas, Voyage archeologique en Grece . . .

^113:4 Epiphanius, Contra Haeres. I. xix.

^113:5 ....--Marinus, Vita Procli, ch. 19.

^113:6 Hildesheimer, Beitrage zur Geog. Palastinas, p. 3.

^114:1 See De Saulcy, Numismatique de la Terre Sainte.

The Philistines, by R.A.S. Macalister, [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

IV. THEIR PLACE IN HISTORY AND CIVILIZATION

A people, or rather a group of peoples, the remnant--the degenerate remnant if you will--of a great civilization, settled on the Palestine coast. They found before them a servile aboriginal population ready to their use, who could relieve them of the necessary but unaccustomed labour of extracting life and wealth from the prolific soil. They were thus free to cultivate the commercial facilities which were already established in the land they made their own. Gaza, Ashkelon, and Ashdod had harbours which opened the way to trade by sea. The great land route from Egypt to Babylon passed right through the heart of the country from end to end--Gaza was from the beginning the principal mart for northern Arabia: in the expressive words of Principal G. A. Smith, we hear the jingling of shekels in the very name of Ashkelon. Corn and wine were produced abundantly within their favoured territory, even in years when the rest of the country suffered famine; an active slave-trade (one of the most lucrative sources of wealth) centred in Philistia, as we learn from the bitter denunciation of Amos. Small wonder then that the lords of the Philistines could offer an enormous bribe to a wretched woman to betray her husband. Small wonder that the Philistines were the carriers and controllers of the arts of civilization in Palestine.

The settlement of the Philistines in Palestine falls in that period of fog, as we may call it, when the iron culture succeeds the bronze in the Eastern Mediterranean. Recent excavations have given us a clear-cut picture of the development of civilization during the bronze age; that wonderful history which was sketched in its barest outline in the course of Chapter I. Then a cloud seems to settle down on the world, through which we can dimly perceive scenes of turmoil, and the shifting of nations. When the mist rolls away it is as though a new world is before us. We see new powers on earth, new gods in heaven: new styles of architecture, new methods of warfare: the alphabet has been invented, and above all, iron has become the metal of which the chief implements are made. Crete and the great days of Egypt belong to the past: the glorious days of classical Greece are the goal before us.

[p. 115]

The chief interest of the Philistines lies in this, that their history falls almost entirely within this period of obscurity, when the iron age of Europe was in its birth-throes. They and their kin, the Zakkala in the east and Turisha in the west, bridge the gap between the old world and the new. It is owing to them that the reminiscences of the days of Crete were handed across a couple of troubled centuries, to form the basis of new civilizations in Greece, in Italy, and in the East.

Our materials for estimating the culture of the Philistines and their place in civilization are the following: (1) The Phaestos Disk; (2) The Medinet Habu sculptures; (3) The results of excavation in Philistia; (4) Scattered Biblical references.

 

(1) On the Phaestos Disk are forty-five characters. Of some of these it is not very easy to determine the signification, but others have some value as indicating the nature of the civilization of those who invented its script, and its analogues.

The writing, running from right to left, is in the same direction as the Carian inscriptions, but not as the Minoan linear tablets.

The plumed head-dress of the sign here called M has been referred to as being the link which connects this disk with Caria on the one hand and with the Philistines on the other. A. J. Reinach (Revue archeologique, Ser. V, vol. xv, pp. 26, 27) publishes Sardinian statuettes showing the same form of head-dress. The Sardinians being probably a later stage in the history of one branch of the sea-peoples, it is natural that they should show an analogous equipment.

The sign a, a man running, shows the simple waist-band which forms the sole body-covering of the Keftian envoys.

The sign b, a captive with arms bound behind, has no more covering than a girdle. The symbol z appears to represent a handcuff or fetter. Perhaps Samson was secured with some such fastening.

The sign c from its small size appears to represent a child. He is clad in a tunic fitting closely to the body and reaching barely to the hips. No doubt, as often in Egypt ancient and modern, in some of the remoter parts of Palestine and among the Bedawin, young children went naked.

Fig. d represents a woman. She has long flowing hair, and seems to be wearing a single garment not unlike the fustan of the modern Palestinian peasant, the upper part of which, however, has been dropped down over the lower so as to expose the body from the girdle upwards. Hall, in a recent article in the Journal of Hellenic Studies, shows that the figure has Mycenaean analogies.

[p. 116]

Fig. e, with the shaved head, perhaps represents a slave. A figure-of-eight (an ownership mark in tatu) is represented on the cheek. [*1]

Click to enlarge

Fig. f may represent a sandalled foot; fig. g may possibly represent a closed hand; but both are doubtful. Figs. h and i possibly represent a breast and membrum muliebre respectively, though the

[p. 117]

former may be a Phrygian cap. The interpretation of these four signs is too uncertain to allow us to attach any weight to them.

In figs. j and k we may possibly see the sacred doves, and in l the sacred fish. But this cannot be pressed. The ram's head (o), the hoof (p), the horn (q), and the hide (s) all indicate a pastoral life. The symbols t, u, y, w, x, y are drawn from the plant world, and it must be noticed that those who developed the script of the Disk showed an unusual appreciation of plant-shapes. It is quite remarkable to find such a variety of floral symbols.

The sign sz is probably a section of a river, suggestive of water.

The sign d is very remarkable. It is almost certainly a representation of a domed house, such as is imitated in the Lycian tombs. It may be the prototype of one of the 'palaces of Ashdod'! The sign z is a pillar with a square capital. The curious sign th may represent some kind of key.

Very important is the ship, fig. e. It is one more link with the Medinet Habu sculptures, in which, as we shall see, an identical ship makes its appearance.

The bow and arrow, figs. k, l, are especially interesting. Reinach (op. cit. p. 35) ingeniously points out that it is a true picture of the bow of the Lycian Pandarus, made of two horns of the wild goat fixed and bound on a piece of wood.

...

Iliad, iv. 105-11.

The curved poignard (r) has also Lycian and Carian analogies (Reinach, op. cit. p. 35). The axe (m), square (s), plane (t), signet-ring (ps), and leather-cutter's knife (f), the latter perforated with a hole in the butt for suspension, all show the specializing of tools which is a characteristic of civilization.

Of especial importance is the round shield with bosses (x). It is not Cretan: the Cretan shield is a long oval. But the Sherdanian warriors at Medinet Habu bear the round bossed shield, and Reinach (op. cit. p. 30) figures an Etruscan statuette which bears an identical protection.

The other signs (p, s, t, x and f) are not sufficiently clear to identify (t may be an astragalus, used in games, and p may be an adze). But enough will have been said to show that quite apart

[p. 118]

from its literary value, the Phaestos Disk is of very considerable importance as a document in the history of Aegean civilization.

(2) We now turn to the sculptures on the temple of Medinet Habu. Here we have precious illustrations of costumes, vehicles, and arms.

Click to enlarge
Fig. 7. Wagons of the Pulasati.

Click to enlarge
Fig. 8. The Head-dress of the Pulasati.

The Pulasati wear a plumed head-dress, the plumes being fitted into an elaborately embroidered band encircling the temples, and secured by a chin-strap passing in front of the ears. The other tribes wear similar head-dresses, except the Shekelesh, who have a cap. The Zakkala are represented as beardless. Their sole body-costume is the waistband, though some of them seem to have bracelets or armlets, and bands or straps crossing the upper part of the body. The women have the close-fitting fustan; the children are naked.

The land contingent travel in wagons, of a square box-like shape, some with framed, some with wickerwork sides. They have two solid wheels, secured to the axle by a linch-pin; and are drawn

[p. 119]

Click to enlarge
Fig. 9. The Sea-fight between Ramessu III and the Allies.

[p. 120]

by four oxen abreast. The sea-contingent travel in ships which show a marked resemblance to that of the Phaestos Disk. The keel is curved (more so at Medinet Habu than at Phaestos) and both bow and stem rise high above the deck, with ornamental finials. A rudder-oar projects from the stem; and at Medinet Habu (not at Phaestos) a mast rises from the middle of the boat, with a yard and a lug-sail. The ships are fitted with oars, which in the summary Phaestos hieroglyphic are not shown.

The warriors in the coalition are armed with a sword and with the long Carian spear; they have also daggers and javelins for throwing, and carry circular shields.

A number of enamelled tablets, once forming part of the decoration of the temple, have been described, [*1] and these add some further valuable details. They show prisoners in full costume, not the summary fighting costume. A number of these do not concern us, being Semitic or North African; but a Shekelesh, a Philistine, and one of the Turisha are represented, if Daressy's identifications are to be accepted. Unfortunately there is no explanatory inscription with the figures.

The Shekelesh has a yellow-coloured skin, a small pointed beard, not meeting the lower lip. His hair is combed backward, in a way remarkably similar to the hair of the woman in the Phaestos disk (or he wears a crimped head-dress). He is apparelled in a gown, black with yellow circles above, green below, with vertical folds; over this is a waistband divided into coloured squares by bands of green. On his breast he wears an amulet, in the shape of a ring suspended round his neck by a cord. A sort of torque [or a chain] surrounds his neck, and his hands are secured in a handcuff.

The Philistine is more fully bearded: he has likewise a yellow-coloured skin. The top of the tablet is unfortunately broken, so only the suggestion of the plumed head-dress is to be seen. He wears a long white robe with short sleeves, quatrefoil ornament embroidered upon it, and with some lines surrounding the neck; over this is a waistband extending from the knees up to the breast, with elaborate embroidery upon it: a tassel hangs in the middle. On the arms are bracelets. The face of this prisoner is of a much more refined cast than any of the others.

The supposed Turisha has a red skin: his costume resembles that of the Philistine, but it is less elaborately embroidered. Three long ornamental tassels hang from the waistband.

(3) In a country like Palestine, frequently plundered and possessing

[p. 121]

a climate that does not permit of the preservation of frescoes and similar ancient records, we cannot hope to find anything like the rich documentation that Egypt offers us on the subject of commerce. Some suggestive facts may, however, be learnt from finds made in recent excavations, more especially pottery with coloured decoration. This will be found described in the section on pottery in my Excavation of Gezer, vol. ii, pp. 128-241.

Click to enlarge
Fig. 10. A Bird, as painted on an Amorite and a Philistine Vase respectively.

Putting aside details, for which I may refer the reader to that work, it may be said that the periods, into which the history down to the fall of the Hebrew monarchy is divided, are five in number; to these have been given the names pre-Semitic, and First to Fourth Semitic. The Second Semitic, which I have dated 1800-1400 B.C., the time which ends in the Tell el-Amarna period, shows Egyptian and Cypriote influence in its pottery, and here for the first time painted ornament becomes prominent. The figures are outlined in broad brush strokes, and the spaces are filled in afterwards, wholly

[p. 122]

or partly, with strokes in another colour. The subjects are animals, birds, fishes, and geometrical patterns generally, and there can be little doubt that they are crude local imitations of models of Late Minoan ware, directly imported into the country. The Third Semitic, 1400-1000 B.C., includes the time of the Philistine supremacy: and though I have dated the beginning of the period rather earlier than the time of their arrival, the peculiar technique of painted pottery that distinguishes it need not be dated so early, and may well have been introduced by them, as it certainly comes to an abrupt end about the time of their fall. In this there is a degeneration observable as compared with the best work of the Second Semitic ware. The designs had in fact become 'hieratic', and the fine broad lines in several colours had given place to thin-line monochrome patterns, which will be found illustrated in the book referred to.

The Philistines thus, in this particular art, show an inferiority to their Semitic predecessors. The reason is simple: they were removed farther in time from the parent designs. But the sudden substitution of the fine-line technique of the Third Semitic period for the broad-line technique of the Second, while the general plan of the designs remains the same, can be most easily accounted for by the assumption that the art passed from one race to another. And the sudden disappearance of the fine-line technique coincides so completely with the subjugation of the Philistines, that we can hardly hesitate to call painted ware displaying the peculiar Third Semitic characters 'Philistine'. This may be a valuable help for future exploration.

The five graves found at Gezer, of which a fully illustrated detailed description will be found in Excavation of Gezer, vol. i, pp. 289-300, were so absolutely different from native Palestinian graves of any period that unless they were those of Philistines or some other foreign tribe they would be inexplicable. They were oblong rectangular receptacles sunk in the ground and covered with large slabs. Each contained a single body stretched out (not crouched, as in the Canaanite interments), the head, with one exception, turned to the east. Ornaments and food-deposits were placed around. The mouth-plate found on some of the skeletons was an important link with Cretan tradition, and the graves, as a whole, show decided kinship with the shaft-graves of Knossos or Mycenae, although naturally the art-centre has shifted to Cyprus, which was the origin of such of the deposits as had no Egyptian analogies. The bones from these tombs presented analogies with Cretan bones (seep. 60 ante); but of course five skeletons are quite insufficient as a basis for anthropological deductions.

With further excavation the debt of Palestinian civilization to the

[p. 123]

[paragraph continues] Philistines will probably be found to be even greater than the foregoing paragraphs would suggest. Briefly, the impression which the daily study of objects found in excavation has made on the present writer is, that from about 1400-1200 B.C. onwards to about 800 B.C. Western Palestine was the scene of a struggle between the Aegean and Egyptian civilizations, with a slight mingling of Mesopotamian influence, and that the local tribes took a merely passive interest in the conflict and made no contribution whatever to its development.

(4) The Biblical and other literary sources point to the same conclusion.

Let us take as an illustration the art of Architecture. It is notable that the only Palestine temples we read about in the Old Testament, until the building of Solomon's temple, are the houses of the Philistine deities. [*1] Yahweh has a simple tent; the Canaanite deities have to be content with their primitive High Places--open areas of ground with rude pillar-stones. But Gaza, Ashdod, and Beth-Shan have their temples, and most likely the place called Beth-Car and some of the Beth-Dagons derived their Semitic names from some conspicuous temples of gods of the Philistine pantheon.

We can deduce something as to the architecture of the Gaza temple from the account of its destruction by Samson (Judges xvi). There were two groups of spectators--a large crowd (the figure 3000 need not be taken literally) on the roof, and the lords and their attendants inside. If Samson was also inside, those on the roof could not have seen him, for no hypaethrum of any probable size would have allowed any considerable number to enjoy the sport. Samson must therefore have been outside the temple; and it follows that the lords and their attendants must have been, not in an enclosed naos, but under an open portico. That is to say, the structure must have been a building of the megaron type. When Samson rested--just where we should expect, at the edge of the grateful shade of the portico, where he could the more quickly recover his strength but would be at a respectful distance from the Philistine notables--he seized the wooden pillars of the portico, which probably tapered

[p. 124]

downwards in the Mycenean style. He pushed them off their bases by 'bowing himself with all his might', and, the portico being distyle and having thus no other support, he brought the whole structure down. Only a megaron plan will satisfy all the conditions of the story.

Buildings such as this must have been familiar to David in Gath, and perhaps the sight of them suggested to his mind the idea of erecting a more worthy temple to his own Deity, as soon as he came into his kingdom. And when the work was carried out by Solomon, we see that the same model was followed.

Click to enlarge
Fig. 11. Sketch-plans and Elevations of the Marneion at Gaza and of Solomon's Temple (accessory buildings omitted). The dimensions of the latter are figured in cubits: the former is not to scale.

The description in 1 Kings vi, vii is not an architect's specification, and it has numerous technical terns hard to understand. Many attempts have been made to design a building which should conform to this account, helped out by the not always trustworthy Josephus. The mutual incompatibility of these restorations (to say nothing of their prima facie architectural improbability) is sufficient to deter the present writer from attempting to add to their number. The main

[p. 125]

lines of the description are, however, clear enough to show with what kind of building we have to deal. We need not attempt to assign a place to the subsidiary external buildings in three stories, their winding stairs and other appurtenances, erected against the outside of the main structure. But we note that the latter was oblong, 60 cubits long, 30 cubits high, and 20 cubits broad. These figures show a classical sense of proportion for which we look in vain in any ancient building that excavation has revealed in Palestine. A portico in front, of the breadth of the house, was 20 cubits broad and 10 cubits deep. Here again the dimensions are proportioned. The portico was distyle, like that in the temple of Gaza: the two pillars were called by names which show that they were NOT masseboth--'the stablisher' and 'strength in it' are very suitable names for pillars that have to bear the responsibility of keeping up a heavy portico. These pillars had shafts 18 cubits long, and capitals 5 cubits high--a total length of 23 cubits, which leaves, when subtracted from the height of the building, 7 cubits, a margin that is just about sufficient for the entablature above and the plinth below. At the opposite end of the building 'the oracle' or 'the most holy place' corresponds exactly to the opisthodomos. It was 20 cubits square, which left a naos, measuring 30 cubits by 20, in the middle of the building: the 'forty cubits' of 1 Kings vi. 16 evidently includes the portico.

With regard to the ordinary domestic architecture of the Philistines, it must be admitted that the excavations which have been made in Philistine towns do not lead us to infer that they were on the whole much better housed than their Semitic neighbours. Amos,  true, speaks of the 'palaces' of Gaza and Ashdod (i. 8, iii. 9); but this is rather a favourite word ('rmnwth) of the prophet's, and he finds 'palaces' in other towns as well. To a rough herdsman many buildings would look palatial, which when viewed from another standpoint would hardly make the same impression.

One of the Philistine tombs at Gezer contained a small knife of iron; and this leads us at once to a discussion of fundamental importance.

Inserted into the account of the battle of Michmash there is a very remarkable passage (1 Sam. xiii. 19-23). It is corrupt, and some parts of it cannot be translated, but the meaning of it seems to be something like this: 'Now there was no smith found throughout all the land of Israel, for the Philistines said, "Lest the Hebrews make them sword or spear." But all the Israelites went down to the Philistines to sharpen every man his share, and his coulter, and his axe and his ox-goad (?).' The next verse is too corrupt to translate, and then the passage proceeds: 'In the day of battle there was neither

[p. 126]

sword nor spear in the hand of any of the people, except with Saul and Jonathan themselves.'

This is sometimes referred to as a 'disarmament', but there is no hint of anything of the kind. It simply says that the Philistines kept the monopoly of the iron trade in their own hands, and naturally restricted the sale of weapons of offence to the Hebrews, just as modern civilized nations have regulations against importing firearms among subject or backward communities. The Hebrews were just emerging from the bronze age culture. Iron agricultural implements, which seem slightly to precede iron war-weapons, had been introduced among them [*1]; but the novelty of iron had not worn off by the time of Solomon when he built his temple without the profaning touch of this metal (1 Kings vi. 7)--just as when Joshua made flint knives to perform the sacred rite of circumcision (Joshua v. 2); the old traditions must be maintained in religious functions. The champions of the Philistines, of course, were able to use iron freely, although for defensive purposes they still use bronze. [*2]

Goliath had a bronze helmet, a bronze cuirass of scale-armour (not a mail-coat, as in the English translation), bronze greaves, and a bronze 'javelin', but a spear with a great shaft and a heavy head of iron. The armour of 'Ishbi-benob' was probably similar, but the text is corrupt and defective. The armour of Goliath is indeed quite Homeric, and very un-Semitic. The kynen pagxalkos, the xalkoknemides, [*3] and the enormous spear--

... [*4]--

are noteworthy in this connexion, especially the greaves, the Hebrew word for which (mtzchth) occurs nowhere else. The thurax lepidutos alone would seem post-Homeric, but this is an argumentum e silentio. Fragments of a scale-cuirass, in iron, and of a rather later date, were found in the excavation of Tell Zakariya, overlooking the scene where the battle is laid (Excavations in Palestine, p. 150). But the culture that Goliath's equipment illustrates, like his ordeal by single combat, is much more European or Aegean than Palestinian.

[p. 127]

In the report of Wen-Amon we found that the Zakkala were busy in the Phoenician ports, and had large influence in Phoenicia. The representations of Phoenician ships, such as the sadly damaged fresco which W. Max Muller has published, [*1] shows them to have been identical in type with the ships of the Pulasati. It is highly probable that further research will show that it was due to the influence of the 'Peoples of the Sea' that the Phoenicians were induced to take to their very un-Semitic seafaring life. And it is also probable that it was due to Zakkala influence that the same people abandoned the practice of circumcision, as Herodotus says they did when they had commerce with 'Greeks'. [*2]

An interesting question now arises. Was it to the Philistines and their kinsmen that the civilized world owes the alphabet? The facts that suggest this query may be briefly stated. For countless generations the Egyptians, the Babylonians, and probably the Hittites, had been lumbering away with their complex syllabaries; scripts as difficult to learn and to use as is the Chinese of to-day. As in China, the complexity of the scripts was a bar to the diffusion of learning: the arts of reading and writing were perforce in the hand of specially trained guilds of scribes. No one thought of the possibility of simplifying the complexities; while current 'hieratic' forms of the letters might come into being with hasty writing, all the elaborate machinery of syllables and ideograms and determinatives was retained without essential modification.

Suddenly we find that a little nation in Syria appears to have hit upon a series of twenty-two easily-written signs by which the whole complex system of the sounds of their language can be expressed with sufficient clearness. If it was really the Phoenicians, of all people, who performed this feat of analysis, it was one of the most stupendous miracles in the history of the world. That the Phoenicians ever originated the alphabet, or anything else, becomes more and more impossible to believe with every advance of knowledge.

The alphabet makes its appearance soon after the movements of the 'sea-peoples'. Zakar-Baal is found keeping his accounts, not on clay tablets (and therefore not in cuneiform) but on papyrus, which he imports from Egypt in large quantities. And we are tempted to ask if the characters he used were some early form of the signs of the so-called 'Phoenician' alphabet.

The oldest specimen of this alphabet yet found has come to light in Cyprus: the next oldest is the far-famed Moabite Stone.

[p. 128]

[paragraph continues] W. Max Muller [*1] cleverly infers from some peculiarities in the rendering of names in the list of Sheshonk's captured towns, that the scribe of that document was working from a catalogue in which the names were written in the Phoenician alphabet. This would bring the use of this alphabet in Palestine back to about 930 B.C., or about a century earlier than the Moabite Stone. A letter in neo-Babylonian cuneiform, probably not much earlier than this, and certainly of local origin, was found at Gezer: the date of the introduction of the Phoenician alphabet is thus narrowed down very closely.

Whence came the signs of this alphabet? De Rouge's theory, which derived them from Egyptian hieratic, was the most reasonable of any, but no longer commands favour. There was for long a script of linear signs, strangely resembling the Phoenician alphabet, in use in Crete. It must be admitted, however, that so far no very satisfactory analogies have been drawn between them, though their comparison is not without promise of future fruit.

But in this connexion the Phaestos Disk once more seems to assume importance. We are inclined to ask if it is possible that in the script of which this document is so far the sole representative, we are to see the long-sought origin? It is not unreasonable to suppose that in process of time the script of the Disk would become simplified into just such a linear script as that alphabet: and the principle of elision of the terminal vowel of syllables, already noticed in analysing the inscription on the Disk, is just what is wanted to help the process of evolution over that last most difficult fence, which divides a syllabary from a pure alphabet. Suppose that three syllables, ka, ko, ku, represented each by a special symbol, lost their vowel under certain grammatical or euphonic conditions; then all three being simply pronounced k might in writing become confused, leading ultimately to the choice of one of the syllabic signs to denote the letter k. Thus an alphabet of consonants would develop, which is just what we have in the Phoenician alphabet. The 45 +x characters of the original script--for we have no guarantee that we have all the characters of the script represented on the disk--could very easily wear down by some such process as this to the twenty-two signs of the Phoenician alphabet.

As to the forms of the letters, in the total absence of intermediate links, and our total ignorance of the phonetic value of the Phaestos signs, it would be premature to institute any elaborate comparisons between the two scripts. The Phaestos Disk is dated not later than

[p. 129]

[paragraph continues] 1600 B.C., the Phoenician alphabet cannot be traced even so far back as about 1000 B.C., and what may have happened in the intervening six hundred years we do not know. But some arresting comparisons are already possible. The symbol which I have called (h) might well in rapid writing develop into the Phoenician sign aleph. The little man running (a) is not unlike some forms of tzade. The head (e) both in name and shape reminds us of resh. The dotted triangle (i) recalls daleth or teth, the fish (l) in name and to some extent in shape suggests nun--it is notable that the fish on the Disk always stands upright on its tail--the five-leaved sprig (w) is something like samekh, the water-sign (sz) might be mem (the three teeth of the Phoenician letter preserving the three lines of the original sign). The manacles (z) resembles beth, the nail-pillar or prop (z) resembles nay in both shape and meaning, the remarkable key (th) simplifies into zayin, the square (s) into gimel, and the object (p) whatever it may be, into pe. These tentative equivalents have been added for comparison to the table of characters on p. 116. The direction of writing is from right to left in each case.

The plumed head-dress, so conspicuous as a sign on the Disk, connects it with the Philistines: and the evidence of forded us by the Golenischeff papyrus of the Syrian colonies of Philistines, or of their near kinsmen the Zakkala, links it with the Phoenicians. How far it may be possible to make further comparisons, with the various scripts of Crete, Cyprus, and Asia Minor, are questions which must be left for future discoveries and for special research.

We are not here writing a history of the alphabet: but one or two points may be noticed which have a bearing on the subject. It is commonly assumed that because the names of the letters have a meaning in Semitic, and no meaning in Greek, therefore they are Semitic words adapted into Greek. This is, however, a non sequitur. [*1] It would be more probable that the borrowing nation should cast about for words similar in sound, and possessing a meaning which would make the names of the letters easily remembered. Such an attempt would be sure to be unsuccessful in some cases: and in point of fact there are several letter-names in the Semitic alphabet to which the tortures of the Inquisition have to be applied before a meaning can be extracted from them through Semitic. It may thus be that all the letter-names are a heritage from some pre-Hellenic, non-Semitic language: and instead of the old idea of a Phoenician Ur-Alphabet from which all the South Semitic, North African, West

[p. 130]

[paragraph continues] Asian, Hellenic, and Italic alphabetic scripts are derived, we are to picture a number of parallel and nearly related alphabets developing out of one of the hieroglyphic syllabaries of the Aegean basin--one of which scripts was taught to the Phoenicians by the despised Philistines. Whoever invented the alphabet laid the foundation-stone of civilization. Can it be that we owe this gift to the Philistines, of all people?

And even this is not all. The rude tribes of Israel were forced to wage a long and stubborn fight with the Philistines for the possession of the Promised Land. For long it seemed doubtful whether Canaan would be retained by the Semitic tribes or lost to them: and it is no mere accident that the best-known name of the country is derived from that of the sea-rovers. In the struggle the Hebrews learned the lessons of culture which they needed for their own advancement: and what was more important, they learned their own essential unity. The pressure of external opposition welded, as nothing else could have done, their loosely-knitted clans into a nation. This was the historic function of the Philistines; they accomplished their task, and then vanished with startling suddenness from the stage. But the Chosen People were led on from strength to strength, till they too fulfilled their mission of teaching mankind to look forward to a time when the knowledge of the Lord should cover the earth as the waters cover the sea.

Thus the influence of the Philistines remains, even if indirectly, a heritage of humanity to the end of time.

Footnotes

^116:1 Compare the scarified lines still to be seen on the faces of negroes who have been liberated from slavery within recent years in the Turkish empire.

^120:1 Daressy, 'Plaquettes emaillees de Medinet Habu,' in Annales du Service des Antiquites de l'Egypte, vol. xi, p. 49.

^123:1 Except the temple at Shechem (Judges viii. 33-ix. 46). The events described as taking place there certainly postulate a covered building. This, however, is perhaps no real exception: it may have originally been a Philistine structure. It was dedicated to a certain Baal- or El-Berith. But 'the Lord of the Covenant' is a strange name for a local ba'al: can it be that Berith is a corruption of Brito[martis]? The Book of Judges was probably written about the sixth century B.C.: by then the temple was most likely a ruin, and the memory of its dedication might easily have become obscured. The curious expression in Ezekiel, commented upon on p. 6 ante, might be similarly explained: by the ordinary canons of criticism the difficult original reading is to be preferred to the easy emendation there quoted.

^126:1 See the essay on 'Bronze and Iron' in Andrew Lang's The World of Homer, pp. 96-104.

^126:2 An elaborate paper, entitled 'Die Erfinder der Eisentechnik', by W. Belck, will be found in Zeitschrift fur Ethnologie (1907), p. 334. It claims the Philistines as the original inventors of the smith's art. That is, perhaps, going a little too far.

^126:3 Greaves appear to be unknown in Oriental or Egyptian warfare. See Daremberg and Saglio, Dict. des antt. gr. et rom., s. v. Ocrea.

^126:4 Il. vi. 318.

^127:1 Mitth. der vorderas. Gesell. (1904), 2, plate iii.

^127:2 II. 104.

^128:1 Asien and Europa, p. 171.

^129:1 See M. Rene Dussaud's paper 'L'Origine egeenne des alphabets semitiques' in Journal asiatique, Ser. X, vol. v, p. 357.

The Philistines, by R.A.S. Macalister, [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 131]

  

INDEX

Abarbanel, <page 100>.

Abimelech, <page 38>, <page 81>.

Abi-Milki, <page 19>.

Abraham, <page 38>.

Achaeans, <page 25>.

Achish, <page 51>, <page 52>, <page 60>, <page 62>, <page 65>, <page 72>, <page 81>.

Adullam, <page 53>.

Agenor, <page 97>.

Ahaz, Philistine revolt under, <page 63>.

Ahimilki, <page 65>.

Ahimiti, <page 64>.

Ahuzzath, <page 81>.

Aijalon, <page 63>.

Aka###353###ou, <page 10>, <page 11>, <page 26> (see also Achish).

'Akir, <page 74>.

Ala###353###ia, <page 8>, <page 19>.

Alcaeus, <page 26>.

Aldemios, <page 107>.

Aldioma, <page 107>.

allofyloi, <page 2>.

Alphabet, origin of, <page 127>.

Alton, <page 13>, <page 18>:<page 83>, <page 105>, <page 113>.

Amos, <page 125> (see also under Scriptural Passages).

Anakim, <page 60>, <page 68>.

Anath, <page 41>.

Anchises, <page 81>.

Antipater of Tarsus, <page 97>.

Antoninus Liberalis, <page 97>.

Aphek, <page 46>.

Aphrodite, statue of, at Gaza, <page 108>.

Architecture, Philistine influence on, <page 123>.

Ark, the, <page 47>, <page 76>, <page 91>.

Armour of Goliath, <page 54>, <page 126>.

Arnold, <page 3>.

Aryans, Philistines probably not, <page 13>.

Ashdod, <page 47>, <page 60>, <page 63>, <page 64>, <page 65>, <page 71>, <page 72>, <page 81>, <page 100>, <page 106>.

--history and site of, <page 73>.

--palaces of, <page 117>.

--siege of, <page 66>, <page 73>.

--speech of, <page 66>.

--temple at, <page 47>.

Ashdodimmu, <page 64>, <page 73>.

Asher, tribe of, <page 69>.

Ashkelon, <page 37>, <page 40>, <page 95>, <page 97>.

--coins of, <page 112>.

--history and site of, <page 71>.

Ashtoreth, Ashtaroth, <page 93>.

--temple of, <page 52>, <page 91>.

Asi, <page 7>, <page 8>.

Asklepios leontouxos, <page 115>.

Assyrian annals, Philistines in, <page 63> sqq.

Astarte, <page 95> (see also Ashtoreth).

Aswan, Jewish colony at, <page 11>, <page 41>.

Atar, Ate, <page 95>.

Atargatis, <page 95>-<page 97>, <page 99>.

Athenaeus, <page 97>.

'Avvim, <page 5>, <page 68>.

Azuri (king of Ashdod), <page 64>.

Azuri (city captured by Sennacherib), <page 64>.

Azutioi, <page 66>.

 

Baal-Berith, <page 123>.

Baal-Perazim, <page 53>, <page 54>, <page 58>.

Baal-zebub, <page 91>.

Badyra, <page 30>, <page 81>.

Baethgen, <page 95>.

Bauer, <page 74>.

Baur, <page 27>.

Beecher, <page 13>.

Belt Dejan, <page 70> (see also Beth-Dagon).

Belck, <page 126>.

Bene-Berak, <page 64>.

Benesasira, <page 10>, <page 44>.

Benjamin of Tudela, <page 72>.

Berossos, <page 104>.

Betagun, <page 106> (see also Beth-Dagon).

Beth-Car, <page 27>, <page 48>, <page 49>, <page 93>.

Beth-Dagon, <page 42>, <page 64>, <page 69>, <page 103>.

Beth-Shan, <page 52>, <page 91>, <page 93>.

Beth-Shemesh, <page 48>, <page 63>, <page 76>.

Birch, <page 82>.

Body-guard of Hebrew kings, Philistine, <page 61>.

Bones of Philistines, <page 60>.

Boylan, <page 105>.

Breasted, <page 19>, <page 20>, <page 21>, <page 29>.

Britomartis, <page 96>, <page 97>, <page 98>, <page 99>, <page 123>.

Bruton, Brutos, <page 97>.

Burrows, <page 15>.

Byblos, <page 8>, <page 30> sq., <page 36>.

 

Callimachus, <page 96>.

Callinus, <page 28>.

Calmet, <page 11>.

Canopus, decree of, <page 11>.

Caphtor, Caphtorim, <page 4>, <page 5>, <page 11>, <page 12>, <page 13>, <page 27>.

Cappadocia, <page 11>, <page 12>.

Carians, Carites, <page 7>, <page 25>, <page 26>, <page 61>.

Carpathos, <page 27>.

Casluhim, <page 4>, <page 5>, <page 12>, <page 28>. Caunus, <page 26>.

Chariots, <page 40>, <page 43>.

Chassinat, <page 81>.

Cherethites, <page 5>, <page 61>, <page 88>, <page 89>.

Cicero, <page 105>.

Cilicia, Cilicians, <page 12>, <page 25>.

Circumcision, <page 21>, <page 39>, <page 46>.

[p. 132]

Clermont-Ganneau, <page 28>, <page 56>, <page 75>, <page 94>.

Clusium, <page 88>.

Colchians, <page 12>.

Conway, <page 82>.

Cornill, <page 6>.

Crest, Carian, <page 26>.

Crete, Cretans, <page 6>, <page 9>, <page 10>, <page 13>.

--messengers from, to Egypt, <page 8>.

Cyprus, <page 8>, <page 35>, <page 122>.

 

Daedalus, <page 96>.

Dagon, Dagan, <page 46>, <page 81>, <page 99>, <page 104>.

--image of, <page 100>.

--names compounded with, <page 103>, <page 104>.

--temples of, <page 67>, <page 73>, <page 90>, <page 91>, <page 99>.

Dagon, a place by Jericho, <page 69> (see also Beth-Dagon).

Daxarenoi, <page 28>.

Damascius, <page 104>, <page 112>.

Dan, tribe of, <page 38>, <page 69>.

Danaoi, <page 25>.

Danuna, Danunu, <page 19>, <page 22>, <page 24>, <page 25>.

Dardanu, <page 19>, <page 25>.

Daressy, <page 120>.

Deborah, song of, <page 38>, <page 40>, <page 41>, <page 90>.

Deir edh-Dhubban, <page 77>.

Delilah, <page 55>, <page 61>, <page 81>, <page 87>.

Delos, inscription at, <page 94>.

Delta, <page 12>.

Democratic instincts of Philistines, <page 88>.

Derketo, <page 95>, <page 98>.

De Rouge, <page 128>.

De Saulcy, <page 114>.

Dhikerin, <page 75>.

Dictynna, <page 96>, <page 98>, <page 99>.

Diodorus Siculus, <page 95>, <page 96>, <page 99>.

Dodecapylon, <page 111>.

Dome of the Rock, Jerusalem, <page 111>, <page 112>.

Dor, <page 30>, <page 36>, <page 69>.

Dussaud, <page 129>.

 

Eben-Ezer, <page 47>.

Ebers, <page 12>, <page 14>, <page 83>.

Ekron, <page 40>, <page 47>, <page 62>, <page 64>, <page 65>, <page 71>, <page 91>.

--history and site of, <page 74>.

Ekron-Saphonah, <page 74>.

Ekwesh, <page 20>, <page 24>, <page 25>.

Elhanan, <page 55>.

Eli, <page 46>.

El-Tekeh, <page 13>, <page 64>, <page 76>.

Ephes-Dammim, <page 50>, <page 54>, <page 57>.

Epiphanius of Constantia, <page 113>.

Erman, <page 29>.

Esar-haddon, <page 65>.

Eshmunazar, <page 102>.

Etruscans, <page 13>, <page 82>, <page 88>, <page 89>, <page 91>, <page 105>, <page 117>.

Europa, <page 97>.

Evans, <page 15>.

Ewald, <page 6>.

Fenish, <page 67>.

Festivals, <page 90>.

Festus, <page 105>.

Fish, sacred, <page 95>.

--avoided by Syrians, <page 97>.

Fourmont, <page 2>.

Frazer, <page 28>.

 

Gath, <page 47>, <page 51>, <page 54>, <page 60>, <page 71>, <page 89>.

--history and site of, <page 72>.

Gatis, <page 97>.

Gaza, <page 40>, <page 60>, <page 65>-<page 67>, <page 71>, <page 100>, <page 106>.

--coins of, <page 15>, <page 112>.

--history and site of, <page 71>.

--temples of, <page 108>.

Gazaioi, <page 66>.

Geba, <page 49>, <page 53>, <page 54>, <page 56>, <page 58>.

Gederoth, <page 63>.

George, St., and the Dragon, <page 98>.

Gesenius, <page 2>.

Gezer, <page 56>, <page 59>, <page 62>, <page 122>.

Gibbethon, <page 62>.

Gibeah of God, <page 49>.

Gibeon, <page 54>.

Gilboa, <page 52>.

Gimzo, <page 63>.

Gob, <page 55>, <page 56>.

Golenischeff Papyrus, <page 24>, <page 29> (see also Wen-Amon).

Goliath, <page 50>, <page 54>, <page 60>, <page 61>, <page 81>, <page 126>.

Governors, Philistine, in Hebrew territory, <page 49>, <page 88>.

Goyim, <page 43>.

Greaves, <page 126>.

 

Habiru, <page 18>.

Hadad-Nirari III conquers the Philistines, <page 63>.

Hadrian, <page 111>.

Hall, H. R., <page 5>, <page 7>, <page 8>, <page 16>, <page 27>, <page 116>.

Hanunu, king of Gaza, <page 63>.

Harosheth, <page 42>.

Harris Papyrus, <page 23>.

Hazael, <page 62>.

Head-dress of Philistines, <page 83>, <page 87> (see also Crest).

Hebrews in Philistine service, <page 52>.

Herodotus, <page 6>, <page 12>, <page 26>, <page 47>, <page 65>, <page 66>. <page 73>, <page 94>, <page 127>.

Hesychius, <page 96>.

Hezekiah, <page 63>, <page 64>.

Hierapolis, <page 95>.

Hittites, <page 18>.

Hitzig, <page 2>, <page 12>, <page 81>.

Hrihor, <page 29>.

Hrozny, <page 104>, <page 105>.

Human sacrifice, <page 91>, <page 109>, <page 110>.

Hunger, <page 92>.

Iamblichus, <page 92>.

Ika###353###amsu, <page 81>.

Ikausu, <page 65>, <page 81>.

Ikhnaton, <page 18>, <page 19>.

Images used as amulets, <page 91>.

Insanity, Semitic attitude towards, <page 51>.

Iron, introduction of, <page 125>.

Isaac, <page 38>.

Ish-baal or Ish-bosheth, <page 52>.

Ishbi-benob, <page 55>, <page 60>.

Ittai, <page 61>, <page 81>.

 

Jabin, <page 42>.

[p. 133]

Jabneh, <page 63>.

Jehoram, Philistine revolt under, <page 61>, <page 62>.

Jehoshaphat, Philistines tributaries to, <page 62>.

Jensen, <page 104>.

Jerome, <page 99>, <page 103>, <page 113>.

Jest, Egyptian, <page 34>.

Jonah, <page 98>.

Jonathan Maccabaeus, <page 67>.

Jonathan, son of Shimei, <page 57>.

Joppa, <page 64>.

Josephus, <page 1>, <page 12>, <page 69>, <page 79>, <page 92>, <page 100>, <page 106>, <page 124>.

Justin, <page 37>.

 

Kadesh, <page 66>.

Kadytis, <page 65>.

Kalt, <page 44>.

Kamphausen, <page 53>.

Karnak, temple of, <page 8>, <page 20>.

Kasios Mountain, <page 12>.

Kanata, inscription at, <page 113>.

Keftiu, <page 7>-<page 11>, <page 14>.

Keilah, <page 51>, <page 57>.

Kelekesh, <page 19>, <page 24>. <page 25>.

Kimhi, David, <page 100>, <page 101>.

Kingship, Hebrew, foundation of, <page 49>.

Kiriath-Jearim, <page 48>.

Kirkmichael, truly well at, <page 93>.

Knobel, <page 12>.

Knossos, <page 9>, <page 10>, <page 18>, <page 122>.

Knudtzon, <page 19>, <page 103>.

Kohler, <page 12>.

Kom Ombo, <page 4>, <page 11>.

 

Lagarde, <page 100>.

Lakemacher, <page 6>.

Lampridius, <page 113>.

Land of Philistines, borders of, <page 68>.

--physical character of, <page 78>.

Lang, <page 126>.

Language, <page 50>, <page 79>.

Leaping over threshold, <page 62> (see also Threshold).

Leleges, <page 26>.

Lenormant, <page 92>.

Levi, Rabbi, <page 100>.

Libnah, <page 62>.

Libyans, <page 20>, <page 21>.

Lords of Philistines, <page 46>, <page 87>.

Lucian, <page 95>, <page 97>, <page 98>.

Lucumones, <page 88>.

Lukku, <page 19>, <page 20>, <page 25>.

Lycians, <page 25>.

--their tombs, <page 117>.

Lydia, <page 25>.

 

Maeonia, <page 25>.

Magical formula in Keftian language, <page 83>.

Maiouma, <page 71>.

Makamaru, <page 30>, <page 81>.

Manoah, <page 46>.

Maoch, <page 81>.

Marcus the Deacon, <page 91>, <page 106>.

Marinus, <page 113>.

Marna, <page 2>, <page 15>, <page 71>. <page 91>, <page 106>, <page 107>, <page 113>.

Marneion, <page 107> sqq., <page 124>.

Masa, <page 19>, <page 24>.

Mawuna, <page 19>, <page 24>, <page 25>.

Medinet Habu, <page 12>, <page 21>, <page 23>, <page 26>, <page 68>, <page 90>, <page 103>, <page 117>, <page 118>.

Menkheperuseneb, tomb of, <page 8>, <page 9>.

Mermaid form of deity, <page 98>, <page 100>.

Merueptah, <page 20>, <page 69>.

Metheg ha-ammah, <page 60>.

Meyer (E.), <page 76>.

Meyer (M. A.), <page 66>.

Michmash, battle of, <page 49>, <page 50>.

Military equipment of Philistines, <page 90>.

Minet el-Kal'ah, <page 74>.

Minoa, <page 15>.

Minoan Periods, <page 15> sqq.

Minos, <page 26>, <page 46>, <page 96>.

Mitinti, king of Ashkelon, <page 65>, <page 68>.

Mnaseus, <page 97>.

Moabite stone, <page 128>.

Moore, <page 40>, <page 41>.

Movers, <page 2>.

Muller, W. Max, <page 8>, <page 9>, <page 10>, <page 12>, <page 14>, <page 21>, <page 28>. <page 29>, <page 58>, <page 81>, <page 103>, <page 127>.

Mysia, <page 25>.

 

Necho, <page 65>,

Nehemiah, <page 66>.

Nesubenebded, <page 29>.

Neubauer, <page 75>, <page 107>.

Nisus, <page 46>.

Nob, <page 51>.

Noordtzij, <page 12>, <page 39>, <page 66>, <page 80>.

 

Oannes, <page 104>.

Obed-Edom, <page 61>.

Odakon, <page 104>.

Ophiussa, <page 27>.

Oracle at Ekron, <page 62>, <page 91>, <page 106>.

Oscans, <page 25>.

 

Padi, <page 64>, <page 65>.

Pamphylia, <page 25>.

Pantheon, <page 111>, <page 112>.

Paton, <page 104>.

Pausanias, <page 96>, <page 105>.

Pedasus, <page 25>.

Pelasgians, <page 2>, <page 12>, <page 26>.

Pelethites, <page 6>, <page 61>.

Peoples of the sea, <page 18> sqq.

Perseus. <page 98>.

Pet-auset, statue of, <page 82>.

Petrie, <page 21>, <page 27>.

Phaestos, <page 16>.

--Disk, <page 26>, <page 83> sqq., <page 106>. <page 115>.

Phicol, <page 81>.

Philistia in the time of Abraham, <page 39>.

--fertility of, <page 62>, <page 114>.

Philistine, the name, <page 1>, <page 2>.

--language, <page 43>.

Philitis, Philition, <page 6>, <page 12>.

Philo, <page 102>, <page 103>.

Phoenicians, <page 11>.

--Philistine influence on, <page 69>, <page 127>.

Pidasa, <page 19>, <page 24>, <page 25>.

Pisidia, <page 25>.

[p. 134]

Pliny, <page 92>.

Porphyrius, <page 106>.

Pottery, Philistine, <page 121>.

Praesos inscriptions, <page 43>, <page 82>.

Priests, Philistine, <page 100>.

Prophetic denunciations of Philistines, <page 70>.

--Ecstasy, fits of, <page 32>, <page 109>.

Psammetichus, <page 66>.

Pulasati, Purasatu, <page 22>, <page 24>, <page 25>.

 

Quatremere, <page 12>.

 

Ramessu II, <page 19>.

--III, <page 21>, <page 22>, <page 35>.

--VI, <page 14>.

--IX, <page 34>.

--XII, <page 29>.

Rapha, <page 60>.

Redslob, <page 3>.

Reinach (A. J.), <page 36>, <page 115>, <page 117>.

Rekhmara, tomb of, <page 8>, <page 9>, <page 11>, <page 12>.

Renan, <page 80>.

Rephaites, Rephaim, <page 60>, <page 68>.

Rephaim, Philistine camp at, <page 58>.

Rhinocolura, <page 68>.

Rhodes, <page 27>.

Rib-Addi, <page 19>, <page 25>.

River of Egypt, <page 68>.

Rost, <page 63>.

Rukipti, king of Ashkelon, <page 63>.

 

Sagalassus, <page 25>.

Samson, <page 38>, <page 44>, <page 87>, <page 100>.

Samuel, <page 47>, <page 49>.

Sardinians, <page 25>.

Sardis, <page 25>.

Sargon, <page 64>.

Sarludari, <page 64>.

Saph, <page 55>, <page 81>.

Saul, <page 49> sqq.

Sayce, <page 4>.

Schliemann, <page 15>.

School exercise-tablet, Hieratic, <page 10>, <page 44>, <page 82>.

Schrader, <page 63>.

Schwally, <page 13>.

Scylax, <page 37>.

Scylla, <page 46>.

Sea-monsters, <page 98>.

Selden, <page 97>.

Semiramis, <page 99>.

Sen-mut, tomb of, <page 8>.

Sennacherib, <page 64>, <page 104>.

Sepp, <page 73>.

Serapis, <page 113>.

Seren, <page 43>, <page 79>, <page 87> (see also Lords)

Shamgar, <page 41>.

Shammah the Hararite, <page 42>, <page 57>.

Shechem, temple at, <page 123>.

Shekelesh, <page 20>, <page 22>, <page 24>, <page 25>.

Shen, <page 52>.

Sherdanu, <page 19>, <page 20>, <page 22>, <page 24>.

Sheshonk, <page 59>.

Shi.(hor, <page 68>.

Shiloh, <page 76>.

Ships, <page 117>, <page 120>, <page 127>.

Shocho, <page 63>.

Shunammite sojourns among Philistines, <page 62>.

Sibbecai, <page 55>.

Sidon, <page 33>, <page 37>.

Sisera, <page 42>, <page 62>, <page 81>.

Skinner, <page 4>.

Slave-trade, <page 71>, <page 114>.

Smith (G. A.), <page 114>.

Smith (H. P.), <page 47>.

Solinus, <page 96>.

Soothsaying, <page 91>.

Sorek, valley of, <page 45>.

Speech of Ashdod, <page 73>.

Spiegelberg, <page 10>.

Stade, <page 13>.

Stark, <page 12>.

Stephanus of Byzantium, <page 15>, <page 28>, <page 72>, <page 97>, <page 100>.

Strabo, <page 26>, <page 27>, <page 28>, <page 66>.

Sutu, <page 18>.

Symbolic initial of Marna, <page 112>.

Syntax of names in Hebrew, <page 3>.

 

Table of nations, <page 1>, <page 4>, <page 28>.

Tacitus, <page 15>.

Tages, <page 105>.

Tarsus, <page 25>.

Tell el-Amarna, <page 19>.

Tell es-Safi, <page 56>, <page 72>.

Tell Zakariya, <page 126>.

Temple, Solomon's, <page 124>.

Temples, Philistine, <page 123>.

Tent-Amon, <page 29>.

Teucrians, <page 28>.

Thargelia, <page 91>.

Thera, <page 18>.

Threshold, rites connected with, <page 102>, <page 111>.

Thutmose III, <page 7>-<page 9>.

Tiele, <page 13>.

Tiglath-Pileser III, <page 63>.

Timnath, <page 63>.

Tobit, <page 104>.

Toy, <page 6>.

Traditions, modern, of Philistines, <page 67>.

Trees, sacred, <page 68>.

Tribal subdivisions of Philistines, <page 88>.

Troas, <page 24>.

Trumbull, <page 102>.

Turisha, <page 20>, <page 24>.

Tyrrhenians, <page 24>.

 

Urania, <page 94>, <page 95>.

Uzziah, <page 62>, <page 72>.

 

Virey, <page 8>.

 

Warati, <page 30>, <page 81>.

Washasha, <page 22>, <page 25>, <page 27>.

Waddington, <page 113>.

Wady el-Arish, <page 68>.

Weill, <page 25>, <page 27>, <page 28>.

Wellhausen, <page 101>.

Wen-Amon, <page 29>, <page 69>, <page 81>, <page 127>.

[p. 135]

Wilkinson, <page 8>.

Winckler, <page 19>, <page 52>, <page 92>, <page 94>, <page 103>.

Wredemann, <page 14>.

 

Xanthus, <page 97>.

 

Yamani, <page 64>.

Yaruna, <page 19>, <page 24>.

 

Zaggi, <page 81>.

Zakar-Baal, <page 30>, <page 127>.

Zakkala, <page 22>, <page 24>, <page 25>, <page 30>, <page 68>, <page 69>.

Zakro, <page 27>.

Zernukah, <page 76>.

Zeus apomyios, <page 92>.

--Careos, <page 26>, <page 27>.

Zibel, king of Gaza, <page 65>.

Zidka, <page 64>.

Ziklag, <page 13>, <page 51>, <page 52>, <page 61>, <page 71>, <page 81>, <page 89>.

Ziph, <page 51>.

The Philistines, by R.A.S. Macalister, [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 136]

  

INDEX OF SCRIPTURAL REFERENCES

(Where the English numeration of verses differs from the Hebrew, the former is here adopted.)

Genesis x. 6, 13, 14: 4, 28

xii. 6: 3.

xii. 10-20: 38.

xv. 16: 3.

xx. 1-18: 38.

xxi 22-34: 38, 39. xxvi. 1-23: 38, 39, 88.

Exodus xiii. 17: 39.

xv. 14: 39.

xxxiii. 31: 40.

Deuteronomy ii. 23: 5, 11, 68.

Joshua v. 2: 126.

xi. 21: 60, 68.

xii. 23: 43.

xiii. 1-3: 4, 40, 43, 68, 74.

xiii. 4: 5.

xvii: 74.

xvii. 16: 43.

xix. 27: 69.

xix. 40: 76.

xix. 43: 74.

Judges i. 18, 19: 40, 48, 89, 90.

iii. 3: 40, 79.

iii. 31: 41.

v. 6: 41.

viii. 33-ix. 46: 123.

x. 6, 7, 11: 2, 44, 105.

xiii. 1, 5: 2.

xiv. 2: 2.

xvi. 23-31: 41, 90, 123.

xviii. 2: 38.

1 Samuel iv: 46.

v. 1-5; 62, 89, 100.

vi. 18: 89.

vii: 48.

vii. 11, 12: 4,27, 47, 52.

ix. 16: 49.

x. 5: 49.

xiii. 5: 90.

xiii. 19-23: 4, 125.

xiv. 3: 48, 76.

xvi. 14-18: 57.

xvi. 21: 54.

xvii: 54, 80.

xvii. 51-54: 4, 75.

1 Samuel xviii. 1: 57.

xviii. 30: 89.

xix. 7: 57.

xxvii. 2: 88.

xxvii. 5: 89.

xxix. 2: 90.

xxix. 3, 9: 89.

xxx. 14: 5, 89.

xxxi. 9: 91.

2 Samuel v. 2: 57.

v. 17-21: 4, 53.

v. 21: 91.

v. 22-25: 53.

viii. 1: 53.

xviii. 3: 55.

xx. 23: 7.

xxi. 12, 17: 4, 55.

xxi. 18, 19: 56.

xxi. 22: 60.

xxiii. 9: 57.

xxiii. 11: 42.

1 Kings ii. 39: 60.

iv. 19: 49.

iv. 21: 88.

vi, vii: 124.

vi. 7: 126.

vii. 30: 80.

ix. 16: 59.

xiv. 25: 59.

2 Kings i. 2: 77, 91.

xi. 4, 19: 7.

xii. 18: 63.

xviii. 8: 63. 71, 89.

xviii. 14: 64.

1 Chronicles iv. 19: 45.

vii. 12: 6.

xi. 13: 4, 42, 57.

xiv. 8-12: 1, 54.

xiv. 13-16: 54.

xviii. 1: 54.

xx. 4: 56.

2 Chronicles xi. 8: 73.

xxi. 16: 4.

xxvi. 14: 80.

xxviii. 18: 63.

Ezra ii. 53: 62.

Nehemiah iv. 7: 66.

Nehemiah vii. 55: 62.

xiii. 23, 24: 66.

Psalm xxxiv. title: 38.

lx. 8-12: 61.

lxxxiii: 66.

lxxxiii. 9; 42.

lxxxvii.: 70.

cviii. 7-10: 61.

Isaiah ii. 6: 91.

ix. 1: 43.

ix. 12. 2,63.

x. 32: 51.

xx. 1: 64.

xxviii. 21: 54.

xlvi. 1: 99.

Jeremiah vii. 14: 76.

xxv. 20: 73, 88.

xlvii. 1: 65.

xlvii. 4: 5, 11.

Ezekiel xvi. 27: 70.

xxiii. 24: 80.

xxv. 16: 6. 88.

xxx. 5: 6, 123.

xliv. 7: 61.

Joel iii. 4: 43.

Amos i. 6: 71.

i. 8: 73, 88, 125.

iii. 9: 73, 125.

vi. 2: 73.

ix. 7: 1, 5, 11, 13.

Micah 1. 10: 72.

Zephaniah i. 8, 9: 62, 102.

ii. 4: 69, 74.

ii. 5: 6.

ii. 6: 13.

Zechariah ix. 5: 88.

ix. 7: 70.

Ecclesiasticus 1. 26: 70.

1 Maccabees v. 68: 73.

x. 83, 84: 47, 67, 73, 106.

xi. 4: 67.

xiv. 34: 89.

xvi. 15: 69.

2 Maccabees xii. 40: 91.

Matthew xii. 24: 91.

John viii. 6: 51.

 

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: pick.txt =====



The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

1. al-Fatihah: The Opening

[001_001]1 In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. 

[001_002]2 Praise be to Allah, Lord of the Worlds, 

[001_003]3 The Beneficent, the Merciful. 

[001_004]4 Master of the Day of Judgment, 

[001_005]5 Thee (alone) we worship; Thee (alone) we ask for help. 

[001_006]6 Show us the straight path, 

[001_007]7 The path of those whom Thou hast favoured; Not the (path) of those who  earn Thine anger nor of those who go astray.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

2. al-Baqarah: The Cow

[002_001]1 Alif. Lam. Mim. 

[002_002]2 This is the Scripture whereof there is no doubt, a guidance unto those who  ward off (evil). 

[002_003]3 Who believe in the Unseen, and establish worship, and spend of that We  have bestowed upon them; 

[002_004]4 And who believe in that which is revealed unto thee (Muhammad) and that  which was revealed before thee, and are certain of the Hereafter. 

[002_005]5 These depend on guidance from their Lord. These are the successful. 

[002_006]6 As for the Disbelievers, Whether thou warn them or thou warn them not it is  all one for them; they believe not. 

[002_007]7 Allah hath sealed their hearing and their hearts, and on their eyes there is a  covering. Theirs will be an awful doom. 

[002_008]8 And of mankind are some who say: We believe in Allah and the Last Day,  when they believe not. 

[002_009]9 They think to beguile Allah and those who believe, and they beguile none  save themselves; but they perceive not. 

[002_010]10 In their hearts is a disease, and Allah increaseth their disease. A painful  doom is theirs because they lie. 

[002_011]11 And when it is said unto them: Make not mischief in the earth, they say: We  are peacemakers only. 

[002_012]12 Are not they indeed the mischief-makers ? But they perceive not. 

[002_013]13 And when it is said unto them: believe as the people believe, they say: shall  we believe as the foolish believe ? are not they indeed the foolish ? But they know  not. 

[002_014]14 And when they fall in with those who believe, they say: We believe; but  when they go apart to their devils they declare: Lo! we are with you; verily we did but  mock. 

[002_015]15 Allah (Himself) doth mock them, leaving them to wander blindly on in their  contumacy. 

[002_016]16 These are they who purchase error at the price of guidance, so their  commerce doth not prosper, neither are they guided. 

[002_017]17 Their likeness is as the likeness of one who kindleth fire, and when it  sheddeth its light around him Allah taketh away their light and leaveth them in  darkness, where they cannot see, 

[002_018]18 Deaf, dumb and blind; and they return not. 

[002_019]19 Or like a rainstorm from the sky, wherein is darkness, thunder and the flash  of lightning. They thrust their fingers in their ears by reason of the thunder-claps, for  fear of death, Allah encompasseth the disbelievers (in His guidance, His omniscience  and His omnipotence). 

[002_020]20 The lightning almost snatcheth away their sight from them. As often as it  flasheth forth for them they walk therein, and when it darkeneth against them they  stand still. If Allah willed, He could destroy their hearing and their sight. Lo! Allah is  able to do all things. 

[002_021]21 O mankind! worship your Lord, Who hath created you and those before you,  so that ye may ward off (evil). 

[002_022]22 Who hath appointed the earth a resting-place for you, and the sky a canopy;  and causeth water to pour down from the sky, thereby producing fruits as food for  you. And do not set up rivals to Allah when ye know (better). 

[002_023]23 And if ye are in doubt concerning that which We reveal unto Our slave  (Muhammad), then produce a surah of the like thereof, and call your witness beside  Allah if ye are truthful. 

[002_024]24 And if ye do it not - and ye can never do it - then guard yourselves against  the Fire prepared for disbelievers, whose fuel is of men and stones. 

[002_025]25 And give glad tidings (O Muhammad) unto those who believe and do good  works; that theirs are Gardens underneath which rivers flow; as often as they are  regaled with food of the fruit thereof, they say: this is what was given us aforetime;  and it is given to them in resemblance. There for them are pure companions; there for  ever  they abide. 

[002_026]26 Lo! Allah disdaineth not to coin the similitude even of a gnat. Those who  believe know that it is the truth from their Lord; but those who disbelieve say: What  doth Allah wish (to teach) by such a similitude ? He misleadeth many thereby, and He  guideth many thereby; and He misleadeth thereby only miscreants; 

[002_027]27 Those who break the covenant of Allah after ratifying it, and sever that  which Allah ordered to be joined, and (who) make mischief in the earth: Those are  they who are the losers. 

[002_028]28 How disbelieve ye in Allah when ye were dead and He gave life to you!  Then He will give you death, then life again, and then unto Him ye will return. 

[002_029]29 He it is Who created for you all that is in the earth. Then turned He to the  heaven, and fashioned it as seven heavens. And He is knower of all things. 

[002_030]30 And when thy Lord said unto the angels: Lo! I am about to place a viceroy in  the earth, they said: Wilt thou place therein one who will do harm therein and will  shed blood, while we, we hymn Thy praise and sanctify Thee ? He said: Surely I  know that which ye know not. 

[002_031]31 And He taught Adam all the names, then showed them to the angels, saying:  Inform Me of the names of these, if ye are truthful. 

[002_032]32 They said: Be glorified! We have no knowledge saving that which Thou hast  taught us. Lo! Thou, only Thou, art the Knower, the Wise. 

[002_033]33 He said: O Adam! Inform them of their names, and when he had informed  them of their names, He said: Did I not tell you that I know the secret of the heavens  and the earth ? And I know that which ye disclose and which ye hide. 

[002_034]34 And when We said unto the angels: Prostrate yourselves before Adam, they  fell prostrate, all save Iblis. He demurred through pride, and so became a disbeliever. 

[002_035]35 And We said: O Adam! Dwell thou and thy wife in the Garden, and eat ye  freely (of the fruits) thereof where ye will; but come not nigh this tree lest ye become  wrong-doers. 

[002_036]36 But Satan caused them to deflect therefrom and expelled them from the  (happy) state in which they were; and We said: Fall down, one of you a foe unto the  other! There shall be for you on earth a habitation and provision for a time. 

[002_037]37 Then Adam received from his Lord words (of revelation), and He relented  toward him. Lo! He is the relenting, the Merciful. 

[002_038]38 We said: Go down, all of you, from hence; but verily there cometh unto you  from Me a guidance; and whoso followeth My guidance, there shall no fear come  upon them neither shall they grieve. 

[002_039]39 But they who disbelieve, and deny Our revelations, such are rightful Peoples  of the Fire. They will abide therein. 

[002_040]40 O Children of Israel! Remember My favour wherewith I favoured you, and  fulfil your (part of the) covenant, I shall fulfil My (part of the) covenant, and fear Me. 

[002_041]41 And believe in that which I reveal, confirming that which ye possess already  (of the Scripture), and be not first to disbelieve therein, and part not with My  revelations for a trifling price, and keep your duty unto Me. 

[002_042]42 Confound not truth with falsehood, nor knowingly conceal the truth. 

[002_043]43 Establish worship, pay the poor-due, and bow your heads with those who  bow (in worship). 

[002_044]44 Enjoin ye righteousness upon mankind while ye yourselves forget (to  practise it) ? And ye are readers of the Scripture! Have ye then no sense ? 

[002_045]45 Seek help in patience and prayer; and truly it is hard save for the humble- minded, 

[002_046]46 Who know that they will have to meet their Lord, and that unto Him they are  returning. 

[002_047]47 O Children of Israel! Remember My favour wherewith I favoured you and  how I preferred you to (all) creatures. 

[002_048]48 And guard yourselves against a day when no soul will in aught avail another,  nor will intercession be accepted from it, nor will compensation be received from it,  nor will they be helped. 

[002_049]49 And (remember) when We did deliver you from Pharaoh's folk, who were  afflicting you with dreadful torment, slaying your sons and sparing your women: that  was a tremendous trial from your Lord. 

[002_050]50 And when We brought you through the sea and rescued you, and drowned  the folk of Pharaoh in your sight. 

[002_051]51 And when We did appoint for Moses forty nights (of solitude), and then ye  chose the calf, when he had gone from you, and were wrong-doers. 

[002_052]52 Then, even after that, We pardoned you in order that ye might give thanks. 

[002_053]53 And when We gave unto Moses the Scripture and the criterion (of right and  wrong), that ye might be led aright. 

[002_054]54 And when Moses said unto his people: O my people! Ye have wronged  yourselves by your choosing of the calf (for worship) so turn in penitence to your  Creator, and kill (the guilty) yourselves. That will be best for you with your Creator  and He will relent toward you. Lo! He is the Relenting, the Merciful. 

[002_055]55 And when ye said: O Moses! We will not believe in thee till we see Allah  plainly; and even while ye gazed the lightning seized you. 

[002_056]56 Then We revived you after your extinction, that ye might give thanks. 

[002_057]57 And We caused the white cloud to overshadow you and sent down on you  the manna and the quails, (saying): Eat of the good things wherewith We have  provided you - they wronged Us not, but they did wrong themselves. 

[002_058]58 And when We said: Go into this township and eat freely of that which is  therein, and enter the gate prostrate, and say: "Repentance." We will forgive you your  sins and will increase (reward) for the right-doers. 

[002_059]59 But those who did wrong changed the word which had been told them for  another saying, and We sent down upon the evil-doers wrath from heaven for their  evil-doing. 

[002_060]60 And when Moses asked for water for his people, We said: Smite with thy  staff the rock. And there gushed out therefrom twelve springs (so that) each tribe  knew their drinking-place. Eat and drink of that which Allah hath provided, and do  not act corruptly, making mischief in the earth. 

[002_061]61 And when ye said: O Moses! We are weary of one kind of food; so call upon  thy Lord for us that He bring forth for us of that which the earth groweth - of its herbs  and its cucumbers and its corn and its lentils and its onions. He said: Would ye  exchange that which is higher for that which is lower ? Go down to settled country,  thus ye shall get that which ye demand. And humiliation and wretchedness were  stamped upon them and they were visited with wrath from Allah. That was because  they disbelieved in Allah's revelations and slew the prophets wrongfully. That was for  their disobedience and transgression. 

[002_062]62 Lo! Those who believe (in that which is revealed unto thee, Muhammad),  and those who are Jews, and Christians, and Sabaeans - whoever believeth in Allah  and the Last Day and doeth right - surely their reward is with their Lord, and there  shall no fear come upon them neither shall they grieve. 

[002_063]63 And (remember, O Children of Israel) when We made a covenant with you  and caused the mount to tower above you, (saying): Hold fast that which We have  given you, and remember that which is therein, that ye may ward off (evil). 

[002_064]64 Then, even after that, ye turned away, and if it had not been for the grace of  Allah and His mercy ye had been among the losers. 

[002_065]65 And ye know of those of you who broke the Sabbath, how We said unto  them: Be ye apes, despised and hated! 

[002_066]66 And We made it an example to their own and to succeeding generations, and  an admonition to the God-fearing. 

[002_067]67 And when Moses said unto his people: Lo! Allah commandeth you that ye  sacrifice a cow, they said: Dost thou make game of us ? He answered: Allah forbid  that I should be among the foolish! 

[002_068]68 They said: Pray for us unto thy Lord that He make clear to us what (cow) she  is. (Moses) answered: Lo! He saith, Verily she is a cow neither with calf nor  immature; (she is) between the two conditions; so do that which ye are commanded. 

[002_069]69 They said: Pray for us unto thy Lord that He make clear to us of what colour  she is. (Moses) answered: Lo! He saith: Verily she is a yellow cow. Bright is her  colour, gladdening beholders. 

[002_070]70 They said: Pray for us unto thy Lord that He make clear to us what (cow) she  is. Lo! cows are much alike to us; and Lo! if Allah wills, we may be led aright. 

[002_071]71 (Moses) answered: Lo! He saith: Verily she is a cow unyoked; she plougheth  not the soil nor watereth the tilth; whole and without mark. They said: Now thou  bringest the truth. So they sacrificed her, though almost they did not. 

[002_072]72 And (remember) when ye slew a man and disagreed concerning it and Allah  brought forth that which ye were hiding. 

[002_073]73 And We said: Smite him with some of it. Thus Allah bringeth the dead to life  and showeth you His portents so that ye may understand. 

[002_074]74 Then, even after that, your hearts were hardened and became as rocks, or  worse than rocks, for hardness. For indeed there are rocks from out which rivers gush,  and indeed there are rocks which split asunder so that water floweth from them. And  indeed there are rocks which fall down for the fear of Allah. Allah is not unaware of  what ye do. 

[002_075]75 Have ye any hope that they will be true to you when a party of them used to  listen to the word of Allah, then used to change it, after they had understood it,  knowingly ? 

[002_076]76 And when they fall in with those who believe, they say: We believe. But  when they go apart one with another they say: Prate ye to them of that which Allah  hath disclosed to you that they may contend with you before your Lord concerning it  ? Have ye then no sense ? 

[002_077]77 Are they then unaware that Allah knoweth that which they keep hidden and  that which they proclaim ? 

[002_078]78 Among them are unlettered folk who know the Scripture not except from  hearsay. They but guess. 

[002_079]79 Therefore woe be unto those who write the Scripture with their hands and  then say, "This is from Allah," that they may purchase a small gain therewith. Woe  unto them for that their hands have written, and woe unto them for that they earn  thereby. 

[002_080]80 And they say: The Fire  (of punishment) will not touch us save for a certain  number of days. Say: Have ye received a covenant from Allah - truly Allah will not  break His covenant - or tell ye concerning Allah that which ye know not ? 

[002_081]81 Nay, but whosoever hath done evil and his sin surroundeth him; such are  rightful owners of the Fire; they will abide therein. 

[002_082]82 And those who believe and do good works: such are rightful owners of the  Garden. They will abide therein. 

[002_083]83 And (remember) when We made a covenant with the Children of Israel,  (saying): Worship none save Allah (only), and be good to parents and to kindred and  to orphans and the needy, and speak kindly to mankind; and establish worship and  pay the poor-due. Then, after that, ye slid back, save a few of you, being averse. 

[002_084]84 And when We made with you a covenant (saying): Shed not the blood of  your people nor turn (a party of) your people out of your dwellings. Then ye ratified  (Our covenant) and ye were witnesses (thereto). 

[002_085]85 Yet ye it is who slay each other and drive out a party of your people from  their homes, supporting one another against them by sin and transgression ? - and if  they came to you as captives ye would ransom them, whereas their expulsion was  itself unlawful for you - Believe ye in part of the Scripture and disbelieve ye in part  thereof ? And what is the reward of those who do so save ignominy in the life of the  world, and on the Day of Resurrection they will be consigned to the most grievous  doom. For Allah is not unaware of what ye do. 

[002_086]86 Such are those who buy the life of the world at the price of the Hereafter.  Their punishment will not be lightened, neither will they have support. 

[002_087]87 And verily We gave unto Moses the Scripture and We caused a train of  messengers to follow after him, and We gave unto Jesus, son of Mary, clear proofs (of  Allah's sovereignty), and We supported him with the Holy spirit. Is it ever so, that,  when there cometh unto you a messenger (from Allah) with that which ye yourselves  desire not, ye grow arrogant, and some ye disbelieve and some ye slay ? 

[002_088]88 And they say: Our hearts are hardened. Nay, but Allah hath cursed them for  their unbelief. Little is that which they believe. 

[002_089]89 And when there cometh unto them a scripture from Allah, confirming that in  their possession - though before that they were asking for a signal triumph over those  who disbelieved - and when there cometh unto them that which they know (to be the  truth) they disbelieve therein. The curse of Allah is on disbelievers. 

[002_090]90 Evil is that for which they sell their souls: that they should disbelieve in that  which Allah hath revealed, grudging that Allah should reveal of His bounty unto  whom He will of His slaves.  They have incurred anger upon anger.  For disbelievers  is a shameful doom. 

[002_091]91 And when it is said unto them: Believe in that which Allah hath revealed,  they say: We believe in that which was revealed unto us. And they disbelieve in that  which cometh after it, though it is the truth confirming that which they possess. Say  (unto them, O Muhammad): Why then slew ye the prophets of Allah aforetime, if ye  are (indeed) believers ? 

[002_092]92 And Moses came unto you with clear proofs (of Allah's Sovereignty), yet,  while he was away, ye chose the calf (for worship) and ye were wrong-doers. 

[002_093]93 And when We made with you a covenant and caused the Mount to tower  above you, (saying): Hold fast by that which We have given you, and hear (Our  Word), they said: We hear and we rebel. And (worship of) the calf was made to sink  into their hearts because of their rejection (of the covenant). Say (unto them): Evil is  that which your belief enjoineth on you, if ye are believers. 

[002_094]94 Say (unto them): If the abode of the Hereafter in the providence of Allah is  indeed for you alone and not for others of mankind (as ye pretend), then long for  death (for ye must long for death) if ye are truthful. 

[002_095]95 But they will never long for it, because of that which their own hands have  sent before them. Allah is aware of evil-doers. 

[002_096]96 And thou wilt find them greediest of mankind for life and (greedier) than the  idolaters. (Each) one of them would like to be allowed to live a thousand years. And  to live (a thousand years) would be no means remove him from the doom. Allah is  Seer of what they do. 

[002_097]97 Say (O Muhammad, to mankind): Who is an enemy to Gabriel! For he it is  who hath revealed (this Scripture) to thy heart by Allah's leave, confirming that which  was (revealed) before it, and a guidance and glad tidings to believers; 

[002_098]98 Who is an enemy to Allah, and His angels and His messengers, and Gabriel  and Michael! Then, lo! Allah (Himself) is an enemy to the disbelievers. 

[002_099]99 Verily We have revealed unto thee clear tokens, and only miscreants will  disbelieve in them. 

[002_100]100 Is it ever so that when they make a covenant a party of them set it aside ?  The truth is, most of them believe not. 

[002_101]101 And when there cometh unto them a messenger from Allah, confirming that  which they possess, a party of those who have received the Scripture fling the  Scripture of Allah behind their backs as if they knew not, 

[002_102]102 And follow that which the devils falsely related against the kingdom of  Solomon. Solomon disbelieved not; but the devils disbelieved, teaching mankind  magic and that which was revealed to the two angels in Babel, Harut and Marut. Nor  did they (the two angels) teach it to anyone till they had said: We are only a  temptation, therefore disbelieve not (in the guidance of Allah). And from these two  (angles) people learn that by which they cause division between man and wife; but  they injure thereby no-one save by Allah's leave. And they learn that which harmeth  them and profiteth them not. And surely they do know that he who trafficketh therein  will have no (happy) portion in the Hereafter; and surely evil is the price for which  they sell their souls, if they but knew. 

[002_103]103 And if they had believed and kept from evil, a recompense from Allah would  be better, if they only knew. 

[002_104]104 O ye who believe, say not (unto the Prophet): "Listen to us" but say "Look  upon us," and be ye listeners. For disbelievers is a painful doom. 

[002_105]105 Neither those who disbelieve among the people of the Scripture nor the  idolaters love that there should be sent down unto you any good thing from your  Lord. But Allah chooseth for His mercy whom He will, and Allah is of Infinite  Bounty. 

[002_106]106 Nothing of our revelation (even a single verse) do we abrogate or cause be  forgotten, but we bring (in place) one better or the like thereof. Knowest thou not that  Allah is Able to do all things ? 

[002_107]107 Knowest thou not that it is Allah unto Whom belongeth the Sovereignty of  the heavens and the earth; and ye have not, beside Allah, any guardian or helper ? 

[002_108]108 Or would ye question your messenger as Moses was questioned aforetime ?  He who chooseth disbelief instead of faith, verily he hath gone astray from a plain  road. 

[002_109]109 Many of the people of the Scripture long to make you disbelievers after your  belief, through envy on their own account, after the truth hath become manifest unto  them. Forgive and be indulgent (toward them) until Allah give command. Lo! Allah is  Able to do all things. 

[002_110]110 Establish worship, and pay the poor-due; and whatever of good ye send  before (you) for your souls, ye will find it with Allah. Lo! Allah is Seer of what ye do. 

[002_111]111 And they say: None entereth paradise unless he be a Jew or a Christian.  These are their own desires. Say: Bring your proof (of what ye state) if ye are truthful. 

[002_112]112 Nay, but whosoever surrendereth his purpose to Allah while doing good, his  reward is with his Lord; and there shall no fear come upon them neither shall they  grieve. 

[002_113]113 And the Jews say the Christians follow nothing (true), and the Christians say  the Jews follow nothing (true); yet both are readers of the Scripture. Even thus speak  those who know not. Allah will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection  concerning that wherein they differ. 

[002_114]114 And who doth greater wrong than he who forbiddeth the approach to the  sanctuaries of Allah lest His name should be mentioned therein, and striveth for their  ruin. As for such, it was never meant that they should enter them except in fear.  Theirs in the world is ignominy and theirs in the Hereafter is an awful doom. 

[002_115]115 Unto Allah belong the East and the West, and whithersoever ye turn, there is  Allah's Countenance. Lo! Allah is All-Embracing, All-Knowing. 

[002_116]116 And they say: Allah hath taken unto Himself a son. Be He glorified! Nay, but  whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth is His. All are subservient unto Him. 

[002_117]117 The Originator of the heavens and the earth! When He decreeth a thing, He  saith unto it only: Be! and it is. 

[002_118]118 And those who have no knowledge say: Why doth not Allah speak unto us,  or some sign come unto us ? Even thus, as they now speak, spake those (who were)  before them. Their hearts are all alike. We have made clear the revelations for people  who are sure. 

[002_119]119 Lo! We have sent thee (O Muhammad) with the truth, a bringer of glad  tidings and a warner. And thou wilt not be asked about the owners of hell-fire. 

[002_120]120 And the Jews will not be pleased with thee, nor will the Christians, till thou  follow their creed. Say: Lo! the guidance of Allah (Himself) is Guidance. And if thou  shouldst follow their desires after the knowledge which hath come unto thee, then  wouldst thou have from Allah no protecting guardian nor helper. 

[002_121]121 Those unto whom We have given the Scripture, who read it with the right  reading, those believe in it. And whoso disbelieveth in it, those are they who are the  losers. 

[002_122]122 O Children of Israel! Remember My favour wherewith I favoured you and  how I preferred you to (all) creatures. 

[002_123]123 And guard (yourselves) against a day when no soul will in aught avail  another, nor will compensation be accepted from it, nor will intercession be of use to  it; nor will they be helped. 

[002_124]124 And (remember) when his Lord tried Abraham with (His) commands, and he  fulfilled them, He said: Lo! I have appointed thee a leader for mankind. (Abraham)  said: And of my offspring (will there be leaders) ? He said: My covenant includeth  not wrong-doers. 

[002_125]125 And when We made the House (at Makka) a resort for mankind and  sanctuary, (saying): Take as your place of worship the place where Abraham stood (to  pray). And We imposed a duty upon Abraham and Ishmael, (saying): Purify My  house for those who go around and those who meditate therein and those who bow  down and prostrate themselves (in worship). 

[002_126]126 And when Abraham prayed: My Lord! Make this a region of security and  bestow upon its people fruits, such of them as believe in Allah and the Last Day, He  answered: As for him who disbelieveth, I shall leave him in contentment for a while,  then I shall compel him to the doom of Fire - a hapless journey's end! 

[002_127]127 And when Abraham and Ishmael were raising the foundations of the House,  (Abraham prayed): Our Lord! Accept from us (this duty). Lo! Thou, only Thou, art  the Hearer, the Knower. 

[002_128]128 Our Lord! And make us submissive unto Thee and of our seed a nation  submissive unto Thee, and show us our ways of worship, and relent toward us. Lo!  Thou, only Thou, art the Relenting, the Merciful. 

[002_129]129 Our Lord! And raise up in their midst a messenger from among them who  shall recite unto them Thy revelations, and shall instruct them in the Scripture and in  wisdom and shall make them grow. Lo! Thou, only Thou, art the Mighty, Wise. 

[002_130]130 And who forsaketh the religion of Abraham save him who befooleth himself  ? Verily We chose him in the world, and lo! in the Hereafter he is among the  righteous. 

[002_131]131 When his Lord said unto him: Surrender! he said: I have surrendered to the  Lord of the Worlds. 

[002_132]132 The same did Abraham enjoin upon his sons, and also Jacob, (saying): O my  sons! Lo! Allah hath chosen for you the (true) religion; therefore die not save as men  who have surrendered (unto Him). 

[002_133]133 Or were ye present when death came to Jacob, when he said unto his sons:  What will ye worship after me ? They said: We shall worship thy God, the God of thy  fathers, Abraham and Ishmael and Isaac, One God, and unto Him we have  surrendered. 

[002_134]134 Those are a people who have passed away. Theirs is that which they earned,  and yours is that which ye earn. And ye will not be asked of what they used to do. 

[002_135]135 And they say: Be Jews or Christians, then ye will be rightly guided. Say  (unto them, O Muhammad): Nay, but (we follow) the religion of Abraham, the  upright, and he was not of the idolaters. 

[002_136]136 Say (O Muslims): We believe in Allah and that which is revealed unto us and  that which was revealed unto Abraham, and Ishmael, and Isaac, and Jacob, and the  tribes, and that which Moses and Jesus received, and that which the prophets received  from their Lord. We make no distinction between any of them, and unto Him we have  surrendered. 

[002_137]137 And if they believe in the like of that which ye believe, then are they rightly  guided. But if they turn away, then are they in schism, and Allah will suffice thee (for  defence) against them. He is the Hearer, the Knower. 

[002_138]138 (We take our) colour from Allah, and who is better than Allah at colouring.  We are His worshippers. 

[002_139]139 Say (unto the People of the Scripture): Dispute ye with us concerning Allah  when He is our Lord and your Lord ? Ours are our works and yours your works. We  look to Him alone. 

[002_140]140 Or say ye that Abraham, and Ishmael, and Isaac, and Jacob, and the tribes  were Jews or Christians ? Say: Do ye know best, or doth Allah ? And who is more  unjust than he who hideth a testimony which he hath received from Allah ? Allah is  not unaware of what ye do. 

[002_141]141 Those are a people who have passed away; theirs is that which they earned  and yours that which ye earn. And ye will not be asked of what they used to do. 

[002_142]142 The foolish of the people will say: What hath turned them from the qiblah  which they formerly observed ? Say: Unto Allah belong the East and the West. He  guideth whom He will unto a straight path. 

[002_143]143 Thus We have appointed you a middle nation, that ye may be witnesses  against mankind, and that the messenger may be a witness against you. And We  appointed the qiblah which ye formerly observed only that We might know him who  followeth the messenger, from him who turneth on his heels. In truth it was a hard  (test) save for those whom Allah guided. But it was not Allah's purpose that your faith  should be in vain, for Allah is Full of Pity, Merciful toward mankind. 

[002_144]144 We have seen the turning of thy face to heaven (for guidance, O  Muhammad). And now verily We shall make thee turn (in prayer) toward a qiblah  which is dear to thee. So turn thy face toward the Inviolable Place of Worship, and ye  (O Muslims), wheresoever ye may be, turn your faces (when ye pray) toward it. Lo!  Those who have received the Scripture know that (this revelation) is the Truth from  their Lord. And Allah is not unaware of what they do. 

[002_145]145 And even if thou broughtest unto those who have received the Scripture all  kinds of portents, they would not follow thy qiblah, nor canst thou be a follower of  their qiblah; nor are some of them followers of the qiblah of others. And if thou  shouldst follow their desires after the knowledge which hath come unto thee, then  surely wert thou of the evil-doers. 

[002_146]146 Those unto whom We gave the Scripture recognise (this revelation) as they  recognise their sons. But lo! a party of them knowingly conceal the truth. 

[002_147]147 It is the Truth from thy Lord (O Muhammad), so be not thou of those who  waver. 

[002_148]148 And each one hath a goal toward which he turneth; so vie with one another in  good works. Wheresoever ye may be, Allah will bring you all together. Lo! Allah is  Able to do all things. 

[002_149]149 And whencesoever thou comest forth (for prayer, O Muhammad) turn thy  face toward the Inviolable Place of Worship. Lo! it is the Truth from thy Lord. Allah  is not unaware of what ye do. 

[002_150]150 Whencesoever thou comest forth turn thy face toward the Inviolable Place of  Worship; and wheresoever ye may be (O Muslims) turn your faces toward it (when ye  pray) so that men may have no argument against you, save such of them as do  injustice - Fear them not, but fear Me! - and so that I may complete My grace upon  you, and that ye may be guided. 

[002_151]151 Even as We have sent unto you a messenger from among you, who reciteth  unto you Our revelations and causeth you to grow, and teacheth you the Scripture and  wisdom, and teacheth you that which ye knew not. 

[002_152]152 Therefore remember Me, I will remember you. Give thanks to Me, and reject  not Me. 

[002_153]153 O ye who believe! Seek help in steadfastness and prayer. Lo! Allah is with  the steadfast. 

[002_154]154 And call not those who are slain in the way of Allah "dead." Nay, they are  living, only ye perceive not. 

[002_155]155 And surely We shall try you with something of fear and hunger, and loss of  wealth and lives and crops; but give glad tidings to the steadfast, 

[002_156]156 Who say, when a misfortune striketh them: Lo! we are Allah's and lo! unto  Him we are returning. 

[002_157]157 Such are they on whom are blessings from their Lord, and mercy. Such are  the rightly guided. 

[002_158]158 Lo! (the mountains) As-Safa and Al-Marwah are among the indications of  Allah. It is therefore no sin for him who is on pilgrimage to the House (of God) or  visiteth it, to go around them (as the pagan custom is). And he who doeth good of his  own accord, (for him) lo! Allah is Responsive, Aware. 

[002_159]159 Lo! Those who hide the proofs and the guidance which We revealed, after  We had made it clear to mankind in the Scripture: such are accursed of Allah and  accursed of those who have the power to curse. 

[002_160]160 Except those who repent and amend and make manifest (the truth). These it  is toward whom I relent. I am the Relenting, the Merciful. 

[002_161]161 Lo! Those who disbelieve, and die while they are disbelievers; on them is the  curse of Allah and of angels and of men combined. 

[002_162]162 They ever dwell therein. The doom will not be lightened for them, neither  will they be reprieved. 

[002_163]163 Your God is One God; there is no God save Him, the Beneficent, the  Merciful. 

[002_164]164 Lo! In the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the difference of night  and day, and the ships which run upon the sea with that which is of use to men, and  the water which Allah sendeth down from the sky, thereby reviving the earth after its  death, and dispersing all kinds of beasts therein, and (in) the ordinance of the winds,  and the clouds obedient between heaven and earth: are signs (of Allah's Sovereignty)  for people who have sense. 

[002_165]165 Yet of mankind are some who take unto themselves (objects of worship  which they set as) rivals to Allah, loving them with a love like (that which is the due)  of Allah (only) - those who believe are stauncher in their love for Allah - Oh, that  those who do evil had but known, (on the day) when they behold the doom, that  power belongeth wholly to Allah, and that Allah is severe in punishment! 

[002_166]166 (On the day) when those who were followed disown those who followed  (them), and they behold the doom, and all their aims collapse with them. 

[002_167]167 And those who were but followers will say: If a return were possible for us,  we would disown them even as they have disowned us. Thus will Allah show them  their own deeds as anguish for them, and they will not emerge from the Fire. 

[002_168]168 O mankind! Eat of that which is lawful and wholesome in the earth, and  follow not the footsteps of the devil. Lo! he is an open enemy for you. 

[002_169]169 He enjoineth upon you only the evil and the foul, and that ye should tell  concerning Allah that which ye know not. 

[002_170]170 And when it is said unto them: Follow that which Allah hath revealed, they  say: We follow that wherein we found our fathers. What! Even though their fathers  were wholly unintelligent  and had no guidance ? 

[002_171]171 The likeness of those who disbelieve (in relation to the messenger) is as the  likeness of one who calleth unto that which heareth naught except a shout and cry.  Deaf, dumb, blind, therefore they have no sense. 

[002_172]172 O ye who believe! Eat of the good things wherewith We have provided you,  and render thanks to Allah if it is (indeed) He Whom ye worship. 

[002_173]173 He hath forbidden you only carrion, and blood, and swineflesh, and that  which hath been immolated to (the name of) any other than Allah. But he who is  driven by necessity, neither craving nor transgressing, it is no sin for him. Lo! Allah  is Forgiving, Merciful. 

[002_174]174 Lo! those who hide aught of the Scripture which Allah hath revealed  and  purchase a small gain therewith, they eat into their bellies nothing else than fire. Allah  will not speak to them on the Day of Resurrection, nor will He make them grow.  Theirs will be a painful doom. 

[002_175]175 Those are they who purchase error at the price of guidance, and torment at  the price of pardon. How constant are they in their strife to reach the Fire! 

[002_176]176 That is because Allah hath revealed the Scripture with the truth. Lo! those  who find (a cause of) disagreement in the Scripture are in open schism. 

[002_177]177 It is not righteousness that ye turn your faces to the East and the West; but  righteous is he who believeth in Allah and the Last Day and the angels and the  Scripture and the prophets; and giveth wealth, for love of Him, to kinsfolk and to  orphans and the needy and the wayfarer and to those who ask, and to set slaves free;  and observeth proper worship and payeth the poor-due. And those who keep their  treaty when they make one, and the patient in tribulation and adversity and time of  stress. Such are they who are sincere. Such are the God-fearing. 

[002_178]178 O ye who believe! Retaliation is prescribed for you in the matter of the  murdered; the freeman for the freeman, and the slave for the slave, and the female for  the female. And for him who is forgiven somewhat by his (injured) brother,  prosecution according to usage and payment unto him in kindness. This is an  alleviation and a mercy from your Lord. He who transgresseth after this will have a  painful doom. 

[002_179]179 And there is life for you in retaliation, O men of understanding, that ye may  ward off (evil). 

[002_180]180 It is prescribed for you, when death approacheth one of you, if he leave  wealth, that he bequeath unto parents and near relatives in kindness. (This is) a duty  for all those who ward off (evil). 

[002_181]181 And whoso changeth (the will) after he hath heard it - the sin thereof is only  upon those who change it. Lo! Allah is Hearer, Knower. 

[002_182]182 But he who feareth from a testator some unjust or sinful clause, and maketh  peace between the parties, (it shall be) no sin for him. Lo! Allah is Forgiving,  Merciful. 

[002_183]183 O ye who believe! Fasting is prescribed for you, even as it was prescribed for  those before you, that ye may ward off (evil); 

[002_184]184 (Fast) a certain number of days; and (for) him who is sick among you, or on  a journey, (the same) number of other days; and for those who can afford it there is a  ransom: the feeding of a man in need - but whoso doeth good of his own accord, it is  better for him: and that ye fast is better for you if ye did but know - 

[002_185]185 The month of Ramadan in which was revealed the Qur'an, a guidance for  mankind, and clear proofs of the guidance, and the Criterion (of right and wrong).  And whosoever of you is present, let him fast the month, and whosoever of you is  sick or on a journey, (let him fast the same) number of other days. Allah desireth for  you ease; He desireth not hardship for you; and (He desireth) that ye should complete  the period, and that ye should magnify Allah for having guided you, and that  peradventure ye may be thankful. 

[002_186]186 And when My servants question thee concerning Me, then surely I am nigh. I  answer the prayer of the suppliant when he crieth unto Me. So let them hear My call  and let them trust in Me, in order that they may be led aright. 

[002_187]187 It is made lawful for you to go in unto your wives on the night of the fast.  They are raiment for you and ye are raiment for them. Allah is Aware that ye were  deceiving yourselves in this respect and He hath turned in mercy toward you and  relieved you. So hold intercourse with them and seek that which Allah hath ordained  for you, and eat and drink until the white thread becometh distinct to you from the  black thread of the dawn. Then strictly observe the fast till nightfall and touch them  not, but be at your devotions in the mosques. These are the limits imposed by Allah,  so approach them not. Thus Allah expoundeth His revelation to mankind that they  may ward off (evil). 

[002_188]188 And eat not up your property among yourselves in vanity, nor seek by it to  gain the hearing of the judges that ye may knowingly devour a portion of the property  of others wrongfully. 

[002_189]189 They ask thee, (O Muhammad), of new moons, say: They are fixed seasons  for mankind and for the pilgrimage. It is not righteousness that ye go to houses by the  backs thereof (as do the idolaters at certain seasons), but the righteous man is he who  wardeth off (evil). So go to houses by the gates thereof, and observe your duty to  Allah, that ye may be successful. 

[002_190]190 Fight in the way of Allah against those who fight against you, but begin not  hostilities. Lo! Allah loveth not aggressors. 

[002_191]191 And slay them wherever ye find them, and drive them out of the places  whence they drove you out, for persecution is worse than slaughter. And fight not  with them at the Inviolable Place of Worship until they first attack you there, but if  they attack you (there) then slay them. Such is the reward of disbelievers. 

[002_192]192 But if they desist, then lo! Allah is Forgiving, Merciful. 

[002_193]193 And fight them until persecution is no more, and religion is for Allah. But if  they desist, then let there be no hostility except against wrong-doers. 

[002_194]194 The forbidden month for the forbidden month, and forbidden things in  retaliation. And one who attacketh you, attack him in like manner as he attacked you.  Observe your duty to Allah, and know that Allah is with those who ward off (evil). 

[002_195]195 Spend your wealth for the cause of Allah, and be not cast by your own hands  to ruin; and do good. Lo! Allah loveth the beneficent. 

[002_196]196 Perform the pilgrimage and the visit (to Makka) for Allah. And if ye are  prevented, then send such gifts as can be obtained with ease, and shave not your  heads until the gifts have reached their destination. And whoever among you is sick  or hath an ailment of the head must pay a ransom of fasting or almsgiving or offering.  And if ye are in safety, then whosoever contenteth himself with the visit for the  pilgrimage (shall give) such gifts as can be had with ease. And whosoever cannot find  (such gifts), then a fast of three days while on the pilgrimage, and of seven when ye  have returned; that is, ten in all. That is for him whoso folk are not present at the  Inviolable Place of Worship. Observe your duty to Allah, and know that Allah is  severe in punishment. 

[002_197]197 The pilgrimage is (in) the well-known months, and whoever is minded to  perform the pilgrimage therein (let him remember that) there is (to be) no lewdness  nor abuse nor angry conversation on the pilgrimage. And whatsoever good ye do  Allah knoweth it. So  make provision for yourselves (Hereafter); for the best  provision is to ward off evil. Therefore keep your duty unto Me, O men of  understanding. 

[002_198]198 It is no sin for you that ye seek the bounty of your Lord (by trading). But,  when ye press on in the multitude from 'Arafat, remember Allah by the sacred  monument. Remember Him as He hath guided you, although before ye were of those  astray. 

[002_199]199 Then hasten onward from the place whence the multitude hasteneth onward,  and ask forgiveness of Allah. Lo! Allah is Forgiving, Merciful. 

[002_200]200 And when ye have completed your devotions, then remember Allah as ye  remember your fathers or with a more lively remembrance. But of mankind is he who  saith: "Our Lord! Give unto us in the world," and he hath no portion in the Hereafter. 

[002_201]201 And of them (also) is he who saith: "Our Lord! Give unto us in the world that  which is good and in the Hereafter that which is good, and guard us from the doom of  Fire." 

[002_202]202 For them there is in store a goodly portion out of that which they have  earned. Allah is swift at reckoning. 

[002_203]203 Remember Allah through the appointed days. Then whoso hasteneth (his  departure) by two days, it is no sin for him, and whoso delayeth, it is no sin for him;  that is for him who wardeth off (evil). Be careful of your duty to Allah, and know that  unto Him ye will be gathered. 

[002_204]204 And of mankind there is he whoso conversation on the life of this world  pleaseth thee (Muhammad), and he calleth Allah to witness as to that which is in his  heart; yet he is the most rigid of opponents. 

[002_205]205 And when he turneth away (from thee) his effort in the land is to make  mischief therein and to destroy the crops and the cattle; and Allah loveth not mischief. 

[002_206]206 And when it is said unto him: Be careful of thy duty to Allah, pride taketh  him to sin. Hell will settle his account, an evil resting-place. 

[002_207]207 And of mankind is he who would sell himself, seeking the pleasure of Allah;  and Allah hath compassion on (His) bondmen. 

[002_208]208 O ye who believe! Come, all of you, into submission (unto Him); and follow  not the footsteps of the devil. Lo! he is an open enemy for you. 

[002_209]209 And if ye slide back after the clear proofs have come unto you, then know  that Allah is Mighty, Wise. 

[002_210]210 Wait they for naught else than that Allah should come unto them in the  shadows of the clouds with the angels ? Then the case would be already judged. All  cases go back to Allah (for judgment). 

[002_211]211 Ask of the Children of Israel how many a clear revelation We gave them! He  who altereth the grace of Allah after it hath come unto him (for him), lo! Allah is  severe in punishment. 

[002_212]212 Beautified is the life of the world for those who disbelieve; they make a jest  of the believers. But those who keep their duty to Allah will be above them on the  Day of Resurrection. Allah giveth without stint to whom He will. 

[002_213]213 Mankind were one community, and Allah sent (unto them) prophets as  bearers of good tidings and as warners, and revealed therewith the Scripture with the  truth that it might judge between mankind concerning that wherein they differed. And  only those unto whom (the Scripture) was given differed concerning it, after clear  proofs had come unto them, through hatred one of another. And Allah by His Will  guided those who believe unto the truth of that concerning which they differed. Allah  guideth whom He will unto a straight path. 

[002_214]214 Or think ye that ye will enter paradise while yet there hath not come unto you  the like of (that which came to) those who passed away before you ? Affliction and  adversity befell them, they were shaken as with earthquake, till the messenger (of  Allah) and those who believed along with him said: When cometh Allah's help ? Now  surely Allah's help is nigh. 

[002_215]215 They ask thee, (O Muhammad), what they shall spend. Say: that which ye  spend for good (must go) to parents and near kindred and orphans and the needy and  the wayfarer. And whatsoever good ye do, lo! Allah is Aware of it. 

[002_216]216 Warfare is ordained for you, though it is hateful unto you; but it may happen  that ye hate a thing which is good for you, and it may happen that ye love a thing  which is bad for you. Allah knoweth, ye know not. 

[002_217]217 They question thee (O Muhammad) with regard to warfare in the sacred  month. Say: Warfare therein is a great (transgression), but to turn (men) from the way  of Allah, and to disbelieve in Him and in the Inviolable Place of Worship, and to  expel His people thence, is a greater with Allah; for persecution is worse than killing.  And they will not cease from fighting against you till they have made you renegades  from your religion, if they can. And whoso becometh a renegade and dieth in his  disbelief: such are they whose works have fallen both in the world and the Hereafter.  Such are rightful owners of the Fire: they will abide therein. 

[002_218]218 Lo! those who believe, and those who emigrate (to escape the persecution)  and strive in the way of Allah, these have hope of Allah's mercy. Allah is Forgiving,  Merciful. 

[002_219]219 They question thee about strong drink and games of chance. Say: In both is  great sin, and (some) utility for men; but the sin of them is greater than their  usefulness. And they ask thee what they ought to spend. Say: that which is  superfluous. Thus Allah maketh plain to you (His) revelations, that haply ye may  reflect. 

[002_220]220 Upon the world and the Hereafter. And they question thee concerning  orphans. Say: To improve their lot is best. And if ye mingle your affairs with theirs,  then (they are) your brothers. Allah knoweth him who spoileth from him who  improveth. Had Allah willed He could have overburdened you. Allah is Mighty,  Wise. 

[002_221]221 Wed not idolatresses till they believe; for lo! a believing bondwoman is  better than an idolatress though she please you; and give not your daughters in  marriage to idolaters till they believe, for lo! a believing slave is better than an  idolater though he please you. These invite unto the Fire, and Allah inviteth unto the  Garden, and unto forgiveness by His grace, and expoundeth His revelations to  mankind that haply they may remember. 

[002_222]222 They question thee (O Muhammad) concerning menstruation. Say: It is an  illness, so let women alone at such times and go not in unto them till they are  cleansed. And when they have purified themselves, then go in unto them as Allah  hath enjoined upon you. Truly Allah loveth those who turn unto Him, and loveth  those who have a care for cleanness. 

[002_223]223 Your women are a tilth for you (to cultivate) so go to your tilth as ye will,  and send (good deeds) before you for your souls, and fear Allah, and know that ye  will (one day) meet Him. Give glad tidings to believers, (O Muhammad). 

[002_224]224 And make not Allah, by your oaths, a hindrance to your being righteous and  observing your duty unto Him and making peace among mankind. Allah is Hearer,  Knower. 

[002_225]225 Allah will not take you to task for that which is unintentional  in your oaths.  But He will take you to task for that which your hearts have garnered. Allah is  Forgiving, Clement. 

[002_226]226 Those who forswear their wives must wait four months; then, if they change  their mind, lo! Allah is Forgiving, Merciful. 

[002_227]227 And if they decide upon divorce (let them remember that) Allah is Hearer,  Knower. 

[002_228]228 Women who are divorced shall wait, keeping themselves apart, three  (monthly) courses. And it is not lawful for them that they should conceal that which  Allah hath created in their wombs if they are believers in Allah and the Last Day. And  their husbands would do better to take them back in that case if they desire a  reconciliation. And they (women) have rights similar to those (of men) over them in  kindness, and men are a degree above them. Allah is Mighty, Wise. 

[002_229]229 Divorce must be pronounced twice and then (a woman) must be retained in  honour or released in kindness. And it is not lawful for you that ye take from women  aught of that which ye have given them; except (in the case) when both fear that they  may not be able to keep within the limits (imposed by) Allah. And if ye fear that they  may not be able to keep the limits of Allah, in that case it is no sin for either of them  if the woman ransom herself. These are the limits (imposed by) Allah. Transgress  them not. For whoso transgresseth Allah's limits: such are wrong-doers. 

[002_230]230 And if he hath divorced her (the third time), then she is not lawful unto him  thereafter until she hath wedded another husband. Then if he (the other husband)  divorce her it is no sin for both of them that they come together again if they consider  that they are able to observe the limits of Allah. These are the limits of Allah. He  manifesteth them for people who have knowledge. 

[002_231]231 When ye have divorced women, and they have reached their term, then retain  them in kindness or release them in kindness. Retain them not to their hurt so that ye  transgress (the limits). He who doeth that hath wronged his soul. Make not the  revelations of Allah a laughing-stock (by your behaviour), but remember Allah's  grace upon you and that which He hath revealed unto you of the Scripture and of  wisdom, whereby He doth exhort you. Observe your duty to Allah and know that  Allah is Aware of all things. 

[002_232]232 And when ye have divorced women and they reach their term, place not  difficulties in the way of their marrying their husbands if it is agreed between them in  kindness. This is an admonition for him among you who believeth in Allah and the  Last Day. That is more virtuous for you, and cleaner. Allah knoweth; ye know not. 

[002_233]233 Mothers shall suckle their children for two whole years; (that is) for those  who wish to complete the suckling. The duty of feeding and clothing nursing mothers  in a seemly manner is upon the father of the child. No-one should be charged beyond  his capacity. A mother should not be made to suffer because of her child, nor should  he to whom the child is born (be made to suffer) because of his child. And on the  (father's) heir is incumbent the like of that (which was incumbent on the father). If  they desire to wean the child by mutual consent and (after) consultation, it is no sin  for them; and if ye wish to give your children out to nurse, it is no sin for you, provide  that ye pay what is due from you in kindness. Observe your duty to Allah, and know  that Allah is Seer of what ye do. 

[002_234]234 Such of you as die and leave behind them wives, they (the wives) shall wait,  keeping themselves apart, four months and ten days. And when they reach the term  (prescribed for them) then there is no sin for you in aught that they may do with  themselves in decency. Allah is informed of what ye do. 

[002_235]235 There is no sin for you in that which ye proclaim or hide in your minds  concerning your troth with women. Allah knoweth that ye will remember them. But  plight not your troth with women except by uttering a recognised form of words. And  do not consummate the marriage until (the term) prescribed is run. Know that Allah  knoweth what is in your minds, so beware of Him; and know that Allah is Forgiving,  Clement. 

[002_236]236 It is no sin for you if ye divorce women while yet ye have not touched them,  nor appointed unto them a portion. Provide for them, the rich according to his means,  and the straitened according to his means, a fair provision. (This is) a bounden duty  for those who do good. 

[002_237]237 If ye divorce them before ye have touched them and ye have appointed unto  them a portion, then (pay the) half of that which ye appointed, unless they (the  women) agree to forgo it, or he agreeth to forgo it in whose hand is the marriage tie.  To forgo is nearer to piety. And forget not kindness among yourselves. Allah is Seer  of what ye do. 

[002_238]238 Be guardians of your prayers, and of the midmost prayer, and stand up with  devotion to Allah. 

[002_239]239 And if ye go in fear, then (pray) standing or on horseback. And when ye are  again in safety, remember Allah, as He hath taught you that which (heretofore) ye  knew not. 

[002_240]240 (In the case of) those of you who are about to die and leave behind them  wives, they should bequeath unto their wives a provision for the year without turning  them out, but if they go out (of their own accord) there is no sin for you in that which  they do of themselves within their rights. Allah is Mighty, Wise. 

[002_241]241 For divorced women a provision in kindness: a duty for those who ward off  (evil). 

[002_242]242 Thus Allah expoundeth unto you His revelations so that ye may understand. 

[002_243]243 Bethink thee (O Muhammad) of those of old, who went forth from their  habitations in their thousands, fearing death, and Allah said unto them: Die; and then  He brought them back to life. Lo! Allah is a Lord of Kindness to mankind, but most  of mankind give not thanks. 

[002_244]244 Fight in the way of Allah, and know that Allah is Hearer, Knower. 

[002_245]245 Who is it that will lend unto Allah a goodly loan, so that He may give it  increase manifold ? Allah straiteneth and enlargeth. Unto Him ye will return. 

[002_246]246 Bethink thee of the leaders of the Children of Israel after Moses, how they  said unto a prophet whom they had: Set up for us a king and we will fight in Allah's  way. He said: Would ye then refrain from fighting if fighting were prescribed for you  ? They said: Why should we not fight in Allah's way when we have been driven from  our dwellings with our children ? Yet, when fighting was prescribed for them, they  turned away, all save a few of them. Allah is aware of evil-doers. 

[002_247]247 Their Prophet said unto them: Lo! Allah hath raised up Saul to be a king for  you. They said: How can he have kingdom over us when we are more deserving of  the kingdom than he is, since he hath not been given wealth enough ? He said: Lo!  Allah hath chosen him above you, and hath increased him abundantly in wisdom and  stature. Allah bestoweth His Sovereignty on whom He will. Allah is All-Embracing,  All-Knowing. 

[002_248]248 And their Prophet said unto them: Lo! the token of his kingdom is that there  shall come unto you the ark wherein is peace of reassurance from your Lord, and a  remnant of that which the house of Moses and the house of Aaron left behind, the  angels bearing it. Lo! herein shall be a token for you if (in truth) ye are believers. 

[002_249]249 And when Saul set out with the army, he said: Lo! Allah will try you by (the  ordeal of) a river. Whosoever therefore drinketh thereof he is not of me, and  whosoever tasteth it not he is of me, save him who taketh (thereof) in the hollow of  his hand. But they drank thereof, all save a few of them. And after he had crossed (the  river), he and those who believed with him, they said: We have no power this day  against Goliath and his hosts. But those who knew that they would meet Allah  exclaimed: How many a little company hath overcome a mighty host by Allah's  leave! Allah is with the steadfast. 

[002_250]250 And when they went into the field against Goliath and his hosts they said:  Our Lord! Bestow on us endurance, make our foothold sure, and give us help against  the disbelieving folk. 

[002_251]251 So they routed them by Allah's leave and David slew Goliath; and Allah gave  him the kingdom and wisdom, and taught him of that which He willeth. And if Allah  had not repelled some men by others the earth would have been corrupted. But Allah  is a Lord of Kindness to (His) creatures. 

[002_252]252 These are the portents of Allah which We recite unto thee (Muhammad) with  truth, and lo! thou art of the number of (Our) messengers; 

[002_253]253 Of those messengers, some of whom We have caused to excel others, and of  whom there are some unto whom Allah spake, while some of them He exalted (above  others) in degree; and We gave Jesus, son of Mary, clear proofs (of Allah's  Sovereignty) and We supported him with the holy Spirit. And if Allah had so wiled it,  those who followed after them would not have fought one with another after the clear  proofs had come unto them. But they differed, some of them believing and some  disbelieving. And if Allah had so willed it, they would not have fought one with  another; but Allah doeth what He will. 

[002_254]254 O ye who believe! spend of that wherewith We have provided you ere a day  come when there will be no trafficking, nor friendship, nor intercession. The  disbelievers, they are the wrong-doers. 

[002_255]255 Allah! There is no God save Him, the Alive, the Eternal. Neither slumber nor  sleep overtaketh Him. Unto Him belongeth whatsoever is in the heavens and  whatsoever is in the earth. Who is he that intercedeth with Him save by His leave ?  He knoweth that which is in front of them and that which is behind them, while they  encompass nothing of His knowledge save what He will. His throne includeth the  heavens and the earth, and He is never weary of preserving them. He is the Sublime,  the Tremendous. 

[002_256]256 There is no compulsion in religion. The right direction is henceforth distinct  from error. And he who rejecteth false deities and believeth in Allah hath grasped a  firm handhold which will never break. Allah is Hearer, Knower. 

[002_257]257 Allah is the Protecting Guardian of those who believe. He bringeth them out  of darkness into light. As for those who disbelieve, their patrons are false deities.  They bring them out of light into darkness. Such are rightful owners of the Fire. They  will abide therein. 

[002_258]258 Bethink thee of him who had an argument with Abraham about his Lord,  because Allah had given him the kingdom; how, when Abraham said: My Lord is He  Who giveth life and causeth death, he answered: I give life and cause death. Abraham  said: Lo! Allah causeth the sun to rise in the East, so do thou cause it to come up from  the West. Thus was the disbeliever abashed. And Allah guideth not wrongdoing folk. 

[002_259]259 Or (bethink thee of) the like of him who, passing by a township which had  fallen into utter ruin, exclaimed: How shall Allah give this township life after its  death ? And Allah made him die a hundred years, then brought him back to life. He  said: How long hast thou tarried ? (The man) said: I have tarried a day or part of a  day. (He) said: Nay, but thou hast tarried for a hundred years. Just look at thy food  and drink which have not rotted! Look at thine ass! And, that We may make thee a  token unto mankind, look at the bones, how We adjust them and then cover them with  flesh! And when (the matter) became clear unto him, he said: I know now that Allah  is Able to do all things. 

[002_260]260 And when Abraham said (unto his Lord): My Lord! Show me how Thou  givest life to the dead, He said: Dost thou not believe ? Abraham said: Yea, but (I ask)  in order that my heart may be at ease. (His Lord) said: Take four of the birds and  cause them to incline unto thee, then place a part of them on each hill, then call them,  they will come to thee in haste, and know that Allah is Mighty, Wise. 

[002_261]261 The likeness of those who spend their wealth in Allah's way is as the likeness  of a grain which groweth seven ears, in every ear a hundred grains. Allah giveth  increase manifold to whom He will. Allah is All-Embracing, All-Knowing. 

[002_262]262 Those who spend their wealth for the cause of Allah and afterward make not  reproach and injury to follow that which they have spent; their reward is with their  Lord, and there shall no fear come upon them, neither shall they grieve. 

[002_263]263 A kind word with forgiveness is better than almsgiving followed by injury.  Allah is Absolute, Clement. 

[002_264]264 O ye who believe! Render not vain your almsgiving by reproach and injury,  like him who spendeth his wealth only to be seen of men and believeth not in Allah  and the Last Day. His likeness is as the likeness of a rock whereon is dust of earth; a  rainstorm smiteth it, leaving it smooth and bare. They have no control of aught of that  which they have gained. Allah guideth not the disbelieving folk. 

[002_265]265 And the likeness of those who spend their wealth in search of Allah's  pleasure, and for the strengthening of their souls, is as the likeness of a garden on a  height. The rainstorm smiteth it and it bringeth forth its fruit twofold. And if the  rainstorm smite it not, then the shower. Allah is Seer of what ye do. 

[002_266]266 Would any of you like to have a garden of palm-trees and vines, with rivers  flowing underneath it, with all kinds of fruit for him therein; and old age hath stricken  him and he hath feeble offspring; and a fiery whirlwind striketh it and it is (all)  consumed by fire. Thus Allah maketh plain His revelations unto you, in order that ye  may give thought. 

[002_267]267 O ye who believe! Spend of the good things which ye have earned, and of  that which We bring forth from the earth for you, and seek not the bad (with intent) to  spend thereof (in charity) when ye would not take it for yourselves save with disdain;  and know that Allah is Absolute, Owner of Praise. 

[002_268]268 The devil promiseth you destitution and enjoineth on you lewdness. But  Allah promiseth you forgiveness from Himself with bounty. Allah is All-Embracing,  All-knowing. 

[002_269]269 He giveth wisdom unto whom He will, and he unto whom wisdom is given,  he truly hath received abundant good. But none remember except men of  understanding. 

[002_270]270 Whatever alms ye spend or vow ye vow, lo! Allah knoweth it. Wrong-doers  have no helpers. 

[002_271]271 If ye publish your almsgiving, it is well, but if ye hide it and give it to the  poor, it will be better for you, and will atone for some of your ill-deeds. Allah is  Informed of what ye do. 

[002_272]272 The guiding of them is not thy duty (O Muhammad), but Allah guideth  whom He will. And whatsoever good thing ye spend, it is for yourselves, when ye  spend not save in search of Allah's Countenance; and whatsoever good thing ye  spend, it will be repaid to you in full, and ye will not be wronged. 

[002_273]273 (Alms are) for the poor who are straitened for the cause of Allah, who cannot  travel in the land (for trade). The unthinking man accounteth them wealthy because of  their restraint. Thou shalt know them by their mark: They do not beg of men with  importunity. And whatsoever good thing ye spend, lo! Allah knoweth it. 

[002_274]274 Those who spend their wealth by night and day, by stealth and openly, verily  their reward is with their Lord, and their shall no fear come upon them neither shall  they grieve. 

[002_275]275 Those who swallow usury cannot rise up save as he ariseth whom the devil  hath prostrated by (his) touch. That is because they say: Trade is just like usury;  whereas Allah permitteth trading and forbiddeth usury. He unto whom an admonition  from his Lord cometh, and (he) refraineth (in obedience thereto), he shall keep (the  profits of) that which is past, and his affair (henceforth) is with Allah. As for him who  returneth (to usury) - Such are rightful owners of the Fire. They will abide therein. 

[002_276]276 Allah hath blighted usury and made almsgiving fruitful. Allah loveth not the  impious and guilty. 

[002_277]277 Lo! those who believe and do good works and establish worship and pay the  poor-due, their reward is with their Lord and there shall no fear come upon them  neither shall they grieve. 

[002_278]278 O ye who believe! Observe your duty to Allah, and give up what remaineth  (due to you) from usury, if ye are (in truth) believers. 

[002_279]279 And if ye do not, then be warned of war (against you) from Allah and His  messenger. And if ye repent, then ye have your principal (without interest). Wrong  not, and ye shall not be wronged. 

[002_280]280 And if the debtor is in straitened circumstances, then (let there be)  postponement to (the time of) ease; and that ye remit the debt as almsgiving would be  better for you if ye did but know. 

[002_281]281 And guard yourselves against a day in which ye will be brought back to  Allah. Then every soul will be paid in full that which it hath earned, and they will not  be wronged. 

[002_282]282 O ye who believe! When ye contract a debt for a fixed term, record it in writing. Let a scribe record it in writing between you in (terms of) equity. No scribe should refuse to write as Allah hath taught him, so let him write, and let him who incurreth the debt dictate, and let him observe his duty to Allah his Lord, and diminish naught thereof. But if he who oweth the debt is of low understanding, or weak, or unable himself to dictate, then let the guardian of his interests dictate in (terms of) equity. And call to witness, from among your men, two witnesses. And if two men be not (at hand) then a man and two women, of such as ye approve as witnesses, so that if the one erreth (through forgetfulness) the other will remember. And the witnesses must not refuse when they are summoned. Be not averse to writing down (the contract) whether it be small or great, with (record of) the term thereof. That is more equitable in the sight of Allah and more sure for testimony, and the best way of avoiding doubt b tween you; save only in the case when it is actual merchandise which ye transfer among yourselves from hand to hand. In that case it is no sin for you if ye write it not. And have witnesses when ye sell one to another, and let no harm be done to scribe or witness. If ye do (harm to them) lo! it is a sin in you. Observe your duty to Allah. Allah is teaching you. And Allah is knower of all things. 

[002_283]283 If ye be on a journey and cannot find a scribe, then a pledge in hand (shall  suffice). And if one of you entrusteth to another let him who is trusted deliver up that  which is entrusted to him (according to the pact between them) and let him observe  his duty to Allah his Lord. Hide not testimony. He who hideth it, verily his heart is  sinful. Allah is Aware of what ye do. 

[002_284]284 Unto Allah (belongeth) whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the  earth; and whether ye make known what is in your minds or hide it, Allah will bring  you to account for it. He will forgive whom He will and He will punish whom He  will. Allah is Able to do all things. 

[002_285]285 The messenger believeth in that which hath been revealed unto him from his  Lord and (so do) believers. Each one believeth in Allah and His angels and His  scriptures and His messengers - We make no distinction between any of His  messengers - and they say: We hear, and we obey. (Grant us) Thy forgiveness, our  Lord. Unto Thee is the journeying. 

[002_286]286 Allah tasketh not a soul beyond its scope. For it (is only) that which it hath  earned, and against it (only) that which it hath deserved. Our Lord! Condemn us not if  we forget, or miss the mark! Our Lord! Lay not on us such a burden as thou didst lay  on those before us! Our Lord! Impose not on us that which we have not the strength  to bear! Pardon us, absolve us and have mercy on us, Thou, our Protector, and give us  victory over the disbelieving folk.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

3. Al-Imran: The Family Of Imran

[003_001]1 Alim. Lam. Mim. 

[003_002]2 Allah! There is no God save Him, the Alive, the Eternal. 

[003_003]3 He hath revealed unto thee (Muhammad) the Scripture with truth, confirming  that which was (revealed) before it, even as He revealed the Torah and the Gospel. 

[003_004]4 Aforetime, for a guidance to mankind; and hath revealed the Criterion (of  right and wrong). Lo! those who disbelieve the revelations of Allah, theirs will be a  heavy doom. Allah is Mighty, Able to Requite (the wrong). 

[003_005]5 Lo! nothing in the earth or in the heavens is hidden from Allah. 

[003_006]6 He it is Who fashioneth you in the wombs as pleaseth Him. There is no God  save Him, the Almighty, the Wise. 

[003_007]7 He it is Who hath revealed unto thee (Muhammad) the Scripture wherein are  clear revelations - they are the substance of the Book - and others (which are)  allegorical. But those in whose hearts is doubt pursue, forsooth, that which is  allegorical seeking (to cause) dissension by seeking to explain it. None knoweth its  explanation save Allah. And those who are of sound instruction say: We believe  therein; the whole is from our Lord; but only men of understanding really heed. 

[003_008]8 Our Lord! Cause not our hearts to stray after Thou hast guided us, and  bestow upon us mercy from Thy Presence. Lo! Thou, only Thou, art the Bestower. 

[003_009]9 Our Lord! Lo! it is Thou Who gatherest mankind together to a Day of which  there is no doubt. Lo! Allah faileth not to keep the tryst. 

[003_010]10 (On that Day) neither the riches nor the progeny of those who disbelieve will  aught avail them with Allah. They will be fuel for Fire. 

[003_011]11 Like Pharaoh's folk and those who were before them, they disbelieved Our  revelations and so Allah seized them for their sins. And Allah is severe in  punishment. 

[003_012]12 Say (O Muhammad) unto those who disbelieve: Ye shall be overcome and  gathered unto Hell, an evil resting-place. 

[003_013]13 There was a token for you in two hosts which met: one army fighting in the  way of Allah, and another disbelieving, whom they saw as twice their number,  clearly, with their very eyes. Thus Allah strengtheneth with His succour whom He  will. Lo! herein verily is a lesson for those who have eyes. 

[003_014]14 Beautified for mankind is love of the joys (that come) from women and  offspring; and stored-up heaps of gold and silver, and horses branded (with their  mark), and cattle and land. That is comfort of the life of the world. Allah! With Him  is a more excellent abode. 

[003_015]15 Say: Shall I inform you of something better than that ? For those who keep  from evil, with their Lord, are Gardens underneath which rivers flow wherein they  will abide, and pure companions, and contentment from Allah. Allah is Seer of His  bondmen, 

[003_016]16 Those who say: Our Lord! Lo! we believe. So forgive us our sins and guard  us from the punishment of Fire; 

[003_017]17 The steadfast, and the truthful, and the obedient, those who spend (and hoard  not), those who pray for pardon in the watches of the night. 

[003_018]18 Allah (Himself) is Witness that there is no God save Him. And the angels  and the men of learning (too are witness). Maintaining His creation in justice, there is  no God save Him the Almighty, the Wise. 

[003_019]19 Lo! religion with Allah (is) the Surrender (to His Will and Guidance). Those  who (formerly) received the Scripture differed only after knowledge came unto them,  through transgression among themselves. Whoso disbelieveth the revelations of Allah  (will find that) lo! Allah is swift at reckoning. 

[003_020]20 And if they argue with thee, (O Muhammad), say: I have surrendered my  purpose to Allah and (so have) those who follow me. And say unto those who have  received the Scripture and those who read not: Have ye (too) surrendered ? If they  surrender, then truly they are rightly guided, and if they turn away, then it is thy duty  only to convey the message (unto them). Allah is Seer of (His) bondmen. 

[003_021]21 Lo! those who disbelieve the revelations of Allah, and slay the prophets  wrongfully, and slay those of mankind who enjoin equity: promise them a painful  doom. 

[003_022]22 Those are they whose works have failed in the world and the Hereafter; and  they have no helpers. 

[003_023]23 Hast thou not seen how those who have received a portion of the Scripture  invoke the Scripture of Allah (in their disputes) that it may judge between them; then  a faction of them turn away, being opposed (to it) ? 

[003_024]24 That is because they say: The Fire will not touch us save for a certain number  of days. That which they used to invent hath deceived them regarding their religion. 

[003_025]25 How (will it be with them) when We have brought them all together to a Day  of which there is no doubt, when every soul will be paid in full what it hath earned,  and they will not be wronged. 

[003_026]26 Say: O Allah! Owner of Sovereignty! Thou givest sovereignty unto whom  Thou wilt, and Thou withdrawest sovereignty from whom Thou wilt. Thou exaltest  whom Thou wilt, and Thou abasest whom Thou wilt. In Thy hand is the good. Lo!  Thou art Able to do all things. 

[003_027]27 Thou causest the night to pass into the day, and Thou causest the day to pass  into the night. And Thou bringest forth the living from the dead, and Thou bringest  forth the dead from the living. And Thou givest sustenance to whom Thou choosest,  without stint. 

[003_028]28 Let not the believers take disbelievers for their friends in preference to  believers. Whoso doeth that hath no connection with Allah unless (it be) that ye but  guard yourselves against them, taking (as it were) security. Allah biddeth you beware  (only) of Himself. Unto Allah is the journeying. 

[003_029]29 Say, (O Muhammad): Whether ye hide that which is in your breasts or reveal  it, Allah knoweth it. He knoweth that which is in the heavens and that which is in the  earth, and Allah is Able to do all things. 

[003_030]30 On the Day when every soul will find itself confronted with all that it hath  done of good and all that it hath done of evil (every soul) will long that there might be  a mighty space of distance between it and that (evil). Allah biddeth you beware of  Him. And Allah is Full of Pity for (His) bondmen. 

[003_031]31 Say, (O Muhammad, to mankind): If ye love Allah, follow me; Allah will  love you and forgive you your sins. Allah is Forgiving, Merciful. 

[003_032]32 Say: Obey Allah and the messenger. But if they turn away, lo! Allah loveth  not the disbelievers (in His guidance). 

[003_033]33 Lo! Allah preferred Adam and Noah and the Family of Abraham and the  Family of 'Imran above (all His) creatures. 

[003_034]34 They were descendants one of another. Allah is Hearer, Knower. 

[003_035]35 (Remember) when the wife of 'Imran said: My Lord! I have vowed unto  Thee that which is in my belly as a consecrated (offering). Accept it from me. Lo!  Thou, only Thou, art the Hearer, the Knower! 

[003_036]36 And when she was delivered she said: My Lord! Lo! I am delivered of a  female - Allah knew best of what she was delivered - the male is not as the female;  and lo! I have named her Mary, and lo! I crave Thy protection for her and for her  offspring from Satan the outcast. 

[003_037]37 And her Lord accepted her with full acceptance and vouchsafed to her a  goodly growth; and made Zachariah her guardian. Whenever Zachariah went into the  sanctuary where she was, he found that she had food. He said: O Mary! Whence  cometh unto thee this (food) ? She answered: It is from Allah. Allah giveth without  stint to whom He will. 

[003_038]38 Then Zachariah prayed unto his Lord and said: My Lord! Bestow upon me of  Thy bounty goodly offspring. Lo! Thou art the Hearer of Prayer. 

[003_039]39 And the angels called to him as he stood praying in the sanctuary: Allah  giveth thee glad tidings of (a son whose name is) John, (who cometh) to confirm a  word from Allah lordly, chaste, a prophet of the righteous. 

[003_040]40 He said: My Lord! How can I have a son when age hath overtaken me  already and my wife is barren ? (The angel) answered: So (it will be). Allah doeth  what He will. 

[003_041]41 He said: My Lord! Appoint a token for me. (The angel) said: The token unto  thee (shall be) that thou shalt not speak unto mankind three days except by signs.  Remember thy Lord much, and praise (Him) in the early hours of night and morning. 

[003_042]42 And when the angels said: O Mary! Lo! Allah hath chosen thee and made  thee pure, and hath preferred thee above (all) the women of creation. 

[003_043]43 O Mary! Be obedient to thy Lord, prostrate thyself and bow with those who  bow (in worship). 

[003_044]44 This is of the tidings of things hidden. We reveal it unto thee (Muhammad).  Thou wast not present with them when they threw their pens (to know) which of them  should be the guardian of Mary, nor wast thou present with them when they  quarrelled (thereupon). 

[003_045]45 (And remember) when the angels said: O Mary! Lo! Allah giveth thee glad  tidings of a word from him, whose name is the Messiah, Jesus, son of Mary,  illustrious in the world and the Hereafter, and one of those brought near (unto Allah). 

[003_046]46 He will speak unto mankind in his cradle and in his manhood, and he is of  the righteous. 

[003_047]47 She said: My Lord! How can I have a child when no mortal hath touched me  ? He said: So (it will be). Allah createth what He will. If He decreeth a thing, He saith  unto it only: Be! and it is. 

[003_048]48 And He will teach him the Scripture and wisdom, and the Torah and the  Gospel, 

[003_049]49 And will make him a messenger unto the Children of Israel, (saying): Lo! I  come unto you with a sign from your Lord. Lo! I fashion for you out of clay the  likeness of a bird, and I breathe into it and it is a bird, by Allah's leave. I heal him  who was born blind, and the leper, and I raise the dead, by Allah's leave. And I  announce unto you what ye eat and what ye store up in your houses. Lo! herein verily  is a portent for you, if ye are to be believers. 

[003_050]50 And (I come) confirming that which was before me of the Torah, and to  make lawful some of that which was forbidden unto you. I come unto you with a sign  from your Lord, so keep your duty to Allah and obey me. 

[003_051]51 Lo! Allah is my Lord and your Lord, so worship Him. That is a straight path. 

[003_052]52 But when Jesus became conscious of their disbelief, he cried: Who will be  my helpers in the cause of Allah ? The disciples said: We will be Allah's helpers. We  believe in Allah, and bear thou witness that we have surrendered (unto Him). 

[003_053]53 Our Lord! We believe in that which Thou hast revealed and we follow him  whom Thou hast sent. Enrol us among those who witness (to the truth). 

[003_054]54 And they (the disbelievers) schemed, and Allah schemed (against them): and  Allah is the best of schemers. 

[003_055]55 (And remember) when Allah said: O Jesus! Lo! I am gathering thee and  causing thee to ascend unto Me, and am cleansing thee of those who disbelieve and  am setting those who follow thee above those who disbelieve until the Day of  Resurrection. Then unto Me ye will (all) return, and I shall judge between you as to  that wherein ye used to differ. 

[003_056]56 As for those who disbelieve I shall chastise them with a heavy chastisement  in the world and the Hereafter; and they will have no helpers. 

[003_057]57 And as for those who believe and do good works, He will pay them their  wages in full. Allah loveth not wrong-doers. 

[003_058]58 This (which) We recite unto thee is a revelation and a wise reminder. 

[003_059]59 Lo! the likeness of Jesus with Allah is as the likeness of Adam. He created  him of dust, then He said unto him: Be! and he is. 

[003_060]60 (This is) the truth from thy Lord (O Muhammad), so be not thou of those  who waver. 

[003_061]61 And whoso disputeth with thee concerning him, after the knowledge which  hath come unto thee, say (unto him): Come! We will summon our sons and your sons,  and our women and your women, and ourselves and yourselves, then we will pray  humbly (to our Lord) and (solemnly) invoke the curse of Allah upon those who lie. 

[003_062]62 Lo! This verily is the true narrative. There is no God save Allah, and lo!  Allah, He verily is, is the Mighty, the Wise. 

[003_063]63 And if they turn away, then lo! Allah is Aware of (who are) the corrupters. 

[003_064]64 Say: O People of the Scripture! Come to an agreement between us and you:  that we shall worship none but Allah, and that we shall ascribe no partner unto Him,  and that none of us shall take others for lords beside Allah. And if they turn away,  then say: Bear witness that we are they who have surrendered (unto Him). 

[003_065]65 O People of the Scripture! Why will ye argue about Abraham, when the  Torah and the Gospel were not revealed till after him ? Have ye then no sense ? 

[003_066]66 Lo! ye are those who argue about that whereof ye have some knowledge:  Why then argue ye concerning that whereof ye have no knowledge ? Allah knoweth.  Ye know not. 

[003_067]67 Abraham was not a Jew, nor yet a Christian; but he was an upright man who  had surrendered (to Allah), and he was not of the idolaters. 

[003_068]68 Lo! those of mankind who have the best claim to Abraham are those who  followed him, and this Prophet and those who believe (with him); and Allah is the  Protecting Guardian of the believers. 

[003_069]69 A party of the People of the Scripture long to make you go astray; and they  make none to go astray except themselves, but they perceive not. 

[003_070]70 O People of the Scripture! Why disbelieve ye in the revelations of Allah,  when ye (yourselves) bear witness (to their truth) ? 

[003_071]71 O People of the Scripture! Why confound ye truth with falsehood and  knowingly conceal the truth ? 

[003_072]72 And a party of the People of the Scripture say: Believe in that which hath  been revealed unto those who believe at the opening of the day, and disbelieve at the  end thereof, in order that they may return; 

[003_073]73 And believe not save in one who followeth your religion - Say (O  Muhammad): Lo! the guidance is Allah's Guidance - that anyone is given the like of  that which was given unto you or that they may argue with you in the presence of  their Lord. Say (O Muhammad): Lo! the bounty is in Allah's hand. He bestoweth it on  whom He will. Allah is All-Embracing, All-Knowing. 

[003_074]74 He selecteth for His mercy whom He will. Allah is of Infinite Bounty. 

[003_075]75 Among the People of the Scripture there is he who, if thou trust him with a  weight of treasure, will return it to thee. And among them there is he who, if thou  trust him with a piece of gold, will not return it to thee unless thou keep standing over  him. That is because they say: We have no duty to the Gentiles. They speak a lie  concerning Allah knowingly. 

[003_076]76 Nay, but (the chosen of Allah is) he who fulfilleth his pledge and wardeth off  (evil); for lo! Allah loveth those who ward off (evil). 

[003_077]77 Lo! those who purchase a small gain at the cost of Allah's covenant and their  oaths, they have no portion in the Hereafter. Allah will neither speak to them nor look  upon them on the Day of Resurrection, nor will He make them grow. Theirs will be a  painful doom. 

[003_078]78 And lo! there is a party of them who distort the Scripture with their tongues,  that ye may think that what they say is from the Scripture, when it is not from the  Scripture. And they say: It is from Allah, when it is not from Allah; and they speak a  lie concerning Allah knowingly. 

[003_079]79 It is not (possible) for any human being unto whom Allah had given the  Scripture and wisdom and the prophethood that he should afterwards have said unto  mankind: Be slaves of me instead of Allah; but (what he said was): Be ye faithful  servants of the Lord by virtue of your constant teaching of the Scripture and of your  constant study thereof. 

[003_080]80 And he commanded you not that ye should take the angels and the prophets  for lords. Would he command you to disbelieve after ye had surrendered (to Allah) ? 

[003_081]81 When Allah made (His) covenant with the prophets, (He said): Behold that  which I have given you of the Scripture and knowledge. And afterward there will  come unto you a messenger, confirming that which ye possess. Ye shall believe in  him and ye shall help him. He said: Do ye agree, and will ye take up My burden  (which I lay upon you) in this (matter) ? They answered: We agree. He said: Then  bear ye witness. I will be a witness with you. 

[003_082]82 Then whosoever after this shall turn away: they will be miscreants. 

[003_083]83 Seek they other than the religion of Allah, when unto Him submitteth  whosoever is in the heavens and the earth, willingly or unwillingly, and unto Him  they will be returned. 

[003_084]84 Say (O Muhammad): We believe in Allah and that which is revealed unto us  and that which was revealed unto Abraham and Ishmael and Isaac and Jacob and the  tribes, and that which was vouchsafed unto Moses and Jesus and the prophets from  their Lord. We make no distinction between any of them, and unto Him we have  surrendered. 

[003_085]85 And whoso seeketh as religion other than the Surrender (to Allah) it will not  be accepted from him, and he will be a loser in the Hereafter. 

[003_086]86 How shall Allah guide a people who disbelieved after their belief and (after)  they bore witness that the messenger is true and after clear proofs (of Allah's  Sovereignty) had come unto them. And Allah guideth not wrongdoing folk. 

[003_087]87 As for such, their guerdon is that on them rests the curse of Allah and of  angels and of men combined. 

[003_088]88 They will abide therein. Their doom will not be lightened, neither will they  be reprieved; 

[003_089]89 Save those who afterward repent and do right. Lo! Allah is Forgiving,  Merciful. 

[003_090]90 Lo! those who disbelieve after their (profession of) belief, and afterward  grow violent in disbelief: their repentance will not be accepted. And such are those  who are astray. 

[003_091]91 Lo! those who disbelieve, and die in disbelief, the (whole) earth full of gold  would not be accepted from such an one if it were offered as a ransom (for his soul).  Theirs will be a painful doom and they will have no helpers. 

[003_092]92 Ye will not attain unto piety until ye spend of that which ye love. And  whatsoever ye spend, Allah is Aware thereof. 

[003_093]93 All food was lawful unto the Children of Israel, save that which Israel  forbade himself, (in days) before the Torah was revealed. Say: Produce the Torah and  read it (unto us) if ye are truthful. 

[003_094]94 And whoever shall invent a falsehood after that concerning Allah, such will  be wrong-doers. 

[003_095]95 Say: Allah speaketh truth. So follow the religion of Abraham, the upright. He  was not of the idolaters. 

[003_096]96 Lo! the first Sanctuary appointed for mankind was that at Mecca, a blessed  place, a guidance to the peoples; 

[003_097]97 Wherein are plain memorials (of Allah's guidance); the place where  Abraham stood up to pray; and whosoever entereth it is safe. And pilgrimage to the  House is a duty unto Allah for mankind, for him who can find a way thither. As for  him who disbelieveth, (let him know that) lo! Allah is Independent of (all) creatures. 

[003_098]98 Say: O People of the Scripture! Why disbelieve ye in the revelations of  Allah, when Allah (Himself) is Witness of what ye do ? 

[003_099]99 Say: O People of the Scripture! Why drive ye back believers from the way of  Allah, seeking to make it crooked, when ye are witnesses (to Allah's guidance) ?  Allah is not unaware of what ye do. 

[003_100]100 O ye who believe! If ye obey a party of those who have received the  Scripture they will make you disbelievers after your belief. 

[003_101]101 How can ye disbelieve, when it is ye unto whom Allah's revelations are  recited, and His messenger is in your midst ? He who holdeth fast to Allah, he indeed  is guided unto a right path. 

[003_102]102 O ye who believe! Observe your duty to Allah with right observance, and die  not save as those who have surrendered (unto Him) 

[003_103]103 And hold fast, all of you together, to the cable of Allah, and do not separate.  And remember Allah's favour unto you: How ye were enemies and He made  friendship between your hearts so that ye became as brothers by His grace; and (how)  ye were upon the brink of an abyss of fire, and He did save you from it. Thus Allah  maketh clear His revelations unto you, that haply ye may be guided, 

[003_104]104 And there may spring from you a nation who invite to goodness, and enjoin  right conduct and forbid indecency. Such are they who are successful. 

[003_105]105 And be ye not as those who separated and disputed after the clear proofs had  come unto them. For such there is an awful doom, 

[003_106]106 On the Day when (some) faces will be whitened and (some) faces will be  blackened; and as for those whose faces have been blackened, it will be said unto  them: Disbelieved ye after your (profession of) belief ? Then taste the punishment for  that ye disbelieved. 

[003_107]107 And as for those whose faces have been whitened, in the mercy of Allah they  dwell for ever. 

[003_108]108 These are revelations of Allah. We recite them unto thee in truth. Allah  willeth no injustice to (His) creatures. 

[003_109]109 Unto Allah belongeth whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the  earth; and unto Allah all things are returned. 

[003_110]110 Ye are the best community that hath been raised up for mankind. Ye enjoin  right conduct and forbid indecency; and ye believe in Allah. And if the People of the  Scripture had believed it had been better for them. Some of them are believers; but  most of them are evil-livers. 

[003_111]111 They will not harm you save a trifling hurt, and if they fight against you they  will turn and flee. And afterward they will not be helped. 

[003_112]112 Ignominy shall be their portion wheresoever they are found save (where they  grasp) a rope from Allah and a rope from men. They have incurred anger from their  Lord, and wretchedness is laid upon them. That is because they used to disbelieve the  revelations of Allah, and slew the prophets wrongfully. That is because they were  rebellious and used to transgress. 

[003_113]113 They are not all alike. Of the People of the Scripture there is a staunch  community who recite the revelations of Allah in the night season, falling prostrate  (before Him). 

[003_114]114 They believe in Allah and the Last Day, and enjoin right conduct and forbid  indecency, and vie one with another in good works. These are of the righteous. 

[003_115]115 And whatever good they do, they will not be denied the meed thereof. Allah  is Aware of those who ward off (evil). 

[003_116]116 Lo! the riches and the progeny of those who disbelieve will not avail them  aught against Allah; and such are rightful owners of the Fire. They will abide therein. 

[003_117]117 The likeness of that which they spend in this life of the world is as the  likeness of a biting, icy wind which smiteth the harvest of a people who have  wronged themselves, and devastateth it. Allah wronged them not, but they do wrong  themselves. 

[003_118]118 O ye who believe! Take not for intimates others than your own folk, who  would spare no pains to ruin you; they love to hamper you. Hatred is revealed by (the  utterance of) their mouths, but that which their breasts hide is greater. We have made  plain for you the revelations if ye will understand. 

[003_119]119 Lo! ye are those who love them though they love you not, and ye believe in  all the Scripture. When they fall in with you they say: We believe; but when they go  apart they bite their finger-tips at you, for rage. Say: Perish in your rage! Lo! Allah is  Aware of what is hidden in (your) breasts. 

[003_120]120 If a lucky chance befall you, it is evil unto them, and if disaster strike you  they rejoice thereat. But if ye persevere and keep from evil their guile will never harm  you. Lo! Allah is Surrounding what they do. 

[003_121]121 And when thou settedst forth at daybreak from thy housefolk to assign to the  believers their positions for the battle, Allah was Hearer, Knower. 

[003_122]122 When two parties of you almost fell away, and Allah was their Protecting  Friend. In Allah let believers put their trust. 

[003_123]123 Allah had already given you the victory at Badr, when ye were contemptible.  So observe your duty to Allah in order that ye may be thankful. 

[003_124]124 When thou didst say unto the believers: Is it not sufficient for you that your  Lord should support you with three thousand angels sent down (to your help) ? 

[003_125]125 Nay, but if ye persevere, and keep from evil, and (the enemy) attack you  suddenly, your Lord will help you with five thousand angels sweeping on. 

[003_126]126 Allah ordained this only as a message of good cheer for you, and that thereby  your hearts might be at rest - Victory cometh only from Allah, the Mighty, the Wise - 

[003_127]127 That He may cut off a part of those who disbelieve, or overwhelm them so  that they retire, frustrated. 

[003_128]128 It is no concern at all of thee (Muhammad) whether He relent toward them or  punish them; for they are evil-doers. 

[003_129]129 Unto Allah belongeth whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the  earth. He forgiveth whom He will, and punisheth whom He will. Allah is Forgiving,  Merciful. 

[003_130]130 O ye who believe! Devour not usury, doubling and quadrupling (the sum  lent). Observe your duty to Allah, that ye may be successful. 

[003_131]131 And ward off (from yourselves) the Fire prepared for disbelievers. 

[003_132]132 And obey Allah and the messenger, that ye may find mercy. 

[003_133]133 And vie one with another for forgiveness from your Lord, and for a paradise  as wide as are the heavens and the earth, prepared for those who ward off (evil); 

[003_134]134 Those who spend (of that which Allah hath given them) in ease and in  adversity, those who control their wrath and are forgiving toward mankind; Allah  loveth the good; 

[003_135]135 And those who, when they do an evil thing or wrong themselves, remember  Allah and implore forgiveness for their sins - Who forgiveth sins save Allah only ? -  and will not knowingly repeat (the wrong) they did. 

[003_136]136 The reward of such will be forgiveness from their Lord, and Gardens  underneath which rivers flow, wherein they will abide for ever - a bountiful reward  for workers! 

[003_137]137 Systems have passed away before you. Do but travel in the land and see the  nature of the consequence for those who did deny (the messengers). 

[003_138]138 This is a declaration for mankind, a guidance and an admonition unto those  who ward off (evil) 

[003_139]139 Faint not nor grieve, for ye will overcome them if ye are (indeed) believers. 

[003_140]140 If ye have received a blow, the (disbelieving) people have received a blow  the like thereof. These are (only) the vicissitudes which We cause to follow one  another for mankind, to the end that Allah may know those who believe and may  choose witnesses from among you; and Allah loveth not wrong-doers. 

[003_141]141 And that Allah may prove those who believe, and may blight the  disbelievers. 

[003_142]142 Or deemed ye that ye would enter paradise while yet Allah knoweth not  those of you who really strive, nor knoweth those (of you) who are steadfast ? 

[003_143]143 And verily ye used to wish for death before ye met it (in the field). Now ye  have seen it with your eyes! 

[003_144]144 Muhammad is but a messenger, messengers (the like of whom) have passed  away before him. Will it be that, when he dieth or is slain, ye will turn back on your  heels ? He who turneth back on his heels doth no hurt to Allah, and Allah will reward  the thankful. 

[003_145]145 No soul can ever die except by Allah's leave and at a term appointed. Whoso  desireth the reward of the world, We bestow on him thereof; and whoso desireth the  reward of the Hereafter, We bestow on him thereof. We shall reward the thankful. 

[003_146]146 And with how many a prophet have there been a number of devoted men  who fought (beside him). They quailed not for aught that befell them in the way of  Allah, nor did they weaken, nor were they brought low. Allah loveth the steadfast. 

[003_147]147 Their cry was only that they said: Our Lord! forgive us for our sins and  wasted efforts, make our foothold sure, and give us victory over the disbelieving folk. 

[003_148]148 So Allah gave them the reward of the world and the good reward of the  Hereafter. Allah loveth those whose deeds are good. 

[003_149]149 O ye who believe! if ye obey those who disbelieve, they will make you turn  back on your heels, and ye turn back as losers. 

[003_150]150 But Allah is your Protector, and He is the Best of Helpers. 

[003_151]151 We shall cast terror into the hearts of those who disbelieve because they  ascribe unto Allah partners, for which no warrant hath been revealed. Their habitation  is the Fire, and hapless the abode of the wrong-doers. 

[003_152]152 Allah verily made good His promise unto you when ye routed them by His  leave, until (the moment) when your courage failed you, and ye disagreed about the  order and ye disobeyed, after He had shown you that for which ye long. Some of you  desired the world, and some of you desired the Hereafter. Therefore He made you flee  from them, that He might try you. Yet now He hath forgiven you. Allah is a Lord of  Kindness to believers. 

[003_153]153 When ye climbed (the hill) and paid no heed to anyone, while the messenger,  in your rear, was calling you (to fight). Therefor He rewarded you grief for (his) grief,  that (He might teach) you not to sorrow either for that which ye missed or for that  which befell you. Allah is Informed of what ye do. 

[003_154]154 Then, after grief, He sent down security for you. As slumber did it overcome  a party of you, while (the other) party, who were anxious on their own account,  thought wrongly of Allah, the thought of ignorance. They said: Have we any part in  the cause ? Say (O Muhammad): The cause belongeth wholly to Allah. They hide  within themselves (a thought) which they reveal not unto thee, saying: Had we had  any part in the cause we should not have been slain here. Say: Even though ye had  been in your houses, those appointed to be slain would have gone forth to the places  where they were to lie. (All this hath been) in order that Allah might try what is in  your breasts and prove what is in your hearts. Allah is Aware of what is hidden in the  breasts (of men). 

[003_155]155 Lo! those of you who turned back on the day when the two hosts met, Satan  alone it was who caused them to backslide, because of some of that which they have  earned. Now Allah hath forgiven them. Lo! Allah is Forgiving, Clement. 

[003_156]156 O ye who believe! Be not as those who disbelieved and said of their brethren  who went abroad in the land or were fighting in the field: If they had been (here) with  us they would not have died or been killed: that Allah may make it anguish in their  hearts. Allah giveth life and causeth death; and Allah is Seer of what ye do. 

[003_157]157 And what though ye be slain in Allah's way or die therein ? Surely pardon  from Allah and mercy are better than all that they amass. 

[003_158]158 What though ye be slain or die, when unto Allah ye are gathered ? 

[003_159]159 It was by the mercy of Allah that thou wast lenient with them (O  Muhammad), for if thou hadst been stern and fierce of heart they would have  dispersed from round about thee. So pardon them and ask forgiveness for them and  consult with them upon the conduct of affairs. And when thou art resolved, then put  thy trust in Allah. Lo! Allah loveth those who put their trust (in Him). 

[003_160]160 If Allah is your helper none can overcome you, and if He withdraw His help  from you, who is there who can help you after Him ? In Allah let believers put their  trust. 

[003_161]161 It is not for any prophet to embezzle. Whoso embezzleth will bring what he  embezzled with him on the Day of Resurrection. Then every soul will be paid in full  what it hath earned; and they will not be wronged. 

[003_162]162 Is one who followeth the pleasure of Allah as one who hath earned  condemnation from Allah, whose habitation is the Fire, a hapless journey's end ? 

[003_163]163 There are degrees (of grace and reprobation) with Allah, and Allah is Seer of  what they do. 

[003_164]164 Allah verily hath shown grace to the believers by sending unto them a  messenger of their own who reciteth unto them His revelations, and causeth them to  grow, and teacheth them the Scripture and wisdom; although before (he came to  them) they were in flagrant error. 

[003_165]165 And was it so, when a disaster smote you, though ye had smitten (them with  a disaster) twice (as great), that ye said: How is this ? Say (unto them, O  Muhammad): It is from yourselves. Lo! Allah is Able to do all things. 

[003_166]166 That which befell you, on the day when the two armies met, was by  permission of Allah; that He might know the true believers; 

[003_167]167 And that He might know the hypocrites, unto whom it was said: Come, fight  in the way of Allah, or defend yourselves. They answered: If we knew aught of  fighting we would follow you. On that day they were nearer disbelief than faith. They  utter with their mouths a thing  which is not in their hearts. Allah is Best Aware of  what they hide. 

[003_168]168 Those who, while they sat at home, said of their brethren (who were fighting  for the cause of Allah): If they had been guided by us they would not have been slain.  Say (unto them, O Muhammad): Then avert death from yourselves if ye are truthful. 

[003_169]169 Think not of those, who are slain in the way of Allah, as dead. Nay, they are  living. With their Lord they have provision. 

[003_170]170 Jubilant (are they) because of that which Allah hath bestowed upon them of  His bounty, rejoicing for the sake of those who have not joined them but are left  behind: That there shall no fear come upon them neither shall they grieve. 

[003_171]171 They rejoice because of favour from Allah and kindness, and that Allah  wasteth not the wage of the believers. 

[003_172]172 As for those who heard the call of Allah and His messenger after the harm  befell them (in the fight); for such of them as do right and ward off (evil), there is  great reward. 

[003_173]173 Those unto whom men said: Lo! the people have gathered against you,  therefor fear them. (The threat of danger) but increased the faith of them and they  cried: Allah is Sufficient for us! Most Excellent is He in Whom we trust! 

[003_174]174 So they returned with grace and favour from Allah, and no harm touched  them. They followed the good pleasure of Allah, and Allah is of Infinite Bounty. 

[003_175]175 It is only the devil who would make (men) fear his partisans. Fear them not;  fear Me, if ye are true believers. 

[003_176]176 Let not their conduct grieve thee, who run easily to disbelief, for lo! they  injure Allah not at all. It is Allah's Will to assign them no portion in the Hereafter, and  theirs will be an awful doom. 

[003_177]177 Those who purchase disbelief at the price of faith harm Allah not at all, but  theirs will be a painful doom. 

[003_178]178 And let not those who disbelieve imagine that the rein We give them bodeth  good unto their souls. We only give them rein that they may grow in sinfulness. And  theirs will be a shameful doom. 

[003_179]179 It is not (the purpose) of Allah to leave you in your present state till He shall  separate the wicked from the good. And it is not (the purpose of) Allah to let you  know the Unseen. But Allah chooseth of His messengers whom He will, (to receive  knowledge thereof). So believe in Allah and His messengers. If ye believe and ward  off (evil), yours will be a vast reward. 

[003_180]180 And let not those who hoard up that which Allah hath bestowed upon them  of His bounty think that it is better for them. Nay, it is worse for them. That which  they hoard will be their collar on the Day of Resurrection. Allah's is the heritage of  the heavens and the earth, and Allah is Informed of what ye do. 

[003_181]181 Verily Allah heard the saying of those who said, (when asked for  contributions to the war): "Allah, forsooth, is poor, and we are rich!" We shall record  their saying with their slaying of the prophets wrongfully and We shall say: Taste ye  the punishment of burning! 

[003_182]182 This is on account of that which your own hands have sent before (you to the  judgment). Allah is no oppressor of (His) bondmen. 

[003_183]183 (The same are) those who say: Lo! Allah hath charged us that we believe not  in any messenger until he bring us an offering which fire (from heaven) shall devour.  Say (unto them, O Muhammad): Messengers came unto you before me with miracles,  and with that (very miracle) which ye describe. Why then did ye slay them ? (Answer  that) if ye are truthful! 

[003_184]184 And if they deny thee, even so did they deny messengers who were before  thee, who came with miracles and with the Psalms and with the Scripture giving light. 

[003_185]185 Every soul will taste of death. And ye will be paid on the Day of  Resurrection only that which ye have fairly earned. Whoso is removed from the Fire  and is made to enter paradise, he indeed is triumphant. The life of this world is but  comfort of illusion. 

[003_186]186 Assuredly ye will be tried in your property and in your persons, and ye will  hear much wrong from those who were given the Scripture before you, and from the  idolaters. But if ye persevere and ward off (evil), then that is of the steadfast heart of  things. 

[003_187]187 And (remember) when Allah laid a charge on those who had received the  Scripture (He said): Ye are to expound it to mankind and not to hide it. But they flung  it behind their backs and bought thereby a little gain. Verily evil is that which they  have gained thereby. 

[003_188]188 Think not that those who exult in what they have given, and love to be  praised for what they have not done - Think not, they are in safety from the doom. A  painful doom is theirs. 

[003_189]189 Unto Allah belongeth the Sovereignty of the heavens and the earth. Allah is  Able to do all things. 

[003_190]190 Lo! In the creation of the heavens and the earth and (in) the difference of  night and day are tokens (of His Sovereignty) for men of understanding, 

[003_191]191 Such as remember Allah, standing, sitting, and reclining, and consider the  creation of the heavens and the earth, (and say): Our Lord! Thou createdst not this in  vain. Glory be to Thee! Preserve us from the doom of Fire. 

[003_192]192 Our Lord! Whom Thou causest to enter the Fire: him indeed Thou hast  confounded. For evil-doers there will be no helpers. 

[003_193]193 Our Lord! Lo! we have heard a crier calling unto Faith: "Believe ye in your  Lord!" So we believed. Our Lord! Therefor forgive us our sins, and remit from us our  evil deeds, and make us die the death of the righteous. 

[003_194]194 Our Lord! And give us that which Thou hast promised to us by Thy  messengers. Confound us not upon the Day of Resurrection. Lo! Thou breakest not  the tryst. 

[003_195]195 And their Lord hath heard them (and He saith): Lo! I suffer not the work of  any worker, male or female, to be lost. Ye proceed one from another. So those who  fled and were driven forth from their homes and suffered damage for My cause, and  fought and were slain, verily I shall remit their evil deeds from them and verily I shall  bring them into Gardens underneath which rivers flow - A reward from Allah. And  with Allah is the fairest of rewards. 

[003_196]196 Let not the vicissitude (of the success) of those who disbelieve, in the land,  deceive thee (O Muhammad). 

[003_197]197 It is but a brief comfort. And afterward their habitation will be hell, an ill  abode. 

[003_198]198 But those who keep their duty to their Lord, for them are Gardens underneath  which rivers flow, wherein they will be safe for ever. A gift of welcome from their  Lord. That which Allah hath in store is better for the righteous. 

[003_199]199 And lo! of the People of the Scripture there are some who believe in Allah  and that which is revealed unto you and that which was revealed unto them, humbling  themselves before Allah. They purchase not a trifling gain at the price of the  revelations of Allah. Verily their reward is with their Lord. Lo! Allah is swift to take  account. 

[003_200]200 O ye who believe! Endure, outdo all others in endurance, be ready, and  observe your duty to Allah, in order that ye may succeed.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

4. an-Nisa': Women

[004_001]1 O mankind! Be careful of your duty to your Lord Who created you from a  single soul and from it created its mate and from them twain hath spread abroad a  multitude of men and women. Be careful of your duty toward Allah in Whom ye  claim (your rights) of one another, and toward the wombs (that bare you). Lo! Allah  hath been a watcher over you. 

[004_002]2 Give unto orphans their wealth. Exchange not the good for the bad (in your  management thereof) nor absorb their wealth into your own wealth. Lo! that would be  a great sin. 

[004_003]3 And if ye fear that ye will not deal fairly by the orphans, marry of the  women, who seem good to you, two or three or four; and if ye fear that ye cannot do  justice (to so many) then one (only) or (the captives) that your right hands possess.  Thus it is more likely that ye will not do injustice. 

[004_004]4 And give unto the women (whom ye marry) free gift of their marriage  portions; but if they of their own accord remit unto you a part thereof, then ye are  welcome to absorb it (in your wealth). 

[004_005]5 Give not unto the foolish (what is in) your (keeping of their) wealth, which  Allah hath given you to maintain; but feed and clothe them from it, and speak kindly  unto them. 

[004_006]6 Prove orphans till they reach the marriageable age; then, if ye find them of  sound judgment, deliver over unto them their fortune; and devour it not by  squandering and in haste lest they should grow up Whoso (of the guardians) is rich,  let him abstain generously (from taking of the property of orphans); and whoso is  poor let him take thereof in reason (for his guardianship). And when ye deliver up  their fortune unto orphans, have (the transaction) witnessed in their presence. Allah  sufficeth as a Reckoner. 

[004_007]7 Unto the men (of a family) belongeth a share of that which parents and near  kindred leave, and unto the women a share of that which parents and near kindred  leave, whether it be little or much - a legal share. 

[004_008]8 And when kinsfolk and orphans and the needy are present at the division (of  the heritage), bestow on them therefrom and speak kindly unto them. 

[004_009]9 And let those fear (in their behaviour toward orphans) who if they left behind  them weak offspring would be afraid for them. So let them mind their duty to Allah,  and speak justly. 

[004_010]10 Lo! Those who devour the wealth of orphans wrongfully, they do but  swallow fire into their bellies, and they will be exposed to burning flame. 

[004_011]11 Allah chargeth you concerning (the provision for) your children: to the male  the equivalent of the portion of two females, and if there be women more than two,  then theirs is two-thirds of the inheritance, and if there be one (only) then the half.  And to each of his parents a sixth of the inheritance, if he have a son; and if he have  no son and his parents are his heirs, then to his mother appertaineth the third; and if  he have brethren, then to his mother appertaineth the sixth, after any legacy he may  have bequeathed, or debt (hath been paid). Your parents and your children: Ye know  not which of them is nearer unto you in usefulness. It is an injunction from Allah. Lo!  Allah is Knower, Wise. 

[004_012]12 And unto you belongeth a half of that which your wives leave, if they have  no child; but if they have a child then unto you the fourth of that which they leave,  afte r any legacy they may have bequeathed, or debt (they ma y have contracted, hath  been paid). And unto them belon geth the fourth of that which ye leave if ye have no  ch ild, but if ye have a child then the eighth of that whi ch ye leave, after any legacy  ye may have bequeathed, o r debt (ye may have contracted, hath been paid). And if  a  man or a woman have a distant heir (having left neit her parent nor child), and he (or  she) have a brother o r a sister (only on the mother's side) then to each of them twain  (the brother and the sister) the sixth, and if they be more than two, then they shall be  sharers in  the third, after any legacy that may have been bequeat hed or debt  (contracted) not injuring (the heirs by wil ling away more than a third of the heritage)  hath been 

[004_013]13 These are the limits (imposed by) Allah. Whoso obeyeth Allah and His  messenger, He will make him enter Gardens underneath which rivers flow, where  such will dwell for ever. That will be the great success. 

[004_014]14 And whoso disobeyeth Allah and His messenger and transgresseth His limits,  He will make him enter Fire, where he will dwell for ever; his will be a shameful  doom. 

[004_015]15 As for those of your women who are guilty of lewdness, call to witness four  of you against them. And if they testify (to the truth of the allegation) then confine  them to the houses until death take them or (until) Allah appoint for them a way  (through new legislation). 

[004_016]16 And as for the two of you who are guilty thereof, punish them both. And if  they repent and improve, then let them be. Lo! Allah is ever relenting, Merciful. 

[004_017]17 Forgiveness is only incumbent on Allah toward those who do evil in  ignorance (and) then turn quickly (in repentance) to Allah. These are they toward  whom Allah relenteth. Allah is ever Knower, Wise. 

[004_018]18 The forgiveness is not for those who do ill-deeds until, when death attendeth  upon one of them, he saith: Lo! I repent now; nor yet for those who die while they are  disbelievers. For such We have prepared a painful doom. 

[004_019]19 O ye who believe! It is not lawful for you forcibly to inherit the women (of  your deceased kinsmen), nor (that) ye should put constraint upon them that ye may  take away a part of that which ye have given them, unless they be guilty of flagrant  lewdness. But consort with them in kindness, for if ye hate them it may happen that  ye hate a thing wherein Allah hath placed much good. 

[004_020]20 And if ye wish to exchange one wife for another and ye have given unto one  of them a sum of money (however great), take nothing from it. Would ye take it by  the way of calumny and open wrong ? 

[004_021]21 How can ye take it (back) after one of you hath gone in unto the other, and  they have taken a strong pledge from you ? 

[004_022]22 And marry not those women whom your fathers married, except what hath  already happened (of that nature) in the past. Lo! it was ever lewdness and  abomination, and an evil way. 

[004_023]23 Forbidden unto you are your mothers, and your daughters, and your sisters,  and your father's sisters, and your mother's sisters, and your brother's daughters and  your sister's daughters, and your foster-mothers, and your foster-sisters, and your  mothers-in-law, and your step-daughters who are under your protection (born) of your  women unto whom ye have gone in - but if ye have not gone in unto them, then it is  no sin for you (to marry their daughters) - and the wives of your sons who (spring)  from your own loins. And (it is forbidden unto you) that ye should have two sisters  together, except what hath already happened (of that nature) in the past. Lo! Allah is  ever Forgiving, Merciful. 

[004_024]24 And all married women (are forbidden unto you) save those (captives) whom  your right hands possess. It is a decree of Allah for you. Lawful unto you are all  beyond those mentioned, so that ye seek them with your wealth in honest wedlock,  not debauchery. And those of whom ye seek content (by marrying them), give unto  them their portions as a duty. And there is no sin for you in what ye do by mutual  agreement after the duty (hath been done). Lo! Allah is ever Knower, Wise. 

[004_025]25 And whoso is not able to afford to marry free, believing women, let them  marry from the believing maids whom your right hands possess. Allah knoweth best  (concerning) your faith. Ye (proceed) one from another; so wed them by permission  of their folk, and give unto them their portions in kindness, they being honest, not  debauched nor of loose conduct. And if when they are honourably married they  commit lewdness they shall incur the half of the punishment (prescribed) for free  women (in that case). This is for him among you who feareth to commit sin. But to  have patience would be better for you. Allah is Forgiving, Merciful. 

[004_026]26 Allah would explain to you and guide you by the examples of those who  were before you, and would turn to you in mercy. Allah is Knower, Wise. 

[004_027]27 And Allah would turn to you in mercy; but those who follow vain desires  would have you go tremendously astray. 

[004_028]28 Allah would make the burden light for you, for man was created weak. 

[004_029]29 O ye who believe! Squander not your wealth among yourselves in vanity,  except it be a trade by mutual consent, and kill not one another. Lo! Allah is ever  Merciful unto you. 

[004_030]30 Whoso doeth that through aggression and injustice, we shall cast him into  Fire, and that is ever easy for Allah. 

[004_031]31 If ye avoid the great (things) which ye are forbidden, We will remit from you  your evil deeds and make you enter at a noble gate. 

[004_032]32 And covet not the thing in which Allah hath made some of you excel others.  Unto men a fortune from that which they have earned, and unto women a fortune  from that which they have earned. (Envy not one another) but ask Allah of His  bounty. Lo! Allah is ever Knower of all things. 

[004_033]33 And unto each We have appointed heirs of that which parents and near  kindred leave; and as for those with whom your right hands have made a covenant,  give them their due. Lo! Allah is ever Witness over all things. 

[004_034]34 Men are in charge of women, because Allah hath made the one of them to  excel the other, and because they spend of their property (for the support of women).  So good women are the obedient, guarding in secret that which Allah hath guarded.  As for those from whom ye fear rebellion, admonish them and banish them to beds  apart, and scourge them. Then if they obey you, seek not a way against them. Lo!  Allah is ever High, Exalted, Great. 

[004_035]35 And if ye fear a breach between them twain (the man and wife), appoint an  arbiter from his folk and an arbiter from her folk. If they desire amendment Allah will  make them of one mind. Lo! Allah is ever Knower, Aware. 

[004_036]36 And serve Allah. Ascribe no thing as partner unto Him. (Show) kindness  unto parents, and unto near kindred, and orphans, and the needy, and unto the  neighbour who is of kin (unto you) and the neighbour who is not of kin, and the  fellow-traveller and the wayfarer and (the slaves) whom your right hands possess. Lo!  Allah loveth not such as are proud and boastful, 

[004_037]37 Who hoard their wealth and enjoin avarice on others, and hide that which  Allah hath bestowed upon them of His bounty. For disbelievers We prepare a  shameful doom; 

[004_038]38 And (also) those who spend their wealth in order to be seen of men, and  believe not in Allah nor the Last Day. Whoso taketh Satan for a comrade, a bad  comrade hath he. 

[004_039]39 What have they (to fear) if they believe in Allah and the Last Day and spend  (aright) of that which Allah hath bestowed upon them, when Allah is ever Aware of  them (and all they do) ? 

[004_040]40 Lo! Allah wrongeth not even of the weight of an ant; and if there is a good  deed, He will double it and will give (the doer) from His presence an immense  reward. 

[004_041]41 But how (will it be with them) when We bring of every people a witness, and  We bring thee (O Muhammad) a witness against these ? 

[004_042]42 On that day those who disbelieved and disobeyed the messenger will wish  that they were level with the ground, and they can hide no fact from Allah. 

[004_043]43 O ye who believe! Draw not near unto prayer when ye are drunken, till ye  know that which ye utter, nor when ye are polluted, save when journeying upon the  road, till ye have bathed. And if ye be ill, or on a journey, or one of you cometh from  the closet, or ye have touched women, and ye find not water, then go to high clean  soil and rub your faces and your hands (therewith). Lo! Allah is Benign, Forgiving. 

[004_044]44 Seest thou not those unto whom a portion of the Scripture hath been given,  how they purchase error, and seek to make you (Muslims) err from the right way ? 

[004_045]45 Allah knoweth best (who are) your enemies. Allah is sufficient as a  Guardian, and Allah is sufficient as a Supporter. 

[004_046]46 Some of those who are Jews change words from their context and say: "We  hear and disobey; hear thou as one who heareth not" and "Listen to us!" distorting  with their tongues and slandering religion.  If they had said: "We hear and we obey:  hear thou, and look at us" it had been better for them, and more upright. But Allah  hath cursed them for their disbelief, so they believe not, save a few. 

[004_047]47 O ye unto whom the Scripture hath been given! Believe in what We have  revealed confirming that which ye possess, before We destroy countenances so as to  confound them, or curse them as We cursed the Sabbath-breakers (of old time). The  commandment of Allah is always executed. 

[004_048]48 Lo! Allah forgiveth not that a partner should be ascribed unto Him. He  forgiveth (all) save that to whom He will. Whoso ascribeth partners to Allah, he hath  indeed invented a tremendous sin. 

[004_049]49 Hast thou not seen those who praise themselves for purity ? Nay, Allah  purifieth whom He will, and they will not be wronged even the hair upon a date- stone. 

[004_050]50 See, how they invent lies about Allah! That of itself is flagrant sin. 

[004_051]51 Hast thou not seen those unto whom a portion of the Scripture hath been  given, how they believe in idols and false deities, and how they say of those  (idolaters) who disbelieve: "These are more rightly guided than those who believe" ? 

[004_052]52 Those are they whom Allah hath cursed, and he whom Allah hath cursed,  thou (O Muhammad) wilt find for him no helper. 

[004_053]53 Or have they even a share in the Sovereignty ? Then in that case, they would  not give mankind even the speck on a date-stone. 

[004_054]54 Or are they jealous of mankind because of that which Allah of His bounty  hath bestowed upon them ? For We bestowed upon the house of Abraham (of old) the  Scripture and wisdom, and We bestowed on them a mighty kingdom. 

[004_055]55 And of them were (some) who believed therein and of them were (some)  who turned away from it. Hell is sufficient for (their) burning. 

[004_056]56 Lo! Those who disbelieve Our revelations, We shall expose them to the Fire.  As often as their skins are consumed We shall exchange them for fresh skins that they  may taste the torment. Lo! Allah is ever Mighty, Wise. 

[004_057]57 And as for those who believe and do good works, We shall make them enter  Gardens underneath which rivers flow - to dwell therein for ever; there for them are  pure companions - and We shall make them enter plenteous shade. 

[004_058]58 Lo! Allah commandeth you that ye restore deposits to their owners, and, if ye  judge between mankind, that ye judge justly. Lo! comely is this which Allah  admonisheth you. Lo! Allah is ever Hearer, Seer. 

[004_059]59 O ye who believe! Obey Allah, and obey the messenger and those of you  who are in authority; and if ye have a dispute concerning any matter, refer it to Allah  and the messenger if ye are (in truth) believers in Allah and the Last Day. That is  better and more seemly in the end. 

[004_060]60 Hast thou not seen those who pretend that they believe in that which is  revealed unto thee and that which was revealed before thee, how they would go for  judgment (in their disputes) to false deities when they have been ordered to abjure  them ? Satan would mislead them far astray. 

[004_061]61 And when it is said unto them: Come unto that which Allah hath revealed  and unto the messenger, thou seest the hypocrites turn from thee with aversion. 

[004_062]62 How would it be if a misfortune smote them because of that which their own  hands have sent before (them) ? Then would they come unto thee, swearing by Allah  that they were seeking naught but harmony and kindness. 

[004_063]63 Those are they, the secrets of whose hearts Allah knoweth. So oppose them  and admonish them, and address them in plain terms about their souls. 

[004_064]64 We sent no messenger save that he should be obeyed by Allah's leave. And  if, when they had wronged themselves, they had but come unto thee and asked  forgiveness of Allah, and asked forgiveness of the messenger, they would have found  Allah Forgiving, Merciful. 

[004_065]65 But nay, by thy Lord, they will not believe (in truth) until they make thee  judge of what is in dispute between them and find within themselves no dislike of that  which thou decidest, and submit with full submission. 

[004_066]66 And if We had decreed for them: Lay down your lives or go forth from your  dwellings, but few of them would have done it; though if they did what they are  exhorted to do it would be better for them, and more strengthening; 

[004_067]67 And then We should bestow upon them from Our presence an immense  reward, 

[004_068]68 And should guide them unto a straight path. 

[004_069]69 Whoso obeyeth Allah and the messenger, they are with those unto whom  Allah hath shown favour, of the prophets and the saints and the martyrs and the  righteous. The best of company are they! 

[004_070]70 That is bounty from Allah, and Allah sufficeth as Knower. 

[004_071]71 O ye who believe! Take your precautions, then advance the proven ones, or  advance all together. 

[004_072]72 Lo! among you there is he who loitereth; and if disaster overtook you, he  would say: Allah hath been gracious unto me since I was not present with them. 

[004_073]73 And if a bounty from Allah befell you, he would surely cry, as if there had  been no love between you and him: Oh, would that I had been with them, then should  I have achieved a great success! 

[004_074]74 Let those fight in the way of Allah who sell the life of this world for the  other. Whoso fighteth in the way of Allah, be he slain or be he victorious, on him We  shall bestow a vast reward. 

[004_075]75 How should ye not fight for the cause of Allah and of the feeble among men  and of the women and the children who are crying: Our Lord! Bring us forth from out  this town of which the people are oppressors! Oh, give us from thy presence some  protecting friend! Oh, give us from Thy presence some defender! 

[004_076]76 Those who believe do battle for the cause of Allah; and those who disbelieve  do battle for the cause of idols. So fight the minions of the devil. Lo! the devil's  strategy is ever weak. 

[004_077]77 Hast thou not seen those unto whom it was said: Withhold your hands,  establish worship and pay the poordue, but when fighting was prescribed for them  behold! a party of them fear mankind even as their fear of Allah or with greater fear,  and say: Our Lord! Why hast Thou ordained fighting for us ? If only Thou wouldst  give us respite yet a while! Say (unto them, O Muhammad): The comfort of this  world is scant; the Hereafter will be better for him who wardeth off (evil); and ye will  not be wronged the down upon a date-stone. 

[004_078]78 Wheresoever ye may be, death will overtake you, even though ye were in  lofty towers. Yet if a happy thing befalleth them they say: This is from Allah; and if  an evil thing befalleth them they say: This is of thy doing (O Muhammad). Say (unto  them): All is from Allah. What is amiss with these people that they come not nigh to  understand a happening ? 

[004_079]79 Whatever of good befalleth thee (O man) it is from Allah, and whatever of ill  befalleth thee it is from thyself. We have sent thee (Muhammad) as a messenger unto  mankind and Allah is sufficient as Witness. 

[004_080]80 Whoso obeyeth the messenger hath obeyed Allah, and whoso turneth away:  We have not sent thee as a warder over them. 

[004_081]81 And they say: (It is) obedience; but when they have gone forth from thee a  party of them spend the night in planning other than what thou sayest. Allah recordeth  what they plan by night. So oppose them and put thy trust in Allah. Allah is sufficient  as Trustee. 

[004_082]82 Will they not then ponder on the Qur'an ? If it had been from other than  Allah they would have found therein much incongruity. 

[004_083]83 And if any tidings, whether of safety or fear, come unto them, they noise it  abroad, whereas if they had referred it to the messenger and to such of them as are in  authority, those among them who are able to think out the matter would have known  it. If it had not been for the grace of Allah upon you and His mercy ye would have  followed Satan, save a few (of you). 

[004_084]84 So fight (O Muhammad) in the way of Allah Thou art not taxed (with the  responsibility for anyone) except thyself - and urge on the believers. Peradventure  Allah will restrain the might of those who disbelieve. Allah is stronger in might and  stronger in inflicting punishment. 

[004_085]85 Whoso interveneth in a good cause will have the reward thereof, and whoso  interveneth in an evil cause will bear the consequence thereof. Allah overseeth all  things. 

[004_086]86 When ye are greeted with a greeting, greet ye with a better than it or return it.  Lo! Allah taketh count of all things. 

[004_087]87 Allah! There is no God save Him. He gathereth you all unto a Day of  Resurrection whereof there is no doubt. Who is more true in statement than Allah ? 

[004_088]88 What aileth you that ye are become two parties regarding the hypocrites,  when Allah cast them back (to disbelief) because of what they earned ? Seek ye to  guide him whom Allah hath sent astray ? He whom Allah sendeth astray, for him thou  (O MUhammad) canst not find a road. 

[004_089]89 They long that ye should disbelieve even as they disbelieve, that ye may be  upon a level (with them). So choose not friends from them till they forsake their  homes in the way of Allah; if they turn back (to enmity) then take them and kill them  wherever ye find them, and choose no friend nor helper from among them, 

[004_090]90 Except those who seek refuge with a people between whom and you there is  a covenant, or (those who) come unto you because their hearts forbid them to make  war on you or make war on their own folk. Had Allah willed He could have given  them power over you so that assuredly they would have fought you. So, if they hold  aloof from you and wage not war against you and offer you peace, Allah alloweth you  no way against them. 

[004_091]91 Ye will find others who desire that they should have security from you, and  security from their own folk. So often as they are returned to hostility they are  plunged therein. If they keep not aloof from you nor offer you peace nor hold their  hands, then take them and kill them wherever ye find them. Against such We have  given you clear warrant. 

[004_092]92 It is not for a believer to kill a believer unless (it be) by mistake. He who  hath killed a believer by mistake must set free a believing slave, and pay the blood- money to the family of the slain, unless they remit it as a charity. If he (the victim) be  of a people hostile unto you, and he is a believer, then (the penance is) to set free a  believing slave. And if he cometh of a folk between whom and you there is a  covenant, then the blood-money must be paid unto his folk and (also) a believing  slave must be set free. And whoso hath not the wherewithal must fast two consecutive  months. A penance from Allah. Allah is Knower, Wise. 

[004_093]93 Whoso slayeth a believer of set purpose, his reward is hell for ever. Allah is  wroth against him and He hath cursed him and prepared for him an awful doom. 

[004_094]94 O ye who believe! When ye go forth (to fight) in the way of Allah, be careful  to discriminate, and say not unto one who offereth you peace: "Thou art not a  believer," seeking the chance profits of this life (so that ye may despoil him). With  Allah are plenteous spoils. Even thus (as he now is) were ye before; but Allah hath  since then been gracious unto you. Therefore take care to discriminate. Allah is ever  Informed of what ye do. 

[004_095]95 Those of the believers who sit still, other than those who have a (disabling)  hurt, are not on an equality with those who strive in the way of Allah with their  wealth and lives. Allah hath conferred on those who strive with their wealth and lives  a rank above the sedentary. Unto each Allah hath promised good, but He hath  bestowed on those who strive a great reward above the sedentary; 

[004_096]96 Degrees of rank from Him, and forgiveness and mercy. Allah is ever  Forgiving, Merciful. 

[004_097]97 Lo! as for those whom the angels take (in death) while they wrong  themselves, (the angels) will ask: In what were ye engaged ? They will say: We were  oppressed in the land. (The angels) will say: Was not Allah's earth spacious that ye  could have migrated therein ? As for such, their habitation will be hell, an evil  journey's end; 

[004_098]98 Except the feeble among men, and the women, and the children, who are  unable to devise a plan and are not shown a way. 

[004_099]99 As for such, it may be that Allah will pardon them. Allah is ever Clement,  Forgiving. 

[004_100]100 Whoso migrateth for the cause of Allah will find much refuge and abundance  in the earth, and whoso forsaketh his home, a fugitive unto Allah and His messenger,  and death overtaketh him, his reward is then incumbent on Allah. Allah is ever  Forgiving, Merciful. 

[004_101]101 And when ye go forth in the land, it is no sin for you to curtail (your)  worship if ye fear that those who disbelieve may attack you. In truth the disbelievers  are an open enemy to you. 

[004_102]102 And when thou (O Muhammad) art among them and arrangest (their)  worship for them, let only a party of them stand with thee (to worship) and let them  take their arms. Then when they have performed their prostrations let them fall to the  rear and let another party come that hath not worshipped and let them worship with  thee, and let them take their precaution and their arms. Those who disbelieve long for  you to neglect your arms and your baggage that they may attack you once for all. It is  no sin for you to lay aside your arms, if rain impedeth you or ye are sick. But take  your precaution. Lo! Allah prepareth for the disbelievers shameful punishment. 

[004_103]103 When ye have performed the act of worship, remember Allah, standing,  sitting and reclining. And when ye are in safety, observe proper worship. Worship at  fixed times hath been enjoined on the believers. 

[004_104]104 Relent not in pursuit of the enemy. If ye are suffering, lo! they suffer even as  ye suffer and ye hope from Allah that for which they cannot hope. Allah is ever  Knower, Wise. 

[004_105]105 Lo! We reveal unto thee the Scripture with the truth, that thou mayst judge  between mankind by that which Allah showeth thee. And be not thou a pleader for the  treacherous; 

[004_106]106 And seek forgiveness of Allah. Lo! Allah is ever Forgiving, Merciful. 

[004_107]107 And plead not on behalf of (people) who deceive themselves. Lo! Allah  loveth not one who is treacherous and sinful. 

[004_108]108 They seek to hide from men and seek not to hide from Allah. He is with them  when by night they hold discourse displeasing unto Him. Allah ever surroundeth what  they do. 

[004_109]109 Ho! ye are they who pleaded for them in the life of the world. But who will  plead with Allah for them on the Day of Resurrection, or who will then be their  defender ? 

[004_110]110 Yet whoso doeth evil or wrongeth his own soul, then seeketh pardon of  Allah, will find Allah Forgiving, Merciful. 

[004_111]111 Whoso committeth sin committeth it only against himself. Allah is ever  Knower, Wise. 

[004_112]112 And whoso committeth a delinquency or crime, then throweth (the blame)  thereof upon the innocent, hath burdened himself with falsehood and a flagrant crime. 

[004_113]113 But for the grace of Allah upon thee (Muhammad), and His mercy, a party of  them had resolved to mislead thee, but they will mislead only themselves and they  will hurt thee not at all. Allah revealeth unto thee the Scripture and wisdom, and  teacheth thee that which thou knewest not. The grace of Allah toward thee hath been  infinite. 

[004_114]114 There is no good in much of their secret conferences save (in) him who  enjoineth almsgiving and kindness and peace-making among the people. Whoso  doeth that, seeking the good pleasure of Allah, We shall bestow on him a vast reward. 

[004_115]115 And whoso opposeth the messenger after the guidance (of Allah) hath been  manifested unto him, and followeth other than the believer's way, We appoint for him  that unto which he himself hath turned, and expose him unto hell - a hapless journey's  end! 

[004_116]116 Lo! Allah pardoneth not that partners should be ascribed unto Him. He  pardoneth all save that to whom He will. Whoso ascribeth partners unto Allah hath  wandered far astray. 

[004_117]117 They invoke in His stead only females; they pray to none else than Satan, a  rebel 

[004_118]118 Whom Allah cursed, and he said: Surely I will take of Thy bondmen an  appointed portion, 

[004_119]119 And surely I will lead them astray, and surely I will arouse desires in them,  and surely I will command them and they will cut the cattle' ears, and surely I will  command them and they will change Allah's creation. Whoso chooseth Satan for a  patron instead of Allah is verily a loser and his loss is manifest. 

[004_120]120 He promiseth them and stirreth up desires in them, and Satan promiseth them  only to beguile. 

[004_121]121 For such, their habitation will be hell, and they will find no refuge therefrom. 

[004_122]122 But as for those who believe and do good works We shall bring them into  Gardens underneath which rivers flow, wherein they will abide for ever. It is a  promise from Allah in truth; and who can be more truthful than Allah in utterance ? 

[004_123]123 It will not be in accordance with your desires, nor the desires of the People of  the Scripture. He who doeth wrong will have the recompense thereof, and will not  find against Allah any protecting friend or helper. 

[004_124]124 And whoso doeth good works, whether of male or female, and he (or she) is  a believer, such will enter paradise and they will not be wronged the dint in a date- stone. 

[004_125]125 Who is better in religion than he who surrendereth his purpose to Allah while  doing good (to men) and followeth the tradition of Abraham, the upright ? Allah  (Himself) chose Abraham for friend. 

[004_126]126 Unto Allah belongeth whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the  earth. Allah ever surroundeth all things. 

[004_127]127 They consult thee concerning women. Say: Allah giveth you decree  concerning them, and the Scripture which hath been recited unto you (giveth decree),  concerning female orphans and those unto whom ye give not that which is ordained  for them though ye desire to marry them, and (concerning) the weak among children,  and that ye should deal justly with orphans. Whatever good ye do, lo! Allah is ever  Aware of it. 

[004_128]128 If a woman feareth ill treatment from her husband, or desertion, it is no sin  for them twain if they make terms of peace between themselves. Peace is better. But  greed hath been made present in the minds (of men). If ye do good and keep from  evil, lo! Allah is ever Informed of what ye do. 

[004_129]129 Ye will not be able to deal equally between (your) wives, however much ye  wish (to do so). But turn not altogether away (from one), leaving her as in suspense. If  ye do good and keep from evil, lo! Allah is ever Forgiving, Merciful. 

[004_130]130 But if they separate, Allah will compensate each out of His abundance. Allah  is ever All-Embracing, All-Knowing. 

[004_131]131 Unto Allah belongeth whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the  earth. And We charged those who received the Scripture before you, and (We charge)  you, that ye keep your duty toward Allah. And if ye disbelieve, lo! unto Allah  belongeth whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth, and Allah is  ever Absolute, Owner of Praise. 

[004_132]132 Unto Allah belongeth whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the  earth. And Allah is sufficient as Defender. 

[004_133]133 If He will, He can remove you, O people, and produce others (in your stead).  Allah is Able to do that. 

[004_134]134 Whoso desireth the reward of the world, (let him know that) with Allah is the  reward of the world and the Hereafter. Allah is ever Hearer, Seer. 

[004_135]135 O ye who believe! Be ye staunch in justice, witnesses for Allah, even though  it be against yourselves or (your) parents or (your) kindred, whether (the case be of) a  rich man or a poor man, for Allah is nearer unto both (them ye are). So follow not  passion lest ye lapse (from truth) and if ye lapse or fall away, then lo! Allah is ever  Informed of what ye do. 

[004_136]136 O ye who believe! Believe in Allah and His messenger and the Scripture  which He hath revealed unto His messenger, and the Scripture which He revealed  aforetime. Whoso disbelieveth in Allah and His angels and His scriptures and His  messengers and the Last Day, he verily hath wandered far astray. 

[004_137]137 Lo! those who believe, then disbelieve and then (again) believe, then  disbelieve, and then increase in disbelief, Allah will never pardon them, nor will He  guide them unto a way. 

[004_138]138 Bear unto the hypocrites the tidings that for them there is a painful doom; 

[004_139]139 Those who chose disbelievers for their friends instead of believers! Do they  look for power at their hands ? Lo! all power appertaineth to Allah. 

[004_140]140 He hath already revealed unto you in the Scripture that, when ye hear the  revelations of Allah rejected and derided, (ye) sit not with them (who disbelieve and  mock) until they engage in some other conversation. Lo! in that case (if ye stayed) ye  would be like unto them. Lo! Allah will gather hypocrites and disbelievers, all  together, into hell; 

[004_141]141 Those who wait upon occasion in regard to you and, if a victory cometh unto  you from Allah, say: Are we not with you ? and if the disbelievers meet with a  success say: Had we not the mastery of you, and did we not protect you from the  believers ? - Allah will judge between you at the Day of Resurrection, and Allah will  not give the disbelievers any way (of success) against the believers. 

[004_142]142 Lo! the hypocrites seek to beguile Allah, but it is He Who beguileth them.  When they stand up to worship they perform it languidly and to be seen of men, and  are mindful of Allah but little; 

[004_143]143 Swaying between this (and that), (belonging) neither to these nor to those.  He whom Allah causeth to go astray, thou (O Muhammad) wilt not find a way for  him: 

[004_144]144 O ye who believe! Choose not disbelievers for (your) friends in place of  believers. Would ye give Allah a clear warrant against you ? 

[004_145]145 Lo! the hypocrites (will be) in the lowest deep of the Fire, and thou wilt find  no helper for them; 

[004_146]146 Save those who repent and amend and hold fast to Allah and make their  religion pure for Allah (only). Those are with the believers. And Allah will bestow on  the believers an immense reward. 

[004_147]147 What concern hath Allah for your punishment if ye are thankful (for His  mercies) and believe (in Him) ? Allah was ever Responsive, Aware. 

[004_148]148 Allah loveth not the utterance of harsh speech save by one who hath been  wronged. Allah is ever Hearer, Knower. 

[004_149]149 If ye do good openly or keep it secret, or forgive evil, lo! Allah is ever  Forgiving, Powerful. 

[004_150]150 Lo! those who disbelieve in Allah and His messengers, and seek to make  distinction between Allah and His messengers, and say: We believe in some and  disbelieve in others, and seek to choose a way in between; 

[004_151]151 Such are disbelievers in truth; and for disbelievers We prepare a shameful  doom. 

[004_152]152 But those who believe in Allah and His messengers and make no distinction  between any of them, unto them Allah will give their wages; and Allah was ever  Forgiving, Merciful. 

[004_153]153 The people of the Scripture ask of thee that thou shouldst cause an (actual)  Book to descend upon them from heaven. They asked a greater thing of Moses  aforetime, for they said: Show us Allah plainly. The storm of lightning seized them  for their wickedness. Then (even) after that) they chose the calf (for worship) after  clear proofs (of Allah's Sovereignty) had come unto them. And We forgave them that!  And We bestowed on Moses evident authority. 

[004_154]154 And We caused the Mount to tower above them at (the taking of) their  covenant: and We bade them: Enter the gate, prostrate! and We bode them:  Transgress not the Sabbath! and We took from them a firm covenant. 

[004_155]155 Then because of their breaking of their covenant, and their disbelieving in  the revelations of Allah, and their slaying of the prophets wrongfully, and their  saying: Our hearts are hardened - Nay, but Allah set a seal upon them for their  disbelief, so that they believe not save a few - 

[004_156]156 And because of their disbelief and of their speaking against Mary a  tremendous calumny; 

[004_157]157 And because of their saying: We slew the Messiah, Jesus son of Mary,  Allah's messenger - they slew him not nor crucified him, but it appeared so unto  them; and lo! those who disagree concerning it are in doubt thereof; they have no  knowledge thereof save pursuit of a conjecture; they slew him not for certain. 

[004_158]158 But Allah took him up unto Himself. Allah was ever Mighty, Wise. 

[004_159]159 There is not one of the People of the Scripture but will believe in him before  his death, and on the Day of Resurrection he will be a witness against them - 

[004_160]160 Because of the wrongdoing of the Jews We forbade them good things which  were (before) made lawful unto them, and because of their much hindering from  Allah's way, 

[004_161]161 And of their taking usury when they were forbidden it, and of their  devouring people's wealth by false pretences, We have prepared for those of them  who disbelieve a painful doom. 

[004_162]162 But those of them who are firm in knowledge and the believers believe in  that which is revealed unto thee, and that which was revealed before thee, especially  the diligent in prayer and those who pay the poor-due, the believers in Allah and the  Last Day. Upon these We shall bestow immense reward. 

[004_163]163 Lo! We inspire thee as We inspired Noah and the prophets after him, as We  inspired Abraham and Ishmael and Isaac and Jacob and the tribes, and Jesus and Job  and Jonah and Aaron and Solomon, and as We imparted unto David the Psalms; 

[004_164]164 And messengers We have mentioned unto thee before and messengers We  have not mentioned unto thee; and Allah spake directly unto Moses; 

[004_165]165 Messengers of good cheer and of warning, in order that mankind might have  no argument against Allah after the messengers. Allah was ever Mighty, Wise. 

[004_166]166 But Allah (Himself) testifieth concerning that which He hath revealeth unto  thee; in His knowledge hath He revealed it; and the angels also testify. And Allah is  sufficient Witness. 

[004_167]167 Lo! those who disbelieve and hinder (others) from the way of Allah, they  verily have wandered far astray. 

[004_168]168 Lo! those who disbelieve and deal in wrong, Allah will never forgive them,  neither will He guide them unto a road, 

[004_169]169 Except the road of hell, wherein they will abide for ever. And that is ever  easy for Allah. 

[004_170]170 O mankind! The messenger hath come unto you with the Truth from your  Lord. Therefor believe; (it is) better for you. But if ye disbelieve, still, lo! unto Allah  belongeth whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth. Allah is ever Knower, Wise. 

[004_171]171 O People of the Scripture! Do not exaggerate in your religion nor utter aught  concerning Allah save the truth. The Messiah, Jesus son of Mary, was only a  messenger of Allah, and His word which He conveyed unto Mary, and a spirit from  Him. So believe in Allah and His messengers, and say not "Three" - Cease! (it is)  better for you! - Allah is only One God. Far is it removed from His Transcendent  Majesty that He should have a son. His is all that is in the heavens and all that is in  the earth. And Allah is sufficient as Defender. 

[004_172]172 The Messiah will never scorn to be a slave unto Allah, nor will the favoured  angels. Whoso scorneth His service and is proud, all such will He assemble unto Him; 

[004_173]173 Then, as for those who believed and did good works, unto them will He pay  their wages in full, adding unto them of His bounty; and as for those who were  scornful and proud, them will He punish with a painful doom. And they will not find  for them, against Allah, any protecting friend or helper. 

[004_174]174 O mankind! Now hath a proof from your Lord come unto you, and We have  sent down unto you a clear light; 

[004_175]175 As for those who believe in Allah, and hold fast unto Him, them He will  cause to enter into His mercy and grace, and will guide them unto Him by a straight  road. 

[004_176]176 They ask thee for a pronouncement. Say: Allah hath pronounced for you  concerning distant kindred. If a man die childless and he have a sister, hers is half the  heritage, and he would have inherited from her had she died childless. And if there be  two sisters, then theirs are two-thirds of the heritage, and if they be brethren, men and  women, unto the male is the equivalent of the share of two females. Allah expoundeth  unto you, so that ye err not. Allah is Knower of all things.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

5. al-Ma'idah: The Food

[005_001]1 O ye who believe! Fulfil your indentures. The beast of cattle is made lawful  unto you (for food) except that which is announced unto you (herein), game being  unlawful when ye are on the pilgrimage. Lo! Allah ordaineth that which pleaseth  Him. 

[005_002]2 O ye who believe! Profane not Allah's monuments nor the Sacred Month nor  the offerings nor the garlands, nor those repairing to the Sacred House, seeking the  grace and pleasure of their Lord. But when ye have left the sacred territory, then go  hunting (if ye will). And let not your hatred of a folk who (once) stopped your going  to the inviolable place of worship seduce you to transgress; but help ye one another  unto righteousness and pious duty. Help not one another unto sin and transgression,  but keep your duty to Allah. Lo! Allah is severe in punishment. 

[005_003]3 Forbidden unto you (for food) are carrion and blood and swineflesh, and that  which hath been dedicated unto any other than Allah, and the strangled, and the dead  through beating, and the dead through falling from a height, and that which hath been  killed by (the goring of) horns, and the devoured of wild beasts, saving that which ye  make lawful (by the death-stroke), and that which hath been immolated unto idols.  And (forbidden is it) that ye swear by the divining arrows. This is an abomination.  This day are those who disbelieve in despair of (ever harming) your religion; so fear  them not, fear Me! This day have I perfected your religion for you and completed My  favour unto you, and have chosen for you as religion al-Islam. Whoso is forced by  hunger, not by will, to sin: (for him) lo! Allah is Forgiving, Merciful. 

[005_004]4 They ask thee (O Muhammad) what is made lawful for them. Say: (all) good  things are made lawful for you. And those beasts and birds of prey which ye have  trained as hounds are trained, ye teach them that which Allah taught you; so eat of  that which they catch for you and mention Allah's name upon it, and observe your  duty to Allah. Lo! Allah is swift to take account. 

[005_005]5 This day are (all) good things made lawful for you. The food of those who  have received the Scripture is lawful for you, and your food is lawful for them. And  so are the virtuous women of the believers and the virtuous women of those who  received the Scripture before you (lawful for you) when ye give them their marriage  portions and live with them in honour, not in fornication, nor taking them as secret  concubines. Whoso denieth the faith, his work is vain and he will be among the losers  in the Hereafter. 

[005_006]6 O ye who believe! When ye rise up for prayer, wash you faces, and your  hands up to the elbows, and lightly rub your heads and (wash) your feet up to the  ankles. And if ye are unclean, purify yourselves. And if ye are sick or on a journey, or  one of you cometh from the closet, or ye have had contact with women, and ye find  not water, then go to clean, high ground and rub your faces and your hands with some  of it. Allah would not place a burden on you, but He would purify you and would  perfect His grace upon you, that ye may give thanks. 

[005_007]7 Remember Allah's grace upon you and His covenant by which He bound you  when ye said: We hear and we obey; And keep your duty to Allah. Lo! He knoweth  what is in the breasts (of men). 

[005_008]8 O ye who believe! Be steadfast witnesses for Allah in equity, and let not  hatred of any people seduce you that ye deal not justly. Deal justly, that is nearer to  your duty. Observe your duty to Allah. Lo! Allah is Informed of what ye do. 

[005_009]9 Allah hath promised those who believe and do good works: Theirs will be  forgiveness and immense reward. 

[005_010]10 And they who disbelieve and deny Our revelations, such are rightful owners  of hell. 

[005_011]11 O ye who believe! Remember Allah's favour unto you, how a people were  minded to stretch out their hands against you but He withheld their hands from you;  and keep your duty to Allah. In Allah let believers put their trust. 

[005_012]12 Allah made a covenant of old with the Children of Israel and We raised  among them twelve chieftains, and Allah said: Lo! I am with you. If ye establish  worship and pay the poor-due, and believe in My messengers and support them, and  lend unto Allah a kindly loan, surely I shall remit your sins, and surely I shall bring  you into Gardens underneath which rivers flow. Whoso among you disbelieveth after  this will go astray from a plain road. 

[005_013]13 And because of their breaking their covenant, We have cursed them and  made hard their hearts. They change words from their context and forget a part of that  whereof they were admonished. Thou wilt not cease to discover treachery from all  save a few of them. But bear with them and pardon them. Lo! Allah loveth the kindly. 

[005_014]14 And with those who say: "Lo! we are Christians," We made a covenant, but  they forgot a part of that whereof they were admonished. Therefor We have stirred up  enmity and hatred among them till the Day of Resurrection, when Allah will inform  them of their handiwork. 

[005_015]15 O People of the Scripture! Now hath Our messenger come unto you,  expounding unto you much of that which ye used to hide in the Scripture, and  forgiving much. now hath come unto you light from Allah and plain Scripture, 

[005_016]16 Whereby Allah guideth him who seeketh His good pleasure unto paths of  peace. He bringeth them out of darkness unto light by His decree, and guideth them  unto a straight path. 

[005_017]17 They indeed have disbelieved who say: Lo! Allah is the Messiah, son of  Mary. Say: Who then can do aught against Allah, if He had willed to destroy the  Messiah son of Mary, and his mother and everyone on earth ? Allah's is the  Sovereignty of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them. He createth  what He will. And Allah is Able to do all things. 

[005_018]18 The Jews and Christians say: We are sons of Allah and His loved ones. Say:  Why then doth He chastise you for your sins ? Nay, ye are but mortals of His  creating. He forgiveth whom He will, and chastiseth whom He will. Allah's is the  Sovereignty of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them, and unto Him  is the journeying. 

[005_019]19 O People of the Scripture! Now hath Our messenger come unto you to make  things plain unto you after an interval (of cessation) of the messengers, lest ye should  say: There came not unto us a messenger of cheer nor any warner. Now hath a  messenger of cheer and a warner come unto you. Allah is Able to do all things. 

[005_020]20 And (remember) when Moses said unto his people: O my people! Remember  Allah's favour unto you, how He placed among you prophets, and He made you kings,  and gave you that (which) He gave not to any (other) of (His) creatures. 

[005_021]21 O my people! Go into the holy land which Allah hath ordained for you. Turn  not in flight, for surely ye turn back as losers: 

[005_022]22 They said: O Moses! Lo! a giant people (dwell) therein and lo! we go not in  till they go forth from thence. When they go forth from thence, then we will enter (not  till then). 

[005_023]23 Then out spake two of those who feared (their Lord, men) unto whom Allah  had been gracious: Enter in upon them by the gate, for if ye enter by it, lo! ye will be  victorious. So put your trust (in Allah) if ye are indeed believers. 

[005_024]24 They said: O Moses! We will never enter (the land) while they are in it. So  go thou and thy Lord and fight! We will sit here. 

[005_025]25 He said: My Lord! I have control of none but myself and my brother, so  distinguish between us and the wrong-doing folk. 

[005_026]26 (Their Lord) said: For this the land will surely be forbidden them for forty  years that they will wander in the earth, bewildered. So grieve not over the  wrongdoing folk. 

[005_027]27 But recite unto them with truth the tale of the two sons of Adam, how they  offered each a sacrifice, and it was accepted from the one of them and it was not  accepted from the other. (The one) said: I will surely kill thee. (The other) answered:  Allah accepteth only from those who ward off (evil). 

[005_028]28 Even if thou stretch out thy hand against me to kill me, I shall not stretch out  my hand against thee to kill thee, lo! I fear Allah, the Lord of the Worlds. 

[005_029]29 Lo! I would rather thou shouldst bear the punishment of the sin against me  and thine own sin and become one of the owners of the fire. That is the reward of  evil-doers. 

[005_030]30 But (the other's) mind imposed on him the killing of his brother, so he slew  him and became one of the losers. 

[005_031]31 Then Allah sent a raven scratching up the ground, to show him how to hide  his brother's naked corpse. He said: Woe unto me! Am I not able to be as this raven  and so hide my brother's naked corpse ? And he became repentant. 

[005_032]32 For that cause We decreed for the Children of Israel that whosoever killeth a  human being for other than manslaughter or corruption in the earth, it shall be as if he  had killed all mankind, and whoso saveth the life of one, it shall be as if he had saved  the life of all mankind. Our messengers came unto them of old with clear proofs (of  Allah's Sovereignty), but afterwards lo! many of them became prodigals in the earth. 

[005_033]33 The only reward of those who make war upon Allah and His messenger and  strive after corruption in the land will be that they will be killed or crucified, or have  their hands and feet on alternate sides cut off, or will be expelled out of the land. Such  will be their degradation in the world, and in the Hereafter theirs will be an awful  doom; 

[005_034]34 Save those who repent before ye overpower them. For know that Allah is  Forgiving, Merciful. 

[005_035]35 O ye who believe! Be mindful of your duty to Allah, and seek the way of  approach unto Him, and strive in His way in order that ye may succeed. 

[005_036]36 As for those who disbelieve, lo! if all that is in the earth were theirs, and as  much again therewith, to ransom them from the doom on the Day of Resurrection, it  would not be accepted from them. Theirs will be a painful doom. 

[005_037]37 They will wish to come forth from the Fire, but they will not come forth  from it. Theirs will be a lasting doom. 

[005_038]38 As for the thief, both male and female, cut off their hands. It is the reward of  their own deeds, an exemplary punishment from Allah. Allah is Mighty, Wise. 

[005_039]39 But whoso repenteth after his wrongdoing and amendeth, lo! Allah will  relent toward him. Lo! Allah is Forgiving, Merciful. 

[005_040]40 Knowest thou not that unto Allah belongeth the Sovereignty of the heavens  and the earth ? He punisheth whom He will, and forgiveth whom He will. Allah is  Able to do all things. 

[005_041]41 O Messenger! Let not them grieve thee who vie one with another in the race  to disbelief, of such as say with their mouths: "We believe," but their hearts believe  not, and of the Jews: listeners for the sake of falsehood, listeners on behalf of other  folk who come not unto thee, changing words from their context and saying: If this be  given unto you, receive it, but if this be not given unto you, then beware! He whom  Allah doometh unto sin, thou (by thine efforts) wilt avail him naught against Allah.  Those are they for whom the Will of Allah is that He cleanse not their hearts. Theirs  in the world will be ignominy, and in the Hereafter an awful doom; 

[005_042]42 Listeners for the sake of falsehood! Greedy for illicit gain! If then they have  recourse unto thee (Muhammad) judge between them or disclaim jurisdiction. If thou  disclaimest jurisdiction, then they cannot harm thee at all. But if thou judgest, judge  between them with equity. Lo! Allah loveth the equitable. 

[005_043]43 How come they unto thee for judgment when they have the Torah, wherein  Allah hath delivered judgment (for them) ? Yet even after that they turn away. Such  (folk) are not believers. 

[005_044]44 Lo! We did reveal the Torah, wherein is guidance and a light, by which the  prophets who surrendered (unto Allah) judged the Jews, and the rabbis and the priests  (judged) by such of Allah's Scripture as they were bidden to observe, and thereunto  were they witnesses. So fear not mankind, but fear Me. And My revelations for a little  gain. Whoso judgeth not by that which Allah hath revealed: such are disbelievers. 

[005_045]45 And We prescribed for them therein: The life for the life, and the eye for the  eye, and the nose for the nose, and the ear for the ear, and the tooth for the tooth, and  for wounds retaliation. But whoso forgoeth it (in the way of charity) it shall be  expiation for him. Whoso judgeth not by that which Allah hath revealed: such are  wrong-doers. 

[005_046]46 And We caused Jesus, son of Mary, to follow in their footsteps, confirming  that which was (revealed) before him in the Torah, and We bestowed on him the  Gospel wherein is guidance and a light, confirming that which was (revealed) before  it in the Torah - a guidance and an admonition unto those who ward off (evil). 

[005_047]47 Let the People of the Gospel judge by that which Allah hath revealed therein.  Whoso judgeth not by that which Allah hath revealed: such are evil-livers. 

[005_048]48 And unto thee have We revealed the Scripture with the truth, confirming  whatever Scripture was before it, and a watcher over it. So judge between them by  that which Allah hath revealed, and follow not their desires away from the truth  which hath come unto thee. For each We have appointed a divine law and a traced-out  way. Had Allah willed He could have made you one community. But that He may try  you by that which He hath given you (He hath made you as ye are). So vie one with  another in good works. Unto Allah ye will all return, and He will then inform you of  that wherein ye differ. 

[005_049]49 So judge between them by that which Allah hath revealed, and follow not  their desires, but beware of them lest they seduce thee from some part of that which  Allah hath revealed unto thee. And if they turn away, then know that Allah's Will is to  smite them for some sin of theirs. Lo! many of mankind are evil-livers. 

[005_050]50 Is it a judgment of the time of (pagan) ignorance that they are seeking ? Who  is better than Allah for judgment to a people who have certainty (in their belief) ? 

[005_051]51 O ye who believe! Take not the Jews and the Christians for friends. They are  friends one to another. He among you who taketh them for friends is (one) of them.  Lo! Allah guideth not wrongdoing folk. 

[005_052]52 And thou seest those in whose heart is a disease race toward them, saying:  We fear lest a change of fortune befall us. And it may happen that Allah will  vouchsafe (unto thee) the victory, or a commandment from His presence. Then will  they repent them of their secret thoughts. 

[005_053]53 Then will the believers say (unto the people of the Scripture): are these they  who swore by Allah their most binding oaths that they were surely with you ? Their  works have failed, and they have become the losers. 

[005_054]54 O ye who believe! Whoso of you becometh a renegade from his religion,  (know that in his stead) Allah will bring a people whom He loveth and who love Him,  humble toward believers, stern toward disbelievers, striving in the way of Allah, and  fearing not the blame of any blamer. Such is the grace of Allah which He giveth unto  whom He will. Allah is All-Embracing, All-Knowing. 

[005_055]55 Your guardian can be only Allah; and His messenger and those who believe,  who establish worship and pay the poordue, and bow down (in prayer). 

[005_056]56 And whoso taketh Allah and His messenger and those who believe for  guardian (will know that), lo! the party of Allah, they are the victorious. 

[005_057]57 O Ye who believe! Choose not for guardians such of those who received the  Scripture before you, and of the disbelievers, as make a jest and sport of your religion.  But keep your duty to Allah if ye are true believers. 

[005_058]58 And when ye call to prayer they take it for a jest and sport. That is because  they are a folk who understand not. 

[005_059]59 Say: O People of the Scripture! Do ye blame us for aught else than that we  believe in Allah and that which is revealed unto us and that which was revealed  aforetime, and because most of you are evil-livers ? 

[005_060]60 Shall I tell thee of a worse (case) than theirs for retribution with Allah ?  (Worse is the case of him) whom Allah hath cursed, him on whom His wrath hath  fallen and of whose sort Allah hath turned some to apes and swine, and who serveth  idols. Such are in worse plight and further astray from the plain road. 

[005_061]61 When they come unto you (Muslims), they say: We believe; but they came in  unbelief and they went out in the same; and Allah knoweth best what they were  hiding. 

[005_062]62 And thou seest many of them vying one with another in sin and transgression  and their devouring of illicit gain. Verily evil is what they do. 

[005_063]63 Why do not the rabbis and the priests forbid their evil-speaking and their  devouring of illicit gain ? Verily evil is their handiwork. 

[005_064]64 The Jews say: Allah's hand is fettered. Their hands are fettered and they are  accursed for saying so. Nay, but both His hands are spread out wide in bounty. He  bestoweth as He will. That which hath been revealed unto thee from thy Lord is  certain to increase the contumacy and disbelief of many of them, and We have cast  among them enmity and hatred till the Day of Resurrection. As often as they light a  fire for war, Allah extinguisheth it. Their effort is for corruption in the land, and Allah  loveth not corrupters. 

[005_065]65 If only the People of the Scripture would believe and ward off (evil), surely  We should remit their sins from them and surely We should bring them into Gardens  of Delight. 

[005_066]66 If they had observed the Torah and the Gospel and that which was revealed  unto them from their Lord, they would surely have been nourished from above them  and from beneath their feet. Among them there are people who are moderate, but  many of them are of evil conduct. 

[005_067]67 O Messenger! Make known that which hath been revealed unto thee from thy  Lord, for if thou do it not, thou wilt not have conveyed His message. Allah will  protect thee from mankind. Lo! Allah guideth not the disbelieving folk. 

[005_068]68 Say O People of the Scripture! Ye have naught (of guidance) till ye observe  the Torah and the Gospel and that which was revealed unto you from your Lord. That  which is revealed unto thee (Muhammad) from thy Lord is certain to increase the  contumacy and disbelief of many of them. But grieve not for the disbelieving folk. 

[005_069]69 Lo! those who believe, and those who are Jews, and Sabaeans, and Christians  - Whosoever believeth in Allah and the Last Day and doeth right - there shall no fear  come upon them neither shall they grieve. 

[005_070]70 We made a covenant of old with the Children of Israel and We sent unto  them messengers. As often as a messenger came unto them with that which their souls  desired not (they became rebellious). Some (of them) they denied and some they  slew. 

[005_071]71 They thought no harm would come of it, so they were wilfully blind and  deaf. And afterward Allah turned (in mercy) toward them. Now (even after that) are  many of them wilfully blind and deaf. Allah is Seer of what they do. 

[005_072]72 They surely disbelieve who say: Lo! Allah is the Messiah, son of Mary. The  Messiah (himself) said: O Children of Israel, worship Allah, my Lord and your Lord.  Lo! whoso ascribeth partners unto Allah, for him Allah hath forbidden paradise. His  abode is the Fire. For evil-doers there will be no helpers. 

[005_073]73 They surely disbelieve who say: Lo! Allah is the third of three; when there is  no God save the One God. If they desist not from so saying a painful doom will fall  on those of them who disbelieve. 

[005_074]74 Will they not rather turn unto Allah and seek forgiveness of Him ? For Allah  is Forgiving, Merciful. 

[005_075]75 The Messiah, son of Mary, was no other than a messenger, messengers (the  like of whom) had passed away before him. And his mother was a saintly woman.  And they both used to eat (earthly) food. See how We make the revelations clear for  them, and see how they are turned away! 

[005_076]76 Say: Serve ye in place of Allah that which possesseth for you neither hurt nor  use ? Allah it is Who is the Hearer, the Knower. 

[005_077]77 Say: O People of the Scripture! Stress not in your religion other than the  truth, and follow not the vain desires of folk who erred of old and led many astray,  and erred from a plain road. 

[005_078]78 Those of the Children of Israel who went astray were cursed by the tongue of  David, and of Jesus, son of Mary. That was because they rebelled and used to  transgress. 

[005_079]79 They restrained not one another from the wickedness they did. Verily evil  was that they used to do! 

[005_080]80 Thou seest many of them making friends with those who disbelieve. Surely  ill for them is that which they themselves send on before them: that Allah will be  wroth with them and in the doom they will abide. 

[005_081]81 If they believed in Allah and the Prophet and that which is revealed unto  him, they would not choose them for their friends. But many of them are of evil  conduct. 

[005_082]82 Thou wilt find the most vehement of mankind in hostility to those who  believe (to be) the Jews and the idolaters. And thou wilt find the nearest of them in  affection to those who believe (to be) those who say: Lo! We are Christians. That is  because there are among them priests and monks, and because they are not proud. 

[005_083]83 When they listen to that which hath been revealed unto the messengers, thou  seest their eyes overflow with tears because of their recognition of the Truth. They  say: Our Lord, we believe. Inscribe us as among the witnesses. 

[005_084]84 How should we not believe in Allah and that which hath come unto us of the  Truth. And (how should we not) hope that our Lord will bring us in along with  righteous folk ? 

[005_085]85 Allah hath rewarded them for that their saying - Gardens underneath which  rivers flow, wherein they will abide for ever. That is the reward of the good. 

[005_086]86 But those who disbelieve and deny Our revelations, they are owners of hell- fire. 

[005_087]87 O ye who believe! Forbid not the good things which Allah hath made lawful  for you, and transgress not, Lo! Allah loveth not transgressors. 

[005_088]88 Eat of that which Allah hath bestowed on you as food lawful and good, and  keep your duty to Allah in Whom ye are believers. 

[005_089]89 Allah will not take you to task for that which is unintentional in your oaths,  but He will take you to task for the oaths which ye swear in earnest. The expiation  thereof is the feeding of ten of the needy with the average of that wherewith ye feed  your own folk, or the clothing of them, or the liberation of a slave, and for him who  findeth not (the wherewithal to do so) then a three days' fast. This is the expiation of  your oaths when ye have sworn; and keep your oaths. Thus Allah expoundeth unto  you His revelations in order that ye may give thanks. 

[005_090]90 O ye who believe! Strong drink and games of chance and idols and divining  arrows are only an infamy of Satan's handiwork. Leave it aside in order that ye may  succeed. 

[005_091]91 Satan seeketh only to cast among you enmity and hatred by means of strong  drink and games of chance, and to turn you from remembrance of Allah and from  (His) worship. Will ye then have done ? 

[005_092]92 Obey Allah and obey the messenger, and beware! But if ye turn away, then  know that the duty of Our messenger is only plain conveyance (of the message). 

[005_093]93 There shall be no sin (imputed) unto those who believe and do good works  for what they may have eaten (in the past). So be mindful of your duty (to Allah), and  believe, and do good works; and again: be mindful of your duty, and believe; and  once again: be mindful of your duty, and do right. Allah loveth the good. 

[005_094]94 O ye who believe! Allah will surely try you somewhat (in the matter) of the  game which ye take with your hands and your spears, that Allah may know him who  feareth Him in secret. Whoso transgresseth after this, for him there is a painful doom. 

[005_095]95 O ye who believe! Kill no wild game while ye are on the pilgrimage. Whoso  of you killeth it of set purpose he shall pay its forfeit in the equivalent of that which  he hath killed, of domestic animals, the judge to be two men among you known for  justice, (the forfeit) to be brought as an offering to the Ka'bah; or, for expiation, he  shall feed poor persons, or the equivalent thereof in fasting, that he may taste the evil  consequences of his deed. Allah forgiveth whatever (of this kind) may have happened  in the past, but whoso relapseth, Allah will take retribution from him. Allah is  Mighty, Able to Requite (the wrong). 

[005_096]96 To hunt and to eat the fish of the sea is made lawful for you, a provision for  you and for seafarers; but to hunt on land is forbidden you so long as ye are on the  pilgrimage. Be mindful of your duty to Allah, unto Whom ye will be gathered. 

[005_097]97 Allah hath appointed the Ka'bah, the Sacred House, a standard for mankind,  and the Sacred Month and the offerings and the garlands. That is so that ye may know  that Allah knoweth whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth, and  that Allah is Knower of all things. 

[005_098]98 Know that Allah is severe in punishment, but that Allah (also) is Forgiving,  Merciful. 

[005_099]99 The duty of the messenger is only to convey (the message). Allah knoweth  what ye proclaim and what ye hide. 

[005_100]100 Say: The evil and the good are not alike even though the plenty of the evil  attract thee. So be mindful of your duty to Allah, O men of understanding, that ye  may succeed. 

[005_101]101 O ye who believe! Ask not of things which, if they were made unto you,  would trouble you; but if ye ask of them when the Qur'an is being revealed, they will  be made known unto you. Allah pardoneth this, for Allah is Forgiving, Clement. 

[005_102]102 A folk before you asked (for such disclosures) and then disbelieved therein. 

[005_103]103 Allah hath not appointed anything in the nature of a Bahirah or a Sa'ibah or a  Wasilah or a Hami, but those who disbelieve invent a lie against Allah. Most of them  have no sense. 

[005_104]104 And when it is said unto them: Come unto that which Allah hath revealed  and unto the messenger, they say: Enough for us is that wherein we found our fathers.  What! Even though their fathers had no knowledge whatsoever, and no guidance ? 

[005_105]105 O ye who believe! Ye have charge of your own souls. He who erreth cannot  injure you if ye are rightly guided. Unto Allah ye will all return; and then He will  inform you of what ye used to do. 

[005_106]106 O ye who believe! Let there be witnesses between you when death draweth  nigh unto one of you, at the time of bequest - two witnesses, just men from among  you, or two others from another tribe, in case ye are campaigning in the land and the  calamity of death befall you. Ye shall empanel them both after the prayer, and, if ye  doubt, they shall be made to swear by Allah (saying): We will not take a bribe, even  though it were (on behalf of) a near kinsman nor will we hide the testimony of Allah,  for then indeed we should be of the sinful. 

[005_107]107 But then, if it is afterwards ascertained that both of them merit (the suspicion  of) sin, let two others take their place of those nearly concerned, and let them swear  by Allah, (saying): Verily our testimony is truer than their testimony and we have not  transgressed (the bounds of duty), for them indeed we should be of the evil-doers. 

[005_108]108 Thus it is more likely that they will bear true witness or fear that after their  oaths the oaths (of others) will be taken. So be mindful of your duty (to Allah) and  hearken. Allah guideth not the froward folk. 

[005_109]109 In the day when Allah gathereth together the messengers, and saith: What  was your response (from mankind) ? they say: We have no knowledge. Lo! Thou,  only Thou art the Knower of Things Hidden, 

[005_110]110 When Allah saith: O Jesus, son of Mary! Remember My favour unto thee  and unto thy mother; how I strengthened thee with the holy Spirit, so that thou  spakest unto mankind in the cradle as in maturity; and how I taught thee the Scripture  and Wisdom and the Torah and the Gospel; and how thou didst shape of clay as it  were the likeness of a bird by My permission, and didst blow upon it and it was a bird  by My permission, and thou didst heal him who was born blind and the leper by My  permission; and how thou didst raise the dead by My permission; and how I  restrained the Children of Israel from (harming) thee when thou camest unto them  with clear proofs, and those of them who disbelieved exclaimed: This is naught else  than mere magic; 

[005_111]111 And when I inspired the disciples, (saying): Believe in Me and in My  messenger, they said: We believe. Bear witness that we have surrendered (unto Thee)  "we are muslims". 

[005_112]112 When the disciples said: O Jesus, son of Mary! Is thy Lord able to send down  for us a table spread with food from heaven ? He said: Observe your duty to Allah, if  ye are true believers. 

[005_113]113 (They said:) We wish to eat thereof, that we may satisfy our hearts and know  that thou hast spoken truth to us, and that thereof we may be witnesses. 

[005_114]114 Jesus, son of Mary, said: O Allah, Lord of us! Send down for us a table  spread with food from heaven, that it may be a feast for us, for the first of us and for  the last of us, and a sign from Thee. Give us sustenance, for Thou art the Best of  Sustainers. 

[005_115]115 Allah said: Lo! I send it down for you. And whoso disbelieveth of you  afterward, him surely will I punish with a punishment wherewith I have not punished  any of (My) creatures. 

[005_116]116 And when Allah saith: O Jesus, son of Mary! Didst thou say unto mankind:  Take me and my mother for two gods beside Allah ? he saith: Be glorified! It was not  mine to utter that to which I had no right. If I used to say it, then Thou knewest it.  Thou knowest what is in my mind, and I know not what is in Thy Mind. Lo! Thou,  only Thou, art the Knower of Things Hidden ? 

[005_117]117 I spake unto them only that which Thou commandedst me, (saying): Worship  Allah, my Lord and your Lord. I was a witness of them while I dwelt among them,  and when Thou tookest me Thou wast the Watcher over them. Thou art Witness over  all things. 

[005_118]118 If Thou punish them, lo! they are Thy slaves, and if Thou forgive them (lo!  they are Thy slaves). Lo! Thou, only Thou, art the Mighty, the Wise. 

[005_119]119 Allah saith: This is a day in which their truthfulness profiteth the truthful, for  theirs are Gardens underneath which rivers flow, wherein they are secure for ever,  Allah taking pleasure in them and they in Him. That is the great triumph. 

[005_120]120 Unto Allah belongeth the Sovereignty of the heavens and the earth and  whatsoever is therein, and He is Able to do all things.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

6. al-An`am: The Cattle

[006_001]1 Praise be to Allah, Who hath created the heavens and the earth, and hath  appointed darkness and light. Yet those who disbelieve ascribe rivals unto their Lord. 

[006_002]2 He it is Who hath created you from clay, and hath decreed a term for you. A  term is fixed with Him. Yet still ye doubt! 

[006_003]3 He is Allah in the heavens and in the earth. He knoweth both your secret and  your utterance, and He knoweth what ye earn. 

[006_004]4 Never came there unto them a revelation of the revelations of Allah but they  did turn away from it. 

[006_005]5 And they denied the truth when it came unto them. But there will come unto  them the tidings of that which they used to deride. 

[006_006]6 See they not how many a generation We destroyed before them, whom We  had established in the earth more firmly than We have established you, and We shed  on them abundant showers from the sky, and made the rivers flow beneath them.  Yet  we destroyed them for their sins, and created after them another generation. 

[006_007]7 Had we sent down unto thee (Muhammad) (actual) writing upon parchment,  so that they could feel it with their hands, those who disbelieve would have said: This  is naught else than mere magic. 

[006_008]8 They say: Why hath not an angel been sent down unto him ? If We sent  down an angel, then the matter would be judged; no further time would be allowed  them (for reflection). 

[006_009]9 Had we appointed him (Our messenger) an angel, We assuredly had made  him (as) a man (that he might speak to men); and (thus) obscured for them (the truth)  they (now) obscure. 

[006_010]10 Messengers (of Allah) have been derided before thee, but that whereat they  scoffed surrounded such of them as did deride. 

[006_011]11 Say (unto the disbelievers): Travel in the land, and see the nature of the  consequence for the rejecters! 

[006_012]12 Say: Unto whom belongeth whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth ? Say:  Unto Allah. He hath prescribed for Himself mercy, that He may bring you all together  to the Day of Resurrection whereof there is no doubt. Those who ruin their souls will  not believe. 

[006_013]13 Unto Him belongeth whatsoever resteth in the night and the day. He is the  Hearer, the Knower. 

[006_014]14 Say: Shall I choose for a protecting friend other than Allah, the Originator of  the heavens and the earth, Who feedeth and is never fed ? Say: I am ordered to be the  first to surrender (unto Him). And be not thou (O Muhammad) of the idolaters. 

[006_015]15 Say: I fear, if I rebel against my Lord, the retribution of an Awful Day. 

[006_016]16 He from whom (such retribution) is averted on that day, (Allah) hath in truth  had mercy on him. That will be the signal triumph. 

[006_017]17 If Allah touch thee with affliction, there is none that can relieve therefrom  save Him, and if He touch thee with good fortune (there is none that can impair it);  for He is Able to do all things. 

[006_018]18 He is the Omnipotent over His slaves, and He is the Wise, the Knower. 

[006_019]19 Say (O Muhammad): What thing is of most weight in testimony ? Say: Allah  is Witness between me and you. And this Qur'an hath been inspired in me, that I may  warn therewith you and whomsoever it may reach. Do ye in sooth bear witness that  there are gods beside Allah ? Say: I bear no such witness. Say: He is only One God.  Lo! I am innocent of that which ye associate (with Him). 

[006_020]20 Those unto whom We gave the Scripture recognise (this revelation) as they  recognise their sons. Those who ruin their own souls will not believe. 

[006_021]21 Who doth greater wrong than he who inventeth a lie against Allah or denieth  His revelations ? Lo! the wrongdoers will not be successful. 

[006_022]22 And on the day We gather them together We shall say unto those who  ascribed partners (unto Allah): Where are (now) those partners of your make-believe  ? 

[006_023]23 Then will they have no contention save that they will say: By Allah, our  Lord, we never were idolaters. 

[006_024]24 See how they lie against themselves, and (how) the thing which they devised  hath failed them! 

[006_025]25 Of them are some who listen unto thee, but We have placed upon their hearts  veils, lest they should understand, and in their ears a deafness. If they saw every token  they would not believe therein; to the point that, when they come unto thee to argue  with thee, the disbelievers say: This is naught else than fables of the men of old. 

[006_026]26 And they forbid (men) from it and avoid it, and they ruin none save  themselves, though they perceive not. 

[006_027]27 If thou couldst see when they are set before the Fire and say: Oh, would that  we might return! Then would we not deny the revelations of our Lord but we would  be of the believers! 

[006_028]28 Nay, but that hath become clear unto them which before they used to hide.  And if they were sent back they would return unto that which they are forbidden. Lo!  they are liars. 

[006_029]29 And they say: There is naught save our life of the world, and we shall not be  raised (again). 

[006_030]30 If thou couldst see when they are set before their Lord! He will say: Is not  this real ? They will say: Yea, verily, by our Lord! He will say: Taste now the  retribution for that ye used to disbelieve. 

[006_031]31 They indeed are losers who deny their meeting with Allah until, when the  Hour cometh on them suddenly, they cry: Alas for us, that we neglected it! They bear  upon their backs their burdens. Ah, evil is that which they bear! 

[006_032]32 Naught is the life of the world save a pastime and a spot. Better far is the  abode of the Hereafter for those who keep their duty (to Allah). Have ye then no  sense ? 

[006_033]33 We know well how their talk grieveth thee, though in truth they deny not  thee (Muhammad) but evil-doers flout the revelations of Allah. 

[006_034]34 Messengers indeed have been denied before thee, and they were patient  under the denial and the persecution till Our succour reached them. There is none to  alter the decisions of Allah. Already there hath reached thee (somewhat) of the tidings  of the messengers (We sent before). 

[006_035]35 And if their aversion is grievous unto thee, then, if thou canst, seek a way  down into the earth or a ladder unto the sky that thou mayst bring unto them a portent  (to convince them all)! - If Allah willed, He could have brought them all together to  the guidance - So be not thou among the foolish ones. 

[006_036]36 Only those can accept who hear. As for the dead, Allah will raise them up;  then unto Him they will be returned. 

[006_037]37 They say: Why hath no portent been sent down upon him from his Lord ?  Say: Lo! Allah is Able to send down a portent. But most of them know not. 

[006_038]38 There is not an animal in the earth, nor a flying creature flying on two wings,  but they are peoples like unto you. We have neglected nothing in the Book (of Our  decrees). Then unto their Lord they will be gathered. 

[006_039]39 Those who deny Our revelations are deaf and dumb in darkness. Whom  Allah will sendeth astray, and whom He will He placeth on a straight path. 

[006_040]40 Say: Can ye see yourselves, if the punishment of Allah come upon you or the  Hour come upon you, (calling upon other than Allah) ? Do ye then call (for help) to  any other than Allah ? (Answer that) if ye are truthful. 

[006_041]41 Nay, but unto Him ye call, and He removeth that because of which ye call  unto Him, if He will, and ye forget whatever partners ye ascribed unto Him. 

[006_042]42 We have sent already unto peoples that were before thee, and We visited  them with tribulation and adversity, in order that they might grow humble. 

[006_043]43 If only, when Our disaster came on them, they had been humble! But their  hearts were hardened and the devil made all that they used to do seem fair unto them! 

[006_044]44 Then, when they forgot that whereof they had been reminded, We opened  unto them the gates of all things till, even as they were rejoicing in that which they  were given, We  seized them unawares, and lo! they were dumbfounded. 

[006_045]45 So of the people who did wrong the last remnant was cut off. Praise be to  Allah, Lord of the Worlds! 

[006_046]46 Say: Have ye imagined, if Allah should take away your hearing and your  sight and seal your hearts, Who is the God Who could restore it to you save Allah ?  See how We display the revelations unto them! Yet still they turn away. 

[006_047]47 Say: Can ye see yourselves, if the punishment of Allah come upon you  unawares or openly ? Would any perish save wrongdoing folk ? 

[006_048]48 We send not the messengers save as bearers of good news and warners.  Whoso believeth and doeth right, there shall no fear come upon them neither shall  they grieve. 

[006_049]49 But as for those who deny Our revelations, torment will afflict them for that  they used to disobey. 

[006_050]50 Say (O Muhammad, to the disbelievers): I say not unto you (that) I possess  the treasures of Allah, nor that I have knowledge of the Unseen; and I say not unto  you: Lo! I am an angel. I follow only that which is inspired in me. Say: Are the blind  man and the seer equal ? Will ye not then take thought ? 

[006_051]51 Warn hereby those who fear (because they know) that they will be gathered  unto their Lord, for whom there is no protecting ally nor intercessor beside Him, that  they may ward off (evil). 

[006_052]52 Repel not those who call upon their Lord at morn and evening, seeking His  Countenance. Thou art not accountable for them in aught, nor are they accountable  for thee in aught, that thou shouldst repel them and be of the wrong-doers. 

[006_053]53 And even so do We try some of them by others, that they say: Are these they  whom Allah favoureth among us ? Is not Allah best Aware of the thanksgivers ? 

[006_054]54 And when those who believe in Our revelations come unto thee, say: Peace  be unto you! Your Lord hath prescribed for Himself mercy, that whoso of you doeth  evil through ignorance and repenteth afterward thereof and doeth right, (for him) lo!  He is Forgiving, Merciful. 

[006_055]55 Thus do We expound the revelations that the way of the unrighteous may be  manifest. 

[006_056]56 Say: I am forbidden to worship those on whom ye call instead of Allah. Say:  I will not follow your desires, for then should I go astray and I should not be of the  rightly guided. 

[006_057]57 Say: I am (relying) on clear proof from my Lord, while ye deny Him. I have  not that for which ye are impatient. The decision is for Allah only. He telleth the truth  and He is the Best of Deciders. 

[006_058]58 Say: If I had that for which ye are impatient, then would the case (ere this)  have been decided between me and you. Allah is Best Aware of the wrong-doers. 

[006_059]59 And with Him are the keys of the Invisible. None but He knoweth them. And  He knoweth what is in the land and the sea. Not a leaf falleth but He knoweth it, not a  grain amid the darkness of the earth, naught of wet or dry but (it is noted) in a clear  record. 

[006_060]60 He it is Who gathereth you at night and knoweth that which ye commit by  day. Then He raiseth you again to life therein, that the term appointed (for you) may  be accomplished. And afterward unto Him is your return. Then He will proclaim unto  you what ye used to do. 

[006_061]61 He is the Omnipotent over His slaves. He sendeth guardians over you until,  when death cometh unto one of you, Our messengers receive him, and they neglect  not. 

[006_062]62 Then are they restored unto Allah, their Lord, the Just. Surely His is the  judgment. And He is the most swift of reckoners. 

[006_063]63 Say: Who delivereth you from the darkness of the land and the sea ? Ye call  upon Him humbly and in secret, (saying): If we are delivered from this (fear) we truly  will be of the thankful. 

[006_064]64 Say: Allah delivereth you from this and from all affliction. Yet ye attribute  partners unto Him. 

[006_065]65 Say: He is able to send punishment upon you from above you or from  beneath your feet, or to bewilder you with dissension and make you taste the tyranny  one of another. See how We display the revelations so that they may understand. 

[006_066]66 Thy people (O Muhammad) have denied it, though it is the Truth. Say: I am  not put in charge of you. 

[006_067]67 For every announcement there is a term, and ye will come to know. 

[006_068]68 And when thou seest those who meddle with Our revelations, withdraw from  them until they meddle with another topic. And if the devil cause thee to forget, sit  not, after the remembrance, with the congregation of wrong-doers. 

[006_069]69 Those who ward off (evil) are not accountable for them in aught, but the  Reminder (must be given them) that haply they (too) may ward off (evil). 

[006_070]70 And forsake those who take their religion for a pastime and a jest, and whom  the life of the world beguileth. Remind (mankind) hereby lest a soul be destroyed by  what it earneth. It hath beside Allah no protecting ally nor intercessor, and though it  offer every compensation it will not be accepted from it. Those are they who perish  by their own deserts. For them is drink of boiling water and a painful doom, because  they disbelieved. 

[006_071]71 Say: Shall we cry, instead of unto Allah, unto that which neither profiteth us  nor hurteth us, and shall we turn back after Allah hath guided us, like one bewildered  whom the devils have infatuated in the earth, who hath companions who invite him to  the guidance (saying): Come unto us ? Say: Lo! the guidance of Allah is Guidance,  and we are ordered to surrender to the Lord of the Worlds, 

[006_072]72 And to establish worship and be dutiful to Him, and He it is unto Whom ye  will be gathered. 

[006_073]73 He it is Who created the heavens and the earth in truth. In the day when He  saith: Be! it is. His Word is the Truth, and His will be the Sovereignty on the day  when the trumpet is blown. Knower of the Invisible and the Visible, He is the Wise,  the Aware. 

[006_074]74 (Remember) when Abraham said unto his father Azar: Takest thou idols for  gods ? Lo! I see thee and thy folk in error manifest. 

[006_075]75 Thus did We show Abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth that  he might be of those possessing certainty: 

[006_076]76 When the night grew dark upon him he beheld a star. He said: This is my  Lord. But when it set, he said: I love not things that set. 

[006_077]77 And when he saw the moon uprising, he exclaimed: This is my Lord. But  when it set, he said: Unless my Lord guide me, I surely shall become one of the folk  who are astray. 

[006_078]78 And when he saw the sun uprising, he cried: This is my Lord! This is  greater! And when it set he exclaimed: O my people! Lo! I am free from all that ye  associate (with Him). 

[006_079]79 Lo! I have turned my face toward Him Who created the heavens and the  earth, as one by nature upright, and I am not of the idolaters. 

[006_080]80 His people argued with him. He said: Dispute ye with me concerning Allah  when He hath guided me ? I fear not at all that which ye set up beside Him unless my  Lord willeth aught. My Lord includeth all things in His knowledge. Will ye not then  remember ? 

[006_081]81 How should I fear that which ye set up beside Him, when ye fear not to set  up beside Allah that for which He hath revealed unto you no warrant ? Which of the  two factions hath more right to safety ? (Answer me that) if ye have knowledge. 

[006_082]82 Those who believe and obscure not their belief by wrongdoing, theirs is  safety; and they are rightly guided. 

[006_083]83 That is Our argument. We gave it unto Abraham against his folk. We raise  unto degrees of wisdom whom We will. Lo! thy Lord is Wise, Aware. 

[006_084]84 And We bestowed upon him Isaac and Jacob; each of them We guided; and  Noah did We guide aforetime; and of his seed (We guided) David and Solomon and  Job and Joseph and Moses and Aaron. Thus do We reward the good. 

[006_085]85 And Zachariah and John and Jesus and Elias. Each one (of them) was of the  righteous. 

[006_086]86 And Ishmael and Elisha and Jonah and Lot. Each one (of them) did We  prefer above (Our) creatures, 

[006_087]87 With some of their forefathers and their offspring and their brethren; and We  chose them and guided them unto a straight path. 

[006_088]88 Such is the guidance of Allah wherewith He guideth whom He will of His  bondmen. But if they had set up (for worship) aught beside Him, (all) that they did  would have been vain. 

[006_089]89 Those are they unto whom We gave the Scripture and command and  prophethood. But if these disbelieve therein, then indeed We shall entrust it to a  people who will not be disbelievers therein. 

[006_090]90 Those are they whom Allah guideth, so follow their guidance. Say (O  Muhammad, unto mankind): I ask of you no fee for it. Lo! it is naught but a Reminder  to (His) creatures. 

[006_091]91 And they measure not the power of Allah its true measure when they say:  Allah hath naught revealed unto a human being. Say (unto the Jews who speak thus):  Who revealed the Book which Moses brought, a light and guidance for mankind,  which ye have put on parchments which ye show, but ye hide much (thereof), and (by  which) ye were taught that which ye knew not yourselves nor (did) your fathers  (know it) ? Say: Allah. Then leave them to their play of cavilling. 

[006_092]92 And this is a blessed Scripture which We have revealed, confirming that  which (was revealed) before it, that thou mayst warn the Mother of Villages and those  around her. Those who believe in the Hereafter believe herein, and they are careful of  their worship. 

[006_093]93 Who is guilty of more wrong than he who forgeth a lie against Allah, or  saith: I am inspired, when he is not inspired in aught; and who saith: I will reveal the  like of that which Allah hath revealed ? If thou couldst see, when the wrong-doers  reach the pangs of death and the angels stretch their hands out (saying): Deliver up  your souls. This day ye are awarded doom of degradation for that ye spake  concerning Allah other than the truth, and used to scorn His portents. 

[006_094]94 Now have ye come unto Us solitary as We did create you at the first, and ye  have left behind you all that We bestowed upon you, and We behold not with you  those your intercessors, of whom ye claimed that they possessed a share in you. Now  is the bond between you severed, and that which ye presumed hath failed you. 

[006_095]95 Lo! Allah (it is) Who splitteth the grain of corn and the date-stone (for  sprouting). He bringeth forth the living from the dead, and is the bringer-forth of the  dead from the living. Such is Allah. How then are ye perverted ? 

[006_096]96 He is the Cleaver of the Daybreak, and He hath appointed the night for  stillness, and the sun and the moon for reckoning. That is the measuring of the  Mighty, the Wise. 

[006_097]97 And He it is Who hath set for you the stars that ye may guide your course by  them amid the darkness of the land and the sea. We have detailed Our revelations for  a people who have knowledge. 

[006_098]98 And He it is Who hath produced you from a single being, and (hath given  you) a habitation and a repository. We have detailed Our revelations for a people who  have understanding. 

[006_099]99 He it is Who sendeth down water from the sky, and therewith We bring forth  buds of every kind; We bring forth the green blade from which We bring forth the  thick-clustered grain; and from the date-palm, from the pollen thereof, spring pendant  bunches; and (We bring forth) gardens of grapes, and the olive and the pomegranate,  alike and unlike. Look upon the fruit thereof, when they bear fruit, and upon its  ripening. Lo! herein verily are portents for a people who believe. 

[006_100]100 Yet they ascribe as partners unto Him the jinn, although He did create them,  and impute falsely, without knowledge, sons and daughters unto Him. Glorified be He  and High Exalted above (all) that they ascribe (unto Him). 

[006_101]101 The Originator of the heavens and the earth! How can He have a child, when  there is for Him no consort, when He created all things and is Aware of all things ? 

[006_102]102 Such is Allah, your Lord. There is no God save Him, the Creator of all  things, so worship Him. And He taketh care of all things. 

[006_103]103 Vision comprehendeth Him not, but He comprehendeth (all) vision. He is the  Subtile, the Aware. 

[006_104]104 Proofs have come unto you from your Lord, so whoso seeth, it is for his own  good, and whoso is blind is blind to his own hurt. And I am not a keeper over you. 

[006_105]105 Thus do We display Our revelations that they may say (unto thee,  Muhammad): "Thou hast studied," and that We may make (it) clear for people who  have knowledge. 

[006_106]106 Follow that which is inspired in thee from thy Lord; there is no God save  Him; and turn away from the idolaters. 

[006_107]107 Had Allah willed, they had not been idolatrous. We have not set thee as a  keeper over them, nor art thou responsible for them. 

[006_108]108 Revile not those unto whom they pray beside Allah lest they wrongfully  revile Allah through ignorance. Thus unto every nation have We made their deed  seem fair. Then unto their Lord is their return, and He will tell them what they used to  do. 

[006_109]109 And they swear a solemn oath by Allah that if there come unto them a  portent they will believe therein. Say; Portents are with Allah and (so is) that which  telleth you that if such came unto them they would not believe. 

[006_110]110 We confound their hearts and their eyes. As they believed not therein at the  first, We let them wander blindly on in their contumacy. 

[006_111]111 And though We should send down the angels unto them, and the dead should  speak unto them, and We should gather against them all things in array, they would  not believe unless Allah so willed. Howbeit, most of them are ignorant. 

[006_112]112 Thus have We appointed unto every prophet an adversary - devils of  humankind and jinn who inspire in one another plausible discourse through guile. If  thy Lord willed, they would not do so; so leave them alone with their devising; 

[006_113]113 That the hearts of those who believe not in the Hereafter may incline thereto,  and that they may take pleasure therein, and that they may earn what they are earning. 

[006_114]114 Shall I seek other than Allah for judge, when He it is Who hath revealed unto  you (this) Scripture, fully explained ? Those unto whom We gave the Scripture  (aforetime) know that it is revealed from thy Lord in truth. So be not thou (O  Muhammad) of the waverers. 

[006_115]115 Perfected is the Word of thy Lord in truth and justice. There is naught that  can change His words. He is the Hearer, the Knower. 

[006_116]116 If thou obeyedst most of those on earth they would mislead thee far from  Allah's way. They follow naught but an opinion, and they do but guess. 

[006_117]117 Lo! thy Lord, He knoweth best who erreth from His way; and He knoweth  best (who are) the rightly guided. 

[006_118]118 Eat of that over which the name of Allah hath been mentioned, if ye are  believers in His revelations. 

[006_119]119 How should ye not eat of that over which the name of Allah hath been  mentioned, when He hath explained unto you that which is forbidden unto you unless  ye are compelled thereto. But lo! many are led astray by their own lusts through  ignorance. Lo! thy Lord, He is Best Aware of the transgressors. 

[006_120]120 Forsake the outwardness of sin and the inwardness thereof. Lo! those who  garner sin will be awarded that which they have earned. 

[006_121]121 And eat not of that whereon Allah's name hath not been mentioned, for lo! it  is abomination. Lo! the devils do inspire their minions to dispute with you. But if ye  obey them, ye will be in truth idolaters. 

[006_122]122 Is he who was dead and We have raised him unto life, and set for him a light  wherein he walketh among men, as him whose similitude is in utter darkness whence  he cannot emerge ? Thus is their conduct made fairseeming for the disbelievers. 

[006_123]123 And thus have We made in every city great ones of its wicked ones, that they  should plot therein. They do but plot against themselves, though they perceive not. 

[006_124]124 And when a token cometh unto them, they say: We will not believe till we  are given that which Allah's messengers are given. Allah knoweth best with whom to  place His message. Humiliation from Allah and heavy punishment will smite the  guilty for their scheming. 

[006_125]125 And whomsoever it is Allah's will to guide, He expandeth his bosom unto the  Surrender, and whomsoever it is His Will to send astray, He maketh his bosom close  and narrow as if he were engaged in sheer ascent. Thus Allah layeth ignominy upon  those who believe not. 

[006_126]126 This is the path of thy Lord, a straight path. We have detailed Our revelations  for a people who take heed. 

[006_127]127 For them is the abode of peace with their Lord. He will be their Protecting  Friend because of what they used to do. 

[006_128]128 In the day when He will gather them together (He will say): O ye assembly  of the jinn! Many of humankind did ye seduce. And their adherents among  humankind will say: Our Lord! We enjoyed one another, but now we have arrived at  the appointed term which Thou appointedst for us. He will say: Fire is your home.  Abide therein for ever, save him whom Allah willeth (to deliver). Lo! thy Lord is  Wise, Aware. 

[006_129]129 Thus We let some of the wrong-doers have power over others because of  what they are wont to earn. 

[006_130]130 O ye assembly of the jinn and humankind! Came there not unto you  messengers of your own who recounted unto you My tokens and warned you of the  meeting of this your Day ? They will say: We testify against ourselves. And the life of  the world beguiled them. And they testify against themselves that they were  disbelievers. 

[006_131]131 This is because thy Lord destroyeth not the townships arbitrarily while their  people are unconscious (of the wrong they do). 

[006_132]132 For all there will be ranks from what they did. Thy Lord is not unaware of  what they do. 

[006_133]133 Thy Lord is the Absolute, the Lord of Mercy. If He will, He can remove you  and can cause what He will to follow after you, even as He raised you from the seed  of other folk. 

[006_134]134 Lo! that which ye are promised will surely come to pass, and ye cannot  escape. 

[006_135]135 Say (O Muhammad): O my people! Work according to your power. Lo! I too  am working. Thus ye will come to know for which of us will be the happy sequel. Lo!  the wrong-doers will not be successful. 

[006_136]136 They assign unto Allah, of the crops and cattle which He created, a portion,  and they say: "This is Allah's" - in their make-believe - "and this is for (His) partners  in regard to us." Thus that which (they assign) unto His partners in them reacheth not  Allah and that which (they assign) unto Allah goeth to their (so-called) partners. Evil  is their ordinance. 

[006_137]137 Thus have their (so-called) partners (of Allah) made the killing of their  children to seem fair unto many of the idolaters, that they may ruin them and make  their faith obscure for them. Had Allah willed (it otherwise), they had not done so. So  leave them alone with their devices. 

[006_138]138 And they say: Such cattle and crops are forbidden. No-one is to eat of them  save whom we will - in their make-believe - cattle whose backs are forbidden, cattle  over which they mention not the name of Allah. (All that is) a lie against Him. He  will repay them for that which they invent. 

[006_139]139 And they say: That which is in the bellies of such cattle is reserved for our  males and is forbidden to our wives; but if it be born dead, then they (all) may be  partakers thereof. He will reward them for their attribution (of such ordinances unto  Him). Lo, He is Wise, Aware. 

[006_140]140 They are losers who besottedly have slain their children without knowledge,  and have forbidden that which Allah bestowed upon them, inventing a lie against  Allah. They indeed have gone astray and are not guided. 

[006_141]141 He it is Who produceth gardens trellised and untrellised, and the date-palm,  and crops of divers flavour, and the olive and the pomegranate, like and unlike. Eat ye  of the fruit thereof when it fruiteth, and pay the due thereof upon the harvest day, and  be not prodigal. Lo! Allah loveth not the prodigals. 

[006_142]142 And of the cattle (He produceth) some for burdens, some for food. Eat of that  which Allah hath bestowed upon you, and follow not the footsteps of the devil, for lo!  he is an open foe to you. 

[006_143]143 Eight pairs: Of the sheep twain, and of the goats twain. Say: Hath He  forbidden the two males or the two females, or that which the wombs of the two  females contain ? Expound to me (the case) with knowledge, if ye are truthful. 

[006_144]144 And of the camels twain and of the oxen twain. Say: Hath He forbidden the  two males or the two females, or that which the wombs of the two females contain; or  were ye by to witness when Allah commanded you (all) this ? Then who doth greater  wrong than he who deviseth a lie concerning Allah, that he may lead mankind astray  without knowledge. Lo! Allah guideth not wrongdoing folk. 

[006_145]145 Say: I find not in that which is revealed unto me aught prohibited to an eater  that he eat thereof, except it be carrion, or blood poured forth, or swineflesh - for that  verily is foul - or the abomination which was immolated to the name of other than  Allah. But whoso is compelled (thereto), neither craving nor transgressing, (for him)  lo! thy Lord is Forgiving, Merciful. 

[006_146]146 Unto those who are Jews We forbade every animal with claws. And of the  oxen and the sheep forbade We unto them the fat thereof save that upon the backs or  the entrails, or that which is mixed with the bone. That we awarded them for their  rebellion. And lo! we verily are truthful. 

[006_147]147 So if they give the lie to thee (Muhammad), say: Your Lord is a Lord of All- Embracing Mercy, and His wrath will never be withdrawn from guilty folk. 

[006_148]148 They who are idolaters will say: Had Allah willed, we had not ascribed (unto  Him) partners neither had our fathers, nor had we forbidden aught. Thus did those  who were before them give the lie (to Allah's messengers) till they tasted of the fear  of Us. Say: Have ye any knowledge that ye can adduce for Us ? Lo! ye follow naught  but an opinion, Lo! ye do but guess. 

[006_149]149 Say - For Allah's is the final argument - Had He willed He could indeed have  guided all of you. 

[006_150]150 Say: Come, bring your witnesses who can bear witness that Allah forbade  (all) this. And if they bear witness, do not thou bear witness with them. Follow thou  not the whims of those who deny Our revelations, those who believe not in the  Hereafter and deem (others) equal with their Lord. 

[006_151]151 Say: Come, I will recite unto you that which your Lord hath made a sacred  duty for you: That ye ascribe no thing as partner unto Him and that ye do good to  parents, and that ye slay not your children because of penury - We provide for you  and for them - and that ye draw not nigh to lewd things whether open or concealed.  And that ye slay not the life which Allah hath made sacred, save in the course of  justice. This He hath command you, in order that ye may discern. 

[006_152]152 And approach not the wealth of the orphan save with that which is better, till  he reach maturity. Give full measure and full weight, in justice. We task not any soul  beyond its scope. And if ye give your word, do justice thereunto, even though it be  (against) a kinsman; and fulfil the covenant of Allah. This He commandeth you that  haply ye may remember. 

[006_153]153 And (He commandeth you, saying): This is My straight path, so follow it.  Follow not other ways, lest ye be parted from His way. This hath He ordained for  you, that ye may ward off (evil). 

[006_154]154 Again, We gave the Scripture unto Moses, complete for him who would do  good, an explanation of all things, a guidance and a mercy, that they might believe in  the meeting with their Lord. 

[006_155]155 And this is a blessed Scripture which We have revealed. So follow it and  ward off (evil), that ye may find mercy. 

[006_156]156 Lest ye should say: The Scripture was revealed only to two sects before us,  and we in sooth were unaware of what they read; 

[006_157]157 Or lest ye should say: If the Scripture had been revealed unto us, we surely  had been better guided than are they. Now hath there come unto you a clear proof  from your Lord, a guidance and mercy; and who doeth greater wrong than he who  denieth the revelations of Allah, and turneth away from them ? We award unto those  who turn away from Our revelations an evil doom because of their aversion. 

[006_158]158 Wait they, indeed, for nothing less than that the angels should come unto  them, or thy Lord should come, or there should come one of the portents from thy  Lord ? In the day when one of the portents from thy Lord cometh, its belief availeth  naught a soul which theretofore believed not, nor in its belief earned good (by works).  Say: Wait ye! Lo! We (too) are waiting. 

[006_159]159 Lo! As for those who sunder their religion and become schismatics, no  concern at all hast thou with them. Their case will go to Allah, Who then will tell  them what they used to do. 

[006_160]160 Whoso bringeth a good deed will receive tenfold the like thereof, while  whoso bringeth an ill-deed will be awarded but the like thereof; and they will not be  wronged. 

[006_161]161 Say: Lo! As for me, my Lord hath guided me unto a straight path, a right  religion, the community of Abraham, the upright, who was no idolater. 

[006_162]162 Say: Lo! my worship and my sacrifice and my living and my dying are for  Allah, Lord of the Worlds. 

[006_163]163 He hath no partner. This am I commanded, and I am first of those who  surrender (unto Him). 

[006_164]164 Say: Shall I seek another than Allah for Lord, when He is Lord of all things ?  Each soul earneth only on its own account, nor doth any laden bear another's load.  Then unto your Lord is your return and He will tell you that wherein ye differed. 

[006_165]165 He it is Who hath placed you as viceroys of the  earth and hath exalted some  of you in rank above others, that He may try you by (the test of) that which He hath  given you. Lo! Thy Lord is swift in prosecution, and Lo! He verily is Forgiving,  Merciful.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

7. al-A`raf: The Elevated Places

[007_001]1 Alif. Lam. Mim. Sad. 

[007_002]2 (It is) a Scripture that is revealed unto thee (Muhammad) - so let there be no  heaviness in thy heart therefrom - that thou mayst warn thereby, and (it is) a  Reminder unto believers. 

[007_003]3 (Saying): Follow that which is sent down unto you from your Lord, and  follow no protecting friends beside Him. Little do ye recollect! 

[007_004]4 How many a township have We destroyed! As a raid by night, or while they  slept at noon, Our terror came unto them. 

[007_005]5 No plea had they, when Our terror came unto them, save that they said: Lo!  We were wrong-doers. 

[007_006]6 Then verily We shall question those unto whom (Our message) hath been  sent, and verily We shall question the messengers. 

[007_007]7 Then verily We shall narrate unto them (the event) with knowledge, for We  were not absent (when it came to pass). 

[007_008]8 The weighing on that day is the true (weighing). As for those whose scale is  heavy, they are the successful. 

[007_009]9 And as for those whose scale is light: those are they who lose their souls  because they used to wrong Our revelations. 

[007_010]10 And We have given you (mankind) power in the earth, and appointed for you  therein livelihoods. Little give ye thanks! 

[007_011]11 And We created you, then fashioned you, then told the angels: Fall ye  prostrate before Adam! And they fell prostrate, all save Iblis, who was not of those  who make prostration. 

[007_012]12 He said: What hindered thee that thou didst not fall prostrate when I bade  thee ? (Iblis) said: I am better than him. Thou createdst me of fire while him Thou  didst create of mud. 

[007_013]13 He said: Then go down hence! It is not for thee to show pride here, so go  forth! Lo! thou art of those degraded. 

[007_014]14 He said: Reprieve me till the day when they are raised (from the dead). 

[007_015]15 He said: Lo! thou art of those reprieved. 

[007_016]16 He said: Now, because Thou hast sent me astray, verily I shall lurk in  ambush for them on Thy Right Path. 

[007_017]17 Then I shall come upon them from before them and from behind them and  from their right hands and from their left hands, and Thou wilt not find most of them  beholden (unto Thee). 

[007_018]18 He said: Go forth from hence, degraded, banished. As for such of them as  follow thee, surely I will fill hell with all of you. 

[007_019]19 And (unto man): O Adam! Dwell thou and thy wife in the Garden and eat  from whence ye will, but come not nigh this tree lest ye become wrong-doers. 

[007_020]20 Then Satan whispered to them that he might manifest unto them that which  was hidden from them of their shame, and he said: Your Lord forbade you from this  tree only lest ye should become angels or become of the immortals. 

[007_021]21 And he swore unto them (saying): Lo! I am a sincere adviser unto you. 

[007_022]22 Thus did he lead them on with guile. And when they tasted of the tree their  shame was manifest to them and they began to hide (by heaping) on themselves some  of the leaves of the Garden. And their Lord called them, (saying): Did I not forbid  you from that tree and tell you: Lo! Satan is an open enemy to you ? 

[007_023]23 They said: Our Lord! We have wronged ourselves. If thou forgive us not and  have not mercy on us, surely we are of the lost! 

[007_024]24 He said: Go down (from hence), one of you a foe unto the other. There will  be for you on earth a habitation and provision for a while. 

[007_025]25 He said: There shall ye live, and there shall ye die, and thence shall ye be  brought forth. 

[007_026]26 O Children of Adam! We have revealed unto you raiment to conceal your  shame, and splendid vesture, but the raiment of restraint from evil, that is best. This is  of the revelations of Allah, that they may remember. 

[007_027]27 O Children of Adam! Let not Satan seduce you as he caused your (first)  parents to go forth from the Garden and tore off from them their robe (of innocence)  that he might manifest their shame to them. Lo! he seeth you, he and his tribe, from  whence ye see him not. Lo! We have made the devils protecting friends for those who  believe not. 

[007_028]28 And when they do some lewdness they say: We found our fathers doing it  and Allah hath enjoined it on us. Say: Allah, verily, enjoineth not lewdness. Tell ye  concerning Allah that which ye know not ? 

[007_029]29 Say: My Lord enjoineth justice. And set your faces upright (toward Him) at  every place of worship and call upon Him, making religion pure for Him (only). As  He brought you into being, so return ye (unto Him). 

[007_030]30 A party hath He led aright, while error hath just hold over (another) party, for  lo! they choose the devils for protecting supporters instead of Allah and deem that  they are rightly guided. 

[007_031]31 O Children of Adam! Look to your adornment at every place of worship, and  eat and drink, but be not prodigal. Lo! He loveth not the prodigals. 

[007_032]32 Say: Who hath forbidden the adornment of Allah which He hath brought  forth for His bondmen, and the good things of His providing ? Say: Such, on the Day  of Resurrection, will be only for those who believed during the life of the world. Thus  do we detail Our revelations for people who have knowledge. 

[007_033]33 Say: My Lord forbiddeth only indecencies, such of them as are apparent and  such as are within, and sin and wrongful oppression, and that ye associate with Allah  that for which no warrant hath been revealed, and that ye tell concerning Allah that  which ye know not. 

[007_034]34 And every nation hath its term, and when its term cometh, they cannot put it  off an hour nor yet advance (it). 

[007_035]35 O Children of Adam! When messengers of your own come unto you who  narrate unto you My revelations, then whosoever refraineth from evil and amendeth -  there shall no fear come upon them neither shall they grieve. 

[007_036]36 But they who deny Our revelations and scorn them  - each are rightful  owners of the Fire; they will abide therein. 

[007_037]37 Who doeth greater wrong than he who inventeth a lie concerning Allah or  denieth Our tokens. (For such) their appointed portion of the Book (of destiny)  reacheth them till, when Our messengers come to gather them, they say: Where (now)  is that to which ye cried beside Allah ? They say: They have departed from us. And  they testify against themselves that they were disbelievers. 

[007_038]38 He saith: Enter into the Fire among nations of the jinn and humankind who  passed away before you. Every time a nation entereth, it curseth its sister (nation) till,  when they have all been made to follow one another thither, the last of them saith  unto the first of them: Our Lord! These led us astray, so give them double torment of  the Fire. He saith: For each one there is double (torment), but ye know not. 

[007_039]39 And the first of them saith unto the last of them: Ye were no whit better than  us, so taste the doom for what ye used to earn. 

[007_040]40 Lo! they who deny Our revelations and scorn them, for them the gates of  heaven will nor be opened not will they enter the Garden until the camel goeth  through the needle's eye. Thus do We requite the guilty. 

[007_041]41 Theirs will be a bed of hell, and over them coverings (of hell). Thus do We  requite wrong-doers. 

[007_042]42 But (as for) those who believe and do good works - We tax not any soul  beyond its scope - Such are rightful owners of the Garden. They abide therein. 

[007_043]43 And We remove whatever rancour may be in their hearts. Rivers flow  beneath them. And they say: The praise to Allah, Who hath guided us to this. We  could not truly have been led aright if Allah had not guided us. Verily the messengers  of our Lord did bring the Truth. And it is cried unto them: This is the Garden. Ye  inherit it for what ye used to do. 

[007_044]44 And the dwellers of the Garden cry unto the dwellers of the Fire: We have  found that which our Lord promised us (to be) the Truth. Have ye (too) found that  which your Lord promised the Truth ? They say: Yea, verily. And a crier in between  them crieth: The curse of Allah is on evil-doers, 

[007_045]45 Who debar (men) from the path of Allah and would have it crooked, and who  are disbelievers in the Last Day. 

[007_046]46 Between them is a veil. And on the Heights are men who know them all by  their marks. And they call unto the dwellers of the Garden: Peace be unto you! They  enter it not although they hope (to enter). 

[007_047]47 And when their eyes are turned toward the dwellers of the Fire, they say: Our  Lord! Place us not with the wrong-doing folk. 

[007_048]48 And the dwellers on the Heights call unto men whom they know by their  marks, (saying): What did your multitude and that in which ye took your pride avail  you ? 

[007_049]49 Are these they of whom ye swore that Allah would not show them mercy ?  (Unto them it hath been said): Enter the Garden. No fear shall come upon you nor is it  ye who will grieve. 

[007_050]50 And the dwellers of the Fire cry out unto the dwellers of the Garden: Pour on  us some water or some wherewith Allah hath provided you. They say: Lo! Allah hath  forbidden both to disbelievers (in His guidance), 

[007_051]51 Who took their religion for a sport and pastime, and whom the life of the  world beguiled. So this day We have forgotten them even as they forgot the meeting  of this their Day and as they used to deny Our tokens. 

[007_052]52 Verily We have brought them a Scripture which We expounded with  knowledge, a guidance and a mercy for a people who believe. 

[007_053]53 Await they aught save the fulfilment thereof ? On the day when the  fulfilment thereof cometh, those who were before forgetful thereof will say: The  messengers of our Lord did bring the Truth! Have we any intercessors, that they may  intercede for us ? Or can we be returned (to life on earth), that we may act otherwise  than we used to act ? They have lost their souls, and that which they devised hath  failed them. 

[007_054]54 Lo! your Lord is Allah Who created the heavens and the earth in six Days,  then mounted He the Throne. He covereth the night with the day, which is in haste to  follow it, and hath made the sun and the moon and the stars subservient by His  command. His verily is all creation and commandment. Blessed be Allah, the Lord of  the Worlds! 

[007_055]55 (O mankind!) Call upon your Lord humbly and in secret. Lo! He loveth not  aggressors. 

[007_056]56 Work not confusion in the earth after the fair ordering (thereof). and call on  Him in fear and hope. Lo! the mercy of Allah is nigh unto the good. 

[007_057]57 And He it is Who sendeth the winds as tidings heralding His mercy, till,  when they bear a cloud heavy (with rain), We lead it to a dead land, and then cause  water to descend thereon and thereby bring forth fruits of every kind. Thus bring We  forth the dead. Haply ye may remember. 

[007_058]58 As for the good land, its vegetation cometh forth by permission of its Lord;  while as for that which is bad, only the useless cometh forth (from it). Thus do We  recount the tokens for people who give thanks. 

[007_059]59 We sent Noah (of old) unto his people, and he said: O my people! Serve  Allah. Ye have no other God save Him. Lo! I fear for you the retribution of an Awful  Day. 

[007_060]60 The chieftains of his people said: Lo! we see thee surely in plain error. 

[007_061]61 He said: O my people! There is no error in me, but I am a messenger from  the Lord of the Worlds. 

[007_062]62 I convey unto you the messages of my Lord and give good counsel unto you,  and know from Allah that which ye know not. 

[007_063]63 Marvel ye that there should come unto you a Reminder from your Lord by  means of a man among you, that he may warn you, and that ye may keep from evil,  and that haply ye may find mercy. 

[007_064]64 But they denied him, so We saved him and those with him in the ship, and  We drowned those who denied Our tokens. Lo! they were blind folk. 

[007_065]65 And unto (the tribe of) A'ad (We sent) their brother, Hud. He said: O my  people! Serve Allah. Ye have no other God save Him. Will ye not ward off (evil) ? 

[007_066]66 The chieftains of his people, who were disbelieving, said: Lo! we surely see  thee in foolishness, and lo! we deem thee of the liars. 

[007_067]67 He said: O my people! There is no foolishness in me, but I am a messenger  from the Lord of the Worlds. 

[007_068]68 I convey unto you the messages of my Lord and am for you a true adviser. 

[007_069]69 Marvel ye that there should come unto you a Reminder from your Lord by  means of a man among you, that he may warn you ? Remember how He made you  viceroys after Noah's folk, and gave you growth of stature. Remember (all) the  bounties of your Lord, that haply ye may be successful. 

[007_070]70 They said: Hast come unto us that we should serve Allah alone, and forsake  what our fathers worshipped ? Then bring upon us that wherewith thou threatenest us  if thou art of the truthful! 

[007_071]71 He said: Terror and wrath from your Lord have already fallen on you. Would  ye wrangle with me over names which ye have named, ye and your fathers, for which  no warrant from Allah hath been revealed ? Then await (the consequence), lo! I (also)  am of those awaiting (it). 

[007_072]72 And We saved him and those with him by a mercy from Us, and We cut the  root of those who denied Our revelations and were not believers. 

[007_073]73 And to (the tribe of) Thamud (We sent) their brother Salih. He said: O my  people! Serve Allah. Ye have no other God save Him. A wonder from your Lord hath  come unto you. Lo! this is the camel of Allah, a token unto you; so let her feed in  Allah's earth, and touch her not with hurt lest painful torment seize you. 

[007_074]74 And remember how He made you viceroys after A'ad and gave you station in  the earth. Ye choose castles in the plains and hew the mountains into dwellings. So  remember (all) the bounties of Allah and do not evil, making mischief in the earth. 

[007_075]75 The chieftains of his people, who were scornful, said unto those whom they  despised, unto such of them as believed: Know ye that Salih is one sent from his Lord  ? They said: Lo! In that wherewith he hath been sent we are believers. 

[007_076]76 Those who were scornful said: Lo! in that which ye believe we are  disbelievers. 

[007_077]77 So they hamstrung the she-camel, and they flouted the commandment of  their Lord, and they said: O Salih! Bring upon us that thou threatenest if thou art  indeed of those sent (from Allah). 

[007_078]78 So the earthquake seized them, and morning found them prostrate in their  dwelling-place. 

[007_079]79 And (Salih) turned from them and said: O my people! I delivered my Lord's  message unto you and gave you good advice, but ye love not good advisers. 

[007_080]80 And Lot! (Remember) when he said unto his folk: Will ye commit  abomination such as no creature ever did before you ? 

[007_081]81 Lo! ye come with lust unto men instead of women. Nay, but ye are wanton  folk. 

[007_082]82 And the answer of his people was only that they said (one to another): Turn  them out of your township. They are folk, forsooth, who keep pure. 

[007_083]83 And We rescued him and his household, save his wife, who was of those  who stayed behind. 

[007_084]84 And We rained a rain upon them. See now the nature of the consequence of  evil-doers! 

[007_085]85 And unto Midian (We sent) their brother, Shu'eyb. He said: O my people!  Serve Allah. Ye have no other God save Him. Lo! a clear proof hath come unto you  from your Lord; so give full measure and full weight and wrong not mankind in their  goods, and work not confusion in the earth after the fair ordering thereof. That will be  better for you, if ye are believers. 

[007_086]86 Lurk not on every road to threaten (wayfarers), and to turn away from Allah's  path him who believeth in Him, and to seek to make it crooked. And remember, when  ye were but few, how He did multiply you. And see the nature of the consequence for  the corrupters! 

[007_087]87 And if there is a party of you which believeth in that wherewith I have been  sent, and there is a party which believeth not, then have patience until Allah judge  between us. He is the Best of all who deal in judgment. 

[007_088]88 The chieftains of his people, who were scornful, said: Surely we will drive  thee out, O Shu'eyb, and those who believe with thee, from our township, unless ye  return to our religion. He said: Even though we hate it ? 

[007_089]89 We should have invented a lie against Allah if we returned to your religion  after Allah hath rescued us from it. It is not for us to return to it unless Allah our Lord  should (so) will. Our Lord comprehendeth all things in knowledge. In Allah do we  put our trust. Our Lord! Decide with truth between us and our folk, for Thou art the  best of those who make decision. 

[007_090]90 But the chieftains of his people, who were disbelieving, said: If ye follow  Shu'eyb, then truly ye shall be the losers. 

[007_091]91 So the earthquake seized them and morning found them prostrate in their  dwelling-place. 

[007_092]92 Those who denied Shu'eyb became as though they had not dwelt there. Those  who denied Shu'eyb, they were the losers. 

[007_093]93 So he turned from them and said: O my people! I delivered my Lord's  messages unto you and gave you good advice; then how can I sorrow for a people that  rejected (truth) ? 

[007_094]94 And We sent no prophet unto any township but We did afflict its folk with  tribulation and adversity that haply they might grow humble. 

[007_095]95 Then changed We the evil plight for good till they grew affluent and said:  Tribulation and distress did touch our fathers. Then We seized them unawares, when  they perceived not. 

[007_096]96 And if the people of the townships had believed and kept from evil, surely  We should have opened for them blessings from the sky and from the earth. But (unto  every messenger) they gave the lie, and so We seized them on account of what they  used to earn. 

[007_097]97 Are the people of the townships then secure from the coming of Our wrath  upon them as a night-raid while they sleep ? 

[007_098]98 Or are the people of the townships then secure from the coming of Our wrath  upon them in the daytime while they play ? 

[007_099]99 Are they then secure from Allah's scheme ? None deemeth himself secure  from Allah's scheme save folk that perish. 

[007_100]100 Is it not an indication to those who inherit the land after its people (who thus  reaped the consequence of evil-doing) that, if We will, We can smite them for their  sins and print upon their hearts so that they hear not ? 

[007_101]101 Such were the townships. We relate some tidings of them unto thee  (Muhammad). Their messengers verily came unto them with clear proofs (of Allah's  Sovereignty), but they could not believe because they had before denied. Thus doth  Allah print upon the hearts of disbelievers (that they hear not). 

[007_102]102 We found no (loyalty to any) covenant in most of them. Nay, most of them  We found wrong-doers. 

[007_103]103 Then, after them, We sent Moses with our tokens unto Pharaoh and his  chiefs, but they repelled them. Now, see the nature of the consequence for the  corrupters! 

[007_104]104 Moses said: O Pharaoh! Lo! I am a messenger from the Lord of the Worlds, 

[007_105]105 Approved upon condition that I speak concerning Allah nothing but the truth.  I come unto you (lords of Egypt) with a clear proof from your Lord. So let the  Children of Israel go with me. 

[007_106]106 (Pharaoh) said: If thou comest with a token, then produce it, if thou art of  those who speak the truth. 

[007_107]107 Then he flung down his staff and lo! it was a serpent manifest; 

[007_108]108 And he drew forth his hand (from his bosom), and lo! it was white for the  beholders. 

[007_109]109 The chiefs of Pharaoh's people said: Lo! this is some knowing wizard, 

[007_110]110 Who would expel you from your land. Now what do ye advise ? 

[007_111]111 They said (unto Pharaoh): Put him off (a while) - him and his brother - and  send into the cities summoners, 

[007_112]112 To bring each knowing wizard unto thee. 

[007_113]113 And the wizards came to Pharaoh, saying: Surely there will be a reward for  us if we are victors. 

[007_114]114 He answered: Yes, and surely ye shall be of those brought near (to me). 

[007_115]115 They said: O Moses! Either throw (first) or let us be the first throwers ? 

[007_116]116 He said: Throw! And when they threw they cast a spell upon the people's  eyes, and overawed them, and produced a mighty spell. 

[007_117]117 And We inspired Moses (saying): Throw thy staff! And lo! it swallowed up  their lying show. 

[007_118]118 Thus was the Truth vindicated and that which they were doing was made  vain. 

[007_119]119 Thus were they there defeated and brought low. 

[007_120]120 And the wizards fell down prostrate, 

[007_121]121 Crying: We believe in the Lord of the Worlds, 

[007_122]122 The Lord of Moses and Aaron. 

[007_123]123 Pharaoh said: Ye believe in Him before I give you leave! Lo! this is the plot  that ye have plotted in the city that ye may drive its people hence. But ye shall come  to know! 

[007_124]124 Surely I shall have your hands and feet cut off upon alternate sides. Then I  shall crucify you every one. 

[007_125]125 They said: Lo! We are about to return unto our Lord! 

[007_126]126 Thou takest vengeance on us only forasmuch as we believed the tokens of  our Lord when they came unto us. Our Lord! Vouchsafe unto us steadfastness and  make us die as men who have surrendered (unto Thee). 

[007_127]127 The chiefs of Pharaoh's people said: (O King), wilt thou suffer Moses and his  people to make mischief in the land, and flout thee and thy gods ? He said: We will  slay their sons and spare their women, for lo! we are in power over them. 

[007_128]128 And Moses said unto his people: Seek help in Allah and endure. Lo! the  earth is Allah's. He giveth it for an inheritance to whom He will. And lo! the sequel is  for those who keep their duty (unto Him). 

[007_129]129 They said: We suffered hurt before thou camest unto us, and since thou hast  come unto us. He said: It may be that your Lord is going to destroy your adversary  and make you viceroys in the earth, that He may see how ye behave. 

[007_130]130 And we straitened Pharaoh's folk with famine and dearth of fruits, that  peradventure they might heed. 

[007_131]131 But whenever good befell them, they said: This is ours; and whenever evil  smote them they ascribed it to the evil auspices of Moses and those with him. Surely  their evil auspice was only with Allah. But most of them knew not. 

[007_132]132 And they said: Whatever portent thou bringest wherewith to bewitch us, we  shall not put faith in thee. 

[007_133]133 So We sent against them the flood and the locusts and the vermin and the  frogs and the blood - a succession of clear signs. But they were arrogant and became a  guilty folk. 

[007_134]134 And when the terror fell on them they cried: O Moses! Pray for us unto thy  Lord, because He hath a covenant with thee. If thou removest the terror from us we  verily will trust thee and will let the Children of Israel go with thee. 

[007_135]135 But when We did remove from them the terror for a term which they must  reach, behold! they broke their covenant. 

[007_136]136 Therefore We took retribution from them; therefore We drowned them in the  sea: because they denied Our revelations and were heedless of them. 

[007_137]137 And We caused the folk who were despised to inherit the eastern parts of the  land and the western parts thereof which We had blessed. And the fair word of thy  Lord was fulfilled for the Children of Israel because of their endurance; and We  annihilated (all) that Pharaoh and his folk had done and that they had contrived. 

[007_138]138 And We brought the Children of Israel across the sea, and they came unto a  people who were given up to idols which they had. They said: O Moses! Make for us  a god even as they have gods. He said: Lo! ye are a folk who know not. 

[007_139]139 Lo! as for these, their way will be destroyed and all that they are doing is in  vain. 

[007_140]140 He said: Shall I seek for you a god other than Allah when He hath favoured  you above (all) creatures ? 

[007_141]141 And (remember) when We did deliver you from Pharaoh's folk who were  afflicting you with dreadful torment, slaughtering your sons and sparing your women.   That was a tremendous trial from your Lord. 

[007_142]142 And when We did appoint for Moses thirty nights (of solitude), and added to  them ten, and he completed the whole time appointed by his Lord of forty nights; and  Moses said unto his brother, Aaron: Take my place among the people. Do right, and  follow not the way of mischief-makers. 

[007_143]143 And when Moses came to Our appointed tryst and his Lord had spoken unto  him, he said: My Lord! Show me (Thy Self), that I may gaze upon Thee. He said:  Thou wilt not see Me, but gaze upon the mountain! If it stand still in its place, then  thou wilt see Me. And when his Lord revealed (His) glory to the mountain He sent it  crashing down. And Moses fell down senseless. And when he woke he said: Glory  unto Thee! I turn unto Thee repentant, and I am the first of (true) believers. 

[007_144]144 He said: O Moses! I have preferred thee above mankind by My messages and  by My speaking (unto thee). So hold that which I have given thee, and be among the  thankful. 

[007_145]145 And We wrote for him, upon the tablets, the lesson to be drawn from all  things and the explanation of all things, then (bade him): Hold it fast; and command  thy people (saying): Take the better (course made clear) therein. I shall show thee the  abode of evil-livers. 

[007_146]146 I shall turn away from My revelations those who magnify themselves  wrongfully in the earth, and if they see each token believe it not, and if they see the  way of righteousness choose it nor for (their) way, and if they see the way of error  choose if for (their) way. That is because they deny Our revelations and are used to  disregard them. 

[007_147]147 Those who deny Our revelations and the meeting of the Hereafter, their  works are fruitless. Are they requited aught save what they used to do ? 

[007_148]148 And the folk of Moses, after (he left them), chose a calf (for worship),  (made) out of their ornaments, of saffron hue, which gave a lowing sound. Saw they  not that it spake not unto them nor guided them to any way ? They chose it, and  became wrong-doers. 

[007_149]149 And when they feared the consequences thereof and saw that they had gone  astray, they said: Unless our Lord have mercy on us and forgive us, we verily are of  the lost. 

[007_150]150 And when Moses returned unto his people, angry and grieved, he said: Evil  is that (course) which ye took after I had left you. Would ye hasten on the judgment  of your Lord ? And he cast down the tablets, and he seized his brother by the head,  dragging him toward him. He said: Son of my mother! Lo! the folk did judge me  weak and almost killed me. Oh, make not mine enemies to triumph over me and place  me not among the evil-doers. 

[007_151]151 He said: My Lord! Have mercy on me and on my brother; bring us into Thy  mercy, Thou the Most Merciful of all who show mercy. 

[007_152]152 Lo! Those who chose the calf (for worship), terror from their Lord and  humiliation will come upon them in the life of the world. Thus do We requite those  who invent a lie. 

[007_153]153 But those who do ill-deeds and afterward repent and believe - lo! for them,  afterward, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful. 

[007_154]154 Then, when the anger of Moses abated, he took up the tablets, and in their  inscription there was guidance and mercy for all those who fear their Lord. 

[007_155]155 And Moses chose of his people seventy men for Our appointed tryst and,  when the trembling came on them, he said: My Lord! If Thou hadst willed Thou hadst  destroyed them long before, and me with them. Wilt thou destroy us for that which  the ignorant among us did ? It is but Thy trial (of us). Thou sendest whom Thou wilt  astray and guidest whom Thou wilt: Thou art our Protecting Friend, therefore forgive  us and have mercy on us, Thou, the Best of all who show forgiveness. 

[007_156]156 And ordain for us in this world that which is good, and in the Hereafter (that  which is good), Lo! We have turned unto Thee. He said: I smite with My punishment  whom I will, and My mercy embraceth all things, therefore I shall ordain it for those  who ward off (evil) and pay the poor-due, and those who believe Our revelations; 

[007_157]157 Those who follow the messenger, the Prophet who can neither read nor  write, whom they will find described in the Torah and the Gospel (which are) with  them. He will enjoin on them that which is right and forbid them that which is wrong.  He will make lawful for them all good things and prohibit for them only the foul; and  he will relieve them of their burden and the fetters that they used to wear. Then those  who believe in him, and honour him, and help him, and follow the light which is sent  down with him: they are the successful. 

[007_158]158 Say (O Muhammad): O mankind! Lo! I am the messenger of Allah to you all  - (the messenger of) Him unto Whom belongeth the Sovereignty of the heavens and  the earth. There is no God save Him. He quickeneth and He giveth death. So believe  in Allah and His messenger, the Prophet who can neither read nor write, who  believeth in Allah and in His Words, and follow him that haply ye may be led aright. 

[007_159]159 And of Moses' folk there is a community who lead with truth and establish  justice therewith. 

[007_160]160 We divided them into twelve tribes, nations; and We inspired Moses, when  his people asked him for water, saying: Smite with thy staff the rock! And there  gushed forth therefrom twelve springs, so that each tribe knew their drinking-place.  And we caused the white cloud to overshadow them and sent down for them the  manna and the quails (saying): Eat of the good things wherewith we have provided  you. They wronged Us not, but they were wont to wrong themselves. 

[007_161]161 And when it was said unto them: Dwell in this township and eat therefrom  whence ye will, and say "Repentance," and enter the gate prostrate; We shall forgive  you your sins; We shall increase (reward) for the right-doers. 

[007_162]162 But those of them who did wrong changed the word which had been told  them for another saying, and We sent down upon them wrath from heaven for their  wrongdoing. 

[007_163]163 Ask them (O Muhammad) of the township that was by the sea, how they did  break the Sabbath, how their big fish came unto them visibly upon their Sabbath day  and on a day when they did not keep Sabbath came they not unto them. Thus did We  try them for that they were evil-livers. 

[007_164]164 And when a community among them said: Why preach ye to a folk whom  Allah is about to destroy or punish with an awful doom, they said: In order to be free  from guilt before your Lord, and that haply they may ward off (evil). 

[007_165]165 And when they forgot that whereof they had been reminded, We rescued  those who forbade wrong, and visited those who did wrong with dreadful punishment  because they were evil-livers. 

[007_166]166 So when they took pride in that which they had been forbidden, We said unto  them: Be ye apes despised and loathed! 

[007_167]167 And (remember) when thy Lord proclaimed that He would raise against them  till the Day of Resurrection those who would lay on them a cruel torment. Lo! verily  thy Lord is swift in prosecution and lo! verily He is Forgiving, Merciful. 

[007_168]168 And We have sundered them in the earth as (separate) nations. Some of them  are righteous, and some far from that. And We have tried them with good things and  evil things that haply they might return. 

[007_169]169 And a generation hath succeeded them who inherited the scriptures. They  grasp the goods of this low life (as the price of evil-doing) and say: It will be forgiven  us. And if there came to them (again) the offer of the like, they would accept it (and  would sin again). Hath not the covenant of the Scripture been taken on their behalf  that they should not speak aught concerning Allah save the truth ? And they have  studied that which is therein. And the abode of the Hereafter is better, for those who  ward off (evil). Have ye then no sense ? 

[007_170]170 And as for those who make (men) keep the Scripture, and establish worship -  lo! We squander not the wages of reformers. 

[007_171]171 And when We shook the Mount above them as it were a covering, and they  supposed that it was going to fall upon them (and We said): Hold fast that which We  have given you, and remember that which is therein, that ye may ward off (evil). 

[007_172]172 And (remember) when thy Lord brought forth from the Children of Adam,  from their reins, their seed, and made them testify of themselves, (saying): Am I not  your Lord ? They said: Yea, verily. We testify. (That was) lest ye should say at the  Day of Resurrection: Lo! of this we were unaware; 

[007_173]173 Or lest ye should say: (It is) only (that) our fathers ascribed partners to Allah  of old and we were (their) seed after them. Wilt Thou destroy us on account of that  which those who follow falsehood did ? 

[007_174]174 Thus we detail the revelations, that haply they may return. 

[007_175]175 Recite unto them the tale of him to whom We gave Our revelations, but he  sloughed them off, so Satan overtook him and he became of those who lead astray. 

[007_176]176 And had We willed We could have raised him by their means, but he clung  to the earth and followed his own lust. Therefor his likeness is as the likeness of a  dog: if thou attackest him he panteth with his tongue out, and if thou leavest him he  panteth with his tongue out. Such is the likeness of the people who deny Our  revelations. Narrate unto them the history (of the men of old), that haply they may  take thought. 

[007_177]177 Evil as an example are the folk who denied Our revelations, and were wont  to wrong themselves. 

[007_178]178 He whom Allah leadeth, he indeed is led aright, while he whom Allah  sendeth astray - they indeed are losers. 

[007_179]179 Already have We urged unto hell many of the jinn and humankind, having  hearts wherewith they understand not, and having eyes wherewith they see not, and  having ears wherewith they hear not. These are as the cattle - nay, but they are worse!  These are the neglectful. 

[007_180]180 Allah's are the fairest names. Invoke Him by them. And leave the company  of those who blaspheme His names. They will be requited what they do. 

[007_181]181 And of those whom We created there is a nation who guide with the Truth  and establish justice therewith. 

[007_182]182 And those who deny Our revelations - step by step We lead them on from  whence they know not. 

[007_183]183 I give them rein (for) lo! My scheme is strong. 

[007_184]184 Have they not bethought them (that) there is no madness in their comrade ?  He is but a plain warner. 

[007_185]185 Have they not considered the dominion of the heavens and the earth, and  what things Allah hath created, and that it may be that their own term draweth nigh ?  In what fact after this will they believe ? 

[007_186]186 Those whom Allah sendeth astray, there is no guide for them. He leaveth  them to wander blindly on in their contumacy. 

[007_187]187 They ask thee of the (destined) Hour, when will it come to port. Say:  Knowledge thereof is with my Lord only. He alone will manifest it at its proper time.  It is heavy in the heavens and the earth. It cometh not to you save unawares. They  question thee as if thou couldst be well informed thereof. Say: Knowledge thereof is  with Allah only, but most of mankind know not. 

[007_188]188 Say: For myself I have no power to benefit, nor power to hurt, save that  which Allah willeth. Had I knowledge of the Unseen, I should have abundance of  wealth, and adversity would not touch me. I am but a warner, and a bearer of good  tidings unto folk who believe. 

[007_189]189 He it is Who did create you from a single soul, and therefrom did make his  mate that he might take rest in her. And when he covered her she bore a light burden,  and she passed (unnoticed) with it, but when it became heavy they cried unto Allah,  their Lord, saying: If thou givest unto us aright we shall be of the thankful. 

[007_190]190 But when He gave unto them aright, they ascribed unto Him partners in  respect of that which He had given them. High is He Exalted above all that they  associate (with Him). 

[007_191]191 Attribute they as partners to Allah those who created naught, but are  themselves created, 

[007_192]192 And cannot give them help, nor can they help themselves ? 

[007_193]193 And if ye call them to the Guidance, they follow you not. Whether ye call  them or are silent is all one for you. 

[007_194]194 Lo! those on whom ye call beside Allah are slaves like unto you. Call on  them now, and let them answer you, if ye are truthful! 

[007_195]195 Have they feet wherewith they walk, or have they hands wherewith they  hold, or have they eyes wherewith they see, or have they ears wherewith they hear ?  Say: Call upon your (so-called) partners (of Allah), and then contrive against me,  spare me not! 

[007_196]196 Lo! my Protecting Friend is Allah Who revealeth the Scripture. He  befriendeth the righteous. 

[007_197]197 They on whom ye call beside Him have no power to help you, nor can they  help you, nor can they help themselves. 

[007_198]198 And if ye (Muslims) call them to the guidance they hear not; and thou  (Muhammad) seest them looking toward thee, but they see not. 

[007_199]199 Keep to forgiveness (O Muhammad), and enjoin kindness, and turn away  from the ignorant. 

[007_200]200 And if a slander from the devil wound thee, then seek refuge in Allah. Lo!  He is Hearer, Knower. 

[007_201]201 Lo! those who ward off (evil), when a glamour from the devil troubleth  them, they do but remember (Allah's Guidance) and behold them seers! 

[007_202]202 Their brethren plunge them further into error and cease not. 

[007_203]203 And when thou bringest not a verse for them they say: Why hast thou not  chosen it ? Say: I follow only that which is inspired in me from my Lord. This  (Qur'an) is insight from your Lord, and a guidance and a mercy for a people that  believe. 

[007_204]204 And when the Qur'an is recited, give ear to it and pay heed, that ye may  obtain mercy. 

[007_205]205 And do thou (O Muhammad) remember thy Lord within thyself humbly and  with awe, below thy breath, at morn and evening. And be not thou of the neglectful. 

[007_206]206 Lo! those who are with thy Lord are not too proud to do Him service, but  they praise Him and adore Him.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

8. al-Anfal: The Spoils Of War

[008_001]1 They ask thee (O Muhammad) of the spoils of war. Say: The spoils of war  belong to Allah and the messenger, so keep your duty to Allah, and adjust the matter  of your difference, and obey Allah and His messenger, if ye are (true) believers. 

[008_002]2 They only are the (true) believers whose hearts feel fear when Allah is  mentioned, and when His revelations are recited unto them they increase their faith,  and who trust in their Lord; 

[008_003]3 Who establish worship and spend of that We have bestowed on them. 

[008_004]4 Those are they who are in truth believers. For them are grades (of honour)  with their Lord, and pardon, and a bountiful provision. 

[008_005]5 Even as thy Lord caused thee (Muhammad) to go forth from thy home with  the Truth, and lo! a party of the believers were averse (to it). 

[008_006]6 Disputing with thee of the Truth after it had been made manifest, as if they  were being driven to death visible. 

[008_007]7 And when Allah promised you one of the two bands (of the enemy) that it  should be yours, and ye longed that other than the armed one might be yours. And  Allah willed that He should cause the Truth to triumph by His words, and cut the root  of the disbelievers; 

[008_008]8 That He might cause the Truth to triumph and bring vanity to naught,  however much the guilty might oppose; 

[008_009]9 When ye sought help of your Lord and He answered you (saying): I will help  you with a thousand of the angels, rank on rank. 

[008_010]10 Allah appointed it only as good tidings, and that your hearts thereby might be  at rest. Victory cometh only by the help of Allah. Lo! Allah is Mighty, Wise. 

[008_011]11 When He made the slumber fall upon you as a reassurance from him and sent  down water from the sky upon you, that thereby He might purify you, and remove  from you the fear of Satan, and make strong your hearts and firm (your) feet thereby. 

[008_012]12 When thy Lord inspired the angels, (saying): I am with you. So make those  who believe stand firm. I will throw fear into the hearts of those who disbelieve. Then  smite the necks and smite of them each finger. 

[008_013]13 That is because they opposed Allah and His messenger. Whoso opposeth  Allah and His messenger, (for him) lo! Allah is severe in punishment. 

[008_014]14 That (is the award), so taste it, and (know) that for disbelievers is the torment  of the Fire. 

[008_015]15 O ye who believe! When ye meet those who disbelieve in battle, turn not  your backs to them. 

[008_016]16 Whoso on that day turneth his back to them, unless manoeuvring for battle or  intent to join a company, he truly hath incurred wrath from Allah, and his habitation  will be hell, a hapless journey's end. 

[008_017]17 Ye (Muslims) slew them not, but Allah slew them. And thou (Muhammad)  threwest not when thou didst throw, but Allah threw, that He might test the believers  by a fair test from Him. Lo! Allah is Hearer, Knower. 

[008_018]18 That (is the case); and (know) that Allah (it is) Who maketh weak the plan of  disbelievers. 

[008_019]19 (O Qureysh!) If ye sought a judgment, now hath the judgment come unto  you. And if ye cease (from persecuting the believers) it will be better for you, but if  ye return (to the attack) We also shall return. And your host will avail you naught,  however numerous it be, and (know) that Allah is with the believers (in His  Guidance). 

[008_020]20 O ye who believe! Obey Allah and His messenger, and turn not away from  him when ye hear (him speak). 

[008_021]21 Be not as those who say, we hear, and they hear not. 

[008_022]22 Lo! the worst of beasts in Allah's sight are the deaf, the dumb, who have no  sense. 

[008_023]23 Had Allah known of any good in them He would have made them hear, but  had He made them hear they would have turned away, averse. 

[008_024]24 O ye who believe! Obey Allah, and the messenger when He calleth you to  that which quickeneth you, and know that Allah cometh in between the man and his  own heart, and that He it is unto Whom ye will be gathered. 

[008_025]25 And guard yourselves against a chastisement which cannot fall exclusively  on those of you who are wrong-doers, and know that Allah is severe in punishment. 

[008_026]26 And remember, when ye were few and reckoned feeble in the land, and were  in fear lest men should extirpate you, how He gave you refuge, and strengthened you  with His help, and made provision of good things for you, that haply ye might be  thankful. 

[008_027]27 O ye who believe! Betray not Allah and His messenger, nor knowingly  betray your trusts. 

[008_028]28 And know that your possessions and your children are a test, and that with  Allah is immense reward. 

[008_029]29 O ye who believe! If ye keep your duty to Allah, He will give you  discrimination (between right and wrong) and will rid you of your evil thoughts and  deeds, and will forgive you. Allah is of Infinite Bounty. 

[008_030]30 And when those who disbelieve plot against thee (O Muhammad) to wound  thee fatally, or to kill thee or to drive thee forth; they plot, but Allah (also) plotteth;  and Allah is the best of plotters. 

[008_031]31 And when Our revelations are recited unto them they say: We have heard. If  we wish we can speak the like of this. Lo! this is naught but fables of the men of old. 

[008_032]32 And when they said: O Allah! If this be indeed the truth from Thee, then rain  down stones on us or bring on us some painful doom! 

[008_033]33 But Allah would not punish them while thou wast with them, nor will He  punish them while they seek forgiveness. 

[008_034]34 What (plea) have they that Allah should not punish them, when they debar  (His servants) from the Inviolable Place of Worship, though they are not its fitting  guardians. Its fitting guardians are those only who keep their duty to Allah. But most  of them know not. 

[008_035]35 And their worship at the (holy) House is naught but whistling and hand- clapping. Therefore (it is said unto them): Taste of the doom because ye disbelieve. 

[008_036]36 Lo! those who disbelieve spend their wealth in order that they may debar  (men) from the way of Allah. They will spend it, then it will become an anguish for  them, then they will be conquered. And those who disbelieve will be gathered unto  hell, 

[008_037]37 That Allah may separate the wicked from the good, The wicked will He  place piece upon piece, and heap them all together, and consign them unto hell. Such  verily are the losers. 

[008_038]38 Tell those who disbelieve that if they cease (from persecution of believers)  that which is past will be forgiven them; but if they return (thereto) then the example  of the men of old hath already gone (before them, for a warning). 

[008_039]39 And fight them until persecution is no more, and religion is all for Allah. But  if they cease, then lo! Allah is Seer of what they do. 

[008_040]40 And if they turn away, then know that Allah is your Befriender - a  Transcendent Patron, a Transcendent Helper! 

[008_041]41 And know that whatever ye take as spoils of war, lo! a fifth thereof is for  Allah, and for the messenger and for the kinsman (who hath need) and orphans and  the needy and the wayfarer, if ye believe in Allah and that which We revealed unto  Our slave on the Day of Discrimination, the day when the two armies met. And Allah  is Able to do all things. 

[008_042]42 When ye were on the near bank (of the valley) and they were on the yonder  bank, and the caravan was below you (on the coast plain). And had ye trysted to meet  one another ye surely would have failed to keep the tryst, but (it happened, as it did,  without the forethought of either of you) that Allah might conclude a thing that must  be done; that he who perished (on that day) might perish by a clear proof (of His  Sovereignty) and he who survived might survive by a clear proof (of His  Sovereignty). Lo! Allah in truth is Hearer, Knower. 

[008_043]43 When Allah showed them unto thee (O Muhammad) in thy dream as few in  number, and if He had shown them to thee as many, ye (Muslims) would have  faltered and would have quarrelled over the affair. But Allah saved (you). Lo! He  knoweth what is in the breasts (of men). 

[008_044]44 And when He made you (Muslims), when ye met (them), see them with your  eyes as few, and lessened you in their eyes, (it was) that Allah might conclude a thing  that must be done. Unto Allah all things are brought back. 

[008_045]45 O ye who believe! When ye meet an army, hold firm and think of Allah  much, that ye may be successful. 

[008_046]46 And obey Allah and His messenger, and dispute not one with another lest ye  falter and your strength depart from you; but be steadfast! Lo! Allah is with the  steadfast. 

[008_047]47 Be not as those who came forth from their dwellings boastfully and to be  seen of men, and debar (men) from the way of Allah, while Allah is surrounding all  they do. 

[008_048]48 And when Satan made their deeds seem fair to them and said: No-one of  mankind can conquer you this day, for I am your protector. But when the armies came  in sight of one another, he took flight, saying: Lo! I am guiltless of you. Lo! I see that  which ye see not. Lo! I fear Allah. And Allah is severe in punishment. 

[008_049]49 When the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease said: Their  religion hath deluded these. Whoso putteth his trust in Allah (will find that) lo! Allah  is Mighty, Wise. 

[008_050]50 If thou couldst see how the angels receive those who disbelieve, smiting  faces and their backs and (saying): Taste the punishment of burning! 

[008_051]51 This is for that which your own hands have sent before (to the Judgment),  and (know) that Allah is not a tyrant to His slaves. 

[008_052]52 (Their way is) as the way of Pharaoh's folk and those before them; they  disbelieved the revelations of Allah, and Allah took them in their sins. Lo! Allah is  Strong, severe in punishment. 

[008_053]53 That is because Allah never changeth the grace He hath bestowed on any  people until they first change that which is in their hearts, and (that is) because Allah  is Hearer, Knower. 

[008_054]54 (Their way is) as the way of Pharaoh's folk and those before them; they  denied the revelations of their Lord, so We destroyed them in their sins. And We  drowned the folk of Pharaoh. All were evil-doers. 

[008_055]55 Lo! the worst of beasts in Allah's sight are the ungrateful who will not  believe. 

[008_056]56 Those of them with whom thou madest a treaty, and then at every  opportunity they break their treaty, and they keep not duty (to Allah). 

[008_057]57 If thou comest on them in the war, deal with them so as to strike fear in those  who are behind them, that haply they may remember. 

[008_058]58 And if thou fearest treachery from any folk, then throw back to them (their  treaty) fairly. Lo! Allah loveth not the treacherous. 

[008_059]59 And let not those who disbelieve suppose that they can outstrip (Allah's  Purpose). Lo! they cannot escape. 

[008_060]60 Make ready for them all thou canst of (armed) force and of horses tethered,  that thereby ye may dismay the enemy of Allah and your enemy, and others beside  them whom ye know not. Allah knoweth them. Whatsoever ye spend in the way of  Allah it will be repaid to you in full, and ye will not be wronged. 

[008_061]61 And if they incline to peace, incline thou also to it, and trust in Allah. Lo!  He, even He, is the Hearer, the Knower. 

[008_062]62 And if they would deceive thee, then lo! Allah is Sufficient for thee. He it is  Who supporteth thee with His help and with the believers, 

[008_063]63 And (as for the believers) hath attuned their hearts. If thou hadst spent all that  is in the earth thou couldst not have attuned their hearts, but Allah hath attuned them.  Lo! He is Mighty, Wise. 

[008_064]64 O Prophet! Allah is Sufficient for thee and those who follow thee of the  believers. 

[008_065]65 O Prophet! Exhort the believers to fight. If there be of you twenty steadfast  they shall overcome two hundred, and if there be of you a hundred (steadfast) they  shall overcome a thousand of those who disbelieve, because they (the disbelievers)  are a folk without intelligence. 

[008_066]66 Now hath Allah lightened your burden, for He knoweth that there is  weakness in you. So if there be of you a steadfast hundred they shall overcome two  hundred, and if there be of you a thousand (steadfast) they shall overcome two  thousand by permission of Allah. Allah is with the steadfast. 

[008_067]67 It is not for any prophet to have captives until he hath made slaughter in the  land. Ye desire the lure of this world and Allah desireth (for you) the Hereafter, and  Allah is Mighty, Wise. 

[008_068]68 Had it not been for an ordinance of Allah which had gone before, an awful  doom had come upon you on account of what ye took. 

[008_069]69 Now enjoy what ye have won, as lawful and good, and keep your duty to  Allah. Lo! Allah is Forgiving, Merciful. 

[008_070]70 O Prophet! Say unto those captives who are in your hands: If Allah knoweth  any good in your hearts He will give you better than that which hath been taken from  you, and will forgive you. Lo! Allah is Forgiving, Merciful. 

[008_071]71 And if they would betray thee, they betrayed Allah before, and He gave  (thee) power over them. Allah is Knower, Wise. 

[008_072]72 Lo! those who believed and left their homes and strove with their wealth and  their lives for the cause of Allah, and those who took them in and helped them: these  are protecting friends one of another. And those who believed but did not leave their  homes, ye have no duty to protect them till they leave their homes; but if they seek  help from you in the matter of religion then it is your duty to help (them) except  against a folk between whom and you there is a treaty. Allah is Seer of what ye do. 

[008_073]73 And those who disbelieve are protectors one of another - If ye do not so,  there will be confusion in the land, and great corruption. 

[008_074]74 Those who believed and left their homes and strove for the cause of Allah,  and those who took them in and helped them - these are the believers in truth. For  them is pardon, and bountiful provision. 

[008_075]75 And those who afterwards believed and left their homes and strove along  with you, they are of you; and those who are akin are nearer one to another in the  ordinance of Allah. Lo! Allah is Knower of all things.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

9. at-Taubah: Repentance

[009_001]1 Freedom from obligation (is proclaimed) from Allah and His messenger  toward those of the idolaters with whom ye made a treaty. 

[009_002]2 Travel freely in the land four months, and know that ye cannot escape Allah  and that Allah will confound the disbelievers (in His Guidance). 

[009_003]3 And a proclamation from Allah and His messenger to all men on the day of  the Greater Pilgrimage that Allah is free from obligation to the idolaters, and (so is)  His messenger. So, if ye repent, it will be better for you; but if ye are averse, then  know that ye cannot escape Allah. Give tidings (O Muhammad) of a painful doom to  those who disbelieve, 

[009_004]4 Excepting those of the idolaters with whom ye (Muslims) have a treaty, and  who have since abated nothing of your right nor have supported anyone against you.  (As for these), fulfil their treaty to them till their term. Lo! Allah loveth those who  keep their duty (unto Him). 

[009_005]5 Then, when the sacred months have passed, slay the idolaters wherever ye  find them, and take them (captive), and besiege them, and prepare for them each  ambush. But if they repent and establish worship and pay the poor-due, then leave  their way free. Lo! Allah is Forgiving, Merciful. 

[009_006]6 And if anyone of the idolaters seeketh thy protection (O Muhammad), then  protect him so that he may hear the Word of Allah, and afterward convey him to his  place of safety. That is because they are a folk who know not. 

[009_007]7 How can there be a treaty with Allah and with His messenger for the  idolaters save those with whom ye made a treaty at the Inviolable Place of Worship ?  So long as they are true to you, be true to them. Lo! Allah loveth those who keep their  duty. 

[009_008]8 How (can there be any treaty for the others) when, if they have the upper  hand of you, they regard not pact nor honour in respect of you ? They satisfy you with  their mouths the while their hearts refuse. And most of them are wrongdoers. 

[009_009]9 They have purchased with the revelations of Allah a little gain, so they debar  (men) from His way. Lo! evil is that which they are wont to do. 

[009_010]10 And they observe toward a believer neither pact nor honour. These are they  who are transgressors. 

[009_011]11 But if they repent and establish worship and pay the poor-due, then are they  your brethren in religion. We detail Our revelations for a people who have  knowledge. 

[009_012]12 And if they break their pledges after their treaty (hath been made with you)  and assail your religion, then fight the heads of disbelief - Lo! they have no binding  oaths - in order that they may desist. 

[009_013]13 Will ye not fight a folk who broke their solemn pledges, and purposed to  drive out the messenger and did attack you first ? What! Fear ye them ? Now Allah  hath more right that ye should fear Him, if ye are believers 

[009_014]14 Fight them! Allah will chastise them at your hands, and He will lay them low  and give you victory over them, and He will heal the breasts of folk who are  believers. 

[009_015]15 And He will remove the anger of their hearts. Allah relenteth toward whom  He will. Allah is Knower, Wise. 

[009_016]16 Or deemed ye that ye would be left (in peace) when Allah yet knoweth not  those of you who strive, choosing for familiar none save Allah and His messenger and  the believers ? Allah is Informed of what ye do. 

[009_017]17 It is not for the idolaters to tend Allah's sanctuaries, bearing witness against  themselves of disbelief. As for such, their works are vain and in the Fire they will  abide. 

[009_018]18 He only shall tend Allah's sanctuaries who believeth in Allah and the Last  Day and observeth proper worship and payeth the poor-due and feareth none save  Allah. For such (only) is it possible that they can be of the rightly guided. 

[009_019]19 Count ye the slaking of a pilgrim's thirst and tendance of the Inviolable Place  of Worship as (equal to the worth of) him who believeth in Allah and the Last Day,  and striveth in the way of Allah ? They are not equal in the sight of Allah. Allah  guideth not wrongdoing folk. 

[009_020]20 Those who believe, and have left their homes and striven with their wealth  and their lives in Allah's way are of much greater worth in Allah's sight. These are  they who are triumphant. 

[009_021]21 Their Lord giveth them good tidings of mercy from Him, and acceptance,  and Gardens where enduring pleasure will be theirs; 

[009_022]22 There they will abide for ever. Lo! with Allah there is immense reward. 

[009_023]23 O ye who believe! Choose not your fathers nor your brethren for friends if  they take pleasure in disbelief rather than faith. Whoso of you taketh them for friends,  such are wrong-doers. 

[009_024]24 Say: If your fathers, and your sons, and your brethren, and your wives, and  your tribe, and the wealth ye have acquired, and merchandise for which ye fear that  there will no sale, and dwellings ye desire are dearer to you than Allah and His  messenger and striving in His way: then wait till Allah bringeth His command to pass.  Allah guideth not wrongdoing folk. 

[009_025]25 Allah hath given you victory on many fields and on the day of Huneyn, when  ye exulted in your multitude but it availed you naught, and the earth, vast as it is, was  straitened for you; then ye turned back in flight; 

[009_026]26 Then Allah sent His peace of reassurance down upon His messenger and  upon the believers, and sent down hosts ye could not see, and punished those who  disbelieved. Such is the reward of disbelievers. 

[009_027]27 Then afterward Allah will relent toward whom He will; for Allah is  Forgiving, Merciful. 

[009_028]28 O ye who believe! The idolaters only are unclean. So let them not come near  the Inviolable Place of Worship after this their year. If ye fear poverty (from the loss  of their merchandise) Allah shall preserve you of His bounty if He will. Lo! Allah is  Knower, Wise. 

[009_029]29 Fight against such of those who have been given the Scripture as believe not  in Allah nor the Last Day, and forbid not that which Allah hath forbidden by His  messenger, and follow not the Religion of Truth, until they pay the tribute readily,  being brought low. 

[009_030]30 And the Jews say: Ezra is the son of Allah, and the Christians say: The  Messiah is the son of Allah. That is their saying with their mouths. They imitate the  saying of those who disbelieved of old. Allah (Himself) fighteth against them. How  perverse are they! 

[009_031]31 They have taken as lords beside Allah their rabbis and their monks and the  Messiah son of Mary, when they were bidden to worship only One God. There is no  God save Him. Be He Glorified from all that they ascribe as partner (unto Him)! 

[009_032]32 Fain would they put out the light of Allah with their mouths, but Allah  disdaineth (aught) save that He shall perfect His light, however much the disbelievers  are averse. 

[009_033]33 He it is Who hath sent His messenger with the guidance and the Religion of  Truth, that He may cause it to prevail over all religion, however much the idolaters  may be averse. 

[009_034]34 O ye who believe! Lo! many of the (Jewish) rabbis and the (Christian)  monks devour the wealth of mankind wantonly and debar (men) from the way of  Allah. They who hoard up gold and silver and spend it not in the way of Allah, unto  them give tidings (O Muhammad) of a painful doom, 

[009_035]35 On the day when it will (all) be heated in the fire of hell, and their foreheads  and their flanks and their backs will be branded therewith (and it will be said unto  them): Here is that which ye hoarded for yourselves. Now taste of what ye used to  hoard. 

[009_036]36 Lo! the number of the months with Allah is twelve months by Allah's  ordinance in the day that He created the heavens and the earth. Four of them are  sacred: that is the right religion. So wrong not yourselves in them. And wage war on  all of the idolaters as they are waging war on all of you. And know that Allah is with  those who keep their duty (unto Him). 

[009_037]37 Postponement (of a sacred month) is only an excess of disbelief whereby  those who disbelieve are misled; they allow it one year and forbid it (another) year,  that they may make up the number of the months which Allah hath hallowed, so that  they allow that which Allah hath forbidden. The evil of their deeds is made  fairseeming unto them. Allah guideth not the disbelieving folk. 

[009_038]38 O ye who believe! What aileth you that when it is said unto you: Go forth in  the way of Allah, ye are bowed down to the ground with heaviness. Take ye pleasure  in the life of the world rather than in the Hereafter ? The comfort of the life of the  world is but little in the Hereafter. 

[009_039]39 If ye go not forth He will afflict you with a painful doom, and will choose  instead of you a folk other than you. Ye cannot harm Him at all. Allah is Able to do  all things. 

[009_040]40 If ye help him not, still Allah helped him when those who disbelieve drove  him forth, the second of two; when they two were in the cave, when he said unto his  comrade: Grieve not. Lo! Allah is with us. Then Allah caused His peace of  reassurance to descend upon him and supported him with hosts ye cannot see, and  made the word of those who disbelieved the nethermost, while Allah's Word it was  that became the uppermost. Allah is Mighty, Wise. 

[009_041]41 Go forth, light-armed and heavy-armed, and strive with your wealth and your  lives in the way of Allah! That is best for you if ye but knew. 

[009_042]42 Had it been a near adventure and an easy journey they had followed thee, but  the distance seemed too far for them. Yet will they swear by Allah (saying): If we had  been able we would surely have set out with you. They destroy their souls, and Allah  knoweth that they verily are liars. 

[009_043]43 Allah forgive thee (O Muhammad)! Wherefor didst thou grant them leave ere  those who told the truth were manifest to thee and thou didst know the liars ? 

[009_044]44 Those who believe in Allah and the Last Day ask no leave of thee lest they  should strive with their wealth and their lives. Allah is Aware of those who keep their  duty (unto Him). 

[009_045]45 They alone ask leave of thee who believe not in Allah and the Last Day, and  whose hearts feel doubt, so in their doubt they waver. 

[009_046]46 And if they had wished to go forth they would assuredly have made ready  some equipment, but Allah was averse to their being sent forth and held them back  and it was said (unto them): Sit ye with the sedentary! 

[009_047]47 Had they gone forth among you they had added to you naught save trouble  and had hurried to and fro among you, seeking to cause sedition among you; and  among you there are some who would have listened to them. Allah is Aware of evil- doers. 

[009_048]48 Aforetime they sought to cause sedition and raised difficulties for thee till the  Truth came and the decree of Allah was made manifest, though they were loth. 

[009_049]49 Of them is he who saith: Grant me leave (to stay at home) and tempt me not.  Surely it is into temptation that they (thus) have fallen. Lo! hell verily is all around  the disbelievers. 

[009_050]50 If good befalleth thee (O Muhammad) it afflicteth them, and if calamity  befalleth thee, they say: We took precaution, and they turn away well pleased. 

[009_051]51 Say: Naught befalleth us save that which Allah hath decreed for us. He is our  Protecting Friend. In Allah let believers put their trust! 

[009_052]52 Say: Can ye await for us aught save one of two good things (death or victory  in Allah's way) ? while we await for you that Allah will afflict you with a doom from  Him or at our hands. Await then! Lo! We are awaiting with you. 

[009_053]53 Say: Pay (your contribution), willingly or unwillingly, it will not be accepted  from you. Lo! ye were ever froward folk. 

[009_054]54 And naught preventeth that their contributions should be accepted from them  save that they have disbelieved in Allah and in His messenger, and they come not to  worship save as idlers, and pay not (their contribution) save reluctantly. 

[009_055]55 So let not their riches nor their children please thee (O Muhammad). Allah  thereby intendeth but to punish them in the life of the world and that their souls shall  pass away while they are disbelievers. 

[009_056]56 And they swear by Allah that they are in truth of you, when they are not of  you, but they are folk who are afraid. 

[009_057]57 Had they but found a refuge, or caverns, or a place to enter, they surely had  resorted thither swift as runaways. 

[009_058]58 And of them is he who defameth thee in the matter of the alms. If they are  given thereof they are content, and if they are not given thereof, behold! they are  enraged. 

[009_059]59 (How much more seemly) had they been content with that which Allah and  His messenger had given them and had said: Allah sufficeth us. Allah will give us of  His bounty, and (also) His messenger. Unto Allah we are suppliants. 

[009_060]60 The alms are only for the poor and the needy, and those who collect them,  and those whose hearts are to be reconciled, and to free the captives and the debtors,  and for the cause of Allah, and (for) the wayfarer; a duty imposed by Allah. Allah is  Knower, Wise. 

[009_061]61 And of them are those who vex the Prophet and say: He is only a hearer. Say:  A hearer of good for you, who believeth in Allah and is true to the believers, and a  mercy for such of you as believe. Those who vex the messenger of Allah, for them  there is a painful doom. 

[009_062]62 They swear by Allah to you (Muslims) to please you, but Allah, with His  messenger, hath more right that they should please Him if they are believers. 

[009_063]63 Know they not that whoso opposeth Allah and His messenger, his verily is  fire of hell, to abide therein ? That is the extreme abasement. 

[009_064]64 The hypocrites fear lest a surah should be revealed concerning them,  proclaiming what is in their hearts. Say: Scoff (your fill)! Lo! Allah is disclosing what  ye fear. 

[009_065]65 And if thou ask them (O Muhammad) they will say: We did but talk and jest.  Say: Was it at Allah and His revelations and His messenger that ye did scoff ? 

[009_066]66 Make no excuse. Ye have disbelieved after your (confession of) belief. If We  forgive a party of you, a party of you We shall punish because they have been guilty. 

[009_067]67 The hypocrites, both men and women, proceed one from another. They  enjoin the wrong, and they forbid the right, and they withhold their hands (from  spending for the cause of Allah). They forget Allah, so He hath forgotten them. Lo!  the hypocrites, they are the transgressors. 

[009_068]68 Allah promiseth the hypocrites, both men and women, and the disbelievers  fire of hell for their abode. It will suffice them. Allah curseth them, and theirs is  lasting torment. 

[009_069]69 Even as those before you who were mightier than you in strength, and more  affluent than you in wealth and children. They enjoyed their lot awhile, so ye enjoy  your lot awhile even as those before you did enjoy their lot awhile. And ye prate even  as they prated. Such are they whose works have perished in the world and the  Hereafter. Such are they who are the losers. 

[009_070]70 Hath not the fame of those before them reached them - the folk of Noah,  A'ad, Thamud, the folk of Abraham, the dwellers of Midian and the disasters (which  befell them) ? Their messengers (from Allah) came unto them with proofs (of Allah's  Sovereignty). So Allah surely wronged them not, but they did wrong themselves. 

[009_071]71 And the believers, men and women, are protecting friends one of another;  they enjoin the right and forbid the wrong, and they establish worship and they pay  the poor-due, and they obey Allah and His messenger. As for these, Allah will have  mercy on them. Lo! Allah is Mighty, Wise. 

[009_072]72 Allah promiseth to the believers, men and women, Gardens underneath  which rivers flow, wherein they will abide - blessed dwellings in Gardens of Eden.  And - greater (far)! - acceptance from Allah. That is the supreme triumph. 

[009_073]73 O Prophet! Strive against the disbelievers and the hypocrites! Be harsh with  them. Their ultimate abode is hell, a hapless journey's end. 

[009_074]74 They swear by Allah that they said nothing (wrong), yet they did say the  word of disbelief, and did disbelieve after their Surrender (to Allah). And they  purposed that which they could not attain, and they sought revenge only that Allah by  His messenger should enrich them of His bounty. If they repent it will be better for  them; and if they turn away, Allah will afflict them with a painful doom in the world  and the Hereafter, and they have no protecting friend nor helper in the earth. 

[009_075]75 And of them is he who made a covenant with Allah (saying): If He give us of  His bounty we will give alms and become of the righteous. 

[009_076]76 Yet when He gave them of His bounty, they hoarded it and turned away,  averse; 

[009_077]77 So He hath made the consequence (to be) hypocrisy in their hearts until the  day when they shall meet Him, because they broke their word to Allah that they  promised Him, and because they lied. 

[009_078]78 Know they not that Allah knoweth both their secret and the thought that they  confide, and that Allah is the Knower of Things Hidden ? 

[009_079]79 Those who point at such of the believers as give the alms willingly and such  as can find naught to give but their endeavours, and deride them - Allah (Himself)  derideth them. Theirs will be a painful doom. 

[009_080]80 Ask forgiveness for them (O Muhammad), or ask not forgiveness for them;  though thou ask forgiveness for them seventy times Allah will not forgive them. That  is because they disbelieved in Allah and His messenger, and Allah guideth not  wrongdoing folk. 

[009_081]81 Those who were left behind rejoiced at sitting still behind the messenger of  Allah, and were averse to striving with their wealth and their lives in Allah's way.  And they said: Go not forth in the heat! Say: The fire of hell is more intense of heat, if  they but understood. 

[009_082]82 Then let them laugh a little: they will weep much, as the reward of what they  used to earn. 

[009_083]83 If Allah bring thee back (from the campaign) unto a party of them and they  ask of thee leave to go out (to fight), then say unto them: Ye shall never more go out  with me nor fight with me against a foe.  Ye were content with sitting still the first  time. So sit still, with the useless. 

[009_084]84 And never (O Muhammad) pray for one of them who dieth, nor stand by his  grave. Lo! they disbelieved in Allah and His messenger, and they died while they  were evil-doers. 

[009_085]85 Let not their wealth nor their children please thee! Allah purposeth only to  punish them thereby in the world, and that their souls shall pass away while they are  disbelievers. 

[009_086]86 And when a surah is revealed (which saith): Believe in Allah and strive along  with His messenger, the men of wealth among them still ask leave of thee and say:  Suffer us to be with those who sit (at home). 

[009_087]87 They are content that they should be with the useless and their hearts are  sealed, so that they apprehend not. 

[009_088]88 But the messenger and those who believe with him strive with their wealth  and their lives. Such are they for whom are the good things. Such are they who are the  successful. 

[009_089]89 Allah hath made ready for them Gardens underneath which rivers flow,  wherein they will abide. That is the supreme triumph. 

[009_090]90 And those among the wandering Arabs who had an excuse came in order that  permission might be granted them. And those who lied to Allah and His messenger  sat at home. A painful doom will fall on those of them who disbelieve. 

[009_091]91 Not unto the weak nor unto the sick nor unto those who can find naught to  spend is any fault (to be imputed though they stay at home) if they are true to Allah  and His messenger. Not unto the good is there any road (of blame). Allah is  Forgiving, Merciful. 

[009_092]92 Nor unto those whom, when they came to thee (asking) that thou shouldst  mount them, thou didst tell: I cannot find whereon to mount you. They turned back  with eyes flowing with tears, for sorrow that they could not find the means to spend. 

[009_093]93 The road (of blame) is only against those who ask for leave of thee (to stay at  home) when they are rich. They are content to be with the useless. Allah hath sealed  their hearts so that they know not. 

[009_094]94 They will make excuse to you (Muslims) when ye return unto them. Say:  Make no excuse, for we shall not believe you. Allah hath told us tidings of you. Allah  and His messenger will see your conduct, and then ye will be brought back unto Him  Who knoweth the Invisible as well as the Visible, and He will tell you what ye used  to do. 

[009_095]95 They will swear by Allah unto you, when ye return unto them, that ye may  let them be. Let them be, for lo! they are unclean, and their abode is hell as the reward  for what they used to earn. 

[009_096]96 They swear unto you, that ye may accept them. Though ye accept them.  Allah verily accepteth not wrongdoing folk. 

[009_097]97 The wandering Arabs are more hard in disbelief and hypocrisy, and more  likely to be ignorant of the limits which Allah hath revealed unto His messenger. And  Allah is Knower, Wise. 

[009_098]98 And of the wandering Arabs there is he who taketh that which he expendeth  (for the cause of Allah) as a loss, and awaiteth (evil) turns of fortune for you (that he  may be rid of it). The evil turn of fortune will be theirs. Allah is Hearer, Knower. 

[009_099]99 And of the wandering Arabs there is he who believeth in Allah and the Last  Day, and taketh that which he expendeth and also the prayers of the messenger as  acceptable offerings in the sight of Allah. Lo! verily it is an acceptable offering for  them. Allah will bring them into His mercy. Lo! Allah is Forgiving, Merciful. 

[009_100]100 And the first to lead the way, of the Muhajirin and the Ansar, and those who  followed them in goodness - Allah is well pleased with them and they are well  pleased with Him, and He hath made ready for them Gardens underneath which rivers  flow, wherein they will abide for ever. That is the supreme triumph. 

[009_101]101 And among those around you of the wandering Arabs there are hypocrites,  and among the townspeople of Al-Madinah (there are some who) persist in hypocrisy  whom thou (O Muhammad) knowest not. We, We know them, and We shall chastise  them twice; then they will be relegated to a painful doom. 

[009_102]102 And (there are) others who have acknowledged their faults. They mixed a  righteous action with another that was bad. It may be that Allah will relent toward  them. Lo! Allah is Forgiving, Merciful. 

[009_103]103 Take alms of their wealth, wherewith thou mayst purify them and mayst  make them grow, and pray for them. Lo! thy prayer is an assuagement for them. Allah  is Hearer, Knower. 

[009_104]104 Know they not that Allah is He Who accepteth repentance from His  bondmen and taketh the alms, and that Allah is He Who is the Relenting, the  Merciful. 

[009_105]105 And say (unto them): Act! Allah will behold your actions, and (so will) His  messenger and the believers, and ye will be brought back to the Knower of the  Invisible and the Visible, and He will tell you what ye used to do. 

[009_106]106 And (there are) others who await Allah's decree, whether He will punish  them or will forgive them. Allah is Knower, Wise. 

[009_107]107 And as for those who chose a place of worship out of opposition and  disbelief, and in order to cause dissent among the believers, and as an outpost for  those who warred against Allah and His messenger aforetime, they will surely swear:  We purposed naught save good. Allah beareth witness that they verily are liars. 

[009_108]108 Never stand (to pray) there. A place of worship which was found upon duty  (to Allah) from the first day is more worthy that thou shouldst stand (to pray) therein,  wherein are men who love to purify themselves. Allah loveth the purifiers. 

[009_109]109 Is he who founded his building upon duty to Allah and His good pleasure  better; or he who founded his building on the brink of a crumbling, overhanging  precipice so that it toppled with him into the fire of hell ? Allah guideth not  wrongdoing folk. 

[009_110]110 The building which they built will never cease to be a misgiving in their  hearts unless their hearts be torn to pieces. Allah is Knower, Wise. 

[009_111]111 Lo! Allah hath bought from the believers their lives and their wealth because  the Garden will be theirs: they shall fight in the way of Allah and shall slay and be  slain. It is a promise which is binding on Him in the Torah and the Gospel and the  Qur'an. Who fulfilleth His covenant better than Allah ? Rejoice then in your bargain  that ye have made, for that is the supreme triumph. 

[009_112]112 (Triumphant) are those who turn repentant (to Allah), those who serve  (Him), those who praise (Him), those who fast, those who bow down, those who fall  prostrate (in worship), those who enjoin the right and who forbid the wrong and those  who keep the limits (ordained) of Allah - And give glad tidings to believers! 

[009_113]113 It is not for the Prophet, and those who believe, to pray for the forgiveness of  idolaters even though they may be near of kin (to them) after it hath become clear that  they are people of hell-fire. 

[009_114]114 The prayer of Abraham for the forgiveness of his father was only because of  a promise he had promised him, but when it had become clear unto him that he (his  father) was an enemy to Allah he (Abraham) disowned him. Lo! Abraham was soft of  heart, long-suffering. 

[009_115]115 It was never Allah's (part) that He should send a folk astray after He had  guided them until He had made clear unto them what they should avoid. Lo! Allah is  Aware of all things. 

[009_116]116 Lo! Allah! Unto Him belongeth the Sovereignty of the heavens and the earth.  He quickeneth and He giveth death. And ye have, instead of Allah, no protecting  friend nor helper. 

[009_117]117 Allah hath turned in mercy to the Prophet, and to the Muhajirin and the  Ansar who followed him in the hour of hardship. After the hearts of a party of them  had almost swerved aside, then turned He unto them in mercy. Lo! He is Full of Pity,  Merciful for them. 

[009_118]118 And to the three also (did He turn in mercy) who were left behind, when the  earth, vast as it is, was straitened for them, and their own souls were straitened for  them till they bethought them that there is no refuge from Allah save toward Him.  Then turned He unto them in mercy that they (too) might turn (repentant unto Him).  Lo! Allah! He is the Relenting, the Merciful. 

[009_119]119 O ye who believe! Be careful of your duty to Allah, and be with the truthful. 

[009_120]120 It is not for the townsfolk of Al-Madinah and for those around them of the  wandering Arabs so stay behind the messenger of Allah and prefer their lives to his  life. That is because neither thirst nor toil nor hunger afflicteth them in the way of  Allah, nor step they any step that angereth the disbelievers, nor gain they from the  enemy a gain, but a good deed is recorded for them therefor. Lo! Allah loseth not the  wages of the good. 

[009_121]121 Nor spend they any spending, small or great, nor do they cross a valley, but it  is recorded for them, that Allah may repay them the best of what they used to do. 

[009_122]122 And the believers should not all go out to fight. Of every troop of them, a  party only should go forth, that they (who are left behind) may gain sound knowledge  in religion, and that they may warn their folk when they return to them, so that they  may beware. 

[009_123]123 O ye who believe! Fight those of the disbelievers who are near to you, and  let them find harshness in you, and know that Allah is with those who keep their duty  (unto Him). 

[009_124]124 And whenever a surah is revealed there are some of them who say: Which  one of you hath thus increased in faith ? As for those who believe, it hath increased  them in faith and they rejoice (therefor). 

[009_125]125 But as for those in whose hearts is disease, it only addeth wickedness to their  wickedness, and they die while they are disbelievers. 

[009_126]126 See they not that they are tested once or twice in every year ? Still they turn  not in repentance, neither pay they heed. 

[009_127]127 And whenever a surah is revealed, they look one at another (as who should  say): Doth anybody see you ? Then they turn away. Allah turneth away their hearts  because they are a folk who understand not. 

[009_128]128 There hath come unto you a messenger, (one) of yourselves, unto whom  aught that ye are overburdened is grievous, full of concern for you, for the believers  full of pity, merciful. 

[009_129]129 Now, if they turn away (O Muhammad) say: Allah sufficeth me. There is no  God save Him. In Him have I put my trust, and He is Lord of the Tremendous  Throne.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

10. Yunus: Jonah

[010_001]1 Alif. Lam. Ra. These are verses of the Wise Scripture. 

[010_002]2 Is it a wonder for mankind that We have inspired a man among them, saying:  Warn mankind and bring unto those who believe the good tidings that they have a  sure footing with their Lord ? The disbelievers say: Lo! this is a mere wizard. 

[010_003]3 Lo! your Lord is Allah Who created the heavens and the earth in six Days,  then He established Himself upon the Throne, directing all things. There is no  intercessor (with Him) save after His permission. That is Allah, your Lord, so  worship Him. Oh, will ye not remind ? 

[010_004]4 Unto Him is the return of all of you; it is a promise of Allah in truth. Lo! He  produceth creation, then reproduceth it, that He may reward those who believe and do  good works with equity; while, as for those who disbelieve, theirs will be a boiling  drink and painful doom because they disbelieved. 

[010_005]5 He it is Who appointed the sun a splendour and the moon a light, and  measured for her stages, that ye might know the number of the years, and the  reckoning. Allah created not (all) that save in truth. He detaileth the revelations for  people who have knowledge. 

[010_006]6 Lo! in the difference of day and night and all that Allah hath created in the  heavens and the earth are portents, verily, for folk who ward off (evil). 

[010_007]7 Lo! those who expect not the meeting with Us but desire the life of the world  and feel secure therein, and those who are neglectful of Our revelations, 

[010_008]8 Their home will be the Fire because of what they used to earn. 

[010_009]9 Lo! those who believe and do good works, their Lord guideth them by their  faith. Rivers will flow beneath them in the Gardens of Delight, 

[010_010]10 Their prayer therein will be: Glory be to Thee, O Allah! and their greeting  therein will be: Peace. And the conclusion of their prayer will be: Praise be to Allah,  Lord of the Worlds! 

[010_011]11 If Allah were to hasten on for men the ill (that they have earned) as they  would hasten on the good, their respite would already have expired. But We suffer  those who look not for the meeting with Us to wander blindly on in their contumacy. 

[010_012]12 And if misfortune touch a man he crieth unto Us, (while reclining) on his  side, or sitting or standing, but when We have relieved him of the misfortune he goeth  his way as though he had not cried unto Us because of a misfortune that afflicted him.  Thus is what they do made (seeming) fair unto the prodigal. 

[010_013]13 We destroyed the generations before you when they did wrong; and their  messengers (from Allah) came unto them with clear proofs (of His Sovereignty) but  they would not believe. Thus do We reward the guilty folk. 

[010_014]14 Then We appointed you viceroys in the earth after them, that We might see  how ye behave. 

[010_015]15 And when Our clear revelations are recited unto them, they who look not for  the meeting with Us say: Bring a Lecture other than this, or change it. Say (O  Muhammad): It is not for me to change it of my accord. I only follow that which is  inspired in me. Lo! if I disobey my Lord I fear the retribution of an awful Day. 

[010_016]16 Say: If Allah had so willed I should not have recited it to you nor would He  have made it known to you. I dwelt among you a whole lifetime before it (came to  me). Have ye then no sense ? 

[010_017]17 Who doeth greater wrong than he who inventeth a lie concerning Allah and  denieth His revelations ? Lo! the guilty never are successful. 

[010_018]18 They worship beside Allah that which neither hurteth them nor profiteth  them, and they say: These are our intercessors with Allah. Say: Would ye inform  Allah of (something) that He knoweth not in the heavens or in the earth ?  Praised be  He and High Exalted above all that ye associate (with Him)! 

[010_019]19 Mankind were but one community; then they differed; and had it not been for  a word that had already gone forth from thy Lord it had been judged between them in  respect of that wherein they differ. 

[010_020]20 And they will say: If only a portent were sent down upon him from his Lord!  Then say, (O Muhammad): The Unseen belongeth to Allah. So wait! Lo! I am waiting  with you. 

[010_021]21 And when We cause mankind to taste of mercy after some adversity which  had afflicted them, behold! they have some plot against Our revelations. Say: Allah is  more swift in plotting. Lo! Our messengers write down that which ye plot. 

[010_022]22 He it is Who maketh you to go on the land and the sea till, when ye are in the  ships and they sail with them with a fair breeze and they are glad therein, a storm- wind reacheth them and the wave cometh unto them from every side and they deem  that they are overwhelmed therein; (then) they cry unto Allah, making their faith pure  for Him only: If Thou deliver us from this, we truly will be of the thankful. 

[010_023]23 Yet when He hath delivered them, behold! they rebel in the earth wrongfully.  O mankind! Your rebellion is only against yourselves. (Ye have) enjoyment of the  life of the world; then unto Us is your return and We shall proclaim unto you what ye  used to do. 

[010_024]24 The similitude of the life of the world is only as water which We send down  from the sky, then the earth's growth of that which men and cattle eat mingleth with it  till, when the earth hath taken on her ornaments and is embellished, and her people  deem that they are masters of her, Our commandment cometh by night or by day and  We make it as reaped corn as if it had not flourished yesterday. Thus do we expound  the revelations for people who reflect. 

[010_025]25 And Allah summoneth to the abode of peace, and leadeth whom He will to a  straight path. 

[010_026]26 For those who do good is the best (reward) and more (thereto). Neither dust  nor ignominy cometh near their faces. Such are rightful owners of the Garden; they  will abide therein. 

[010_027]27 And those who earn ill-deeds, (for them) requital of each ill-deed by the like  thereof; and ignominy overtaketh them - They have no protector from Allah - as if  their faces had been covered with a cloak of darkest night. Such are rightful owners of  the Fire; they will abide therein. 

[010_028]28 On the day when We gather them all together, then We say unto those who  ascribed partners (unto Us): Stand back, ye and your (pretended) partners (of Allah)!  And We separate them, the one from the other, and their (pretended) partners say: It  was not us ye worshipped. 

[010_029]29 Allah sufficeth as a witness between us and you, that we were unaware of  your worship. 

[010_030]30 There doth every soul experience that which it did aforetime, and they are  returned unto Allah, their rightful Lord, and that which they used to invent hath failed  them. 

[010_031]31 Say (unto them, O Muhammad): Who provideth for you from the sky and the  earth, or Who owneth hearing and sight; and Who bringeth forth the living from the  dead and bringeth forth the dead from the living; and Who directeth the course ? They  will say: Allah. Then say: Will ye not then keep your duty (unto Him) ? 

[010_032]32 Such then is Allah, your rightful Lord. After the Truth what is there saving  error ? How then are ye turned away! 

[010_033]33 Thus is the Word of thy Lord justified concerning those who do wrong: that  they believe not. 

[010_034]34 Say: Is there of your partners (whom ye ascribe unto Allah) one that  produceth Creation and then reproduceth it ? Say: Allah produceth Creation, then  reproduceth it. How then, are ye misled! 

[010_035]35 Say: Is there of your partners (whom ye ascribe unto Allah) one that leadeth  to the Truth ? Say: Allah leadeth to the Truth. Is He Who leadeth to the Truth more  deserving that He should be followed, or he who findeth not the way unless he  (himself) be guided. What aileth you ? How judge ye ? 

[010_036]36 Most of them follow not but conjecture. Assuredly conjecture can by no  means take the place of truth. Lo! Allah is Aware of what they do. 

[010_037]37 And this Qur'an is not such as could ever be invented in despite of Allah; but  it is a confirmation of that which was before it and an exposition of that which is  decreed for mankind - Therein is no doubt - from the Lord of the Worlds. 

[010_038]38 Or say they: He hath invented it ? Say: Then bring a surah like unto it, and  call (for help) on all ye can besides Allah, if ye are truthful. 

[010_039]39 Nay, but they denied that, the knowledge whereof they could not compass,  and whereof the interpretation (in events) hath not yet come unto them. Even so did  those before them deny. Then see what was the consequence for the wrong-doers! 

[010_040]40 And of them is he who believeth therein, and of them is he who believeth not  therein, and thy Lord is Best Aware of the corrupters. 

[010_041]41 And if they deny thee, say: Unto me my work, and unto you your work. Ye  are innocent of what I do, and I am innocent of what ye do. 

[010_042]42 And of them are some who listen unto thee. But canst thou make the deaf to  hear even though they apprehend not ? 

[010_043]43 And of them is he who looketh toward thee. But canst thou guide the blind  even though they see not ? 

[010_044]44 Lo! Allah wrongeth not mankind in aught; but mankind wrong themselves. 

[010_045]45 And on the day when He shall gather them together, (when it will seem) as  though they had tarried but an hour of the day, recognising one another, those will  verily have perished who denied the meeting with Allah and were not guided. 

[010_046]46 Whether We let thee (O Muhammad) behold something of that which We  promise them or (whether We) cause thee to die, still unto Us is their return, and  Allah, moreover, is Witness over what they do. 

[010_047]47 And for every nation there is a messenger. And when their messenger  cometh (on the Day of Judgment) it will be judged between them fairly, and they will  not be wronged. 

[010_048]48 And they say: When will this promise be fulfilled, if ye are truthful ? 

[010_049]49 Say: I have no power to hurt or benefit myself, save that which Allah willeth.  For every nation there is an appointed time. When their time cometh, then they cannot  put it off an hour, nor hasten (it). 

[010_050]50 Say: Have ye thought: When His doom cometh unto you as a raid by night,  or in the (busy) day; what is there of it that the guilty ones desire to hasten ? 

[010_051]51 Is it (only) then, when it hath befallen you, that ye will believe ? What!  (Believe) now, when (until now) ye have been hastening it on (through disbelief) ? 

[010_052]52 Then will it be said unto those who dealt unjustly Taste the torment of  eternity. Are ye requited aught save what ye used to earn ? 

[010_053]53 And they ask thee to inform them (saying): Is it true ? Say: Yea, by my Lord,  verily it is true, and ye cannot escape. 

[010_054]54 And if each soul that doeth wrong had all that is in the earth it would seek to  ransom itself therewith; and they will feel remorse within them, when they see the  doom. But it hath been judged between them fairly and they are not wronged. 

[010_055]55 Lo! verily all that is in the heavens and the earth is Allah's. Lo! verily Allah's  promise is true. But most of them know not. 

[010_056]56 He quickeneth and giveth death, and unto Him ye will be returned. 

[010_057]57 O mankind! There hath come unto you an exhortation from your Lord, a  balm for that which is in the breasts, a guidance and a mercy for believers. 

[010_058]58 Say: In the bounty of Allah and in His mercy: therein let them rejoice. It is  better than what they hoard. 

[010_059]59 Say: Have ye considered what provision Allah hath sent down for you, how  ye have made of it lawful and unlawful ? Hath Allah permitted you, or do ye invent a  lie concerning Allah ? 

[010_060]60 And what think those who invent a lie concerning Allah (will be their plight)  upon the Day of Resurrection ? Lo! Allah truly is Bountiful toward mankind, but  most of them give not thanks. 

[010_061]61 And thou (Muhammad) art not occupied with any business and thou recitest  not a Lecture from this (Scripture), and ye (mankind) perform no act, but We are  Witness of you when ye are engaged therein. And not an atom's weight in the earth or  in the sky escapeth your Lord, nor what is less than that or greater than that, but it is  (written) in a clear Book. 

[010_062]62 Lo! verily the friends of Allah are (those) on whom fear (cometh) not, nor do  they grieve ? 

[010_063]63 Those who believe and keep their duty (to Allah). 

[010_064]64 Theirs are good tidings in the life of the world and in the Hereafter - There is  no changing the Words of Allah - that is the Supreme Triumph. 

[010_065]65 And let not their speech grieve thee (O Muhammad). Lo! power belongeth  wholly to Allah. He is the Hearer, the Knower. 

[010_066]66 Lo! is it not unto Allah that belongeth whosoever is in the heavens and  whosoever is in the earth ? Those who follow aught instead of Allah follow not (His)  partners. They follow only a conjecture, and they do but guess. 

[010_067]67 He it is Who hath appointed for you the night that ye should rest therein and  the day giving sight. Lo! herein verily are portents for a folk that heed. 

[010_068]68 They say: Allah hath taken (unto Him) a son - Glorified be He! He hath no  needs! His is all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth. Ye have no warrant  for this. Tell ye concerning Allah that which ye know not ? 

[010_069]69 Say: Verily those who invent a lie concerning Allah will not succeed. 

[010_070]70 This world's portion (will be theirs), then unto Us is their return. Then We  make them taste a dreadful doom because they used to disbelieve. 

[010_071]71 Recite unto them the story of Noah, when he told his people: O my people! If  my sojourn (here) and my reminding you by Allah's revelations are an offence unto  you, in Allah have I put my trust, so decide upon your course of action you and your  partners. Let not your course of action be in doubt for you. Then have at me, give me  no respite. 

[010_072]72 But if ye are averse I have asked of you no wage. My wage is the concern of  Allah only, and I am commanded to be of those who surrender (unto Him). 

[010_073]73 But they denied him, so We saved him and those with him in the ship, and  made them viceroys (in the earth), while We drowned those who denied Our  revelations. See then the nature of the consequence for those who had been warned. 

[010_074]74 Then, after him, We sent messengers unto their folk, and they brought them  clear proofs. But they were not ready to believe in that which they before denied.  Thus print We on the hearts of the transgressors. 

[010_075]75 Then, after them, We sent Moses and Aaron unto Pharaoh and his chiefs with  Our revelations, but they were arrogant and were a guilty folk. 

[010_076]76 And when the Truth from Our presence came unto them, they said: Lo! this  is mere magic. 

[010_077]77 Moses said: Speak ye (so) of the Truth when it hath come unto you ? Is this  magic ? Now magicians thrive not. 

[010_078]78 They said: Hast thou come unto us to pervert us from that (faith) in which we  found our fathers, and that you two may own the place of greatness in the land ? We  will not believe you two. 

[010_079]79 And Pharaoh said: Bring every cunning wizard unto me. 

[010_080]80 And when the wizards came, Moses said unto them: Cast your cast! 

[010_081]81 And when they had cast, Moses said: That which ye have brought is magic.  Lo! Allah will make it vain. Lo! Allah upholdeth not the work of mischief-makers. 

[010_082]82 And Allah will vindicate the Truth by His words, however much the guilty  be averse. 

[010_083]83 But none trusted Moses, save some scions of his people, (and they were) in  fear of Pharaoh and their chiefs, that he would persecute them. Lo! Pharaoh was  verily a tyrant in the land, and lo! he verily was of the wanton. 

[010_084]84 And Moses said: O my people! If ye have believed in Allah then put trust in  Him, if ye have indeed surrendered (unto Him)! 

[010_085]85 They said: In Allah we put trust. Our Lord! Oh, make us not a lure for the  wrongdoing folk; 

[010_086]86 And, of Thy mercy, save us from the folk that disbelieve. 

[010_087]87 And We inspired Moses and his brother, (saying): Appoint houses for your  people in Egypt and make your houses oratories, and establish worship. And give  good news to the believers. 

[010_088]88 And Moses said: Our Lord! Lo! Thou hast given Pharaoh and his chiefs  splendour and riches in the life of the world, Our Lord! that they may lead men astray  from Thy way. Our Lord! Destroy their riches and harden their hearts so that they  believe not till they see the painful doom. 

[010_089]89 He said: Your prayer is heard. Do ye twain keep to the straight path, and  follow not the road of those who have no knowledge. 

[010_090]90 And We brought the Children of Israel across the sea, and Pharaoh with his  hosts pursued them in rebellion and transgression, till, when the (fate of) drowning  overtook him, he exclaimed: I believe that there is no God save Him in Whom the  Children of Israel believe, and I am of those who surrender (unto Him). 

[010_091]91 What! Now! When hitherto thou hast rebelled and been of the wrong-doers ? 

[010_092]92 But this day We save thee in thy body that thou mayst be a portent for those  after thee. Lo! most of mankind are heedless of Our portents. 

[010_093]93 And We verily did allot unto the Children of Israel a fixed abode, and did  provide them with good things; and they differed not until the knowledge came unto  them. Lo! thy Lord will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection concerning  that wherein they used to differ. 

[010_094]94 And if thou (Muhammad) art in doubt concerning that which We reveal unto  thee, then question those who read the Scripture (that was) before thee. Verily the  Truth from thy Lord hath come unto thee. So be not thou of the waverers. 

[010_095]95 And be not thou of those who deny the revelations of Allah, for then wert  thou of the losers. 

[010_096]96 Lo! those for whom the word of thy Lord (concerning sinners) hath effect  will not believe, 

[010_097]97 Though every token come unto them, till they see the painful doom. 

[010_098]98 If only there had been a community (of all those that were destroyed of old)  that believed and profited by its belief as did the folk of Jonah! When they believed  We drew off from them the torment of disgrace in the life of the world and gave them  comfort for a while. 

[010_099]99 And if thy Lord willed, all who are in the earth would have believed  together. Wouldst thou (Muhammad) compel men until they are believers ? 

[010_100]100 It is not for any soul to believe save by the permission of Allah. He hath set  uncleanness upon those who have no sense. 

[010_101]101 Say: Behold what is in the heavens and the earth! But revelations and  warnings avail not folk who will not believe. 

[010_102]102 What expect they save the like of the days of those who passed away before  them ? Say: Expect then! I am with you among the expectant. 

[010_103]103 Then shall We save Our messengers and the believers, in like manner (as of  old). It is incumbent upon Us to save believers. 

[010_104]104 Say (O Muhammad): O mankind! If ye are in doubt of my religion, then  (know that) I worship not those whom ye worship instead of Allah, but I worship  Allah Who causeth you to die, and I have been commanded to be of the believers. 

[010_105]105 And, (O Muhammad) set thy purpose resolutely for religion, as a man by  nature upright, and be not of those who ascribe partners (to Allah). 

[010_106]106 And cry not, beside Allah, unto that which cannot profit thee nor hurt thee,  for if thou didst so then wert thou of the wrong-doers. 

[010_107]107 If Allah afflicteth thee with some hurt, there is none who can remove it save  Him; and if He desireth good for thee, there is none who can repel His bounty. He  striketh with it whom He will of his bondmen. He is the Forgiving, the Merciful. 

[010_108]108 Say: O mankind! Now hath the Truth from your Lord come unto you. So  whosoever is guided, is guided only for (the good of) his soul, and whosoever erreth  erreth only against it. And I am not a warder over you. 

[010_109]109 And (O Muhammad) follow that which is inspired in thee, and forbear until  Allah give judgment. And He is the Best of Judges.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

11. Hud: Hud

[011_001]1 Alif. Lam. Ra. (This is) a Scripture the revelations whereof are perfected and  then expounded. (It cometh) from One Wise, Informed, 

[011_002]2 (Saying): Serve none but Allah. Lo! I am unto you from Him a warner and a  bringer of good tidings. 

[011_003]3 And (bidding you): Ask pardon of your Lord and turn to Him repentant. He  will cause you to enjoy a fair estate until a time appointed. He giveth His bounty unto  every bountiful one. But if ye turn away, lo! (then) I fear for you the retribution of an  awful Day. 

[011_004]4 Unto Allah is your return, and He is Able to do all things. 

[011_005]5 Lo! now they fold up their breasts that they may hide (their thoughts) from  Him. At the very moment when they cover themselves with their clothing, Allah  knoweth that which they keep hidden and that which they proclaim. Lo! He is Aware  of what is in the breasts (of men). 

[011_006]6 And there is not a beast in the earth but the sustenance thereof dependeth on  Allah. He knoweth its habitation and its repository. All is in a clear Record. 

[011_007]7 And He it is Who created the heavens and the earth in six Days - and His  Throne was upon the water - that He might try you, which of you is best in conduct.  Yet if thou (O Muhammad) sayest: Lo! ye will be raised again after death! those who  disbelieve will surely say: This is naught but mere magic. 

[011_008]8 And if We delay for them the doom until a reckoned time, they will surely  say: What withholdeth it ? Verily on the day when it cometh unto them, it cannot be  averted from them, and that which they derided will surround them. 

[011_009]9 And if we cause man to taste some mercy from Us and afterward withdraw it  from him, lo! he is despairing, thankless. 

[011_010]10 And if We cause him to taste grace after some misfortune that had befallen  him, he saith: The ills have gone from me. Lo! he is exultant, boastful; 

[011_011]11 Save those who persevere and do good works. Theirs will be forgiveness and  a great reward. 

[011_012]12 A likely thing, that thou wouldst forsake aught of that which hath been  revealed unto thee, and that thy breast should be straitened for it, because they say:  Why hath not a treasure been sent down for him, or an angel come with him ? Thou  art but a warner, and Allah is in charge of all things. 

[011_013]13 Or they say: He hath invented it. Say: Then bring ten surahs, the like thereof,  invented, and call on everyone ye can beside Allah, if ye are truthful! 

[011_014]14 And if they answer not your prayer, then know that it is revealed only in the  knowledge of Allah; and that there is no God save Him. Will ye then be (of) those  who surrender ? 

[011_015]15 Whoso desireth the life of the world and its pomp, We shall repay them their  deeds herein, and therein they will not be wronged. 

[011_016]16 Those are they for whom is naught in the Hereafter save the Fire. (All) that  they contrive here is vain and (all) that they are wont to do is fruitless. 

[011_017]17 Is he (to be counted equal with them) who relieth on a clear proof from his  Lord, and a witness from Him reciteth it, and before it was the Book of Moses, an  example and a mercy ? Such believe therein, and whoso disbelieveth therein of the  clans, the Fire is his appointed place. So be not thou in doubt concerning it. Lo! it is  the Truth from thy Lord; but most of mankind believe not. 

[011_018]18 Who doeth greater wrong than he who inventeth a lie concerning Allah ?  Such will be brought before their Lord, and the witnesses will say: These are they  who lied concerning their Lord. Now the curse of Allah is upon wrong-doers, 

[011_019]19 Who debar (men) from the way of Allah and would have it crooked, and who  are disbelievers in the Hereafter. 

[011_020]20 Such will not escape in the earth, nor have they any protecting friends beside  Allah. For them the torment will be double. They could not bear to hear, and they  used not to see. 

[011_021]21 Such are they who have lost their souls, and that which they used to invent  hath failed them. 

[011_022]22 Assuredly in the Hereafter they will be the greatest losers. 

[011_023]23 Lo! those who believe and do good works and humble themselves before  their Lord: such are rightful owners of the Garden; they will abide therein. 

[011_024]24 The similitude of the two parties is as the blind and the deaf and the seer and  the hearer. Are they equal in similitude ? Will ye not then be admonished ? 

[011_025]25 And We sent Noah unto his folk (and he said): Lo! I am a plain warner unto  you. 

[011_026]26 That ye serve none, save Allah. Lo! I fear for you the retribution of a painful  Day. 

[011_027]27 The chieftains of his folk, who disbelieved, said: We see thee but a mortal  like us, and we see not that any follow thee save the most abject among us, without  reflection. We behold in you no merit above us - nay, we deem you liars. 

[011_028]28 He said: O my people! Bethink you, if I rely on a clear proof from my Lord  and there hath come unto me a mercy from His presence, and it hath been made  obscure to you, can we compel you to accept it when ye are averse thereto ? 

[011_029]29 And O my people! I ask of you no wealth therefor. My reward is the concern  only of Allah, and I am not going to thrust away those who believe - Lo! they have to  meet their Lord! - but I see you a folk that are ignorant. 

[011_030]30 And, O my people! who would deliver me from Allah if I thrust them away ?  Will ye not then reflect ? 

[011_031]31 I say not unto you: "I have the treasures of Allah" nor "I have knowledge of  the Unseen," nor say I: "Lo! I am an angel!" Nor say I unto those whom your eyes  scorn that Allah will not give them good - Allah knoweth best what is in their hearts -  Lo! then indeed I should be of the wrong-doers. 

[011_032]32 They said: O Noah! Thou hast disputed with us and multiplied disputation  with us; now bring upon us that wherewith thou threatenest us, if thou art of the  truthful. 

[011_033]33 He said: Only Allah will bring it upon you if He will, and ye can by no  means escape. 

[011_034]34 My counsel will not profit you if I were minded to advise you, if Allah's will  is to keep you astray. He is your Lord and unto Him ye will be brought back. 

[011_035]35 Or say they (again): He hath invented it ? Say: If I have invented it, upon me  be my crimes, but I am innocent of (all) that ye commit. 

[011_036]36 And it was inspired in Noah, (saying): No-one of thy folk will believe save  him who hath believed already. Be not distressed because of what they do. 

[011_037]37 Build the ship under Our eyes and by Our inspiration, and speak not unto Me  on behalf of those who do wrong. Lo! they will be drowned. 

[011_038]38 And he was building the ship, and every time that chieftains of his people  passed him, they made mock of him. He said: Though ye make mock of Us, yet We  mock at you even as ye mock; 

[011_039]39 And ye shall know to whom a punishment that will confound him cometh,  and upon whom a lasting doom will fall. 

[011_040]40 (Thus it was) till, when Our commandment came to pass and the oven  gushed forth water, We said: Load therein two of every kind, a pair (the male and  female), and thy household, save him against whom the word hath gone forth already,  and those who believe. And but a few were they who believed with him. 

[011_041]41 And he said: Embark therein! In the name of Allah be its course and its  mooring. Lo! my Lord is Forgiving, Merciful. 

[011_042]42 And it sailed with them amid waves like mountains, and Noah cried unto his  son - and he was standing aloof - O my son! Come ride with us, and be not with the  disbelievers. 

[011_043]43 He said: I shall betake me to some mountain that will save me from the  water. (Noah) said: This day there is none that saveth from the commandment of  Allah save him on whom He hath had mercy. And the wave came in between them,  so he was among the drowned. 

[011_044]44 And it was said: O earth! Swallow thy water and, O sky! be cleared of  clouds! And the water was made to subside. And the commandment was fulfilled.  And it (the ship) came to rest upon (the mount) Al-Judi and it was said: A far removal  for wrongdoing folk! 

[011_045]45 And Noah cried unto his Lord and said: My Lord! Lo! my son is of my  household! Surely Thy promise is the truth and Thou are the Most Just of Judges. 

[011_046]46 He said: O Noah! Lo! he is not of thy household; lo! he is of evil conduct, so  ask not of Me that whereof thou hast no knowledge. I admonish thee lest thou be  among the ignorant. 

[011_047]47 He said: My Lord! Lo! in Thee do I seek refuge (from the sin) that I should  ask of Thee that whereof I have no knowledge. Unless Thou forgive me and have  mercy on me I shall be among the lost. 

[011_048]48 It was said (unto him): O Noah! Go thou down (from the mountain) with  peace from Us and blessings upon thee and some nations (that will spring) from those  with thee. (There will be other) nations unto whom We shall give enjoyment a long  while and then a painful doom from Us will overtake them. 

[011_049]49 This is of the tidings of the Unseen which We inspire in thee (Muhammad).  Thou thyself knewest it not, nor did thy folk (know it) before this. Then have  patience. Lo! the sequel is for those who ward off (evil). 

[011_050]50 And unto (the tribe of) A'ad (We sent) their brother, Hud. He said: O my  people! Serve Allah! Ye have no other God save Him. Lo! ye do but invent. 

[011_051]51 O my people! I ask of you no reward for it. Lo! my reward is the concern  only of Him Who made me. Have ye then no sense ? 

[011_052]52 And, O my people! Ask forgiveness of your Lord, then turn unto Him  repentant; He will cause the sky to rain abundance on you and will add unto you  strength to your strength. Turn not away, guilty! 

[011_053]53 They said: O Hud! Thou hast brought us no clear proof and we are not going  to forsake our gods on thy (mere) saying, and we are not believers in thee. 

[011_054]54 We say naught save that one of our gods hath possessed thee in an evil way.  He said: I call Allah to witness, and do ye (too) bear witness, that I am innocent of  (all) that ye ascribe as partners (to Allah) 

[011_055]55 Beside Him. So (try to) circumvent me, all of you, give me no respite. 

[011_056]56 Lo! I have put my trust in Allah, my Lord and your Lord. Not an animal but  He doth grasp it by the forelock! Lo! my Lord is on a straight path. 

[011_057]57 And if ye turn away, still I have conveyed unto you that wherewith I was  sent unto you, and my Lord will set in place of you a folk other than you. Ye cannot  injure Him at all. Lo! my Lord is Guardian over all things. 

[011_058]58 And when Our commandment came to pass We saved Hud and those who  believed with him by a mercy from Us; We saved them from a harsh doom. 

[011_059]59 And such were A'ad. They denied the revelations of their Lord and flouted  His messengers and followed the command of every froward potentate. 

[011_060]60 And a curse was made to follow them in the world and on the Day of  Resurrection. Lo! A'ad disbelieved in their Lord. A far removal for A'ad, the folk of  Hud! 

[011_061]61 And unto (the tribe of) Thamud (We sent) their brother Salih. He said: O my  people! Serve Allah, Ye have no other God save Him. He brought you forth from the  earth and hath made you husband it. So ask forgiveness of Him and turn unto Him  repentant. Lo! my Lord is Nigh, Responsive. 

[011_062]62 They said: O Salih! Thou hast been among us hitherto as that wherein our  hope was placed. Dost thou ask us not to worship what our fathers worshipped ? Lo!  we verily are in grave doubt concerning that to which thou callest us. 

[011_063]63 He said: O my people! Bethink you: if I am (acting) on clear proof from my  Lord and there hath come unto me a mercy from Him, who will save me from Allah if  I disobey Him ? Ye would add to me naught save perdition. 

[011_064]64 O my people! This is the camel of Allah, a token unto you, so suffer her to  feed in Allah's earth, and touch her not with harm lest a near torment seize you. 

[011_065]65 But they hamstrung her, and then he said: Enjoy life in your dwelling-place  three days! This is a threat that will not be belied. 

[011_066]66 So, when Our commandment came to pass, We saved Salih, and those who  believed with him, by a mercy from Us, from the ignominy of that day. Lo, thy Lord!  He is the Strong, the Mighty. 

[011_067]67 And the (awful) Cry overtook those who did wrong, so that morning found  them prostrate in their dwellings, 

[011_068]68 As though they had not dwelt there. Lo! Thamud disbelieved in their Lord. A  far removal for Thamud! 

[011_069]69 And Our messengers cam unto Abraham with good news. They said: Peace!  He answered: Peace! and delayed not to bring a roasted calf. 

[011_070]70 And when he saw their hands reached not to it, he mistrusted them and  conceived a fear of them. They said: Fear not! Lo! we are sent unto the folk of Lot. 

[011_071]71 And his wife, standing by laughed when We gave her good tidings (of the  birth) of Isaac, and, after Isaac, of Jacob. 

[011_072]72 She said: Oh woe is me! Shall I bear a child when I am an old woman, and  this my husband is an old man ? Lo! this is a strange thing! 

[011_073]73 They said: Wonderest thou at the commandment of Allah ? The mercy of  Allah and His blessings be upon you, O people of the house! Lo! He is Owner of  Praise, Owner of Glory! 

[011_074]74 And when the awe departed from Abraham, and the glad news reached him,  he pleaded with Us on behalf of the folk of Lot. 

[011_075]75 Lo! Abraham was mild, imploring, penitent. 

[011_076]76 (It was said) O Abraham! Forsake this! Lo! thy Lord's commandment hath  gone forth, and lo! there cometh unto them a doom which cannot be repelled. 

[011_077]77 And when Our messengers came unto Lot, he was distressed and knew not  how to protect them. He said: This is a distressful day. 

[011_078]78 And his people came unto him, running towards him - and before then they  used to commit abominations - He said: O my people! Here are my daughters! They  are purer for you. Beware of Allah, and degrade me not in (the person of) my guests.  Is there not among you any upright man ? 

[011_079]79 They said: Well thou knowest that we have no right to thy daughters, and  well thou knowest what we want. 

[011_080]80 He said: Would that I had strength to resist you or had some strong support  (among you)! 

[011_081]81 (The messengers) said: O Lot! Lo! we are messengers of thy Lord; they shall  not reach thee. So travel with thy people in a part of the night, and let not one of you  turn round - (all) save thy wife. Lo! that which smiteth them will smite her (also). Lo!  their tryst is (for) the morning. Is not the morning nigh ? 

[011_082]82 So when Our commandment came to pass We overthrew (that township) and  rained upon it stones of clay, one after another, 

[011_083]83 Marked with fire in the providence of thy Lord (for the destruction of the  wicked). And they are never far from the wrong-doers. 

[011_084]84 And unto Midian (We sent) their brother Shu'eyb.  He said: O my people!  Serve Allah. Ye have no other God save Him! And give not short measure and short  weight. Lo! I see you well-to-do, and lo! I fear for you the doom of a besetting Day. 

[011_085]85 O my people! Give full measure and full weight in justice, and wrong not  people in respect of their goods. And do not evil in the earth, causing corruption. 

[011_086]86 That which Allah leaveth with you is better for you if ye are believers; and I  am not a keeper over you. 

[011_087]87 They said: O Shu'eyb! Doth thy way of prayer command thee that we should  forsake that which our fathers (used to) worship, or that we (should leave off) doing  what we will with our own property. Lo! thou art the mild, the guide to right  behaviour. 

[011_088]88 He said: O my people! Bethink you: if I am (acting) on a clear proof from  my Lord and He sustaineth me with fair sustenance from Him (how can I concede  aught to you) ? I desire not to do behind your backs that which I ask you not to do. I  desire naught save reform so far as I am able. My welfare is only in Allah. In Him I  trust and unto Him I turn (repentant). 

[011_089]89 And, O my people! Let not the schism with me cause you to sin so that there  befall you that which befell the folk of Noah and the folk of Hud, and the folk of  Salih; and the folk of Lot are not far off from you. 

[011_090]90 Ask pardon of your Lord and then turn unto Him (repentant). Lo! my Lord is  Merciful, Loving. 

[011_091]91 They said: O Shu'eyb! We understand not much of that thou tellest, and lo!  we do behold thee weak among us. But for thy family, we should have stoned thee,  for thou art not strong against us. 

[011_092]92 He said: O my people! Is my family more to be honoured by you than Allah  ? and ye put Him behind you, neglected! Lo! my Lord surroundeth what ye do. 

[011_093]93 And, O my people! Act according to your power, lo! I (too) am acting. Ye  will soon know on whom there cometh a doom that will abase him, and who it is that  lieth. And watch! Lo! I am a watcher with you. 

[011_094]94 And when Our commandment came to pass We saved Shu'eyb and those  who believed with him by a mercy from Us; and the (Awful) Cry seized those who  did injustice, and morning found them prostrate in their dwellings, 

[011_095]95 As though they had not dwelt there. A far removal for Midian, even as  Thamud had been removed afar! 

[011_096]96 And verily We sent Moses with Our revelations and a clear warrant 

[011_097]97 Unto Pharaoh and his chiefs, but they did follow the command of Pharaoh,  and the command of Pharaoh was no right guide. 

[011_098]98 He will go before his people on the Day of Resurrection and will lead them  to the Fire for watering-place. Ah, hapless is the watering-place (whither they are)  led. 

[011_099]99 A curse is made to follow them in the world and on the Day of Resurrection.  Hapless is the gift (that will be) given (them). 

[011_100]100 That is (something) of the tidings of the townships (which were destroyed of  old). We relate it unto thee (Muhammad). Some of them are standing and some  (already) reaped. 

[011_101]101 We wronged them not, but they did wrong themselves; and their gods on  whom they call beside Allah availed them naught when came thy Lord's command;  they added to them naught save ruin. 

[011_102]102 Even thus is the grasp of thy Lord when He graspeth the townships while  they are doing wrong. Lo! His grasp is painful, very strong. 

[011_103]103 Lo! herein verily there is a portent for those who fear the doom of the  Hereafter. That is a day unto which mankind will be gathered, and that is a day that  will be witnessed. 

[011_104]104 And We defer it only to a term already reckoned. 

[011_105]105 On the day when it cometh no soul will speak except by His permission;  some among them will be wretched, (others) glad. 

[011_106]106 As for those who will be wretched (on that day) they will be in the Fire;  sighing and wailing will be their portion therein, 

[011_107]107 Abiding there so long as the heavens and the earth endure save for that which  thy Lord willeth. Lo! thy Lord is Doer of what He will. 

[011_108]108 And as for those who will be glad (that day) they will be in the Garden,  abiding there so long as the heavens and the earth endure save for that which thy Lord  willeth: a gift unfailing. 

[011_109]109 So be not thou in doubt concerning that which these (folk) worship. They  worship only as their fathers worshipped aforetime. Lo! we shall pay them their  whole due unabated. 

[011_110]110 And we verily gave unto Moses the Scripture, and there was strife thereupon;  and had it not been for a Word that had already gone forth from thy Lord, the case  would have been judged between them, and lo! they are in grave doubt concerning it. 

[011_111]111 And lo! unto each thy Lord will verily repay his works in full. Lo! He is  Informed of what they do. 

[011_112]112 So tread thou the straight path as thou art commanded, and those who turn  (unto Allah) with thee, and transgress not. Lo! He is Seer of what ye do. 

[011_113]113 And incline not toward those who do wrong lest the Fire touch you, and ye  have no protecting friends against Allah, and afterward ye would not be helped. 

[011_114]114 Establish worship at the two ends of the day and in some watches of the  night. Lo! good deeds annul ill-deeds. This is reminder for the mindful. 

[011_115]115 And have patience, (O Muhammad), for lo! Allah loseth not the wages of the  good. 

[011_116]116 If only there had been among the generations before you men possessing a  remnant (of good sense) to warn (their people) from corruption in the earth, as did a  few of those whom We saved from them! The wrong-doers followed that by which  they were made sapless, and were guilty. 

[011_117]117 In truth thy Lord destroyed not the townships tyrannously while their folk  were doing right. 

[011_118]118 And if thy Lord had willed, He verily would have made mankind one nation,  yet they cease not differing, 

[011_119]119 Save him on whom thy Lord hath mercy; and for that He did create them.  And the Word of thy Lord hath been fulfilled: Verily I shall fill hell with the jinn and  mankind together. 

[011_120]120 And all that We relate unto thee of the story of the messengers is in order  that thereby We may make firm thy heart. And herein hath come unto thee the Truth  and an exhortation and a reminder for believers. 

[011_121]121 And say unto those who believe not: Act according to your power. Lo! We  (too) are acting. 

[011_122]122 And wait! Lo! We (too) are waiting. 

[011_123]123 And Allah's is the Invisible of the heavens and the earth, and unto Him the  whole matter will be returned. So worship Him and put thy trust in Him. Lo! thy Lord  is not unaware of what ye (mortals) do.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

12. Yusuf: Joseph

[012_001]1 Alif. Lam. Ra. These are verse of the Scripture that maketh plain. 

[012_002]2 Lo! We have revealed it, a Lecture in Arabic, that ye may understand. 

[012_003]3 We narrate unto thee (Muhammad) the best of narratives in that We have  inspired in thee this Qur'an, though aforetime thou wast of the heedless. 

[012_004]4 When Joseph said unto his father: O my father! Lo! I saw in a dream eleven  planets and the sun and the moon, I saw them prostrating themselves unto me. 

[012_005]5 He said: O my dear son! Tell not thy brethren of thy vision, lest they plot a  plot against thee. Lo! Satan is for man an open foe. 

[012_006]6 Thus thy Lord will prefer thee and will teach thee the interpretation of  events, and will perfect His grace upon thee and upon the family of Jacob as He  perfected it upon thy forefathers, Abraham and Isaac. Lo! thy Lord is Knower, Wise. 

[012_007]7 Verily in Joseph and his brethren are signs (of Allah's Sovereignty) for the  inquiring. 

[012_008]8 When they said: Verily Joseph and his brother are dearer to our father than  we are, many though we be. Lo! our father is in plain aberration. 

[012_009]9 (One said): Kill Joseph or cast him to some (other) land, so that your father's  favour may be all for you, and (that) ye may afterward be righteous folk. 

[012_010]10 One among them said: Kill not Joseph but, if ye must be doing, fling him  into the depth of the pit; some caravan will find him. 

[012_011]11 They said: O our father! Why wilt thou not trust us with Joseph, when lo! we  are good friends to him ? 

[012_012]12 Send him with us to-morrow that he may enjoy himself and play. And lo! we  shall take good care of him. 

[012_013]13 He said: Lo! in truth it saddens me that ye should take him with you, and I  fear less the wolf devour him while ye are heedless of him. 

[012_014]14 They said: If the wolf should devour him when we are (so strong) a band,  then surely we should have already perished. 

[012_015]15 Then, when they led him off, and were of one mind that they should place  him in the depth of the pit, We inspired in him: Thou wilt tell them of this deed of  theirs when they know (thee) not. 

[012_016]16 And they came weeping to their father in the evening. 

[012_017]17 Saying: O our father! We went racing one with another, and left Joseph by  our things, and the wolf devoured him, and thou believest not our saying even when  we speak the truth. 

[012_018]18 And they came with false blood on his shirt. He said: Nay, but your minds  have beguiled you into something. (My course is) comely patience. And Allah it is  Whose help is to be sought in that (predicament) which ye describe. 

[012_019]19 And there came a caravan, and they sent their waterdrawer. He let down his  pail (into the pit). He said: Good luck! Here is a youth. And they hid him as a  treasure, and Allah was Aware of what they did. 

[012_020]20 And they sold him for a low price, a number of silver coins; and they  attached no value to him. 

[012_021]21 And he of Egypt who purchased him said unto his wife: Receive him  honourably. Perchance he may prove useful to us or we may adopt him as a son. Thus  we established Joseph in the land that We might teach him the interpretation of  events. And Allah was predominant in His career, but most of mankind know not. 

[012_022]22 And And when he reached his prime We gave him wisdom and knowledge.  Thus We reward the good. 

[012_023]23 And she, in whose house he was, asked of him an evil act. She bolted the  doors and said: Come! He said: I seek refuge in Allah! Lo! he is my lord, who hath  treated me honourably. Lo! wrong-doers never prosper. 

[012_024]24 She verily desired him, and he would have desired her if it had not been that  he saw the argument of his Lord. Thus it was, that We might ward off from him evil  and lewdness. Lo! he was of Our chosen slaves. 

[012_025]25 And they raced with one another to the door, and she tore his shirt from  behind, and they met her lord and master at the door. She said: What shall be his  reward, who wisheth evil to thy folk, save prison or a painful doom ? 

[012_026]26 (Joseph) said: She it was who asked of me an evil act. And a witness of her  own folk testified: If his shirt is torn from before, then she speaketh truth and he is of  the liars. 

[012_027]27 And if his shirt is torn from behind, then she hath lied and he is of the  truthful. 

[012_028]28 So when he saw his shirt torn from behind, he said: Lo! this is of the guile of  you women. Lo! the guile of you is very great. 

[012_029]29 O Joseph! Turn away from this, and thou, (O woman), ask forgiveness for  thy sin. Lo! thou art of the faulty. 

[012_030]30 And women in the city said: The ruler's wife is asking of her slave-boy an ill- deed. Indeed he has smitten her to the heart with love. We behold her in plain  aberration. 

[012_031]31 And when she heard of their sly talk, she sent to them and prepared for them  a cushioned couch (to lie on at the feast) and gave to every one of them a knife and  said (to Joseph): Come out unto them! And when they saw him they exalted him and  cut their hands, exclaiming: Allah Blameless! This is no a human being. This is not  other than some gracious angel. 

[012_032]32 She said: This is he on whose account ye blamed me. I asked of him an evil  act, but he proved continent, but if he do not my behest he verily shall be imprisoned,  and verily shall be of those brought low. 

[012_033]33 He said: O my Lord! Prison is more dear than that unto which they urge me,  and if Thou fend not off their wiles from me I shall incline unto them and become of  the foolish. 

[012_034]34 So his Lord heard his prayer and fended off their wiles from him. Lo! He is  Hearer, Knower. 

[012_035]35 And it seemed good to them (the men-folk) after they had seen the signs (of  his innocence) to imprison him for a time. 

[012_036]36 And two young men went to prison with him. One of them said: I dreamed  that I was pressing wine. The other said: I dreamed that I was carrying upon my head  bread whereof the birds were eating. Announce unto us the interpretation, for we see  thee of those good (at interpretation). 

[012_037]37 He said: The food which ye are given (daily) shall not come unto you but I  shall tell you the interpretation ere it cometh unto you. This is of that which my Lord  hath taught me. Lo! I have forsaken the religion of folk who believe not in Allah and  are disbelievers in the Hereafter. 

[012_038]38 And I have followed the religion of my fathers, Abraham and Isaac and  Jacob. It never was for us to attribute aught as partner to Allah. This is of the bounty  of Allah unto us (the seed of Abraham) and unto mankind; but most men give not  thanks. 

[012_039]39 O my fellow-prisoners! Are divers lords better, or Allah the One, Almighty ? 

[012_040]40 Those whom ye worship beside Him are but names which ye have named, ye  and your fathers. Allah hath revealed no sanction for them. The decision rests with  Allah only, Who hath commanded you that ye worship none save Him. This is the  right religion, but most men know not. 

[012_041]41 O my two fellow-prisoners! As for one of you, he will pour out wine for his  lord to drink; and as for the other, he will be crucified so that the birds will eat from  his head. Thus is the case judged concerning which ye did inquire. 

[012_042]42 And he said unto him of the twain who he knew would be released: Mention  me in the presence of thy lord. But Satan caused him to forget to mention it to his  lord, so he (Joseph) stayed in prison for some years. 

[012_043]43 And the king said: Lo! I saw in a dream seven fat kine which seven lean  were eating, and seven green ears of corn and other (seven) dry. O notables! Expound  for me my vision, if ye can interpret dreams. 

[012_044]44 They answered: Jumbled dreams! And we are not knowing in the  interpretation of dreams. 

[012_045]45 And he of the two who was released, and (now) at length remembered, said:  I am going to announce unto you the interpretation, therefore send me forth. 

[012_046]46 (And when he came to Joseph in the prison, he exclaimed): Joseph! O thou  truthful one! Expound for us the seven fat kine which seven lean were eating and the  seven green ears of corn and other (seven) dry, that I may return unto the people, so  that they may know. 

[012_047]47 He said: Ye shall sow seven years as usual, but that which ye reap, leave it in  the ear, all save a little which ye eat. 

[012_048]48 Then after that will come seven hard years which will devour all that ye have  prepared for them, save a little of that which ye have stored. 

[012_049]49 Then, after that, will come a year when the people will have plenteous crops  and when they will press (wine and oil). 

[012_050]50 And the king said: Bring him unto me. And when the messenger came unto  him, he (Joseph) said: Return unto thy lord and ask him what was the case of the  women who cut their hands. Lo! my Lord knoweth their guile. 

[012_051]51 He (the king) (then sent for those women and) said: What happened when ye  asked an evil act of Joseph ? They answered: Allah Blameless! We know no evil of  him. Said the wife of the ruler: Now the truth is out. I asked of him an evil act, and he  is surely of the truthful. 

[012_052]52 (Then Joseph said: I asked for) this, that he (my lord) may know that I  betrayed him not in secret, and that surely Allah guideth not the snare of the  betrayers. 

[012_053]53 I do not exculpate myself. Lo! the (human) soul enjoineth unto evil, save that  whereon my Lord hath mercy. Lo! my Lord is Forgiving, Merciful. 

[012_054]54 And the king said: Bring him unto me that I may attach him to my person.  And when he had talked with him he said: Lo! thou art to-day in our presence  established and trusted. 

[012_055]55 He said: Set me over the storehouses of the land. Lo! I am a skilled  custodian. 

[012_056]56 Thus gave We power to Joseph in the land. He was the owner of it where he  pleased. We reach with Our mercy whom We will. We lose not the reward of the  good. 

[012_057]57 And the reward of the Hereafter is better, for those who believe and ward off  (evil). 

[012_058]58 And Joseph's brethren came and presented themselves before him, and he  knew them but they knew him not. 

[012_059]59 And when he provided them with their provision he said: Bring unto me a  brother of yours from your father. See ye not that I fill up the measure and I am the  best of hosts ? 

[012_060]60 And if ye bring him not unto me, then there shall be no measure for you with  me, nor shall ye draw near. 

[012_061]61 They said: We will try to win him from his father: that we will surely do. 

[012_062]62 He said unto his young men: Place their merchandise in their saddlebags, so  that they may know it when they go back to their folk, and so will come again. 

[012_063]63 So when they went back to their father they said: O our father! The measure  is denied us, so send with us our brother that we may obtain the measure, surely we  will guard him well. 

[012_064]64 He said: Can I entrust him to you save as I entrusted his brother to you  aforetime ? Allah is better at guarding, and He is the Most Merciful of those who  show mercy. 

[012_065]65 And when they opened their belongings they discovered that their  merchandise had been returned to them. They said: O our father! What (more) can we  ask ? Here is our merchandise returned to us. We shall get provision for our folk and  guard our brother, and we shall have the extra measure of a camel (load). This (that  we bring now) is a light measure. 

[012_066]66 He said: I will not send him with you till ye give me an undertaking in the  name of Allah that ye will bring him back to me, unless ye are surrounded. And when  they gave him their undertaking he said: Allah is the Warden over what we say. 

[012_067]67 And he said: O my sons! Go not in by one gate; go in by different gates. I  can naught avail you as against Allah. Lo! the decision rests with Allah only. In Him  do I put my trust, and in Him let all the trusting put their trust. 

[012_068]68 And when they entered in the manner which their father had enjoined, it  would have naught availed them as against Allah; it was but a need of Jacob's soul  which he thus satisfied; and lo! he was a lord of knowledge because We had taught  him; but most of mankind know not. 

[012_069]69 And when they went in before Joseph, he took his brother unto him, saying:  Lo! I, even I, am thy brother, therefore sorrow not for what they did. 

[012_070]70 And when he provided them with their provision, he put the drinking-cup in  his brother's saddlebag, and then a crier cried: O camel-riders! Lo! ye are surely  thieves! 

[012_071]71 They cried, coming toward them: What is it ye have lost ? 

[012_072]72 They said: We have lost the king's cup, and he who bringeth it shall have a  camel-load, and I (said Joseph) am answerable for it. 

[012_073]73 They said: By Allah, well ye know we came not to do evil in the land, and  are no thieves. 

[012_074]74 They said: And what shall be the penalty for it, if ye prove liars ? 

[012_075]75 They said: The penalty for it! He in whose bag (the cup) is found, he is the  penalty for it. Thus we requite wrong-doers. 

[012_076]76 Then he (Joseph) began the search with their bags before his brother's bag,  then he produced it from his brother's bag. Thus did We contrive for Joseph. He could  not have taken his brother according to the king's law unless Allah willed. We raise  by grades (of mercy) whom We will, and over every lord of knowledge there is one  more knowing. 

[012_077]77 They said: If he stealeth, a brother of his stole before. But Joseph kept it  secret in his soul and revealed it not unto them. He said (within himself): Ye are in  worse case, and Allah knoweth best (the truth of) that which ye allege. 

[012_078]78 They said: O ruler of the land! Lo! he hath a very aged father, so take one of  us instead of him. Lo! we behold thee of those who do kindness. 

[012_079]79 He said: Allah forbid that we should seize save him with whom we found our  property; then truly we should be wrong-doers. 

[012_080]80 So, When they despaired of (moving) him, they conferred together apart. The  eldest of them said: Know ye not how your father took an undertaking from you in  Allah's name and how ye failed in the case of Joseph aforetime ? Therefore I shall not  go forth from the land until my father giveth leave or Allah judgeth for me. He is the  Best of Judges. 

[012_081]81 Return unto your father and say: O our father! Lo! thy son hath stolen. We  testify only to that which we know; we are not guardians of the Unseen. 

[012_082]82 Ask the township where we were, and the caravan with which we travelled  hither. Lo! we speak the truth. 

[012_083]83 (And when they came unto their father and had spoken thus to him) he said:  Nay, but your minds have beguiled you into something. (My course is) comely  patience! It may be that Allah will bring them all unto me. Lo! He, only He, is the  Knower, the Wise. 

[012_084]84 And he turned away from them and said: Alas, my grief for Joseph! And his  eyes were whitened with the sorrow that he was suppressing. 

[012_085]85 They said: By Allah, thou wilt never cease remembering Joseph till thy  health is ruined or thou art of those who perish! 

[012_086]86 He said: I expose my distress and anguish only unto Allah, and I know from  Allah that which ye know not. 

[012_087]87 Go, O my sons, and ascertain concerning Joseph and his brother, and despair  not of the Spirit of Allah. Lo! none despaireth of the Spirit of Allah save disbelieving  folk. 

[012_088]88 And when they came (again) before him (Joseph) they said: O ruler!  Misfortune hath touched us and our folk, and we bring but poor merchandise, so fill  for us the measure and be charitable unto us. Lo! Allah will requite the charitable, 

[012_089]89 He said: Know ye what ye did unto Joseph and his brother in your ignorance  ? 

[012_090]90 They said: Is it indeed thou who art Joseph ? He said: I am Joseph and this is  my brother. Allah hath shown us favour. Lo! he who wardeth off (evil) and endureth  (findeth favour); for lo! Allah loseth not the wages of the kindly. 

[012_091]91 They said: By Allah, verily Allah hath preferred thee above us, and we were  indeed sinful. 

[012_092]92 He said: Have no fear this day! May Allah forgive you, and He is the Most  Merciful of those who show mercy. 

[012_093]93 Go with this shirt of mine and lay it on my father's face, he will become  (again) a seer; and come to me with all your folk. 

[012_094]94 When the caravan departed their father had said: Truly I am conscious of the  breath of Joseph, though ye call me dotard. 

[012_095]95 (Those around him) said: By Allah, lo! thou art in thine old aberration. 

[012_096]96 Then, when the bearer of glad tidings came, he laid it on his face and he  became a seer once more. He said: Said I not unto you that I know from Allah that  which ye know not ? 

[012_097]97 They said: O our father! Ask forgiveness of our sins for us, for lo! we were  sinful. 

[012_098]98 He said: I shall ask forgiveness for you of my Lord. Lo! He is the Forgiving,  the Merciful. 

[012_099]99 And when they came in before Joseph, he took his parents unto him, and  said: Come into Egypt safe, if Allah will! 

[012_100]100 And he placed his parents on the dais and they fell down before him  prostrate, and he said: O my father! This is the interpretation of my dream of old. My  Lord hath made it true, and He hath shown me kindness, since He took me out of the  prison and hath brought you from the desert after Satan had made strife between me  and my brethren. Lo! my Lord is tender unto whom He will. He is the Knower, the  Wise. 

[012_101]101 O my Lord! Thou hast given me (something) of sovereignty and hast taught  me (something) of the interpretation of events - Creator of the heavens and the earth!  Thou art my Protecting Guardian in the world and the Hereafter. Make me to die  muslim  (unto Thee), and join me to the righteous. 

[012_102]102 This is of the tidings of the Unseen which We inspire in thee (Muhammad).  Thou wast not present with them when they fixed their plan and they were scheming. 

[012_103]103 And though thou try much, most men will not believe. 

[012_104]104 Thou askest them no fee for it. It is naught else than a reminder unto the  peoples. 

[012_105]105 How many a portent is there in the heavens and the earth which they pass by  with face averted! 

[012_106]106 And most of them believe not in Allah except that they attribute partners  (unto Him). 

[012_107]107 Deem they themselves secure from the coming on them of a pall of Allah's  punishment, or the coming of the Hour suddenly while they are unaware ? 

[012_108]108 Say: This is my Way: I call on Allah with sure knowledge. I and whosoever  followeth me - Glory be to Allah! - and I am not of the idolaters. 

[012_109]109 We sent not before thee (any messengers) save men whom We inspired from  among the folk of the townships - Have they not travelled in the land and seen the  nature of the consequence for those who were before them ? And verily the abode of  the Hereafter, for those who ward off (evil), is best. Have ye then no sense ? - 

[012_110]110 Till, when the messengers despaired and thought that they were denied, then  came unto them Our help, and whom We would was saved. And Our wrath cannot be  warded from the guilty. 

[012_111]111 In their history verily there is a lesson for men of understanding. It is no  invented story but a confirmation of the existing (Scripture) and a detailed  explanation of everything, and a guidance and a mercy for folk who believe.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

13. ar-Ra`d: The Thunder

[013_001]1 Alif. Lam. Mim. Ra. These are verses of the Scripture. That which is  revealed unto thee from thy Lord is the Truth, but most of mankind believe not. 

[013_002]2 Allah it is Who raised up the heavens without visible supports, then mounted  the Throne, and compelled the sun and the moon to be of service, each runneth unto  an appointed term; He ordereth the course; He detaileth the revelations, that haply ye  may be certain of the meeting with your Lord. 

[013_003]3 And He it is Who spread out the earth and placed therein firm hills and  flowing streams, and of all fruits He placed therein two spouses (male and female).  He covereth the night with the day. Lo! herein verily are portents for people who take  thought. 

[013_004]4 And in the Earth are neighbouring tracts, vineyards and ploughed lands, and  date-palms, like and unlike, which are watered with one water. And we have made  some of them to excel others in fruit. Lo! herein verily are portents for people who  have sense. 

[013_005]5 And if thou wonderest, then wondrous is their saying: When we are dust, are  we then forsooth (to be raised) in a new creation ? Such are they who disbelieve in  their Lord; such have carcans on their necks; such are rightful owners of the Fire, they  will abide therein. 

[013_006]6 And they bid thee hasten on the evil rather than the good, when exemplary  punishments have indeed occurred before them. But lo! thy Lord is rich in pardon for  mankind despite their wrong, and lo! thy Lord is strong in punishment. 

[013_007]7 Those who disbelieve say: If only some portent were sent down upon him  from his Lord! Thou art a warner only, and for every folk a guide. 

[013_008]8 Allah knoweth that which every female beareth and that which the wombs  absorb and that which they grow. And everything with Him is measured. 

[013_009]9 He is the Knower of the Invisible and the Visible, the Great, the High  Exalted. 

[013_010]10 Alike of you is he who hideth the saying and he who noiseth it abroad, he  who lurketh in the night and he who goeth freely in the daytime. 

[013_011]11 For him are angels ranged before him and behind him, who guard him by  Allah's command. Lo! Allah changeth not the condition of a folk until they (first)  change that which is in their hearts; and if Allah willeth misfortune for a folk there is  none that can repel it, nor have they a defender beside Him. 

[013_012]12 He it is Who showeth you the lightning, a fear and a hope, and raiseth the  heavy clouds. 

[013_013]13 The thunder hymneth His praise and (so do) the angels for awe of Him. He  launcheth the thunderbolts and smiteth with them whom He will while they dispute  (in doubt) concerning Allah, and He is mighty in wrath. 

[013_014]14 Unto Him is the real prayer. Those unto whom they pray beside Allah  respond to them not at all, save as (is the response to) one who stretcheth forth his  hands toward water (asking) that it may come unto his mouth, and it will never reach  it. The prayer of disbelievers goeth (far) astray. 

[013_015]15 And unto Allah falleth prostrate whosoever is in the heavens and the earth,  willingly or unwillingly, as do their shadows in the morning and the evening hours. 

[013_016]16 Say (O Muhammad): Who is Lord of the heavens and the earth ? Say: Allah.  Say: Take ye then (others) beside Him for protectors, which, even for themselves,  have neither benefit nor hurt ? Say: Is the blind man equal to the seer, or is darkness  equal to light ? Or assign they unto Allah partners who created the like of His creation  so that the creation (which they made and His creation) seemed alike to them ? Say:  Allah is the Creator of all things, and He is the One, the Almighty. 

[013_017]17 He sendeth down water from the sky, so that valleys flow according to their  measure, and the flood beareth (on its surface) swelling foam - from that which they  smelt in the fire in order to make ornaments and tools riseth a foam like unto it - thus  Allah coineth (the similitude of) the true and the false. Then, as for the foam, it  passeth away as scum upon the banks, while, as for that which is of use to mankind, it  remaineth in the earth. Thus Allah coineth the similitudes. 

[013_018]18 For those who answered Allah's call is bliss; and for those who answered not  His call, if they had all that is in the earth, and therewith the like thereof, they would  proffer it as ransom. Such will have a woeful reckoning, and their habitation will be  hell, a dire abode. 

[013_019]19 Is he who knoweth that what is revealed unto thee from thy Lord is the truth  like him who is blind ? But only men of understanding heed; 

[013_020]20 Such as keep the pact of Allah, and break not the covenant; 

[013_021]21 Such as unite that which Allah hath commandeth should be joined, and fear  their Lord, and dread a woeful reckoning; 

[013_022]22 Such as persevere in seeking their Lord's Countenance and are regular in  prayer and spend of that which We bestow upon them secretly and openly, and  overcome evil with good. Theirs will be the sequel of the (heavenly) Home, 

[013_023]23 Gardens of Eden which they enter, along with all who do right of their  fathers and their helpmeets and their seed. The angels enter unto them from every  gate, 

[013_024]24 (Saying): Peace be unto you because ye persevered. Ah, passing sweet will  be the sequel of the (heavenly) Home. 

[013_025]25 And those who break the covenant of Allah after ratifying it, and sever that  which Allah hath commanded should be joined, and make mischief in the earth: theirs  is the curse and theirs the ill abode. 

[013_026]26 Allah enlargeth livelihood for whom He will, and straiteneth (it for whom He  will); and they rejoice in the life of the world, whereas the life of the world is but  brief comfort as compared with the Hereafter. 

[013_027]27 Those who disbelieve say: If only a portent were sent down upon him from  his Lord! Say: Lo! Allah sendeth whom He will astray, and guideth unto Himself all  who turn (unto Him), 

[013_028]28 Who have believed and whose hearts have rest in the remembrance of Allah.  Verily in the remembrance of Allah do hearts find rest! 

[013_029]29 Those who believe and do right: Joy is for them, and bliss (their) journey's  end. 

[013_030]30 Thus We send thee (O Muhammad) unto a nation, before whom other  nations have passed away, that thou mayst recite unto them that which We have  inspired in thee, while they are disbelievers in the Beneficent. Say: He is my Lord;  there is no God save Him. In Him do I put my trust and unto Him is my recourse. 

[013_031]31 Had it been possible for a Lecture to cause the mountains to move, or the  earth to be torn asunder, or the dead to speak, (this Qur'an would have done so). Nay,  but Allah's is the whole command. Do not those who believe know that, had Allah  willed, He could have guided all mankind ? As for those who disbelieve, disaster  ceaseth not to strike them because of what they do, or it dwelleth near their home  until the threat of Allah come to pass. Lo! Allah faileth not to keep the tryst. 

[013_032]32 And verily messengers (of Allah) were mocked before thee, but long I bore  with those who disbelieved. At length I seized them, and how (awful) was My  punishment! 

[013_033]33 Is He Who is aware of the deserts of every soul (as he who is aware of  nothing) ? Yet they ascribe unto Allah partners. Say: Name them. Is it that ye would  inform Him of something which He knoweth not in the earth ? Or is it but a way of  speaking ? Nay but their contrivance is made seeming fair for those who disbelieve  and they are kept from the right road. He whom Allah sendeth astray, for him there is  no guide. 

[013_034]34 For them is torment in the life of the world, and verily the doom of the  Hereafter is more painful, and they have no defender from Allah. 

[013_035]35 A similitude of the Garden which is promised unto those who keep their duty  (to Allah): Underneath it rivers flow; its food is everlasting, and its shade; this is the  reward of those who keep their duty, while the reward of disbelievers is the Fire. 

[013_036]36 Those unto whom We gave the Scripture rejoice in that which is revealed  unto thee. And of the clans there are who deny some of it. Say: I am commanded only  that I serve Allah and ascribe unto Him no partner. Unto Him I cry, and unto Him is  my return. 

[013_037]37 Thus have We revealed it, a decisive utterance in Arabic; and if thou  shouldst follow their desires after that which hath come unto thee of knowledge, then  truly wouldst thou have from Allah no protecting friend nor defender. 

[013_038]38 And verily We sent messengers (to mankind) before thee, and We appointed  for them wives and offspring, and it was not (given) to any messenger that he should  bring a portent save by Allah's leave. For everything there is a time prescribed. 

[013_039]39 Allah effaceth what He will, and establisheth (what He will), and with Him is  the source of ordinance. 

[013_040]40 Whether We let thee see something of that which We have promised them,  or make thee die (before its happening), thine is but conveyance (of the message).  Ours the reckoning. 

[013_041]41 See they not how we aim to the land, reducing it of its outlying parts ?  (When) Allah doometh there is none that can postpone His doom, and He is swift at  reckoning. 

[013_042]42 Those who were before them plotted; but all plotting is Allah's. He knoweth  that which each soul earneth. The disbelievers will come to know for whom will be  the sequel of the (heavenly) Home. 

[013_043]43 They who disbelieve say: Thou art no messenger (of Allah). Say: Allah, and  whosoever hath knowledge of the Scripture, is sufficient witness between me and  you.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

14. Ibrahim: Abraham

[014_001]1 Alif. Lam. Ra. (This is) a Scripture which We have revealed unto thee  (Muhammad) that thereby thou mayst bring forth mankind from darkness unto light,  by the permission of their Lord, unto the path of the Mighty, the Owner of Praise, 

[014_002]2 Allah, unto Whom belongeth whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is  in the earth. and woe unto the disbelievers from an awful doom; 

[014_003]3 Those who love the life of the world more than the Hereafter, and debar  (men) from the way of Allah and would have it crooked: such are far astray. 

[014_004]4 And We never sent a messenger save with the language of his folk, that he  might make (the message) clear for them. Then Allah sendeth whom He will astray,  and guideth whom He will. He is the Mighty, the Wise. 

[014_005]5 We verily sent Moses with Our revelations, saying: Bring thy people forth  from darkness unto light. And remind them of the days of Allah. Lo! therein are  revelations for each steadfast, thankful (heart). 

[014_006]6 And (remind them) how Moses said unto his people: Remember Allah's  favour unto you when He delivered you from Pharaoh's folk who were afflicting you  with dreadful torment, and were slaying your sons and sparing your women; that was  a tremendous trial from your Lord. 

[014_007]7 And when your Lord proclaimed: If ye give thanks, I will give you more; but  if ye are thankless, lo! My punishment is dire. 

[014_008]8 And Moses said: Though ye and all who are in the earth prove thankless, lo!  Allah verily is Absolute, Owner of Praise. 

[014_009]9 Hath not the history of those before you reached you: the folk of Noah, and  (the tribes of) A'ad and Thamud, and those after them ? None save Allah knoweth  them. Their messengers came unto them with clear proofs, but they thrust their hands  into their mouths, and said: Lo! we disbelieve in that wherewith ye have been sent,  and lo! we are in grave doubt concerning that to which ye call us. 

[014_010]10 Their messengers said: Can there be doubt concerning Allah, the Creator of  the heavens and the earth ? He calleth you that He may forgive you your sins and  reprieve you unto an appointed term. They said: Ye are but mortals like us, who  would fain turn us away from what our fathers used to worship. Then bring some  clear warrant. 

[014_011]11 Their messengers said unto them: We are but mortals like you, but Allah  giveth grace unto whom He will of His slaves. It is not ours to bring you a warrant  unless by the permission of Allah. In Allah let believers put their trust! 

[014_012]12 How should we not put our trust in Allah when He hath shown us our ways ?  We surely will endure the hurt ye do us. In Allah let the trusting put their trust. 

[014_013]13 And those who disbelieved said unto their messengers: Verily we will drive  you out from our land, unless ye return to our religion. Then their Lord inspired them,  (saying): Verily we shall destroy the wrong-doers, 

[014_014]14 And verily We shall make you to dwell in the land after them. This is for him  who feareth My Majesty and feareth My threats. 

[014_015]15 And they sought help (from their Lord) and every froward potentate was  bought to naught; 

[014_016]16 Hell is before him, and he is made to drink a festering water, 

[014_017]17 Which he sippeth but can hardly swallow, and death cometh unto him from  every side while yet he cannot die, and before him is a harsh doom. 

[014_018]18 A similitude of those who disbelieve in their Lord: Their works are as ashes  which the wind bloweth hard upon a stormy day. They have no control of aught that  they have earned. That is the extreme failure. 

[014_019]19 Hast thou not seen that Allah hath created the heavens and the earth with  truth ? If He will, He can remove you and bring (in) some new creation; 

[014_020]20 And that is no great matter for Allah. 

[014_021]21 They all come forth unto their Lord. Then those who were despised say unto  those who were scornful: We were unto you a following, can ye then avert from us  aught of Allah's doom ? They say: Had Allah guided us, we should have guided you.  Whether we rage or patiently endure is (now) all one for us; we have no place of  refuge. 

[014_022]22 And Satan saith, when the matter hath been decided: Lo! Allah promised you  a promise of truth; and I promised you, then failed you. And I had no power over you  save that I called unto you and ye obeyed me. So blame not, but blame yourselves. I  cannot help you, nor can ye help me, Lo! I disbelieved in that which ye before  ascribed to me. Lo! for wrong-doers is a painful doom. 

[014_023]23 And those who believed and did good works are made to enter Gardens  underneath which rivers flow, therein abiding by permission of their Lord, their  greeting therein: Peace! 

[014_024]24 Seest thou not how Allah coineth a similitude: A goodly saying, as a goodly  tree, its root set firm, its branches reaching into heaven, 

[014_025]25 Giving its fruit at every season by permission of its Lord ? Allah coineth the  similitudes for mankind in order that they may reflect. 

[014_026]26 And the similitude of a bad saying is as a bad tree, uprooted from upon the  earth, possessing no stability. 

[014_027]27 Allah confirmeth those who believe by a firm saying in the life of the world  and in the Hereafter, and Allah sendeth wrong-doers astray. And Allah doeth what He  will. 

[014_028]28 Hast thou not seen those who gave the grace of Allah in exchange for  thanklessness and led their people down to the Abode of Loss, 

[014_029]29 (Even to) hell ? They are exposed thereto. A hapless end! 

[014_030]30 And they set up rivals to Allah that they may mislead (men) from His way.  Say: Enjoy life (while ye may) for lo! your journey's end will be the Fire. 

[014_031]31 Tell My bondmen who believe to establish worship and spend of that which  We have given them, secretly and publicly, before a day cometh wherein there will be  neither traffick nor befriending. 

[014_032]32 Allah is He Who created the heavens and the earth, and causeth water to  descend from the sky, thereby producing fruits as food for you, and maketh the ships  to be of service unto you, that they may run upon the sea at His command, and hath  made of service unto you the rivers; 

[014_033]33 And maketh the sun and the moon, constant in their courses, to be of service  unto you, and hath made of service unto you the night and the day. 

[014_034]34 And He giveth you of all ye ask of Him, and if ye would count the bounty of  Allah ye cannot reckon it. Lo! man is verily a wrong-doer, an ingrate. 

[014_035]35 And when Abraham said: My Lord! Make safe this territory, and preserve  me and my sons from serving idols. 

[014_036]36 My Lord! Lo! they have led many of mankind astray. But whoso followeth  me, he verily is of me. And whoso disobeyeth me - Still Thou art Forgiving, Merciful. 

[014_037]37 Our Lord! Lo! I have settled some of my posterity in an uncultivable valley  near unto Thy holy House, our Lord! that they may establish proper worship; so  incline some hearts of men that they may yearn toward them, and provide Thou them  with fruits in order that they may be thankful. 

[014_038]38 Our Lord! Lo! Thou knowest that which we hide and that which we  proclaim. Nothing in the earth or in the heaven is hidden from Allah. 

[014_039]39 Praise be to Allah Who hath given me, in my old age, Ishmael and Isaac! Lo!  my Lord is indeed the Hearer of Prayer. 

[014_040]40 My Lord! Make me to establish proper worship, and some of my posterity  (also); our Lord! and accept my prayer. 

[014_041]41 Our Lord! Forgive me and my parents and believers on the day when the  account is cast. 

[014_042]42 Deem not that Allah is unaware of what the wicked do. He but giveth them a  respite till a day when eyes will stare (in terror), 

[014_043]43 As they come hurrying on in fear, their heads upraised, their gaze returning  not to them, and their hearts as air. 

[014_044]44 And warn mankind of a day when the doom will come upon them, and those  who did wrong will say: Our Lord! Reprieve us for a little while. We will obey Thy  call and will follow the messengers. (It will be answered): Did ye not swear before  that there would be no end for you ? 

[014_045]45 And (have ye not) dwelt in the dwellings of those who wronged themselves  (of old) and (hath it not) become plain to you how We dealt with them and made  examples for you ? 

[014_046]46 Verily they have plotted their plot, and their plot is with Allah, though their  plot were one whereby the mountains should be moved. 

[014_047]47 So think not that Allah will fail to keep His promise to His messengers. Lo!  Allah is Mighty, Able to Requite (the wrong). 

[014_048]48 On the day when the earth will be changed to other than the earth, and the  heavens (also will be changed) and they will come forth unto Allah, the One, the  Almighty, 

[014_049]49 Thou wilt see the guilty on that day linked together in chains, 

[014_050]50 Their raiment of pitch, and the Fire covering their faces, 

[014_051]51 That Allah may repay each soul what it hath earned. Lo! Allah is swift at  reckoning. 

[014_052]52 This is a clear message for mankind in order that they may be warned  thereby, and that they may know that He is only One God, and that men of  understanding may take heed.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

15. al-Hijr: The Rock

[015_001]1 Alif. Lam. Ra. These are verses of the Scripture and a plain Reading. 

[015_002]2 It may be that those who disbelieve wish ardently that they were Muslims. 

[015_003]3 Let them eat and enjoy life, and let (false) hope beguile them. They will  come to know! 

[015_004]4 And We destroyed no township but there was a known decree for it. 

[015_005]5 No nation can outstrip its term nor can they lag behind. 

[015_006]6 And they say: O thou unto whom the Reminder is revealed, lo! thou art  indeed a madman! 

[015_007]7 Why bringest thou not angels unto us, if thou art of the truthful ? 

[015_008]8 We send not down the angels save with the Fact, and in that case (the  disbelievers) would not be tolerated. 

[015_009]9 Lo! We, even We, reveal the Reminder, and lo! We verily are its Guardian. 

[015_010]10 We verily sent (messengers) before thee among the factions of the men of  old. 

[015_011]11 And never came there unto them a messenger but they did mock him. 

[015_012]12 Thus do We make it traverse the hearts of the guilty: 

[015_013]13 They believe not therein, though the example of the men of old hath gone  before. 

[015_014]14 And even if We opened unto them a gate of heaven and they kept mounting  through it, 

[015_015]15 They would say: Our sight is wrong - nay, but we are folk bewitched. 

[015_016]16 And verily in the heaven we have set mansions of the stars, and We have  beautified it for beholders. 

[015_017]17 And We have guarded it from every outcast devil, 

[015_018]18 Save him who stealeth the hearing, and them doth a clear flame pursue. 

[015_019]19 And the earth have We spread out, and placed therein firm hills, and caused  each seemly thing to grow therein. 

[015_020]20 And we have given unto you livelihoods therein, and unto those for whom ye  provide not. 

[015_021]21 And there is not a thing but with Us are the stores thereof. And we send it not  down save in appointed measure. 

[015_022]22 And We send the winds fertilising, and cause water to descend from the sky,  and give it you to drink. It is not ye who are the holders of the store thereof. 

[015_023]23 Lo! and it is We, even We, Who quicken and give death, and We are the  Inheritor. 

[015_024]24 And verily We know the eager among you and verily We know the laggards. 

[015_025]25 Lo! thy Lord will gather them together. Lo! He is Wise, Aware. 

[015_026]26 Verily We created man of potter's clay of black mud altered, 

[015_027]27 And the jinn did We create aforetime of essential fire. 

[015_028]28 And (remember) when thy Lord said unto the angels: Lo! I am creating a  mortal out of potter's clay of black mud altered, 

[015_029]29 So, when I have made him and have breathed into him of My Spirit, do ye  fall down, prostrating yourselves unto him. 

[015_030]30 So the angels fell prostrate, all of them together 

[015_031]31 Save Iblis. He refused to be among the prostrate. 

[015_032]32 He said: O Iblis! What aileth thee that thou art not among the prostrate ? 

[015_033]33 He said: I am not one to prostrate myself unto a mortal whom Thou hast  created out of potter's clay of black mud altered! 

[015_034]34 He said: Then go thou forth from hence, for lo! thou art outcast. 

[015_035]35 And lo! the curse shall be upon thee till the Day of Judgment. 

[015_036]36 He said: My Lord! Reprieve me till the day when they are raised. 

[015_037]37 He said: Then lo! thou art of those reprieved 

[015_038]38 Till the Day of appointed time. 

[015_039]39 He said: My Lord! Because Thou hast sent me astray, I verily shall adorn the  path of error for them in the earth, and shall mislead them every one, 

[015_040]40 Save such of them as are Thy perfectly devoted slaves. 

[015_041]41 He said: This is a right course incumbent upon Me: 

[015_042]42 Lo! as for My slaves, thou hast no power over any of them save such of the  froward as follow thee, 

[015_043]43 And lo! for all such, hell will be the promised place. 

[015_044]44 It hath seven gates, and each gate hath an appointed portion. 

[015_045]45 Lo! those who ward off (evil) are among gardens and watersprings. 

[015_046]46 (And it is said unto them): Enter them in peace, secure. 

[015_047]47 And We remove whatever rancour may be in their breasts. As brethren, face  to face, (they rest) on couches raised. 

[015_048]48 Toil cometh not unto them there, nor will they be expelled from thence. 

[015_049]49 Announce, (O Muhammad) unto My slaves that verily I am the Forgiving,  the Merciful, 

[015_050]50 And that My doom is the dolorous doom. 

[015_051]51 And tell them of Abraham's guests, 

[015_052]52 (How) when they came in unto him, and said: Peace. He said: Lo! we are  afraid of you. 

[015_053]53 They said: Be not afraid! Lo! we bring thee good tidings of a boy possessing  wisdom. 

[015_054]54 He said: Bring ye me good tidings (of a son) when old age hath overtaken me  ? Of what then can ye bring good tidings ? 

[015_055]55 They said: We bring thee good tidings in truth. So be not thou of the  despairing. 

[015_056]56 He said: And who despaireth of the mercy of his Lord save those who are  astray ? 

[015_057]57 He said: And afterward what is your business, O ye messengers (of Allah) ? 

[015_058]58 They said: We have been sent unto a guilty folk, 

[015_059]59 (All) save the family of Lot. Them we shall deliver every one, 

[015_060]60 Except his wife, of whom We had decreed that she should be of those who  stay behind. 

[015_061]61 And when the messengers came unto the family of Lot, 

[015_062]62 He said: Lo! ye are folk unknown (to me). 

[015_063]63 They said: Nay, but we bring thee that concerning which they keep  disputing, 

[015_064]64 And bring thee the Truth, and lo! we are truth-tellers. 

[015_065]65 So travel with thy household in a portion of the night, and follow thou their  backs. Let none of you turn round, but go whither ye are commanded. 

[015_066]66 And We made plain the case to him, that the root of them (who did wrong)  was to be cut at early morn. 

[015_067]67 And the people of the city came, rejoicing at the news (of new arrivals). 

[015_068]68 He said: Lo! they are my guests. Affront me not! 

[015_069]69 And keep your duty to Allah, and shame me not! 

[015_070]70 They said; Have we not forbidden you from (entertaining) anyone ? 

[015_071]71 He said: Here are my daughters, if ye must be doing (so). 

[015_072]72 By thy life (O Muhammad) they moved blindly in the frenzy of approaching  death. 

[015_073]73 Then the (Awful) Cry overtook them at the sunrise. 

[015_074]74 And We utterly confounded them, and We rained upon them stones of heated  clay. 

[015_075]75 Lo! therein verily are portents for those who read the signs. 

[015_076]76 And lo! it is upon a road still uneffaced. 

[015_077]77 Lo! therein is indeed a portent for believers. 

[015_078]78 And the dwellers in the wood indeed were evil-doers. 

[015_079]79 So we took vengeance on them; and lo! they both are on a high-road plain to  see. 

[015_080]80 And the dwellers in Al-Hijr denied (Our) messengers. 

[015_081]81 And we gave them Our revelations, but they were averse to them. 

[015_082]82 And they used to hew out dwellings from the hills, (wherein they dwelt)  secure. 

[015_083]83 But the (Awful) Cry overtook them at the morning hour, 

[015_084]84 And that which they were wont to count as gain availed them not. 

[015_085]85 We created not the heavens and the earth and all that is between them save  with truth, and lo! the Hour is surely coming. So forgive, (O Muhammad), with a  gracious forgiveness. 

[015_086]86 Lo! Thy Lord! He is the All-Wise Creator. 

[015_087]87 We have given thee seven of the oft-repeated (verses) and the great Qur'an. 

[015_088]88 Strain not thine eyes toward that which We cause some wedded pairs among  them to enjoin, and be not grieved on their account, and lower thy wing (in  tenderness) for the believers. 

[015_089]89 And say: Lo! I, even I, am a plain warner, 

[015_090]90 Such as We send down for those who make division, 

[015_091]91 Those who break the Qur'an into parts. 

[015_092]92 Them, by thy Lord, We shall question, every one, 

[015_093]93 Of what they used to do. 

[015_094]94 So proclaim that which thou art commanded, and withdraw from the  idolaters. 

[015_095]95 Lo! We defend thee from the scoffers, 

[015_096]96 Who set some other god along with Allah. But they will come to know. 

[015_097]97 Well know We that thy bosom is oppressed by what they say, 

[015_098]98 But hymn the praise of thy Lord, and be of those who make prostration (unto  Him). 

[015_099]99 And serve thy Lord till the Inevitable cometh unto thee.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

16. an-Nahl: The Bee

[016_001]1 The commandment of Allah will come to pass, so seek not ye to hasten it.  Glorified and Exalted be He above all that they associate (with Him). 

[016_002]2 He sendeth down the angels with the Spirit of His command unto whom He  will of His bondmen, (saying): Warn mankind that there is no God save Me, so keep  your duty unto Me. 

[016_003]3 He hath created the heavens and the earth with truth. High be He Exalted  above all that they associate (with Him). 

[016_004]4 He hath created man from a drop of fluid, yet behold! he is an open  opponent. 

[016_005]5 And the cattle hath He created, whence ye have warm clothing and uses, and  whereof ye eat; 

[016_006]6 And wherein is beauty for you, when ye bring them home, and when ye take  them out to pasture. 

[016_007]7 And they bear your loads for you unto a land ye could not reach save with  great trouble to yourselves. Lo! your Lord is Full of Pity, Merciful. 

[016_008]8 And horses and mules and asses (hath He created) that ye may ride them, and  for ornament. And He createth that which ye know not. 

[016_009]9 And Allah's is the direction of the way, and some (roads) go not straight.  And had He willed He would have led you all aright. 

[016_010]10 He it is Who sendeth down water from the sky, whence ye have drink, and  whence are trees on which ye send your beasts to pasture. 

[016_011]11 Therewith He causeth crops to grow for you, and the olive and the date-palm  and grapes and all kinds of fruit. Lo! herein is indeed a portent for people who reflect. 

[016_012]12 And He hath constrained the night and the day and the sun and the moon to  be of service unto you, and the stars are made subservient by His command. Lo!  herein indeed are portents for people who have sense. 

[016_013]13 And whatsoever He hath created for you in the earth of divers hues, lo!  therein is indeed a portent for people who take heed. 

[016_014]14 And He it is Who hath constrained the sea to be of service that ye eat fresh  meat from thence, and bring forth from thence ornaments which ye wear. And thou  seest the ships ploughing it that ye (mankind) may seek of His bounty and that haply  ye may give thanks. 

[016_015]15 And He hath cast into the earth firm hills that it quake not with you, and  streams and roads that ye may find a way. 

[016_016]16 And landmarks (too), and by the star they find a way. 

[016_017]17 Is He then Who createth as him who createth not ? Will ye not then  remember ? 

[016_018]18 And if ye would count the favour of Allah ye cannot reckon it. Lo! Allah is  indeed Forgiving, Merciful. 

[016_019]19 And Allah knoweth that which ye keep hidden and that which ye proclaim. 

[016_020]20 Those unto whom they cry beside Allah created naught, but are themselves  created. 

[016_021]21 (They are) dead, not living. And they know not when they will be raised. 

[016_022]22 Your God is One God. But as for those who believe not in the Hereafter their  hearts refuse to know, for they are proud. 

[016_023]23 Assuredly Allah knoweth that which they keep hidden and that which they  proclaim. Lo! He loveth not the proud. 

[016_024]24 And when it is said unto them: What hath your Lord revealed ? they say:  (Mere) fables of the men of old, 

[016_025]25 That they may bear their burdens undiminished on the Day of Resurrection,  with somewhat of the burdens of those whom they mislead without knowledge. Ah!  evil is that which they bear! 

[016_026]26 Those before them plotted, so Allah struck at the foundations of their  building, and then the roof fell down upon them from above them, and the doom  came on them whence they knew not; 

[016_027]27 Then on the Day of Resurrection He will disgrace them and will say: Where  are My partners, for whose sake ye opposed (My guidance) ? Those who have been  given knowledge will say: Disgrace this day and evil are upon the disbelievers, 

[016_028]28 Whom the angels cause to die while they are wronging themselves. Then will  they make full submission (saying): We used not to do any wrong. Nay! Surely Allah  is Knower of what ye used to do. 

[016_029]29 So enter the gates of hell, to dwell therein for ever. Woeful indeed will be the  lodging of the arrogant. 

[016_030]30 And it is said unto those who ward off (evil): What hath your Lord revealed ?  They say: Good. For those who do good in this world there is a good (reward) and the  home of the Hereafter will be better. Pleasant indeed will be the home of those who  ward off (evil) - 

[016_031]31 Gardens of Eden which they enter, underneath which rivers flow, wherein  they have what they will. Thus Allah repayeth those who ward off (evil), 

[016_032]32 Those whom the angels cause to die (when they are) good. They say: Peace  be unto you! Enter the Garden because of what ye used to do. 

[016_033]33 Await they aught say that the angels should come unto them or thy Lord's  command should come to pass ? Even so did those before them. Allah wronged them  not, but they did wrong themselves, 

[016_034]34 So that the evils of what they did smote them, and that which they used to  mock surrounded them. 

[016_035]35 And the idolaters say: Had Allah willed, we had not worshipped aught beside  Him, we and our fathers, nor had we forbidden aught without (command from) Him.  Even so did those before them. Are the messengers charged with aught save plain  conveyance (of the message) ? 

[016_036]36 And verily We have raised in every nation a messenger, (proclaiming): Serve  Allah and shun false gods. Then some of them (there were) whom Allah guided, and  some of them (there were) upon whom error had just hold. Do but travel in the land  and see the nature of the consequence for the deniers! 

[016_037]37 Even if thou (O Muhammad) desirest their right guidance, still Allah  assuredly will not guide him who misleadeth. Such have no helpers. 

[016_038]38 And they swear by Allah their most binding oaths (that) Allah will not raise  up him who dieth. Nay, but it is a promise (binding) upon Him in truth, but most of  mankind know not, 

[016_039]39 That He may explain unto them that wherein they differ, and that those who  disbelieved may know that they were liars. 

[016_040]40 And Our word unto a thing, when We intend it, is only that We say unto it:  Be! and it is. 

[016_041]41 And those who became fugitives for the cause of Allah after they had been  oppressed, We verily shall give them goodly lodging in the world, and surely the  reward of the Hereafter is greater, if they but knew; 

[016_042]42 Such as are steadfast and put their trust in Allah. 

[016_043]43 And We sent not (as Our messengers) before thee other than men whom We  inspired - Ask the followers of the Remembrance if ye know not! - 

[016_044]44 With clear proofs and writings; and We have revealed unto thee the  Remembrance that thou mayst explain to mankind that which hath been revealed for  them, and that haply they may reflect. 

[016_045]45 Are they who plan ill-deeds then secure that Allah will not cause the earth to  swallow them, or that the doom will not come on them whence they know not ? 

[016_046]46 Or that He will not seize them in their going to and fro so that there be no  escape for them ? 

[016_047]47 Or that He will not seize them with a gradual wasting ? Lo! thy Lord is  indeed Full of Pity, Merciful. 

[016_048]48 Have they not observed all things that Allah hath created, how their shadows  incline to the right and to the left, making prostration unto Allah, and they are lowly ? 

[016_049]49 And unto Allah maketh prostration whatsoever is in the heavens and  whatsoever is in the earth of living creatures, and the angels (also) and they are not  proud. 

[016_050]50 They fear their Lord above them, and do what they are bidden. 

[016_051]51 Allah hath said: Choose not two gods. There is only One God. So of Me, Me  only, be in awe. 

[016_052]52 Unto Him belongeth whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth, and religion  is His for ever. Will ye then fear any other than Allah ? 

[016_053]53 And whatever of comfort ye enjoy, it is from Allah. Then, when misfortune  reacheth you, unto Him ye cry for help. 

[016_054]54 And afterward, when He hath rid you of the misfortune, behold! a set of you  attribute partners to their Lord, 

[016_055]55 So as to deny that which We have given them. Then enjoy life (while ye  may), for ye will come to know. 

[016_056]56 And they assign a portion of that which We have given them unto what they  know not. By Allah! but ye will indeed be asked concerning (all) that ye used to  invent. 

[016_057]57 And they assign unto Allah daughters - Be He Glorified! - and unto  themselves what they desire; 

[016_058]58 When if one of them receiveth tidings of the birth of a female, his face  remaineth darkened, and he is wroth inwardly. 

[016_059]59 He hideth himself from the folk because of the evil of that whereof he hath  had tidings, (asking himself): Shall he keep it in contempt, or bury it beneath the dust.  Verily evil is their judgment. 

[016_060]60 For those who believe not in the Hereafter is an evil similitude, and Allah's is  the Sublime Similitude. He is the Mighty, the Wise. 

[016_061]61 If Allah were to take mankind to task for their wrong-doing, he would not  leave hereon a living creature, but He reprieveth them to an appointed term, and when  their term cometh they cannot put (it) off an hour nor (yet) advance (it). 

[016_062]62 And they assign unto Allah that which they (themselves) dislike, and their  tongues expound the lie that the better portion will be theirs. Assuredly theirs will be  the Fire, and they will be abandoned. 

[016_063]63 By Allah, We verily sent messengers unto the nations before thee, but the  devil made their deeds fairseeming unto them. So he is their patron this day, and  theirs  will be a painful doom. 

[016_064]64 And We have revealed the Scripture unto thee only that thou mayst explain  unto them that wherein they differ, and (as) a guidance and a mercy for a people who  believe. 

[016_065]65 Allah sendeth down water from the sky and therewith reviveth the earth after  her death. Lo! herein is indeed a portent for a folk who hear. 

[016_066]66 And lo! in the cattle there is a lesson for you. We give you to drink of that  which is in their bellies, from betwixt the refuse and the blood, pure milk palatable to  the drinkers. 

[016_067]67 And of the fruits of the date-palm, and grapes, whence ye derive strong drink  and (also) good nourishment. Lo! therein is indeed a portent for people who have  sense. 

[016_068]68 And thy Lord inspired the bee, saying: Choose thou habitations in the hills  and in the trees and in that which they thatch; 

[016_069]69 Then eat of all fruits, and follow the ways of thy Lord, made smooth (for  thee). There cometh forth from their bellies a drink divers of hues, wherein is healing  for mankind. Lo! herein is indeed a portent for people who reflect. 

[016_070]70 And Allah createth you, then causeth you to die, and among you is he who is  brought back to the most abject stage of life, so that he knoweth nothing after (having  had) knowledge. Lo! Allah is Knower, Powerful. 

[016_071]71 And Allah hath favoured some of you above others in provision. Now those  who are more favoured will by no means hand over their provision to those (slaves)  whom their right hands possess, so that they may be equal with them in respect  thereof. Is it then the grace of Allah that they deny ? 

[016_072]72 And Allah hath given you wives of your own kind, and hath given you, from  your wives, sons and grandsons, and hath made provision of good things for you. Is it  then in vanity that they believe and in the grace of Allah that they disbelieve ? 

[016_073]73 And they worship beside Allah that which owneth no provision whatsoever  for them from the heavens or the earth, nor have they (whom they worship) any  power. 

[016_074]74 So coin not similitudes for Allah. Lo! Allah knoweth; ye know not. 

[016_075]75 Allah coineth a similitude: (on the one hand) a (mere) chattel slave, who hath  control of nothing, and (on the other hand) one on whom we have bestowed a fair  provision from Us, and he spendeth thereof secretly and openly. Are they equal ?  Praise be to Allah! But most of them know not. 

[016_076]76 And Allah coineth a similitude: Two men, one of them dumb, having control  of nothing, and he is a burden on his owner; whithersoever he directeth him to go, he  bringeth no good. Is he equal with one who enjoineth justice and followeth a straight  path (of conduct) ? 

[016_077]77 And unto Allah belongeth the Unseen of the heavens and the earth, and the  matter of the Hour (of Doom) is but as a twinkling of the eye, or it is nearer still. Lo!  Allah is Able to do all things. 

[016_078]78 And Allah brought you forth from the wombs of your mothers knowing  nothing, and gave you hearing and sight and hearts that haply ye might give thanks. 

[016_079]79 Have they not seen the birds obedient in mid-air ? None holdeth them save  Allah. Lo! herein, verily, are portents for a people who believe. 

[016_080]80 And Allah hath given you in your houses an abode, and hath given you  (also), of the hides of cattle, houses which ye find light (to carry) on the day of  migration and on the day of pitching camp; and of their wool and their fur and their  hair, caparison and comfort for a while. 

[016_081]81 And Allah hath given you, of that which He hath created, shelter from the  sun; and hath given you places of refuge in the mountains, and hath given you coats  to ward off the heat from you, and coats (of armour) to save you from your own  foolhardiness. Thus doth He perfect His favour unto you, in order that ye may  surrender (unto Him). 

[016_082]82 Then, if they turn away, thy duty (O Muhammad) is but plain conveyance (of  the message). 

[016_083]83 They know the favour of Allah and then deny it. Most of them are ingrates. 

[016_084]84 And (bethink you of) the day when we raise up of every nation a witness,  then there is no leave for disbelievers, nor are they allowed to make amends. 

[016_085]85 And when those who did wrong behold the doom, it will not be made light  for them, nor will they be reprieved. 

[016_086]86 And when those who ascribed partners to Allah behold those partners of  theirs, they will say: Our Lord! these are our partners unto whom we used to cry  instead of Thee. But they will fling to them the saying: Lo! ye verily are liars! 

[016_087]87 And they proffer unto Allah submission on that day, and all that they used to  invent hath failed them. 

[016_088]88 For those who disbelieve and debar (men) from the way of Allah, We add  doom to doom because they wrought corruption, 

[016_089]89 And (bethink you of) the day when We raise in every nation a witness  against them of their own folk, and We bring thee (Muhammad) as a witness against  these. And We reveal the Scripture unto thee as an exposition of all things, and a  guidance and a mercy and good tidings for those who have surrendered (to Allah). 

[016_090]90 Lo! Allah enjoineth justice and kindness, and giving to kinsfolk, and  forbiddeth lewdness and abomination and wickedness. He exhorteth you in order that  ye may take heed. 

[016_091]91 Fulfil the covenant of Allah when ye have covenanted, and break not your  oaths after the asseveration of them, and after ye have made Allah surety over you.  Lo! Allah knoweth what ye do. 

[016_092]92 And be not like unto her who unravelleth the thread, after she hath made it  strong, to thin filaments, making your oaths a deceit between you because of a nation  being more numerous than (another) nation. Allah only trieth you thereby, and He  verily will explain to you on the Day of Resurrection that wherein ye differed. 

[016_093]93 Had Allah willed He could have made you (all) one nation, but He sendeth  whom He will astray and guideth whom He will, and ye will indeed be asked of what  ye used to do. 

[016_094]94 Make not your oaths a deceit between you, lest a foot should slip after being  firmly planted and ye should taste evil forasmuch as ye debarred (men) from the way  of Allah, and yours should be an awful doom. 

[016_095]95 And purchase not a small gain at the price of Allah's covenant. Lo! that  which Allah hath is better for you, if ye did but know. 

[016_096]96 That which ye have wasteth away, and that which Allah hath remaineth. And  verily We shall pay those who are steadfast a recompense in proportion to the best of  what they used to do. 

[016_097]97 Whosoever doeth right, whether male or female, and is a believer, him verily  we shall quicken with good life, and We shall pay them a recompense in proportion to  the best of what they used to do. 

[016_098]98 And when thou recitest the Qur'an, seek refuge in Allah from Satan the  outcast. 

[016_099]99 Lo! he hath no power over those who believe and put trust in their Lord. 

[016_100]100 His power is only over those who make a friend of him, and those who  ascribe partners unto Him (Allah). 

[016_101]101 And when We put a revelation in place of (another) revelation, - and Allah  knoweth best what He revealeth - they say: Lo! thou art but inventing. Most of them  know not. 

[016_102]102 Say: The holy Spirit hath delivered it from thy Lord with truth, that it may  confirm (the faith of) those who believe, and as guidance and good tidings for those  who have surrendered (to Allah). 

[016_103]103 And We know well that they say: Only a man teacheth him. The speech of  him at whom they falsely hint is outlandish, and this is clear Arabic speech. 

[016_104]104 Lo! those who disbelieve the revelations of Allah, Allah guideth them not  and theirs will be a painful doom. 

[016_105]105 Only they invent falsehood who believe not Allah's revelations, and (only)  they are the liars. 

[016_106]106 Whoso disbelieveth in Allah after his belief - save him who is forced thereto  and whose heart is still content with the Faith - but whoso findeth ease in disbelief:  On them is wrath from Allah. Theirs will be an awful doom. 

[016_107]107 That is because they have chosen the life of the world rather than the  Hereafter, and because Allah guideth not the disbelieving folk. 

[016_108]108 Such are they whose hearts and ears and eyes Allah hath sealed. And such  are the heedless. 

[016_109]109 Assuredly in the Hereafter they are the losers. 

[016_110]110 Then lo! thy Lord - for those who became fugitives after they had been  persecuted, and then fought and were steadfast - lo! thy Lord afterward is (for them)  indeed Forgiving, Merciful. 

[016_111]111 On the Day when every soul will come pleading for itself, and every soul  will be repaid what it did, and they will not be wronged. 

[016_112]112 Allah coineth a similitude: a township that dwelt secure and well content, its  provision coming to it in abundance from every side, but it disbelieved in Allah's  favours, so Allah made it experience the garb of dearth and fear because of what they  used to do. 

[016_113]113 And verily there had come unto them a messenger from among them, but  they had denied him, and so the torment seized them while they were wrong-doers. 

[016_114]114 So eat of the lawful and good food which Allah hath provided for you, and  thank the bounty of your Lord if it is Him ye serve. 

[016_115]115 He hath forbidden for you only carrion and blood and swineflesh and that  which hath been immolated in the name of any other than Allah; but he who is driven  thereto, neither craving nor transgressing, lo! then Allah is Forgiving, Merciful. 

[016_116]116 And speak not, concerning that which your own tongues qualify (as clean or  unclean), the falsehood: "This is lawful, and this is forbidden," so that ye invent a lie  against Allah. Lo! those who invent a lie against Allah will not succeed. 

[016_117]117 A brief enjoyment (will be theirs); and theirs a painful doom. 

[016_118]118 And unto those who are Jews We have forbidden that which We have  already related unto thee. And We wronged them not, but they were wont to wrong  themselves. 

[016_119]119 Then lo! thy Lord - for those who do evil in ignorance and afterward repent  and amend - lo! (for them) thy Lord is afterward indeed Forgiving, Merciful. 

[016_120]120 Lo! Abraham was a nation obedient to Allah, by nature upright, and he was  not of the idolaters; 

[016_121]121 Thankful for His bounties; He chose him and He guided him unto a straight  path. 

[016_122]122 And We gave him good in the world, and in the Hereafter he is among the  righteous. 

[016_123]123 And afterward We inspired thee (Muhammad, saying): Follow the religion of  Abraham, as one by nature upright. He was not of the idolaters. 

[016_124]124 The Sabbath was appointed only for those who differed concerning it, and lo!  thy Lord will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection concerning that  wherein they used to differ. 

[016_125]125 Call unto the way of thy Lord with wisdom and fair exhortation, and reason  with them in the better way. Lo! thy Lord is Best Aware of him who strayeth from  His way, and He is Best Aware of those who go aright. 

[016_126]126 If ye punish, then punish with the like of that wherewith ye were afflicted.  But if ye endure patiently, verily it is better for the patient. 

[016_127]127 Endure thou patiently (O Muhammad). Thine endurance is only by (the help  of) Allah. Grieve not for them, and be not in distress because of that which they  devise. 

[016_128]128 Lo! Allah is with those who keep their duty unto Him and those who are  doers of good.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

17. bani Isra'il: The Israelites

[017_001]1 Glorified be He Who carried His servant by night from the Inviolable Place  of Worship to the Far distant place of worship the neighbourhood whereof We have  blessed, that We might show him of Our tokens! Lo! He, only He, is the Hearer, the  Seer. 

[017_002]2 We gave unto Moses the Scripture, and We appointed it a guidance for the  children of Israel, saying: Choose no guardian beside Me. 

[017_003]3 (They were) the seed of those whom We carried (in the ship) along with  Noah. Lo! he was a grateful slave. 

[017_004]4 And We decreed for the Children of Israel in the Scripture: Ye verily will  work corruption in the earth twice, and ye will become great tyrants. 

[017_005]5 So when the time for the first of the two came, We roused against you slaves  of Ours of great might who ravaged (your) country, and it was a threat performed. 

[017_006]6 Then we gave you once again your turn against them, and We aided you with  wealth and children and made you more in soldiery. 

[017_007]7 (Saying): If ye do good, ye do good for your own souls, and if ye do evil, it is  for them (in like manner). So, when the time for the second (of the judgments) came  (We roused against you others of Our slaves) to ravage you, and to enter the Temple  even as they entered it the first time, and to lay waste all that they conquered with an  utter wasting. 

[017_008]8 It may be that your Lord will have mercy on you, but if ye repeat (the crime)  We shall repeat (the punishment), and We have appointed hell a dungeon for the  disbelievers. 

[017_009]9 Lo! this Qur'an guideth unto that which is straightest, and giveth tidings unto  the believers who do good works that theirs will be a great reward. 

[017_010]10 And that those who believe not in the Hereafter, for them We have prepared  a painful doom. 

[017_011]11 Man prayeth for evil as he prayeth for good; for man was ever hasty. 

[017_012]12 And We appoint the night and the day two portents. Then We make dark the  portent of the night, and We make the portent of the day sight-giving, that ye may  seek bounty from your Lord, and that ye may know the computation of the years, and  the reckoning; and everything have We expounded with a clear expounding. 

[017_013]13 And every man's augury have We fastened to his own neck, and We shall  bring forth for him on the Day of Resurrection a book which he will find wide open. 

[017_014]14 (And it will be said unto him): Read thy Book. Thy soul sufficeth as reckoner  against thee this day. 

[017_015]15 Whosoever goeth right, it is only for (the good of) his own soul that he goeth  right, and whosoever erreth, erreth only to its hurt. No laden soul can bear another's  load, We never punish until we have sent a messenger. 

[017_016]16 And when We would destroy a township We send commandment to its folk  who live at ease, and afterward they commit abomination therein, and so the Word (of  doom) hath effect for it, and we annihilate it with complete annihilation. 

[017_017]17 How many generations have We destroyed since Noah! And Allah sufficeth  as Knower and Beholder of the sins of His slaves. 

[017_018]18 Whoso desireth that (life) which hasteneth away, We hasten for him therein  what We will for whom We please. And afterward We have appointed for him hell;  he will endure the heat thereof, condemned, rejected. 

[017_019]19 And whoso desireth the Hereafter and striveth for it with the effort necessary,  being a believer; for such, their effort findeth favour (with their Lord). 

[017_020]20 Each do We supply, both these and those, from the bounty of thy Lord. And  the bounty of thy Lord can never be walled up. 

[017_021]21 See how We prefer one of them above another, and verily the Hereafter will  be greater in degrees and greater in preferment. 

[017_022]22 Set not up with Allah any other god (O man) lest thou sit down reproved,  forsaken. 

[017_023]23 Thy Lord hath decreed, that ye worship none save Him, and (that ye show)  kindness to parents. If one of them or both of them attain old age with thee, say not  "Fie" unto them nor repulse them, but speak unto them a gracious word. 

[017_024]24 And lower unto them the wing of submission through mercy, and say: My  Lord! Have mercy on them both as they did care for me when I was little. 

[017_025]25 Your Lord is Best Aware of what is in your minds. If ye are righteous, then  lo! He was ever Forgiving unto those who turn (unto Him). 

[017_026]26 Give the kinsman his due, and the needy, and the wayfarer, and squander not  (thy wealth) in wantonness. 

[017_027]27 Lo! the squanderers were ever brothers of the devils, and the devil was ever  an ingrate to his Lord. 

[017_028]28 But if thou turn away from them, seeking mercy from thy Lord, for which  thou hopest, then speak unto them a reasonable word. 

[017_029]29 And let not thy hand be chained to thy neck nor open it with a complete  opening, lest thou sit down rebuked, denuded. 

[017_030]30 Lo! thy Lord enlargeth the provision for whom He will, and straiteneth (it for  whom He will). Lo, He was ever Knower, Seer of His slaves. 

[017_031]31 Slay not your children, fearing a fall to poverty, We shall provide for them  and for you. Lo! the slaying of them is great sin. 

[017_032]32 And come not near unto adultery. Lo! it is an abomination and an evil way. 

[017_033]33 And slay not the life which Allah hath forbidden save with right. Whoso is  slain wrongfully, We have given power unto his heir, but let him not commit excess  in slaying. Lo! he will be helped. 

[017_034]34 Come not near the wealth of the orphan save with that which is better till he  come to strength; and keep the covenant. Lo! of the covenant it will be asked. 

[017_035]35 Fill the measure when ye measure, and weigh with a right balance; that is  meet, and better in the end. 

[017_036]36 (O man), follow not that whereof thou hast no knowledge. Lo! the hearing  and the sight and the heart - of each of these it will be asked. 

[017_037]37 And walk not in the earth exultant. Lo! thou canst not rend the earth, nor  canst thou stretch to the height of the hills. 

[017_038]38 The evil of all that is hateful in the sight of thy Lord. 

[017_039]39 This is (part) of that wisdom wherewith thy Lord hath inspired thee (O  Muhammad). And set not up with Allah any other god, lest thou be cast into hell,  reproved, abandoned. 

[017_040]40 Hath your Lord then distinguished you (O men of Makka) by giving you  sons, and hath chosen for Himself females from among the angels ? Lo! verily ye  speak an awful word! 

[017_041]41 We verily have displayed (Our warnings) in this Qur'an that they may take  heed, but it increaseth them in naught save aversion. 

[017_042]42 Say (O Muhammad, to the disbelievers): If there were other gods along with  Him, as they say, then had they sought a way against the Lord of the Throne. 

[017_043]43 Glorified is He, and High Exalted above what they say! 

[017_044]44 The seven heavens and the earth and all that is therein praise Him, and there  is not a thing but hymneth His praise; but ye understand not their praise. Lo! He is  ever Clement, Forgiving. 

[017_045]45 And when thou recitest the Qur'an we place between thee and those who  believe not in the Hereafter a hidden barrier; 

[017_046]46 And We place upon their hearts veils lest they should understand it, and in  their ears a deafness; and when thou makest mention of thy Lord alone in the Qur'an,  they turn their backs in aversion. 

[017_047]47 We are Best Aware of what they wish to hear when they give ear to thee and  when they take secret counsel, when the evil-doers say: Ye follow but a man  bewitched. 

[017_048]48 See what similitudes they coin for thee, and thus are all astray, and cannot  find a road! 

[017_049]49 And they say: When we are bones and fragments, shall we forsooth, be  raised up as a new creation ? 

[017_050]50 Say: Be ye stones or iron 

[017_051]51 Or some created thing that is yet greater in your thoughts! Then they will  say: Who shall bring us back (to life). Say: He Who created you at the first. Then will  they shake their heads at thee, and say: When will it be ? Say: It will perhaps be soon; 

[017_052]52 A day when He will call you and ye will answer with His praise, and ye will  think that ye have tarried but a little while. 

[017_053]53 Tell My bondmen to speak that which is kindlier. Lo! the devil soweth  discord among them. Lo! the devil is for man an open foe. 

[017_054]54 Your Lord is Best Aware of you. If He will, He will have mercy on you, or if  He will, He will punish you. We have not sent thee (O Muhammad) as a warden over  them. 

[017_055]55 And thy Lord is Best Aware of all who are in the heavens and the earth. And  we preferred some of the prophets above others, and unto David We gave the Psalms. 

[017_056]56 Say: Cry unto those (saints and angels) whom ye assume (to be gods) beside  Him, yet they have no power to rid you of misfortune nor to change. 

[017_057]57 Those unto whom they cry seek the way of approach to their Lord, which of  them shall be the nearest; they hope for His mercy and they fear His doom. Lo! the  doom of thy Lord is to be shunned. 

[017_058]58 There is not a township but We shall destroy it ere the Day of Resurrection,  or punish it with dire punishment. That is set forth in the Book (of Our decrees). 

[017_059]59 Naught hindereth Us from sending portents save that the folk of old denied  them. And We gave Thamud the she-camel - a clear portent save to warn. 

[017_060]60 And (it was a warning) when we told thee: Lo! thy Lord encompasseth  mankind, and We appointed the sight which We showed thee as an ordeal for  mankind, and (likewise) the Accursed Tree in the Qur'an. We warn them, but it  increaseth them in naught save gross impiety. 

[017_061]61 And when We said unto the angels: Fall down prostrate before Adam and  they fell prostrate all save Iblis, he said: Shall I fall prostrate before that which Thou  hast created of clay ? 

[017_062]62 He said: Seest Thou this (creature) whom Thou hast honoured above me, if  Thou give me grace until the Day of Resurrection I verily will seize his seed, save but  a few. 

[017_063]63 He said: Go, and whosoever of them followeth thee - lo! hell will be your  payment, ample payment. 

[017_064]64 And excite any of them whom thou canst with thy voice, and urge thy horse  and foot against them, and be a partner in their wealth and children, and promise  them. Satan promiseth them only to deceive. 

[017_065]65 Lo! My (faithful) bondmen - over them thou hast no power, and thy Lord  sufficeth as (their) guardian. 

[017_066]66 (O mankind), your Lord is He Who driveth for you the ship upon the sea that  ye may seek of His bounty. Lo! He was ever Merciful toward you. 

[017_067]67 And when harm toucheth you upon the sea, all unto whom ye cry (for  succour) fail save Him (alone), but when He bringeth you safe to land, ye turn away,  for man was ever thankless. 

[017_068]68 Feel ye then secure that He will not cause a slope of the land to engulf you,  or send a sand-storm upon you, and then ye will find that ye have no protector ? 

[017_069]69 Or feel ye secure that He will not return you to that (plight) a second time,  and send against you a hurricane of wind and drown you for your thanklessness, and  then ye will not find therein that ye have any avenger against Us ? 

[017_070]70 Verily we have honoured the Children of Adam. We carry them on the land  and the sea, and have made provision of good things for them, and have preferred  them above many of those whom We created with a marked preferment. 

[017_071]71 On the day when We shall summon all men with their record, whoso is given  his book in his right hand - such will read their book and they will not be wronged a  shred. 

[017_072]72 Whoso is blind here will be blind in the Hereafter, and yet further from the  road. 

[017_073]73 And they indeed strove hard to beguile thee (Muhammad) away from that  wherewith We have inspired thee, that thou shouldst invent other than it against Us;  and then would they have accepted thee as a friend. 

[017_074]74 And if We had not made thee wholly firm thou mightest almost have inclined  unto them a little. 

[017_075]75 Then had we made thee taste a double (punishment) of living and a double  (punishment) of dying, then hadst thou found no helper against Us. 

[017_076]76 And they indeed wished to scare thee from the land that they might drive  thee forth from thence, and then they would have stayed (there) but a little after thee. 

[017_077]77 (Such was Our) method in the case of those whom We sent before thee (to  mankind), and thou wilt not find for Our method aught of power to change. 

[017_078]78 Establish worship at the going down of the sun until the dark of night, and  (the recital of) the Qur'an at dawn. Lo! (the recital of) the Qur'an at dawn is ever  witnessed. 

[017_079]79 And some part of the night awake for it, a largess for thee. It may be that thy  Lord will raise thee to a praised estate. 

[017_080]80 And say: My Lord! Cause me to come in with a firm incoming and to go out  with a firm outgoing. And give me from Thy presence a sustaining Power. 

[017_081]81 And say: Truth hath come and falsehood hath vanished away. Lo! falsehood  is ever bound to vanish. 

[017_082]82 And We reveal of the Qur'an that which is a healing and a mercy for  believers though it increase the evil-doers in naught save ruin. 

[017_083]83 And when We make life pleasant unto man, he turneth away and is averse;  and when ill toucheth him he is in despair. 

[017_084]84 Say: Each one doth according to his rule of conduct, and thy Lord is Best  Aware of him whose way is right. 

[017_085]85 They are asking thee concerning the Spirit. Say: The Spirit is by command of  my Lord, and of knowledge ye have been vouchsafed but little. 

[017_086]86 And if We willed We could withdraw that which We have revealed unto  thee, then wouldst thou find no guardian for thee against Us in respect thereof. 

[017_087]87 (It is naught) save mercy from thy Lord. Lo! His kindness unto thee was ever  great. 

[017_088]88 Say: Verily, though mankind and the jinn should assemble to produce the  like of this Qur'an, they could not produce the like thereof though they were helpers  one of another. 

[017_089]89 And verily We have displayed for mankind in this Qur'an all kind of  similitudes, but most of mankind refuse aught save disbelief. 

[017_090]90 And they say: We will not put faith in thee till thou cause a spring to gush  forth from the earth for us; 

[017_091]91 Or thou have a garden of date-palms and grapes, and cause rivers to gush  forth therein abundantly; 

[017_092]92 Or thou cause the heaven to fall upon us piecemeal, as thou hast pretended,  or bring Allah and the angels as a warrant; 

[017_093]93 Or thou have a house of gold; or thou ascend up into heaven, and even then  we will put no faith in thine ascension till thou bring down for us a book that we can  read. Say (O Muhammad): My Lord be Glorified! Am I aught save a mortal  messenger ? 

[017_094]94 And naught prevented mankind from believing when the guidance came unto  them save that they said: Hath Allah sent a mortal as (His) messenger ? 

[017_095]95 Say: If there were in the earth angels walking secure, We had sent down for  them from heaven an angel as messenger. 

[017_096]96 Say: Allah sufficeth for a witness between me and you. Lo! He is Knower,  Seer of His slaves. 

[017_097]97 And he whom Allah guideth, he is led aright; while, as for him whom He  sendeth astray, for them thou wilt find no protecting friends beside Him, and We shall  assemble them on the Day of Resurrection on their faces, blind, dumb and deaf; their  habitation will be hell; whenever it abateth, We increase the flame for them. 

[017_098]98 That is their reward because they disbelieved Our revelations and said: When  we are bones and fragments shall we, forsooth, be raised up as a new creation ? 

[017_099]99 Have they not seen that Allah Who created the heavens and the earth is Able  to create the like of them, and hath appointed for them an end whereof there is no  doubt ? But the wrong-doers refuse aught save disbelief. 

[017_100]100 Say (unto them): If ye possessed the treasures of the mercy of my Lord, ye  would surely hold them back for fear of spending, for man was ever grudging. 

[017_101]101 And verily We gave unto Moses nine tokens, clear proofs (of Allah's  Sovereignty). Do but ask the Children of Israel how he came unto them, then Pharaoh  said unto him: Lo! I deem thee one bewitched, O Moses. 

[017_102]102 He said: In truth thou knowest that none sent down these (portents) save the  Lord of the heavens and the earth as proofs, and lo! (for my part) I deem thee lost, O  Pharaoh. 

[017_103]103 And he wished to scare them from the land, but We drowned him and those  with him, all together. 

[017_104]104 And We said unto the Children of Israel after him: Dwell in the land; but  when the promise of the Hereafter cometh to pass We shall bring you as a crowd  gathered out of various nations. 

[017_105]105 With truth have We sent it down, and with truth hath it descended. And We  have sent thee as naught else save a bearer of good tidings and a warner. 

[017_106]106 And (it is) a Qur'an that We have divided, that thou mayst recite it unto  mankind at intervals, and We have revealed it by (successive) revelation. 

[017_107]107 Say: Believe therein or believe not, lo! those who were given knowledge  before it, when it is read unto them, fall down prostrate on their faces, adoring, 

[017_108]108 Saying: Glory to our Lord! Verily the promise of our Lord must be fulfilled. 

[017_109]109 They fall down on their faces, weeping, and it increaseth humility in them. 

[017_110]110 Say (unto mankind): Cry unto Allah, or cry unto the Beneficent, unto  whichsoever ye cry (it is the same). His are the most beautiful names. And thou  (Muhammad), be not loud-voiced in thy worship nor yet silent therein, but follow a  way between. 

[017_111]111 And say: Praise be to Allah, Who hath not taken unto Himself a son, and  Who hath no partner in the Sovereignty, nor hath He any protecting friend through  dependence. And magnify Him with all magnificence.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

18. al-Kahf: The Cave

[018_001]1 Praise be to Allah Who hath revealed the Scripture unto His slave, and hath  not placed therein any crookedness, 

[018_002]2 (But hath made it) straight, to give warning of stern punishment from Him,  and to bring unto the believers who do good works the news that theirs will be a fair  reward, 

[018_003]3 Wherein they will abide for ever; 

[018_004]4 And to warn those who say: Allah hath chosen a son, 

[018_005]5 (A thing) whereof they have no knowledge, nor (had) their fathers, Dreadful  is the word that cometh out of their mouths. They speak naught but a lie. 

[018_006]6 Yet it may be, if they believe not in this statement, that thou (Muhammad)  wilt torment thy soul with grief over their footsteps. 

[018_007]7 Lo! We have placed all that is on the earth as an ornament thereof that We  may try them: which of them is best in conduct. 

[018_008]8 And lo! We shall make all that is thereon a barren mound. 

[018_009]9 Or deemest thou that the People of the Cave and the Inscription are a wonder  among Our portents ? 

[018_010]10 When the young men fled for refuge to the Cave and said: Our Lord! Give us  mercy from Thy presence, and shape for us right conduct in our plight. 

[018_011]11 Then We sealed up their hearing in the Cave for a number of years. 

[018_012]12 And afterward We raised them up that We might know which of the two  parties would best calculate the time that they had tarried. 

[018_013]13 We narrate unto thee their story with truth. Lo! they were young men who  believed in their Lord, and We increased them in guidance. 

[018_014]14 And We made firm their hearts when they stood forth and said: Our Lord is  the Lord of the heavens and the earth. We cry unto no God beside Him, for then  should we utter an enormity. 

[018_015]15 These, our people, have chosen (other) gods beside Him though they bring  no clear warrant (vouchsafed) to them. And who doth greater wrong than he who  inventeth a lie concerning Allah ? 

[018_016]16 And when ye withdraw from them and that which they worship except Allah,  then seek refuge in the Cave; your Lord will spread for you of His mercy and will  prepare for you a pillow in your plight. 

[018_017]17 And thou mightest have seen the sun when it rose move away from their  cave to the right, and when it set go past them on the left, and they were in the cleft  thereof. That was (one) of the portents of Allah. He whom Allah guideth, he indeed is  led aright, and he whom He sendeth astray, for him thou wilt not find a guiding  friend. 

[018_018]18 And thou wouldst have deemed them waking though they were asleep, and  We caused them to turn over to the right and the left, and their dog stretching out his  paws on the threshold. If thou hadst observed them closely thou hadst assuredly  turned away from them in flight, and hadst been filled with awe of them. 

[018_019]19 And in like manner We awakened them that they might question one another.  A speaker from among them said: How long have ye tarried ? They said: We have   tarried a day or some part of a day, (Others) said: Your Lord best knoweth what ye  have tarried. Now send one of you with this your silver coin unto the city, and let him  see what food is purest there and bring you a supply thereof. Let him be courteous  and let no man know of you. 

[018_020]20 For they, if they should come to know of you, will stone you or turn you  back to their religion; then ye will never prosper. 

[018_021]21 And in like manner We disclosed them (to the people of the city) that they  might know that the promise of Allah is true, and that, as for the Hour, there is no  doubt concerning it. When (the people of the city) disputed of their case among  themselves, they said: Build over them a building; their Lord knoweth best  concerning them. Those who won their point said: We verily shall build a place of  worship over them. 

[018_022]22 (Some) will say: They were three, their dog the fourth, and (some) say: Five,  their dog the sixth, guessing at random; and (some) say: Seven, and their dog the  eighth. Say (O Muhammad): My Lord is Best Aware of their number. None knoweth  them save a few. So contend not concerning them except with an outward contending,  and ask not any of them to pronounce concerning them. 

[018_023]23 And say not of anything: Lo! I shall do that tomorrow, 

[018_024]24 Except if Allah will. And remember thy Lord when thou forgettest, and say:  It may be that my Lord guideth me unto a nearer way of truth than this. 

[018_025]25 And (it is said) they tarried in their Cave three hundred years and add nine. 

[018_026]26 Say: Allah is Best Aware how long they tarried. His is the Invisible of the  heavens and the earth. How clear of sight is He and keen of hearing! They have no  protecting friend beside Him, and He maketh none to share in His government. 

[018_027]27 And recite that which hath been revealed unto thee of the Scripture of thy  Lord. There is none who can change His words, and thou wilt find no refuge beside  Him. 

[018_028]28 Restrain thyself along with those who cry unto their Lord at morn and  evening, seeking His Countenance; and let not thine eyes overlook them, desiring the  pomp of the life of the world; and obey not him whose heart We have made heedless  of Our remembrance, who followeth his own lust and whose case hath been  abandoned. 

[018_029]29 Say: (It is) the truth from the Lord of you (all). Then whosoever will, let him  believe, and whosoever will, let him disbelieve. Lo! We have prepared for  disbelievers Fire. Its tent encloseth them. If they ask for showers, they will be  showered with water like to molten lead which burneth the faces. Calamitous the  drink and ill the resting-place! 

[018_030]30 Lo! as for those who believe and do good works - Lo! We suffer not the  reward of one whose work is goodly to be lost. 

[018_031]31 As for such, theirs will be Gardens of Eden, wherein rivers flow beneath  them; therein they will be given armlets of gold and will wear green robes of finest  silk and gold embroidery, reclining upon throne therein. Blest the reward, and fair the  resting-place! 

[018_032]32 Coin for them a similitude: Two men, unto one of whom We had assigned  two gardens of grapes, and We had surrounded both with date-palms and had put  between them tillage. 

[018_033]33 Each of the gardens gave its fruit and withheld naught thereof. And We  caused a river to gush forth therein. 

[018_034]34 And he had fruit. And he said unto his comrade, when he spake with him: I  am more than thee in wealth, and stronger in respect of men. 

[018_035]35 And he went into his garden, while he (thus) wronged himself. He said: I  think not that all this will ever perish. 

[018_036]36 I think not that the Hour will ever come, and if indeed I am brought back  unto my Lord I surely shall find better than this as a resort. 

[018_037]37 His comrade, when he (thus) spake with him, exclaimed: Disbelievest thou in  Him Who created thee of dust, then of a drop (of seed), and then fashioned thee a man  ? 

[018_038]38 But He is Allah, my Lord, and I ascribe unto my Lord no partner. 

[018_039]39 If only, when thou enteredst thy garden, thou hadst said: That which Allah  willeth (will come to pass)! There is no strength save in Allah! Though thou seest me  as less than thee in wealth and children, 

[018_040]40 Yet it may be that my Lord will give me better than thy garden, and will send  on it a bolt from heaven, and some morning it will be a smooth hillside, 

[018_041]41 Or some morning the water thereof will be lost in the earth so that thou canst  not make search for it. 

[018_042]42 And his fruit was beset (with destruction). Then began he to wring his hands  for all that he had spent upon it, when (now) it was all ruined on its trellises, and to  say: Would that I had ascribed no partner to my Lord! 

[018_043]43 And he had no troop of men to help him as against Allah, nor could he save  himself. 

[018_044]44 In this case is protection only from Allah, the True, He is Best for reward,  and best for consequence. 

[018_045]45 And coin for them the similitude of the life of the world as water which We  send down from the sky, and the vegetation of the earth mingleth with it and then  becometh dry twigs that the winds scatter. Allah is able to do all things. 

[018_046]46 Wealth and children are an ornament of the life of the world. But the good  deeds which endure are better in thy Lord's sight for reward, and better in respect of  hope. 

[018_047]47 And (bethink you of) the Day when we remove the hills and ye see the earth  emerging, and We gather them together so as to leave not one of them behind. 

[018_048]48 And they are set before thy Lord in ranks (and it is said unto them): Now  verily have ye come unto Us as We created you at the first. But ye thought that We  had set no tryst for you. 

[018_049]49 And the Book is placed, and thou seest the guilty fearful of that which is  therein, and they say: What kind of a Book is this that leaveth not a small thing nor a  great thing but hath counted it! And they find all that they did confronting them, and  thy Lord wrongeth no-one. 

[018_050]50 And (remember) when We said unto the angels: Fall prostrate before Adam,  and they fell prostrate, all save Iblis. He was of the jinn, so he rebelled against his  Lord's command. Will ye choose him and his seed for your protecting friends instead  of Me, when they are an enemy unto you ? Calamitous is the exchange for evil-doers. 

[018_051]51 I made them not to witness the creation of the heavens and the earth, nor  their own creation; nor choose I misleaders for (My) helpers. 

[018_052]52 And (be mindful of) the Day when He will say: Call those partners of Mine  whom ye pretended. Then they will cry unto them, but they will not hear their prayer,  and We shall set a gulf of doom between them. 

[018_053]53 And the guilty behold the Fire and know that they are about to fall therein,  and they find no way of escape thence. 

[018_054]54 And verily We have displayed for mankind in this Qur'an all manner of  similitudes, but man is more than anything contentious. 

[018_055]55 And naught hindereth mankind from believing when the guidance cometh  unto them, and from asking forgiveness of their Lord unless (it be that they wish) that  the judgment of the men of old should come upon them or (that) they should be  confronted with the Doom. 

[018_056]56 We send not the messengers save as bearers of good news and warners.  Those who disbelieve contend with falsehood in order to refute the Truth thereby.  And they take Our revelations and that wherewith they are threatened as a jest. 

[018_057]57 And who doth greater wrong than he who hath been reminded of the  revelations of his Lord, yet turneth away from them and forgetteth what his hands  send forward (to the Judgment) ? Lo! on their hearts We have placed coverings so  that they understand not, and in their ears a deafness. And though thou call them to  the guidance, in that case they can never be led aright. 

[018_058]58 Thy Lord is the Forgiver, Full of Mercy. If He took them to task (now) for  what they earn, He would hasten on the doom for them; but theirs is an appointed  term from which they will find no escape. 

[018_059]59 And (all) those townships! We destroyed them when they did wrong, and We  appointed a fixed time for their destruction. 

[018_060]60 And when Moses said unto his servant: I will not give up until I reach the  point where the two rivers meet, though I march on for ages. 

[018_061]61 And when they reached the point where the two met, they forgot their fish,  and it took its way into the waters, being free. 

[018_062]62 And when they had gone further, he said unto his servant: Bring us our  breakfast. Verily we have found fatigue in this our journey. 

[018_063]63 He said: Didst thou see, when we took refuge on the rock, and I forgot the  fish - and none but Satan caused me to forget to mention it - it took its way into the  waters by a marvel. 

[018_064]64 He said: This is that which we have been seeking. So they retraced their steps  again. 

[018_065]65 Then found they one of Our slaves, unto whom We had given mercy from  Us, and had taught him knowledge from Our presence. 

[018_066]66 Moses said unto him: May I follow thee, to the end that thou mayst teach me  right conduct of that which thou hast been taught ? 

[018_067]67 He said: Lo! thou canst not bear with me. 

[018_068]68 How canst thou bear with that whereof thou canst not compass any  knowledge ? 

[018_069]69 He said: Allah willing, thou shalt find me patient and I shall not in aught  gainsay thee. 

[018_070]70 He said: Well, if thou go with me, ask me not concerning aught till I myself  make mention of it unto thee. 

[018_071]71 So they twain set out till, when they were in the ship, he made a hole therein.  (Moses) said: Hast thou made a hole therein to drown the folk thereof ? Thou verily  hast done a dreadful thing. 

[018_072]72 He said: Did I not tell thee that thou couldst not bear with me ? 

[018_073]73 (Moses) said: Be not wroth with me that I forgot, and be not hard upon me  for my fault. 

[018_074]74 So they twain journeyed on till, when they met a lad, he slew him. (Moses)  said: What! Hast thou slain an innocent soul who hath slain no man ? Verily thou hast  done a horrid thing. 

[018_075]75 He said: Did I not tell thee that thou couldst not bear with me ? 

[018_076]76 (Moses) said: If I ask thee after this concerning aught, keep not company  with me. Thou hast received an excuse from me. 

[018_077]77 So they twain journeyed on till, when they came unto the folk of a certain  township, they asked its folk for food, but they refused to make them guests. And  they found therein a wall upon the point of falling into ruin, and he repaired it.  (Moses) said: If thou hadst wished, thou couldst have taken payment for it. 

[018_078]78 He said: This is the parting between thee and me! I will announce unto thee  the interpretation of that thou couldst not bear with patience. 

[018_079]79 As for the ship, it belonged to poor people working on the river, and I wished  to mar it, for there was a king behind them who is taking every ship by force. 

[018_080]80 And as for the lad, his parents were believers and we feared lest he should  oppress them by rebellion and disbelief. 

[018_081]81 And we intended that their Lord should change him for them for one better in  purity and nearer to mercy. 

[018_082]82 And as for the wall, it belonged to two orphan boys in the city, and there was  beneath it a treasure belonging to them, and their father had been righteous, and thy  Lord intended that they should come to their full strength and should bring forth their  treasure as a mercy from their Lord; and I did it not upon my own command. Such is  the interpretation of that wherewith thou couldst not bear. 

[018_083]83 They will ask thee of Dhu'l-Qarneyn. Say: I shall recite unto you a  remembrance of him. 

[018_084]84 Lo! We made him strong in the land and gave him unto every thing a road. 

[018_085]85 And he followed a road 

[018_086]86 Till, when he reached the setting-place of the sun, he found it setting in a  muddy spring, and found a people thereabout. We said: O Dhu'l-Qarneyn! Either  punish or show them kindness. 

[018_087]87 He said: As for him who doeth wrong, we shall punish him, and then he will  be brought back unto his Lord, Who will punish him with awful punishment! 

[018_088]88 But as for him who believeth and doeth right, good will be his reward, and  We shall speak unto him a mild command. 

[018_089]89 Then he followed a road 

[018_090]90 Till, when he reached the rising-place of the sun, he found it rising on a  people for whom We had appointed no shelter therefrom. 

[018_091]91 So (it was). And We knew all concerning him. 

[018_092]92 Then he followed a road 

[018_093]93 Till, when he came between the two mountains, he found upon their hither  side a folk that scarce could understand a saying. 

[018_094]94 They said: O Dhu'l-Qarneyn! Lo! Gog and Magog are spoiling the land. So  may we pay thee tribute on condition that thou set a barrier between us and them ? 

[018_095]95 He said: That wherein my Lord hath established me is better (than your  tribute). Do but help me with strength (of men), I will set between you and them a  bank. 

[018_096]96 Give me pieces of iron - till, when he had levelled up (the gap) between the  cliffs, he said: Blow! - till, when he had made it a fire, he said: Bring me molten  copper to pour thereon. 

[018_097]97 And (Gog and Magog) were not able to surmount, nor could they pierce (it). 

[018_098]98 He said: This is a mercy from my Lord; but when the promise of my Lord  cometh to pass, He will lay it low, for the promise of my Lord is true. 

[018_099]99 And on that day we shall let some of them surge against others, and the  Trumpet will be blown. Then We shall gather them together in one gathering. 

[018_100]100 On that day we shall present hell to the disbelievers, plain to view, 

[018_101]101 Those whose eyes were hoodwinked from My reminder, and who could not  bear to hear. 

[018_102]102 Do the disbelievers reckon that they can choose My bondmen as protecting  friends beside Me ? Lo! We have prepared hell as a welcome for the disbelievers. 

[018_103]103 Say: Shall We inform you who will be the greatest losers by their works ? 

[018_104]104 Those whose effort goeth astray in the life of the world, and yet they reckon  that they do good work. 

[018_105]105 Those are they who disbelieve in the revelations of their Lord and in the  meeting with Him. Therefor their works are vain, and on the Day of Resurrection We  assign no weight to them. 

[018_106]106 That is their reward: hell, because they disbelieved, and made a jest of Our  revelations and Our messengers. 

[018_107]107 Lo! those who believe and do good works, theirs are the Gardens of Paradise  for welcome, 

[018_108]108 Wherein they will abide, with no desire to be removed from thence. 

[018_109]109 Say: Though the sea became ink for the Words of my Lord, verily the sea  would be used up before the words of my Lord were exhausted, even though We  brought the like thereof to help. 

[018_110]110 Say: I am only a mortal like you. My Lord inspireth in me that your God is  only One God. And whoever hopeth for the meeting with his Lord, let him do  righteous work, and make none sharer of the worship due unto his Lord.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

19. Maryam: Mary

[019_001]1 Kaf. Ha. Ya. A'in. Sad. 

[019_002]2 A mention of the mercy of thy Lord unto His servant Zachariah. 

[019_003]3 When he cried unto his Lord a cry in secret, 

[019_004]4 Saying: My Lord! Lo! the bones of me wax feeble and my head is shining  with grey hair, and I have never been unblest in prayer to Thee, my Lord. 

[019_005]5 Lo! I fear my kinsfolk after me, since my wife is barren. Oh, give me from  Thy presence a successor 

[019_006]6 Who shall inherit of me and inherit (also) of the house of Jacob. And make  him, my Lord, acceptable (unto Thee). 

[019_007]7 (It was said unto him): O Zachariah! Lo! We bring thee tidings of a son  whose name is John; we have given the same name to none before (him). 

[019_008]8 He said: My Lord! How can I have a son when my wife is barren and I have  reached infirm old age ? 

[019_009]9 He said: So (it will be). Thy Lord saith: It is easy for Me, even as I created  thee before, when thou wast naught. 

[019_010]10 He said: My Lord! Appoint for me some token. He said: Thy token is that  thou, with no bodily defect, shalt not speak unto mankind three nights. 

[019_011]11 Then he came forth unto his people from the sanctuary, and signified to  them: Glorify your Lord at break of day and fall of night. 

[019_012]12 (And it was said unto his son): O John! Hold fast the Scripture. And we gave  him wisdom when a child, 

[019_013]13 And compassion from Our presence, and purity; and he was devout, 

[019_014]14 And dutiful toward his parents. And he was not arrogant, rebellious. 

[019_015]15 Peace on him the day he was born, and the day he dieth and the day he shall  be raised alive! 

[019_016]16 And make mention of Mary in the Scripture, when she had withdrawn from  her people to a chamber looking East, 

[019_017]17 And had chosen seclusion from them. Then We sent unto her Our Spirit and  it assumed for her the likeness of a perfect man. 

[019_018]18 She said: Lo! I seek refuge in the Beneficent One from thee, if thou art God- fearing. 

[019_019]19 He said: I am only a messenger of thy Lord, that I may bestow on thee a  faultless son. 

[019_020]20 She said: How can I have a son when no mortal hath touched me, neither  have I been unchaste ? 

[019_021]21 He said: So (it will be). Thy Lord saith: It is easy for Me. And (it will be)  that We may make of him a revelation for mankind and a mercy from Us, and it is a  thing ordained. 

[019_022]22 And she conceived him, and she withdrew with him to a far place. 

[019_023]23 And the pangs of childbirth drove her unto the trunk of the palm-tree. She  said: Oh, would that I had died ere this and had become a thing of naught, forgotten! 

[019_024]24 Then (one) cried unto her from below her, saying: Grieve not! Thy Lord hath  placed a rivulet beneath thee, 

[019_025]25 And shake the trunk of the palm-tree toward thee, thou wilt cause ripe dates  to fall upon thee. 

[019_026]26 So eat and drink and be consoled. And if thou meetest any mortal, say: Lo! I  have vowed a fast unto the Beneficent, and may not speak this day to any mortal. 

[019_027]27 Then she brought him to her own folk, carrying him. They said: O Mary!  Thou hast come with an amazing thing. 

[019_028]28 O sister of Aaron! Thy father was not a wicked man nor was thy mother a  harlot. 

[019_029]29 Then she pointed to him. They said: How can we talk to one who is in the  cradle, a young boy ? 

[019_030]30 He spake: Lo! I am the slave of Allah. He hath given me the Scripture and  hath appointed me a Prophet, 

[019_031]31 And hath made me blessed wheresoever I may be, and hath enjoined upon  me prayer and almsgiving so long as I remain alive, 

[019_032]32 And (hath made me) dutiful toward her who bore me, and hath not made me  arrogant, unblest. 

[019_033]33 Peace on me the day I was born, and the day I die, and the day I shall be  raised alive! 

[019_034]34 Such was Jesus, son of Mary: (this is) a statement of the truth concerning  which they doubt. 

[019_035]35 It befitteth not (the Majesty of) Allah that He should take unto Himself a son.  Glory be to Him! When He decreeth a thing, He saith unto it only: Be! and it is. 

[019_036]36 And lo! Allah is my Lord and your Lord. So serve Him. That is the right  path. 

[019_037]37 The sects among them differ: but woe unto the disbelievers from the meeting  of an awful Day. 

[019_038]38 See and hear them on the Day they come unto Us! yet the evil-doers are to- day in error manifest. 

[019_039]39 And warn them of the Day of anguish when the case hath been decided. Now  they are in a state of carelessness, and they believe not. 

[019_040]40 Lo! We, only We, inherit the earth and all who are thereon, and unto Us they  are returned. 

[019_041]41 And make mention (O Muhammad) in the Scripture of Abraham. Lo! he was  a saint, a prophet. 

[019_042]42 When he said unto his father: O my father! Why worshippest thou that which  heareth not nor seeth, nor can in aught avail thee ? 

[019_043]43 O my father! Lo! there hath come unto me of knowledge that which came  not unto thee. So follow me, and I will lead thee on a right path. 

[019_044]44 O my father! Serve not the devil. Lo! the devil is a rebel unto the Beneficent. 

[019_045]45 O my father! Lo! I fear lest a punishment from the Beneficent overtake thee  so that thou become a comrade of the devil. 

[019_046]46 He said: Rejectest thou my gods, O Abraham ? If thou cease not, I shall  surely stone thee. Depart from me a long while! 

[019_047]47 He said: Peace be unto thee! I shall ask forgiveness of my Lord for thee. Lo!  He was ever gracious unto me. 

[019_048]48 I shall withdraw from you and that unto which ye pray beside Allah, and I  shall pray unto my Lord. It may be that, in prayer unto my Lord, I shall not be  unblest. 

[019_049]49 So, when he had withdrawn from them and that which they were  worshipping beside Allah, We gave him Isaac and Jacob. Each of them We made a  prophet. 

[019_050]50 And we gave them of Our mercy, and assigned to them a high and true  renown. 

[019_051]51 And make mention in the Scripture of Moses. Lo! he was chosen, and he was  a messenger (of Allah), a prophet. 

[019_052]52 We called him from the right slope of the Mount, and brought him nigh in  communion. 

[019_053]53 And We bestowed upon him of Our mercy his brother Aaron, a prophet  (likewise). 

[019_054]54 And make mention in the Scripture of Ishmael. Lo! he was a keeper of his  promise, and he was a messenger (of Allah), a prophet. 

[019_055]55 He enjoined upon his people worship and almsgiving, and was acceptable in  the sight of his Lord. 

[019_056]56 And make mention in the Scripture of Idris. Lo! he was a saint, a prophet; 

[019_057]57 And We raised him to high station. 

[019_058]58 These are they unto whom Allah showed favour from among the prophets, of  the seed of Adam and of those whom We carried (in the ship) with Noah, and of the  seed of Abraham and Israel, and from among those whom We guided and chose.  When the revelations of the Beneficent were recited unto them, they fell down,  adoring and weeping. 

[019_059]59 Now there hath succeeded them a later generation whom have ruined  worship and have followed lusts. But they will meet deception. 

[019_060]60 Save him who shall repent and believe and do right. Such will enter the  Garden, and they will not be wronged in aught - 

[019_061]61 Gardens of Eden, which the Beneficent hath promised to His slaves in the  unseen. Lo! His promise is ever sure of fulfilment - 

[019_062]62 They hear therein no idle talk, but only Peace; and therein they have food for  morn and evening. 

[019_063]63 Such is the Garden which We cause the devout among Our bondmen to  inherit. 

[019_064]64 We (angels) come not down save by commandment of thy Lord. Unto Him  belongeth all that is before us and all that is behind us and all that is between those  two, and thy Lord was never forgetful - 

[019_065]65 Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them! Therefor,  worship thou Him and be thou steadfast in His service. Knowest thou one that can be  named along with Him ? 

[019_066]66 And man saith: When I am dead, shall I forsooth be brought forth alive ? 

[019_067]67 Doth not man remember that We created him before, when he was naught ? 

[019_068]68 And, by thy Lord, verily We shall assemble them and the devils, then We  shall bring them, crouching, around hell. 

[019_069]69 Then We shall pluck out from every sect whichever of them was most  stubborn in rebellion to the Beneficent. 

[019_070]70 And surely We are Best Aware of those most worthy to be burned therein. 

[019_071]71 There is not one of you but shall approach it. That is a fixed ordinance of thy  Lord. 

[019_072]72 Then We shall rescue those who kept from evil, and leave the evil-doers  crouching there. 

[019_073]73 And when Our clear revelations are recited unto them, those who disbelieve  say unto those who believe: Which of the two parties (yours or ours) is better in  position, and more imposing as an army ? 

[019_074]74 How many a generation have We destroyed before them, who were more  imposing in respect of gear and outward seeming! 

[019_075]75 Say: As for him who is in error, the Beneficent will verily prolong his span  of life until, when they behold that which they were promised, whether it be  punishment (in the world), or the Hour (of doom), they will know who is worse in  position and who is weaker as an army. 

[019_076]76 Allah increaseth in right guidance those who walk aright, and the good deeds  which endure are better in thy Lord's sight for reward, and better for resort. 

[019_077]77 Hast thou seen him who disbelieveth in Our revelations and saith: Assuredly  I shall be given wealth and children ? 

[019_078]78 Hath he perused the Unseen, or hath he made a pact with the Beneficent ? 

[019_079]79 Nay, but We shall record that which he saith and prolong for him a span of  torment. 

[019_080]80 And We shall inherit from him that whereof he spake, and he will come unto  Us, alone (without his wealth and children). 

[019_081]81 And they have chosen (other) gods beside Allah that they may be a power for  them. 

[019_082]82 Nay, but they will deny their worship of them, and become opponents unto  them. 

[019_083]83 Seest thou not that We have set the devils on the disbelievers to confound  them with confusion ? 

[019_084]84 So make no haste against them (O Muhammad). We do but number unto  them a sum (of days). 

[019_085]85 On the day when We shall gather the righteous unto the Beneficent, a goodly  company. 

[019_086]86 And drive the guilty unto hell, a weary herd, 

[019_087]87 They will have no power of intercession, save him who hath made a  covenant with his Lord. 

[019_088]88 And they say: The Beneficent hath taken unto Himself a son. 

[019_089]89 Assuredly ye utter a disastrous thing 

[019_090]90 Whereby almost the heavens are torn, and the earth is split asunder and the  mountains fall in ruins, 

[019_091]91 That ye ascribe unto the Beneficent a son, 

[019_092]92 When it is not meet for (the Majesty of) the Beneficent that He should  choose a son. 

[019_093]93 There is none in the heavens and the earth but cometh unto the Beneficent as  a slave. 

[019_094]94 Verily He knoweth them and numbereth them with (right) numbering. 

[019_095]95 And each one of them will come unto Him on the Day of Resurrection,  alone. 

[019_096]96 Lo! those who believe and do good works, the Beneficent will appoint for  them love. 

[019_097]97 And We make (this Scripture) easy in thy tongue, (O Muhammad) only that  thou mayst bear good tidings therewith unto those who ward off (evil), and warn  therewith the froward folk. 

[019_098]98 And how many a generation before them have We destroyed! Canst thou  (Muhammad) see a single man of them, or hear from them the slightest sound ?

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

20. Ta Ha: Ta Ha

[020_001]1 Ta. Ha. 

[020_002]2 We have not revealed unto thee (Muhammad) this Qur'an that thou shouldst  be distressed, 

[020_003]3 But as a reminder unto him who feareth, 

[020_004]4 A revelation from Him Who created the earth and the high heavens, 

[020_005]5 The Beneficent One, Who is established on the Throne. 

[020_006]6 Unto Him belongeth whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the  earth, and whatsoever is between them, and whatsoever is beneath the sod. 

[020_007]7 And if thou speakest aloud, then lo! He knoweth the secret (thought) and  (that which is yet) more hidden. 

[020_008]8 Allah! There is no God save Him. His are the most beautiful names. 

[020_009]9 Hath there come unto thee the story of Moses ? 

[020_010]10 When he saw a fire and said unto his folk: Lo! Wait! I see a fire afar off.  Peradventure I may bring you a brand therefrom or may find guidance at the fire. 

[020_011]11 And when he reached it, he was called by name: O Moses! 

[020_012]12 Lo! I, even I, am thy Lord, So take off thy shoes, for lo! thou art in the holy  valley of Tuwa. 

[020_013]13 And I have chosen thee, so hearken unto that which is inspired. 

[020_014]14 Lo! I, even I, am Allah, There is no God save Me. So serve Me and establish  worship for My remembrance. 

[020_015]15 Lo! the Hour is surely coming. But I will to keep it hidden, that every soul  may be rewarded for that which it striveth (to achieve). 

[020_016]16 Therefor, let not him turn thee aside from (the thought of) it who believeth  not therein but followeth his own desire, lest thou perish. 

[020_017]17 And what is that in thy right hand, O Moses ? 

[020_018]18 He said: This is my staff whereon I lean, and wherewith I bear down  branches for my sheep, and wherein I find other uses. 

[020_019]19 He said: Cast it down, O Moses! 

[020_020]20 So he cast it down, and lo! it was a serpent, gliding. 

[020_021]21 He said: Grasp it and fear not. We shall return it to its former state. 

[020_022]22 And thrust thy hand within thine armpit, it will come forth white without  hurt. (That will be) another token. 

[020_023]23 That We may show thee (some) of Our greater portents, 

[020_024]24 Go thou unto Pharaoh! Lo! he hath transgressed (the bounds). 

[020_025]25 (Moses) said: My Lord! relieve my mind 

[020_026]26 And ease my task for me; 

[020_027]27 And loose a knot from my tongue, 

[020_028]28 That they may understand my saying. 

[020_029]29 Appoint for me a henchman from my folk, 

[020_030]30 Aaron, my brother. 

[020_031]31 Confirm my strength with him 

[020_032]32 And let him share my task, 

[020_033]33 That we may glorify Thee much 

[020_034]34 And much remember Thee. 

[020_035]35 Lo! Thou art ever Seeing us. 

[020_036]36 He said: Thou art granted thy request, O Moses. 

[020_037]37 And indeed, another time, already We have shown thee favour, 

[020_038]38 When we inspired in thy mother that which is inspired, 

[020_039]39 Saying: Throw him into the ark, and throw it into the river, then the river  shall throw it on to the bank, and there an enemy to Me and an enemy to him shall  take him. And I endued thee with love from Me that thou mightest be trained  according to My will, 

[020_040]40 When thy sister went and said: Shall I show you one who will nurse him ?  and we restored thee to thy mother that her eyes might be refreshed and might not  sorrow. And thou didst kill a man and We delivered thee from great distress, and tried  thee with a heavy trial. And thou didst tarry years among the folk of Midian. Then  camest thou (hither) by (My) providence, O Moses, 

[020_041]41 And I have attached thee to Myself. 

[020_042]42 Go, thou and thy brother, with My tokens, and be not faint in remembrance  of Me. 

[020_043]43 Go, both of you, unto Pharaoh. Lo! he hath transgressed (the bounds). 

[020_044]44 And speak unto him a gentle word, that peradventure he may heed or fear. 

[020_045]45 They said: Our Lord! Lo! we fear that he may be beforehand with us or that  he may play the tyrant. 

[020_046]46 He said: Fear not. Lo! I am with you twain, Hearing and Seeing. 

[020_047]47 So go ye unto him and say: Lo! we are two messengers of thy Lord. So let  the children of Israel go with us, and torment them not. We bring thee a token from  thy Lord. And peace will be for him who followeth right guidance. 

[020_048]48 Lo! it hath been revealed unto us that the doom will be for him who denieth  and turneth away. 

[020_049]49 (Pharaoh) said: Who then is the Lord of you twain, O Moses ? 

[020_050]50 He said: Our Lord is He Who gave unto everything its nature, then guided it  aright. 

[020_051]51 He said: What then is the state of the generations of old ? 

[020_052]52 He said: The knowledge thereof is with my Lord in a Record. My Lord  neither erreth nor forgetteth, 

[020_053]53 Who hath appointed the earth as a bed and hath threaded roads for you  therein and hath sent down water from the sky and thereby We have brought forth  divers kinds of vegetation, 

[020_054]54 (Saying): Eat ye and feed your cattle. Lo! herein verily are portents for men  of thought. 

[020_055]55 Thereof We created you, and thereunto We return you, and thence We bring  you forth a second time. 

[020_056]56 And We verily did show him all Our tokens, but he denied them and refused. 

[020_057]57 He said: Hast come to drive us out from our land by thy magic, O Moses ? 

[020_058]58 But we surely can produce for thee magic the like thereof; so appoint a tryst  between us and you, which neither we nor thou shall fail to keep, at a place  convenient (to us both). 

[020_059]59 (Moses) said: Your tryst shall be the day of the feast, and let the people  assemble when the sun hath risen high. 

[020_060]60 Then Pharaoh went and gathered his strength, then came (to the appointed  tryst). 

[020_061]61 Moses said unto them: Woe unto you! Invent not a lie against Allah, lest He  extirpate you by some punishment. He who lieth faileth miserably. 

[020_062]62 Then they debated one with another what they must do, and they kept their  counsel secret. 

[020_063]63 They said: Lo! these are two wizards who would drive you out from your  country by their magic, and destroy your best traditions; 

[020_064]64 So arrange your plan, and come in battle line. Whoso is uppermost this day  will be indeed successful. 

[020_065]65 They said: O Moses! Either throw first, or let us be the first to throw ? 

[020_066]66 He said: Nay, do ye throw! Then lo! their cords and their staves, by their  magic, appeared to him as though they ran. 

[020_067]67 And Moses conceived a fear in his mind. 

[020_068]68 We said: Fear not! Lo! thou art the higher. 

[020_069]69 Throw that which is in thy right hand! It will eat up that which they have  made. Lo! that which they have made is but a wizard's artifice, and a wizard shall not  be successful to whatever point (of skill) he may attain. 

[020_070]70 Then the wizards were (all) flung down prostrate, crying: We believe in the  Lord of Aaron and Moses. 

[020_071]71 (Pharaoh) said: Ye put faith in him before I give you leave. Lo! he is your  chief who taught you magic. Now surely I shall cut off your hands and your feet  alternately, and I shall crucify you on the trunks of palm trees, and ye shall know for  certain which of us hath sterner and more lasting punishment. 

[020_072]72 They said: We choose thee not above the clear proofs that have come unto  us, and above Him Who created us. So decree what thou wilt decree. Thou wilt end  for us only this life of the world. 

[020_073]73 Lo! we believe in our Lord, that He may forgive us our sins and the magic  unto which thou didst force us. Allah is better and more lasting. 

[020_074]74 Lo! whoso cometh guilty unto his Lord, verily for him is hell. There he will  neither die nor live. 

[020_075]75 But whoso cometh unto Him a believer, having done good works, for such  are the high stations; 

[020_076]76 Gardens of Eden underneath which rivers flow, wherein they will abide for  ever. That is the reward of him who groweth. 

[020_077]77 And verily We inspired Moses, saying: Take away My slaves by night and  strike for them a dry path in the sea, fearing not to be overtaken, neither being afraid  (of the sea). 

[020_078]78 Then Pharaoh followed them with his hosts and there covered them that  which did cover them of the sea. 

[020_079]79 And Pharaoh led his folk astray, he did not guide them. 

[020_080]80 O Children of Israel! We delivered you from your enemy, and we made a  covenant with you on the holy mountain's side, and sent down on you the manna and  the quails, 

[020_081]81 (Saying): Eat of the good things wherewith We have provided you, and  transgress not in respect thereof lest My wrath come upon you: and he on whom My  wrath cometh, he is lost indeed. 

[020_082]82 And lo! verily I am Forgiving toward him who repenteth and believeth and  doeth good, and afterward walketh aright. 

[020_083]83 And (it was said): What hath made thee hasten from thy folk, O Moses ? 

[020_084]84 He said: They are close upon my track. I hastened unto Thee, my Lord, that  Thou mightest be well pleased. 

[020_085]85 He said: Lo! We have tried thy folk in thine absence, and As-Samiri hath  misled them. 

[020_086]86 Then Moses went back unto his folk, angry and sad. He said: O my people!  Hath not your Lord promised you a fair promise ? Did the time appointed then appear  too long for you, or did ye wish that wrath from your Lord should come upon you,  that ye broke tryst with me ? 

[020_087]87 They said: We broke not tryst with thee of our own will, but we were laden  with burdens of ornaments of the folk, then cast them (in the fire), for thus As-Samiri  proposed. 

[020_088]88 Then he produced for them a calf, of saffron hue, which gave forth a lowing  sound. And they cried: This is your god and the god of Moses, but he hath forgotten. 

[020_089]89 See they not, then, that it returneth no saying unto them and possesseth for  them neither hurt nor use ? 

[020_090]90 And Aaron indeed had told them beforehand: O my people! Ye are but being  seduced therewith, for lo! your Lord is the Beneficent, so follow me and obey my  order. 

[020_091]91 They said: We shall by no means cease to be its votaries till Moses return  unto us. 

[020_092]92 He (Moses) said: O Aaron! What held thee back when thou didst see them  gone astray, 

[020_093]93 That thou followedst me not ? Hast thou then disobeyed my order ? 

[020_094]94 He said: O son of my mother! Clutch not my beard nor my head! I feared lest  thou shouldst say: Thou hast caused division among the Children of Israel, and hast  not waited for my word. 

[020_095]95 (Moses) said: And what hast thou to say, O Samiri ? 

[020_096]96 He said: I perceived what they perceive not, so I seized a handful from the  footsteps of the messenger, and then threw it in. Thus my soul commended to me. 

[020_097]97 (Moses) said: Then go! and lo! in this life it is for thee to say: Touch me not!  and lo! there is for thee a tryst thou canst not break. Now look upon thy god of which  thou hast remained a votary. Verily we will burn it and will scatter its dust over the  sea. 

[020_098]98 Your God is only Allah, than Whom there is no other God. He embraceth all  things in His knowledge. 

[020_099]99 Thus relate We unto thee (Muhammad) some tidings of that which happened  of old, and We have given thee from Our presence a reminder. 

[020_100]100 Whoso turneth away from it, he verily will bear a burden on the Day of  Resurrection, 

[020_101]101 Abiding under it - an evil burden for them on the Day of Resurrection, 

[020_102]102 The day when the Trumpet is blown. On that day we assemble the guilty  white-eyed (with terror), 

[020_103]103 Murmuring among themselves: Ye have tarried but ten (days). 

[020_104]104 We are Best Aware of what they utter when their best in conduct say: Ye  have tarried but a day. 

[020_105]105 They will ask thee of the mountains (on that day). Say: My Lord will break  them into scattered dust. 

[020_106]106 And leave it as an empty plain, 

[020_107]107 Wherein thou seest neither curve nor ruggedness. 

[020_108]108 On that day they follow the summoner who deceiveth not, and voices are  hushed for the Beneficent, and thou hearest but a faint murmur. 

[020_109]109 On that day no intercession availeth save (that of) him unto whom the  Beneficent hath given leave and whose word He accepteth. 

[020_110]110 He knoweth (all) that is before them and (all) that is behind them, while they  cannot compass it in knowledge. 

[020_111]111 And faces humble themselves before the Living, the Eternal. And he who  beareth (a burden of) wrongdoing is indeed a failure (on that day). 

[020_112]112 And he who hath done some good works, being a believer, he feareth not  injustice nor begrudging (of his wage). 

[020_113]113 Thus we have revealed it as a Lecture in Arabic, and have displayed therein  certain threats, that peradventure they may keep from evil or that it may cause them to  take heed. 

[020_114]114 Then exalted be Allah, the True King! And hasten not (O Muhammad) with  the Qur'an ere its revelation hath been perfected unto thee, and say: My Lord!  Increase me in knowledge. 

[020_115]115 And verily We made a covenant of old with Adam, but he forgot, and We  found no constancy in him. 

[020_116]116 And when We said unto the angels: Fall prostrate before Adam, they fell  prostrate (all) save Iblis; he refused. 

[020_117]117 Therefor we said: O Adam! This is an enemy unto thee and unto thy wife, so  let him not drive you both out of the Garden so that thou come to toil. 

[020_118]118 It is (vouchsafed) unto thee that thou hungerest not therein nor art naked, 

[020_119]119 And that thou thirstest not therein nor art exposed to the sun's heat. 

[020_120]120 But the devil whispered to him, saying: O Adam! Shall I show thee the tree  of immortality and power that wasteth not away ? 

[020_121]121 Then they twain ate thereof, so that their shame became apparent unto them,  and they began to hide by heaping on themselves some of the leaves of the Garden.  And Adam disobeyed his Lord, so went astray. 

[020_122]122 Then his Lord chose him, and relented toward him, and guided him. 

[020_123]123 He said: Go down hence, both of you, one of you a foe unto the other. But  when there come unto you from Me a guidance, then whoso followeth My guidance,  he will not go astray nor come to grief. 

[020_124]124 But he who turneth away from remembrance of Me, his will be a narrow life,  and I shall bring him blind to the assembly on the Day of Resurrection. 

[020_125]125 He will say: My Lord! Wherefor hast Thou gathered me (hither) blind, when  I was wont to see ? 

[020_126]126 He will say: So (it must be). Our revelations came unto thee but thou didst  forget them. In like manner thou art forgotten this Day. 

[020_127]127 Thus do We reward him who is prodigal and believeth not the revelations of  his Lord; and verily the doom of the Hereafter will be sterner and more lasting. 

[020_128]128 Is it not a guidance for them (to know) how many a generation We destroyed  before them, amid whose dwellings they walk ? Lo! therein verily are signs for men  of thought. 

[020_129]129 And but for a decree that had already gone forth from thy Lord, and a term  already fixed, the judgment would have been inevitable (in this world). 

[020_130]130 Therefor (O Muhammad), bear with what they say, and celebrate the praise  of thy Lord ere the rising of the sun and ere the going down thereof. And glorify Him  some hours of the night and at the two ends of the day, that thou mayst find  acceptance. 

[020_131]131 And strain not thine eyes toward that which We cause some wedded pairs  among them to enjoy, the flower of the life of the world, that We may try them  thereby. The provision of thy Lord is better and more lasting. 

[020_132]132 And enjoin upon thy people worship, and be constant therein. We ask not of  thee a provision: We provided for thee. And the sequel is for righteousness. 

[020_133]133 And they say: If only he would bring us a miracle from his Lord! Hath there  not come unto them the proof of what is in the former scriptures ? 

[020_134]134 And if we had destroyed them with some punishment before it, they would  assuredly have said: Our Lord! If only Thou hadst sent unto us a messenger, so that  we might have followed Thy revelations before we were (thus) humbled and  disgraced! 

[020_135]135 Say: Each is awaiting; so await ye! Ye will come to know who are the  owners of the path of equity, and who is right.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

21. al-Anbiya': The Prophets

[021_001]1 Their reckoning draweth nigh for mankind, while they turn away in  heedlessness. 

[021_002]2 Never cometh there unto them a new reminder from their Lord but they listen  to it while they play, 

[021_003]3 With hearts preoccupied. And they confer in secret. The wrong-doers say: Is  this other than a mortal like you ? Will ye then succumb to magic when ye see (it) ? 

[021_004]4 He saith: My Lord knoweth what is spoken in the heaven and the earth. He is  the Hearer, the Knower. 

[021_005]5 Nay, say they, (these are but) muddled dreams; nay, he hath but invented it;  nay, he is but a poet. Let him bring us a portent even as those of old (who were God's  messengers) were sent (with portents). 

[021_006]6 Not a township believed of those which We destroyed before them (though  We sent them portents): would they then believe ? 

[021_007]7 And We sent not (as Our messengers) before thee other than men, whom We  inspired. Ask the followers of the Reminder if ye know not ? 

[021_008]8 We gave them not bodies that would not eat food, nor were they immortals. 

[021_009]9 Then we fulfilled the promise unto them. So we delivered them and whom  We would, and We destroyed the prodigals. 

[021_010]10 Now We have revealed unto you a Scripture wherein is your Reminder. Have  ye then no sense ? 

[021_011]11 How many a community that dealt unjustly have We shattered, and raised up  after them another folk! 

[021_012]12 And, when they felt Our might, behold them fleeing from it! 

[021_013]13 (But it was said unto them): Flee not, but return to that (existence) which  emasculated you and to your dwellings, that ye may be questioned. 

[021_014]14 They cried: Alas for us! we were wrong-doers. 

[021_015]15 And this their crying ceased not till We made them as reaped corn, extinct. 

[021_016]16 We created not the heaven and the earth and all that is between them in play. 

[021_017]17 If We had wished to find a pastime, We could have found it in Our presence  - if We ever did. 

[021_018]18 Nay, but We hurl the true against the false, and it doth break its head and lo!  it vanisheth. And yours will be woe for that which ye ascribe (unto Him). 

[021_019]19 Unto Him belongeth whosoever is in the heavens and the earth. And those  who dwell in His presence are not too proud to worship Him, nor do they weary; 

[021_020]20 They glorify (Him) night and day; they flag not. 

[021_021]21 Or have they chosen gods from the earth who raise the dead ? 

[021_022]22 If there were therein gods beside Allah, then verily both (the heavens and the  earth) had been disordered. Glorified be Allah, the Lord of the Throne, from all that  they ascribe (unto Him). 

[021_023]23 He will not be questioned as to that which He doeth, but they will be  questioned. 

[021_024]24 Or have they chosen other gods beside Him ? say: Bring your proof (of their  godhead). This is the Reminder of those with me and those before me, but most of  them know not the Truth and so they are averse. 

[021_025]25 And We sent no messenger before thee but We inspired him, (saying): There  is no God save Me (Allah), so worship Me. 

[021_026]26 And they say: The Beneficent hath taken unto Himself a son. Be He  Glorified! Nay, but (those whom they call sons) are honoured slaves; 

[021_027]27 They speak not until He hath spoken, and they act by His command. 

[021_028]28 He knoweth what is before them and what is behind them, and they cannot  intercede except for him whom He accepteth, and they quake for awe of Him. 

[021_029]29 And one of them who should say: Lo! I am a god beside Him, that one We  should repay with hell. Thus We Repay wrong-doers. 

[021_030]30 Have not those who disbelieve known that the heavens and the earth were of  one piece, then We parted them, and we made every living thing of water ? Will they  not then believe ? 

[021_031]31 And We have placed in the earth firm hills lest it quake with them, and We  have placed therein ravines as roads that haply they may find their way. 

[021_032]32 And we have made the sky a roof withheld (from them). Yet they turn away  from its portents. 

[021_033]33 And He it is Who created the night and the day, and the sun and the moon.  They float, each in an orbit. 

[021_034]34 We appointed immortality for no mortal before thee. What! if thou diest, can  they be immortal! 

[021_035]35 Every soul must taste of death, and We try you with evil and with good, for  ordeal. And unto Us ye will be returned. 

[021_036]36 And when those who disbelieve behold thee, they but choose thee out for  mockery, (saying): Is this he who maketh mention of your gods ? And they would  deny all mention of the Beneficent. 

[021_037]37 Man is made of haste. I shall show you My portents, but ask Me not to  hasten. 

[021_038]38 And they say: When will this promise (be fulfilled), if ye are truthful ? 

[021_039]39 If those who disbelieved but knew the time when they will not be able to  drive off the fire from their faces and from their backs, and they will not be helped! 

[021_040]40 Nay, but it will come upon them unawares so that it will stupefy them, and  they will be unable to repel it, neither will they be reprieved. 

[021_041]41 Messengers before thee, indeed, were mocked, but that whereat they mocked  surrounded those who scoffed at them. 

[021_042]42 Say: Who guardeth you in the night or in the day from the Beneficent ? Nay,  but they turn away from mention of their Lord! 

[021_043]43 Or have they gods who can shield them from Us ? They cannot help  themselves nor can they be defended from Us. 

[021_044]44 Nay, but We gave these and their fathers ease until life grew long for them.  See they not how we aim to the land, reducing it of its outlying parts ? Can they then  be the victors ? 

[021_045]45 Say (O Muhammad, unto mankind): I warn you only by the Inspiration. But  the deaf hear not the call when they are warned. 

[021_046]46 And if a breath of thy Lord's punishment were to touch them, they assuredly  would say: Alas for us! Lo! we were wrong-doers. 

[021_047]47 And We set a just balance for the Day of Resurrection so that no soul is  wronged in aught. Though it be of the weight of a grain of mustard seed, We bring it.  And We suffice for reckoners. 

[021_048]48 And We verily gave Moses and Aaron the Criterion (of right and wrong) and  a light and a Reminder for those who keep from evil, 

[021_049]49 Those who fear their Lord in secret and who dread the Hour (of doom). 

[021_050]50 This is a blessed Reminder that we have revealed: Will ye then reject it ? 

[021_051]51 And We verily gave Abraham of old his proper course, and We were Aware  of him, 

[021_052]52 When he said unto his father and his folk: What are these images unto which  ye pay devotion ? 

[021_053]53 They said: We found our fathers worshippers of them. 

[021_054]54 He said: Verily ye and your fathers were in plain error. 

[021_055]55 They said: Bringest thou unto us the truth, or art thou some jester ? 

[021_056]56 He said: Nay, but your Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth, Who  created them; and I am of those who testify unto that. 

[021_057]57 And, by Allah, I shall circumvent your idols after ye have gone away and  turned your backs. 

[021_058]58 Then he reduced them to fragments, all save the chief of them, that haply  they might have recourse to it. 

[021_059]59 They said: Who hath done this to our gods ? Surely it must be some evil- doer. 

[021_060]60 They said: We heard a youth make mention of them, who is called Abraham. 

[021_061]61 They said: Then bring him (hither) before the people's eyes that they may  testify. 

[021_062]62 They said: Is it thou who hast done this to our gods, O Abraham ? 

[021_063]63 He said: But this, their chief hath done it. So question them, if they can  speak. 

[021_064]64 Then gathered they apart and said: Lo! ye yourselves are the wrong-doers. 

[021_065]65 And they were utterly confounded, and they said: Well thou knowest that  these speak not. 

[021_066]66 He said: Worship ye then instead of Allah that which cannot profit you at all,  nor harm you ? 

[021_067]67 Fie on you and all that ye worship instead of Allah! Have ye then no sense ? 

[021_068]68 They cried: Burn him and stand by your gods, if ye will be doing. 

[021_069]69 We said: O fire, be coolness and peace for Abraham, 

[021_070]70 And they wished to set a snare for him, but We made them the greater losers. 

[021_071]71 And We rescued him and Lot (and brought them) to the land which We have  blessed for (all) peoples. 

[021_072]72 And We bestowed upon him Isaac, and Jacob as a grandson. Each of them  We made righteous. 

[021_073]73 And We made them chiefs who guide by Our command, and We inspired in  them the doing of good deeds and the right establishment of worship and the giving of  alms, and they were worshippers of Us (alone). 

[021_074]74 And unto Lot we gave judgment and knowledge, and We delivered him from  the community that did abominations. Lo! they were folk of evil, lewd. 

[021_075]75 And We brought him in unto Our mercy. Lo! he was of the righteous. 

[021_076]76 And Noah, when he cried of old, We heard his prayer and saved him and his  household from the great affliction. 

[021_077]77 And delivered him from the people who denied Our revelations. Lo! they  were folk of evil, therefor did We drown them all. 

[021_078]78 And David and Solomon, when they gave judgment concerning the field,  when people's sheep had strayed and browsed therein by night; and We were  witnesses to their judgment. 

[021_079]79 And We made Solomon to understand (the case); and unto each of them We  gave judgment and knowledge. And we subdued the hills and the birds to hymn (His)  praise along with David. We were the doers (thereof). 

[021_080]80 And We taught him the art of making garments (of mail) to protect you in  your daring. Are ye then thankful ? 

[021_081]81 And unto Solomon (We subdued) the wind in its raging. It set by his  command toward the land which We had blessed. And of everything We are Aware. 

[021_082]82 And of the evil ones (subdued We unto him) some who dived (for pearls) for  him and did other work, and We were warders unto them. 

[021_083]83 And Job, when he cried unto his Lord, (saying): Lo! adversity afflicteth me,  and Thou art Most Merciful of all who show mercy. 

[021_084]84 Then We heard his prayer and removed that adversity from which he  suffered, and We gave him his household (that he had lost) and the like thereof along  with them, a mercy from Our store, and a remembrance for the worshippers; 

[021_085]85 And (mention) Ishmael, and Idris, and Dhu'l-Kifl. All were of the steadfast. 

[021_086]86 And We brought them in unto Our mercy. Lo! they are among the righteous. 

[021_087]87 And (mention) Dhu'n-Nun, when he went off in anger and deemed that We  had no power over him, but he cried out in the darkness, saying: There is no God save  Thee. Be Thou Glorified! Lo! I have been a wrong-doer. 

[021_088]88 Then we heard his prayer and saved him from the anguish. Thus we save  believers. 

[021_089]89 And Zachariah, when he cried unto his Lord: My Lord! Leave me not  childless, though Thou art the Best of inheritors. 

[021_090]90 Then We heard his prayer, and bestowed upon him John, and adjusted his  wife (to bear a child) for him. Lo! they used to vie one with the other in good deeds,  and they cried unto Us in longing and in fear, and were submissive unto Us. 

[021_091]91 And she who was chaste, therefor We breathed into her (something) of Our  Spirit and made her and her son a token for (all) peoples. 

[021_092]92 Lo! this, your religion, is one religion, and I am your Lord, so worship Me. 

[021_093]93 And they have broken their religion (into fragments) among them, (yet) all  are returning unto Us. 

[021_094]94 Then whoso doeth some good works and is a believer, there will be no  rejection of his effort. Lo! We record (it) for him. 

[021_095]95 And there is a ban upon any community which We have destroyed: that they  shall not return. 

[021_096]96 Until, when Gog and Magog are let loose, and they hasten out of every  mound, 

[021_097]97 And the True Promise draweth nigh; then behold them, staring wide (in  terror), the eyes of those who disbelieve! (They say): Alas for us! We (lived) in  forgetfulness of this. Ah, but we were wrong-doers! 

[021_098]98 Lo! ye (idolaters) and that which ye worship beside Allah are fuel of hell.  Thereunto ye will come. 

[021_099]99 If these had been gods they would not have come thither, but all will abide  therein. 

[021_100]100 Therein wailing is their portion, and therein they hear not. 

[021_101]101 Lo! those unto whom kindness hath gone forth before from Us, they will be  far removed from thence. 

[021_102]102 They will not hear the slightest sound thereof, while they abide in that which  their souls desire. 

[021_103]103 The Supreme Horror will not grieve them, and the angels will welcome  them, (saying): This is your Day which ye were promised; 

[021_104]104 The Day when We shall roll up the heavens as a recorder rolleth up a written  scroll. As We began the first creation, We shall repeat it. (It is) a promise (binding)  upon Us. Lo! We are to perform it. 

[021_105]105 And verily we have written in the Scripture, after the Reminder: My  righteous slaves will inherit the earth: 

[021_106]106 Lo! there is a plain statement for folk who are devout. 

[021_107]107 We sent thee not save as a mercy for the peoples. 

[021_108]108 Say: It is only inspired in me that your God is One God. Will ye then  surrender (unto Him) ? 

[021_109]109 But if they are averse, then say: I have warned you all alike, although I know  not whether nigh or far is that which ye are promised. 

[021_110]110 Lo! He knoweth that which is said openly, and that which ye conceal. 

[021_111]111 And I know not but that this may be a trial for you, and enjoyment for a  while. 

[021_112]112 He saith: My Lord! Judge Thou with truth. Our Lord is the Beneficent,  Whose help is to be implored against that which ye ascribe (unto Him).

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

22. al-Hajj: The Pilgrimage

[022_001]1 O mankind! Fear your Lord. Lo! the earthquake of the Hour (of Doom) is a  tremendous thing. 

[022_002]2 On the day when ye behold it, every nursing mother will forget her nursling  and every pregnant one will be delivered of her burden, and thou (Muhammad) wilt  see mankind as drunken, yet they will not be drunken, but the Doom of Allah will be  strong (upon them). 

[022_003]3 Among mankind is he who disputeth concerning Allah without knowledge,  and followeth each froward devil; 

[022_004]4 For him it is decreed that whoso taketh him for friend, he verily will mislead  him and will guide him to the punishment of the Flame. 

[022_005]5 O mankind! if ye are in doubt concerning the Resurrection, then lo! We have  created you from dust, then from a drop of seed, then from a clot, then from a little  lump of flesh shapely and shapeless, that We may make (it) clear for you. And We  cause what We will to remain in the wombs for an appointed time, and afterward We  bring you forth as infants, then (give you growth) that ye attain your full strength.  And among you there is he who dieth (young), and among you there is he who is  brought back to the most abject time of life, so that, after knowledge, he knoweth  naught. And thou (Muhammad) seest the earth barren, but when We send down water  thereon, it doth thrill and swell and put forth every lovely kind (of growth). 

[022_006]6 That is because Allah, He is the Truth and because He quickeneth the dead,  and because He is Able to do all things; 

[022_007]7 And because the Hour will come, there is no doubt thereof; and because  Allah will raise those who are in the graves. 

[022_008]8 And among mankind is he who disputeth concerning Allah without  knowledge or guidance or a scripture giving light, 

[022_009]9 Turning away in pride to beguile (men) from the way of Allah. For him in  this world is ignominy, and on the Day of Resurrection We make him taste the doom  of burning. 

[022_010]10 (And unto him it will be said): This is for that which thy two hands have sent  before, and because Allah is no oppressor of His slaves. 

[022_011]11 And among mankind is he who worshippeth Allah upon a narrow marge so  that if good befalleth him he is content therewith, but if a trial befalleth him, he falleth  away utterly. He loseth both the world and the Hereafter. That is the sheer loss. 

[022_012]12 He calleth, beside Allah, unto that which hurteth him not nor benefiteth him.  That is the far error. 

[022_013]13 He calleth unto him whose harm is nearer than his benefit; verily an evil  patron and verily an evil friend! 

[022_014]14 Lo! Allah causeth those who believe and do good works to enter Gardens  underneath which rivers flow. Lo! Allah doth what He intendeth. 

[022_015]15 Whoso is wont to think (through envy) that Allah will not give him  (Muhammad) victory in the world and the Hereafter (and is enraged at the thought of  his victory), let him stretch a rope up to the roof (of his dwelling), and let him hang  himself. Then let him see whether his strategy dispelleth that whereat he rageth!. 

[022_016]16 Thus We reveal it as plain revelations, and verily Allah guideth whom He  will. 

[022_017]17 Lo! those who believe (this revelation), and those who are Jews, and the  Sabaeans and the Christians and the Magians and the idolaters - Lo! Allah will decide  between them on the Day of Resurrection. Lo! Allah is Witness over all things. 

[022_018]18 Hast thou not seen that unto Allah payeth adoration whosoever is in the  heavens and whosoever is in the earth, and the sun, and the moon, and the stars, and  the hills, and the trees, and the beasts, and many of mankind, while there are many  unto whom the doom is justly due. He whom Allah scorneth, there is none to give  him honour. Lo! Allah doeth what He will. 

[022_019]19 These twain (the believers and the disbelievers) are two opponents who  contend concerning their Lord. But as for those who disbelieve, garments of fire will  be cut out for them; boiling fluid will be poured down on their heads, 

[022_020]20 Whereby that which is in their bellies, and their skins too, will be melted; 

[022_021]21 And for them are hooked rods of iron. 

[022_022]22 Whenever, in their anguish, they would go forth from thence they are driven  back therein and (it is said unto them): Taste the doom of burning. 

[022_023]23 Lo! Allah will cause those who believe and do good works to enter Gardens  underneath which rivers flow, wherein they will be allowed armlets of gold, and  pearls, and their raiment therein will be silk. 

[022_024]24 They are guided unto gentle speech; they are guided unto the path of the  Glorious One. 

[022_025]25 Lo! those who disbelieve and bar (men) from the way of Allah and from the  Inviolable Place of Worship, which We have appointed for mankind together, the  dweller therein and the nomad: whosoever seeketh wrongful partiality therein, him  We shall cause to taste a painful doom. 

[022_026]26 And (remember) when We prepared for Abraham the place of the (holy)  House, saying: Ascribe thou no thing as partner unto Me, and purify My House for  those who make the round (thereof) and those who stand and those who bow and  make prostration. 

[022_027]27 And proclaim unto mankind the pilgrimage. They will come unto thee on  foot and on every lean camel; they will come from every deep ravine, 

[022_028]28 That they may witness things that are of benefit to them, and mention the  name of Allah on appointed days over the beast of cattle that He hath bestowed upon  them. Then eat thereof and feed therewith the poor unfortunate. 

[022_029]29 Then let them make an end of their unkemptness and pay their vows and go  around the ancient House. 

[022_030]30 That (is the command). And whoso magnifieth the sacred things of Allah, it  will be well for him in the sight of his Lord. The cattle are lawful unto you save that  which hath been told you. So shun the filth of idols, and shun lying speech, 

[022_031]31 Turning unto Allah (only), not ascribing partners unto Him; for whoso  ascribeth partners unto Allah, it is as if he had fallen from the sky and the birds had  snatched him or the wind had blown him to a far-off place. 

[022_032]32 That (is the command). And whoso magnifieth the offerings consecrated to  Allah, it surely is from devotion of the hearts, 

[022_033]33 Therein are benefits for you for an appointed term; and afterward they are  brought for sacrifice unto the ancient House. 

[022_034]34 And for every nation have We appointed a ritual, that they may mention the  name of Allah over the beast of cattle that He hath given them for food; and your God  is One God, therefor surrender unto Him. And give good tidings (O Muhammad) to  the humble, 

[022_035]35 Whose hearts fear when Allah is mentioned, and the patient of whatever may  befall them, and those who establish worship and who spend of that We have  bestowed on them. 

[022_036]36 And the camels! We have appointed them among the ceremonies of Allah.  Therein ye have much good. So mention the name of Allah over them when they are  drawn up in lines. Then when their flanks fall (dead), eat thereof and feed the beggar  and the suppliant. Thus have We made them subject unto you, that haply ye may give  thanks. 

[022_037]37 Their flesh and their food reach not Allah, but the devotion from you  reacheth Him. Thus have We made them subject unto you that ye may magnify Allah  that He hath guided you. And give good tidings (O Muhammad) to the good. 

[022_038]38 Lo! Allah defendeth those who are true. Lo! Allah loveth not each  treacherous ingrate. 

[022_039]39 Sanction is given unto those who fight because they have been wronged; and  Allah is indeed Able to give them victory; 

[022_040]40 Those who have been driven from their homes unjustly only because they  said: Our Lord is Allah - For had it not been for Allah's repelling some men by means  of others, cloisters and churches and oratories and mosques, wherein the name of  Allah is oft mentioned, would assuredly have been pulled down. Verily Allah helpeth  one who helpeth Him. Lo! Allah is Strong, Almighty - 

[022_041]41 Those who, if We give them power in the land, establish worship and pay the  poor-due and enjoin kindness and forbid iniquity. And Allah's is the sequel of events. 

[022_042]42 If they deny thee (Muhammad), even so the folk of Noah, and (the tribes of)  A'ad and Thamud, before thee, denied (Our messengers); 

[022_043]43 And the folk of Abraham and the folk of Lot; 

[022_044]44 (And) the dwellers in Midian. And Moses was denied; but I indulged the  disbelievers a long while, then I seized them, and how (terrible) was My abhorrence! 

[022_045]45 How many a township have We destroyed while it was sinful, so that it lieth  (to this day) in ruins, and (how many) a deserted well and lofty tower! 

[022_046]46 Have they not travelled in the land, and have they hearts wherewith to feel  and ears wherewith to hear ? For indeed it is not the eyes that grow blind, but it is the  hearts, which are within the bosoms, that grow blind. 

[022_047]47 And they will bid thee hasten on the Doom, and Allah faileth not His  promise, but lo! a Day with Allah is as a thousand years of what ye reckon. 

[022_048]48 And how many a township did I suffer long though it was sinful! Then I  grasped it. Unto Me is the return. 

[022_049]49 Say: O mankind! I am only a plain warner unto you. 

[022_050]50 Those who believe and do good works, for them is pardon and a rich  provision; 

[022_051]51 While those who strive to thwart Our revelations, such are rightful owners of  the Fire. 

[022_052]52 Never sent We a messenger or a prophet before thee but when He recited (the  message) Satan proposed (opposition) in respect of that which he recited thereof. But  Allah abolisheth that which Satan proposeth. Then Allah establisheth His revelations.  Allah is Knower, Wise; 

[022_053]53 That He may make that which the devil proposeth a temptation for those in  whose hearts is a disease, and those whose hearts are hardened - Lo! the evil-doers are  in open schism - 

[022_054]54 And that those who have been given knowledge may know that it is the truth  from thy Lord, so that they may believe therein and their hearts may submit humbly  unto Him. Lo! Allah verily is guiding those who believe unto a right path. 

[022_055]55 And those who disbelieve will not cease to be in doubt thereof until the Hour  come upon them unawares, or there come unto them the doom of a disastrous day. 

[022_056]56 The Sovereignty on that day will be Allah's, He will judge between them.  Then those who believed and did good works will be in Gardens of Delight, 

[022_057]57 While those who disbelieved and denied Our revelations, for them will be a  shameful doom. 

[022_058]58 Those who fled their homes for the cause of Allah and then were slain or  died, Allah verily will provide for them a good provision. Lo! Allah, He verily is Best  of all who make provision. 

[022_059]59 Assuredly He will cause them to enter by an entry that they will love. Lo!  Allah verily is Knower, Indulgent. 

[022_060]60 That (is so). And whoso hath retaliated with the like of that which he was  made to suffer and then hath (again) been wronged, Allah will succour him. Lo! Allah  verily is Mild, Forgiving. 

[022_061]61 That is because Allah maketh the night to pass into the day and maketh the  day to pass into the night, and because Allah is Hearer, Seer. 

[022_062]62 That is because Allah, He is the True, and that whereon they call instead of  Him, it is the false, and because Allah, He is the High, the Great. 

[022_063]63 Seest thou not how Allah sendeth down water from the sky and then the  earth becometh green upon the morrow ? Lo! Allah is Subtile, Aware. 

[022_064]64 Unto Him belongeth all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth. Lo!  Allah, He verily is the Absolute, the Owner of Praise. 

[022_065]65 Hast thou not seen how Allah hath made all that is in the earth subservient  unto you ? And the ship runneth upon the sea by His command, and He holdeth back  the heaven from falling on the earth unless by His leave. Lo! Allah is, for mankind,  Full of Pity, Merciful. 

[022_066]66 And He it is Who gave you life, then He will cause you to die, and then will  give you life (again). Lo! man is verily an ingrate. 

[022_067]67 Unto each nation have We given sacred rites which they are to perform; so  let them not dispute with thee of the matter, but summon thou unto thy Lord. Lo! thou  indeed followest right guidance. 

[022_068]68 And if they wrangle with thee, say: Allah is Best Aware of what ye do. 

[022_069]69 Allah will judge between you on the Day of Resurrection concerning that  wherein ye used to differ. 

[022_070]70 Hast thou not known that Allah knoweth all that is in the heaven and the  earth ? Lo! it is in a record. Lo! that is easy for Allah. 

[022_071]71 And they worship instead of Allah that for which He hath sent down no  warrant, and that whereof they have no knowledge. For evil-doers there is no helper. 

[022_072]72 And when Our revelations are recited unto them, thou knowest the denial in  the faces of those who disbelieve; they all but attack those who recite Our revelations  unto them. Say: Shall I proclaim unto you worse than that ? The Fire! Allah hath  promised it for those who disbelieve. A hapless journey's end! 

[022_073]73 O mankind! A similitude is coined, so pay ye heed to it: Lo! those on whom  ye call beside Allah will never create a fly though they combine together for the  purpose. And if the fly took something from them, they could not rescue it from it. So  weak are (both) the seeker and the sought! 

[022_074]74 They measure not Allah His rightful measure. Lo! Allah is Strong, Almighty. 

[022_075]75 Allah chooseth from the angels messengers, and (also) from mankind. Lo!  Allah is Hearer, Seer. 

[022_076]76 He knoweth all that is before them and all that is behind them, and unto  Allah all things are returned. 

[022_077]77 O ye who believe! Bow down and prostrate yourselves, and worship your  Lord, and do good, that haply ye may prosper. 

[022_078]78 And strive for Allah with the endeavour which is His right. He hath chosen  you and hath not laid upon you in religion any hardship; the faith of your father  Abraham (is yours). He hath named you Muslims of old time and in this (Scripture),  that the messenger may be a witness against you, and that ye may be witnesses  against mankind. So establish worship, pay the poor-due, and hold fast to Allah. He is  your Protecting friend. A blessed Patron and a blessed Helper!

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

23. al-Mu'minun: The Believers

[023_001]1 Successful indeed are the believers 

[023_002]2 Who are humble in their prayers, 

[023_003]3 And who shun vain conversation, 

[023_004]4 And who are payers of the poor-due; 

[023_005]5 And who guard their modesty - 

[023_006]6 Save from their wives or the (slaves) that their right hands possess, for then  they are not blameworthy, 

[023_007]7 But whoso craveth beyond that, such are transgressors - 

[023_008]8 And who are shepherds of their pledge and their covenant, 

[023_009]9 And who pay heed to their prayers. 

[023_010]10 These are the heirs 

[023_011]11 Who will inherit paradise. There they will abide. 

[023_012]12 Verily We created man from a product of wet earth; 

[023_013]13 Then placed him as a drop (of seed) in a safe lodging; 

[023_014]14 Then fashioned We the drop a clot, then fashioned We the clot a little lump,  then fashioned We the little lump bones, then clothed the bones with flesh, and then  produced it as another creation. So blessed be Allah, the Best of creators! 

[023_015]15 Then lo! after that ye surely die. 

[023_016]16 Then lo! on the Day of Resurrection ye are raised (again). 

[023_017]17 And We have created above you seven paths, and We are never unmindful of  creation. 

[023_018]18 And we send down from the sky water in measure, and We give it lodging in  the earth, and lo! We are Able to withdraw it. 

[023_019]19 Then We produce for you therewith gardens of date-palms and grapes,  wherein is much fruit for you and whereof ye eat; 

[023_020]20 And a tree that springeth forth from Mount Sinai that groweth oil and relish  for the eaters. 

[023_021]21 And lo! in the cattle there is verily a lesson for you. We give you to drink of  that which is in their bellies, and many uses have ye in them, and of them do ye eat; 

[023_022]22 And on them and on the ship ye are carried. 

[023_023]23 And We verily sent Noah unto his folk, and he said: O my people! Serve  Allah. Ye have no other God save Him. Will ye not ward off (evil) ? 

[023_024]24 But the chieftains of his folk, who disbelieved, said: This is only a mortal  like you who would make himself superior to you. Had Allah willed, He surely could  have sent down angels. We heard not of this in the case of our fathers of old. 

[023_025]25 He is only a man in whom is a madness, so watch him for a while. 

[023_026]26 He said: My Lord! Help me because they deny me. 

[023_027]27 Then We inspired in him, saying: Make the ship under Our eyes and Our  inspiration. Then, when Our command cometh and the oven gusheth water, introduce  therein of every (kind) two spouses, and thy household save him thereof against  whom the Word hath already gone forth. And plead not with Me on behalf of those  who have done wrong. Lo! they will be drowned. 

[023_028]28 And when thou art on board the ship, thou and whoso is with thee, then say:  Praise be to Allah Who hath saved us from the wrongdoing folk! 

[023_029]29 And say: My Lord! Cause me to land at a blessed landing-place, for Thou art  Best of all who bring to land. 

[023_030]30 Lo! herein verily are portents, for lo! We are ever putting (mankind) to the  test. 

[023_031]31 Then, after them, We brought forth another generation; 

[023_032]32 And we sent among them a messenger of their own, saying: Serve Allah, Ye  have no other God save Him. Will ye not ward off (evil) ? 

[023_033]33 And the chieftains of his folk, who disbelieved and denied the meeting of the  Hereafter, and whom We had made soft in the life of the world, said: This is only a  mortal like you, who eateth of that whereof ye eat and drinketh of that ye drink. 

[023_034]34 If ye were to obey a mortal like yourselves, then, lo! ye surely would be  losers. 

[023_035]35 Doth he promise you that you, when ye are dead and have become dust and  bones, will (again) be brought forth ? 

[023_036]36 Begone, begone, with that which ye are promised! 

[023_037]37 There is naught but our life of the world; we die and we live, and we shall  not be raised (again). 

[023_038]38 He is only a man who hath invented a lie about Allah. We are not going to  put faith in him. 

[023_039]39 He said: My Lord! Help me because they deny me. 

[023_040]40 He said: In a little while they surely will become repentant. 

[023_041]41 So the (Awful) Cry overtook them rightfully, and We made them like as  wreckage (that a torrent hurleth). A far removal for wrongdoing folk! 

[023_042]42 Then after them We brought forth other generations. 

[023_043]43 No nation can outstrip its term, nor yet postpone it. 

[023_044]44 Then We sent our messengers one after another. Whenever its messenger  came unto a nation they denied him; so We caused them to follow one another (to  disaster) and We made them bywords. A far removal for folk who believe not! 

[023_045]45 Then We sent Moses and his brother Aaron with Our tokens and a clear  warrant 

[023_046]46 Unto Pharaoh and his chiefs, but they scorned (them) and they were despotic  folk. 

[023_047]47 And they said: Shall we put faith in two mortals like ourselves, and whose  folk are servile unto us ? 

[023_048]48 So they denied them, and became of those who were destroyed. 

[023_049]49 And We verily gave Moses the Scripture, that haply they might go aright. 

[023_050]50 And We made the son of Mary and his mother a portent, and We gave them  refuge on a height, a place of flocks and watersprings. 

[023_051]51 O ye messengers! Eat of the good things, and do right. Lo! I am Aware of  what ye do. 

[023_052]52 And lo! this your religion is one religion and I am your Lord, so keep your  duty unto Me. 

[023_053]53 But they (mankind) have broken their religion among them into sects, each  group rejoicing in its tenets. 

[023_054]54 So leave them in their error till a time. 

[023_055]55 Think they that in the wealth and sons wherewith We provide them 

[023_056]56 We hasten unto them with good things ? Nay, but they perceive not. 

[023_057]57 Lo! those who go in awe for fear of their Lord. 

[023_058]58 And those who believe in the revelations of their Lord, 

[023_059]59 And those who ascribe not partners unto their Lord, 

[023_060]60 And those who give that which they give with hearts afraid because they are  about to return unto their Lord, 

[023_061]61 These race for the good things, and they shall win them in the race. 

[023_062]62 And we task not any soul beyond its scope, and with Us is a Record which  speaketh the truth, and they will not be wronged. 

[023_063]63 Nay, but their hearts are in ignorance of this (Qur'an), and they have other  works, besides, which they are doing; 

[023_064]64 Till when We grasp their luxurious ones with the punishment, behold! they  supplicate. 

[023_065]65 Supplicate not this day! Assuredly ye will not be helped by Us. 

[023_066]66 My revelations were recited unto you, but ye used to turn back on your heels, 

[023_067]67 In scorn thereof. Nightly did ye rave together. 

[023_068]68 Have they not pondered the Word, or hath that come unto them which came  not unto their fathers of old ? 

[023_069]69 Or know they not their messenger, and so reject him ? 

[023_070]70 Or say they: There is a madness in him ? Nay, but he bringeth them the  Truth; and most of them are haters of the Truth. 

[023_071]71 And if the Truth had followed their desires, verily the heavens and the earth  and whosoever is therein had been corrupted. Nay, We have brought them their  Reminder, but from their Reminder they now turn away. 

[023_072]72 Or dost thou ask of them (O Muhammad) any tribute ? But the bounty of thy  Lord is better, for He is Best of all who make provision. 

[023_073]73 And lo! thou summonest them indeed unto a straight path. 

[023_074]74 And lo! those who believe not in the Hereafter are indeed astray from the  path. 

[023_075]75 Though We had mercy on them and relieved them of the harm afflicting  them, they still would wander blindly on in their contumacy. 

[023_076]76 Already have We grasped them with punishment, but they humble not  themselves unto their Lord, nor do they pray, 

[023_077]77 Until, when We open for them the gate of extreme punishment, behold! they  are aghast thereat. 

[023_078]78 He it is Who hath created for you ears and eyes and hearts. Small thanks give  ye! 

[023_079]79 And He it is Who hath sown you broadcast in the earth, and unto Him ye will  be gathered. 

[023_080]80 And He it is Who giveth life and causeth death, and His is the difference of  night and day. Have ye then no sense ? 

[023_081]81 Nay, but they say the like of that which said the men of old; 

[023_082]82 They say: When we are dead and have become (mere) dust and bones, shall  we then, forsooth, be raised again ? 

[023_083]83 We were already promised this, we and our forefathers. Lo! this is naught but  fables of the men of old. 

[023_084]84 Say: Unto Whom (belongeth) the earth and whosoever is therein, if ye have  knowledge ? 

[023_085]85 They will say: Unto Allah. Say: Will ye not then remember ? 

[023_086]86 Say: Who is Lord of the seven heavens, and Lord of the Tremendous Throne  ? 

[023_087]87 They will say: Unto Allah (all that belongeth). Say: Will ye not then keep  duty (unto Him) ? 

[023_088]88 Say: In Whose hand is the dominion over all things and He protecteth, while  against Him there is no protection, if ye have knowledge ? 

[023_089]89 They will say: Unto Allah (all that belongeth). Say: How then are ye  bewitched ? 

[023_090]90 Nay, but We have brought them the Truth, and lo! they are liars. 

[023_091]91 Allah hath not chosen any son, nor is there any god along with Him; else  would each god have assuredly championed that which he created, and some of them  would assuredly have overcome others. Glorified be Allah above all that they allege. 

[023_092]92 Knower of the Invisible and the Visible! and Exalted be He over all that they  ascribe as partners (unto Him)! 

[023_093]93 Say: My Lord! If Thou shouldst show me that which they are promised. 

[023_094]94 My Lord! then set me not among the wrongdoing folk. 

[023_095]95 And verily We are Able to show thee that which We have promised them. 

[023_096]96 Repel evil with that which is better. We are Best Aware of that which they  allege. 

[023_097]97 And say: My Lord! I seek refuge in Thee from suggestions of the evil ones, 

[023_098]98 And I seek refuge in Thee, my Lord, lest they be present with me, 

[023_099]99 Until, when death cometh unto one of them, he saith: My Lord! Send me  back, 

[023_100]100 That I may do right in that which I have left behind! But nay! It is but a word  that he speaketh; and behind them is a barrier until the day when they are raised. 

[023_101]101 And when the trumpet is blown there will be no kinship among them that  day, nor will they ask of one another. 

[023_102]102 Then those whose scales are heavy, they are the successful. 

[023_103]103 And those whose scales are light are those who lose their souls, in hell  abiding. 

[023_104]104 The fire burneth their faces, and they are glum therein. 

[023_105]105 (It will be said): Were not My revelations recited unto you, and then ye used  to deny them ? 

[023_106]106 They will say: Our Lord! Our evil fortune conquered us, and we were erring  folk. 

[023_107]107 Our Lord! Oh, bring us forth from hence! If we return (to evil) then indeed  we shall be wrong-doers. 

[023_108]108 He saith: Begone therein, and speak not unto Me. 

[023_109]109 Lo! there was a party of My slaves who said: Our Lord! We believe, therefor  forgive us and have mercy on us for Thou art Best of all who show mercy; 

[023_110]110 But ye chose them for a laughing-stock until they caused you to forget  remembrance of Me, while ye laughed at them. 

[023_111]111 Lo! I have rewarded them this day forasmuch as they were steadfast in that  they, even they, are the triumphant. 

[023_112]112 He will say: How long tarried ye in the earth, counting by years ? 

[023_113]113 They will say: We tarried by a day or part of a day. Ask of those who keep  count! 

[023_114]114 He will say: Ye tarried but a little if ye only knew. 

[023_115]115 Deemed ye then that We had created you for naught, and that ye would not  be returned unto Us ? 

[023_116]116 Now Allah be Exalted, the True King! There is no God save Him, the Lord  of the Throne of Grace. 

[023_117]117 He who crieth unto any other god along with Allah hath no proof thereof. His  reckoning is only with his Lord. Lo! disbelievers will not be successful. 

[023_118]118 And (O Muhammad) say: My Lord! Forgive and have mercy, for Thou art  Best of all who show mercy.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

24. an-Nur: The Light

[024_001]1 (Here is) a surah which We have revealed and enjoined, and wherein We  have revealed plain tokens, that haply ye may take heed. 

[024_002]2 The adulterer and the adulteress, scourge ye each one of them (with) a  hundred stripes. And let not pity for the twain withhold you from obedience to Allah,  if ye believe in Allah and the Last Day. And let a party of believers witness their  punishment. 

[024_003]3 The adulterer shall not marry save an adulteress or an idolatress, and the  adulteress none shall marry save an adulterer or an idolater. All that is forbidden unto  believers. 

[024_004]4 And those who accuse honourable women but bring not four witnesses,  scourge them (with) eighty stripes and never (afterward) accept their testimony - They  indeed are evil-doers - 

[024_005]5 Save those who afterward repent and make amends. (For such) lo! Allah is  Forgiving, Merciful. 

[024_006]6 As for those who accuse their wives but have no witnesses except  themselves; let the testimony of one of them be four testimonies, (swearing) by Allah  that he is of those who speak the truth; 

[024_007]7 And yet a fifth, invoking the curse of Allah on him if he is of those who lie. 

[024_008]8 And it shall avert the punishment from her if she bear witness before Allah  four times that the thing he saith is indeed false, 

[024_009]9 And a fifth (time) that the wrath of Allah be upon her if he speaketh truth. 

[024_010]10 And had it not been for the grace of Allah and His mercy unto you, and that  Allah is Clement, Wise, (ye had been undone). 

[024_011]11 Lo! they who spread the slander are a gang among you. Deem it not a bad  thing for you; nay, it is good for you. Unto every man of them (will be paid) that  which he hath earned of the sin; and as for him among them who had the greater share  therein, his will be an awful doom. 

[024_012]12 Why did not the believers, men and women, when ye heard it, think good of  their own own folk, and say: It is a manifest untruth ? 

[024_013]13 Why did they not produce four witnesses ? Since they produce not witnesses,  they verily are liars in the sight of Allah. 

[024_014]14 Had it not been for the grace of Allah and His mercy unto you in the world  and the Hereafter an awful doom had overtaken you for that whereof ye murmured. 

[024_015]15 When ye welcomed it with your tongues, and uttered with your mouths that  whereof ye had no knowledge, ye counted it a trifle. In the sight of Allah it is very  great. 

[024_016]16 Wherefor, when ye heard it, said ye not: It is not for us to speak of this.  Glory be to Thee (O Allah)! This is awful calumny. 

[024_017]17 Allah admonisheth you that ye repeat not the like thereof ever, if ye are (in  truth) believers. 

[024_018]18 And He expoundeth unto you the revelations. Allah is Knower, Wise. 

[024_019]19 Lo! those who love that slander should be spread concerning those who  believe, theirs will be a painful punishment in the world and the Hereafter. Allah  knoweth. Ye know not. 

[024_020]20 Had it not been for the grace of Allah and His mercy unto you, and that Allah  is Clement, Merciful, (ye had been undone). 

[024_021]21 O ye who believe! Follow not the footsteps of the devil. Unto whomsoever  followeth the footsteps of the devil, lo! he commandeth filthiness and wrong. Had it  not been for the grace of Allah and His mercy unto you, not one of you would ever  have grown pure. But Allah causeth whom He will to grow. And Allah is Hearer,  Knower. 

[024_022]22 And let not those who possess dignity and ease among you swear not to give  to the near of kin and to the needy, and to fugitives for the cause of Allah. Let them  forgive and show indulgence. Yearn ye not that Allah may forgive you ? Allah is  Forgiving, Merciful. 

[024_023]23 Lo! as for those who traduce virtuous, believing women (who are) careless,  cursed are they in the world and the Hereafter. Theirs will be an awful doom 

[024_024]24 On the day when their tongues and their hands and their feet testify against  them as to what they used to do, 

[024_025]25 On that day Allah will pay them their just due, and they will know that Allah,  He is the Manifest Truth. 

[024_026]26 Vile women are for vile men, and vile men for vile women. Good women are  for good men, and good men for good women; such are innocent of that which people  say: For them is pardon and a bountiful provision. 

[024_027]27 O ye who believe! Enter not houses other than your own without first  announcing your presence and invoking peace upon the folk thereof. That is better for  you, that ye may be heedful. 

[024_028]28 And if ye find no-one therein, still enter not until permission hath been given.  And if it be said unto you: Go away again, then go away, for it is purer for you. Allah  knoweth what ye do. 

[024_029]29 (It is) no sin for you to enter uninhabited houses wherein is comfort for you.  Allah knoweth what ye proclaim and what ye hide. 

[024_030]30 Tell the believing men to lower their gaze and be modest. That is purer for  them. Lo! Allah is aware of what they do. 

[024_031]31 And tell the believing women to lower their gaze and be modest, and to  display of their adornment only that which is apparent, and to draw their veils over  their bosoms, and not to reveal their adornment save to their own husbands or fathers  or husbands' fathers, or their sons or their husbands' sons, or their brothers or their  brothers' sons or sisters' sons, or their women, or their slaves, or male attendants who  lack vigour, or children who know naught of women's nakedness. And let them not  stamp their feet so as to reveal what they hide of their adornment. And turn unto  Allah together, O believers, in order that ye may succeed. 

[024_032]32 And marry such of you as are solitary and the pious of your slaves and maid- servants. If they be poor, Allah will enrich them of His bounty. Allah is of ample  means, Aware. 

[024_033]33 And let those who cannot find a match keep chaste till Allah give them  independence by His grace. And such of your slaves as seek a writing (of  emancipation), write it for them if ye are aware of aught of good in them, and bestow  upon them of the wealth of Allah which He hath bestowed upon you. Force not your  slave-girls to whoredom that ye may seek enjoyment of the life of the world, if they  would preserve their chastity. And if one force them, then (unto them), after their  compulsion, lo! Allah will be Forgiving, Merciful. 

[024_034]34 And verily We have sent down for you revelations that make plain, and the  example of those who passed away before you. An admonition unto those who ward  off (evil). 

[024_035]35 Allah is the Light of the heavens and the earth. The similitude of His light is  as a niche wherein is a lamp. The lamp is in a glass. The glass is as it were a shining  star. (This lamp is) kindled from a blessed tree, an olive neither of the East nor of the  West, whose oil would almost glow forth (of itself) though no fire touched it. Light  upon light. Allah guideth unto His light whom He will. And Allah speaketh to  mankind in allegories, for Allah is Knower of all things. 

[024_036]36 (This lamp is found) in houses which Allah hath allowed to be exalted and  that His name shall be remembered therein. Therein do offer praise to Him at morn  and evening. 

[024_037]37 Men whom neither merchandise nor sale beguileth from remembrance of  Allah and constancy in prayer and paying to the poor their due; who fear a day when  hearts and eyeballs will be overturned; 

[024_038]38 That Allah may reward them with the best of what they did, and increase  reward for them of His bounty. Allah giveth blessings without stint to whom He will. 

[024_039]39 As for those who disbelieve, their deeds are as a mirage in a desert. The  thirsty one supposeth it to be water till he cometh unto it and findeth it naught, and  findeth, in the place thereof, Allah Who payeth him his due; and Allah is swift at  reckoning. 

[024_040]40 Or as darkness on a vast, abysmal sea. There covereth him a wave, above  which is a wave, above which is a cloud. Layer upon layer of darkness. When he  holdeth out his hand he scarce can see it. And he for whom Allah hath not appointed  light, for him there is no light. 

[024_041]41 Hast thou not seen that Allah, He it is Whom all who are in the heavens and  the earth praise, and the birds in their flight ? Of each He knoweth verily the worship  and the praise; and Allah is Aware of what they do. 

[024_042]42 And unto Allah belongeth the Sovereignty of the heavens and the earth, and  unto Allah is the journeying. 

[024_043]43 Hast thou not seen how Allah wafteth the clouds, then gathereth them, then  maketh them layers, and thou seest the rain come forth from between them; He  sendeth down from the heaven mountains wherein is hail, and smiteth therewith  whom He will, and averteth it from whom He will. The flashing of His lightning all  but snatcheth away the sight. 

[024_044]44 Allah causeth the revolution of the day and the night. Lo! herein is indeed a  lesson for those who see. 

[024_045]45 Allah hath created every animal of water. Of them is (a kind) that goeth upon  its belly and (a kind) that goeth upon two legs and (a kind) that goeth upon four.  Allah createth what He will. Lo! Allah is Able to do all things. 

[024_046]46 Verily We have sent down revelations and explained them. Allah guideth  whom He will unto a straight path. 

[024_047]47 And they say: We believe in Allah and the messenger, and we obey; then  after that a faction of them turn away. Such are not believers. 

[024_048]48 And when they appeal unto Allah and His messenger to judge between them,  lo! a faction of them are averse; 

[024_049]49 But if right had been with them they would have come unto him willingly. 

[024_050]50 Is there in their hearts a disease, or have they doubts, or fear they lest Allah  and His messenger should wrong them in judgment ? Nay, but such are evil-doers. 

[024_051]51 The saying of (all true) believers when they appeal unto Allah and His  messenger to judge between them is only that they say: We hear and we obey. And  such are the successful. 

[024_052]52 He who obeyeth Allah and His messenger, and feareth Allah, and keepeth  duty (unto Him): such indeed are the victorious. 

[024_053]53 They swear by Allah solemnly that, if thou order them, they will go forth.  Say: Swear not; known obedience (is better). Lo! Allah is Informed of what ye do. 

[024_054]54 Say: Obey Allah and obey the messenger. But if ye turn away, then (it is) for  him (to do) only that wherewith he hath been charged, and for you (to do) only that  wherewith ye have been charged. If ye obey him, ye will go aright. But the messenger  hath no other charge than to convey (the message) plainly. 

[024_055]55 Allah hath promised such of you as believe and do good work that He will  surely make them to succeed (the present rulers) in the earth even as He caused those  who were before them to succeed (others); and that He will surely establish for them  their religion which He hath approved for them, and will give them in exchange  safety after their fear. They serve Me. They ascribe no thing as partner unto Me.  Those who disbelieve henceforth, they are the miscreants. 

[024_056]56 Establish worship and pay the poor-due and obey the messenger, that haply  ye may find mercy. 

[024_057]57 Think not that the disbelievers can escape in the land. Fire will be their home  - a hapless journey's end! 

[024_058]58 O ye who believe! Let your slaves, and those of you who have not come to  puberty, ask leave of you at three times (before they come into your presence): Before  the prayer of dawn, and when ye lay aside your raiment for the heat of noon, and after  the prayer of night. Three times of privacy for you. It is no sin for them or for you at  other times, when some of you go round attendant upon others (if they come into your  presence without leave). Thus Allah maketh clear the revelations for you. Allah is  Knower, Wise. 

[024_059]59 And when the children among you come to puberty then let them ask leave  even as those before them used to ask it. Thus Allah maketh clear His revelations for  you. Allah is Knower, Wise. 

[024_060]60 As for women past child-bearing, who have no hope of marriage, it is no sin  for them if they discard their (outer) clothing in such a way as not to show adornment.  But to refrain is better for them. Allah is Hearer, Knower. 

[024_061]61 No blame is there upon the blind nor any blame upon the lame nor any blame  upon the sick nor on yourselves if ye eat from your houses, or the houses of your  fathers, or the houses of your mothers, or the houses of your brothers, or the houses of  your sisters, or the houses of your fathers' brothers, or the houses of your fathers'  sisters, or the houses of your mothers' brothers, or the houses of your mothers' sisters,  or (from that) whereof ye hold the keys, or (from the house) of a friend. No sin shall it  be for you whether ye eat together or apart. But when ye enter houses, salute one  another with a greeting from Allah, blessed and sweet. Thus Allah maketh clear His  revelations for you, that haply ye may understand. 

[024_062]62 They only are the true believers who believe in Allah and His messenger  and, when they are with him on some common errand, go not away until they have  asked leave of him. Lo! those who ask leave of thee, those are they who believe in  Allah and His messenger. So, if they ask thy leave for some affair of theirs, give leave  to whom thou wilt of them, and ask for them forgiveness of Allah. Lo! Allah is  Forgiving, Merciful. 

[024_063]63 Make not the calling of the messenger among you as your calling one of  another. Allah knoweth those of you who steal away, hiding themselves. And let  those who conspire to evade orders beware lest grief or painful punishment befall  them. 

[024_064]64 Lo! verily unto Allah belongeth whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth.  He knoweth your condition. And (He knoweth) the Day when they are returned unto  Him so that He may inform them of what they did. Allah is Knower of all things.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

25. al-Furqan: The Criterion

[025_001]1 Blessed is He Who hath revealed unto His slave the Criterion (of right and  wrong), that he may be a warner to the peoples. 

[025_002]2 He unto Whom belongeth the Sovereignty of the heavens and the earth, He  hath chosen no son nor hath He any partner in the Sovereignty. He hath created  everything and hath meted out for it a measure. 

[025_003]3 Yet they choose beside Him other gods who create naught but are themselves  created, and possess not hurt nor profit for themselves, and possess not death nor life,  nor power to raise the dead. 

[025_004]4 Those who disbelieve say: This is naught but a lie that he hath invented, and  other folk have helped him with it, so that they have produced a slander and a lie. 

[025_005]5 And they say: Fables of the men of old which he hath had written down so  that they are dictated to him morn and evening. 

[025_006]6 Say (unto them, O Muhammad): He who knoweth the secret of the heavens  and the earth hath revealed it. Lo! He ever is Forgiving, Merciful. 

[025_007]7 And they say: What aileth this messenger (of Allah) that he eateth food and  walketh in the markets ? Why is not an angel sent down unto him, to be a warner with  him. 

[025_008]8 Or (why is not) treasure thrown down unto him, or why hath he not a  paradise from whence to eat ? And the evil-doers say: Ye are but following a man  bewitched. 

[025_009]9 See how they coin similitudes for thee, so that they are all astray and cannot  find a road! 

[025_010]10 Blessed is He Who, if He will, will assign thee better than (all) that - Gardens  underneath which rivers flow  - and will assign thee mansions. 

[025_011]11 Nay, but they deny (the coming of) the Hour, and for those who deny (the  coming of) the Hour We have prepared a flame. 

[025_012]12 When it seeth them from afar, they hear the crackling and the roar thereof. 

[025_013]13 And when they are flung into a narrow place thereof, chained together, they  pray for destruction there. 

[025_014]14 Pray not that day for one destruction, but pray for many destructions! 

[025_015]15 Say: Is that (doom) better or the Garden of Immortality which is promised  unto those who ward off (evil) ? It will be their reward and journey's end. 

[025_016]16 Therein abiding, they have all that they desire. It is for thy Lord a promise  that must be fulfilled. 

[025_017]17 And on the day when He will assemble them and that which they worship  instead of Allah and will say: Was it ye who misled these my slaves or did they  (themselves) wander from the way ? 

[025_018]18 They will say: Be Thou Glorified! it was not for us to choose any protecting  friends beside thee; but Thou didst give them and their fathers ease till they forgot the  warning and became lost folk. 

[025_019]19 Thus they will give you the lie regarding what ye say, then ye can neither  avert (the doom) nor obtain help. And whoso among you doeth wrong, We shall make  him taste great torment. 

[025_020]20 We never sent before thee any messengers but lo! they verily ate food and  walked in the markets. And We have appointed some of you a test for others: Will ye  be steadfast ? And thy Lord is ever Seer. 

[025_021]21 And those who look not for a meeting with Us say: Why are angels not sent  down unto us and (Why) do we not see our Lord! Assuredly they think too highly of  themselves and are scornful with great pride. 

[025_022]22 On the day when they behold the angels, on that day there will be no good  tidings for the guilty; and they will cry: A forbidding ban! 

[025_023]23 And We shall turn unto the work they did and make it scattered motes. 

[025_024]24 Those who have earned the Garden on that day will be better in their home  and happier in their place of noonday rest; 

[025_025]25 A day when the heaven with the clouds will be rent asunder and the angels  will be sent down, a grand descent. 

[025_026]26 The Sovereignty on that day will be the True (Sovereignty) belonging to the  Beneficent One, and it will be a hard day for disbelievers. 

[025_027]27 On the day when the wrong-doer gnaweth his hands, he will say: Ah, would  that I had chosen a way together with the messenger (of Allah)! 

[025_028]28 Alas for me! Ah, would that I had never taken such an one for friend! 

[025_029]29 He verily led me astray from the Reminder after it had reached me. Satan  was ever man's deserter in the hour of need. 

[025_030]30 And the messenger saith: O my Lord! Lo! mine own folk make this Qur'an of  no account. 

[025_031]31 Even so have We appointed unto every prophet an opponent from among the  guilty; but Allah sufficeth for a Guide and Helper. 

[025_032]32 And those who disbelieve say: Why is the Qur'an not revealed unto him all at  once ? (It is revealed) thus that We may strengthen thy heart therewith; and We have  arranged it in right order. 

[025_033]33 And they bring thee no similitude but We bring thee the Truth (as against it),  and better (than their similitude) as argument. 

[025_034]34 Those who will be gathered on their faces unto hell: such are worse in plight  and further from the right road. 

[025_035]35 We verily gave Moses the Scripture and placed with him his brother Aaron  as henchman. 

[025_036]36 Then We said: Go together unto the folk who have denied Our revelations.  Then We destroyed them, a complete destruction. 

[025_037]37 And Noah's folk, when they denied the messengers, We drowned them and  made of them a portent for mankind. We have prepared a painful doom for evil-doers. 

[025_038]38 And (the tribes of) A'ad and Thamud, and the dwellers in Ar-Rass, and many  generations in between. 

[025_039]39 Each (of them) We warned by examples, and each (of them) We brought to  utter ruin. 

[025_040]40 And indeed they have passed by the township whereon was rained the fatal  rain. Can it be that they have not seen it ? Nay, but they hope for no resurrection. 

[025_041]41 And when they see thee (O Muhammad) they treat thee only as a jest  (saying): Is this he whom Allah sendeth as a messenger ? 

[025_042]42 He would have led us far away from our gods if we had not been staunch to  them. They will know, when they behold the doom, who is more astray as to the road. 

[025_043]43 Hast thou seen him who chooseth for his god his own lust ? Wouldst thou  then be guardian over him ? 

[025_044]44 Or deemest thou that most of them hear or understand ? They are but as the  cattle - nay, but they are farther astray ? 

[025_045]45 Hast thou not seen how thy Lord hath spread the shade - And if He willed He  could have made it still - then We have made the sun its pilot; 

[025_046]46 Then We withdraw it unto Us, a gradual withdrawal ? 

[025_047]47 And He it is Who maketh night a covering for you, and sleep repose, and  maketh day a resurrection. 

[025_048]48 And He it is Who sendeth the winds, glad tidings heralding His mercy, and  We send down purifying water from the sky, 

[025_049]49 That We may give life thereby to a dead land, and We give many beasts and  men that We have created to drink thereof. 

[025_050]50 And verily We have repeated it among them that they may remember, but  most of mankind begrudge aught save ingratitude. 

[025_051]51 If We willed, We could raise up a warner in every village. 

[025_052]52 So obey not the disbelievers, but strive against them herewith with a great  endeavour. 

[025_053]53 And He it is Who hath given independence to the two seas (though they  meet); one palatable, sweet, and the other saltish, bitter; and hath set a bar and a  forbidding ban between them. 

[025_054]54 And He it is Who hath created man from water, and hath appointed for him  kindred by blood and kindred by marriage; for thy Lord is ever Powerful. 

[025_055]55 Yet they worship instead of Allah that which can neither benefit them nor  hurt them. The disbeliever was ever a partisan against his Lord. 

[025_056]56 And We have sent thee (O Muhammad) only as a bearer of good tidings and  a warner. 

[025_057]57 Say: I ask of you no reward for this, save that whoso will may choose a way  unto his Lord. 

[025_058]58 And trust thou in the Living One Who dieth not, and hymn His praise. He  sufficeth as the Knower of His bondmen's sins, 

[025_059]59 Who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six  Days, then He mounted the Throne. The Beneficent! Ask anyone informed  concerning Him! 

[025_060]60 And when it is said unto them: Adore the Beneficent! they say: And what is  the Beneficent ? Are we to adore whatever thou (Muhammad) biddest us ? And it  increaseth aversion in them. 

[025_061]61 Blessed be He Who hath placed in the heaven mansions of the stars, and hath  placed therein a great lamp and a moon giving light! 

[025_062]62 And He it is Who hath appointed night and day in succession, for him who  desireth to remember, or desireth thankfulness. 

[025_063]63 The (faithful) slaves of the Beneficent are they who walk upon the earth  modestly, and when the foolish ones address them answer: Peace; 

[025_064]64 And who spend the night before their Lord, prostrate and standing, 

[025_065]65 And who say: Our Lord! Avert from us the doom of hell; lo! the doom  thereof is anguish; 

[025_066]66 Lo! it is wretched as abode and station; 

[025_067]67 And those who, when they spend, are neither prodigal nor grudging; and  there is ever a firm station between the two; 

[025_068]68 And those who cry not unto any other god along with Allah, nor take the life  which Allah hath forbidden save in (course of) justice, nor commit adultery - and  whoso doeth this shall pay the penalty; 

[025_069]69 The doom will be doubled for him on the Day of Resurrection, and he will  abide therein disdained for ever; 

[025_070]70 Save him who repenteth and believeth and doth righteous work; as for such,  Allah will change their evil deeds to good deeds. Allah is ever Forgiving, Merciful. 

[025_071]71 And whosoever repenteth and doeth good, he verily repenteth toward Allah  with true repentance - 

[025_072]72 And those who will not witness vanity, but when they pass near senseless  play, pass by with dignity. 

[025_073]73 And those who, when they are reminded of the revelations of their Lord, fall  not deaf and blind thereat. 

[025_074]74 And who say: Our Lord! Vouchsafe us comfort of our wives and of our  offspring, and make us patterns for (all) those who ward off (evil). 

[025_075]75 They will be awarded the high place forasmuch as they were steadfast, and  they will meet therein with welcome and the ward of peace, 

[025_076]76 Abiding there for ever. Happy is it as abode and station! 

[025_077]77 Say (O Muhammad, unto the disbelievers): My Lord would not concern  Himself with you but for your prayer. But now ye have denied (the Truth), therefor  there will be judgment.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

26. ash-Shu`ara': The Poets

[026_001]1 Ta. Sin. Mim. 

[026_002]2 These are revelations of the Scripture that maketh plain. 

[026_003]3 It may be that thou tormentest thyself (O Muhammad) because they believe  not. 

[026_004]4 If We will, We can send down on them from the sky a portent so that their  necks would remain bowed before it. 

[026_005]5 Never cometh there unto them a fresh reminder from the Beneficent One, but  they turn away from it. 

[026_006]6 Now they have denied (the Truth); but there will come unto them tidings of  that whereat they used to scoff. 

[026_007]7 Have they not seen the earth, how much of every fruitful kind We make to  grow therein ? 

[026_008]8 Lo! herein is indeed a portent; yet most of them are not believers. 

[026_009]9 And lo! thy Lord! He is indeed the Mighty, the Merciful. 

[026_010]10 And when thy Lord called Moses, saying: Go unto the wrongdoing folk, 

[026_011]11 The folk of Pharaoh. Will they not ward off (evil) ? 

[026_012]12 He said: My Lord! Lo! I fear that they will deny me, 

[026_013]13 And I shall be embarrassed, and my tongue will not speak plainly, therefor  send for Aaron (to help me). 

[026_014]14 And they have a crime against me, so I fear that they will kill me. 

[026_015]15 He said: Nay, verily. So go ye twain with Our tokens. Lo! We shall be with  you, Hearing. 

[026_016]16 And come together unto Pharaoh and say: Lo! we bear a message of the Lord  of the Worlds, 

[026_017]17 (Saying): Let the Children of Israel go with us. 

[026_018]18 (Pharaoh) said (unto Moses): Did we not rear thee among us as a child ? And  thou didst dwell many years of thy life among us, 

[026_019]19 And thou didst that thy deed which thou didst, and thou wast one of the  ingrates. 

[026_020]20 He said: I did it then, when I was of those who are astray. 

[026_021]21 Then I fled from you when I feared you, and my Lord vouchsafed me a  command and appointed me (of the number) of those sent (by Him). 

[026_022]22 And this is the past favour wherewith thou reproachest me: that thou hast  enslaved the Children of Israel. 

[026_023]23 Pharaoh said: And what is the Lord of the Worlds ? 

[026_024]24 (Moses) said: Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them,  if ye had but sure belief. 

[026_025]25 (Pharaoh) said unto those around him: Hear ye not ? 

[026_026]26 He said: Your Lord and the Lord of your fathers. 

[026_027]27 (Pharaoh) said: Lo! your messenger who hath been sent unto you is indeed a  madman! 

[026_028]28 He said: Lord of the East and the West and all that is between them, if ye did  but understand. 

[026_029]29 (Pharaoh) said: If thou choosest a god other than me, I assuredly shall place  thee among the prisoners. 

[026_030]30 He said: Even though I show thee something plain ? 

[026_031]31 (Pharaoh) said: Produce it then, if thou art of the truthful! 

[026_032]32 Then he flung down his staff and it became a serpent manifest, 

[026_033]33 And he drew forth his hand and lo! it was white to the beholders. 

[026_034]34 (Pharaoh) said unto the chiefs about him: Lo! this is verily a knowing  wizard, 

[026_035]35 Who would drive you out of your land by his magic. Now what counsel ye ? 

[026_036]36 They said: Put him off, (him) and his brother, and send into the cities  summoners 

[026_037]37 Who shall bring unto thee every knowing wizard. 

[026_038]38 So the wizards were gathered together at a set time on a day appointed. 

[026_039]39 And it was said unto the people: Are ye (also) gathering ? 

[026_040]40 (They said): Aye, so that we may follow the wizards if they are the winners. 

[026_041]41 And when the wizards came they said unto Pharaoh: Will there surely be a  reward for us if we are the winners ? 

[026_042]42 He said: Aye, and ye will then surely be of those brought near (to me). 

[026_043]43 Moses said unto them: Throw what ye are going to throw! 

[026_044]44 Then they threw down their cords and their staves and said: By Pharaoh's  might, lo! we verily are the winners. 

[026_045]45 Then Moses threw his staff and lo! it swallowed that which they did falsely  show. 

[026_046]46 And the wizards were flung prostrate, 

[026_047]47 Crying: We believe in the Lord of the Worlds, 

[026_048]48 The Lord of Moses and Aaron. 

[026_049]49 (Pharaoh) said: Ye put your faith in him before I give you leave. Lo! he  doubtless is your chief who taught you magic! But verily ye shall come to know.  Verily I will cut off your hands and your feet alternately, and verily I will crucify you  every one. 

[026_050]50 They said: It is no hurt, for lo! unto our Lord we shall return. 

[026_051]51 Lo! we ardently hope that our Lord will forgive us our sins because we are  the first of the believers. 

[026_052]52 And We inspired Moses, saying: Take away My slaves by night, for ye will  be pursued. 

[026_053]53 Then Pharaoh sent into the cities summoners, 

[026_054]54 (Who said): Lo! these indeed are but a little troop, 

[026_055]55 And lo! they are offenders against us. 

[026_056]56 And lo! we are a ready host. 

[026_057]57 Thus did We take them away from gardens and watersprings, 

[026_058]58 And treasures and a fair estate. 

[026_059]59 Thus (were those things taken from them) and We caused the Children of  Israel to inherit them. 

[026_060]60 And they overtook them at sunrise. 

[026_061]61 And when the two hosts saw each other, those with Moses said: Lo! we are  indeed caught. 

[026_062]62 He said: Nay, verily! for lo! my Lord is with me. He will guide me. 

[026_063]63 Then We inspired Moses, saying: Smite the sea with thy staff. And it parted,  and each part was as a mountain vast. 

[026_064]64 Then brought We near the others to that place. 

[026_065]65 And We saved Moses and those with him, every one; 

[026_066]66 And We drowned the others. 

[026_067]67 Lo! herein is indeed a portent, yet most of them are not believers. 

[026_068]68 And lo, thy Lord! He is indeed the Mighty, the Merciful. 

[026_069]69 Recite unto them the story of Abraham: 

[026_070]70 When he said unto his father and his folk: What worship ye ? 

[026_071]71 They said: We worship idols, and are ever devoted unto them. 

[026_072]72 He said: Do they hear you when ye cry ? 

[026_073]73 Or do they benefit or harm you ? 

[026_074]74 They said: Nay, but we found our fathers acting on this wise. 

[026_075]75 He said: See now that which ye worship, 

[026_076]76 Ye and your forefathers! 

[026_077]77 Lo! they are (all) an enemy unto me, save the Lord of the Worlds, 

[026_078]78 Who created me, and He doth guide me, 

[026_079]79 And Who feedeth me and watereth me. 

[026_080]80 And when I sicken, then He healeth me, 

[026_081]81 And Who causeth me to die, then giveth me life (again), 

[026_082]82 And Who, I ardently hope, will forgive me my sin on the Day of Judgment. 

[026_083]83 My Lord! Vouchsafe me wisdom and unite me to the righteous. 

[026_084]84 And give unto me a good report in later generations. 

[026_085]85 And place me among the inheritors of the Garden of Delight, 

[026_086]86 And forgive my father. Lo! he is of those who err. 

[026_087]87 And abase me not on the day when they are raised, 

[026_088]88 The day when wealth and sons avail not (any man) 

[026_089]89 Save him who bringeth unto Allah a whole heart. 

[026_090]90 And the Garden will be brought nigh for those who ward off (evil). 

[026_091]91 And hell will appear plainly to the erring. 

[026_092]92 And it will be said unto them: Where is (all) that ye used to worship 

[026_093]93 Instead of Allah ? Can they help you or help themselves ? 

[026_094]94 Then will they be hurled therein, they and the seducers 

[026_095]95 And the hosts of Iblis, together. 

[026_096]96 And they will say, when they are quarrelling therein: 

[026_097]97 By Allah, of a truth we were in error manifest 

[026_098]98 When we made you equal with the Lord of the Worlds. 

[026_099]99 It was but the guilty who misled us. 

[026_100]100 Now we have no intercessors 

[026_101]101 Nor any loving friend. 

[026_102]102 Oh, that we had another turn (on earth), that we might be of the believers! 

[026_103]103 Lo! herein is indeed a portent, yet most of them are not believers! 

[026_104]104 And lo, thy Lord! He is indeed the Mighty, the Merciful. 

[026_105]105 Noah's folk denied the messengers (of Allah), 

[026_106]106 When their brother Noah said unto them: Will ye not ward off (evil) ? 

[026_107]107 Lo! I am a faithful messenger unto you, 

[026_108]108 So keep your duty to Allah, and obey me. 

[026_109]109 And I ask of you no wage therefor; my wage is the concern only of the Lord  of the Worlds. 

[026_110]110 So keep your duty to Allah, and obey me. 

[026_111]111 They said: Shall we put faith in thee, when the lowest (of the people) follow  thee ? 

[026_112]112 He said: And what knowledge have I of what they may have been doing (in  the past) ? 

[026_113]113 Lo! their reckoning is my Lord's concern, if ye but knew; 

[026_114]114 And I am not (here) to repulse believers. 

[026_115]115 I am only a plain warner. 

[026_116]116 They said: If thou cease not, O Noah, thou wilt surely be among those stoned  (to death). 

[026_117]117 He said: My Lord! Lo! my own folk deny me. 

[026_118]118 Therefor judge Thou between us, a (conclusive) judgment, and save me and  those believers who are with me. 

[026_119]119 And We saved him and those with him in the laden ship. 

[026_120]120 Then afterward We drowned the others. 

[026_121]121 Lo! herein is indeed a portent, yet most of them are not believers. 

[026_122]122 And lo, thy Lord, He is indeed the Mighty, the Merciful. 

[026_123]123 (The tribe of) A'ad denied the messengers (of Allah). 

[026_124]124 When their brother Hud said unto them: Will ye not ward off (evil) ? 

[026_125]125 Lo! I am a faithful messenger unto you, 

[026_126]126 So keep your duty to Allah and obey me. 

[026_127]127 And I ask of you no wage therefor; my wage is the concern only of the Lord  of the Worlds. 

[026_128]128 Build ye on every high place a monument for vain delight ? 

[026_129]129 And seek ye out strongholds, that haply ye may last for ever ? 

[026_130]130 And if ye seize by force, seize ye as tyrants ? 

[026_131]131 Rather keep your duty to Allah, and obey me. 

[026_132]132 Keep your duty toward Him Who hath aided you with (the good things) that  ye know, 

[026_133]133 Hath aided you with cattle and sons. 

[026_134]134 And gardens and watersprings. 

[026_135]135 Lo! I fear for you the retribution of an awful day. 

[026_136]136 They said: It is all one to us whether thou preachest or art not of those who  preach; 

[026_137]137 This is but a fable of the men of old, 

[026_138]138 And we shall not be doomed. 

[026_139]139 And they denied him; therefor We destroyed them. Lo! herein is indeed a  portent, yet most of them are not believers. 

[026_140]140 And lo! thy Lord, He is indeed the Mighty, the Merciful. 

[026_141]141 (The tribe of) Thamud denied the messengers (of Allah) 

[026_142]142 When their brother Salih said unto them: Will ye not ward off (evil) ? 

[026_143]143 Lo! I am a faithful messenger unto you, 

[026_144]144 So keep your duty to Allah and obey me. 

[026_145]145 And I ask of you no wage therefor; my wage is the concern only of the Lord  of the Worlds. 

[026_146]146 Will ye be left secure in that which is here before us, 

[026_147]147 In gardens and watersprings. 

[026_148]148 And tilled fields and heavy-sheathed palm-trees, 

[026_149]149 Though ye hew out dwellings in the mountain, being skilful ? 

[026_150]150 Therefor keep your duty to Allah and obey me, 

[026_151]151 And obey not the command of the prodigal, 

[026_152]152 Who spread corruption in the earth, and reform not. 

[026_153]153 They said: Thou art but one of the bewitched; 

[026_154]154 Thou art but a mortal like us. So bring some token if thou art of the truthful. 

[026_155]155 He said: (Behold) this she-camel. She hath the right to drink (at the well),  and ye have the right to drink, (each) on an appointed day. 

[026_156]156 And touch her not with ill lest there come on you the retribution of an awful  day. 

[026_157]157 But they hamstrung her, and then were penitent. 

[026_158]158 So the retribution came on them. Lo! herein is indeed a portent, yet most of  them are not believers. 

[026_159]159 And lo! thy Lord! He is indeed the Mighty, the Merciful. 

[026_160]160 The folk of Lot denied the messengers (of Allah), 

[026_161]161 When their brother Lot said unto them: Will ye not ward off (evil) ? 

[026_162]162 Lo! I am a faithful messenger unto you, 

[026_163]163 So keep your duty to Allah and obey me. 

[026_164]164 And I ask of you no wage therefor; my wage is the concern only of the Lord  of the Worlds. 

[026_165]165 What! Of all creatures do ye come unto the males, 

[026_166]166 And leave the wives your Lord created for you ? Nay, but ye are froward  folk. 

[026_167]167 They said: If thou cease not, O Lot, thou wilt soon be of the outcast. 

[026_168]168 He said: I am in truth of those who hate your conduct. 

[026_169]169 My Lord! Save me and my household from what they do. 

[026_170]170 So We saved him and his household, every one, 

[026_171]171 Save an old woman among those who stayed behind. 

[026_172]172 Then afterward We destroyed the others. 

[026_173]173 And We rained on them a rain. And dreadful is the rain of those who have  been warned. 

[026_174]174 Lo! herein is indeed a portent, yet most of them are not believers. 

[026_175]175 And lo! thy Lord, He is indeed the Mighty, the Merciful. 

[026_176]176 The dwellers in the wood (of Midian) denied the messengers (of Allah), 

[026_177]177 When Shu'eyb said unto them: Will ye not ward off (evil) ? 

[026_178]178 Lo! I am a faithful messenger unto you, 

[026_179]179 So keep your duty to Allah and obey me. 

[026_180]180 And I ask of you no wage for it; my wage is the concern only of the Lord of  the Worlds. 

[026_181]181 Give full measure, and be not of those who give less (than the due). 

[026_182]182 And weigh with the true balance. 

[026_183]183 Wrong not mankind in their goods, and do not evil, making mischief, in the  earth. 

[026_184]184 And keep your duty unto Him Who created you and the generations of the  men of old. 

[026_185]185 They said: Thou art but one of the bewitched; 

[026_186]186 Thou art but a mortal like us, and lo! we deem thee of the liars. 

[026_187]187 Then make fragments of the heaven fall upon us, if thou art of the truthful. 

[026_188]188 He said: My Lord is Best Aware of what ye do. 

[026_189]189 But they denied him, so there came on them the retribution of the day of  gloom. Lo! it was the retribution of an awful day. 

[026_190]190 Lo! herein is indeed a portent; yet most of them are not believers. 

[026_191]191 And lo! thy Lord! He is indeed the Mighty, the Merciful. 

[026_192]192 And lo! it is a revelation of the Lord of the Worlds, 

[026_193]193 Which the True Spirit hath brought down 

[026_194]194 Upon thy heart, that thou mayst be (one) of the warners, 

[026_195]195 In plain Arabic speech. 

[026_196]196 And lo! it is in the Scriptures of the men of old. 

[026_197]197 Is it not a token for them that the doctors of the Children of Israel know it ? 

[026_198]198 And if We had revealed it unto one of any other nation than the Arabs, 

[026_199]199 And he had read it unto them, they would not have believed in it. 

[026_200]200 Thus do We make it traverse the hearts of the guilty. 

[026_201]201 They will not believe in it till they behold the painful doom, 

[026_202]202 So that it will come upon them suddenly, when they perceive not. 

[026_203]203 Then they will say: Are we to be reprieved ? 

[026_204]204 Would they (now) hasten on Our doom ? 

[026_205]205 Hast thou then seen, if We content them for (long) years, 

[026_206]206 And then cometh that which they were promised, 

[026_207]207 (How) that wherewith they were contented naught availeth them ? 

[026_208]208 And We destroyed no township but it had its warners 

[026_209]209 For reminder, for We never were oppressors. 

[026_210]210 The devils did not bring it down. 

[026_211]211 It is not meet for them, nor is it in their power, 

[026_212]212 Lo! verily they are banished from the hearing. 

[026_213]213 Therefor invoke not with Allah another god, lest thou be one of the doomed. 

[026_214]214 And warn thy tribe of near kindred, 

[026_215]215 And lower thy wing (in kindness) unto those believers who follow thee. 

[026_216]216 And if they (thy kinsfolk) disobey thee, say: Lo! I am innocent of what they  do. 

[026_217]217 And put thy trust in the Mighty, the Merciful. 

[026_218]218 Who seeth thee when thou standest up (to pray) 

[026_219]219 And (seeth) thine abasement among those who fall prostrate (in worship). 

[026_220]220 Lo! He, only He, is the Hearer, the Knower. 

[026_221]221 Shall I inform you upon whom the devils descend ? 

[026_222]222 They descend on every sinful, false one. 

[026_223]223 They listen eagerly, but most of them are liars. 

[026_224]224 As for poets, the erring follow them. 

[026_225]225 Hast thou not seen how they stray in every valley, 

[026_226]226 And how they say that which they do not ? 

[026_227]227 Save those who believe and do good works, and remember Allah much, and  vindicate themselves after they have been wronged. Those who do wrong will come  to know by what a (great) reverse they will be overturned!

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

27. an-Naml: The Ant

[027_001]1 Ta. Sin. These are revelations of the Qur'an and a Scripture that maketh  plain; 

[027_002]2 A guidance and good tidings for believers 

[027_003]3 Who establish worship and pay the poor-due and are sure of the Hereafter. 

[027_004]4 Lo! as for those who believe not in the Hereafter, We have made their works  fairseeming unto them so that they are all astray. 

[027_005]5 Those are they for whom is the worst of punishment, and in the Hereafter  they will be the greatest losers. 

[027_006]6 Lo! as for thee (Muhammad), thou verily receivest the Qur'an from the  presence of One Wise, Aware. 

[027_007]7 (Remember) when Moses said unto his household: Lo! I spy afar off a fire; I  will bring you tidings thence, or bring to you a borrowed flame that ye may warm  yourselves. 

[027_008]8 But when he reached it, he was called, saying: Blessed is Whosoever is in the  fire and Whosoever is round about it! And Glorified be Allah, the Lord of the  Worlds! 

[027_009]9 O Moses! Lo! it is I, Allah, the Mighty, the Wise. 

[027_010]10 And throw down thy staff! But when he saw it writhing as it were a demon,  he turned to flee headlong; (but it was said unto him): O Moses! Fear not! the  emissaries fear not in My presence, 

[027_011]11 Save him who hath done wrong and afterward hath changed evil for good.  And lo! I am Forgiving, Merciful. 

[027_012]12 And put thy hand into the bosom of thy robe, it will come forth white but  unhurt. (This will be one) among nine tokens unto Pharaoh and his people Lo! they  were ever evil-living folk. 

[027_013]13 But when Our tokens came unto them, plain to see, they said: This is mere  magic, 

[027_014]14 And they denied them, though their souls acknowledged them, for spite and  arrogance. Then see the nature of the consequence for the wrong-doers! 

[027_015]15 And We verily gave knowledge unto David and Solomon, and they said:  Praise be to Allah, Who hath preferred us above many of His believing slaves! 

[027_016]16 And Solomon was David's heir. And he said: O mankind! Lo! we have been  taught the language of birds, and have been given (abundance) of all things. This  surely is evident favour. 

[027_017]17 And there were gathered together unto Solomon his armies of the jinn and  humankind, and of the birds, and they were set in battle order; 

[027_018]18 Till, when they reached the Valley of the Ants, an ant exclaimed: O ants!  Enter your dwellings lest Solomon and his armies crush you, unperceiving. 

[027_019]19 And (Solomon) smiled, laughing at her speech, and said: My Lord, arouse  me to be thankful for Thy favour wherewith Thou hast favoured me and my parents,  and to do good that shall be pleasing unto Thee, and include me in (the number of)  Thy righteous slaves. 

[027_020]20 And he sought among the birds and said: How is it that I see not the hoopoe,  or is he among the absent ? 

[027_021]21 I verily will punish him with hard punishment or I verily will slay him, or he  verily shall bring me a plain excuse. 

[027_022]22 But he was not long in coming, and he said: I have found out (a thing) that  thou apprehendest not, and I come unto thee from Sheba with sure tidings. 

[027_023]23 Lo! I found a woman ruling over them, and she hath been given (abundance)  of all things, and hers is a mighty throne. 

[027_024]24 I found her and her people worshipping the sun instead of Allah; and Satan  maketh their works fairseeming unto them, and debarreth them from the way (of  Truth), so that they go not aright; 

[027_025]25 So that they worship not Allah, Who bringeth forth the hidden in the heavens  and the earth, and knoweth what ye hide and what ye proclaim, 

[027_026]26 Allah; there is no God save Him, the Lord of the Tremendous Throne. 

[027_027]27 (Solomon) said: We shall see whether thou speakest truth or whether thou art  of the liars. 

[027_028]28 Go with this my letter and throw it down unto them; then turn away and see  what (answer) they return, 

[027_029]29 (The Queen of Sheba) said (when she received the letter): O chieftains! Lo!  there hath been thrown unto me a noble letter. 

[027_030]30 Lo! it is from Solomon, and lo! it is: In the name of Allah, the Beneficent,  the Merciful; 

[027_031]31 Exalt not yourselves against me, but come unto me as those who surrender. 

[027_032]32 She said: O chieftains! Pronounce for me in my case. I decide no case till ye  are present with me. 

[027_033]33 They said: We are lords of might and lords of great prowess, but it is for thee  to command; so consider what thou wilt command. 

[027_034]34 She said: Lo! kings, when they enter a township, ruin it and make the honour  of its people shame. Thus will they do. 

[027_035]35 But lo! I am going to send a present unto them, and to see with what  (answer) the messengers return. 

[027_036]36 So when (the envoy) came unto Solomon, (the King) said: What! Would ye  help me with wealth ? But that which Allah hath given me is better than that which  He hath given you. Nay it is ye (and not I) who exult in your gift. 

[027_037]37 Return unto them. We verily shall come unto them with hosts that they  cannot resist, and we shall drive them out from thence with shame, and they will be  abased. 

[027_038]38 He said: O chiefs! Which of you will bring me her throne before they come  unto me, surrendering ? 

[027_039]39 A stalwart of the jinn said: I will bring it thee before thou canst rise from thy  place. Lo! I verily am strong and trusty for such work. 

[027_040]40 One with whom was knowledge of the Scripture said: I will bring it thee  before thy gaze returneth unto thee. And when he saw it set in his presence,  (Solomon) said: This is of the bounty of my Lord, that He may try me whether I give  thanks or am ungrateful. Whosoever giveth thanks he only giveth thanks for (the good  of) his own soul; and whosoever is ungrateful (is ungrateful only to his own soul's  hurt). For lo! my Lord is Absolute in independence, Bountiful. 

[027_041]41 He said: Disguise her throne for her that we may see whether she will go  aright or be of those not rightly guided. 

[027_042]42 So, when she came, it was said (unto her): Is thy throne like this ? She said:  (It is) as though it were the very one. And (Solomon said): We were given the  knowledge before her and we had surrendered (to Allah). 

[027_043]43 And (all) that she was wont to worship instead of Allah hindered her, for she  came of disbelieving folk. 

[027_044]44 It was said unto her: Enter the hall. And when she saw it she deemed it a  pool and bared her legs. (Solomon) said: Lo! it is a hall, made smooth, of glass. She  said: My Lord! Lo! I have wronged myself, and I surrender with Solomon unto Allah,  the Lord of the Worlds. 

[027_045]45 And We verily sent unto Thamud their brother Salih, saying: Worship Allah.  And lo! they (then  became two parties quarrelling. 

[027_046]46 He said: O my people! Why will ye hasten on the evil rather than the good ?  Why will ye not ask pardon of Allah, that ye may receive mercy. 

[027_047]47 They said: We augur evil of thee and those with thee. He said: Your evil  augury is with Allah. Nay, but ye are folk that are being tested. 

[027_048]48 And there were in the city nine persons who made mischief in the land and  reformed not. 

[027_049]49 They said: Swear one to another by Allah that we verily will attack him and  his household by night, and afterward we will surely say unto his friend: We  witnessed not the destruction of his household. And lo! we are truthtellers. 

[027_050]50 So they plotted a plot: and We plotted a plot, while they perceived not. 

[027_051]51 Then see the nature of the consequence of their plotting, for lo! We destroyed  them and their people, every one. 

[027_052]52 See, yonder are their dwellings empty and in ruins because they did wrong.  Lo! herein is indeed a portent for a people who have knowledge. 

[027_053]53 And we saved those who believed and used to ward off (evil). 

[027_054]54 And Lot! when he said unto his folk: Will ye commit abomination  knowingly ? 

[027_055]55 Must ye needs lust after men instead of women ? Nay, but ye are folk who  act senselessly. 

[027_056]56 But the answer of his folk was naught save that they said: Expel the  household of Lot from your township, for they (forsooth) are folk who would keep  clean! 

[027_057]57 Then We saved him and his household save his wife; We destined her to be  of those who stayed behind. 

[027_058]58 And We rained a rain upon them. Dreadful is the rain of those who have  been warned. 

[027_059]59 Say (O Muhammad): Praise be to Allah, and peace be on His slaves whom  He hath chosen! Is Allah best, or (all) that ye ascribe as partners (unto Him) ? 

[027_060]60 Is not He (best) Who created the heavens and the earth, and sendeth down for  you water from the sky wherewith We cause to spring forth joyous orchards, whose  trees it never hath been yours to cause to grow. Is there any God beside Allah ? Nay,  but they are folk who ascribe equals (unto Him)! 

[027_061]61 Is not He (best) Who made the earth a fixed abode, and placed rivers in the  folds thereof, and placed firm hills therein, and hath set a barrier between the two seas  ? Is there any God beside Allah ? Nay, but most of them know not! 

[027_062]62 Is not He (best) Who answereth the wronged one when he crieth unto Him  and removeth the evil, and hath made you viceroys of the earth ? Is there any God  beside Allah ? Little do they reflect! 

[027_063]63 Is not He (best) Who guideth you in the darkness of the land and the sea, He  Who sendeth the winds as heralds of His mercy ? Is there any God beside Allah ?  High Exalted be Allah from all that they ascribe as partner (unto Him)! 

[027_064]64 Is not He (best) Who produceth creation, then reproduceth it, and Who  provideth for you from the heaven and the earth ? Is there any God beside Allah ?  Say: Bring your proof, if ye are truthful! 

[027_065]65 Say (O Muhammad): None in the heavens and the earth knoweth the Unseen  save Allah; and they know not when they will be raised (again). 

[027_066]66 Nay, but doth their knowledge reach to the Hereafter ? Nay, for they are in  doubt concerning it. Nay, for they cannot see it. 

[027_067]67 Yet those who disbelieve say: When we have become dust like our fathers,  shall we verily be brought forth (again) ? 

[027_068]68 We were promised this, forsooth, we and our fathers. (All) this is naught but  fables of the men of old. 

[027_069]69 Say (unto them, O Muhammad): Travel in the land and see the nature of the  sequel for the guilty! 

[027_070]70 And grieve thou not for them, nor be in distress because of what they plot  (against thee). 

[027_071]71 And they say: When (will) this promise (be fulfilled), if ye are truthful ? 

[027_072]72 Say: It may be that a part of that which ye would hasten on is close behind  you. 

[027_073]73 Lo! thy Lord is full of bounty for mankind, but most of them do not give  thanks. 

[027_074]74 Lo! thy Lord knoweth surely all that their bosoms hide, and all that they  proclaim. 

[027_075]75 And there is nothing hidden in the heaven or the earth but it is in a clear  Record. 

[027_076]76 Lo! this Qur'an narrateth unto the Children of Israel most of that concerning  which they differ. 

[027_077]77 And lo! it is a guidance and a mercy for believers. 

[027_078]78 Lo! thy Lord will judge between them of His wisdom, and He is the Mighty,  the Wise. 

[027_079]79 Therefor (O Muhammad) put thy trust in Allah, for thou (standest) on the  plain Truth. 

[027_080]80 Lo! thou canst not make the dead to hear, nor canst thou make the deaf to  hear the call when they have turned to flee; 

[027_081]81 Nor canst thou lead the blind out of their error. Thou canst make none to  hear, save those who believe Our revelations and who have surrendered. 

[027_082]82 And when the word is fulfilled concerning them, We shall bring forth a beast  of the earth to speak unto them because mankind had not faith in Our revelations. 

[027_083]83 And (remind them of) the Day when We shall gather out of every nation a  host of those who denied Our revelations, and they will be set in array; 

[027_084]84 Till, when they come (before their Lord), He will say: Did ye deny My  revelations when ye could not compass them in knowledge, or what was it that ye did  ? 

[027_085]85 And the Word will be fulfilled concerning them because they have done  wrong, and they will not speak. 

[027_086]86 Have they not seen how We have appointed the night that they may rest  therein, and the day sight-giving ? Lo! therein verily are portents for a people who  believe. 

[027_087]87 And (remind them of) the Day when the Trumpet will be blown, and all who  are in the heavens and the earth will start in fear, save him whom Allah willeth. And  all come unto Him, humbled. 

[027_088]88 And thou seest the hills thou deemest solid flying with the flight of clouds:  the doing of Allah Who perfecteth all things. Lo! He is Informed of what ye do. 

[027_089]89 Whoso bringeth a good deed will have better than its worth; and such are  safe from fear that Day. 

[027_090]90 And whoso bringeth an ill-deed, such will be flung down on their faces in the  Fire. Are ye rewarded aught save what ye did ? 

[027_091]91 (Say): I (Muhammad) am commanded only to serve the Lord of this land  which He hath hallowed, and unto Whom all things belong. And I am commanded to  be of those who surrender (unto Him), 

[027_092]92 And to recite the Qur'an. And whoso goeth right, goeth right only for (the  good of) his own soul; and as for him who goeth astray - (Unto him) say: Lo! I am  only a warner. 

[027_093]93 And say: Praise be to Allah Who will show you His portents so that ye shall  know them. And thy Lord is not unaware of what ye (mortals) do.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

28. al-Qasas: The Narrative

[028_001]1 Ta. Sin. Mim. 

[028_002]2 These are revelations of the Scripture that maketh plain. 

[028_003]3 We narrate unto thee (somewhat) of the story of Moses and Pharaoh with  truth, for folk who believe. 

[028_004]4 Lo! Pharaoh exalted himself in the earth and made its people castes. A tribe  among them he oppressed, killing their sons and sparing their women. Lo! he was of  those who work corruption. 

[028_005]5 And We desired to show favour unto those who were oppressed in the earth,  and to make them examples and to make them the inheritors, 

[028_006]6 And to establish them in the earth, and to show Pharaoh and Haman and their  hosts that which they feared from them. 

[028_007]7 And We inspired the mother of Moses, saying: Suckle him and, when thou  fearest for him, then cast him into the river and fear not nor grieve. Lo! We shall  bring him back unto thee and shall make him (one) of Our messengers. 

[028_008]8 And the family of Pharaoh took him up, that he might become for them an  enemy and a sorrow, Lo! Pharaoh and Haman and their hosts were ever sinning. 

[028_009]9 And the wife of Pharaoh said: (He will be) a consolation for me and for thee.  Kill him not. Peradventure he may be of use to us, or we may choose him for a son.  And they perceived not. 

[028_010]10 And the heart of the mother of Moses became void, and she would have  betrayed him if We had not fortified her heart, that she might be of the believers. 

[028_011]11 And she said unto his sister: Trace him. So she observed him from afar, and  they perceived not. 

[028_012]12 And We had before forbidden foster-mothers for him, so she said: Shall I  show you a household who will rear him for you and take care of him ? 

[028_013]13 So We restored him to his mother that she might be comforted and not  grieve, and that she might know that the promise of Allah is true. But most of them  know not. 

[028_014]14 And when he reached his full strength and was ripe, We gave him wisdom  and knowledge. Thus do We reward the good. 

[028_015]15 And he entered the city at a time of carelessness of its folk, and he found  therein two men fighting, one of his own caste, and the other of his enemies; and he  who was of his caste asked him for help against him who was of his enemies. So  Moses struck him with his fist and killed him. He said: This is of the devil's doing.  Lo! he is an enemy, a mere misleader. 

[028_016]16 He said: My Lord! Lo! I have wronged my soul, so forgive me. Then He  forgave him. Lo! He is the Forgiving, the Merciful. 

[028_017]17 He said: My Lord! Forasmuch as Thou hast favoured me, I will nevermore  be a supporter of the guilty. 

[028_018]18 And morning found him in the city, fearing, vigilant, when behold! he who  had appealed to him the day before cried out to him for help. Moses said unto him:  Lo! thou art indeed a mere hothead. 

[028_019]19 And when he would have fallen upon the man who was an enemy unto them  both, he said: O Moses! Wouldst thou kill me as thou didst kill a person yesterday.  Thou wouldst be nothing but a tyrant in the land, thou wouldst not be of the  reformers. 

[028_020]20 And a man came from the uttermost part of the city, running. He said: O  Moses! Lo! the chiefs take counsel against thee to slay thee; therefor escape. Lo! I am  of those who give thee good advice. 

[028_021]21 So he escaped from thence, fearing, vigilant. He said: My Lord! Deliver me  from the wrongdoing folk. 

[028_022]22 And when he turned his face toward Midian, he said: Peradventure my Lord  will guide me in the right road. 

[028_023]23 And when he came unto the water of Midian he found there a whole tribe of  men, watering. And he found apart from them two women keeping back (their  flocks). He said: What aileth you ? The two said: We cannot give (our flocks) to drink  till the shepherds return from the water; and our father is a very old man. 

[028_024]24 So he watered (their flock) for them. Then he turned aside into the shade, and  said: My Lord! I am needy of whatever good Thou sendest down for me. 

[028_025]25 Then there came unto him one of the two women, walking shyly. She said:  Lo! my father biddeth thee, that he may reward thee with a payment for that thou  didst water (the flock) for us. Then, when he came unto him and told him the (whole)  story, he said: Fear not! Thou hast escaped from the wrongdoing folk. 

[028_026]26 One of the two women said: O my father! Hire him! For the best (man) that  thou canst hire in the strong, the trustworthy. 

[028_027]27 He said: Lo! I fain would marry thee to one of these two daughters of mine  on condition that thou hirest thyself to me for (the term of) eight pilgrimages. Then if  thou completest ten it will be of thine own accord, for I would not make it hard for  thee. Allah willing, thou wilt find me of the righteous. 

[028_028]28 He said: That (is settled) between thee and me. Whichever of the two terms I  fulfil, there will be no injustice to me, and Allah is Surety over what we say. 

[028_029]29 Then, when Moses had fulfilled the term, and was travelling with his  housefolk, he saw in the distance a fire and said unto his housefolk: Bide ye (here).  Lo! I see in the distance a fire; peradventure I shall bring you tidings thence, or a  brand from the fire that ye may warm yourselves. 

[028_030]30 And when he reached it, he was called from the right side of the valley in the  blessed field, from the tree: O Moses! Lo! I, even I, am Allah, the Lord of the Worlds; 

[028_031]31 Throw down thy staff. And when he saw it writhing as it had been a demon,  he turned to flee headlong, (and it was said unto him): O Moses! Draw nigh and fear  not. Lo! thou art of those who are secure. 

[028_032]32 Thrust thy hand into the bosom of thy robe it will come forth white without  hurt. And guard thy heart from fear. Then these shall be two proofs from your Lord  unto Pharaoh and his chiefs. Lo! they are evil-living folk. 

[028_033]33 He said: My Lord! Lo! I killed a man among them and I fear that they will  kill me. 

[028_034]34 My brother Aaron is more eloquent than me in speech. Therefor send him  with me as a helper to confirm me. Lo! I fear that they will give the lie to me. 

[028_035]35 He said: We will strengthen thine arm with thy brother, and We will give  unto you both power so that they cannot reach you for Our portents. Ye twain, and  those who follow you, will be the winners. 

[028_036]36 But when Moses came unto them with Our clear tokens, they said: This is  naught but invented magic. We never heard of this among our fathers of old. 

[028_037]37 And Moses said: My Lord is Best Aware of him who bringeth guidance from  His presence, and whose will be the sequel of the Home (of bliss). Lo! wrong-doers  will not be successful. 

[028_038]38 And Pharaoh said: O chiefs! I know not that ye have a god other than me, so  kindle for me (a fire), O Haman, to bake the mud; and set up for me a lofty tower in  order that I may survey the God of Moses; and lo! I deem him of the liars. 

[028_039]39 And he and his hosts were haughty in the land without right, and deemed that  they would never be brought back to Us. 

[028_040]40 Therefor We seized him and his hosts, and abandoned them unto the sea.  Behold the nature of the consequence for evil-doers! 

[028_041]41 And We made them patterns that invite unto the Fire, and on the Day of  Resurrection they will not be helped. 

[028_042]42 And We made a curse to follow them in this world, and on the Day of  Resurrection they will be among the hateful. 

[028_043]43 And We verily gave the Scripture unto Moses after We had destroyed the  generations of old: clear testimonies for mankind, and a guidance and a mercy, that  haply they might reflect. 

[028_044]44 And thou (Muhammad) wast not on the western side (of the Mount) when  We expounded unto Moses the commandment, and thou wast not among those  present; 

[028_045]45 But We brought forth generations, and their lives dragged on for them. And  thou wast not a dweller in Midian, reciting unto them Our revelations, but We kept  sending (messengers to men). 

[028_046]46 And thou was not beside the Mount when We did call; but (the knowledge of  it is) a mercy from thy Lord that thou mayst warn a folk unto whom no warner came  before thee, that haply they may give heed. 

[028_047]47 Otherwise, if disaster should afflict them because of that which their own  hands have sent before (them), they might say: Our Lord! Why sentest Thou no  messenger unto us, that we might have followed Thy revelations and been of the  believers ? 

[028_048]48 But when there came unto them the Truth from Our presence, they said: Why  is he not given the like of what was given unto Moses ? Did they not disbelieve in  that which was given unto Moses of old ? They say: Two magics that support each  other; and they say: Lo! in both we are disbelievers. 

[028_049]49 Say (unto them, O Muhammad): Then bring a scripture from the presence of  Allah that giveth clearer guidance than these two (that) I may follow it, if ye are  truthful. 

[028_050]50 And if they answer thee not, then know that what they follow is their lusts.  And who goeth farther astray than he who followeth his lust without guidance from  Allah. Lo! Allah guideth not wrongdoing folk. 

[028_051]51 And now verily We have caused the Word to reach them, that haply they  may give heed. 

[028_052]52 Those unto whom We gave the Scripture before it, they believe in it, 

[028_053]53 And when it is recited unto them, they say: We believe in it. Lo! it is the  Truth from our Lord. Lo! even before it we were of those who surrender (unto Him). 

[028_054]54 These will be given their reward twice over, because they are steadfast and  repel evil with good, and spend of that wherewith We have provided them, 

[028_055]55 And when they hear vanity they withdraw from it and say: Unto us our  works and unto you your works. Peace be unto you! We desire not the ignorant. 

[028_056]56 Lo! thou (O Muhammad) guidest not whom thou lovest, but Allah guideth  whom He will. And He is Best Aware of those who walk aright. 

[028_057]57 And they say: If we were to follow the Guidance with thee we should be torn  out of our land. Have We not established for them a sure sanctuary, whereunto the  produce of all things is brought (in trade), a provision from Our presence ? But most  of them know not. 

[028_058]58 And how many a community have We destroyed that was thankless for its  means of livelihood! And yonder are their dwellings, which have not been inhabited  after them save a little. And We, even We, were the inheritors. 

[028_059]59 And never did thy Lord destroy the townships, till He had raised up in their  mother(-town) a messenger reciting unto them Our revelations. And never did We  destroy the townships unless the folk thereof were evil-doers. 

[028_060]60 And whatsoever ye have been given is a comfort of the life of the world and  an ornament thereof; and that which Allah hath is better and more lasting. Have ye  then no sense ? 

[028_061]61 Is he whom We have promised a fair promise which he will find (true) like  him whom We suffer to enjoy awhile the comfort of the life of the world, then on the  Day of Resurrection he will be of those arraigned ? 

[028_062]62 On the day when He will call unto them and say: Where are My partners  whom ye imagined ? 

[028_063]63 Those concerning whom the Word will have come true will say: Our Lord!  These are they whom we led astray. We led them astray even as we ourselves were  astray. We declare our innocence before Thee: us they never worshipped. 

[028_064]64 And it will be said: Cry unto your (so-called) partners (of Allah). And they  will cry unto them, and they will give no answer unto them, and they will see the  Doom. Ah, if they had but been guided! 

[028_065]65 And on the Day when He will call unto them and say: What answer gave ye  to the messengers ? 

[028_066]66 On that day (all) tidings will be dimmed for them, nor will they ask one of  another, 

[028_067]67 But as for him who shall repent and believe and do right, he haply may be  one of the successful. 

[028_068]68 Thy Lord bringeth to pass what He willeth and chooseth. They have never  any choice. Glorified be Allah and Exalted above all that they associate (with Him)! 

[028_069]69 And thy Lord knoweth what their breasts conceal, and what they publish. 

[028_070]70 And He is Allah; there is no God save Him. His is all praise in the former  and the latter (state), and His is the command, and unto Him ye will be brought back. 

[028_071]71 Say: Have ye thought, if Allah made night everlasting for you till the Day of  Resurrection, who is a god beside Allah who could bring you light ? Will ye not then  hear ? 

[028_072]72 Say: Have ye thought, if Allah made day everlasting for you till the Day of  Resurrection, who is a god beside Allah who could bring you night wherein ye rest ?  Will ye not then see ? 

[028_073]73 Of His mercy hath He appointed for you night and day, that therein ye may  rest, and that ye may seek His bounty, and that haply ye may be thankful. 

[028_074]74 And on the Day when He shall call unto them and say: Where are My  partners whom ye pretended ? 

[028_075]75 And We shall take out from every nation a witness and We shall say: Bring  your proof. Then they will know that Allah hath the Truth, and all that they invented  will have failed them. 

[028_076]76 Now Korah was of Moses' folk, but he oppressed them; and We gave him so  much treasure that the stores thereof would verily have been a burden for a troop of  mighty men. When his own folk said unto him: Exult not; lo! Allah loveth not the  exultant; 

[028_077]77 But seek the abode of the Hereafter in that which Allah hath given thee and  neglect not thy portion of the world, and be thou kind even as Allah hath been kind to  thee, and seek not corruption in the earth; lo! Allah loveth not corrupters, 

[028_078]78 He said: I have been given it only on account of knowledge I possess. Knew  he not that Allah had destroyed already of the generations before him men who were  mightier than him in strength and greater in respect of following ? The guilty are not  questioned of their sins. 

[028_079]79 Then went he forth before his people in his pomp. Those who were desirous  of the life of the world said: Ah, would that we had the like of what hath been given  unto Korah! Lo! he is lord of rare good fortune. 

[028_080]80 But those who had been given knowledge said: Woe unto you! The reward of  Allah for him who believeth and doeth right is better, and only the steadfast will  obtain it. 

[028_081]81 So We caused the earth to swallow him and his dwelling-place. Then he had  no host to help him against Allah, nor was he of those who can save themselves. 

[028_082]82 And morning found those who had coveted his place but yesterday crying:  Ah, welladay! Allah enlargeth the provision for whom He will of His slaves and  straiteneth it (for whom He will). If Allah had not been gracious unto us He would  have caused it to swallow us (also). Ah, welladay! the disbelievers never prosper. 

[028_083]83 As for that Abode of the Hereafter We assign it unto those who seek not  oppression in the earth, nor yet corruption. The sequel is for those who ward off  (evil). 

[028_084]84 Whoso bringeth a good deed, he will have better than the same; while as for  him who bringeth an ill-deed, those who do ill-deeds will be requited only what they  did. 

[028_085]85 Lo! He Who hath given thee the Qur'an for a law will surely bring thee home  again. Say: My Lord is Best Aware of him who bringeth guidance and him who is in  error manifest. 

[028_086]86 Thou hadst no hope that the Scripture would be inspired in thee; but it is a  mercy from thy Lord, so never be a helper to the disbelievers. 

[028_087]87 And let them not divert thee from the revelations of Allah after they have  been sent down unto thee; but call (mankind) unto thy Lord, and be not of those who  ascribe partners (unto Him). 

[028_088]88 And cry not unto any other god along with Allah. There is no God save Him.  Everything will perish save His countenance. His is the command, and unto Him ye  will be brought back.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

29. al-`Ankabut: The Spider

[029_001]1 Alif. Lam. Mim. 

[029_002]2 Do men imagine that they will be left (at ease) because they say, We believe,  and will not be tested with affliction ? 

[029_003]3 Lo! We tested those who were before you. Thus Allah knoweth those who  are sincere, and knoweth those who feign. 

[029_004]4 Or do those who do ill-deeds imagine that they can outstrip Us ? Evil (for  them) is that which they decide. 

[029_005]5 Whoso looketh forward to the meeting with Allah (let him know that) Allah's  reckoning is surely nigh, and He is the Hearer, the Knower. 

[029_006]6 And whosoever striveth, striveth only for himself, for lo! Allah is altogether  Independent of (His) creatures. 

[029_007]7 And as for those who believe and do good works, We shall remit from them  their evil deeds and shall repay them the best that they did. 

[029_008]8 We have enjoined on man kindness to parents; but if they strive to make thee  join with Me that of which thou hast no knowledge, then obey them not. Unto Me is  your return and I shall tell you what ye used to do. 

[029_009]9 And as for those who believe and do good works, We verily shall make them  enter in among the righteous. 

[029_010]10 Of mankind is he who saith: We believe in Allah, but, if he be made to suffer  for the sake of Allah, he mistaketh the persecution of mankind for Allah's  punishment; and then, if victory cometh from thy Lord, will say: Lo! we were with  you (all the while). Is not Allah Best Aware of what is in the bosoms of (His)  creatures ? 

[029_011]11 Verily Allah knoweth those who believe, and verily He knoweth the  hypocrites. 

[029_012]12 Those who disbelieve say unto those who believe: Follow our way (of  religion) and we verily will bear your sins (for you). They cannot bear aught of their  sins. Lo! they verily are liars. 

[029_013]13 But they verily will bear their own loads and other loads beside their own,  and they verily will be questioned on the Day of Resurrection concerning that which  they invented. 

[029_014]14 And verily we sent Noah (as Our messenger) unto his folk, and he continued  with them for a thousand years save fifty years; and the flood engulfed them, for they  were wrong-doers. 

[029_015]15 And We rescued him and those with him in the ship, and made of it a portent  for the peoples. 

[029_016]16 And Abraham! (Remember) when he said unto his folk: Serve Allah, and  keep your duty unto Him; that is better for you if ye did but know. 

[029_017]17 Ye serve instead of Allah only idols, and ye only invent a lie. Lo! those  whom ye serve instead of Allah own no provision for you. So seek your provision  from Allah, and serve Him, and give thanks unto Him, (for) unto Him ye will be  brought back. 

[029_018]18 But if ye deny, then nations have denied before you. The messenger is only  to convey (the message) plainly. 

[029_019]19 See they not how Allah produceth creation, then reproduceth it ? Lo! for  Allah that is easy. 

[029_020]20 Say (O Muhammad): Travel in the land and see how He originated creation,  then Allah bringeth forth the later growth. Lo! Allah is Able to do all things. 

[029_021]21 He punisheth whom He will and showeth mercy unto whom He will, and  unto Him ye will be turned. 

[029_022]22 Ye cannot escape (from Him) in the earth or in the sky, and beside Allah  there is for you no friend or helper. 

[029_023]23 Those who disbelieve in the revelations of Allah and in (their) Meeting with  Him, such have no hope of My mercy. For such there is a painful doom. 

[029_024]24 But the answer of his folk was only that they said: "Kill him" or "Burn him."  Then Allah saved him from the Fire. Lo! herein verily are portents for folk who  believe. 

[029_025]25 He said: Ye have chosen only idols instead of Allah. The love between you is  only in the life of the world. Then on the Day of Resurrection ye will deny each other  and curse each other, and your abode will be the Fire, and ye will have no helpers. 

[029_026]26 And Lot believed him, and said: Lo! I am a fugitive unto my Lord. Lo! He,  only He, is the Mighty, the Wise. 

[029_027]27 And We bestowed on him Isaac and Jacob, and We established the  prophethood and the Scripture among his seed, and We gave him his reward in the  world, and lo! in the Hereafter he verily is among the righteous. 

[029_028]28 And Lot! (Remember) when he said unto his folk: Lo! ye commit lewdness  such as no creature did before you. 

[029_029]29 For come ye not in unto males, and cut ye not the road (for travellers), and  commit ye not abomination in your meetings ? But the answer of his folk was only  that they said: Bring Allah's doom upon us if thou art a truthteller! 

[029_030]30 He said: My Lord! Give me victory over folk who work corruption. 

[029_031]31 And when Our messengers brought Abraham the good news, they said: Lo!  we are about to destroy the people of that township, for its people are wrong-doers. 

[029_032]32 He said: Lo! Lot is there. They said: We are best aware of who is there. We  are to deliver him and his household, all save his wife, who is of those who stay  behind. 

[029_033]33 And when Our messengers came unto Lot, he was troubled upon their  account, for he could not protect them; but they said: Fear not, nor grieve! Lo! we are  to deliver thee and thy household, (all) save thy wife, who is of those who stay  behind. 

[029_034]34 Lo! We are about to bring down upon the folk of this township a fury from  the sky because they are evil-livers. 

[029_035]35 And verily of that We have left a clear sign for people who have sense. 

[029_036]36 And unto Midian We sent Shu'eyb, their brother. He said: O my people!  Serve Allah, and look forward to the Last Day, and do not evil, making mischief, in  the earth. 

[029_037]37 But they denied him, and the dreadful earthquake took them, and morning  found them prostrate in their dwelling place. 

[029_038]38 And (the tribes of) A'ad and Thamud! (Their fate) is manifest unto you from  their (ruined and deserted) dwellings. Satan made their deeds seem fair unto them and  so debarred them from the Way, though they were keen observers. 

[029_039]39 And Korah, Pharaoh and Haman! Moses came unto them with clear proofs  (of Allah's Sovereignty), but they were boastful in the land. And they were not  winners (in the race). 

[029_040]40 So We took each one in his sin; of them was he on whom We sent a  hurricane, and of them was he who was overtaken by the (Awful) Cry, and of them  was he whom We caused the earth to swallow, and of them was he whom We  drowned. It was not for Allah to wrong them, but they wronged themselves. 

[029_041]41 The likeness of those who choose other patrons than Allah is as the likeness  of the spider when she taketh unto herself a house, and lo! the frailest of all houses is  the spider's house, if they but knew. 

[029_042]42 Lo! Allah knoweth what thing they invoke instead of Him. He is the Mighty,  the Wise. 

[029_043]43 As for these similitudes, We coin them for mankind, but none will grasp their  meaning save the wise. 

[029_044]44 Allah created the heavens and the earth with truth. Lo! therein is indeed a  portent for believers. 

[029_045]45 Recite that which hath been inspired in thee of the Scripture, and establish  worship. Lo! worship preserveth from lewdness and iniquity, but verily remembrance  of Allah is more important. And Allah knoweth what ye do. 

[029_046]46 And argue not with the People of the Scripture unless it be in (a way) that is  better, save with such of them as do wrong; and say: We believe in that which hath  been revealed unto us and revealed unto you; our God and your God is One, and unto  Him we surrender. 

[029_047]47 In like manner We have revealed unto thee the Scripture, and those unto  whom We gave the Scripture aforetime will believe therein; and of these (also) there  are some who believe therein. And none deny Our revelations save the disbelievers. 

[029_048]48 And thou (O Muhammad) wast not a reader of any scripture before it, nor  didst thou write it with thy right hand, for then might those have doubted, who follow  falsehood. 

[029_049]49 But it is clear revelations in the hearts of those who have been given  knowledge, and none deny Our revelations save wrong-doers. 

[029_050]50 And they say: Why are not portents sent down upon him from his Lord ?  Say: Portents are with Allah only, and I am but a plain warner. 

[029_051]51 Is it not enough for them that We have sent down unto thee the Scripture  which is read unto them ? Lo! herein verily is mercy, and a reminder for folk who  believe. 

[029_052]52 Say (unto them, O Muhammad): Allah sufficeth for witness between me and  you. He knoweth whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth. And those who believe  in vanity and disbelieve in Allah, they it is who are the losers. 

[029_053]53 They bid thee hasten on the doom (of Allah). And if a term had not been  appointed, the doom would assuredly have come unto them (ere now). And verily it  will come upon them suddenly when they perceive not. 

[029_054]54 They bid thee hasten on the doom, when lo! hell verily will encompass the  disbelievers 

[029_055]55 On the day when the doom will overwhelm them from above them and from  underneath their feet, and He will say: Taste what ye used to do! 

[029_056]56 O my bondmen who believe! Lo! My earth is spacious. Therefor serve Me  only. 

[029_057]57 Every soul will taste of death. Then unto Us ye will be returned. 

[029_058]58 Those who believe and do good works, them verily We shall house in lofty  dwellings of the Garden underneath which rivers flow. There they will dwell secure.  How sweet the guerdon of the toilers, 

[029_059]59 Who persevere, and put their trust in their Lord! 

[029_060]60 And how many an animal there is that beareth not its own provision! Allah  provideth for it and for you. He is the Hearer, the Knower. 

[029_061]61 And if thou wert to ask them: Who created the heavens and the earth, and  constrained the sun and the moon (to their appointed work) ? they would say: Allah.  How then are they turned away ? 

[029_062]62 Allah maketh the provision wide for whom He will of His bondmen, and  straiteneth it for whom (He will). Lo! Allah is Aware of all things. 

[029_063]63 And if thou wert to ask them: Who causeth water to come down from the  sky, and therewith reviveth the earth after its death ? they verily would say: Allah.  Say: Praise be to Allah! But most of them have no sense. 

[029_064]64 This life of the world is but a pastime and a game. Lo! the home of the  Hereafter - that is Life, if they but knew. 

[029_065]65 And when they mount upon the ships they pray to Allah, making their faith  pure for Him only, but when He bringeth them safe to land, behold! they ascribe  partners (unto Him), 

[029_066]66 That they may disbelieve in that which We have given them, and that they  may take their ease. But they will come to know. 

[029_067]67 Have they not seen that We have appointed a sanctuary immune (from  violence), while mankind are ravaged all around them ? Do they then believe in  falsehood and disbelieve in the bounty of Allah ? 

[029_068]68 Who doeth greater wrong than he who inventeth a lie concerning Allah, or  denieth the truth when it cometh unto him ? Is not there a home in hell for  disbelievers ? 

[029_069]69 As for those who strive in Us, We surely guide them to Our paths, and lo!  Allah is with the good.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

30. ar-Rum: The Romans

[030_001]1 Alif. Lam. Mim. 

[030_002]2 The Romans have been defeated 

[030_003]3 In the nearer land, and they, after their defeat will be victorious 

[030_004]4 Within ten years - Allah's is the command in the former case and in the latter  - and in that day believers will rejoice 

[030_005]5 In Allah's help to victory. He helpeth to victory whom He will. He is the  Mighty, the Merciful. 

[030_006]6 It is a promise of Allah. Allah faileth not His promise, but most of mankind  know not. 

[030_007]7 They know only some appearance of the life of the world, and are heedless  of the Hereafter. 

[030_008]8 Have they not pondered upon themselves ? Allah created not the heavens and  the earth, and that which is between them, save with truth and for a destined end. But  truly many of mankind are disbelievers in the meeting with their Lord. 

[030_009]9 Have they not travelled in the land and seen the nature of the consequence  for those who were before them ? They were stronger than these in power, and they  dug the earth and built upon it more than these have built. Messengers of their own  came unto them with clear proofs (of Allah's Sovereignty). Surely Allah wronged  them not, but they did wrong themselves. 

[030_010]10 Then evil was the consequence to those who dealt in evil, because they  denied the revelations of Allah and made a mock of them. 

[030_011]11 Allah produceth creation, then He reproduceth it, then unto Him ye will be  returned. 

[030_012]12 And in the day when the Hour riseth the unrighteous will despair. 

[030_013]13 There will be none to intercede for them of those whom they made equal  with Allah. And they will reject their partners (whom they ascribed unto Him). 

[030_014]14 In the day when the Hour cometh, in that day they will be sundered. 

[030_015]15 As for those who believed and did good works, they will be made happy in a  Garden. 

[030_016]16 But as for those who disbelieved and denied Our revelations, and denied the  meeting of the Hereafter, such will be brought to doom. 

[030_017]17 So glory be to Allah when ye enter the night and when ye enter the morning - 

[030_018]18 Unto Him be praise in the heavens and the earth! - and at the sun's decline  and in the noonday. 

[030_019]19 He bringeth forth the living from the dead, and He bringeth forth the dead  from the living, and He reviveth the earth after her death. And even so will ye be  brought forth. 

[030_020]20 And of His signs is this: He created you of dust, and behold you human  beings, ranging widely! 

[030_021]21 And of His signs is this: He created for you helpmeets from yourselves that  ye might find rest in them, and He ordained between you love and mercy. Lo! herein  indeed are portents for folk who reflect. 

[030_022]22 And of His signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the  difference of your languages and colours. Lo! herein indeed are portents for men of  knowledge. 

[030_023]23 And of His signs is your slumber by night and by day, and your seeking of  His bounty. Lo! herein indeed are portents for folk who heed. 

[030_024]24 And of His signs is this: He showeth you the lightning for a fear and for a  hope, and sendeth down water from the sky, and thereby quickeneth the earth after  her death. Lo! herein indeed are portents for folk who understand. 

[030_025]25 And of His signs is this: The heavens and the earth stand fast by His  command, and afterward, when He calleth you, lo! from the earth ye will emerge. 

[030_026]26 Unto Him belongeth whosoever is in the heavens and the earth. All are  obedient unto Him. 

[030_027]27 He it is Who produceth creation, then reproduceth it, and it is easier for Him.  His is the Sublime Similitude in the heavens and the earth. He is the Mighty, the  Wise. 

[030_028]28 He coineth for you a similitude of yourselves. Have ye, from among those  whom your right hands possess, partners in the wealth We have bestowed upon you,  equal with you in respect thereof, so that ye fear them as ye fear each other (that ye  ascribe unto Us partners out of that which We created) ? Thus We display the  revelations for people who have sense. 

[030_029]29 Nay, but those who do wrong follow their own lusts without knowledge.  Who is able to guide him whom Allah hath sent astray ? For such there are no  helpers. 

[030_030]30 So set thy purpose (O Muhammad) for religion as a man by nature upright -  the nature (framed) of Allah, in which He hath created man. There is no altering (the  laws of) Allah's creation. That is the right religion, but most men know not - 

[030_031]31 Turning unto Him (only); and be careful of your duty unto Him and establish  worship, and be not of those who ascribe partners (unto Him); 

[030_032]32 Of those who split up their religion and became schismatics, each sect  exulting in its tenets. 

[030_033]33 And when harm toucheth men they cry unto their Lord, turning to Him in  repentance; then, when they have tasted of His mercy, behold! some of them attribute  partners to their Lord 

[030_034]34 So as to disbelieve in that which We have given them. (Unto such it is said):  Enjoy yourselves awhile, but ye will come to know. 

[030_035]35 Or have We revealed unto them any warrant which speaketh of that which  they associate with Him ? 

[030_036]36 And when We cause mankind to taste of mercy they rejoice therein; but if an  evil thing befall them as the consequence of their own deeds, lo! they are in despair! 

[030_037]37 See they not that Allah enlargeth the provision for whom He will, and  straiteneth (it for whom He will). Lo! herein indeed are portents for folk who believe. 

[030_038]38 So give to the kinsman his due, and to the needy, and to the wayfarer. That is  best for those who seek Allah's Countenance. And such are they who are successful. 

[030_039]39 That which ye give in usury in order that it may increase on (other) people's  property hath no increase with Allah; but that which ye give in charity, seeking  Allah's Countenance, hath increase manifold. 

[030_040]40 Allah is He Who created you and then sustained you, then causeth you to die,  then giveth life to you again. Is there any of your (so-called) partners (of Allah) that  doeth aught of that ? Praised and Exalted be He above what they associate (with  Him)! 

[030_041]41 Corruption doth appear on land and sea because of (the evil) which men's  hands have done, that He may make them taste a part of that which they have done, in  order that they may return. 

[030_042]42 Say (O Muhammad, to the disbelievers): Travel in the land, and see the  nature of the consequence for those who were before you! Most of them were  idolaters. 

[030_043]43 So set thy purpose resolutely for the right religion, before the inevitable day  cometh from Allah. On that day mankind will be sundered- 

[030_044]44 Whoso disbelieveth must (then) bear the consequences of his disbelief, while  those who do right make provision for themselves - 

[030_045]45 That He may reward out of His bounty those who believe and do good  works. Lo! He loveth not the disbelievers (in His guidance). 

[030_046]46 And of His signs is this: He sendeth herald winds to make you taste His  mercy, and that the ships may sail at His command, and that ye may seek his favour,  and that haply ye may be thankful. 

[030_047]47 Verily We sent before thee (Muhammad) messengers to their own folk. Then  we took vengeance upon those who were guilty (in regard to them). To help believers  is ever incumbent upon Us. 

[030_048]48 Allah is He Who sendeth the winds so that they raise clouds, and spreadeth  them along the sky as pleaseth Him, and causeth them to break and thou seest the rain  downpouring from within them. And when He maketh it to fall on whom He will of  His bondmen, lo! they rejoice; 

[030_049]49 Though before that, even before it was sent down upon them, they were in  despair. 

[030_050]50 Look, therefore, at the prints of Allah's mercy (in creation): how He  quickeneth the earth after her death. Lo! He verily is the Quickener of the Dead, and  He is Able to do all things. 

[030_051]51 And if We sent a wind and they beheld it yellow, they verily would still  continue in their disbelief. 

[030_052]52 For verily thou (Muhammad) canst not make the dead to hear, nor canst thou  make the deaf to hear the call when they have turned to flee. 

[030_053]53 Nor canst thou guide the blind out of their error. Thou canst make none to  hear save those who believe in Our revelations so that they surrender (unto Him). 

[030_054]54 Allah is He Who shaped you out of weakness, then appointed after weakness  strength, then, after strength, appointed weakness and grey hair. He createth what He  will. He is the Knower, the Mighty. 

[030_055]55 And on the day when the Hour riseth the guilty will vow that they did tarry  but an hour - thus were they ever deceived. 

[030_056]56 But those to whom knowledge and faith are given will say: The truth is, ye  have tarried, by Allah's decree, until the Day of Resurrection. This is the Day of  Resurrection, but ye used not to know. 

[030_057]57 In that day their excuses will not profit those who did injustice, nor will they  be allowed to make amends. 

[030_058]58 Verily We have coined for mankind in this Qur'an all kinds of similitudes;  and indeed if thou camest unto them with a miracle, those who disbelieve would  verily exclaim: Ye are but tricksters! 

[030_059]59 Thus doth Allah seal the hearts of those who know not. 

[030_060]60 So have patience (O Muhammad)! Allah's promise is the very truth, and let  not those who have no certainty make thee impatient.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

31. Luqman: Lukman

[031_001]1 Alif. Lam. Mim. 

[031_002]2 These are revelations of the wise Scripture, 

[031_003]3 A guidance and a mercy for the good, 

[031_004]4 Those who establish worship and pay the poor-due and have sure faith in the  Hereafter. 

[031_005]5 Such have guidance from their Lord. Such are the successful. 

[031_006]6 And of mankind is he who payeth for mere pastime of discourse, that he may  mislead from Allah's way without knowledge, and maketh it the butt of mockery. For  such there is a shameful doom. 

[031_007]7 And when Our revelations are recited unto him he turneth away in pride as if  he heard them not, as if there were a deafness in his ears. So give him tidings of a  painful doom. 

[031_008]8 Lo! those who believe and do good works, for them are the gardens of  delight, 

[031_009]9 Wherein they will abide. It is a promise of Allah in truth. He is the Mighty,  the Wise. 

[031_010]10 He hath created the heavens without supports that ye can see, and hath cast  into the earth firm hills, so that it quake not with you; and He hath dispersed therein  all kinds of beasts. And We send down water from the sky and We cause (plants) of  every goodly kind to grow therein. 

[031_011]11 This is the Creation of Allah. Now show me that which those (ye worship)  beside Him have created. Nay, but the wrong-doers are in error manifest! 

[031_012]12 And verily We gave Luqman wisdom, saying: Give thanks unto Allah; and  whosoever giveth thanks, he giveth thanks for (the good of) his soul. And whosoever  refuseth - Lo! Allah is Absolute, Owner of Praise. 

[031_013]13 And (remember) when Luqman said unto his son, when he was exhorting  him: O my dear son! Ascribe no partners unto Allah. Lo! to ascribe partners (unto  Him) is a tremendous wrong - 

[031_014]14 And We have enjoined upon man concerning his partners - His mother  beareth him in weakness upon weakness, and his weaning is in two years - Give  thanks unto Me and unto thy parents. Unto Me is the journeying. 

[031_015]15 But if they strive with thee to make thee ascribe unto Me as partner that of  which thou hast no knowledge, then obey them not. Consort with them in the world  kindly, and follow the path of him who repenteth unto Me. Then unto Me will be your  return, and I shall tell you what ye used to do - 

[031_016]16 O my dear son! Lo! though it be but the weight of a grain of mustard-seed,  and though it be in a rock, or in the heavens, or in the earth, Allah will bring it forth.  Lo! Allah is Subtile, Aware. 

[031_017]17 O my dear son! Establish worship and enjoin kindness and forbid iniquity,  and persevere whatever may befall thee. Lo! that is of the steadfast heart of things. 

[031_018]18 Turn not thy cheek in scorn toward folk, nor walk with pertness in the land.  Lo! Allah loveth not each braggart boaster. 

[031_019]19 Be modest in thy bearing and subdue thy voice. Lo! the harshest of all voices  is the voice of the ass. 

[031_020]20 See ye not how Allah hath made serviceable unto you whatsoever is in the  skies and whatsoever is in the earth and hath loaded you with His favours both  without and within ? Yet of mankind is he who disputeth concerning Allah, without  knowledge or guidance or a scripture giving light. 

[031_021]21 And if it be said unto them: Follow that which Allah hath revealed, they say:  Nay, but we follow that wherein we found our fathers. What! Even though the devil  were inviting them unto the doom of flame ? 

[031_022]22 Whosoever surrendereth his purpose to Allah while doing good, he verily  hath grasped the firm hand-hold. Unto Allah belongeth the sequel of all things. 

[031_023]23 And whosoever disbelieveth, let not his disbelief afflict thee (O  Muhammad). Unto Us is their return, and We shall tell them what they did. Lo! Allah  is Aware of what is in the breasts (of men). 

[031_024]24 We give them comfort for a little, and then We drive them to a heavy doom. 

[031_025]25 If thou shouldst ask them: Who created the heavens and the earth ? they  would answer: Allah. Say: Praise be to Allah! But most of them know not. 

[031_026]26 Unto Allah belongeth whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth. Lo! Allah,  He is the Absolute, the Owner of Praise. 

[031_027]27 And if all the trees in the earth were pens, and the sea, with seven more seas  to help it, (were ink), the words of Allah could not be exhausted. Lo! Allah is Mighty,  Wise. 

[031_028]28 Your creation and your raising (from the dead) are only as (the creation and  the raising of) a single soul. Lo! Allah is Hearer, Knower. 

[031_029]29 Hast thou not seen how Allah causeth the night to pass into the day and  causeth the day to pass into the night, and hath subdued the sun and the moon (to do  their work), each running unto an appointed term; and that Allah is Informed of what  ye do ? 

[031_030]30 That (is so) because Allah, He is the True, and that which they invoke beside  Him is the False, and because Allah, He is the Sublime, the Great. 

[031_031]31 Hast thou not seen how the ships glide on the sea by Allah's grace, that He  may show you of His wonders ? Lo! therein indeed are portents for every steadfast,  grateful (heart). 

[031_032]32 And if a wave enshroudeth them like awnings, they cry unto Allah, making  their faith pure for Him only. But when He bringeth them safe to land, some of them  compromise. None denieth Our signs save every traitor ingrate. 

[031_033]33 O mankind! Keep your duty to your Lord and fear a Day when the parent  will not be able to avail the child in aught, nor the child to avail the parent. Lo!  Allah's promise is the very truth. Let not the life of the world beguile you, nor let the  deceiver beguile you, in regard to Allah. 

[031_034]34 Lo! Allah! With Him is knowledge of the Hour. He sendeth down the rain,  and knoweth that which is in the wombs. No soul knoweth what it will earn to- morrow, and no soul knoweth in what land it will die. Lo! Allah is Knower, Aware.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

32. as-Sajdah: The Adoration

[032_001]1 Alif. Lam. Mim 

[032_002]2 The revelation of the Scripture whereof there is no doubt is from the Lord of  the Worlds. 

[032_003]3 Or say they: He hath invented it ? Nay, but it is the Truth from thy Lord, that  thou mayst warn a folk to whom no warner came before thee, that haply they may  walk aright. 

[032_004]4 Allah it is Who created the heavens and the earth, and that which is between  them, in six Days. Then He mounted the Throne. Ye have not, beside Him, a  protecting friend or mediator. Will ye not then remember ? 

[032_005]5 He directeth the ordinance from the heaven unto the earth; then it ascendeth  unto Him in a Day, whereof the measure is a thousand years of that ye reckon. 

[032_006]6 Such is the Knower of the Invisible and the Visible, the Mighty, the  Merciful, 

[032_007]7 Who made all things good which He created, and He began the creation of  man from clay; 

[032_008]8 Then He made his seed from a draught of despised fluid; 

[032_009]9 Then He fashioned him and breathed into him of His Spirit; and appointed  for you hearing and sight and hearts. Small thanks give ye! 

[032_010]10 And they say: When we are lost in the earth, how can we then be re-created ?  Nay but they are disbelievers in the meeting with their Lord. 

[032_011]11 Say: The angel of death, who hath charge concerning you, will gather you,  and afterward unto your Lord ye will be returned. 

[032_012]12 Couldst thou but see when the guilty hang their heads before their Lord, (and  say): Our Lord! We have now seen and heard, so send us back; we will do right, now  we are sure. 

[032_013]13 And if We had so willed, We could have given every soul its guidance, but  the word from Me concerning evildoers took effect: that I will fill hell with the jinn  and mankind together. 

[032_014]14 So taste (the evil of your deeds). Forasmuch as ye forgot the meeting of this  your day, lo! We forget you. Taste the doom of immortality because of what ye used  to do. 

[032_015]15 Only those believe in Our revelations who, when they are reminded of them,  fall down prostrate and hymn the praise of their Lord, and they are not scornful, 

[032_016]16 Who forsake their beds to cry unto their Lord in fear and hope, and spend of  that We have bestowed on them. 

[032_017]17 No soul knoweth what is kept hid for them of joy, as a reward for what they  used to do. 

[032_018]18 Is he who is a believer like unto him who is an evil-liver ? They are not alike. 

[032_019]19 But as for those who believe and do good works, for them are the Gardens of  Retreat - a welcome (in reward) for what they used to do. 

[032_020]20 And as for those who do evil, their retreat is the Fire. Whenever they desire  to issue forth from thence, they are brought back thither. Unto them it is said: Taste  the torment of the Fire which ye used to deny. 

[032_021]21 And verily We make them taste the lower punishment before the greater, that  haply they may return. 

[032_022]22 And who doth greater wrong than he who is reminded of the revelations of  his Lord, then turneth from them. Lo! We shall requite the guilty. 

[032_023]23 We verily gave Moses the Scripture; so be not ye in doubt of his receiving it;  and We appointed it a guidance for the Children of Israel. 

[032_024]24 And when they became steadfast and believed firmly in Our revelations, We  appointed from among them leaders who guided by Our command. 

[032_025]25 Lo! thy Lord will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection  concerning that wherein they used to differ. 

[032_026]26 Is it not a guidance for them (to observe) how many generations We  destroyed before them, amid whose dwelling places they do walk ? Lo! therein verily  are portents! Will they not then heed ? 

[032_027]27 Have they not seen how We lead the water to the barren land and therewith  bring forth crops whereof their cattle eat, and they themselves ? Will they not then see  ? 

[032_028]28 And they say: When cometh this victory (of yours) if ye are truthful ? 

[032_029]29 Say (unto them): On the day of the victory the faith of those who disbelieve  (and who then will believe) will not avail them, neither will they be reprieved. 

[032_030]30 So withdraw from them (O Muhammad), and await (the event). Lo! they  (also) are awaiting (it).

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

33. al-Ahzab: The Allies

[033_001]1 O Prophet! Keep thy duty to Allah and obey not the disbelievers and the  hypocrites. Lo! Allah is Knower, Wise. 

[033_002]2 And follow that which is inspired in thee from thy Lord. Lo! Allah is Aware  of what ye do. 

[033_003]3 And put thy trust in Allah, for Allah is sufficient as Trustee. 

[033_004]4 Allah hath not assigned unto any man two hearts within his body, nor hath  He made your wives whom ye declare (to be your mothers) your mothers, nor hath He  made those whom ye claim (to be your sons) your sons. This is but a saying of your  mouths. But Allah saith the truth and He showeth the way. 

[033_005]5 Proclaim their real parentage. That will be more equitable in the sight of  Allah. And if ye know not their fathers, then (they are) your brethren in the faith, and  your clients. And there is no sin for you in the mistakes that ye make unintentionally,  but what your hearts purpose (that will be a sin for you). Allah is ever Forgiving,  Merciful. 

[033_006]6 The Prophet is closer to the believers than their selves, and his wives are (as)  their mothers. And the owners of kinship are closer one to another in the ordinance of  Allah than (other) believers and the fugitives (who fled from Mecca), except that ye  should do kindness to your friends. This is written in the Book (of nature). 

[033_007]7 And when We exacted a covenant from the prophets, and from thee (O  Muhammad) and from Noah and Abraham and Moses and Jesus son of Mary. We  took from them a solemn covenant; 

[033_008]8 That He may ask the loyal of their loyalty. And He hath prepared a painful  doom for the unfaithful. 

[033_009]9 O ye who believe! Remember Allah's favour unto you when there came  against you hosts, and We sent against them a great wind and hosts ye could not see.  And Allah is ever Seer of what ye do. 

[033_010]10 When they came upon you from above you and from below you, and when  eyes grew wild and hearts reached to the throats, and ye were imagining vain thoughts  concerning Allah. 

[033_011]11 There were the believers sorely tried, and shaken with a mighty shock. 

[033_012]12 And when the hypocrites, and those in whose hearts is a disease, were  saying: Allah and His messenger promised us naught but delusion. 

[033_013]13 And when a party of them said: O folk of Yathrib! There is no stand  (possible) for you, therefor turn back. And certain of them (even) sought permission  of the Prophet, saying: Our homes lie open (to the enemy). And they lay not open.  They but wished to flee. 

[033_014]14 If the enemy had entered from all sides and they had been exhorted to  treachery, they would have committed it, and would have hesitated thereupon but  little. 

[033_015]15 And verily they had already sworn unto Allah that they would not turn their  backs (to the foe). An oath to Allah must be answered for. 

[033_016]16 Say: Flight will not avail you if ye flee from death or killing, and then ye  dwell in comfort but a little while. 

[033_017]17 Say: Who is he who can preserve you from Allah if He intendeth harm for  you, or intendeth mercy for you. They will not find that they have any friend or helper  other than Allah. 

[033_018]18 Allah already knoweth those of you who hinder, and those who say unto  their brethren: "Come ye hither unto us!" and they come not to the stress of battle  save a little, 

[033_019]19 Being sparing of their help to you (believers). But when the fear cometh,  then thou (Muhammad) seest them regarding thee with rolling eyes like one who  fainteth unto death. Then, when the fear departeth, they scald you with sharp tongues  in their greed for wealth (from the spoil). Such have not believed. Therefor Allah  maketh their deeds fruitless. And that is easy for Allah. 

[033_020]20 They hold that the clans have not retired (for good); and if the clans should  advance (again), they would fain be in the desert with the wandering Arabs, asking  for the news of you; and if they were among you, they would not give battle, save a  little. 

[033_021]21 Verily in the messenger of Allah ye have a good example for him who  looketh unto Allah and the Last Day, and remembereth Allah much. 

[033_022]22 And when the true believers saw the clans, they said: This is that which  Allah and His messenger promised us. Allah and His messenger are true. It did but  confirm them in their faith and resignation. 

[033_023]23 Of the believers are men who are true to that which they covenanted with  Allah. Some of them have paid their vow by death (in battle), and some of them still  are waiting; and they have not altered in the least; 

[033_024]24 That Allah may reward the true men for their truth, and punish the hypocrites  if He will, or relent toward them (if He will). Lo! Allah is Forgiving, Merciful. 

[033_025]25 And Allah repulsed the disbelievers in their wrath; they gained no good.  Allah averted their attack from the believers. Allah is ever Strong, Mighty. 

[033_026]26 And He brought those of the People of the Scripture who supported them  down from their strongholds, and cast panic into their hearts. Some ye slew, and ye  made captive some. 

[033_027]27 And He caused you to inherit their land and their houses and their wealth,  and land ye have not trodden. Allah is ever Able to do all things. 

[033_028]28 O Prophet! Say unto thy wives: If ye desire the world's life and its  adornment, come! I will content you and will release you with a fair release. 

[033_029]29 But if ye desire Allah and His messenger and the abode of the Hereafter, then  lo! Allah hath prepared for the good among you an immense reward. 

[033_030]30 O ye wives of the Prophet! Whosoever of you committeth manifest  lewdness, the punishment for her will be doubled, and that is easy for Allah. 

[033_031]31 And whosoever of you is submissive unto Allah and His messenger and  doeth right, We shall give her her reward twice over, and We have prepared for her a  rich provision. 

[033_032]32 O ye wives of the Prophet! Ye are not like any other women. If ye keep your  duty (to Allah), then be not soft of speech, lest he in whose heart is a disease aspire  (to you), but utter customary speech. 

[033_033]33 And stay in your houses. Bedizen not yourselves with the bedizenment of the  Time of Ignorance. Be regular in prayer, and pay the poor-due, and obey Allah and  His messenger. Allah's wish is but to remove uncleanness far from you, O Folk of the  Household, and cleanse you with a thorough cleansing. 

[033_034]34 And bear in mind that which is recited in your houses of the revelations of  Allah and wisdom. Lo! Allah is Subtile, Aware. 

[033_035]35 Lo! men who surrender unto Allah, and women who surrender, and men who  believe and women who believe, and men who obey and women who obey, and men  who speak the truth and women who speak the truth, and men who persevere (in  righteousness) and women who persevere, and men who are humble and women who  are humble, and men who give alms and women who give alms, and men who fast  and women who fast, and men who guard their modesty and women who guard (their  modesty), and men who remember Allah much and women who remember - Allah  hath prepared for them forgiveness and a vast reward. 

[033_036]36 And it becometh not a believing man or a believing woman, when Allah and  His messenger have decided an affair (for them), that they should (after that) claim  any say in their affair; and whoso is rebellious to Allah and His messenger, he verily  goeth astray in error manifest. 

[033_037]37 And when thou saidst unto him on whom Allah hath conferred favour and  thou hast conferred favour: Keep thy wife to thyself, and fear Allah. And thou didst  hide in thy mind that which Allah was to bring to light, and thou didst fear mankind  whereas Allah hath a better right that thou shouldst fear Him. So when Zeyd had  performed that necessary formality (of divorce) from her, We gave her unto thee in  marriage, so that (henceforth) there may be no sin for believers in respect of wives of  their adopted sons, when the latter have performed the necessary formality (of  release) from them. The commandment of Allah must be fulfilled. 

[033_038]38 There is no reproach for the Prophet in that which Allah maketh his due.  That was Allah's way with those who passed away of old - and the commandment of  Allah is certain destiny - 

[033_039]39 Who delivered the messages of Allah and feared Him, and feared none save  Allah. Allah keepeth good account. 

[033_040]40 Muhammad is not the father of any man among you, but he is the messenger  of Allah and the Seal of the Prophets; and Allah is ever Aware of all things. 

[033_041]41 O ye who believe! Remember Allah with much remembrance. 

[033_042]42 And glorify Him early and late. 

[033_043]43 He it is Who blesseth you, and His angels (bless you), that He may bring you  forth from darkness unto light; and He is ever Merciful to the believers. 

[033_044]44 Their salutation on the day when they shall meet Him will be: Peace. And He  hath prepared for them a goodly recompense. 

[033_045]45 O Prophet! Lo! We have sent thee as a witness and a bringer of good tidings  and a warner. 

[033_046]46 And as a summoner unto Allah by His permission, and as a lamp that giveth  light. 

[033_047]47 And announce unto the believers the good tidings that they will have great  bounty from Allah. 

[033_048]48 And incline not to the disbelievers and the hypocrites. Disregard their  noxious talk, and put thy trust in Allah. Allah is sufficient as Trustee. 

[033_049]49 O ye who believe! If ye wed believing women and divorce them before ye  have touched them, then there is no period that ye should reckon. But content them  and release them handsomely. 

[033_050]50 O Prophet! Lo! We have made lawful unto thee thy wives unto whom thou  hast paid their dowries, and those whom thy right hand possesseth of those whom  Allah hath given thee as spoils of war, and the daughters of thine uncle on the father's  side and the daughters of thine aunts on the father's side, and the daughters of thine  uncle on the mother's side and the daughters of thine aunts on the mother's side who  emigrated with thee, and a believing woman if she give herself unto the Prophet and  the Prophet desire to ask her in marriage - a privilege for thee only, not for the (rest  of) believers - We are Aware of that which We enjoined upon them concerning their  wives and those whom their right hands possess - that thou mayst be free from blame,  for Allah is ever Forgiving, Merciful. 

[033_051]51 Thou canst defer whom thou wilt of them and receive unto thee whom thou  wilt, and whomsoever thou desirest of those whom thou hast set aside (temporarily),  it is no sin for thee (to receive her again); that is better; that they may be comforted  and not grieve, and may all be pleased with what thou givest them. Allah knoweth  what is in your hearts (O men), and Allah is ever Forgiving, Clement. 

[033_052]52 It is not allowed thee to take (other) women henceforth, nor that thou  shouldst change them for other wives even though their beauty pleased thee, save  those whom thy right hand possesseth. And Allah is ever Watcher over all things. 

[033_053]53 O Ye who believe! Enter not the dwellings of the Prophet for a meal without  waiting for the proper time, unless permission be granted you. But if ye are invited,  enter, and, when your meal is ended, then disperse. Linger not for conversation. Lo!  that would cause annoyance to the Prophet, and he would be shy of (asking) you (to  go); but Allah is not shy of the truth. And when ye ask of them (the wives of the  Prophet) anything, ask it of them from behind a curtain. That is purer for your hearts  and for their hearts. And it is not for you to cause annoyance to the messenger of  Allah, nor that ye should ever marry his wives after him. Lo! that in Allah's sight  would be an enormity. 

[033_054]54 Whether ye divulge a thing or keep it hidden, lo! Allah is ever Knower of all  things. 

[033_055]55 It is no sin for them (thy wives) to converse freely) with their fathers, or their  sons, or their brothers, or their brothers' sons, or the sons of their sisters or of their  own women, or their slaves. O women! Keep your duty to Allah. Lo! Allah is ever  Witness over all things. 

[033_056]56 Lo! Allah and His angels shower blessings on the Prophet. O ye who  believe! Ask blessings on him and salute him with a worthy salutation. 

[033_057]57 Lo! those who malign Allah and His messenger, Allah hath cursed them in  the world and the Hereafter, and hath prepared for them the doom of the disdained. 

[033_058]58 And those who malign believing men and believing women undeservedly,  they bear the guilt of slander and manifest sin. 

[033_059]59 O Prophet! Tell thy wives and thy daughters and the women of the believers  to draw their cloaks close round them (when they go abroad). That will be better, so  that they may be recognised and not annoyed. Allah is ever Forgiving, Merciful. 

[033_060]60 If the hypocrites, and those in whose hearts is a disease, and the alarmists in  the city do not cease, We verily shall urge thee on against them, then they will be  your neighbours in it but a little while. 

[033_061]61 Accursed, they will be seized wherever found and slain with a (fierce)  slaughter. 

[033_062]62 That was the way of Allah in the case of those who passed away of old; thou  wilt not find for the way of Allah aught of power to change. 

[033_063]63 Men ask thee of the Hour. Say: The knowledge of it is with Allah only. What  can convey (the knowledge) unto thee ? It may be that the Hour is nigh. 

[033_064]64 Lo! Allah hath cursed the disbelievers, and hath prepared for them a flaming  fire, 

[033_065]65 Wherein they will abide for ever. They will find (then) no protecting friend  nor helper. 

[033_066]66 On the day when their faces are turned over in the Fire, they say: Oh, would  that we had obeyed Allah and had obeyed His messenger! 

[033_067]67 And they say: Our Lord! Lo! we obeyed our princes and great men, and they  misled us from the Way. 

[033_068]68 Our Lord! Oh, give them double torment and curse them with a mighty  curse. 

[033_069]69 O ye who believe! Be not as those who slandered Moses, but Allah proved  his innocence of that which they alleged, and he was well esteemed in Allah's sight. 

[033_070]70 O ye who believe! Guard your duty to Allah, and speak words straight to the  point; 

[033_071]71 He will adjust your works for you and will forgive you your sins. Whosoever  obeyeth Allah and His messenger, he verily hath gained a signal victory. 

[033_072]72 Lo! We offered the trust unto the heavens and the earth and the hills, but they  shrank from bearing it and were afraid of it. And man assumed it. Lo! he hath proved  a tyrant and a fool. 

[033_073]73 So Allah punisheth hypocritical men and hypocritical women, and idolatrous  men and idolatrous women. But Allah pardoneth believing men and believing  women, and Allah is ever Forgiving, Merciful.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

34. Saba': Sheba

[034_001]1 Praise be to Allah, unto Whom belongeth whatsoever is in the heavens and  whatsoever is in the earth. His is the praise in the Hereafter, and He is the Wise, the  Aware. 

[034_002]2 He knoweth that which goeth into the earth and that which cometh forth from  it, and that descendeth from the heaven and that which ascendeth into it. He is the  Merciful, the Forgiving. 

[034_003]3 Those who disbelieve say: The Hour will never come unto us. Say: Nay, by  my Lord, but it is coming unto you surely. (He is) the Knower of the Unseen. Not an  atom's weight, or less than that or greater, escapeth Him in the heavens or in the earth,  but it is in a clear Record, 

[034_004]4 That He may reward those who believe and do good works. For them is  pardon and a rich provision. 

[034_005]5 But those who strive against Our revelations, challenging (Us), theirs will be  a painful doom of wrath. 

[034_006]6 Those who have been given knowledge see that what is revealed unto thee  from thy Lord is the truth and leadeth unto the path of the Mighty, the Owner of  Praise. 

[034_007]7 Those who disbelieve say: Shall we show you a man who will tell you (that)  when ye have become dispersed in dust with most complete dispersal still, even then,  ye will be created anew ? 

[034_008]8 Hath he invented a lie concerning Allah, or is there in him a madness ? Nay,  but those who disbelieve in the Hereafter are in torment and far error. 

[034_009]9 Have they not observed what is before them and what is behind them of the  sky and the earth ? If We will, We can make the earth swallow them, or cause  obliteration from the sky to fall on them.  Lo! herein surely is a portent for every  slave who turneth (to Allah) repentant. 

[034_010]10 And assuredly We gave David grace from Us, (saying): O ye hills and birds,  echo his psalms of praise! And We made the iron supple unto him, 

[034_011]11 Saying: Make thou long coats of mail and measure the links (thereof). And  do ye right. Lo! I am Seer of what ye do. 

[034_012]12 And unto Solomon (We gave) the wind, whereof the morning course was a  month's journey and the evening course a month's journey, and We caused the fount  of copper to gush forth for him, and (We gave him) certain of the jinn who worked  before him by permission of his Lord. And such of them as deviated from Our  command, them We caused to taste the punishment of flaming Fire. 

[034_013]13 They made for him what he willed: synagogues and statues, basins like wells  and boilers built into the ground. Give thanks, O House of David! Few of My  bondmen are thankful. 

[034_014]14 And when We decreed death for him, nothing showed his death to them save  a creeping creature of the earth which gnawed away his staff. And when he fell the  jinn saw clearly how, if they had known the Unseen, they would not have continued  in despised toil. 

[034_015]15 There was indeed a sign for Sheba in their dwelling-place: Two gardens on  the right hand and the left (as who should say): Eat of the provision of your Lord and  render thanks to Him. A fair land and an indulgent Lord! 

[034_016]16 But they were froward, so We sent on them the flood of 'Iram, and in  exchange for their two gardens gave them two gardens bearing bitter fruit, the  tamarisk and here and there a lote-tree. 

[034_017]17 This We awarded them because of their ingratitude. Punish We ever any save  the ingrates ? 

[034_018]18 And We set, between them and the towns which We had blessed, towns easy  to be seen, and We made the stage between them easy, (saying): Travel in them safely  both by night and day. 

[034_019]19 But they said: Our Lord! Make the stage between our journeys longer. And  they wronged themselves, therefore We made them bywords (in the land) and  scattered them abroad, a total scattering. Lo! herein verily are portents for each  steadfast, grateful (heart). 

[034_020]20 And Satan indeed found his calculation true concerning them, for they follow  him, all save a group of true believers. 

[034_021]21 And he had no warrant whatsoever against them, save that We would know  him who believeth in the Hereafter from him who is in doubt thereof; and thy Lord (O  Muhammad) taketh note of all things. 

[034_022]22 Say (O Muhammad): Call upon those whom ye set up beside Allah! They  possess not an atom's weight either in the heavens or in the earth, nor have they any  share in either, nor hath He an auxiliary among them. 

[034_023]23 No intercession availeth with Him save for him whom He permitteth. Yet,  when fear is banished from their hearts, they say: What was it that your Lord said ?  They say: The Truth. And He is the Sublime, the Great. 

[034_024]24 Say: Who giveth you provision from the sky and the earth ? Say: Allah, Lo!  we or you assuredly are rightly guided or in error manifest. 

[034_025]25 Say: Ye will not be asked of what we committed, nor shall we be asked of  what ye do. 

[034_026]26 Say: Our Lord will bring us all together, then He will judge between us with  truth. He is the All-knowing Judge. 

[034_027]27 Say: Show me those whom ye have joined unto Him as partners. Nay (ye  dare not)! For He is Allah, the Mighty, the Wise. 

[034_028]28 And We have not sent thee (O Muhammad) save as a bringer of good tidings  and a warner unto all mankind; but most of mankind know not. 

[034_029]29 And they say: When is this promise (to be fulfilled) if ye are truthful ? 

[034_030]30 Say (O Muhammad): Yours is the promise of a Day which ye cannot  postpone nor hasten by an hour. 

[034_031]31 And those who disbelieve say: We believe not in this Qur'an nor in that  which was before it; but oh, if thou couldst see, when the wrong-doers are brought up  before their Lord, how they cast the blame one to another; how those who were  despised (in the earth) say unto those who were proud: But for you, we should have  been believers. 

[034_032]32 Those who were proud say unto those who were despised: Did we drive you  away from the guidance after it had come unto you ? Nay, but ye were guilty. 

[034_033]33 Those who were despised say unto those who were proud: Nay but (it was  your) scheming night and day, when ye commanded us to disbelieve in Allah and set  up rivals unto Him. And they are filled with remorse when they behold the doom; and  We place carcans on the necks of those who disbelieved. Are they requited aught save  what they used to do ? 

[034_034]34 And We sent not unto any township a warner, but its pampered ones  declared: Lo! we are disbelievers in that wherewith ye have been sent. 

[034_035]35 And they say: We are more (than you) in wealth and children. We are not the  punished! 

[034_036]36 Say (O Muhammad): Lo! my Lord enlargeth the provision for whom He will  and narroweth it (for whom He will). But most of mankind know not. 

[034_037]37 And it is not your wealth nor your children that will bring you near unto Us,  but he who believeth and doeth good (he draweth near). As for such, theirs will be  twofold reward for what they did and they will dwell secure in lofty halls. 

[034_038]38 And as for those who strive against Our revelations, challenging, they will be  brought to the doom. 

[034_039]39 Say: Lo! my Lord enlargeth the provision for whom He will of His bondmen,  and narroweth (it) for him. And whatsoever ye spend (for good) He replaceth it. And  He is the Best of Providers. 

[034_040]40 And on the day when He will gather them all together, He will say unto the  angels: Did these worship you ? 

[034_041]41 They will say: Be Thou Glorified. Thou (alone) art our Guardian, not them!  Nay, but they worshipped the jinn; most of them were believers in them. 

[034_042]42 That day ye will possess no use nor hurt one for another. And We shall say  unto those who did wrong: Taste the doom of the Fire which ye used to deny. 

[034_043]43 And if Our revelations are recited unto them in plain terms, they say: This is  naught else than a man who would turn you away from what your fathers used to  worship; and they say: This is naught else than an invented lie. Those who disbelieve  say of the truth when it reacheth them: This is naught else than mere magic. 

[034_044]44 And We have given them no scriptures which they study, nor sent We unto  them, before thee, any warner. 

[034_045]45 Those before them denied, and these have not attained a tithe of that which  We bestowed on them (of old); yet they denied My messengers. How intense then  was My abhorrence (of them)! 

[034_046]46 Say (unto them, O Muhammad): I exhort you unto one thing only: that ye  awake, for Allah's sake, by twos and singly, and then reflect: There is no madness in  your comrade. He is naught else than a warner unto you in face of a terrific doom. 

[034_047]47 Say: Whatever reward I might have asked of you is yours. My reward is the  affair of Allah only. He is Witness over all things. 

[034_048]48 Say: Lo! my Lord hurleth the truth. (He is) the Knower of Things Hidden. 

[034_049]49 Say: The Truth hath come, and falsehood showeth not its face and will not  return. 

[034_050]50 Say: If I err, I err only to my own loss, and if I am rightly guided it is  because of that which my Lord hath revealed unto me. Lo! He is Hearer, Nigh. 

[034_051]51 Couldst thou but see when they are terrified with no escape, and are seized  from near at hand, 

[034_052]52 And say: We (now) believe therein. But how can they reach (faith) from afar  off, 

[034_053]53 When they disbelieved in it of yore. They aim at the unseen from afar off. 

[034_054]54 And a gulf is set between them and that which they desire, as was done for  people of their kind of old. Lo! they were in hopeless doubt.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

35. al-Fatir: The Creator

[035_001]1 Praise be to Allah, the Creator of the heavens and the earth, Who appointeth  the angels messengers having wings two, three and four. He multiplieth in creation  what He will. Lo! Allah is Able to do all things. 

[035_002]2 That which Allah openeth unto mankind of mercy none can withhold it; and  that which He withholdeth none can release thereafter. He is the Mighty, the Wise. 

[035_003]3 O mankind! Remember Allah's grace toward you! Is there any creator other  than Allah who provideth for you from the sky and the earth ? There is no God save  Him. Whither then are ye turned ? 

[035_004]4 And if they deny thee, (O Muhammad), messengers (of Allah) were denied  before thee. Unto Allah all things are brought back. 

[035_005]5 O mankind! Lo! the promise of Allah is true. So let not the life of the world  beguile you, and let not the (avowed) beguiler beguile you with regard to Allah. 

[035_006]6 Lo! the devil is an enemy for you, so treat him as an enemy. He only  summoneth his faction to be owners of the flaming Fire. 

[035_007]7 Those who disbelieve, theirs will be an awful doom; and those who believe  and do good works, theirs will be forgiveness and a great reward. 

[035_008]8 Is he, the evil of whose deeds is made fairseeming unto him so that he  deemeth it good, (other than Satan's dupe) ? Allah verily sendeth whom He will  astray, and guideth whom He will; so let not thy soul expire in sighings for them. Lo!  Allah is Aware of what they do! 

[035_009]9 And Allah it is Who sendeth the winds and they raise a cloud; then We lead  it unto a dead land and revive therewith the earth after its death. Such is the  Resurrection. 

[035_010]10 Whoso desireth power (should know that) all power belongeth to Allah. Unto  Him good words ascend, and the pious deed doth He exalt; but those who plot  iniquities, theirs will be an awful doom; and the plotting of such (folk) will come to  naught. 

[035_011]11 Allah created you from dust, then from a little fluid, then He made you pairs  (the male and female). No female beareth or bringeth forth save with His knowledge.  And no-one groweth old who groweth old, nor is aught lessened of his life, but it is  recorded in a Book, Lo! that is easy for Allah. 

[035_012]12 And the two seas are not alike: this, fresh, sweet, good to drink, this (other)  bitter, salt. And from them both ye eat fresh meat and derive the ornament that ye  wear. And thou seest the ship cleaving them with its prow that ye may seek of His  bounty, and that haply ye may give thanks. 

[035_013]13 He maketh the night to pass into the day and He maketh the day to pass into  the night. He hath subdued the sun and moon to service. Each runneth unto an  appointed term. Such is Allah, your Lord; His is the Sovereignty; and those unto  whom ye pray instead of Him own not so much as the white spot on a date-stone. 

[035_014]14 If ye pray unto them they hear not your prayer, and if they heard they could  not grant it you. On the Day of Resurrection they will disown association with you.  None can inform you like Him Who is Aware. 

[035_015]15 O mankind! Ye are the poor in your relation to Allah. And Allah! He is the  Absolute, the Owner of Praise. 

[035_016]16 If He will, He can be rid of you and bring (instead of you) some new  creation. 

[035_017]17 That is not a hard thing for Allah. 

[035_018]18 And no burdened soul can bear another's burden, and if one heavy laden  crieth for (help with) his load, naught of it will be lifted even though he (unto whom  he crieth) be of kin. Thou warnest only those who fear their Lord in secret, and have  established worship. He who groweth (in goodness), groweth only for himself, (he  cannot by his merit redeem others). Unto Allah is the journeying. 

[035_019]19 The blind man is not equal with the seer; 

[035_020]20 Nor is darkness (tantamount to) light; 

[035_021]21 Nor is the shadow equal with the sun's full heat; 

[035_022]22 Nor are the living equal with the dead. Lo! Allah maketh whom He will to  hear. Thou canst not reach those who are in the graves. 

[035_023]23 Thou art but a warner. 

[035_024]24 Lo! We have sent thee with the Truth, a bearer of glad tidings and a warner;  and there is not a nation but a warner hath passed among them. 

[035_025]25 And if they deny thee, those before them also denied. Their messengers came  unto them with clear proofs (of Allah's Sovereignty), and with the Psalms and the  Scripture giving light. 

[035_026]26 Then seized I those who disbelieved, and how intense was My abhorrence! 

[035_027]27 Hast thou not seen that Allah causeth water to fall from the sky, and We  produce therewith fruit of divers hues; and among the hills are streaks white and red,  of divers hues, and (others) raven-black; 

[035_028]28 And of men and beasts and cattle, in like manner, divers hues ? The erudite  among His bondmen fear Allah alone. Lo! Allah is Mighty, Forgiving. 

[035_029]29 Lo! those who read the Scripture of Allah, and establish worship, and spend  of that which We have bestowed on them secretly and openly, they look forward to  imperishable gain, 

[035_030]30 That He will pay them their wages and increase them of His grace. Lo! He is  Forgiving, Responsive. 

[035_031]31 As for that which We inspire in thee of the Scripture, it is the Truth  confirming that which was (revealed) before it. Lo! Allah is indeed Observer, Seer of  His slaves. 

[035_032]32 Then We gave the Scripture as inheritance unto those whom We elected of  Our bondmen. But of them are some who wrong themselves and of them are some  who are lukewarm, and of them are some who outstrip (others) through good deeds,  by Allah's leave. That is the great favour! 

[035_033]33 Gardens of Eden! They enter them wearing armlets of gold and pearl and  their raiment therein is silk. 

[035_034]34 And they say: Praise be to Allah Who hath put grief away from us. Lo! Our  Lord is Forgiving, Bountiful, 

[035_035]35 Who, of His grace, hath installed us in the mansion of eternity, where toil  toucheth us not nor can weariness affect us. 

[035_036]36 But as for those who disbelieve, for them is fire of hell; it taketh not  complete effect upon them so that they can die, nor is its torment lightened for them.  Thus We punish every ingrate. 

[035_037]37 And they cry for help there, (saying): Our Lord! Release us; we will do right,  not (the wrong) that we used to do. Did not We grant you a life long enough for him  who reflected to reflect therein ? And the warner came unto you. Now taste (the  flavour of your deeds), for evil-doers have no helper. 

[035_038]38 Lo! Allah is the Knower of the Unseen of the heavens and the earth. Lo! He  is Aware of the secret of (men's) breasts. 

[035_039]39 He it is Who hath made you regents in the earth; so he who disbelieveth, his  disbelief be on his own head. Their disbelief increaseth for the disbelievers, in their  Lord's sight, naught save abhorrence. Their disbelief increaseth for the disbelievers  naught save loss. 

[035_040]40 Say: Have ye seen your partner-gods to whom ye pray beside Allah ? Show  me what they created of the earth! Or have they any portion in the heavens ? Or have  We given them a scripture so they act on clear proof therefrom ? Nay, the evil-doers  promise one another only to deceive. 

[035_041]41 Lo! Allah graspeth the heavens and the earth that they deviate not, and if  they were to deviate there is not one that could grasp them after Him. Lo! He is ever  Clement, Forgiving. 

[035_042]42 And they swore by Allah, their most binding oath, that if a warner came unto  them they would be more tractable than any of the nations; yet, when a warner came  unto them it aroused in them naught save repugnance, 

[035_043]43 (Shown in their) behaving arrogantly in the land and plotting evil; and the  evil plot encloseth but the men who make it. Then, can they expect aught save the  treatment of the folk of old ? Thou wilt not find for Allah's way of treatment any  substitute, nor wilt thou find for Allah's way of treatment aught of power to change. 

[035_044]44 Have they not travelled in the land and seen the nature of the consequence  for those who were before them, and they were mightier than these in power ? Allah  is not such that aught in the heavens or in the earth escapeth Him. Lo! He is the Wise,  the Mighty. 

[035_045]45 If Allah took mankind to task by that which they deserve, He would not  leave a living creature on the surface of the earth; but He reprieveth them unto an  appointed term, and when their term cometh - then verily (they will know that) Allah  is ever Seer of His slaves.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

36. Ya Sin: Ya Sin

[036_001]1 Ya Sin. 

[036_002]2 By the wise Qur'an, 

[036_003]3 Lo! thou art of those sent 

[036_004]4 On a straight path, 

[036_005]5 A revelation of the Mighty, the Merciful, 

[036_006]6 That thou mayst warn a folk whose fathers were not warned, so they are  heedless. 

[036_007]7 Already hath the judgment, (for their infidelity) proved true of most of them,  for they believe not. 

[036_008]8 Lo! We have put on their necks carcans reaching unto the chins, so that they  are made stiff-necked. 

[036_009]9 And We have set a bar before them and a bar behind them, and (thus) have  covered them so that they see not. 

[036_010]10 Whether thou warn them or thou warn them not, it is alike for them, for they  believe not. 

[036_011]11 Thou warnest only him who followeth the Reminder and feareth the  Beneficent in secret. To him bear tidings of forgiveness and a rich reward. 

[036_012]12 Lo! We it is Who bring the dead to life. We record that which they send  before (them, and their footprints. And all things We have kept in a clear Register. 

[036_013]13 Coin for them a similitude: The people of the city when those sent (from  Allah) came unto them; 

[036_014]14 When We sent unto them twain, and they denied them both, so We  reinforced them with a third, and they said: Lo! we have been sent unto you. 

[036_015]15 They said: Ye are but mortals like unto us. The Beneficent hath naught  revealed. Ye do but lie! 

[036_016]16 They answered: Our Lord knoweth that we are indeed sent unto you, 

[036_017]17 And our duty is but plain conveyance (of the message). 

[036_018]18 (The people of the city) said: We augur ill of you. If ye desist not, we shall  surely stone you, and grievous torture will befall you at our hands. 

[036_019]19 They said: Your evil augury be with you! Is it because ye are reminded (of  the truth) ? Nay, but ye are froward folk! 

[036_020]20 And there came from the uttermost part of the city a man running. He cried:  O my people! Follow those who have been sent! 

[036_021]21 Follow those who ask of you no fee, and who are rightly guided. 

[036_022]22 For what cause should I not serve Him Who hath created me, and unto  Whom ye will be brought back ? 

[036_023]23 Shall I take (other) gods in place of Him when, if the Beneficent should wish  me any harm, their intercession will avail me naught, nor can they save ? 

[036_024]24 Then truly I should be in error manifest. 

[036_025]25 Lo! I have believed in your Lord, so hear me! 

[036_026]26 It was said (unto him): Enter paradise. He said: Would that my people knew 

[036_027]27 With what (munificence) my Lord hath pardoned me and made me of the  honoured ones! 

[036_028]28 We sent not down against his people after him a host from heaven, nor do  We ever send. 

[036_029]29 It was but one Shout, and lo! they were extinct. 

[036_030]30 Ah, the anguish for the bondmen! Never came there unto them a messenger  but they did mock him! 

[036_031]31 Have they not seen how many generations We destroyed before them, which  indeed returned not unto them; 

[036_032]32 But all, without exception, will be brought before Us. 

[036_033]33 A token unto them is the dead earth. We revive it, and We bring forth from it  grain so that they eat thereof; 

[036_034]34 And We have placed therein gardens of the date-palm and grapes, and We  have caused springs of water to gush forth therein, 

[036_035]35 That they may eat of the fruit thereof, and their hands made it not. Will they  not, then, give thanks ? 

[036_036]36 Glory be to Him Who created all the sexual pairs, of that which the earth  groweth, and of themselves, and of that which they know not! 

[036_037]37 A token unto them is night. We strip it of the day, and lo! they are in  darkness. 

[036_038]38 And the sun runneth on unto a resting-place for him. That is the measuring of  the Mighty, the Wise. 

[036_039]39 And for the moon We have appointed mansions till she return like an old  shrivelled palm-leaf. 

[036_040]40 It is not for the sun to overtake the moon, nor doth the night outstrip the day.  They float each in an orbit. 

[036_041]41 And a token unto them is that We bear their offspring in the laden ship, 

[036_042]42 And have created for them of the like thereof whereon they ride. 

[036_043]43 And if We will, We drown them, and there is no help for them, neither can  they be saved; 

[036_044]44 Unless by mercy from Us and as comfort for a while. 

[036_045]45 When it is said unto them: Beware of that which is before you and that which  is behind you, that haply ye may find mercy (they are heedless). 

[036_046]46 Never came a token of the tokens of their Lord to them, but they did turn  away from it! 

[036_047]47 And when it is said unto them: Spend of that wherewith Allah hath provided  you, those who disbelieve say unto those who believe: Shall we feed those whom  Allah, if He willed, would feed ? Ye are in naught else than error manifest. 

[036_048]48 And they say: When will this promise be fulfilled, if ye are truthful ? 

[036_049]49 They await but one Shout, which will surprise them while they are disputing. 

[036_050]50 Then they cannot make bequest, nor can they return to their own folk. 

[036_051]51 And the trumpet is blown and lo! from the graves they hie unto their Lord, 

[036_052]52 Crying: Woe upon us! Who hath raised us from our place of sleep ? This is  that which the Beneficent did promise, and the messengers spoke truth. 

[036_053]53 It is but one Shout, and behold them brought together before Us! 

[036_054]54 This day no soul is wronged in aught; nor are ye requited aught save what ye  used to do. 

[036_055]55 Lo! those who merit paradise this day are happily employed, 

[036_056]56 They and their wives, in pleasant shade, on thrones reclining; 

[036_057]57 Theirs the fruit (of their good deeds) and theirs (all) that they ask; 

[036_058]58 The word from a Merciful Lord (for them) is: Peace! 

[036_059]59 But avaunt ye, O ye guilty, this day! 

[036_060]60 Did I not charge you, O ye sons of Adam, that ye worship not the devil - Lo!  he is your open foe! - 

[036_061]61 But that ye worship Me ? That was the right path. 

[036_062]62 Yet he hath led astray of you a great multitude. Had ye then no sense ? 

[036_063]63 This is hell which ye were promised (if ye followed him). 

[036_064]64 Burn therein this day for that ye disbelieved. 

[036_065]65 This day We seal up their mouths, and their hands speak out to Us and their  feet bear witness as to what they used to earn. 

[036_066]66 And had We willed, We verily could have quenched their eyesight so that  they should struggle for the way. Then how could they have seen ? 

[036_067]67 And had We willed, We verily could have fixed them in their place, making  them powerless to go forward or turn back. 

[036_068]68 He whom we bring unto old age, We reverse him in creation (making him go  back to weakness after strength). Have ye then no sense ? 

[036_069]69 And We have not taught him (Muhammad) poetry, nor is it meet for him.  This is naught else than a Reminder and a Lecture making plain, 

[036_070]70 To warn whosoever liveth, and that the word may be fulfilled against the  disbelievers. 

[036_071]71 Have they not seen how We have created for them of Our handiwork the  cattle, so that they are their owners, 

[036_072]72 And have subdued them unto them, so that some of them they have for  riding, some for food ? 

[036_073]73 Benefits and (divers) drinks have they from them. Will they not then give  thanks ? 

[036_074]74 And they have taken (other) gods beside Allah, in order that they may be  helped. 

[036_075]75 It is not in their power to help them; but they (the worshippers) are unto them  a host in arms. 

[036_076]76 So let not their speech grieve thee (O Muhammad). Lo! We know what they  conceal and what proclaim. 

[036_077]77 Hath not man seen that We have created him from a drop of seed ? Yet lo! he  is an open opponent. 

[036_078]78 And he hath coined for Us a similitude, and hath forgotten the fact of his  creation, saying: Who will revive these bones when they have rotted away ? 

[036_079]79 Say: He will revive them Who produced them at the first, for He is Knower  of every creation, 

[036_080]80 Who hath appointed for you fire from the green tree, and behold! ye kindle  from it. 

[036_081]81 Is not He Who created the heavens and the earth Able to create the like of  them ? Aye, that He is! for He is the All-Wise Creator, 

[036_082]82 But His command, when He intendeth a thing, is only that He saith unto it:  Be! and it is. 

[036_083]83 Therefor Glory be to Him in Whose hand is the dominion over all things!  Unto Him ye will be brought back.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

37. as-Saffat: The Rangers

[037_001]1 By those who set the ranks in battle order 

[037_002]2 And those who drive away (the wicked) with reproof 

[037_003]3 And those who read (the Word) for a reminder, 

[037_004]4 Lo! thy Lord is surely One; 

[037_005]5 Lord of the heavens and of the earth and all that is between them, and Lord  of the sun's risings. 

[037_006]6 Lo! We have adorned the lowest heaven with an ornament, the planets; 

[037_007]7 With security from every froward devil. 

[037_008]8 They cannot listen to the Highest Chiefs for they are pelted from every side, 

[037_009]9 Outcast, and theirs is a perpetual torment; 

[037_010]10 Save him who snatcheth a fragment, and there pursueth him a piercing flame. 

[037_011]11 Then ask them (O Muhammad): Are they stronger as a creation, or those  (others) whom we have created ? Lo! We created them of plastic clay. 

[037_012]12 Nay, but thou dost marvel when they mock 

[037_013]13 And heed not when they are reminded, 

[037_014]14 And seek to scoff when they behold a portent. 

[037_015]15 And they say: Lo! this is mere magic; 

[037_016]16 When we are dead and have become dust and bones, shall we then, forsooth,  be raised (again) ? 

[037_017]17 And our forefathers ? 

[037_018]18 Say (O Muhammad): Ye, in truth; and ye will be brought low. 

[037_019]19 There is but one Shout, and lo! they behold, 

[037_020]20 And say: Ah, woe for us! This is the Day of Judgment. 

[037_021]21 This is the Day of Separation, which ye used to deny. 

[037_022]22 (And it is said unto the angels): Assemble those who did wrong, together  with their wives and what they used to worship 

[037_023]23 Instead of Allah, and lead them to the path to hell; 

[037_024]24 And stop them, for they must be questioned. 

[037_025]25 What aileth you that ye help not one another ? 

[037_026]26 Nay, but this day they make full submission. 

[037_027]27 And some of them draw near unto others, mutually questioning. 

[037_028]28 They say: Lo! ye used to come unto us, imposing, (swearing that ye spoke  the truth). 

[037_029]29 They answer: Nay, but ye (yourselves) were not believers. 

[037_030]30 We had no power over you, but ye were wayward folk. 

[037_031]31 Now the Word of our Lord hath been fulfilled concerning us. Lo! we are  about to taste (the doom). 

[037_032]32 Thus we misled you. Lo! we were (ourselves) astray. 

[037_033]33 Then lo! this day they (both) are sharers in the doom. 

[037_034]34 Lo! thus deal We with the guilty. 

[037_035]35 For when it was said unto them, There is no God save Allah, they were  scornful 

[037_036]36 And said: Shall we forsake our gods for a mad poet ? 

[037_037]37 Nay, but he brought the Truth, and he confirmed those sent (before him). 

[037_038]38 Lo! (now) verily ye taste the painful doom - 

[037_039]39 Ye are requited naught save what ye did - 

[037_040]40 Save single-minded slaves of Allah; 

[037_041]41 For them there is a known provision, 

[037_042]42 Fruits. And they will be honoured 

[037_043]43 In the Gardens of delight, 

[037_044]44 On couches facing one another; 

[037_045]45 A cup from a gushing spring is brought round for them, 

[037_046]46 White, delicious to the drinkers, 

[037_047]47 Wherein there is no headache nor are they made mad thereby. 

[037_048]48 And with them are those of modest gaze, with lovely eyes, 

[037_049]49 (Pure) as they were hidden eggs (of the ostrich). 

[037_050]50 And some of them draw near unto others, mutually questioning. 

[037_051]51 A speaker of them saith: Lo! I had a comrade 

[037_052]52 Who used to say: Art thou in truth of those who put faith (in his words) ? 

[037_053]53 Can we, when we are dead and have become mere dust and bones - can we  (then) verily be brought to book ? 

[037_054]54 He saith: Will ye look ? 

[037_055]55 Then looketh he and seeth him in the depth of hell. 

[037_056]56 He saith: By Allah, thou verily didst all but cause my ruin, 

[037_057]57 And had it not been for the favour of my Lord, I too had been of those haled  forth (to doom). 

[037_058]58 Are we then not to die 

[037_059]59 Saving our former death, and are we not to be punished ? 

[037_060]60 Lo! this is the supreme triumph. 

[037_061]61 For the like of this, then, let the workers work. 

[037_062]62 Is this better as a welcome, or the tree of Zaqqum ? 

[037_063]63 Lo! We have appointed it a torment for wrong-doers. 

[037_064]64 Lo! it is a tree that springeth in the heart of hell. 

[037_065]65 Its crop is as it were the heads of devils 

[037_066]66 And lo! they verily must eat thereof, and fill (their) bellies therewith. 

[037_067]67 And afterward, lo! thereupon they have a drink of boiling water 

[037_068]68 And afterward, lo! their return is surely unto hell. 

[037_069]69 They indeed found their fathers astray, 

[037_070]70 But they make haste (to follow) in their footsteps. 

[037_071]71 And verily most of the men of old went astray before them, 

[037_072]72 And verily We sent among them warners. 

[037_073]73 Then see the nature of the consequence for those warned, 

[037_074]74 Save single-minded slaves of Allah. 

[037_075]75 And Noah verily prayed unto Us, and gracious was the Hearer of his prayer 

[037_076]76 And We saved him and his household from the great distress, 

[037_077]77 And made his seed the survivors, 

[037_078]78 And left for him among the later folk (the salutation): 

[037_079]79 Peace be unto Noah among the peoples! 

[037_080]80 Lo! thus do We reward the good. 

[037_081]81 Lo! he is one of Our believing slaves. 

[037_082]82 Then We did drown the others. 

[037_083]83 And lo! of his persuasion verily was Abraham 

[037_084]84 When he came unto his Lord with a whole heart; 

[037_085]85 When he said unto his father and his folk: What is it that ye worship ? 

[037_086]86 Is it a falsehood - gods beside Allah - that ye desire ? 

[037_087]87 What then is your opinion of the Lord of the Worlds ? 

[037_088]88 And he glanced a glance at the stars 

[037_089]89 Then said: Lo! I feel sick! 

[037_090]90 And they turned their backs and went away from him. 

[037_091]91 Then turned he to their gods and said: Will ye not eat ? 

[037_092]92 What aileth you that ye speak not ? 

[037_093]93 Then he attacked them, striking with his right hand. 

[037_094]94 And (his people) came toward him, hastening. 

[037_095]95 He said: Worship ye that which ye yourselves do carve 

[037_096]96 When Allah hath created you and what ye make ? 

[037_097]97 They said: Build for him a building and fling him in the red-hotfire. 

[037_098]98 And they designed a snare for him, but We made them the undermost. 

[037_099]99 And he said: Lo! I am going unto my Lord Who will guide me. 

[037_100]100 My Lord! Vouchsafe me of the righteous. 

[037_101]101 So We gave him tidings of a gentle son. 

[037_102]102 And when (his son) was old enough to walk with him, (Abraham) said: O my  dear son, I have seen in a dream that I must sacrifice thee. So look, what thinkest thou  ? He said: O my father! Do that which thou art commanded. Allah willing, thou shalt  find me of the steadfast. 

[037_103]103 Then, when they had both surrendered (to Allah), and he had flung him down  upon his face, 

[037_104]104 We called unto him: O Abraham! 

[037_105]105 Thou hast already fulfilled the vision. Lo! thus do We reward the good. 

[037_106]106 Lo! that verily was a clear test. 

[037_107]107 Then We ransomed him with a tremendous victim. 

[037_108]108 And We left for him among the later folk (the salutation): 

[037_109]109 Peace be unto Abraham! 

[037_110]110 Thus do We reward the good. 

[037_111]111 Lo! he is one of Our believing slaves. 

[037_112]112 And we gave him tidings of the birth of Isaac, a prophet of the righteous. 

[037_113]113 And We blessed him and Isaac. And of their seed are some who do good, and  some who plainly wrong themselves. 

[037_114]114 And We verily gave grace unto Moses and Aaron, 

[037_115]115 And saved them and their people from the great distress, 

[037_116]116 And helped them so that they became the victors. 

[037_117]117 And We gave them the clear Scripture 

[037_118]118 And showed them the right path. 

[037_119]119 And We left for them among the later folk (the salutation): 

[037_120]120 Peace be unto Moses and Aaron! 

[037_121]121 Lo! thus do We reward the good. 

[037_122]122 Lo! they are two of Our believing slaves. 

[037_123]123 And lo! Elias was of those sent (to warn), 

[037_124]124 When he said unto his folk: Will ye not ward off (evil) ? 

[037_125]125 Will ye cry unto Baal and forsake the Best of creators, 

[037_126]126 Allah, your Lord and Lord of your forefathers ? 

[037_127]127 But they denied him, so they surely will be haled forth (to the doom) 

[037_128]128 Save single-minded slaves of Allah. 

[037_129]129 And we left for him among the later folk (the salutation): 

[037_130]130 Peace be unto Elias! 

[037_131]131 Lo! thus do We reward the good. 

[037_132]132 Lo! he is one of our believing slaves. 

[037_133]133 And lo! Lot verily was of those sent (to warn). 

[037_134]134 When We saved him and his household, every one, 

[037_135]135 Save an old woman among those who stayed behind; 

[037_136]136 Then We destroyed the others. 

[037_137]137 And lo! ye verily pass by (the ruin of) them in the morning 

[037_138]138 And at night-time; have ye then no sense ? 

[037_139]139 And lo! Jonah verily was of those sent (to warn) 

[037_140]140 When he fled unto the laden ship, 

[037_141]141 And then drew lots and was of those rejected; 

[037_142]142 And the fish swallowed him while he was blameworthy; 

[037_143]143 And had he not been one of those who glorify (Allah) 

[037_144]144 He would have tarried in its belly till the day when they are raised; 

[037_145]145 Then We cast him on a desert shore while he was sick; 

[037_146]146 And We caused a tree of gourd to grow above him; 

[037_147]147 And We sent him to a hundred thousand (folk) or more 

[037_148]148 And they believed, therefor We gave them comfort for a while. 

[037_149]149 Now ask them (O Muhammad): Hath thy Lord daughters whereas they have  sons ? 

[037_150]150 Or created We the angels females while they were present ? 

[037_151]151 Lo! it is of their falsehood that they say: 

[037_152]152 Allah hath begotten. Allah! verily they tell a lie. 

[037_153]153 (And again of their falsehood): He hath preferred daughters to sons. 

[037_154]154 What aileth you ? How judge ye ? 

[037_155]155 Will ye not then reflect ? 

[037_156]156 Or have ye a clear warrant ? 

[037_157]157 Then produce your writ, if ye are truthful. 

[037_158]158 And they imagine kinship between him and the jinn, whereas the jinn know  well that they will be brought before (Him). 

[037_159]159 Glorified be Allah from that which they attribute (unto Him), 

[037_160]160 Save single-minded slaves of Allah. 

[037_161]161 Lo! verily, ye and that which ye worship, 

[037_162]162 Ye cannot excite (anyone) against Him. 

[037_163]163 Save him who is to burn in hell. 

[037_164]164 There is not one of us but hath his known position. 

[037_165]165 Lo! we, even we are they who set the ranks, 

[037_166]166 Lo! we, even we are they who hymn His praise 

[037_167]167 And indeed they used to say: 

[037_168]168 If we had but a reminder from the men of old 

[037_169]169 We would be single-minded slaves of Allah. 

[037_170]170 Yet (now that it is come) they disbelieve therein; but they will come to know. 

[037_171]171 And verily Our word went forth of old unto Our bondmen sent (to warn) 

[037_172]172 That they verily would be helped, 

[037_173]173 And that Our host, they verily would be the victors. 

[037_174]174 So withdraw from them (O Muhammad) awhile, 

[037_175]175 And watch, for they will (soon) see. 

[037_176]176 Would they hasten on Our doom ? 

[037_177]177 But when it cometh home to them, then it will be a hapless morn for those  who have been warned. 

[037_178]178 Withdraw from them awhile 

[037_179]179 And watch, for they will (soon) see. 

[037_180]180 Glorified be thy Lord, the Lord of Majesty, from that which they attribute  (unto Him) 

[037_181]181 And peace be unto those sent (to warn). 

[037_182]182 And praise be to Allah, Lord of the Worlds!

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

38. Sad: Sad

[038_001]1 Sad. By the renowned Qur'an, 

[038_002]2 Nay, but those who disbelieve are in false pride and schism. 

[038_003]3 How many a generation We destroyed before them, and they cried out when  it was no longer the time for escape! 

[038_004]4 And they marvel that a warner from among themselves hath come unto them,  and the disbelievers say: This is a wizard, a charlatan. 

[038_005]5 Maketh he the gods One God ? Lo! that is an astounding thing. 

[038_006]6 The chiefs among them go about, exhorting: Go and be staunch to your gods!  Lo! this is a thing designed. 

[038_007]7 We have not heard of this in later religion. This is naught but an invention. 

[038_008]8 Hath the reminder been unto him (alone) among us ? Nay, but they are in  doubt concerning My reminder; nay but they have not yet tasted My doom. 

[038_009]9 Or are theirs the treasures of the mercy of thy Lord, the Mighty, the  Bestower ? 

[038_010]10 Or is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them  theirs ? Then let them ascend by ropes! 

[038_011]11 A defeated host are (all) the factions that are there. 

[038_012]12 The folk of Noah before them denied (their messenger) and (so did the tribe  of) A'ad, and Pharaoh firmly planted, 

[038_013]13 And (the tribe of) Thamud, and the folk of Lot, and the dwellers in the wood:  these were the factions. 

[038_014]14 Not one of them but did deny the messengers, therefor My doom was  justified, 

[038_015]15 These wait for but one Shout, there will be no second thereto. 

[038_016]16 They say: Our Lord! Hasten on for us our fate before the Day of Reckoning. 

[038_017]17 Bear with what they say, and remember Our bondman David, lord of might,  Lo! he was ever turning in repentance (toward Allah). 

[038_018]18 Lo! We subdued the hills to hymn the praises (of their Lord) with him at  nightfall and sunrise, 

[038_019]19 And the birds assembled; all were turning unto Him. 

[038_020]20 We made his kingdom strong and gave him wisdom and decisive speech. 

[038_021]21 And hath the story of the litigants come unto thee ? How they climbed the  wall into the royal chamber; 

[038_022]22 How they burst in upon David, and he was afraid of them. They said: Be not  afraid! (We are) two litigants, one of whom hath wronged the other, therefor judge  aright between us; be not unjust; and show us the fair way. 

[038_023]23 Lo! this my brother hath ninety and nine ewes while I had one ewe; and he  said: Entrust it to me, and he conquered me in speech. 

[038_024]24 (David) said: He hath wronged thee in demanding thine ewe in addition to  his ewes, and lo! many partners oppress one another, save such as believe and do  good works, and they are few. And David guessed that We had tried him, and he  sought forgiveness of his Lord, and he bowed himself and fell down prostrate and  repented. 

[038_025]25 So We forgave him that; and lo! he had access to Our presence and a happy  journey's end. 

[038_026]26 (And it was said unto him): O David! Lo! We have set thee as a viceroy in  the earth; therefor judge aright between mankind, and follow not desire that it beguile  thee from the way of Allah. Lo! those who wander from the way of Allah have an  awful doom, forasmuch as they forgot the Day of Reckoning. 

[038_027]27 And We created not the heaven and the earth and all that is between them in  vain. That is the opinion of those who disbelieve. And woe unto those who disbelieve,  from the Fire! 

[038_028]28 Shall We treat those who believe and do good works as those who spread  corruption in the earth; or shall We treat the pious as the wicked ? 

[038_029]29 (This is) a Scripture that We have revealed unto thee, full of blessing, that  they may ponder its revelations, and that men of understanding may reflect. 

[038_030]30 And We bestowed on David, Solomon. How excellent a slave! Lo! he was  ever turning in repentance (toward Allah). 

[038_031]31 When there were shown to him at eventide lightfooted coursers 

[038_032]32 And he said: Lo! I have preferred the good things (of the world) to the  remembrance of my Lord; till they were taken out of sight behind the curtain. 

[038_033]33 (Then he said): Bring them back to me, and fell to slashing (with his sword  their) legs and necks. 

[038_034]34 And verily We tried Solomon, and set upon his throne a (mere) body. Then  did he repent. 

[038_035]35 He said: My Lord! Forgive me and bestow on me sovereignty such as shall  not belong to any after me. Lo! Thou art the Bestower. 

[038_036]36 So We made the wind subservient unto him, setting fair by his command  whithersoever he intended. 

[038_037]37 And the unruly, every builder and diver (made We subservient), 

[038_038]38 And others linked together in chains, 

[038_039]39 (Saying): This is Our gift, so bestow thou, or withhold, without reckoning. 

[038_040]40 And lo! he hath favour with Us, and a happy journey's end. 

[038_041]41 And make mention (O Muhammad) of Our bondman Job, when he cried unto  his Lord (saying): Lo! the devil doth afflict me with distress and torment. 

[038_042]42 (And it was said unto him): Strike the ground with thy foot. This (spring) is a  cool bath and a refreshing drink. 

[038_043]43 And We bestowed on him (again) his household and therewith the like  thereof, a mercy from Us, and a memorial for men of understanding. 

[038_044]44 And (it was said unto him): Take in thine hand a branch and smite therewith,  and break not thine oath. Lo! We found him steadfast, how excellent a slave! Lo! he  was ever turning in repentance (to his Lord). 

[038_045]45 And make mention of Our bondmen, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, men of parts  and vision. 

[038_046]46 Lo! We purified them with a pure thought, remembrance of the Home (of the  Hereafter). 

[038_047]47 Lo! in Our sight they are verily of the elect, the excellent. 

[038_048]48 And make mention of Ishmael and Elisha and Dhu'l-Kifl. All are of the  chosen. 

[038_049]49 This is a reminder. And lo! for those who ward off (evil) is a happy journey's  end, 

[038_050]50 Gardens of Eden, whereof the gates are opened for them, 

[038_051]51 Wherein, reclining, they call for plenteous fruit and cool drink (that is)  therein. 

[038_052]52 And with them are those of modest gaze, companions. 

[038_053]53 This it is that ye are promised for the Day of Reckoning. 

[038_054]54 Lo! this in truth is Our provision, which will never waste away. 

[038_055]55 This (is for the righteous). And lo! for the transgressors there with be an evil  journey's end, 

[038_056]56 Hell, where they will burn, an evil resting-place. 

[038_057]57 Here is a boiling and an ice-cold draught, so let them taste it, 

[038_058]58 And other (torment) of the kind in pairs (the two extremes)! 

[038_059]59 Here is an army rushing blindly with you. (Those who are already in the Fire  say): No word of welcome for them. Lo! they will roast at the Fire. 

[038_060]60 They say: Nay, but you (misleaders), for you there is no word of welcome.  Ye prepared this for us (by your misleading). Now hapless is the plight. 

[038_061]61 They say: Our Lord! Whoever did prepare this for us, oh, give him double  portion of the Fire! 

[038_062]62 And they say: What aileth us that we behold not men whom we were wont to  count among the wicked ? 

[038_063]63 Did we take them (wrongly) for a laughing-stock, or have our eyes missed  them ? 

[038_064]64 Lo! that is very truth: the wrangling of the dwellers in the Fire. 

[038_065]65 Say (unto them, O Muhammad): I am only a warner, and there is no God  save Allah, the One, the Absolute, 

[038_066]66 Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them, the Mighty,  the Pardoning. 

[038_067]67 Say: It is tremendous tidings 

[038_068]68 Whence ye turn away! 

[038_069]69 I had no knowledge of the Highest Chiefs when they disputed; 

[038_070]70 It is revealed unto me only that I may be a plain warner. 

[038_071]71 When thy Lord said unto the angels: Lo! I am about to create a mortal out of  mire, 

[038_072]72 And when I have fashioned him and breathed into him of My Spirit, then fall  down before him prostrate, 

[038_073]73 The angels fell down prostrate, every one, 

[038_074]74 Saving Iblis; he was scornful and became one of the disbelievers. 

[038_075]75 He said: O Iblis! What hindereth thee from falling prostrate before that which  I have created with both My hands ? Art thou too proud or art thou of the high exalted  ? 

[038_076]76 He said: I am better than him. Thou createdst me of fire, whilst him Thou  didst create of clay. 

[038_077]77 He said: Go forth from hence, for lo! thou art outcast, 

[038_078]78 And lo! My curse is on thee till the Day of Judgment. 

[038_079]79 He said: My Lord! Reprieve me till the day when they are raised. 

[038_080]80 He said: Lo! thou art of those reprieved 

[038_081]81 Until the day of the time appointed. 

[038_082]82 He said: Then, by Thy might, I surely will beguile them every one, 

[038_083]83 Save Thy single-minded slaves among them. 

[038_084]84 He said: The Truth is, and the Truth I speak, 

[038_085]85 That I shall fill hell with thee and with such of them as follow thee, together. 

[038_086]86 Say (O Muhammad, unto mankind): I ask of you no fee for this, and I am no  simulating. 

[038_087]87 Lo! it is naught else than a reminder for all peoples 

[038_088]88 And ye will come in time to know the truth thereof.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

39. az-Zumar: The Companies

[039_001]1 The revelation of the Scripture is from Allah, the Mighty, the Wise. 

[039_002]2 Lo! We have revealed the Scripture unto thee (Muhammad) with truth; so  worship Allah, making religion pure for Him (only). 

[039_003]3 Surely pure religion is for Allah only. And those who choose protecting  friends beside Him (say): We worship them only that they may bring us near unto  Allah. Lo! Allah will judge between them concerning that wherein they differ. Lo!  Allah guideth not him who is a liar, an ingrate. 

[039_004]4 If Allah had willed to choose a son, He could have chosen what He would of  that which He hath created. Be He Glorified! He is Allah, the One, the Absolute. 

[039_005]5 He hath created the heavens and the earth with truth. He maketh night to  succeed day, and He maketh day to succeed night, and He constraineth the sun and  the moon to give service, each running on for an appointed term. Is not He the  Mighty, the Forgiver ? 

[039_006]6 He created you from one being, then from that (being) He made its mate; and  He hath provided for you of cattle eight kinds. He created you in the wombs of your  mothers, creation after creation, in a threefold gloom. Such is Allah, your Lord. His is  the Sovereignty. There is no God save Him. How then are ye turned away ? 

[039_007]7 If ye are thankless, yet Allah is Independent of you, though He is not pleased  with thanklessness for His bondmen; and if ye are thankful He is pleased therewith  for you. No laden soul will bear another's load. Then unto your Lord is your return;  and He will tell you what ye used to do. Lo! He knoweth what is in the breasts (of  men). 

[039_008]8 And when some hurt toucheth man, he crieth unto his Lord, turning unto  Him (repentant). Then, when He granteth him a boon from Him he forgetteth that for  which he cried unto Him before, and setteth up rivals to Allah that he may beguile  (men) from his way. Say (O Muhammad, unto such an one): Take pleasure in thy  disbelief a while. Lo! thou art of the owners of the Fire. 

[039_009]9 Is he who payeth adoration in the watches of the night, prostrate and  standing, bewaring of the Hereafter and hoping for the mercy of his Lord, (to be  accounted equal with a disbeliever) ? Say (unto them, O Muhammad): Are those who  know equal with those who know not ? But only men of understanding will pay heed. 

[039_010]10 Say: O My bondmen who believe! Observe your duty to your Lord. For  those who do good in this world there is good, and Allah's earth is spacious. Verily  the steadfast will be paid their wages without stint. 

[039_011]11 Say (O Muhammad): Lo! I am commanded to worship Allah, making  religion pure for Him (only). 

[039_012]12 And I am commanded to be the first of those who are muslims (surrender  unto Him). 

[039_013]13 Say: Lo! if I should disobey my Lord, I fear the doom of a tremendous Day. 

[039_014]14 Say: Allah I worship, making my religion pure for Him (only). 

[039_015]15 Then worship what ye will beside Him. Say: The losers will be those who  lose themselves and their housefolk on the Day of Resurrection. Ah, that will be the  manifest loss! 

[039_016]16 They have an awning of fire above them and beneath them a dais (of fire).  With this doth Allah appal His bondmen. O My bondmen, therefor fear Me! 

[039_017]17 And those who put away false gods lest they should worship them and turn  to Allah in repentance, for them there are glad tidings. Therefor give good tidings (O  Muhammad) to My bondmen 

[039_018]18 Who hear advice and follow the best thereof. Such are those whom Allah  guideth, and such are men of understanding. 

[039_019]19 Is he on whom the word of doom is fulfilled (to be helped), and canst thou  (O Muhammad) rescue him who is in the Fire ? 

[039_020]20 But those who keep their duty to their Lord, for them are lofty halls with  lofty halls above them, built (for them), beneath which rivers flow. (It is) a promise of  Allah. Allah faileth not His promise. 

[039_021]21 Hast thou not seen how Allah hath sent down water from the sky and hath  caused it to penetrate the earth as watersprings, and afterward thereby produceth  crops of divers hues; and afterward they wither and thou seest them turn yellow; then  He maketh them chaff. Lo! herein verily is a reminder for men of understanding. 

[039_022]22 Is he whose bosom Allah hath expanded for Al-Islam, so that he followeth a  light from his Lord, (as he who disbelieveth) ? Then woe unto those whose hearts are  hardened against remembrance of Allah. Such are in plain error. 

[039_023]23 Allah hath (now) revealed the fairest of statements, a Scripture consistent,  (wherein promises of reward are) paired (with threats of punishment), whereat doth  creep the flesh of those who fear their Lord, so that their flesh and their hearts soften  to Allah's reminder. Such is Allah's guidance, wherewith He guideth whom He will.  And him whom Allah sendeth astray, for him there is no guide. 

[039_024]24 Is he then, who will strike his face against the awful doom upon the Day of  Resurrection (as he who doeth right) ? And it will be said unto the wrong-doers: Taste  what ye used to earn. 

[039_025]25 Those before them denied, and so the doom came on them whence they  knew not. 

[039_026]26 Thus Allah made them taste humiliation in the life of the world, and verily  the doom of the Hereafter will be greater if they did but know. 

[039_027]27 And verily We have coined for mankind in this Qur'an all kinds of  similitudes, that haply they may reflect; 

[039_028]28 A Lecture in Arabic, containing no crookedness, that haply they may ward  off (evil). 

[039_029]29 Allah coineth a similitude: A man in relation to whom are several part- owners, quarrelling, and a man belonging wholly to one man. Are the two equal in  similitude ? Praise be to Allah! But most of them know not. 

[039_030]30 Lo! thou wilt die, and lo! they will die; 

[039_031]31 Then lo! on the Day of Resurrection, before your Lord ye will dispute. 

[039_032]32 And who doth greater wrong than he who telleth a lie against Allah, and  denieth the truth when it reacheth him ? Will not the home of disbelievers be in hell ? 

[039_033]33 And whoso bringeth the truth and believeth therein - Such are the dutiful. 

[039_034]34 They shall have what they will of their Lord's bounty. That is the reward of  the good: 

[039_035]35 That Allah will remit from them the worst of what they did, and will pay  them for reward the best they used to do. 

[039_036]36 Will not Allah defend His slave ? Yet they would frighten thee with those  beside Him. He whom Allah sendeth astray, for him there is no guide. 

[039_037]37 And he whom Allah guideth, for him there can be no misleader. Is not Allah  Mighty, Able to Requite (the wrong) ? 

[039_038]38 And verily, if thou shouldst ask them: Who created the heavens and the earth  ? they will say: Allah. Say: Bethink you then of those ye worship beside Allah, if  Allah willed some hurt for me, could they remove from me His hurt; or if He willed  some mercy for me, could they restrain His mercy ? Say: Allah is my all. In Him do  (all) the trusting put their trust. 

[039_039]39 Say: O my people! Act in your manner. Lo! I (too) am acting. Thus ye will  come to know 

[039_040]40 Who it is unto whom cometh a doom that will abase him, and on whom there  falleth everlasting doom. 

[039_041]41 Lo! We have revealed unto thee (Muhammad) the Scripture for mankind  with truth. Then whosoever goeth right it is for his soul, and whosoever strayeth,  strayeth only to its hurt. And thou art not a warder over them. 

[039_042]42 Allah receiveth (men's) souls at the time of their death, and that (soul) which  dieth not (yet) in its sleep. He keepeth that (soul) for which He hath ordained death  and dismisseth the rest till an appointed term. Lo! herein verily are portents for people  who take thought. 

[039_043]43 Or choose they intercessors other than Allah ? Say: What! Even though they  have power over nothing and have no intelligence ? 

[039_044]44 Say: Unto Allah belongeth all intercession. His is the Sovereignty of the  heavens and the earth. And afterward unto Him ye will be brought back. 

[039_045]45 And when Allah alone is mentioned, the hearts of those who believe not in  the Hereafter are repelled, and when those (whom they worship) beside Him are  mentioned, behold! they are glad. 

[039_046]46 Say: O Allah! Creator of the heavens and the earth! Knower of the Invisible  and the Visible! Thou wilt judge between Thy slaves concerning that wherein they  used to differ. 

[039_047]47 And though those who do wrong possess all that is in the earth, and therewith  as much again, they verily will seek to ransom themselves therewith on the Day of  Resurrection from the awful doom; and there will appear unto them, from their Lord,  that wherewith they never reckoned. 

[039_048]48 And the evils that they earned will appear unto them, and that whereat they  used to scoff will surround them. 

[039_049]49 Now when hurt toucheth a man he crieth unto Us, and afterward when We  have granted him a boon from Us, he saith: Only by force of knowledge I obtained it.  Nay, but it is a test. But most of them know not. 

[039_050]50 Those before them said it, yet (all) that they had earned availed them not; 

[039_051]51 But the evils that they earned smote them; and such of these as do wrong, the  evils that they earn will smite them; they cannot escape. 

[039_052]52 Know they not that Allah enlargeth providence for whom He will, and  straiteneth it (for whom He will). Lo! herein verily are portents for people who  believe. 

[039_053]53 Say: O My slaves who have been prodigal to their own hurt! Despair not of  the mercy of Allah, Who forgiveth all sins. Lo! He is the Forgiving, the Merciful. 

[039_054]54 Turn unto your Lord repentant, and surrender unto Him, before there come  unto you the doom, when ye cannot be helped. 

[039_055]55 And follow the better (guidance) of that which is revealed unto you from  your Lord, before the doom cometh on you suddenly when ye know not, 

[039_056]56 Lest any soul should say: Alas, my grief that I was unmindful of Allah, and I  was indeed among the scoffers! 

[039_057]57 Or should say: If Allah had but guided me I should have been among the  dutiful! 

[039_058]58 Or should say, when it seeth the doom: Oh, that I had but a second chance  that I might be among the righteous! 

[039_059]59 (But now the answer will be): Nay, for My revelations came unto thee, but  thou didst deny them and wast scornful and wast among the disbelievers. 

[039_060]60 And on the Day of Resurrection thou (Muhammad) seest those who lied  concerning Allah with their faces blackened. Is not the home of the scorners in hell ? 

[039_061]61 And Allah delivereth those who ward off (evil) because of their deserts. Evil  toucheth them not, nor do they grieve. 

[039_062]62 Allah is Creator of all things, and He is Guardian over all things. 

[039_063]63 His are the keys of the heavens and the earth, and they who disbelieve the  revelations of Allah - such are they who are the losers. 

[039_064]64 Say (O Muhammad, to the disbelievers): Do ye bid me serve other than  Allah ? O ye fools! 

[039_065]65 And verily it hath been revealed unto thee as unto those before thee (saying):  If thou ascribe a partner to Allah thy work will fail and thou indeed wilt be among the  losers. 

[039_066]66 Nay, but Allah must thou serve, and be among the thankful! 

[039_067]67 And they esteem not Allah as He hath the right to be esteemed, when the  whole earth is His handful on the Day of Resurrection, and the heavens are rolled in  His right hand. Glorified is He and High Exalted from all that they ascribe as partner  (unto Him). 

[039_068]68 And the trumpet is blown, and all who are in the heavens and all who are in  the earth swoon away, save him whom Allah willeth. Then it is blown a second time,  and behold them standing waiting! 

[039_069]69 And the earth shineth with the light of her Lord, and the Book is set up, and  the prophets and the witnesses are brought, and it is judged between them with truth,  and they are not wronged. 

[039_070]70 And each soul is paid in full for what it did. And He is Best Aware of what  they do. 

[039_071]71 And those who disbelieve are driven unto hell in troops till, when they reach  it and the gates thereof are opened, and the warders thereof say unto them: Came  there not unto you messengers of your own, reciting unto you the revelations of your  Lord and warning you of the meeting of this your Day ? they say: Yea, verily. But the  word of doom of disbelievers is fulfilled. 

[039_072]72 It is said (unto them): Enter ye the gates of hell to dwell therein. Thus  hapless is the journey's end of the scorners. 

[039_073]73 And those who keep their duty to their Lord are driven unto the Garden in  troops till, when they reach it, and the gates thereof are opened, and the warders  thereof say unto them: Peace be unto you! Ye are good, so enter ye (the Garden of  delight), to dwell therein; 

[039_074]74 They say: Praise be to Allah, Who hath fulfilled His promise unto us and  hath made us inherit the land, sojourning in the Garden where we will! So bounteous  is the wage of workers. 

[039_075]75 And thou (O Muhammad) seest the angels thronging round the Throne,  hymning the praises of their Lord. And they are judged aright. And it is said: Praise  be to Allah, the Lord of the Worlds!

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

40. al-Mu'min: The Forgiving One

[040_001]1 Ha. Mim. 

[040_002]2 The revelation of the Scripture is from Allah, the Mighty, the Knower, 

[040_003]3 The Forgiver of sin, the Accepter of repentance, the Stern in punishment, the  Bountiful. There is no God save Him. Unto Him is the journeying. 

[040_004]4 None argue concerning the revelations of Allah save those who disbelieve,  so let not their turn of fortune in the land deceive thee (O Muhammad). 

[040_005]5 The folk of Noah and the factions after them denied (their messengers)  before these, and every nation purposed to seize their messenger and argued falsely,  (thinking) thereby to refute the Truth. Then I seized them, and how (awful) was My  punishment. 

[040_006]6 Thus was the word of thy Lord concerning those who disbelieve fulfilled:  That they are owners of the Fire. 

[040_007]7 Those who bear the Throne, and all who are round about it, hymn the praises  of their Lord and believe in Him and ask forgiveness for those who believe (saying):  Our Lord! Thou comprehendest all things in mercy and knowledge, therefor forgive  those who repent and follow Thy way. Ward off from them the punishment of hell. 

[040_008]8 Our Lord! And make them enter the Gardens of Eden which thou hast  promised them, with such of their fathers and their wives and their descendants as do  right. Lo! Thou, only Thou, art the Mighty, the Wise. 

[040_009]9 And ward off from them ill-deeds; and he from whom Thou wardest off ill- deeds that day, him verily hast Thou taken into mercy. That is the supreme triumph. 

[040_010]10 Lo! (on that day) those who disbelieve are informed by proclamation: Verily  Allah's abhorrence is more terrible than your abhorrence one of another, when ye  were called unto the faith but did refuse. 

[040_011]11 They say: Our Lord! Twice hast Thou made us die, and twice hast Thou  made us live. Now we confess our sins. Is there any way to go out ? 

[040_012]12 (It is said unto them): This is (your plight) because, when Allah only was  invoked, ye disbelieved, but when some partner was ascribed to Him ye were  believing. But the command belongeth only to Allah, the Sublime, the Majestic. 

[040_013]13 He it is Who showeth you His portents, and sendeth down for you provision  from the sky. None payeth heed save him who turneth (unto Him) repentant. 

[040_014]14 Therefor (O believers) pray unto Allah, making religion pure for Him (only),  however much the disbelievers be averse - 

[040_015]15 The Exalter of Ranks, the Lord of the Throne. He causeth the Spirit of His  command upon whom He will of His slaves, that He may warn of the Day of  Meeting, 

[040_016]16 The day when they come forth, nothing of them being hidden from Allah.  Whose is the Sovereignty this day ? It is Allah's, the One, the Almighty. 

[040_017]17 This day is each soul requited that which it hath earned; no wrong (is done)  this day. Lo! Allah is swift at reckoning. 

[040_018]18 Warn them (O Muhammad) of the Day of the approaching (doom), when the  hearts will be choking the throats, (when) there will be no friend for the wrong-doers,  nor any intercessor who will be heard. 

[040_019]19 He knoweth the traitor of the eyes, and that which the bosoms hide. 

[040_020]20 Allah judgeth with truth, while those to whom they cry instead of Him judge  not at all. Lo! Allah, He is the Hearer, the Seer. 

[040_021]21 Have they not travelled in the land to see the nature of the consequence for  those who disbelieved before them ? They were mightier than these in power and (in  the) traces (which they left behind them) in the earth. Yet Allah seized them for their  sins, and they had no protector from Allah. 

[040_022]22 That was because their messengers kept bringing them clear proofs (of  Allah's Sovereignty) but they disbelieved; so Allah seized them. Lo! He is Strong,  severe in punishment. 

[040_023]23 And verily We sent Moses with Our revelations and a clear warrant 

[040_024]24 Unto Pharaoh and Haman and Korah, but they said: A lying sorcerer! 

[040_025]25 And when he brought them the Truth from Our presence, they said: Slay the  sons of those who believe with him, and spare their women. But the plot of  disbelievers is in naught but error. 

[040_026]26 And Pharaoh said: Suffer me to kill Moses, and let him cry unto his Lord.  Lo! I fear that he will alter your religion or that he will cause confusion in the land. 

[040_027]27 Moses said: Lo! I seek refuge in my Lord and your Lord from every scorner  who believeth not in a Day of Reckoning. 

[040_028]28 And a believing man of Pharaoh's family, who hid his faith, said: Would ye  kill a man because he saith: My Lord is Allah, and hath brought you clear proofs from  your Lord ? If he is lying, then his lie is upon him; and if he is truthful, then some of  that wherewith he threateneth you will strike you. Lo! Allah guideth not one who is a  prodigal, a liar. 

[040_029]29 O my people! Yours is the kingdom to-day, ye being uppermost in the land.  But who would save us from the wrath of Allah should it reach us ? Pharaoh said: I  do but show you what I think, and I do but guide you to wise policy. 

[040_030]30 And he who believed said: O my people! Lo! I fear for you a fate like that of  the factions (of old); 

[040_031]31 A plight like that of Noah's folk, and A'ad and Thamud, and those after them,  and Allah willeth no injustice for (His) slaves. 

[040_032]32 And, O my people! Lo! I fear for you a Day of Summoning, 

[040_033]33 A day when ye will turn to flee, having no preserver from Allah: and he  whom Allah sendeth astray, for him there is no guide. 

[040_034]34 And verily Joseph brought you of old clear proofs, yet ye ceased not to be in  doubt concerning what he brought you till, when he died, ye said: Allah will not send  any messenger after him. Thus Allah deceiveth him who is a prodigal, a doubter. 

[040_035]35 Those who wrangle concerning the revelations of Allah without any warrant  that hath come unto them, it is greatly hateful in the sight of Allah and in the sight of  those who believe. Thus doth Allah print on every arrogant, disdainful heart. 

[040_036]36 And Pharaoh said: O Haman! Build for me a tower that haply I may reach  the roads, 

[040_037]37 The roads of the heavens, and may look upon the God of Moses, though  verily I think him a liar. Thus was the evil that he did made fairseeming unto Pharaoh,  and he was debarred from the (right) way. The plot of Pharaoh ended but in ruin. 

[040_038]38 And he who believed said: O my people! Follow me. I will show you the  way of right conduct. 

[040_039]39 O my people! Lo! this life of the world is but a passing comfort, and lo! the  Hereafter, that is the enduring home. 

[040_040]40 Whoso doeth an ill-deed, he will be repaid the like thereof, while whoso  doeth right, whether male or female, and is a believer, (all) such will enter the  Garden, where they will be nourished without stint. 

[040_041]41 And, O my people! What aileth me that I call you unto deliverance when ye  call me unto the Fire ? 

[040_042]42 Ye call me to disbelieve in Allah and ascribe unto Him as partners that  whereof I have no knowledge, while I call you unto the Mighty, the Forgiver. 

[040_043]43 Assuredly that whereunto ye call me hath no claim in the world or in the  Hereafter, and our return will be unto Allah, and the prodigals will be owners of the  Fire. 

[040_044]44 And ye will remember what I say unto you. I confide my cause unto Allah.  Lo! Allah is Seer of (His) slaves. 

[040_045]45 So Allah warded off from him the evils which they plotted, while a dreadful  doom encompassed Pharaoh's folk, 

[040_046]46 The Fire; they are exposed to it morning and evening; and on the day when  the Hour upriseth (it is said): Cause Pharaoh's folk to enter the most awful doom. 

[040_047]47 And when they wrangle in the Fire, the weak say unto those who were proud:  Lo! we were a following unto you; will ye therefor rid us of a portion of the Fire ? 

[040_048]48 Those who were proud say: Lo! we are all (together) herein. Lo! Allah hath  judged between (His) slaves. 

[040_049]49 And those in the Fire say unto the guards of hell: Entreat your Lord that He  relieve us of a day of the torment. 

[040_050]50 They say: Came not your messengers unto you with clear proofs ? They say:  Yea, verily. They say: Then do ye pray, although the prayer of disbelievers is in vain. 

[040_051]51 Lo! We verily do help Our messengers, and those who believe, in the life of  the world and on the day when the witnesses arise, 

[040_052]52 The day when their excuse availeth not the evil-doers, and theirs is the curse,  and theirs the ill abode. 

[040_053]53 And We verily gave Moses the guidance, and We caused the Children of  Israel to inherit the Scripture, 

[040_054]54 A guide and a reminder for men of understanding. 

[040_055]55 Then have patience (O Muhammad). Lo! the promise of Allah is true. And  ask forgiveness of thy sin, and hymn the praise of thy Lord at fall of night and in the  early hours. 

[040_056]56 Lo! those who wrangle concerning the revelations of Allah without a warrant  having come unto them, there is naught else in their breasts save pride which they  will never attain. So take thou refuge in Allah. Lo! He, only He, is the Hearer, the  Seer. 

[040_057]57 Assuredly the creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than the  creation of mankind; but most of mankind know not. 

[040_058]58 And the blind man and the seer are not equal, neither are those who believe  and do good works (equal with) the evil-doer. Little do ye reflect! 

[040_059]59 Lo! the Hour is surely coming, there is no doubt thereof; yet most of  mankind believe not. 

[040_060]60 And your Lord hath said: Pray unto Me and I will hear your prayer. Lo!  those who scorn My service, they will enter hell, disgraced. 

[040_061]61 Allah it is Who hath appointed for you night that ye may rest therein, and  day for seeing. Lo! Allah is a Lord of bounty for mankind, yet most of mankind give  not thanks. 

[040_062]62 Such is Allah, your Lord, the Creator of all things, There is no God save  Him. How then are ye perverted ? 

[040_063]63 Thus are they perverted who deny the revelations of Allah. 

[040_064]64 Allah it is Who appointed for you the earth for a dwelling-place and the sky  for a canopy, and fashioned you and perfected your shapes, and hath provided you  with good things. Such is Allah, your Lord. Then blessed be Allah, the Lord of the  Worlds! 

[040_065]65 He is the Living One. There is no God save Him. So pray unto Him, making  religion pure for Him (only). Praise be to Allah, the Lord of the Worlds! 

[040_066]66 Say (O Muhammad): I am forbidden to worship those unto whom ye cry  beside Allah since there have come unto me clear proofs from my Lord, and I am  commanded to surrender to the Lord of the Worlds. 

[040_067]67 He it is Who created you from dust, then from a drop (of seed) then from a  clot, then bringeth you forth as a child, then (ordaineth) that ye attain full strength and  afterward that ye become old men - though some among you die before - and that ye  reach an appointed term, that haply ye may understand. 

[040_068]68 He it is Who quickeneth and giveth death. When He ordaineth a thing, He  saith unto it only: Be! and it is. 

[040_069]69 Hast thou not seen those who wrangle concerning the revelations of Allah,  how they are turned away ? - 

[040_070]70 Those who deny the Scripture and that wherewith We send Our messengers.  But they will come to know, 

[040_071]71 When carcans are about their necks and chains. They are dragged 

[040_072]72 Through boiling waters; then they are thrust into the Fire. 

[040_073]73 Then it is said unto them: Where are (all) that ye used to make partners (in  the Sovereignty) 

[040_074]74 Beside Allah ? They say: They have failed us; but we used not to pray to  anything before. Thus doth Allah send astray the disbelievers (in His guidance). 

[040_075]75 (And it is said unto them): This is because ye exulted in the earth without  right, and because ye were petulant. 

[040_076]76 Enter ye the gates of hell, to dwell therein. Evil is the habitation of the  scornful. 

[040_077]77 Then have patience (O Muhammad). Lo! the promise of Allah is true. And  whether we let thee see a part of that which We promise them, or (whether) We cause  thee to die, still unto Us they will be brought back. 

[040_078]78 Verily We sent messengers before thee, among them those of whom We  have told thee, and some of whom We have not told thee; and it was not given to any  messenger that he should bring a portent save by Allah's leave, but when Allah's  commandment cometh (the cause) is judged aright, and the followers of vanity will  then be lost. 

[040_079]79 Allah it is Who hath appointed for you cattle, that ye may ride on some of  them, and eat of some - 

[040_080]80 (Many) benefits ye have from them - and that ye may satisfy by their means  a need that is in your breasts, and may be borne upon them as upon the ship. 

[040_081]81 And He showeth you His tokens. Which, then, of the tokens of Allah do ye  deny ? 

[040_082]82 Have they not travelled in the land to see the nature of the consequence for  those before them ? They were more numerous than these, and mightier in power and  (in the) traces (which they left behind them) in the earth. But all that they used to earn  availed them not. 

[040_083]83 And when their messengers brought them clear proofs (of Allah's  Sovereignty) they exulted in the knowledge they (themselves) possessed. And that  which they were wont to mock befell them. 

[040_084]84 Then, when they saw Our doom, they said: We believe in Allah only and  reject (all) that we used to associate (with Him). 

[040_085]85 But their faith could not avail them when they saw Our doom. This is Allah's  law which hath ever taken course for His bondmen. And then the disbelievers will be  ruined.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

41. Ha Mim Sajdah: Revelations Well Expounded

[041_001]1 Ha. Mim. 

[041_002]2 A revelation from the Beneficent, the Merciful, 

[041_003]3 A Scripture whereof the verses are expounded, a Lecture in Arabic for  people who have knowledge, 

[041_004]4 Good tidings and a warning. But most of them turn away so that they hear  not. 

[041_005]5 And they say: Our hearts are protected from that unto which thou (O  Muhammad) callest us, and in our ears there is a deafness, and between us and thee  there is a veil. Act, then. Lo! we also shall be acting. 

[041_006]6 Say (unto them O Muhammad): I am only a mortal like you. It is inspired in  me that your God is One God, therefor take the straight path unto Him and seek  forgiveness of Him. And woe unto the idolaters, 

[041_007]7 Who give not the poor-due, and who are disbelievers in the Hereafter. 

[041_008]8 Lo! as for those who believe and do good works, for them is a reward  enduring. 

[041_009]9 Say (O Muhammad, unto the idolaters): Disbelieve ye verily in Him Who  created the earth in two Days, and ascribe ye unto Him rivals ? He (and none else) is  the Lord of the Worlds. 

[041_010]10 He placed therein firm hills rising above it, and blessed it and measured  therein its sustenance in four Days, alike for (all) who ask; 

[041_011]11 Then turned He to the heaven when it was smoke, and said unto it and unto  the earth: Come both of you, willingly or loth. They said: We come, obedient. 

[041_012]12 Then He ordained them seven heavens in two Days and inspired in each  heaven its mandate; and We decked the nether heaven with lamps, and rendered it  inviolable. That is the measuring of the Mighty, the Knower. 

[041_013]13 But if they turn away, then say: I warn you of a thunderbolt like the  thunderbolt (which fell of old upon the tribes) of A'ad and Thamud; 

[041_014]14 When their messengers came unto them from before them and behind them,  saying: Worship none but Allah! they said: If our Lord had willed, He surely would  have sent down angels (unto us), so lo! we are disbelievers in that wherewith ye have  been sent. 

[041_015]15 As for A'ad, they were arrogant in the land without right, and they said: Who  is mightier than us in power ? Could they not see that Allah Who created them, He  was mightier than them in power ? And they denied Our revelations. 

[041_016]16 Therefor We let loose on them a raging wind in evil days, that We might  make them taste the torment of disgrace in the life of the world. And verily the doom  of the Hereafter will be more shameful, and they will not be helped. 

[041_017]17 And as for Thamud, We gave them guidance, but they preferred blindness to  the guidance, so the bolt of the doom of humiliation overtook them because of what  they used to earn. 

[041_018]18 And We delivered those who believed and used to keep their duty to Allah. 

[041_019]19 And (make mention of) the day when the enemies of Allah are gathered unto  the Fire, they are driven on 

[041_020]20 Till, when they reach it, their ears and their eyes and their skins testify  against them as to what they used to do. 

[041_021]21 And they say unto their skins: Why testify ye against us ? They say: Allah  hath given us speech Who giveth speech to all things, and Who created you at the  first, and unto Whom ye are returned. 

[041_022]22 Ye did not hide yourselves lest your ears and your eyes and your skins  should testify against you, but ye deemed that Allah knew not much of what ye did. 

[041_023]23 That, your thought which ye did think about your Lord, hath ruined you; and  ye find yourselves (this day) among the lost. 

[041_024]24 And though they are resigned, yet the Fire is still their home; and if they ask  for favour, yet they are not of those unto whom favour can be shown. 

[041_025]25 And We assigned them comrades (in the world), who made their present and  their past fairseeming unto them. And the Word concerning nations of the jinn and  humankind who passed away before them hath effect for them. Lo! they were ever  losers. 

[041_026]26 Those who disbelieve say: Heed not this Qur'an, and drown the hearing of it;  haply ye may conquer. 

[041_027]27 But verily We shall cause those who disbelieve to taste an awful doom, and  verily We shall requite them the worst of what they used to do. 

[041_028]28 That is the reward of Allah's enemies: the Fire. Therein is their immortal  home, payment forasmuch as they denied Our revelations. 

[041_029]29 And those who disbelieve will say: Our Lord! Show us those who beguiled  us of the jinn and humankind. We will place them underneath our feet that they may  be among the nethermost. 

[041_030]30 Lo! those who say: Our Lord is Allah, and afterward are upright, the angels  descend upon them, saying: Fear not nor grieve, but hear good tidings of the paradise  which ye are promised. 

[041_031]31 We are your protecting friends in the life of the world and in the Hereafter.  There ye will have (all) that your souls desire, and there ye will have (all) for which  ye pray. 

[041_032]32 A gift of welcome from One Forgiving, Merciful. 

[041_033]33 And who is better in speech than him who prayeth unto his Lord and doeth  right, and saith: Lo! I am of those who are muslims (surrender unto Him). 

[041_034]34 The good deed and the evil deed are not alike. Repel the evil deed with one  which is better, then lo! he, between whom and thee there was enmity (will become)  as though he was a bosom friend. 

[041_035]35 But none is granted it save those who are steadfast, and none is granted it  save the owner of great happiness. 

[041_036]36 And if a whisper from the devil reach thee (O Muhammad) then seek refuge  in Allah. Lo! He is the Hearer, the Knower. 

[041_037]37 And of His portents are the night and the day and the sun and the moon.  Adore not the sun not the moon; but adore Allah Who created them, if it is in truth  Him Whom ye worship. 

[041_038]38 But if they are too proud - still those who are with thy Lord glorify Him  night and day, and tire not. 

[041_039]39 And of His portents (is this): that thou seest the earth lowly, but when We  send down water thereon it thrilleth and groweth. Lo! He Who quickeneth it is verily  the Quickener of the Dead. Lo! He is Able to do all things. 

[041_040]40 Lo! those who distort Our revelations are not hid from Us. Is he who is  hurled into the Fire better, or he who cometh secure on the Day of Resurrection ? Do  what ye will. Lo! He is Seer of what ye do. 

[041_041]41 Lo! those who disbelieve in the Reminder when it cometh unto them (are  guilty), for lo! it is an unassailable Scripture. 

[041_042]42 Falsehood cannot come at it from before it or from behind it. (It is) a  revelation from the Wise, the Owner of Praise. 

[041_043]43 Naught is said unto thee (Muhammad) save what was said unto the  messengers before thee. Lo! thy Lord is owner of forgiveness, and owner (also) of  dire punishment. 

[041_044]44 And if We had appointed it a Lecture in a foreign tongue they would  assuredly have said: If only its verses were expounded (so that we might understand)  ? What! A foreign tongue and an Arab ? - Say unto them (O Muhammad): For those  who believe it is a guidance and a healing; and as for those who disbelieve, there is a  deafness in their ears, and it is blindness for them. Such are called to from afar. 

[041_045]45 And We verily gave Moses the Scripture, but there hath been dispute  concerning it; and but for a Word that had already gone forth from thy Lord, it would  ere now have been judged between them; but lo! they are in hopeless doubt  concerning it. 

[041_046]46 Whoso doeth right it is for his soul, and whoso doeth wrong it is against it.  And thy Lord is not at all a tyrant to His slaves. 

[041_047]47 Unto Him is referred (all) knowledge of the Hour. And no fruits burst forth  from their sheaths, and no female carrieth or bringeth forth but with His knowledge.  And on the day when He calleth unto them: Where are now My partners ? they will  say: We confess unto Thee, not one of us is a witness (for them). 

[041_048]48 And those to whom they used to cry of old have failed them, and they  perceive they have no place of refuge. 

[041_049]49 Man tireth not of praying for good, and if ill toucheth him, then he is  disheartened, desperate. 

[041_050]50 And verily, if We cause him to taste mercy after some hurt that hath touched  him, he will say: This is my own; and I deem not that the Hour will ever rise, and if I  am brought back to my Lord, I surely shall be better off with Him - But We verily  shall tell those who disbelieve (all) that they did, and We verily shall make them taste  hard punishment. 

[041_051]51 When We show favour unto man, he withdraweth and turneth aside, but  when ill toucheth him then he aboundeth in prayer. 

[041_052]52 Bethink you: If it is from Allah and ye reject it - Who is further astray than  one who is at open feud (with Allah) ? 

[041_053]53 We shall show them Our portents on the horizons and within themselves  until it will be manifest unto them that it is the Truth. Doth not thy Lord suffice, since  He is Witness over all things ? 

[041_054]54 How! Are they still in doubt about the meeting with their Lord ? Lo! Is not  He surrounding all things ?

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

42. ash-Shura: The Counsel

[042_001]1 Ha. Mim. 

[042_002]2 A'in. Sin. Qaf. 

[042_003]3 Thus Allah the Mighty, the Knower inspireth thee (Muhammad) as (He  inspired) those before thee. 

[042_004]4 Unto Him belongeth all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth, and  He is the Sublime, the Tremendous. 

[042_005]5 Almost might the heavens above be rent asunder while the angels hymn the  praise of their Lord and ask forgiveness for those on the earth. Lo! Allah, He is the  Forgiver, the Merciful. 

[042_006]6 And as for those who choose protecting friends beside Him, Allah is Warden  over them, and thou art in no wise a guardian over them. 

[042_007]7 And thus We have inspired in thee a Lecture in Arabic, that thou mayst warn  the mother-town and those around it, and mayst warn of a day of assembling whereof  there is no doubt. A host will be in the Garden, and a host of them in the Flame. 

[042_008]8 Had Allah willed, He could have made them one community, but Allah  bringeth whom He will into His mercy. And the wrong-doers have no friend nor  helper. 

[042_009]9 Or have they chosen protecting friends besides Him ? But Allah, He (alone)  is the Protecting Friend. He quickeneth the dead, and He is Able to do all things. 

[042_010]10 And in whatsoever ye differ, the verdict therein belongeth to Allah. Such is  my Lord, in Whom I put my trust, and unto Whom I turn. 

[042_011]11 The Creator of the heavens and the earth. He hath made for you pairs of  yourselves, and of the cattle also pairs, whereby He multiplieth you. Naught is as His  likeness; and He is the Hearer, the Seer. 

[042_012]12 His are the keys of the heavens and the earth. He enlargeth providence for  whom He will and straiteneth (it for whom He will). Lo! He is Knower of all things. 

[042_013]13 He hath ordained for you that religion which He commended unto Noah, and  that which We inspire in thee (Muhammad), and that which We commended unto  Abraham and Moses and Jesus, saying: Establish the religion, and be not divided  therein. Dreadful for the idolaters is that unto which thou callest them. Allah chooseth  for Himself whom He will, and guideth unto Himself him who turneth (toward Him). 

[042_014]14 And they were not divided until after the knowledge came unto them,  through rivalry among themselves; and had it not been for a Word that had already  gone forth from thy Lord for an appointed term, it surely had been judged between  them. And those who were made to inherit the Scripture after them are verily in  hopeless doubt concerning it. 

[042_015]15 Unto this, then, summon (O Muhammad). And be thou upright as thou art  commanded, and follow not their lusts, but say: I believe in whatever scripture Allah  hath sent down, and I am commanded to be just among you. Allah is our Lord and  your Lord. Unto us our works and unto you your works; no argument between us and  you. Allah will bring us together, and unto Him is the journeying. 

[042_016]16 And those who argue concerning Allah after He hath been acknowledged,  their argument hath no weight with their Lord, and wrath is upon them and theirs will  be an awful doom. 

[042_017]17 Allah it is Who hath revealed the Scripture with truth, and the Balance. How  canst thou know ? It may be that the Hour is nigh. 

[042_018]18 Those who believe not therein seek to hasten it, while those who believe are  fearful of it and know that it is the Truth. Are not they who dispute, in doubt  concerning the Hour, far astray ? 

[042_019]19 Allah is gracious unto His slaves. He provideth for whom He will. And He is  the Strong, the Mighty. 

[042_020]20 Whoso desireth the harvest of the Hereafter, We give him increase in its  harvest. And whoso desireth the harvest of the world, We give him thereof, and he  hath no portion in the Hereafter. 

[042_021]21 Or have they partners (of Allah) who have made lawful for them in religion  that which Allah allowed not ? And but for a decisive word (gone forth already), it  would have been judged between them. Lo! for wrong-doers is a painful doom. 

[042_022]22 Thou seest the wrong-doers fearful of that which they have earned, and it  will surely befall them, while those who believe and do good works (will be) in  flowering meadows of the Gardens, having what they wish from their Lord. This is  the great preferment. 

[042_023]23 This it is which Allah announceth unto His bondmen who believe and do  good works. Say (O Muhammad, unto mankind): I ask of you no fee therefor, save  lovingkindness among kinsfolk. And whoso scoreth a good deed We add unto its  good for him. Lo! Allah is Forgiving, Responsive. 

[042_024]24 Or say they: He hath invented a lie concerning Allah ? If Allah willed, He  could have sealed thy heart (against them). And Allah will wipe out the lie and will  vindicate the truth by His words. Lo! He is Aware of what is hidden in the breasts (of  men). 

[042_025]25 And He it is Who accepteth repentance from His bondmen, and pardoneth  the evil deeds, and knoweth what ye do, 

[042_026]26 And accepteth those who do good works, and giveth increase unto them of  His bounty. And as for disbelievers, theirs will be an awful doom. 

[042_027]27 And if Allah were to enlarge the provision for His slaves they would surely  rebel in the earth, but He sendeth down by measure as He willeth. Lo! He is  Informed, a Seer of His bondmen. 

[042_028]28 And He it is Who sendeth down the saving rain after they have despaired,  and spreadeth out His mercy. He is the Protecting Friend, the Praiseworthy. 

[042_029]29 And of His portents is the creation of the heaven and the earth, and of  whatever beasts He hath dispersed therein. And He is Able to gather them when He  will. 

[042_030]30 Whatever of misfortune striketh you, it is what your right hands have earned.  And He forgiveth much. 

[042_031]31 Ye cannot escape in the earth, for beside Allah ye have no protecting friend  nor any helper. 

[042_032]32 And of His portents are the ships, like banners on the sea; 

[042_033]33 If He will He calmeth the wind so that they keep still upon its surface - Lo!  herein verily are signs for every steadfast grateful (heart). - 

[042_034]34 Or He causeth them to perish on account of that which they have earned -  And He forgiveth much - 

[042_035]35 And that those who argue concerning Our revelations may know they have  no refuge. 

[042_036]36 Now whatever ye have been given is but a passing comfort for the life of the  world, and that which Allah hath is better and more lasting for those who believe and  put their trust in their Lord, 

[042_037]37 And those who shun the worst of sins and indecencies and, when they are  wroth, forgive, 

[042_038]38 And those who answer the call of their Lord and establish worship, and  whose affairs are a matter of counsel, and who spend of what We have bestowed on  them, 

[042_039]39 And those who, when great wrong is done to them, defend themselves, 

[042_040]40 The guerdon of an ill-deed is an ill the like thereof. But whosoever pardoneth  and amendeth, his wage is the affair of Allah. Lo! He loveth not wrong-doers. 

[042_041]41 And whoso defendeth himself after he hath suffered wrong - for such, there  is no way (of blame) against them. 

[042_042]42 The way (of blame) is only against those who oppress mankind, and  wrongfully rebel in the earth. For such there is a painful doom. 

[042_043]43 And verily whoso is patient and forgiveth - lo! that, verily, is (of) the  steadfast heart of things. 

[042_044]44 He whom Allah sendeth astray, for him there is no protecting friend after  Him. And thou (Muhammad) wilt see the evil-doers when they see the doom, (how)  they say: Is there any way of return ? 

[042_045]45 And thou wilt see them exposed to (the Fire), made humble by disgrace, and  looking with veiled eyes. And those who believe will say: Lo! the (eternal) losers are  they who lose themselves and their housefolk on the Day of Resurrection. Lo! are not  the wrong-doers in perpetual torment ? 

[042_046]46 And they will have no protecting friends to help them instead of Allah. He  whom Allah sendeth astray, for him there is no road. 

[042_047]47 Answer the call of your Lord before there cometh unto you from Allah a Day  which there is no averting. Ye have no refuge on that Day, nor have a ye any (power  of) refusal. 

[042_048]48 But if they are averse, We have not sent thee as a warder over them. Thine is  only to convey (the message). And lo! when We cause man to taste of mercy from Us  he exulteth therefor. And if some evil striketh them because of that which their own  hands have sent before, then lo! man is an ingrate. 

[042_049]49 Unto Allah belongeth the Sovereignty of the heavens and the earth. He  createth what He will. He bestoweth female (offspring) upon whom He will, and  bestoweth male (offspring) upon whom He will; 

[042_050]50 Or He mingleth them, males and females, and He maketh barren whom He  will. Lo! He is Knower, Powerful. 

[042_051]51 And it was not (vouchsafed) to any mortal that Allah should speak to him  unless (it be) by revelation or from behind a veil, or (that) He sendeth a messenger to  reveal what He will by His leave. Lo! He is Exalted, Wise. 

[042_052]52 And thus have We inspired in thee (Muhammad) a Spirit of Our command.  Thou knewest not what the Scripture was, nor what the Faith. But We have made it a  light whereby We guide whom We will of Our bondmen. And lo! thou verily dost  guide unto a right path, 

[042_053]53 The path of Allah, unto Whom belongeth whatsoever is in the heavens and  whatsoever is in the earth. Do not all things reach Allah at last ?

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

43. az-Zukhruf: The Embellishment

[043_001]1 Ha. Mim. 

[043_002]2 By the Scripture which maketh plain, 

[043_003]3 Lo! We have appointed it a Lecture, in Arabic that haply ye may understand. 

[043_004]4 And Lo! in the Source of Decrees, which We possess, it is indeed sublime,  decisive. 

[043_005]5 Shall We utterly ignore you because ye are a wanton folk ? 

[043_006]6 How many a prophet did We send among the men of old! 

[043_007]7 And never came there unto them a prophet but they used to mock him. 

[043_008]8 Then We destroyed men mightier than these in prowess; and the example of  the men of old hath gone (before them). 

[043_009]9 And if thou (Muhammad) ask them: Who created the heavens and the earth,  they will surely answer: The Mighty, the Knower created them; 

[043_010]10 Who made the earth a resting-place for you, and placed roads for you therein,  that haply ye may find your way; 

[043_011]11 And Who sendeth down water from the sky in (due) measure, and We revive  a dead land therewith. Even so will ye be brought forth; 

[043_012]12 He Who created all the pairs, and appointed for you ships and cattle  whereupon ye ride. 

[043_013]13 That ye may mount upon their backs, and may remember your Lord's favour  when ye mount thereon, and may say: Glorified be He Who hath subdued these unto  us, and we were not capable (of subduing them); 

[043_014]14 And lo! unto our Lord we surely are returning. 

[043_015]15 And they allot to Him a portion of His bondmen! Lo! man is verily a mere  ingrate. 

[043_016]16 Or chooseth He daughters of all that He hath created, and honoureth He you  with sons ? 

[043_017]17 And if one of them hath tidings of that which he likeneth to the Beneficent  One, his countenance becometh black and he is full of inward rage. 

[043_018]18 (Liken they then to Allah) that which is bred up in outward show, and in  dispute cannot make itself plain ? 

[043_019]19 And they make the angels, who are the slaves of the Beneficent, females. Did  they witness their creation ? Their testimony will be recorded and they will be  questioned. 

[043_020]20 And they say: If the Beneficent One had (so) willed, we should not have  worshipped them. They have no knowledge whatsoever of that. They do but guess. 

[043_021]21 Or have We given them any scripture before (this Qur'an) so that they are  holding fast thereto ? 

[043_022]22 Nay, for they say only: Lo! we found our fathers following a religion, and we  are guided by their footprints. 

[043_023]23 And even so We sent not a warner before thee (Muhammad) into any  township but its luxurious ones said: Lo! we found our fathers following a religion,  and we are following their footprints. 

[043_024]24 (And the warner) said: What! Even though I bring you better guidance than  that ye found your fathers following ? They answered: Lo! in what ye bring we are  disbelievers. 

[043_025]25 So We requited them. Then see the nature of the consequence for the  rejecters! 

[043_026]26 And when Abraham said unto his father and his folk: Lo! I am innocent of  what ye worship 

[043_027]27 Save Him Who did create me, for He will surely guide me. 

[043_028]28 And he made it a word enduring among his seed, that haply they might  return. 

[043_029]29 Nay, but I let these and their fathers enjoy life (only) till there should come  unto them the Truth and a messenger making plain. 

[043_030]30 And now that the Truth hath come unto them they say: This is mere magic,  and lo! we are disbelievers therein. 

[043_031]31 And they say: If only this Qur'an had been revealed to some great man of the  two towns ? 

[043_032]32 Is it they who apportion thy Lord's mercy ? We have apportioned among  them their livelihood in the life of the world, and raised some of them above others in  rank that some of them may take labour from others; and the mercy of thy Lord is  better than (the wealth) that they amass. 

[043_033]33 And were it not that mankind would have become one community, We might  well have appointed, for those who disbelieve in the Beneficent, roofs of silver for  their houses and stairs (of silver) whereby to mount, 

[043_034]34 And for their houses doors (of silver) and couches of silver whereon to  recline, 

[043_035]35 And ornaments of gold. Yet all that would have been but a provision of the  life of the world. And the Hereafter with your Lord would have been for those who  keep from evil. 

[043_036]36 And he whose sight is dim to the remembrance of the Beneficent, We assign  unto him a devil who becometh his comrade; 

[043_037]37 And lo! they surely turn them from the way of Allah, and yet they deem that  they are rightly guided; 

[043_038]38 Till, when he cometh unto Us, he saith (unto his comrade): Ah, would that  between me and thee there were the distance of the two horizons - an evil comrade! 

[043_039]39 And it profiteth you not this day, because ye did wrong, that ye will be  sharers in the doom. 

[043_040]40 Canst thou (Muhammad) make the deaf to hear, or canst thou guide the blind  or him who is in error manifest ? 

[043_041]41 And if We take thee away, We surely shall take vengeance on them, 

[043_042]42 Or (if) We show thee that wherewith We threaten them; for lo! We have  complete command of them. 

[043_043]43 So hold thou fast to that which is inspired in thee. Lo! thou art on a right  path. 

[043_044]44 And lo! it is in truth a Reminder for thee and for thy folk; and ye will be  questioned. 

[043_045]45 And ask those of Our messengers whom We sent before thee: Did We ever  appoint gods to be worshipped beside the Beneficent ? 

[043_046]46 And verily We sent Moses with Our revelations unto Pharaoh and his chiefs,  and he said: I am a messenger of the Lord of the Worlds. 

[043_047]47 But when he brought them Our tokens, behold! they laughed at them. 

[043_048]48 And every token that We showed them was greater than its sister (token),  and We grasped them with the torment, that haply they might turn again. 

[043_049]49 And they said: O wizard! Entreat thy Lord for us by the pact that He hath  made with thee. Lo! we verily will walk aright. 

[043_050]50 But when We eased them of the torment, behold! they broke their word. 

[043_051]51 And Pharaoh caused a proclamation to be made among his people saying: O  my people! Is not mine the sovereignty of Egypt and these rivers flowing under me ?  Can ye not then discern ? 

[043_052]52 I am surely better than this fellow, who is despicable and can hardly make  (his meaning) plain! 

[043_053]53 Why, then, have armlets of gold not been set upon him, or angels sent along  with him ? 

[043_054]54 Thus he persuaded his people to make light (of Moses), and they obeyed  him. Lo! they were a wanton folk. 

[043_055]55 So, when they angered Us, We punished them and drowned them every one. 

[043_056]56 And We made them a thing past, and an example for those after (them). 

[043_057]57 And when the son of Mary is quoted as an example, behold! the folk laugh  out, 

[043_058]58 And say: Are our gods better, or is he ? They raise not the objection save for  argument. Nay! but they are a contentious folk. 

[043_059]59 He is nothing but a slave on whom We bestowed favour, and We made him a  pattern for the Children of Israel. 

[043_060]60 And had We willed We could have set among you angels to be viceroys in  the earth. 

[043_061]61 And lo! verily there is knowledge of the Hour. So doubt ye not concerning it,  but follow Me. This is the right path. 

[043_062]62 And let not Satan turn you aside. Lo! he is an open enemy for you. 

[043_063]63 When Jesus came with clear proofs (of Allah's Sovereignty), he said: I have  come unto you with wisdom, and to make plain some of that concerning which ye  differ. So keep your duty to Allah, and obey me. 

[043_064]64 Lo! Allah, He is my Lord and your Lord. So worship Him. This is a right  path. 

[043_065]65 But the factions among them differed. Then woe unto those who do wrong  from the doom of a painful day. 

[043_066]66 Await they aught save the Hour, that it shall come upon them suddenly,  when they know not ? 

[043_067]67 Friends on that day will be foes one to another, save those who kept their  duty (to Allah). 

[043_068]68 O My slaves! For you there is no fear this day, nor is it ye who grieve; 

[043_069]69 (Ye) who believed Our revelations and were self-surrendered, 

[043_070]70 Enter the Garden, ye and your wives, to be made glad. 

[043_071]71 Therein are brought round for them trays of gold and goblets, and therein is  all that souls desire and eyes find sweet. And ye are immortal therein. 

[043_072]72 This is the Garden which ye are made to inherit because of what ye used to  do. 

[043_073]73 Therein for you is fruit in plenty whence to eat. 

[043_074]74 Lo! the guilty are immortal in hell's torment. 

[043_075]75 It is not relaxed for them, and they despair therein. 

[043_076]76 We wronged them not, but they it was who did the wrong. 

[043_077]77 And they cry: O master! Let thy Lord make an end of us. He saith: Lo! here  ye must remain. 

[043_078]78 We verily brought the Truth unto you, but ye were, most of you, averse to  the Truth. 

[043_079]79 Or do they determine any thing (against the Prophet) ? Lo! We (also) are  determining. 

[043_080]80 Or deem they that We cannot hear their secret thoughts and private  confidences ? Nay, but Our envoys, present with them, do record. 

[043_081]81 Say (O Muhammad): If the Beneficent One hath a son, then, I shall be first  among the worshippers. (But there is no son). 

[043_082]82 Glorified be the Lord of the heavens and the earth, the Lord of the Throne,  from that which they ascribe (unto Him)! 

[043_083]83 So let them flounder (in their talk) and play until they meet the Day which  they are promised. 

[043_084]84 And He it is Who in the heaven is God, and in the earth God. He is the Wise,  the Knower. 

[043_085]85 And blessed be He unto Whom belongeth the Sovereignty of the heavens and  the earth and all that is between them, and with Whom is knowledge of the Hour, and  unto Whom ye will be returned. 

[043_086]86 And those unto whom they cry instead of Him possess no power of  intercession, saving him who beareth witness unto the Truth knowingly. 

[043_087]87 And if thou ask them who created them, they will surely say: Allah. How  then are they turned away ? 

[043_088]88 And he saith: O my Lord! Lo! these are a folk who believe not. 

[043_089]89 Then bear with them (O Muhammad) and say: Peace. But they will come to  know.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

44. ad-Dukhan: The Evident Smoke

[044_001]1 Ha. Mim. 

[044_002]2 By the Scripture that maketh plain 

[044_003]3 Lo! We revealed it on a blessed night - Lo! We are ever warning - 

[044_004]4 Whereon every wise command is made clear 

[044_005]5 As a command from Our presence - Lo! We are ever sending - 

[044_006]6 A mercy from thy Lord. Lo! He, even He is the Hearer, the Knower, 

[044_007]7 Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them, if ye would  be sure. 

[044_008]8 There is no God save Him. He quickeneth and giveth death; your Lord and  Lord of your forefathers. 

[044_009]9 Nay, but they play in doubt. 

[044_010]10 But watch thou (O Muhammad) for the day when the sky will produce  visible smoke 

[044_011]11 That will envelop the people. This will be a painful torment. 

[044_012]12 (Then they will say): Our Lord relieve us of the torment. Lo! we are  believers. 

[044_013]13 How can there be remembrance for them, when a messenger making plain  (the Truth) had already come unto them, 

[044_014]14 And they had turned away from him and said: One taught (by others), a  madman ? 

[044_015]15 Lo! We withdraw the torment a little. Lo! ye return (to disbelief). 

[044_016]16 On the day when We shall seize them with the greater seizure, (then) in truth  We shall punish. 

[044_017]17 And verily We tried before them Pharaoh's folk, when there came unto them  a noble messenger, 

[044_018]18 Saying: Give up to me the slaves of Allah. Lo! I am a faithful messenger  unto you. 

[044_019]19 And saying: Be not proud against Allah. Lo! I bring you a clear warrant. 

[044_020]20 And lo! I have sought refuge in my Lord and your Lord lest ye stone me to  death. 

[044_021]21 And if ye put no faith in me, then let me go. 

[044_022]22 And he cried unto his Lord, (saying): These are guilty folk. 

[044_023]23 Then (his Lord commanded): Take away My slaves by night. Lo! ye will be  followed, 

[044_024]24 And leave the sea behind at rest, for lo! they are a drowned host. 

[044_025]25 How many were the gardens and the watersprings that they left behind, 

[044_026]26 And the cornlands and the goodly sites 

[044_027]27 And pleasant things wherein they took delight! 

[044_028]28 Even so (it was), and We made it an inheritance for other folk; 

[044_029]29 And the heaven and the earth wept not for them, nor were they reprieved. 

[044_030]30 And We delivered the Children of Israel from the shameful doom; 

[044_031]31 (We delivered them) from Pharaoh. Lo! he was a tyrant of the wanton ones. 

[044_032]32 And We chose them, purposely, above (all) creatures. 

[044_033]33 And We gave them portents wherein was a clear trial. 

[044_034]34 Lo! these, forsooth, are saying: 

[044_035]35 There is naught but our first death, and we shall not be raised again. 

[044_036]36 Bring back our fathers, if ye speak the truth! 

[044_037]37 Are they better, or the folk of Tubb'a and those before them ? We destroyed  them, for surely they were guilty. 

[044_038]38 And We created not the heavens and the earth, and all that is between them,  in play. 

[044_039]39 We created them not save with truth; but most of them know not. 

[044_040]40 Assuredly the Day of Decision is the term for all of them, 

[044_041]41 A day when friend can in naught avail friend, nor can they be helped, 

[044_042]42 Save him on whom Allah hath mercy. Lo! He is the Mighty, the Merciful. 

[044_043]43 Lo! the tree of Zaqqum, 

[044_044]44 The food of the sinner! 

[044_045]45 Like molten brass, it seetheth in their bellies 

[044_046]46 As the seething of boiling water. 

[044_047]47 (And it will be said): Take him and drag him to the midst of hell, 

[044_048]48 Then pour upon his head the torment of boiling water. 

[044_049]49 (Saying): Taste! Lo! thou wast forsooth the mighty, the noble! 

[044_050]50 Lo! this is that whereof ye used to doubt. 

[044_051]51 Lo! those who kept their duty will be in a place secured. 

[044_052]52 Amid gardens and watersprings, 

[044_053]53 Attired in silk and silk embroidery, facing one another. 

[044_054]54 Even so (it will be). And We shall wed them unto fair ones with wide, lovely  eyes. 

[044_055]55 They call therein for every fruit in safety. 

[044_056]56 They taste not death therein, save the first death. And He hath saved them  from the doom of hell, 

[044_057]57 A bounty from thy Lord. That is the supreme triumph. 

[044_058]58 And We have made (this Scripture) easy in thy language only that they may  heed. 

[044_059]59 Wait then (O Muhammad). Lo! they (too) are waiting.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

45. al-Jathiyah: The Kneeling

[045_001]1 Ha. Mim. 

[045_002]2 The revelation of the Scripture is from Allah, the Mighty, the Wise. 

[045_003]3 Lo! in the heavens and the earth are portents for believers. 

[045_004]4 And in your creation, and all the beasts that He scattereth in the earth, are  portents for a folk whose faith is sure. 

[045_005]5 And the difference of night and day and the provision that Allah sendeth  down from the sky and thereby quickeneth the earth after her death, and the ordering  of the winds, are portents for a people who have sense. 

[045_006]6 These are the portents of Allah which We recite unto thee (Muhammad) with  truth. Then in what fact, after Allah and His portents, will they believe ? 

[045_007]7 Woe unto each sinful liar, 

[045_008]8 Who heareth the revelations of Allah recited unto him, and then continueth in  pride as though he heard them not. Give him tidings of a painful doom. 

[045_009]9 And when he knoweth aught of Our revelations he maketh it a jest. For such  there is a shameful doom. 

[045_010]10 Beyond them there is hell, and that which they have earned will naught avail  them, nor those whom they have chosen for protecting friends beside Allah. Theirs  will be an awful doom. 

[045_011]11 This is guidance. And those who disbelieve the revelations of their Lord, for  them there is a painful doom of wrath. 

[045_012]12 Allah it is Who hath made the sea of service unto you that the ships may run  thereon by His command, and that ye may seek of His bounty, and that haply ye may  be thankful; 

[045_013]13 And hath made of service unto you whatsoever is in the heavens and  whatsoever is in the earth; it is all from Him. Lo! herein verily are portents for a  people who reflect. 

[045_014]14 Tell those who believe to forgive those who hope not for the days of Allah;  in order that He may requite folk what they used to earn. 

[045_015]15 Whoso doeth right, it is for his soul, and whoso doeth wrong, it is against it.  And afterward unto your Lord ye will be brought back. 

[045_016]16 And verily we gave the Children of Israel the Scripture and the Command  and the Prophethood, and provided them with good things and favoured them above  (all) peoples; 

[045_017]17 And gave them plain commandments. And they differed not until after the  knowledge came unto them, through rivalry among themselves. Lo! thy Lord will  judge between them on the Day of Resurrection concerning that wherein they used to  differ. 

[045_018]18 And now have We set thee (O Muhammad) on a clear road of (Our)  commandment; so follow it, and follow not the whims of those who know not. 

[045_019]19 Lo! they can avail thee naught against Allah. And lo! as for the wrong-doers,  some of them are friends of others; and Allah is the Friend of those who ward off  (evil). 

[045_020]20 This is clear indication for mankind, and a guidance and a mercy for a folk  whose faith is sure. 

[045_021]21 Or do those who commit ill-deeds suppose that We shall make them as those  who believe and do good works, the same in life and death ? Bad is their judgment! 

[045_022]22 And Allah hath created the heavens and the earth with truth, and that every  soul may be repaid what it hath earned. And they will not be wronged. 

[045_023]23 Hast thou seen him who maketh his desire his god, and Allah sendeth him  astray purposely, and sealeth up his hearing and his heart, and setteth on his sight a  covering ? Then who will lead him after Allah (hath condemned him) ? Will ye not  then heed ? 

[045_024]24 And they say: There is naught but our life of the world; we die and we live,  and naught destroyeth us save time; when they have no knowledge whatsoever of (all)  that; they do but guess. 

[045_025]25 And when Our clear revelations are recited unto them their only argument is  that they say: Bring (back) our fathers. then, if ye are truthful. 

[045_026]26 Say (unto them, O Muhammad): Allah giveth life to you, then causeth you to  die, then gathereth you unto the Day of Resurrection whereof there is no doubt. But  most of mankind know not. 

[045_027]27 And unto Allah belongeth the Sovereignty of the heavens and the earth; and  on the day when the Hour riseth, on that day those who follow falsehood will be lost. 

[045_028]28 And thou wilt see each nation crouching, each nation summoned to its  record. (And it will be said unto them): This day ye are requited what ye used to do. 

[045_029]29 This Our Book pronounceth against you with truth. Lo! We have caused (all)  that ye did to be recorded. 

[045_030]30 Then, as for those who believed and did good works, their Lord will bring  them in unto His mercy. That is the evident triumph. 

[045_031]31 And as for those who disbelieved (it will be said unto them): Were not Our  revelations recited unto you ? But ye were scornful and became a guilty folk. 

[045_032]32 And when it was said: Lo! Allah's promise is the truth, and there is no doubt  of the Hour's coming, ye said: We know not what the Hour is. We deem it naught but  a conjecture, and we are by no means convinced. 

[045_033]33 And the evils of what they did will appear unto them, and that which they  used to deride will befall them. 

[045_034]34 And it will be said: This day We forget you, even as ye forgot the meeting of  this your day; and your habitation is the Fire, and there is none to help you. 

[045_035]35 This, forasmuch as ye made the revelations of Allah a jest, and the life of the  world beguiled you. Therefor this day they come not forth from thence, nor can they  make amends. 

[045_036]36 Then praise be to Allah, Lord of the heavens and Lord of the earth, the Lord  of the Worlds. 

[045_037]37 And unto Him (alone) belongeth Majesty in the heavens and the earth, and  He is the Mighty, the Wise.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

46. al-Ahqaf: The Sandhills

[046_001]1 Ha. Mim. 

[046_002]2 The revelation of the Scripture is from Allah the Mighty, the Wise. 

[046_003]3 We created not the heavens and the earth and all that is between them save  with truth, and for a term appointed. But those who disbelieve turn away from that  whereof they are warned. 

[046_004]4 Say (unto them, O Muhammad): Have ye thought on all that ye invoke  beside Allah ? Show me what they have created of the earth. Or have they any portion  in the heavens ? Bring me a scripture before this (Scripture), or some vestige of  knowledge (in support of what ye say), if ye are truthful. 

[046_005]5 And who is further astray than those who, instead of Allah, pray unto such as  hear not their prayer until the Day of Resurrection, and are unconscious of their  prayer, 

[046_006]6 And when mankind are gathered (to the Judgment) will become enemies for  them, and will become deniers of having been worshipped. 

[046_007]7 And when Our clear revelations are recited unto them, those who disbelieve  say of the Truth when it reacheth them: This is mere magic. 

[046_008]8 Or say they: He hath invented it ? Say (O Muhammad): If I have invented it,  still ye have no power to support me against Allah. He is Best Aware of what ye say  among yourselves concerning it. He sufficeth for a witness between me and you. And  He is the Forgiving, the Merciful. 

[046_009]9 Say: I am no new thing among the messengers (of Allah), nor know I what  will be done with me or with you. I do but follow that which is inspired in me, and I  am but a plain warner. 

[046_010]10 Bethink you: If it is from Allah and ye disbelieve therein, and a witness of  the Children of Israel hath already testified to the like thereof and hath believed, and  ye are too proud (what plight is yours) ? Lo! Allah guideth not wrong-doing folk. 

[046_011]11 And those who disbelieve say of those who believe: If it had been (any)  good, they would not have been before us in attaining it. And since they will not be  guided by it, they say: This is an ancient lie; 

[046_012]12 When before it there was the Scripture of Moses, an example and a mercy;  and this is a confirming Scripture in the Arabic language, that it may warn those who  do wrong and bring good tidings for the righteous. 

[046_013]13 Lo! those who say: Our Lord is Allah, and thereafter walk aright, there shall  no fear come upon them neither shall they grieve. 

[046_014]14 Such are rightful owners of the Garden, immortal therein, as a reward for  what they used to do. 

[046_015]15 And We have commended unto man kindness toward parents. His mother  beareth him with reluctance, and bringeth him forth with reluctance, and the bearing  of him and the weaning of him is thirty months, till, when he attaineth full strength  and reacheth forty years, he saith: My Lord! Arouse me that I may give thanks for the  favour wherewith Thou hast favoured me and my parents, and that I may do right  acceptable unto Thee. And be gracious unto me in the matter of my seed. Lo! I have  turned unto Thee repentant, and lo! I am of those who surrender (unto Thee). 

[046_016]16 Those are they from whom We accept the best of what they do, and overlook  their evil deeds. (They are) among the owners of the Garden. This is the true promise  which they were promised (in the world). 

[046_017]17 And whoso saith unto his parents: Fie upon you both! Do ye threaten me that  I shall be brought forth (again) when generations before me have passed away ? And  they twain cry unto Allah for help (and say): Woe unto thee! Believe! Lo! the promise  of Allah is true. But he saith: This is naught save fables of the men of old: 

[046_018]18 Such are those on whom the Word concerning nations of the jinn and  mankind which have passed away before them hath effect. Lo! they are the losers. 

[046_019]19 And for all there will be ranks from what they do, that He may pay them for  their deeds; and they will not be wronged. 

[046_020]20 And on the day when those who disbelieve are exposed to the Fire (it will be  said): Ye squandered your good things in the life of the world and sought comfort  therein. Now this day ye are rewarded with the doom of ignominy because ye were  disdainful in the land without a right, and because ye used to transgress. 

[046_021]21 And make mention (O Muhammad) of the brother of A'ad when he warned  his folk among the wind-curved sandhills - and verily warners came and went before  and after him - saying: Serve none but Allah. Lo! I fear for you the doom of a  tremendous Day. 

[046_022]22 They said: Hast come to turn us away from our gods ? Then bring upon us  that wherewith thou threatenest us, if thou art of the truthful. 

[046_023]23 He said: The knowledge is with Allah only. I convey unto you that  wherewith I have been sent, but I see you are a folk that know not. 

[046_024]24 Then, when they beheld it as a dense cloud coming toward their valleys, they  said: Here is a cloud bringing us rain. Nay, but it is that which ye did seek to hasten, a  wind wherein is painful torment, 

[046_025]25 Destroying all things by commandment of its Lord. And morning found them  so that naught could be seen save their dwellings. Thus do We reward the guilty folk. 

[046_026]26 And verily We had empowered them with that wherewith We have not  empowered you, and had assigned them ears and eyes and hearts; but their ears and  eyes and hearts availed them naught since they denied the revelations of Allah; and  what they used to mock befell them. 

[046_027]27 And verily We have destroyed townships round about you, and displayed  (for them) Our revelation, that haply they might return. 

[046_028]28 Then why did those whom they had chosen for gods as a way of approach  (unto Allah) not help them ? Nay, but they did fail them utterly. And (all) that was  their lie, and what they used to invent. 

[046_029]29 And when We inclined toward thee (Muhammad) certain of the jinn, who  wished to hear the Qur'an and, when they were in its presence, said: Give ear! and,  when it was finished, turned back to their people, warning. 

[046_030]30 They said: O our people! Lo! we have heard a scripture which hath been  revealed after Moses, confirming that which was before it, guiding unto the truth and  a right road. 

[046_031]31 O our people! respond to Allah's summoner and believe in Him. He will  forgive you some of your sins and guard you from a painful doom. 

[046_032]32 And whoso respondeth not to Allah's summoner he can nowise escape in the  earth, and he hath no protecting friends instead of Him. Such are in error manifest. 

[046_033]33 Have they not seen that Allah, Who created the heavens and the earth and  was not wearied by their creation, is Able to give life to the dead ? Aye, He verily is  Able to do all things. 

[046_034]34 And on the day when those who disbelieve are exposed to the Fire (they will  be asked): Is not this real ? They will say: Yea, by our Lord. He will say: Then taste  the doom for that ye disbelieved. 

[046_035]35 Then have patience (O Muhammad) even as the stout of heart among the  messengers (of old) had patience, and seek not to hasten on (the doom) for them. On  the day when they see that which they are promised (it will seem to them) as though  they had tarried but an hour of daylight. A clear message. Shall any be destroyed save  evil-living folk ?

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

47. Muhammad: Muhammad

[047_001]1 Those who disbelieve and turn (men) from the way of Allah, He rendereth  their actions vain. 

[047_002]2 And those who believe and do good works and believe in that which is  revealed unto Muhammad - and it is the truth from their Lord - He riddeth them of  their ill-deeds and improveth their state. 

[047_003]3 That is because those who disbelieve follow falsehood and because those  who believe follow the truth from their Lord. Thus Allah coineth their similitudes for  mankind. 

[047_004]4 Now when ye meet in battle those who disbelieve, then it is smiting of the  necks until, when ye have routed them, then making fast of bonds; and afterward  either grace or ransom till the war lay down its burdens. That (is the ordinance). And  if Allah willed He could have punished them (without you) but (thus it is ordained)  that He may try some of you by means of others. And those who are slain in the way  of Allah, He rendereth not their actions vain. 

[047_005]5 He will guide them and improve their state, 

[047_006]6 And bring them in unto the Garden which He hath made known to them. 

[047_007]7 O ye who believe! If ye help Allah, He will help you and will make your  foothold firm. 

[047_008]8 And those who disbelieve, perdition is for them, and He will make their  actions vain. 

[047_009]9 That is because they are averse to that which Allah hath revealed, therefor  maketh He their actions fruitless. 

[047_010]10 Have they not travelled in the land to see the nature of the consequence for  those who were before them ? Allah wiped them out. And for the disbelievers there  will be the like thereof. 

[047_011]11 That is because Allah is patron of those who believe, and because the  disbelievers have no patron. 

[047_012]12 Lo! Allah will cause those who believe and do good works to enter Gardens  underneath which rivers flow; while those who disbelieve take their comfort in this  life and eat even as the cattle eat, and the Fire is their habitation. 

[047_013]13 And how many a township stronger than thy township (O Muhammad)  which hath cast thee out, have We destroyed, and they had no helper! 

[047_014]14 Is he who relieth on a clear proof from his Lord like those for whom the evil  that they do is beautified while they follow their own lusts ? 

[047_015]15 A similitude of the Garden which those who keep their duty (to Allah) are  promised: Therein are rivers of water unpolluted, and rivers of milk whereof the  flavour changeth not, and rivers of wine delicious to the drinkers, and rivers of clear- run honey; therein for them is every kind of fruit, with pardon from their Lord. (Are  those who enjoy all this) like those who are immortal in the Fire and are given boiling  water to drink so that it teareth their bowels ? 

[047_016]16 Among them are some who give ear unto thee (Muhammad) till, when they  go forth from thy presence they say unto those who have been given knowledge:  What was that he said just now ? Those are they whose hearts Allah hath sealed, and  they follow their own lusts. 

[047_017]17 While as for those who walk aright, He addeth to their guidance, and giveth  them their protection (against evil). 

[047_018]18 Await they aught save the Hour, that it should come upon them unawares ?  And the beginnings thereof have already come. But how, when it hath come upon  them, can they take their warning ? 

[047_019]19 So know (O Muhammad) that there is no God save Allah, and ask  forgiveness for thy sin and for believing men and believing women. Allah knoweth  (both) your place of turmoil and your place of rest. 

[047_020]20 And those who believe say: If only a surah were revealed! But when a  decisive surah is revealed and war is mentioned therein, thou seest those in whose  hearts is a disease looking at thee with the look of men fainting unto death. Therefor  woe unto them! 

[047_021]21 Obedience and a civil word. Then, when the matter is determined, if they are  loyal to Allah it will be well for them. 

[047_022]22 Would ye then, if ye were given the command, work corruption in the land  and sever your ties of kinship ? 

[047_023]23 Such are they whom Allah curseth so that He deafeneth them and maketh  blind their eyes. 

[047_024]24 Will they then not meditate on the Qur'an, or are there locks on the hearts ? 

[047_025]25 Lo! those who turn back after the guidance hath been manifested unto them,  Satan hath seduced them, and He giveth them the rein. 

[047_026]26 That is because they say unto those who hate what Allah hath revealed: We  will obey you in some matters; and Allah knoweth their secret talk. 

[047_027]27 Then how (will it be with them) when the angels gather them, smiting their  faces and their backs! 

[047_028]28 That will be because they followed that which angereth Allah, and hated that  which pleaseth Him. Therefor He hath made their actions vain. 

[047_029]29 Or do those in whose hearts is a disease deem that Allah will not bring to  light their (secret) hates ? 

[047_030]30 And if We would, We could show them unto thee (Muhammad) so that thou  shouldst know them surely by their marks. And thou shalt know them by the burden  of their talk. And Allah knoweth your deeds. 

[047_031]31 And verily We shall try you till We know those of you who strive hard (for  the cause of Allah) and the steadfast, and till We test your record. 

[047_032]32 Lo! those who disbelieve and turn from the way of Allah and oppose the  messenger after the guidance hath been manifested unto them, they hurt Allah not a  jot, and He will make their actions fruitless. 

[047_033]33 O ye who believe! Obey Allah and obey the messenger, and render not your  actions vain. 

[047_034]34 Lo! those who disbelieve and turn from the way of Allah and then die  disbelievers, Allah surely will not pardon them. 

[047_035]35 So do not falter and cry out for peace when ye (will be) the uppermost, and  Allah is with you, and He will not grudge (the reward of) your actions. 

[047_036]36 The life of the world is but a sport and a pastime. And if ye believe and ward  off (evil). He will give you your wages, and will not ask of you your wordly wealth. 

[047_037]37 If He should ask it of you and importune you, ye would hoard it, and He  would bring to light your (secret) hates. 

[047_038]38 Lo! ye are those who are called to spend in the way of Allah, yet among you  there are some who hoard. And as for him who hoardeth, he hoardeth only from his  soul. And Allah is the Rich, and ye are the poor. And if ye turn away He will  exchange you for some other folk, and they will not be the likes of you.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

48. al-Fath: The Victory

[048_001]1 Lo! We have given thee (O Muhammad) a signal victory, 

[048_002]2 That Allah may forgive thee of thy sin that which is past and that which is to  come, and may perfect His favour unto thee, and may guide thee on a right path, 

[048_003]3 And that Allah may help thee with strong help - 

[048_004]4 He it is Who sent down peace of reassurance into the hearts of the believers  that they might add faith unto their faith. Allah's are the hosts of the heavens and the  earth, and Allah is ever Knower, Wise - 

[048_005]5 That He may bring the believing men and the believing women into Gardens  underneath which rivers flow, wherein they will abide, and may remit from them their  evil deeds -  That, in the sight of Allah, is the supreme triumph - 

[048_006]6 And may punish the hypocritical men and the hypocritical women, and the  idolatrous men and the idolatrous women, who think an evil thought concerning  Allah. For them is the evil turn of fortune, and Allah is wroth against them and hath  cursed them, and hath made ready for them hell, a hapless journey's end. 

[048_007]7 Allah's are the hosts of the heavens and the earth, and Allah is ever Mighty,  Wise. 

[048_008]8 Lo! We have sent thee (O Muhammad) as a witness and a bearer of good  tidings and a warner, 

[048_009]9 That ye (mankind) may believe in Allah and His messenger, and may honour  Him, and may revere Him, and may glorify Him at early dawn and at the close of day. 

[048_010]10 Lo! those who swear allegiance unto thee (Muhammad), swear allegiance  only unto Allah. The Hand of Allah is above their hands. So whosoever breaketh his  oath, breaketh it only to his soul's hurt; while whosoever keepeth his covenant with  Allah, on him will He bestow immense reward. 

[048_011]11 Those of the wandering Arabs who were left behind will tell thee: Our  possessions and our households occupied us, so ask forgiveness for us! They speak  with their tongues that which is not in their hearts. Say: Who can avail you aught  against Allah, if He intend you hurt or intend you profit ? Nay, but Allah is ever  Aware of what ye do. 

[048_012]12 Nay, but ye deemed that the messenger and the believers would never return  to their own folk, and that was made fairseeming in your hearts, and ye did think an  evil thought, and ye were worthless folk. 

[048_013]13 And so for him who believeth not in Allah and His messenger - Lo! We have  prepared a flame for disbelievers. 

[048_014]14 And Allah's is the Sovereignty of the heavens and the earth. He forgiveth  whom He will, and punisheth whom He will. And Allah is ever Forgiving, Merciful. 

[048_015]15 Those who were left behind will say, when ye set forth to capture booty: Let  us go with you. They fain would change the verdict of Allah. Say (unto them, O  Muhammad): Ye shall not go with us. Thus hath Allah said beforehand. Then they  will say: Ye are envious of us. Nay, but they understand not, save a little. 

[048_016]16 Say unto those of the wandering Arabs who were left behind: Ye will be  called against a folk of mighty prowess, to fight them until they surrender; and if ye  obey, Allah will give you a fair reward; but if ye turn away as ye did turn away  before, He will punish you with a painful doom. 

[048_017]17 There is no blame for the blind, nor is there blame for the lame, nor is there  blame for the sick (that they go not forth to war). And whoso obeyeth Allah and His  messenger, He will make him enter Gardens underneath which rivers flow; and  whoso turneth back, him will He punish with a painful doom. 

[048_018]18 Allah was well pleased with the believers when they swore allegiance unto  thee beneath the tree, and He knew what was in their hearts, and He sent down peace  of reassurance on them, and hath rewarded them with a near victory; 

[048_019]19 And much booty that they will capture. Allah is ever Mighty, Wise. 

[048_020]20 Allah promiseth you much booty that ye will capture, and hath given you this  in advance, and hath withheld men's hands from you, that it may be a token for the  believers, and that He may guide you on a right path. 

[048_021]21 And other (gain), which ye have not been able to achieve, Allah will  compass it, Allah is Able to do all things. 

[048_022]22 And if those who disbelieve join battle with you they will take to flight, and  afterward they will find no protecting friend nor helper. 

[048_023]23 It is the law of Allah which hath taken course aforetime. Thou wilt not find  for the law of Allah aught of power to change. 

[048_024]24 And He it is Who hath withheld men's hands from you, and hath withheld  your hands from them, in the valley of Mecca, after He had made you victors over  them. Allah is Seer of what ye do. 

[048_025]25 These it was who disbelieved and debarred you from the Inviolable Place of  Worship, and debarred the offering from reaching its goal. And if it had not been for  believing men and believing women, whom ye know not - lest ye should tread them  under foot and thus incur guilt for them unknowingly; that Allah might bring into His  mercy whom He will - If (the believers and the disbelievers) had been clearly  separated We verily had punished those of them who disbelieved with painful  punishment. 

[048_026]26 When those who disbelieve had set up in their hearts zealotry, the zealotry of  the Age of Ignorance, then Allah sent down His peace of reassurance upon His  messenger and upon the believers and imposed on them the word of self-restraint, for  they were worthy of it and meet for it. And Allah is Aware of all things. 

[048_027]27 Allah hath fulfilled the vision for His messenger in very truth. Ye shall  indeed enter the Inviolable Place of Worship, if Allah will, secure, (having your hair)  shaven and cut, not fearing. But He knoweth that which ye know not, and hath given  you a near victory beforehand. 

[048_028]28 He it is Who hath sent His messenger with the guidance and the religion of  truth, that He may cause it to prevail over all religion. And Allah sufficeth as a  Witness. 

[048_029]29 Muhammad is the messenger of Allah. And those with him are hard against  the disbelievers and merciful among themselves. Thou (O Muhammad) seest them  bowing and falling prostrate (in worship), seeking bounty from Allah and (His)  acceptance. The mark of them is on their foreheads from the traces of prostration.  Such is their likeness in the Torah and their likeness in the Gospel - like as sown corn  that sendeth forth its shoot and strengtheneth it and riseth firm upon its stalk,  delighting the sowers - that He may enrage the disbelievers with (the sight of) them.  Allah hath promised, unto such of them as believe and do good works, forgiveness  and immense reward.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

49. al-Hujurat: The Chambers

[049_001]1 O ye who believe! Be not forward in the presence of Allah and His  messenger, and keep your duty to Allah. Lo! Allah is Hearer, Knower. 

[049_002]2 O ye who believe! Lift not up your voices above the voice of the Prophet,  nor shout when speaking to him as ye shout one to another, lest your works be  rendered vain while ye perceive not. 

[049_003]3 Lo! they who subdue their voices in the presence of the messenger of Allah,  those are they whose hearts Allah hath proven unto righteousness. Theirs will be  forgiveness and immense reward. 

[049_004]4 Lo! those who call thee from behind the private apartments, most of them  have no sense. 

[049_005]5 And if they had had patience till thou camest forth unto them, it had been  better for them. And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful. 

[049_006]6 O ye who believe! If an evil-liver bring you tidings, verify it, lest ye smite  some folk in ignorance and afterward repent of what ye did. 

[049_007]7 And know that the messenger of Allah is among you. If he were to obey you  in much of the government, ye would surely be in trouble; but Allah hath endeared  the faith to you and hath beautified it in your hearts, and hath made disbelief and  lewdness and rebellion hateful unto you. Such are they who are the rightly guided. 

[049_008]8 (It is) a bounty and a grace from Allah; and Allah is Knower, Wise. 

[049_009]9 And if two parties of believers fall to fighting, then make peace between  them. And if one party of them doeth wrong to the other, fight ye that which doeth  wrong till it return unto the ordinance of Allah; then, if it return, make peace between  them justly, and act equitably. Lo! Allah loveth the equitable. 

[049_010]10 The believers are naught else than brothers. Therefore make peace between  your brethren and observe your duty to Allah that haply ye may obtain mercy. 

[049_011]11 O ye who believe! Let not a folk deride a folk who may be better than they  (are), not let women (deride) women who may be better than they are; neither defame  one another, nor insult one another by nicknames. Bad is the name of lewdness after  faith. And whoso turneth not in repentance, such are evil-doers. 

[049_012]12 O ye who believe! Shun much suspicion; for lo! some suspicion is a crime.  And spy not, neither backbite one another. Would one of you love to eat the flesh of  his dead brother ? Ye abhor that (so abhor the other)! And keep your duty (to Allah).  Lo! Allah is Relenting, Merciful. 

[049_013]13 O mankind! Lo! We have created you male and female, and have made you  nations and tribes that ye may know one another. Lo! the noblest of you, in the sight  of Allah, is the best in conduct. Lo! Allah is Knower, Aware. 

[049_014]14 The wandering Arabs say: We believe. Say (unto them, O Muhammad): Ye  believe not, but rather say "We submit," for the faith hath not yet entered into your  hearts. Yet, if ye obey Allah and His messenger, He will not withhold from you aught  of (the reward of) your deeds. Lo! Allah is Forgiving, Merciful. 

[049_015]15 The (true) believers are those only who believe in Allah and His messenger  and afterward doubt not, but strive with their wealth and their lives for the cause of  Allah. Such are the sincere. 

[049_016]16 Say (unto them, O Muhammad): Would ye teach Allah your religion, when  Allah knoweth all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth, and Allah is Aware  of all things ? 

[049_017]17 They make it a favour unto thee (Muhammad) that they have surrendered  (unto Him). Say: Deem not your Surrender a favour unto me; but Allah doth confer a  favour on you, inasmuch as He hath led you to the Faith, if ye are earnest. 

[049_018]18 Lo! Allah knoweth the Unseen of the heavens and the earth. And Allah is  Seer of what ye do.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

50. Qaf: Qaf

[050_001]1 Qaf. By the Glorious Qur'an, 

[050_002]2 Nay, but they marvel that a warner of their own hath come unto them; and  the disbelievers say: This is a strange thing: 

[050_003]3 When we are dead and have become dust (shall we be brought back again) ?  That would be a far return! 

[050_004]4 We know that which the earth taketh of them, and with Us is a recording  Book. 

[050_005]5 Nay, but they have denied the truth when it came unto them, therefor they  are now in troubled case. 

[050_006]6 Have they not then observed the sky above them, how We have constructed  it and beautified it, and how there are no rifts therein ? 

[050_007]7 And the earth have We spread out, and have flung firm hills therein, and  have caused of every lovely kind to grow thereon, 

[050_008]8 A vision and a reminder for every penitent slave. 

[050_009]9 And We send down from the sky blessed water whereby We give growth  unto gardens and the grain of crops, 

[050_010]10 And lofty date-palms with ranged clusters, 

[050_011]11 Provision (made) for men; and therewith We quicken a dead land. Even so  will be the resurrection of the dead. 

[050_012]12 The folk of Noah denied (the truth) before them, and (so did) the dwellers at  Ar-Rass and (the tribe of) Thamud, 

[050_013]13 And (the tribe of) A'ad, and Pharaoh, and the brethren of Lot, 

[050_014]14 And the dwellers in the wood, and the folk of Tubb'a: every one denied their  messengers, therefor My threat took effect. 

[050_015]15 Were We then worn out by the first creation ? Yet they are in doubt about a  new creation. 

[050_016]16 We verily created man and We know what his soul whispereth to him, and  We are nearer to him than his jugular vein. 

[050_017]17 When the two Receivers receive (him), seated on the right hand and on the  left, 

[050_018]18 He uttereth no word but there is with him an observer ready. 

[050_019]19 And the agony of death cometh in truth. (And it is said unto him): This is that  which thou wast wont to shun. 

[050_020]20 And the trumpet is blown. This is the threatened Day. 

[050_021]21 And every soul cometh, along with it a driver and a witness. 

[050_022]22 (And unto the evil-doer it is said): Thou wast in heedlessness of this. Now  We have removed from thee thy covering, and piercing is thy sight this day. 

[050_023]23 And (unto the evil-doer) his comrade saith: This is that which I have ready  (as testimony). 

[050_024]24 (And it is said): Do ye twain hurl to hell each rebel ingrate, 

[050_025]25 Hinderer of good, transgressor, doubter, 

[050_026]26 Who setteth up another god along with Allah. Do ye twain hurl him to the  dreadful doom. 

[050_027]27 His comrade saith: Our Lord! I did not cause him to rebel, but he was  (himself) far gone in error. 

[050_028]28 He saith: Contend not in My presence, when I had already proffered unto  you the warning. 

[050_029]29 The sentence that cometh from Me cannot be changed, and I am in no wise a  tyrant unto the slaves. 

[050_030]30 On the day when We say unto hell: Art thou filled ? and it saith: Can there be  more to come ? 

[050_031]31 And the Garden is brought nigh for those who kept from evil, no longer  distant. 

[050_032]32 (And it is said): This is that which ye were promised.  (It is) for every  penitent and heedful one, 

[050_033]33 Who feareth the Beneficent in secret and cometh with a contrite heart. 

[050_034]34 Enter it in peace. This is the day of immortality. 

[050_035]35 There they have all that they desire, and there is more with Us. 

[050_036]36 And how many a generation We destroyed before them, who were mightier  than these in prowess so that they overran the lands! Had they any place of refuge  (when the judgment came) ? 

[050_037]37 Lo! therein verily is a reminder for him who hath a heart, or giveth ear with  full intelligence. 

[050_038]38 And verily We created the heavens and the earth, and all that is between  them, in six Days, and naught of weariness touched Us. 

[050_039]39 Therefor (O Muhammad) bear with what they say, and hymn the praise of  thy Lord before the rising and before the setting of the sun; 

[050_040]40 And in the night-time hymn His praise, and after the (prescribed)  prostrations. 

[050_041]41 And listen on the day when the crier crieth from a near place, 

[050_042]42 The day when they will hear the (Awful) Cry in truth. That is the day of  coming forth (from the graves). 

[050_043]43 Lo! We it is Who quicken and give death, and unto Us is the journeying. 

[050_044]44 On the day when the earth splitteth asunder from them, hastening forth (they  come). That is a gathering easy for Us (to make). 

[050_045]45 We are Best Aware of what they say, and thou (O Muhammad) art in no wise  a compeller over them. But warn by the Qur'an him who feareth My threat.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

51. adh-Dhariyat: The Scatterers

[051_001]1 By those that winnow with a winnowing 

[051_002]2 And those that bear the burden (of the rain) 

[051_003]3 And those that glide with ease (upon the sea) 

[051_004]4 And those who distribute (blessings) by command, 

[051_005]5 Lo! that wherewith ye are threatened is indeed true, 

[051_006]6 And lo! the judgment will indeed befall. 

[051_007]7 By the heaven full of paths, 

[051_008]8 Lo! ye, forsooth, are of various opinion (concerning the truth). 

[051_009]9 He is made to turn away from it who is (himself) averse. 

[051_010]10 Accursed be the conjecturers 

[051_011]11 Who are careless in an abyss! 

[051_012]12 They ask: When is the Day of Judgment ? 

[051_013]13 (It is) the day when they will be tormented at the Fire, 

[051_014]14 (And it will be said unto them): Taste your torment (which ye inflicted). This  is what ye sought to hasten. 

[051_015]15 Lo! those who keep from evil will dwell amid gardens and watersprings, 

[051_016]16 Taking that which their Lord giveth them; for lo! aforetime they were doers  of good; 

[051_017]17 They used to sleep but little of the night, 

[051_018]18 And ere the dawning of each day would seek forgiveness, 

[051_019]19 And in their wealth the beggar and the outcast had due share. 

[051_020]20 And in the earth are portents for those whose faith is sure. 

[051_021]21 And (also) in yourselves. Can ye then not see ? 

[051_022]22 And in the heaven is your providence and that which ye are promised; 

[051_023]23 And by the Lord of the heavens and the earth, it is the truth, even as (it is  true) that ye speak. 

[051_024]24 Hath the story of Abraham's honoured guests reached thee (O Muhammad) ? 

[051_025]25 When they came in unto him and said: Peace! he answered, Peace! (and  thought): Folk unknown (to me). 

[051_026]26 Then he went apart unto his housefolk so that they brought a fatted calf; 

[051_027]27 And he set it before them, saying: Will ye not eat ? 

[051_028]28 Then he conceived a fear of them. They said: Fear not! and gave him tidings  of (the birth of) a wise son. 

[051_029]29 Then his wife came forward, making moan, and smote her face, and cried: A  barren old woman! 

[051_030]30 They said: Even so saith thy Lord. Lo! He is the Wise, the Knower. 

[051_031]31 (Abraham) said: And (afterward) what is your errand, O ye sent (from Allah)  ? 

[051_032]32 They said: Lo! we are sent unto a guilty folk, 

[051_033]33 That we may send upon them stones of clay, 

[051_034]34 Marked by thy Lord for (the destruction of) the wanton. 

[051_035]35 Then we brought forth such believers as were there. 

[051_036]36 But We found there but one house of those surrendered (to Allah). 

[051_037]37 And We left behind therein a portent for those who fear a painful doom. 

[051_038]38 And in Moses (too, there is a portent) when We sent him unto Pharaoh with  clear warrant, 

[051_039]39 But he withdrew (confiding) in his might, and said: A wizard or a madman. 

[051_040]40 So We seized him and his hosts and flung them in the sea, for he was  reprobate. 

[051_041]41 And in (the tribe of) A'ad (there is a portent) when we sent the fatal wind  against them. 

[051_042]42 It spared naught that it reached, but made it (all) as dust. 

[051_043]43 And in (the tribe of) Thamud (there is a portent) when it was told them: Take  your ease awhile. 

[051_044]44 But they rebelled against their Lord's decree, and so the thunderbolt overtook  them even while they gazed; 

[051_045]45 And they were unable to rise up, nor could they help themselves. 

[051_046]46 And the folk of Noah aforetime. Lo! they were licentious folk. 

[051_047]47 We have built the heaven with might, and We it is Who make the vast extent  (thereof). 

[051_048]48 And the earth have We laid out, how gracious is the Spreader (thereof)! 

[051_049]49 And all things We have created by pairs, that haply ye may reflect. 

[051_050]50 Therefor flee unto Allah; lo! I am a plain warner unto you from him. 

[051_051]51 And set not any other god along with Allah; lo! I am a plain warner unto you  from Him. 

[051_052]52 Even so there came no messenger unto those before them but they said: A  wizard or a madman! 

[051_053]53 Have they handed down (the saying) as an heirloom one unto another ? Nay,  but they are froward folk. 

[051_054]54 So withdraw from them (O Muhammad), for thou art in no wise  blameworthy, 

[051_055]55 And warn, for warning profiteth believers. 

[051_056]56 I created the jinn and humankind only that they might worship Me. 

[051_057]57 I seek no livelihood from them, nor do I ask that they should feed Me. 

[051_058]58 Lo! Allah! He it is that giveth livelihood, the Lord of unbreakable might. 

[051_059]59 And lo! for those who (now) do wrong there is an evil day like unto the evil  day (which came for) their likes (of old); so let them not ask Me to hasten on (that  day). 

[051_060]60 And woe unto those who disbelieve, from (that) their day which they are  promised.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

52. at-Tur: The Mountain

[052_001]1 By the Mount, 

[052_002]2 And a Scripture inscribed 

[052_003]3 On fine parchment unrolled, 

[052_004]4 And the House frequented, 

[052_005]5 And the roof exalted, 

[052_006]6 And the sea kept filled, 

[052_007]7 Lo! the doom of thy Lord will surely come to pass; 

[052_008]8 There is none that can ward it off. 

[052_009]9 On the day when the heaven will heave with (awful) heaving, 

[052_010]10 And the mountains move away with (awful) movement, 

[052_011]11 Then woe that day unto the deniers 

[052_012]12 Who play in talk of grave matters; 

[052_013]13 The day when they are thrust with a (disdainful) thrust, into the fire of hell 

[052_014]14 (And it is said unto them): This is the Fire which ye were wont to deny. 

[052_015]15 Is this magic, or do ye not see ? 

[052_016]16 Endure the heat thereof, and whether ye are patient of it or impatient of it is  all one for you. Ye are only being paid for what ye used to do. 

[052_017]17 Lo! those who kept their duty dwell in gardens and delight, 

[052_018]18 Happy because of what their Lord hath given them, and (because) their Lord  hath warded off from them the torment of hell-fire. 

[052_019]19 (And it is said unto them): Eat and drink in health (as a reward) for what ye  used to do, 

[052_020]20 Reclining on ranged couches. And we wed them unto fair ones with wide,  lovely eyes. 

[052_021]21 And they who believe and whose seed follow them in faith, We cause their  seed to join them (there), and We deprive them of nought of their (life's) work. Every  man is a pledge for that which he hath earned. 

[052_022]22 And We provide them with fruit and meat such as they desire. 

[052_023]23 There they pass from hand to hand a cup wherein is neither vanity nor cause  of sin. 

[052_024]24 And there go round, waiting on them menservants of their own, as they were  hidden pearls. 

[052_025]25 And some of them draw near unto others, questioning, 

[052_026]26 Saying: Lo! of old, when we were with our families, we were ever anxious; 

[052_027]27 But Allah hath been gracious unto us and hath preserved us from the torment  of the breath of Fire. 

[052_028]28 Lo! we used to pray unto Him of old. Lo! He is the Benign, the Merciful. 

[052_029]29 Therefor warn (men, O Muhammad). By the grace of Allah thou art neither  soothsayer nor madman. 

[052_030]30 Or say they: (he is) a poet, (one) for whom we may expect the accident of  time ? 

[052_031]31 Say (unto them): Except (your fill)! Lo! I am with you among the expectant. 

[052_032]32 Do their minds command them to do this, or are they an outrageous folk ? 

[052_033]33 Or say they: He hath invented it ? Nay, but they will not believe! 

[052_034]34 Then let them produce speech the like thereof, if they are truthful. 

[052_035]35 Or were they created out of naught ? Or are they the creators ? 

[052_036]36 Or did they create the heavens and the earth ? Nay, but they are sure of  nothing! 

[052_037]37 Or do they own the treasures of thy Lord ? Or have they been given charge  (thereof) ? 

[052_038]38 Or have they any stairway (unto heaven) by means of which they overhear  (decrees). Then let their listener produce some warrant manifest! 

[052_039]39 Or hath He daughters whereas ye have sons ? 

[052_040]40 Or askest thou (Muhammad) a fee from them so that they are plunged in debt  ? 

[052_041]41 Or possess they the Unseen so that they can write (it) down ? 

[052_042]42 Or seek they to ensnare (the messenger) ? But those who disbelieve, they are  the ensnared! 

[052_043]43 Or have they any god beside Allah ? Glorified be Allah from all that they  ascribe as partner (unto Him)! 

[052_044]44 And if they were to see a fragment of the heaven falling, they would say: A  heap of clouds. 

[052_045]45 Then let them be (O Muhammad), till they meet their day, in which they will  be thunder-stricken, 

[052_046]46 A day in which their guile will naught avail them, nor will they be helped. 

[052_047]47 And verily, for those who do wrong, there is a punishment beyond that. But  most of them know not. 

[052_048]48 So wait patiently (O Muhammad) for thy Lord's decree, for surely thou art in  Our sight; and hymn the praise of thy Lord when thou uprisest, 

[052_049]49 And in the night-time also hymn His praise, and at the setting of the stars.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

53. an-Najm: The Star

[053_001]1 By the Star when it setteth, 

[053_002]2 Your comrade erreth not, nor is deceived; 

[053_003]3 Nor doth he speak of (his own) desire. 

[053_004]4 It is naught save an inspiration that is inspired, 

[053_005]5 Which one of mighty powers hath taught him, 

[053_006]6 One vigorous; and he grew clear to view 

[053_007]7 When he was on the uppermost horizon. 

[053_008]8 Then he drew nigh and came down 

[053_009]9 Till he was (distant) two bows' length or even nearer, 

[053_010]10 And He revealed unto His slave that which He revealed. 

[053_011]11 The heart lied not (in seeing) what it saw. 

[053_012]12 Will ye then dispute with him concerning what he seeth ? 

[053_013]13 And verily he saw him yet another time 

[053_014]14 By the lote-tree of the utmost boundary, 

[053_015]15 Nigh unto which is the Garden of Abode. 

[053_016]16 When that which shroudeth did enshroud the lote-tree, 

[053_017]17 The eye turned not aside nor yet was overbold. 

[053_018]18 Verily he saw one of the greater revelations of his Lord. 

[053_019]19 Have ye thought upon Al-Lat and Al-'Uzza 

[053_020]20 And Manat, the third, the other ? 

[053_021]21 Are yours the males and His the females ? 

[053_022]22 That indeed were an unfair division! 

[053_023]23 They are but names which ye have named, ye and your fathers, for which  Allah hath revealed no warrant. They follow but a guess and that which (they)  themselves desire. And now the guidance from their Lord hath come unto them. 

[053_024]24 Or shall man have what he coveteth ? 

[053_025]25 But unto Allah belongeth the after (life), and the former. 

[053_026]26 And how many angels are in the heavens whose intercession availeth naught  save after Allah giveth leave to whom He chooseth and accepteth. 

[053_027]27 Lo! it is those who disbelieve in the Hereafter who name the angels with the  names of females. 

[053_028]28 And they have no knowledge thereof. They follow but a guess, and lo! a  guess can never take the place of the truth. 

[053_029]29 Then withdraw (O Muhammad) from him who fleeth from Our remembrance  and desireth but the life of the world. 

[053_030]30 Such is their sum of knowledge. Lo! thy Lord is Best Aware of him who  strayeth, and He is Best Aware of him whom goeth right. 

[053_031]31 And unto Allah belongeth whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in  the earth, that He may reward those who do evil with that which they have done, and  reward those who do good with goodness. 

[053_032]32 Those who avoid enormities of sin and abominations, save the unwilled  offences - (for them) lo! thy Lord is of vast mercy. He is Best Aware of you (from the  time) when He created you from the earth, and when ye were hidden in the bellies of  your mothers. Therefor ascribe not purity unto yourselves. He is Best Aware of him  who wardeth off (evil). 

[053_033]33 Didst thou (O Muhammad) observe him who turned away, 

[053_034]34 And gave a little, then was grudging ? 

[053_035]35 Hath he knowledge of the Unseen so that he seeth ? 

[053_036]36 Or hath he not had news of what is in the books of Moses 

[053_037]37 And Abraham who paid his debt: 

[053_038]38 That no laden one shall bear another's load, 

[053_039]39 And that man hath only that for which he maketh effort, 

[053_040]40 And that his effort will be seen. 

[053_041]41 And afterward he will be repaid for it with fullest payment; 

[053_042]42 And that thy Lord, He is the goal; 

[053_043]43 And that He it is who maketh laugh, and maketh weep, 

[053_044]44 And that He it is Who giveth death and giveth life; 

[053_045]45 And that He createth the two spouses, the male and the female, 

[053_046]46 From a drop (of seed) when it is poured forth; 

[053_047]47 And that He hath ordained the second bringing forth; 

[053_048]48 And that He it is Who enricheth and contenteth; 

[053_049]49 And that He it is Who is the Lord of Sirius; 

[053_050]50 And that He destroyed the former (tribe of) A'ad, 

[053_051]51 And (the tribe of) Thamud He spared not; 

[053_052]52 And the folk of Noah aforetime, Lo! they were more unjust and more  rebellious; 

[053_053]53 And Al-Mu'tafikah He destroyed 

[053_054]54 So that there covered them that which did cover. 

[053_055]55 Concerning which then, of the bounties of thy Lord, canst thou dispute ? 

[053_056]56 This is a warner of the warners of old. 

[053_057]57 The threatened Hour is nigh. 

[053_058]58 None beside Allah can disclose it. 

[053_059]59 Marvel ye then at this statement, 

[053_060]60 And laugh and not weep, 

[053_061]61 While ye amuse yourselves ? 

[053_062]62 Rather prostrate yourselves before Allah and serve Him.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

54. al-Qamar: The Moon

[054_001]1 The hour drew nigh and the moon was rent in twain. 

[054_002]2 And if they behold a portent they turn away and say: Prolonged illusion. 

[054_003]3 They denied (the Truth) and followed their own lusts. Yet everything will  come to a decision 

[054_004]4 And surely there hath come unto them news whereof the purport should  deter, 

[054_005]5 Effective wisdom; but warnings avail not. 

[054_006]6 So withdraw from them (O Muhammad) on the day when the Summoner  summoneth unto a painful thing. 

[054_007]7 With downcast eyes, they come forth from the graves as they were locusts  spread abroad, 

[054_008]8 Hastening toward the summoner; the disbelievers say: This is a hard day. 

[054_009]9 The folk of Noah denied before them, yea, they denied Our slave and said: A  madman; and he was repulsed. 

[054_010]10 So he cried unto his Lord, saying: I am vanquished, so give help. 

[054_011]11 Then opened We the gates of heaven with pouring water 

[054_012]12 And caused the earth to gush forth springs, so that the waters met for a  predestined purpose. 

[054_013]13 And We carried him upon a thing of planks and nails, 

[054_014]14 That ran (upon the waters) in Our sight, as a reward for him who was  rejected. 

[054_015]15 And verily We left it as a token; but is there any that remembereth ? 

[054_016]16 Then see how (dreadful) was My punishment after My warnings! 

[054_017]17 And in truth We have made the Qur'an easy to remember; but is there any  that remembereth ? 

[054_018]18 (The tribe of) A'ad rejected warnings. Then how (dreadful) was My  punishment after My warnings. 

[054_019]19 Lo! We let loose on them a raging wind on a day of constant calamity, 

[054_020]20 Sweeping men away as though they were uprooted trunks of palm-trees. 

[054_021]21 Then see how (dreadful) was My punishment after My warnings! 

[054_022]22 And in truth We have made the Qur'an easy to remember; but is there any  that remembereth ? 

[054_023]23 (The tribe of) Thamud rejected warnings 

[054_024]24 For they said; Is it a mortal man, alone among us, that we are to follow ?  Then indeed we should fall into error and madness. 

[054_025]25 Hath the remembrance been given unto him alone among us ? Nay, but he is  a rash liar. 

[054_026]26 (Unto their warner it was said): To-morrow they will know who is the rash  liar. 

[054_027]27 Lo! We are sending the she-camel as a test for them; so watch them and have  patience; 

[054_028]28 And inform them that the water is to be shared between (her and) them.  Every drinking will be witnessed. 

[054_029]29 But they call their comrade and he took and hamstrung (her). 

[054_030]30 Then see how (dreadful) was My punishment after My warnings! 

[054_031]31 Lo! We sent upon them one Shout, and they became as the dry twigs  (rejected by) the builder of a cattle-fold. 

[054_032]32 And in truth We have made the Qur'an easy to remember; but is there any  that remembereth ? 

[054_033]33 The folk of Lot rejected warnings. 

[054_034]34 Lo! We sent a storm of stones upon them (all) save the family of Lot, whom  We rescued in the last watch of the night, 

[054_035]35 As grace from Us. Thus We reward him who giveth thanks. 

[054_036]36 And he indeed had warned them of Our blow, but they did doubt the  warnings. 

[054_037]37 They even asked of him his guests for an ill purpose. Then We blinded their  eyes (and said): Taste now My punishment after My warnings! 

[054_038]38 And in truth the punishment decreed befell them early in the morning. 

[054_039]39 Now taste My punishment after My warnings! 

[054_040]40 And in truth We have made the Qur'an easy to remember; but is there any  that remembereth ? 

[054_041]41 And warnings came in truth unto the house of Pharaoh 

[054_042]42 Who denied Our revelations, every one. Therefore We grasped them with the  grasp of the Mighty, the Powerful. 

[054_043]43 Are your disbelievers better than those, or have ye some immunity in the  scriptures ? 

[054_044]44 Or say they: We are a host victorious ? 

[054_045]45 The hosts will all be routed and will turn and flee. 

[054_046]46 Nay, but the Hour (of doom) is their appointed tryst, and the Hour will be  more wretched and more bitter (than their earthly failure). 

[054_047]47 Lo! the guilty are in error and madness. 

[054_048]48 On the day when they are dragged into the Fire upon their faces (it is said  unto them): Feel the touch of hell. 

[054_049]49 Lo! We have created every thing by measure. 

[054_050]50 And Our commandment is but one (commandment), as the twinkling of an  eye. 

[054_051]51 And verily We have destroyed your fellows; but is there any that  remembereth ? 

[054_052]52 And every thing they did is in the scriptures, 

[054_053]53 And every small and great thing is recorded. 

[054_054]54 Lo! the righteous will dwell among gardens and rivers, 

[054_055]55 Firmly established in the favour of a Mighty King.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

55. ar-Rahman: The Merciful

[055_001]1 The Beneficent 

[055_002]2 Hath made known the Qur'an. 

[055_003]3 He hath created man. 

[055_004]4 He hath taught him utterance. 

[055_005]5 The sun and the moon are made punctual. 

[055_006]6 The stars and the trees adore. 

[055_007]7 And the sky He hath uplifted; and He hath set the measure, 

[055_008]8 That ye exceed not the measure, 

[055_009]9 But observe the measure strictly, nor fall short thereof. 

[055_010]10 And the earth hath He appointed for (His) creatures, 

[055_011]11 Wherein are fruit and sheathed palm-trees, 

[055_012]12 Husked grain and scented herb. 

[055_013]13 Which is it, of the favours of your Lord, that ye deny ? 

[055_014]14 He created man of clay like the potter's, 

[055_015]15 And the jinn did He create of smokeless fire. 

[055_016]16 Which is it, of the favours of your Lord, that ye deny ? 

[055_017]17 Lord of the two Easts, and Lord of the two Wests! 

[055_018]18 Which is it, of the favours of your Lord, that ye deny ? 

[055_019]19 He hath loosed the two seas. They meet. 

[055_020]20 There is a barrier between them. They encroach not (one upon the other). 

[055_021]21 Which is it, of the favours of your Lord, that ye deny ? 

[055_022]22 There cometh forth from both of them the pearl and coral-stone. 

[055_023]23 Which is it, of the favours of your Lord, that ye deny ? 

[055_024]24 His are the ships displayed upon the sea, like banners. 

[055_025]25 Which is it, of the favours of your Lord, that ye deny ? 

[055_026]26 Everyone that is thereon will pass away; 

[055_027]27 There remaineth but the Countenance of thy Lord of Might and Glory. 

[055_028]28 Which is it, of the favours of your Lord, that ye deny ? 

[055_029]29 All that are in the heavens and the earth entreat Him. Every day He  exerciseth (universal) power. 

[055_030]30 Which is it, of the favours of your Lord, that ye deny ? 

[055_031]31 We shall dispose of you, O ye two dependents (man and jinn). 

[055_032]32 Which is it, of the favours of your Lord, that ye deny ? 

[055_033]33 O company of jinn and men, if ye have power to penetrate (all) regions of the  heavens and the earth, then penetrate (them)! Ye will never penetrate them save with  (Our) sanction. 

[055_034]34 Which is it, of the favours of your Lord, that ye deny ? 

[055_035]35 There will be sent, against you both, heat of fire and flash of brass, and ye  will not escape. 

[055_036]36 Which is it, of the favours of your Lord, that ye deny ? 

[055_037]37 And when the heaven splitteth asunder and becometh rosy like red hide - 

[055_038]38 Which is it, of the favours of your Lord, that ye deny ? - 

[055_039]39 On that day neither man nor jinni will be questioned of his sin. 

[055_040]40 Which is it, of the favours of your Lord, that ye deny ? 

[055_041]41 The guilty will be known by their marks, and will be taken by the forelocks  and the feet. 

[055_042]42 Which is it, of the favours of your Lord, that ye deny ? 

[055_043]43 This is hell which the guilty deny. 

[055_044]44 They go circling round between it and fierce, boiling water. 

[055_045]45 Which is it, of the favours of your Lord, that ye deny ? 

[055_046]46 But for him who feareth the standing before his Lord there are two gardens. 

[055_047]47 Which is it, of the favours of your Lord, that ye deny ? 

[055_048]48 Of spreading branches. 

[055_049]49 Which is it, of the favours of your Lord, that ye deny ? 

[055_050]50 Wherein are two fountains flowing. 

[055_051]51 Which is it, of the favours of your Lord, that ye deny ? 

[055_052]52 Wherein is every kind of fruit in pairs. 

[055_053]53 Which is it, of the favours of your Lord, that ye deny ? 

[055_054]54 Reclining upon couches lined with silk brocade, the fruit of both the gardens  near to hand. 

[055_055]55 Which is it, of the favours of your Lord, that ye deny ? 

[055_056]56 Therein are those of modest gaze, whom neither man nor jinni will have  touched before them. 

[055_057]57 Which is it, of the favours of your Lord, that ye deny ? 

[055_058]58 (In beauty) like the jacynth and the coral-stone. 

[055_059]59 Which is it, of the favours of your Lord, that ye deny ? 

[055_060]60 Is the reward of goodness aught save goodness ? 

[055_061]61 Which is it, of the favours of your Lord, that ye deny ? 

[055_062]62 And beside them are two other gardens, 

[055_063]63 Which is it, of the favours of your Lord, that ye deny ? 

[055_064]64 Dark green with foliage. 

[055_065]65 Which is it, of the favours of your Lord, that ye deny ? 

[055_066]66 Wherein are two abundant springs. 

[055_067]67 Which is it, of the favours of your Lord, that ye deny ? 

[055_068]68 Wherein is fruit, the date-palm and pomegranate. 

[055_069]69 Which is it, of the favours of your Lord, that ye deny ? 

[055_070]70 Wherein (are found) the good and beautiful - 

[055_071]71 Which is it, of the favours of your Lord, that ye deny ? - 

[055_072]72 Fair ones, close-guarded in pavilions - 

[055_073]73 Which is it, of the favours of your Lord, that ye deny ? - 

[055_074]74 Whom neither man nor jinni will have touched before them - 

[055_075]75 Which is it, of the favours of your Lord, that ye deny ? 

[055_076]76 Reclining on green cushions and fair carpets. 

[055_077]77 Which is it, of the favours of your Lord, that ye deny ? 

[055_078]78 Blessed be the name of thy Lord, Mighty and glorious!

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

56. al-Waqi`ah: That Which is Coming

[056_001]1 When the event befalleth - 

[056_002]2 There is no denying that it will befall - 

[056_003]3 Abasing (some), exalting (others); 

[056_004]4 When the earth is shaken with a shock 

[056_005]5 And the hills are ground to powder 

[056_006]6 So that they become a scattered dust, 

[056_007]7 And ye will be three kinds: 

[056_008]8 (First) those on the right hand; what of those on the right hand ? 

[056_009]9 And (then) those on the left hand; what of those on the left hand ? 

[056_010]10 And the foremost in the race, the foremost in the race: 

[056_011]11 Those are they who will be brought nigh 

[056_012]12 In gardens of delight; 

[056_013]13 A multitude of those of old 

[056_014]14 And a few of those of later time. 

[056_015]15 On lined couches, 

[056_016]16 Reclining therein face to face. 

[056_017]17 There wait on them immortal youths 

[056_018]18 With bowls and ewers and a cup from a pure spring 

[056_019]19 Wherefrom they get no aching of the head nor any madness, 

[056_020]20 And fruit that they prefer 

[056_021]21 And flesh of fowls that they desire. 

[056_022]22 And (there are) fair ones with wide, lovely eyes, 

[056_023]23 Like unto hidden pearls, 

[056_024]24 Reward for what they used to do. 

[056_025]25 There hear they no vain speaking nor recrimination 

[056_026]26 (Naught) but the saying: Peace, (and again) Peace. 

[056_027]27 And those on the right hand; what of those on the right hand ? 

[056_028]28 Among thornless lote-trees 

[056_029]29 And clustered plantains, 

[056_030]30 And spreading shade, 

[056_031]31 And water gushing, 

[056_032]32 And fruit in plenty 

[056_033]33 Neither out of reach nor yet forbidden, 

[056_034]34 And raised couches; 

[056_035]35 Lo! We have created them a (new) creation 

[056_036]36 And made them virgins, 

[056_037]37 Lovers, friends, 

[056_038]38 For those on the right hand; 

[056_039]39 A multitude of those of old 

[056_040]40 And a multitude of those of later time. 

[056_041]41 And those on the left hand: What of those on the left hand ? 

[056_042]42 In scorching wind and scalding water 

[056_043]43 And shadow of black smoke, 

[056_044]44 Neither cool nor refreshing. 

[056_045]45 Lo! heretofore they were effete with luxury 

[056_046]46 And used to persist in the awful sin. 

[056_047]47 And they used to say: When we are dead and have become dust and bones,  shall we then, forsooth, be raised again, 

[056_048]48 And also our forefathers ? 

[056_049]49 Say (unto them, O Muhammad): Lo! those of old and those of later time 

[056_050]50 Will all be brought together to the tryst of an appointed day. 

[056_051]51 Then lo! ye, the erring, the deniers, 

[056_052]52 Ye verily will eat of a tree called Zaqqum 

[056_053]53 And will fill your bellies therewith; 

[056_054]54 And thereon ye will drink of boiling water, 

[056_055]55 Drinking even as the camel drinketh. 

[056_056]56 This will be their welcome on the Day of Judgment. 

[056_057]57 We created you. Will ye then admit the truth ? 

[056_058]58 Have ye seen that which ye emit ? 

[056_059]59 Do ye create it or are We the Creator ? 

[056_060]60 We mete out death among you, and We are not to be outrun, 

[056_061]61 That We may transfigure you and make you what ye know not. 

[056_062]62 And verily ye know the first creation. Why, then, do ye not reflect ? 

[056_063]63 Have ye seen that which ye cultivate ? 

[056_064]64 Is it ye who foster it, or are We the Fosterer ? 

[056_065]65 If We willed, We verily could make it chaff, then would ye cease not to  exclaim: 

[056_066]66 Lo! we are laden with debt! 

[056_067]67 Nay, but we are deprived! 

[056_068]68 Have ye observed the water which ye drink ? 

[056_069]69 Is it ye who shed it from the raincloud, or are We the Shedder ? 

[056_070]70 If We willed We verily could make it bitter. Why then, give ye not thanks ? 

[056_071]71 Have ye observed the fire which ye strike out; 

[056_072]72 Was it ye who made the tree thereof to grow, or were We the grower ? 

[056_073]73 We, even We, appointed it a memorial and a comfort for the dwellers in the  wilderness. 

[056_074]74 Therefor (O Muhammad), praise the name of thy Lord, the Tremendous. 

[056_075]75 Nay, I swear by the places of the stars - 

[056_076]76 And lo! that verily is a tremendous oath, if ye but knew - 

[056_077]77 That (this) is indeed a noble Qur'an 

[056_078]78 In a Book kept hidden 

[056_079]79 Which none toucheth save the purified, 

[056_080]80 A revelation from the Lord of the Worlds. 

[056_081]81 Is it this Statement that ye scorn, 

[056_082]82 And make denial thereof your livelihood ? 

[056_083]83 Why, then, when (the soul) cometh up to the throat (of the dying) 

[056_084]84 And ye are at that moment looking 

[056_085]85 - And We are nearer unto him than ye are, but ye see not - 

[056_086]86 Why then, if ye are not in bondage (unto Us), 

[056_087]87 Do ye not force it back, if ye are truthful ? 

[056_088]88 Thus if he is of those brought nigh, 

[056_089]89 Then breath of life, and plenty, and a Garden of delight. 

[056_090]90 And if he is of those on the right hand, 

[056_091]91 Then (the greeting) "Peace be unto thee" from those on the right hand. 

[056_092]92 But if he is of the rejecters, the erring, 

[056_093]93 Then the welcome will be boiling water 

[056_094]94 And roasting at hell-fire. 

[056_095]95 Lo! this is certain truth. 

[056_096]96 Therefor (O Muhammad) praise the name of thy Lord, the Tremendous.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

57. al-Hadid: The Iron

[057_001]1 All that is in the heavens and the earth glorifieth Allah; and He is the Mighty,  the Wise. 

[057_002]2 His is the Sovereignty of the heavens and the earth; He quickeneth and He  giveth death; and He is Able to do all things. 

[057_003]3 He is the First and the Last, and the Outward and the Inward; and He is  Knower of all things. 

[057_004]4 He it is Who created the heavens and the earth in six Days; then He mounted  the Throne. He knoweth all that entereth the earth and all that emergeth therefrom and  all that cometh down from the sky and all that ascendeth therein; and He is with you  wheresoever ye may be. And Allah is Seer of what ye do. 

[057_005]5 His is the Sovereignty of the heavens and the earth, and unto Allah (all)  things are brought back. 

[057_006]6 He causeth the night to pass into the day, and He causeth the day to pass into  the night, and He is knower of all that is in the breasts. 

[057_007]7 Believe in Allah and His messenger, and spend of that whereof He hath  made you trustees; and such of you as believe and spend (aright), theirs will be a great  reward. 

[057_008]8 What aileth you that ye believe not in Allah, when the messenger calleth you  to believe in your Lord, and He hath already made a covenant with you, if ye are  believers ? 

[057_009]9 He it is Who sendeth down clear revelations unto His slave, that He may  bring you forth from darkness unto light; and lo! for you, Allah is Full of Pity,  Merciful. 

[057_010]10 And what aileth you that ye spend not in the way of Allah when unto Allah  belongeth the inheritance of the heavens and the earth ? Those who spent and fought  before the victory are not upon a level (with the rest of you). Such are greater in rank  than those who spent and fought afterwards. Unto each hath Allah promised good.  And Allah is Informed of what ye do. 

[057_011]11 Who is he that will lend unto Allah a goodly loan, that He may double it for  him and his may be a rich reward ? 

[057_012]12 On the day when thou (Muhammad) wilt see the believers, men and women,  their light shining forth before them and on their right hands, (and wilt hear it said  unto them): Glad news for you this day: Gardens underneath which rivers flow,  wherein ye are immortal. That is the supreme triumph. 

[057_013]13 On the day when the hypocritical men and the hypocritical women will say  unto those who believe: Look on us that we may borrow from your light! it will be  said: Go back and seek for light! Then there will separate them a wall wherein is a  gate, the inner side whereof containeth mercy, while the outer side thereof is toward  the doom. 

[057_014]14 They will cry unto them (saying): Were we not with you ? They will say:  Yea, verily; but ye tempted one another, and hesitated, and doubted, and vain desires  beguiled you till the ordinance of Allah came to pass; and the deceiver deceived you  concerning Allah; 

[057_015]15 So this day no ransom can be taken from you nor from those who  disbelieved. Your home is the Fire; that is your patron, and a hapless journey's end. 

[057_016]16 Is not the time ripe for the hearts of those who believe to submit to Allah's  reminder and to the truth which is revealed, that they become not as those who  received the scripture of old but the term was prolonged for them and so their hearts  were hardened, and many of them are evil-livers. 

[057_017]17 Know that Allah quickeneth the earth after its death. We have made clear  Our revelations for you, that haply ye may understand. 

[057_018]18 Lo! those who give alms, both men and women, and lend unto Allah a  goodly loan, it will be doubled for them, and theirs will be a rich reward. 

[057_019]19 And those who believe in Allah and His messengers, they are the loyal, and  the martyrs are with their Lord; they have their reward and their light; while as for  those who disbelieve and deny Our revelations, they are owners of hell-fire. 

[057_020]20 Know that the life of the world is only play, and idle talk, and pageantry, and  boasting among you, and rivalry in respect of wealth and children; as the likeness of  vegetation after rain, whereof the growth is pleasing to the husbandman, but afterward  it drieth up and thou seest it turning yellow, then it becometh straw. And in the  Hereafter there is grievous punishment, and (also) forgiveness from Allah and His  good pleasure, whereas the life of the world is but matter of illusion. 

[057_021]21 Race one with another for forgiveness from your Lord and a Garden whereof  the breadth is as the breadth of the heavens and the earth, which is in store for those  who believe in Allah and His messengers. Such is the bounty of Allah, which He  bestoweth upon whom He will, and Allah is of Infinite Bounty. 

[057_022]22 Naught of disaster befalleth in the earth or in yourselves but it is in a Book  before we bring it into being - Lo! that is easy for Allah - 

[057_023]23 That ye grieve not for the sake of that which hath escaped you, nor yet exult  because of that which hath been given. Allah loveth not all prideful boasters, 

[057_024]24 Who hoard and who enjoin upon the people avarice. And whosoever turneth  away, still Allah is the Absolute, the Owner of Praise. 

[057_025]25 We verily sent Our messengers with clear proofs, and revealed with them the  Scripture and the Balance, that mankind may observe right measure; and He revealed  iron, wherein is mighty power and (many) uses for mankind, and that Allah may  know him who helpeth Him and His messengers, though unseen. Lo! Allah is Strong,  Almighty. 

[057_026]26 And We verily sent Noah and Abraham and placed the prophethood and the  scripture among their seed, and among them there is he who goeth right, but many of  them are evil-livers. 

[057_027]27 Then We caused Our messengers to follow in their footsteps; and We caused  Jesus, son of Mary, to follow, and gave him the Gospel, and placed compassion and  mercy in the hearts of those who followed him. But monasticism they invented - We  ordained it not for them - only seeking Allah's pleasure, and they observed it not with  right observance. So We give those of them who believe their reward, but many of  them are evil-livers. 

[057_028]28 O ye who believe! Be mindful of your duty to Allah and put faith in His  messenger. He will give you twofold of His mercy and will appoint for you a light  wherein ye shall walk, and will forgive you. Allah is Forgiving, Merciful; 

[057_029]29 That the People of the Scripture may know that they control naught of the  bounty of Allah, but that the bounty is in Allah's hand to give to whom He will. And  Allah is of Infinite Bounty.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

58. al-Mujadilah: She Who Pleaded

[058_001]1 Allah hath heard the saying of her that disputeth with thee (Muhammad)  concerning her husband, and complaineth unto Allah. And Allah heareth your  colloquy. Lo! Allah is Hearer, Knower. 

[058_002]2 Such of you as put away your wives (by saying they are as their mothers) -  They are not their mothers; none are their mothers except those who gave them birth -  they indeed utter an ill word and a lie. And lo! Allah is Forgiving, Merciful. 

[058_003]3 Those who put away their wives (by saying they are as their mothers) and  afterward would go back on that which they have said, (the penalty) in that case (is)  the freeing of a slave before they touch one another. Unto this ye are exhorted; and  Allah is Informed of what ye do. 

[058_004]4 And he who findeth not (the wherewithal), let him fast for two successive  months before they touch one another; and for him who is unable to do so (the  penance is) the feeding of sixty needy ones. This, that ye may put trust in Allah and  His messenger. Such are the limits (imposed by Allah); and for disbelievers is a  painful doom. 

[058_005]5 Lo! those who oppose Allah and His messenger will be abased even as those  before them were abased; and We have sent down clear tokens, and for disbelievers is  a shameful doom 

[058_006]6 On the day when Allah will raise them all together and inform them of what  they did. Allah hath kept account of it while they forgot it. And Allah is Witness over  all things. 

[058_007]7 Hast thou not seen that Allah knoweth all that is in the heavens and all that is  in the earth ? There is no secret conference of three but He is their fourth, nor of five  but He is their sixth, nor of less than that or more but He is with them wheresoever  they may be; and afterward, on the Day of Resurrection, He will inform them of what  they did. Lo! Allah is Knower of all things. 

[058_008]8 Hast thou not observed those who were forbidden conspiracy and afterward  returned to that which they had been forbidden, and (now) conspire together for crime  and wrongdoing and disobedience toward the messenger ? And when they come unto  thee they greet thee with a greeting wherewith Allah greeteth thee not, and say within  themselves: Why should Allah punish us for what we say ? Hell will suffice them;  they will feel the heat thereof - a hapless journey's end! 

[058_009]9 O ye who believe! When ye conspire together, conspire not together for  crime and wrongdoing and disobedience toward the messenger, but conspire together  for righteousness and piety, and keep your duty toward Allah, unto whom ye will be  gathered. 

[058_010]10 Lo! Conspiracy is only of the devil, that he may vex those who believe; but  he can harm them not at all unless by Allah's leave. In Allah let believers put their  trust. 

[058_011]11 O ye who believe! when it is said unto you, Make room! in assemblies, then  make room; Allah will make way for you (hereafter). And when it is said, Come up  higher! go up higher; Allah will exalt those who believe among you, and those who  have knowledge, to high ranks. Allah is Informed of what ye do. 

[058_012]12 O ye who believe! When ye hold conference with the messenger, offer an  alms before your conference. That is better and purer for you. But if ye cannot find  (the wherewithal) then lo! Allah is Forgiving, Merciful. 

[058_013]13 Fear ye to offer alms before your conference ? Then, when ye do it not and  Allah hath forgiven you, establish worship and pay the poor-due and obey Allah and  His messenger. And Allah is Aware of what ye do. 

[058_014]14 Hast thou not seen those who take for friends a folk with whom Allah is  wroth ? They are neither of you nor of them, and they swear a false oath knowingly. 

[058_015]15 Allah hath prepared for them a dreadful doom. Evil indeed is that which they  are wont to do. 

[058_016]16 They make a shelter of their oaths and turn (men) from the way of Allah; so  theirs will be a shameful doom. 

[058_017]17 Their wealth and their children will avail them naught against Allah. Such  are rightful owners of the Fire; they will abide therein. 

[058_018]18 On the day when Allah will raise them all together, then will they swear unto  Him as they (now) swear unto you, and they will fancy that they have some standing.  Lo! is it not they who are the liars ? 

[058_019]19 The devil hath engrossed them and so hath caused them to forget  remembrance of Allah. They are the devil's party. Lo! is it not the devil's party who  will be the losers ? 

[058_020]20 Lo! those who oppose Allah and His messenger, they will be among the  lowest. 

[058_021]21 Allah hath decreed: Lo! I verily shall conquer, I and My messengers. Lo!  Allah is Strong, Almighty. 

[058_022]22 Thou wilt not find folk who believe in Allah and the Last Day loving those  who oppose Allah and His messenger, even though they be their fathers or their sons  or their brethren or their clan. As for such, He hath written faith upon their hearts and  hath strengthened them with a Spirit from Him, and He will bring them into Gardens  underneath which rivers flow, wherein they will abide. Allah is well pleased with  them, and they are well pleased with Him. They are Allah's party. Lo! is it not Allah's  party who are the successful ?

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

59. al-Hashr: The Exile

[059_001]1 All that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth glorifieth Allah, and He is  the Mighty, the Wise. 

[059_002]2 He it is Who hath caused those of the People of the Scripture who  disbelieved to go forth from their homes unto the first exile. Ye deemed not that they  would go forth, while they deemed that their strongholds would protect them from  Allah.  But Allah reached them from a place whereof they recked not, and cast terror  in their hearts so that they ruined their houses with their own hands and the hands of  the believers. So learn a lesson, O ye who have eyes! 

[059_003]3 And if Allah had not decreed migration for them, He verily would have  punished them in the world, and theirs in the Hereafter is the punishment of the Fire. 

[059_004]4 That is because they were opposed to Allah and His messenger; and whoso is  opposed to Allah, (for him) verily Allah is stern in reprisal. 

[059_005]5 Whatsoever palm-trees ye cut down or left standing on their roots, it was by  Allah's leave, in order that He might confound the evil-livers. 

[059_006]6 And that which Allah gave as spoil unto His messenger from them, ye urged  not any horse or riding-camel for the sake thereof, but Allah giveth His messenger  lordship over whom He will. Allah is Able to do all things. 

[059_007]7 That which Allah giveth as spoil unto His messenger from the people of the  townships, it is for Allah and His messenger and for the near of kin and the orphans  and the needy and the wayfarer, that it become not a commodity between the rich  among you. And whatsoever the messenger giveth you, take it. And whatsoever he  forbiddeth, abstain (from it). And keep your duty to Allah. Lo! Allah is stern in  reprisal. 

[059_008]8 And (it is) for the poor fugitives who have been driven out from their homes  and their belongings, who seek bounty from Allah and help Allah and His messenger.  They are the loyal. 

[059_009]9 Those who entered the city and the faith before them love those who flee  unto them for refuge, and find in their breasts no need for that which hath been given  them, but prefer (the fugitives) above themselves though poverty become their lot.  And whoso is saved from his own avarice - such are they who are successful. 

[059_010]10 And those who came (into the faith) after them say: Our Lord! Forgive us  and our brethren who were before us in the faith, and place not in our hearts any  rancour toward those who believe. Our Lord! Thou art Full of Pity, Merciful. 

[059_011]11 Hast thou not observed those who are hypocrites, (how) they tell their  brethren who disbelieve among the People of the Scripture: If ye are driven out, we  surely will go out with you, and we will never obey anyone against you, and if ye are  attacked we verily will help you. And Allah beareth witness that they verily are liars. 

[059_012]12 (For) indeed if they are driven out they go not out with them, and indeed if  they are attacked they help them not, and indeed if they had helped them they would  have turned and fled, and then they would not have been victorious. 

[059_013]13 Ye are more awful as a fear in their bosoms than Allah. That is because they  are a folk who understand not. 

[059_014]14 They will not fight against you in a body save in fortified villages or from  behind walls. Their adversity among themselves is very great. Ye think of them as a  whole whereas their hearts are divers. That is because they are a folk who have no  sense. 

[059_015]15 On the likeness of those (who suffered) a short time before them, they taste  the ill-effects of their own conduct, and theirs is painful punishment. 

[059_016]16 (And the hypocrites are) on the likeness of the devil when he telleth man to  disbelieve, then, when he disbelieveth saith: Lo! I am quit of thee. Lo! I fear Allah,  the Lord of the Worlds. 

[059_017]17 And the consequence for both will be that they are in the Fire, therein  abiding. Such is the reward of evil-doers. 

[059_018]18 O ye who believe! Observe your duty to Allah. And let every soul look to  that which it sendeth on before for the morrow. And observe your duty to Allah. Lo!  Allah is Informed of what ye do. 

[059_019]19 And be not ye as those who forgot Allah, therefor He caused them to forget  their souls. Such are the evil-doers. 

[059_020]20 Not equal are the owners of the Fire and the owners of the Garden. The  owners of the Garden, they are the victorious. 

[059_021]21 If We had caused this Qur'an to descend upon a mountain, thou (O  Muhammad) verily hadst seen it humbled, rent asunder by the fear of Allah. Such  similitudes coin We for mankind that haply they may reflect. 

[059_022]22 He is Allah, than Whom there is no other God, the Knower of the Invisible  and the Visible. He is the Beneficent, Merciful. 

[059_023]23 He is Allah, than Whom there is no other God, the Sovereign Lord, the Holy  One, Peace, the Keeper of Faith, the Guardian, the Majestic, the Compeller, the  Superb. Glorified be Allah from all that they ascribe as partner (unto Him). 

[059_024]24 He is Allah, the Creator, the Shaper out of naught, the Fashioner. His are the  most beautiful names. All that is in the heavens and the earth glorifieth Him, and He  is the Mighty, the Wise.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

60. al-Mumtahanah: She Who is Tested

[060_001]1 O ye who believe! Choose not My enemy and your enemy for allies. Do ye  give them friendship when they disbelieve in that truth which hath come unto you,  driving out the messenger and you because ye believe in Allah, your Lord ? If ye have  come forth to strive in My way and seeking My good pleasure, (show them not  friendship). Do ye show friendship unto them in secret, when I am Best Aware of  what ye hide and what ye proclaim ? And whosoever doeth it among you, he verily  hath strayed from the right way. 

[060_002]2 If they have the upper hand of you, they will be your foes, and will stretch  out their hands and their tongues toward you with evil (intent), and they long for you  to disbelieve. 

[060_003]3 Your ties of kindred and your children will avail you naught upon the Day of  Resurrection. He will part you. Allah is Seer of what ye do. 

[060_004]4 There is a goodly pattern for you in Abraham and those with him, when they  told their folk: Lo! we are guiltless of you and all that ye worship beside Allah. We  have done with you. And there hath arisen between us and you hostility and hate for  ever until ye believe in Allah only - save that which Abraham promised his father  (when he said): I will ask forgiveness for thee, though I own nothing for thee from  Allah - Our Lord! In Thee we put our trust, and unto Thee we turn repentant, and unto  Thee is the journeying. 

[060_005]5 Our Lord! Make us not a prey for those who disbelieve, and forgive us, our  Lord! Lo! Thou, only Thou, are the Mighty, the Wise. 

[060_006]6 Verily ye have in them a goodly pattern for everyone who looketh to Allah  and the Last Day. And whosoever may turn away, lo! still Allah, He is the Absolute,  the Owner of Praise. 

[060_007]7 It may be that Allah will ordain love between you and those of them with  whom ye are at enmity. Allah is Mighty, and Allah is Forgiving, Merciful. 

[060_008]8 Allah forbiddeth you not those who warred not against you on account of  religion and drove you not out from your homes, that ye should show them kindness  and deal justly with them. Lo! Allah loveth the just dealers. 

[060_009]9 Allah forbiddeth you only those who warred against you on account of  religion and have driven you out from your homes and helped to drive you out, that  ye make friends of them. Whosoever maketh friends of them - (All) such are wrong- doers. 

[060_010]10 O ye who believe! When believing women come unto you as fugitives,  examine them. Allah is Best Aware of their faith. Then, if ye know them for true  believers, send them not back unto the disbelievers. They are not lawful for them (the  disbelievers), nor are they (the disbelievers) lawful for them. And give them (the  disbelievers) that which they have spent (upon them). And it is no sin for you to  marry such women when ye have given them their dues. And hold not to the ties of  disbelieving women; and ask for (the return of) that which ye have spent; and let them  (the disbelievers) ask for that which they have spent. That is the judgment of Allah.  He judgeth between you. Allah is Knower, Wise. 

[060_011]11 And if any of your wives have gone from you unto the disbelievers and  afterward ye have your turn (of triumph), then give unto those whose wives have  gone the like of that which they have spent, and keep your duty to Allah in Whom ye  are believers. 

[060_012]12 O Prophet! If believing women come unto thee, taking oath of allegiance  unto thee that they will ascribe no thing as partner unto Allah, and will neither steal  nor commit adultery nor kill their children, nor produce any lie that they have devised  between their hands and feet, nor disobey thee in what is right, then accept their  allegiance and ask Allah to forgive them. Lo! Allah is Forgiving, Merciful. 

[060_013]13 O ye who believe! Be not friendly with a folk with whom Allah is wroth, (a  folk) who have despaired of the Hereafter as the disbelievers despair of those who are  in the graves.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

61. as-Saff: The Ranks

[061_001]1 All that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth glorifieth Allah, and He is  the Mighty, the Wise. 

[061_002]2 O ye who believe! Why say ye that which ye do not ? 

[061_003]3 It is most hateful in the sight of Allah that ye say that which ye do not. 

[061_004]4 Lo! Allah loveth them who battle for His cause in ranks, as if they were a  solid structure. 

[061_005]5 And (remember) when Moses said unto his people: O my people! Why  persecute ye me, when ye well know that I am Allah's messenger unto you ? So when  they went astray Allah sent their hearts astray. And Allah guideth not the evil-living  folk. 

[061_006]6 And when Jesus son of Mary said: O Children of Israel! Lo! I am the  messenger of Allah unto you, confirming that which was (revealed) before me in the  Torah, and bringing good tidings of a messenger who cometh after me, whose name  is the Praised One. Yet when he hath come unto them with clear proofs, they say:  This is mere magic. 

[061_007]7 And who doeth greater wrong than he who inventeth a lie against Allah when  he is summoned unto Al-Islam ? And Allah guideth not wrongdoing folk. 

[061_008]8 Fain would they put out the light of Allah with their mouths, but Allah will  perfect His light however much the disbelievers are averse. 

[061_009]9 He it is Who hath sent His messenger with the guidance and the religion of  truth, that He may make it conqueror of all religion however much idolaters may be  averse. 

[061_010]10 O ye who believe! Shall I show you a commerce that will save you from a  painful doom ? 

[061_011]11 Ye should believe in Allah and His messenger, and should strive for the  cause of Allah with your wealth and your lives. That is better for you, if ye did but  know. 

[061_012]12 He will forgive you your sins and bring you into Gardens underneath which  rivers flow, and pleasant dwellings in Gardens of Eden. That is the supreme triumph. 

[061_013]13 And (He will give you) another (blessing) which ye love: help from Allah  and present victory. Give good tidings (O Muhammad) to believers. 

[061_014]14 O ye who believe! Be Allah's helpers, even as Jesus son of Mary said unto  the disciples: Who are my helpers for Allah ? They said: We are Allah's helpers. And  a party of the Children of Israel believed, while a party disbelieved. Then We  strengthened those who believed against their foe, and they became the uppermost.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

62. al-Jumu`ah: The Day of Congregation

[062_001]1 All that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth glorifieth Allah, the  Sovereign Lord, the Holy One, the Mighty, the Wise. 

[062_002]2 He it is Who hath sent among the unlettered ones a messenger of their own,  to recite unto them His revelations and to make them grow, and to teach them the  Scripture and wisdom, though heretofore they were indeed in error manifest, 

[062_003]3 Along with others of them who have not yet joined them. He is the Mighty,  the Wise. 

[062_004]4 That is the bounty of Allah; which He giveth unto whom He will. Allah is of  Infinite Bounty. 

[062_005]5 The likeness of those who are entrusted with the Law of Moses, yet apply it  not, is as the likeness of the ass carrying books. Wretched is the likeness of folk who  deny the revelations of Allah. And Allah guideth not wrongdoing folk. 

[062_006]6 Say (O Muhammad): O ye who are Jews! If ye claim that ye are favoured of  Allah apart from (all) mankind, then long for death if ye are truthful. 

[062_007]7 But they will never long for it because of all that their own hands have sent  before, and Allah is Aware of evil-doers. 

[062_008]8 Say (unto them, O Muhammad): Lo! the death from which ye shrink will  surely meet you, and afterward ye will be returned unto the Knower of the Invisible  and the Visible, and He will tell you what ye used to do. 

[062_009]9 O ye who believe! When the call is heard for the prayer of the day of  congregation, haste unto remembrance of Allah and leave your trading. That is better  for you if ye did but know. 

[062_010]10 And when the prayer is ended, then disperse in the land and seek of Allah's  bounty, and remember Allah much, that ye may be successful. 

[062_011]11 But when they spy some merchandise or pastime they break away to it and  leave thee standing. Say: That which Allah hath is better than pastime and than  merchandise, and Allah is the Best of providers.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

63. al-Munafiqun: The Hypocrites

[063_001]1 When the hypocrites come unto thee (O Muhammad), they say: We bear  witness that thou art indeed Allah's messenger. And Allah knoweth that thou art  indeed His messenger, and Allah beareth witness that the hypocrites indeed are  speaking falsely. 

[063_002]2 They make their faith a pretext so that they may turn (men) from the way of  Allah. Verily evil is that which they are wont to do, 

[063_003]3 That is because they believed, then disbelieved, therefore their hearts are  sealed so that they understand not. 

[063_004]4 And when thou seest them their figures please thee; and if they speak thou  givest ear unto their speech. (They are) as though they were blocks of wood in striped  cloaks. They deem every shout to be against them. They are the enemy, so beware of  them. Allah confound them! How they are perverted! 

[063_005]5 And when it is said unto them: Come! The messenger of Allah will ask  forgiveness for you! they avert their faces and thou seest them turning away,  disdainful. 

[063_006]6 Whether thou ask forgiveness for them or ask not forgiveness for them is all  one for them; Allah will not forgive them. Lo! Allah guideth not the evil-living folk. 

[063_007]7 They it is who say: Spend not on behalf of those (who dwell) with Allah's  messenger that they may disperse (and go away from you); when Allah's are the  treasures of the heavens and the earth; but the hypocrites comprehend not. 

[063_008]8 They say: Surely, if we return to Al-Madinah the mightier will soon drive out  the weaker; when might belongeth to Allah and to His messenger and to the believers;  but the hypocrites know not. 

[063_009]9 O ye who believe! Let not your wealth nor your children distract you from  remembrance of Allah. Those who do so, they are the losers. 

[063_010]10 And spend of that wherewith We have provided you before death cometh  unto one of you and he saith: My Lord! If only thou wouldst reprieve me for a little  while, then I would give alms and be among the righteous. 

[063_011]11 But Allah reprieveth no soul when its term cometh, and Allah is Informed of  what ye do.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

64. at-Taghabun: The Cheating

[064_001]1 All that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth glorifieth Allah; unto  Him belongeth Sovereignty and unto Him belongeth praise, and He is Able to do all  things. 

[064_002]2 He it is Who created you, but one of you is a disbeliever and one of you is a  believer, and Allah is Seer of what ye do. 

[064_003]3 He created the heavens and the earth with truth, and He shaped you and  made good your shapes, and unto Him is the journeying. 

[064_004]4 He knoweth all that is in the heavens and the earth, and He knoweth what ye  conceal and what ye publish. And Allah is Aware of what is in the breasts (of men). 

[064_005]5 Hath not the story reached you of those who disbelieved of old and so did  taste the ill-effects of their conduct, and theirs will be a painful doom. 

[064_006]6 That was because their messengers (from Allah) kept coming unto them with  clear proofs (of Allah's Sovereignty), but they said: Shall mere mortals guide us ? So  they disbelieved and turned away, and Allah was independent (of them). Allah is  Absolute, Owner of Praise. 

[064_007]7 Those who disbelieve assert that they will not be raised again. Say (unto  them, O Muhammad): Yea, verily, by my Lord! ye will be raised again and then ye  will be informed of what ye did; and that is easy for Allah. 

[064_008]8 So believe in Allah and His messenger and the light which We have  revealed. And Allah is Informed of what ye do. 

[064_009]9 The day when He shall gather you unto the Day of Assembling, that will be a  day of mutual disillusion. And whoso believeth in Allah and doeth right, He will  remit from him his evil deeds and will bring him unto Gardens underneath which  rivers flow, therein to abide for ever. That is the supreme triumph. 

[064_010]10 But those who disbelieve and deny Our revelations, such are owners of the  Fire; they will abide therein - a hapless journey's end! 

[064_011]11 No calamity befalleth save by Allah's leave. And whosoever believeth in  Allah, He guideth his heart. And Allah is Knower of all things. 

[064_012]12 Obey Allah and obey His messenger; but if ye turn away, then the duty of  Our messenger is only to convey (the message) plainly. 

[064_013]13 Allah! There is no God save Him. In Allah, therefore, let believers put their  trust. 

[064_014]14 O ye who believe! Lo! among your wives and your children there are  enemies for you, therefor beware of them. And if ye efface and overlook and forgive,  then lo! Allah is Forgiving, Merciful. 

[064_015]15 Your wealth and your children are only a temptation, whereas Allah! with  Him is an immense reward. 

[064_016]16 So keep your duty to Allah as best ye can, and listen, and obey, and spend;  that is better for your souls. And whoso is saved from his own greed, such are the  successful. 

[064_017]17 If ye lend unto Allah a goodly loan, He will double it for you and will  forgive you, for Allah is Responsive, Clement, 

[064_018]18 Knower of the Invisible and the Visible, the Mighty, the Wise.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

65. at-Talaq: The Divorce

[065_001]1 O Prophet! When ye (men) put away women, put them away for their (legal)  period and reckon the period, and keep your duty to Allah, your Lord. Expel them not  from their houses nor let them go forth unless they commit open immorality. Such are  the limits (imposed by) Allah; and whoso transgresseth Allah's limits, he verily  wrongeth his soul. Thou knowest not: it may be that Allah will afterward bring some  new thing to pass. 

[065_002]2 Then, when they have reached their term, take them back in kindness or part  from them in kindness, and call to witness two just men among you, and keep your  testimony upright for Allah. Whoso believeth in Allah and the Last Day is exhorted to  act thus. And whosoever keepeth his duty to Allah, Allah will appoint a way out for  him, 

[065_003]3 And will provide for him from (a quarter) whence he hath no expectation.  And whosoever putteth his trust in Allah, He will suffice him. Lo! Allah bringeth His  command to pass. Allah hath set a measure for all things. 

[065_004]4 And for such of your women as despair of menstruation, if ye doubt, their  period (of waiting) shall be three months, along with those who have it not. And for  those with child, their period shall be till they bring forth their burden. And  whosoever keepeth his duty to Allah, He maketh his course easy for him. 

[065_005]5 That is the commandment of Allah which He revealeth unto you. And whoso  keepeth his duty to Allah, He will remit from him his evil deeds and magnify reward  for him. 

[065_006]6 Lodge them where ye dwell, according to your wealth, and harass them not  so as to straiten life for them. And if they are with child, then spend for them till they  bring forth their burden. Then, if they give suck for you, give them their due payment  and consult together in kindness; but if ye make difficulties for one another, then let  some other woman give suck for him (the father of the child). 

[065_007]7 Let him who hath abundance spend of his abundance, and he whose  provision is measured, let him spend of that which Allah hath given him. Allah asketh  naught of any soul save that which He hath given it. Allah will vouchsafe, after  hardship, ease. 

[065_008]8 And how many a community revolted against the ordinance of its Lord and  His messengers, and We called it to a stern account and punished it with dire  punishment, 

[065_009]9 So that it tasted the ill-effects of its conduct, and the consequence of its  conduct was loss. 

[065_010]10 Allah hath prepared for them stern punishment; so keep your duty to Allah,  O men of understanding! O ye who believe! Now Allah hath sent down unto you a  reminder, 

[065_011]11 A messenger reciting unto you the revelations of Allah made plain, that He  may bring forth those who believe and do good works from darkness unto light. And  whosoever believeth in Allah and doeth right, He will bring him into Gardens  underneath which rivers flow, therein to abide for ever. Allah hath made good  provision for him. 

[065_012]12 Allah it is who hath created seven heavens, and of the earth the like thereof.  The commandment cometh down among them slowly, that ye may know that Allah is  Able to do all things, and that Allah surroundeth all things in knowledge.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

66. at-Tahrim: The Prohibition

[066_001]1 O Prophet! Why bannest thou that which Allah hath made lawful for thee,  seeking to please thy wives ? And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful. 

[066_002]2 Allah hath made lawful for you (Muslims) absolution from your oaths (of  such a kind), and Allah is your Protector. He is the Knower, the Wise. 

[066_003]3 When the Prophet confided a fact unto one of his wives and when she  afterward divulged it and Allah apprised him thereof, he made known (to her) part  thereof and passed over part. And when he told it her she said: Who hath told thee ?  He said: The Knower, the Aware hath told me. 

[066_004]4 If ye twain turn unto Allah repentant, (ye have cause to do so) for your hearts  desired (the ban); and if ye aid one another against him (Muhammad) then lo! Allah,  even He, is his Protecting Friend, and Gabriel and the righteous among the believers;  and furthermore the angels are his helpers. 

[066_005]5 It may happen that his Lord, if he divorce you, will give him in your stead  wives better than you, submissive (to Allah), believing, pious, penitent, devout,  inclined to fasting, widows and maids. 

[066_006]6 O ye who believe! Ward off from yourselves and your families a Fire  whereof the fuel is men and stones, over which are set angels strong, severe, who  resist not Allah in that which He commandeth them, but do that which they are  commanded. 

[066_007]7 (Then it will be said): O ye who disbelieve! Make no excuses for yourselves  this day. Ye are only being paid for what ye used to do. 

[066_008]8 O ye who believe! Turn unto Allah in sincere repentance! It may be that your  Lord will remit from you your evil deeds and bring you into Gardens underneath  which rivers flow, on the day when Allah will not abase the Prophet and those who  believe with him. Their light will run before them and on their right hands; they will  say: Our Lord!  Perfect our light for us, and forgive us! Lo! Thou art Able to do all  things. 

[066_009]9 O Prophet! Strive against the disbelievers and the hypocrites, and be stern  with them. Hell will be their home, a hapless journey's end. 

[066_010]10 Allah citeth an example for those who disbelieve: the wife of Noah and the  wife of Lot, who were under two of Our righteous slaves yet betrayed them so that  they (the husbands) availed them naught against Allah and it was said (unto them):  Enter the Fire along with those who enter. 

[066_011]11 And Allah citeth an example for those who believe: the wife of Pharaoh  when she said: My Lord! Build for me a home with thee in the Garden, and deliver  me from Pharaoh and his work, and deliver me from evil-doing folk; 

[066_012]12 And Mary, daughter of 'Imran, whose body was chaste, therefor We breathed  therein something of Our Spirit. And she put faith in the words of her Lord and His  scriptures, and was of the obedient.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

67. al-Mulk: The Kingdom

[067_001]1 Blessed is He in Whose hand is the Sovereignty, and, He is Able to do all  things. 

[067_002]2 Who hath created life and death that He may try you which of you is best in  conduct; and He is the Mighty, the Forgiving, 

[067_003]3 Who hath created seven heavens in harmony. Thou (Muhammad) canst see  no fault in the Beneficent One's creation; then look again: Canst thou see any rifts ? 

[067_004]4 Then look again and yet again, thy sight will return unto thee weakened and  made dim. 

[067_005]5 And verily We have beautified the world's heaven with lamps, and We have  made them missiles for the devils, and for them We have prepared the doom of flame. 

[067_006]6 And for those who disbelieve in their Lord there is the doom of hell, a  hapless journey's end! 

[067_007]7 When they are flung therein they hear its roaring as it boileth up, 

[067_008]8 As it would burst with rage. Whenever a (fresh) host is flung therein the  wardens thereof ask them: Came there unto you no warner ? 

[067_009]9 They say: Yea, verily, a warner came unto us; but we denied and said: Allah  hath naught revealed; ye are in naught but a great error. 

[067_010]10 And they say: Had we been wont to listen or have sense, we had not been  among the dwellers in the flames. 

[067_011]11 So they acknowledge their sins; but far removed (from mercy) are the  dwellers in the flames. 

[067_012]12 Lo! those who fear their Lord in secret, theirs will be forgiveness and a great  reward. 

[067_013]13 And keep your opinion secret or proclaim it, lo! He is Knower of all that is in  the breasts (of men). 

[067_014]14 Should He not know what He created ? And He is the Subtile, the Aware. 

[067_015]15 He it is Who hath made the earth subservient unto you, so Walk in the paths  thereof and eat of His providence. And unto Him will be the resurrection (of the  dead). 

[067_016]16 Have ye taken security from Him Who is in the heaven that He will not cause  the earth to swallow you when lo! it is convulsed ? 

[067_017]17 Or have ye taken security from Him Who is in the heaven that He will not let  loose on you a hurricane ? But ye shall know the manner of My warning. 

[067_018]18 And verily those before them denied, then (see) the manner of My wrath  (with them)! 

[067_019]19 Have they not seen the birds above them spreading out their wings and  closing them ? Naught upholdeth them save the Beneficent. Lo! He is Seer of all  things. 

[067_020]20 Or who is he that will be an army unto you to help you instead of the  Beneficent ? The disbelievers are in naught but illusion. 

[067_021]21 Or who is he that will provide for you if He should withhold His providence  ? Nay, but they are set in pride and frowardness. 

[067_022]22 Is he who goeth groping on his face more rightly guided, or he who walketh  upright on a straight road ? 

[067_023]23 Say (unto them, O Muhammad): He it is who gave you being, and hath  assigned unto you ears and eyes and hearts. Small thanks give ye! 

[067_024]24 Say: He it is Who multiplieth you in the earth, and unto Whom ye will be  gathered. 

[067_025]25 And they say: When (will) this promise (be fulfilled), if ye are truthful ? 

[067_026]26 Say: The knowledge is with Allah only, and I am but a plain warner; 

[067_027]27 But when they see it nigh, the faces of those who disbelieve will be awry,  and it will be said (unto them): This is that for which ye used to call. 

[067_028]28 Say (O Muhammad): Have ye thought: Whether Allah causeth me  (Muhammad) and those with me to perish or hath mercy on us, still, who will protect  the disbelievers from a painful doom ? 

[067_029]29 Say: He is the Beneficent. In Him we believe and in Him we put our trust.  And ye will soon know who it is that is in error manifest. 

[067_030]30 Say: Have ye thought: If (all) your water were to disappear into the earth,  who then could bring you gushing water ?

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

68. al-Qalam: The Pen

[068_001]1 Nun. By the pen and that which they write (therewith), 

[068_002]2 Thou art not, for thy Lord's favour unto thee, a madman. 

[068_003]3 And lo! thine verily will be a reward unfailing. 

[068_004]4 And lo! thou art of a tremendous nature. 

[068_005]5 And thou wilt see and they will see 

[068_006]6 Which of you is the demented. 

[068_007]7 Lo! thy Lord is Best Aware of him who strayeth from His way, and He is  Best Aware of those who walk aright. 

[068_008]8 Therefor obey not thou the rejecters 

[068_009]9 Who would have had thee compromise, that they may compromise. 

[068_010]10 Neither obey thou each feeble oath-monger, 

[068_011]11 Detracter, spreader abroad of slanders, 

[068_012]12 Hinderer of the good, transgressor, malefactor 

[068_013]13 Greedy therewithal, intrusive. 

[068_014]14 It is because he is possessed of wealth and children 

[068_015]15 That, when Our revelations are recited unto him, he saith: Mere fables of the  men of old. 

[068_016]16 We shall brand him on the nose. 

[068_017]17 Lo! We have tried them as We tried the owners of the garden when they  vowed that they would pluck its fruit next morning, 

[068_018]18 And made no exception (for the Will of Allah); 

[068_019]19 Then a visitation from thy Lord came upon it while they slept 

[068_020]20 And in the morning it was as if plucked. 

[068_021]21 And they cried out one unto another in the morning, 

[068_022]22 Saying: Run unto your field if ye would pluck (the fruit). 

[068_023]23 So they went off, saying one unto another in low tones: 

[068_024]24 No needy man shall enter it to-day against you. 

[068_025]25 They went betimes, strong in (this) purpose. 

[068_026]26 But when they saw it, they said: Lo! we are in error! 

[068_027]27 Nay, but we are desolate! 

[068_028]28 The best among them said: Said I not unto you: Why glorify ye not (Allah) ? 

[068_029]29 They said: Glorified be our Lord! Lo! we have been wrong-doers. 

[068_030]30 Then some of them drew near unto others, self-reproaching. 

[068_031]31 They said: Alas for us! In truth we were outrageous. 

[068_032]32 It may be that our Lord will give us better than this in place thereof. Lo! we  beseech our Lord. 

[068_033]33 Such was the punishment. And verily the punishment of the Hereafter is  greater if they did but know. 

[068_034]34 Lo! for those who keep from evil are gardens of bliss with their Lord. 

[068_035]35 Shall We then treat those who have surrendered as We treat the guilty ? 

[068_036]36 What aileth you ? How foolishly ye judge! 

[068_037]37 Or have ye a scripture wherein ye learn 

[068_038]38 That ye shall indeed have all that ye choose ? 

[068_039]39 Or have ye a covenant on oath from Us that reacheth to the Day of Judgment,  that yours shall be all that ye ordain ? 

[068_040]40 Ask them (O Muhammad) which of them will vouch for that! 

[068_041]41 Or have they other gods ? Then let them bring their other gods if they are  truthful 

[068_042]42 On the day when it befalleth in earnest, and they are ordered to prostrate  themselves but are not able, 

[068_043]43 With eyes downcast, abasement stupefying them. And they had been  summoned to prostrate themselves while they were yet unhurt. 

[068_044]44 Leave Me (to deal) with those who give the lie to this pronouncement. We  shall lead them on by steps from whence they know not. 

[068_045]45 Yet I bear with them, for lo! My scheme is firm. 

[068_046]46 Or dost thou (Muhammad) ask a fee from them so that they are heavily taxed  ? 

[068_047]47 Or is the Unseen theirs that they can write (thereof) ? 

[068_048]48 But wait thou for thy Lord's decree, and be not like him of the fish, who cried  out in despair. 

[068_049]49 Had it not been that favour from his Lord had reached him he surely had  been cast into the wilderness while he was reprobate. 

[068_050]50 But his Lord chose him and placed him among the righteous. 

[068_051]51 And lo! those who disbelieve would fain disconcert thee with their eyes  when they hear the Reminder, and they say: Lo! he is indeed mad; 

[068_052]52 When it is naught else than a Reminder to creation.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

69. al-Haqqah: The Inevitable

[069_001]1 The Reality! 

[069_002]2 What is the Reality ? 

[069_003]3 Ah, what will convey unto thee what the reality is! 

[069_004]4 (The tribes of) Thamud and A'ad disbelieved in the judgment to come. 

[069_005]5 As for Thamud, they were destroyed by the lightning. 

[069_006]6 And as for A'ad, they were destroyed by a fierce roaring wind, 

[069_007]7 Which He imposed on them for seven long nights and eight long days so that  thou mightest have seen men lying overthrown, as they were hollow trunks of palm- trees. 

[069_008]8 Canst thou (O Muhammad) see any remnant of them ? 

[069_009]9 And Pharaoh and those before him, and the communities that were  destroyed, brought error, 

[069_010]10 And they disobeyed the messenger of their Lord, therefor did He grip them  with a tightening grip. 

[069_011]11 Lo! when the waters rose, We carried you upon the ship 

[069_012]12 That We might make it a memorial for you, and that remembering ears (that  heard the story) might remember. 

[069_013]13 And when the trumpet shall sound one blast 

[069_014]14 And the earth with the mountains shall be lifted up and crushed with one  crash, 

[069_015]15 Then, on that day will the Event befall. 

[069_016]16 And the heaven will split asunder, for that day it will be frail. 

[069_017]17 And the angels will be on the sides thereof, and eight will uphold the Throne  of thy Lord that day, above them. 

[069_018]18 On that day ye will be exposed; not a secret of you will be hidden. 

[069_019]19 Then, as for him who is given his record in his right hand, he will say: Take,  read my book! 

[069_020]20 Surely I knew that I should have to meet my reckoning. 

[069_021]21 Then he will be in blissful state 

[069_022]22 In a high garden 

[069_023]23 Whereof the clusters are in easy reach. 

[069_024]24 (And it will be said unto those therein): Eat and drink at ease for that which  ye sent on before you in past days. 

[069_025]25 But as for him who is given his record in his left hand, he will say: Oh,  would that I had not been given my book 

[069_026]26 And knew not what my reckoning! 

[069_027]27 Oh, would that it had been death! 

[069_028]28 My wealth hath not availed me, 

[069_029]29 My power hath gone from me. 

[069_030]30 (It will be said): Take him and fetter him 

[069_031]31 And then expose him to hell-fire 

[069_032]32 And then insert him in a chain whereof the length is seventy cubits. 

[069_033]33 Lo! He used not to believe in Allah the Tremendous, 

[069_034]34 And urged not on the feeding of the wretched. 

[069_035]35 Therefor hath he no lover here this day, 

[069_036]36 Nor any food save filth 

[069_037]37 Which none but sinners eat. 

[069_038]38 But nay! I swear by all that ye see 

[069_039]39 And all that ye see not 

[069_040]40 That it is indeed the speech of an illustrious messenger. 

[069_041]41 It is not poet's speech - little is it that ye believe! 

[069_042]42 Nor diviner's speech - little is it that ye remember! 

[069_043]43 It is a revelation from the Lord of the Worlds. 

[069_044]44 And if he had invented false sayings concerning Us, 

[069_045]45 We assuredly had taken him by the right hand 

[069_046]46 And then severed his life-artery, 

[069_047]47 And not one of you could have held Us off from him. 

[069_048]48 And lo! it is a warrant unto those who ward off (evil). 

[069_049]49 And lo! We know that some among you will deny (it). 

[069_050]50 And lo! it is indeed an anguish for the disbelievers. 

[069_051]51 And lo! it is absolute truth. 

[069_052]52 So glorify the name of thy Tremendous Lord.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

70. al-Ma`arij: The Ladders

[070_001]1 A questioner questioned concerning the doom about to fall 

[070_002]2 Upon the disbelievers, which none can repel, 

[070_003]3 From Allah, Lord of the Ascending Stairways 

[070_004]4 (Whereby) the angels and the Spirit ascend unto Him in a Day whereof the  span is fifty thousand years. 

[070_005]5 But be patient (O Muhammad) with a patience fair to see. 

[070_006]6 Lo! they behold it afar off 

[070_007]7 While we behold it nigh: 

[070_008]8 The day when the sky will become as molten copper, 

[070_009]9 And the hills become as flakes of wool, 

[070_010]10 And no familiar friend will ask a question of his friend 

[070_011]11 Though they will be given sight of them. The guilty man will long to be able  to ransom himself from the punishment of that day at the price of his children 

[070_012]12 And his spouse and his brother 

[070_013]13 And his kin that harboured him 

[070_014]14 And all that are in the earth, if then it might deliver him. 

[070_015]15 But nay! for lo! it is the fire of hell 

[070_016]16 Eager to roast; 

[070_017]17 It calleth him who turned and fled (from truth), 

[070_018]18 And hoarded (wealth) and withheld it. 

[070_019]19 Lo! man was created anxious, 

[070_020]20 Fretful when evil befalleth him 

[070_021]21 And, when good befalleth him, grudging; 

[070_022]22 Save worshippers. 

[070_023]23 Who are constant at their worship 

[070_024]24 And in whose wealth there is a right acknowledged 

[070_025]25 For the beggar and the destitute; 

[070_026]26 And those who believe in the Day of Judgment, 

[070_027]27 And those who are fearful of their Lord's doom - 

[070_028]28 Lo! the doom of their Lord is that before which none can feel secure - 

[070_029]29 And those who preserve their chastity 

[070_030]30 Save with their wives and those whom their right hands possess, for thus  they are not blameworthy; 

[070_031]31 But whoso seeketh more than that, those are they who are transgressors; 

[070_032]32 And those who keep their pledges and their covenant, 

[070_033]33 And those who stand by their testimony 

[070_034]34 And those who are attentive at their worship. 

[070_035]35 These will dwell in Gardens, honoured. 

[070_036]36 What aileth those who disbelieve, that they keep staring toward thee (O  Muhammad), open-eyed, 

[070_037]37 On the right and on the left, in groups ? 

[070_038]38 Doth every man among them hope to enter the Garden of Delight ? 

[070_039]39 Nay, verily. Lo! We created them from what they know. 

[070_040]40 But nay! I swear by the Lord of the rising-places and the setting-places of the  planets that We verily are Able 

[070_041]41 To replace them by (others) better than them. And we are not to be outrun. 

[070_042]42 So let them chat and play until they meet their Day which they are promised, 

[070_043]43 The day when they come forth from the graves in haste, as racing to a goal, 

[070_044]44 With eyes aghast, abasement stupefying them: Such is the Day which they  are promised.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

71. Nuh: Noah

[071_001]1 Lo! We sent Noah unto his people (saying): Warn thy people ere the painful  doom come unto them. 

[071_002]2 He said: O my people! Lo! I am a plain warner unto you 

[071_003]3 (Bidding you): Serve Allah and keep your duty unto Him and obey me, 

[071_004]4 That He may forgive you somewhat of your sins and respite you to an  appointed term. Lo! the term of Allah, when it cometh, cannot be delayed, if ye but  knew. 

[071_005]5 He said: My Lord! Lo! I have called unto my people night and day 

[071_006]6 But all my calling doth but add to their repugnance; 

[071_007]7 And lo! whenever I call unto them that Thou mayst pardon them they thrust  their fingers in their ears and cover themselves with their garments and persist (in  their refusal) and magnify themselves in pride. 

[071_008]8 And lo! I have called unto them aloud, 

[071_009]9 And lo! I have made public proclamation unto them, and I have appealed to  them in private. 

[071_010]10 And I have said: Seek pardon of your Lord. Lo! He was ever Forgiving. 

[071_011]11 He will let loose the sky for you in plenteous rain, 

[071_012]12 And will help you with wealth and sons, and will assign unto you Gardens  and will assign unto you rivers. 

[071_013]13 What aileth you that ye hope not toward Allah for dignity 

[071_014]14 When He created you by (divers) stages ? 

[071_015]15 See ye not how Allah hath created seven heavens in harmony, 

[071_016]16 And hath made the moon a light therein, and made the sun a lamp ? 

[071_017]17 And Allah hath caused you to grow as a growth from the earth, 

[071_018]18 And afterward He maketh you return thereto, and He will bring you forth  again, a (new) forthbringing. 

[071_019]19 And Allah hath made the earth a wide expanse for you 

[071_020]20 That ye may thread the valley-ways thereof. 

[071_021]21 Noah said: My Lord! Lo! they have disobeyed me and followed one whose  wealth and children increase him in naught save ruin; 

[071_022]22 And they have plotted a mighty plot, 

[071_023]23 And they have said: Forsake not your gods. Forsake not Wadd, nor Suwa',  nor Yaghuth and Ya'uq and Nasr. 

[071_024]24 And they have led many astray, and Thou increasest the wrong-doers in  naught save error. 

[071_025]25 Because of their sins they were drowned, then made to enter a Fire. And they  found they had no helpers in place of Allah. 

[071_026]26 And Noah said: My Lord! Leave not one of the disbelievers in the land. 

[071_027]27 If Thou shouldst leave them, they will mislead Thy slaves and will beget  none save lewd ingrates. 

[071_028]28 My Lord! Forgive me and my parents and him who entereth my house  believing, and believing men and believing women, and increase not the wrong-doers  in aught save ruin.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

72. al-Jinn: The Jinn

[072_001]1 Say (O Muhammad): It is revealed unto me that a company of the Jinn gave  ear, and they said: Lo! we have heard a marvellous Qur'an, 

[072_002]2 Which guideth unto righteousness, so we believe in it and we ascribe no  partner unto our Lord. 

[072_003]3 And (we believe) that He - exalted be the glory of our Lord! - hath taken  neither wife nor son, 

[072_004]4 And that the foolish one among us used to speak concerning Allah an  atrocious lie. 

[072_005]5 And lo! we had supposed that humankind and jinn would not speak a lie  concerning Allah - 

[072_006]6 And indeed (O Muhammad) individuals of humankind used to invoke the  protection of individuals of the jinn, so that they increased them in revolt against  Allah); 

[072_007]7 And indeed they supposed, even as ye suppose, that Allah would not raise  anyone (from the dead) - 

[072_008]8 And (the Jinn who had listened to the Qur'an said): We had sought the  heaven but had found it filled with strong warders and meteors. 

[072_009]9 And we used to sit on places (high) therein to listen. But he who listeneth  now findeth a flame in wait for him; 

[072_010]10 And we know not whether harm is boded unto all who are in the earth, or  whether their Lord intendeth guidance for them. 

[072_011]11 And among us there are righteous folk and among us there are far from that.  We are sects having different rules. 

[072_012]12 And we know that we cannot escape from Allah in the earth, nor can we  escape by flight. 

[072_013]13 And when we heard the guidance, we believed therein, and whoso believeth  in his Lord, he feareth neither loss nor oppression. 

[072_014]14 And there are among us some who have surrendered (to Allah) and there are  among us some who are unjust. And whoso hath surrendered to Allah, such have  taken the right path purposefully. 

[072_015]15 And as for those who are unjust, they are firewood for hell. 

[072_016]16 If they (the idolaters) tread the right path, We shall give them to drink of  water in abundance 

[072_017]17 That We may test them thereby, and whoso turneth away from the  remembrance of his Lord; He will thrust him into ever-growing torment. 

[072_018]18 And the places of worship are only for Allah, so pray not unto anyone along  with Allah. 

[072_019]19 And when the slave of Allah stood up in prayer to Him, they crowded on  him, almost stifling. 

[072_020]20 Say (unto them, O Muhammad): I pray unto Allah only, and ascribe unto  Him no partner. 

[072_021]21 Say: Lo! I control not hurt nor benefit for you. 

[072_022]22 Say: Lo! none can protect me from Allah, nor can I find any refuge beside  Him 

[072_023]23 (Mine is) but conveyance (of the Truth) from Allah, and His messages; and  whoso disobeyeth Allah and His messenger, lo! his is fire of hell, wherein such dwell  for ever. 

[072_024]24 Till (the day) when they shall behold that which they are promised (they may  doubt); but then they will know (for certain) who is weaker in allies and less in  multitude. 

[072_025]25 Say (O Muhammad, unto the disbelievers): I know not whether that which ye  are promised is nigh, or if my Lord hath set a distant term for it. 

[072_026]26 (He is) the Knower of the Unseen, and He revealeth unto none His secret, 

[072_027]27 Save unto every messenger whom He hath chosen, and then He maketh a  guard to go before him and a guard behind him 

[072_028]28 That He may know that they have indeed conveyed the messages of their  Lord. He surroundeth all their doings, and He keepeth count of all things.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

73. al-Muzammil: The Mantled One

[073_001]1 O thou wrapped up in thy raiment! 

[073_002]2 Keep vigil the night long, save a little - 

[073_003]3 A half thereof, or abate a little thereof 

[073_004]4 Or add (a little) thereto - and chant the Qur'an in measure, 

[073_005]5 For we shall charge thee with a word of weight. 

[073_006]6 Lo! the vigil of the night is (a time) when impression is more keen and  speech more certain. 

[073_007]7 Lo! thou hast by day a chain of business. 

[073_008]8 So remember the name of thy Lord and devote thyself with a complete  devotion - 

[073_009]9 Lord of the East and the West; there is no God save Him; so choose thou  Him alone for thy defender - 

[073_010]10 And bear with patience what they utter, and part from them with a fair leave- taking. 

[073_011]11 Leave Me to deal with the deniers, lords of ease and comfort (in this life);  and do thou respite them awhile. 

[073_012]12 Lo! with Us are heavy fetters and a raging fire, 

[073_013]13 And food which choketh (the partaker), and a painful doom 

[073_014]14 On the day when the earth and the hills rock, and the hills become a heap of  running sand. 

[073_015]15 Lo! We have sent unto you a messenger as witness against you, even as We  sent unto Pharaoh a messenger. 

[073_016]16 But Pharaoh rebelled against the messenger, whereupon We seized him with  no gentle grip. 

[073_017]17 Then how, if ye disbelieve, will ye protect yourselves upon the day which  will turn children grey, 

[073_018]18 The very heaven being then rent asunder. His promise is to be fulfilled. 

[073_019]19 Lo! This is a Reminder. Let him who will, then, choose a way unto his Lord. 

[073_020]20 Lo! thy Lord knoweth how thou keepest vigil sometimes nearly two-thirds of  the night, or (sometimes) half or a third thereof, as do a party of those with thee.  Allah measureth the night and the day. He knoweth that ye count it not, and turneth  unto you in mercy. Recite, then, of the Qur'an that which is easy for you. He knoweth  that there are sick folk among you, while others travel in the land in search of Allah's  bounty, and others (still) are fighting for the cause of Allah. So recite of it that which  is easy (for you), and establish worship and pay the poor-due, and (so) lend unto  Allah a goodly loan. Whatsoever good ye send before you for your souls, ye will find  it with Allah, better and greater in the recompense. And seek forgiveness of Allah.  Lo! Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

74. al-Mudathir: The Clothed One

[074_001]1 O thou enveloped in thy cloak, 

[074_002]2 Arise and warn! 

[074_003]3 Thy Lord magnify, 

[074_004]4 Thy raiment purify, 

[074_005]5 Pollution shun! 

[074_006]6 And show not favour, seeking wordly gain! 

[074_007]7 For the sake of thy Lord, be patient! 

[074_008]8 For when the trumpet shall sound, 

[074_009]9 Surely that day will be a day of anguish, 

[074_010]10 Not of ease, for disbelievers. 

[074_011]11 Leave Me (to deal) with him whom I created lonely, 

[074_012]12 And then bestowed upon him ample means, 

[074_013]13 And sons abiding in his presence 

[074_014]14 And made (life) smooth for him. 

[074_015]15 Yet he desireth that I should give more. 

[074_016]16 Nay! For lo! he hath been stubborn to Our revelations. 

[074_017]17 On him I shall impose a fearful doom. 

[074_018]18 For lo! he did consider; then he planned - 

[074_019]19 (Self-)destroyed is he, how he planned! 

[074_020]20 Again (self-)destroyed is he, how he planned! - 

[074_021]21 Then looked he, 

[074_022]22 Then frowned he and showed displeasure. 

[074_023]23 Then turned he away in pride 

[074_024]24 And said: This is naught else than magic from of old; 

[074_025]25 This is naught else than speech of mortal man. 

[074_026]26 Him shall I fling unto the burning. 

[074_027]27  - Ah, what will convey unto thee what that burning is! - 

[074_028]28 It leaveth naught; it spareth naught 

[074_029]29 It shrivelleth the man. 

[074_030]30 Above it are nineteen. 

[074_031]31 We have appointed only angels to be wardens of the Fire, and their number  have We made to be a stumbling-block for those who disbelieve; that those to whom  the Scripture hath been given may have certainty, and that believers may increase in  faith; and that those to whom the Scripture hath been given and believers may not  doubt; and that those in whose hearts there is disease, and disbelievers, may say:  What meaneth Allah by this similitude ? Thus Allah sendeth astray whom He will,  and whom He will He guideth. None knoweth the hosts of thy Lord save Him. This is  naught else than a Reminder unto mortals. 

[074_032]32 Nay, by the Moon 

[074_033]33 And the night when it withdraweth 

[074_034]34 And the dawn when it shineth forth, 

[074_035]35 Lo! this is one of the greatest (portents) 

[074_036]36 As a warning unto men, 

[074_037]37 Unto him of you who will advance or hang back. 

[074_038]38 Every soul is a pledge for its own deeds; 

[074_039]39 Save those who will stand on the right hand. 

[074_040]40 In gardens they will ask one another 

[074_041]41 Concerning the guilty: 

[074_042]42 What hath brought you to this burning ? 

[074_043]43 They will answer: We were not of those who prayed 

[074_044]44 Nor did we feed the wretched. 

[074_045]45 We used to wade (in vain dispute) with (all) waders, 

[074_046]46 And we used to deny the Day of Judgment, 

[074_047]47 Till the Inevitable came unto us. 

[074_048]48 The mediation of no mediators will avail them then. 

[074_049]49 Why now turn they away from the Admonishment, 

[074_050]50 As they were frightened asses 

[074_051]51 Fleeing from a lion ? 

[074_052]52 Nay, but everyone of them desireth that he should be given open pages (from  Allah). 

[074_053]53 Nay, verily. They fear not the Hereafter. 

[074_054]54 Nay, verily. Lo! this is an Admonishment. 

[074_055]55 So whosoever will may heed. 

[074_056]56 And they will not heed unless Allah willeth (it). He is the fount of fear. He is  the fount of Mercy.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

75. al-Qiyamah: The Resurrection

[075_001]1 Nay, I swear by the Day of Resurrection; 

[075_002]2 Nay, I swear by the accusing soul (that this Scripture is true). 

[075_003]3 Thinketh man that We shall not assemble his bones ? 

[075_004]4 Yea, verily. We are Able to restore his very fingers! 

[075_005]5 But man would fain deny what is before him. 

[075_006]6 He asketh: When will be this Day of Resurrection ? 

[075_007]7 But when sight is confounded 

[075_008]8 And the moon is eclipsed 

[075_009]9 And sun and moon are united, 

[075_010]10 On that day man will cry: Whither to flee! 

[075_011]11 Alas! No refuge! 

[075_012]12 Unto thy Lord is the recourse that day. 

[075_013]13 On that day man is told the tale of that which he hath sent before and left  behind. 

[075_014]14 Oh, but man is a telling witness against himself, 

[075_015]15 Although he tender his excuses. 

[075_016]16 Stir not thy tongue herewith to hasten it. 

[075_017]17 Lo! upon Us (resteth) the putting together thereof and the reading thereof. 

[075_018]18 And when We read it, follow thou the reading; 

[075_019]19 Then lo! upon Us (resteth) the explanation thereof. 

[075_020]20 Nay, but ye do love the fleeting Now 

[075_021]21 And neglect the Hereafter. 

[075_022]22 That day will faces be resplendent, 

[075_023]23 Looking toward their Lord; 

[075_024]24 And that day will other faces be despondent, 

[075_025]25 Thou wilt know that some great disaster is about to fall on them. 

[075_026]26 Nay, but when the life cometh up to the throat 

[075_027]27 And men say: Where is the wizard (who can save him now) ? 

[075_028]28 And he knoweth that it is the parting; 

[075_029]29 And agony is heaped on agony; 

[075_030]30 Unto thy Lord that day will be the driving. 

[075_031]31 For he neither trusted, nor prayed. 

[075_032]32 But he denied and flouted. 

[075_033]33 Then went he to his folk with glee. 

[075_034]34 Nearer unto thee and nearer, 

[075_035]35 Again nearer unto thee and nearer (is the doom). 

[075_036]36 Thinketh man that he is to be left aimless ? 

[075_037]37 Was he not a drop of fluid which gushed forth ? 

[075_038]38 Then he became a clot; then (Allah) shaped and fashioned 

[075_039]39 And made of him a pair, the male and female. 

[075_040]40 Is not He (Who doeth so) Able to bring the dead to life ?

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

76. ad-Dahr: The Man

[076_001]1 Hath there come upon man (ever) any period of time in which he was a thing  unremembered ? 

[076_002]2 Lo! We create man from a drop of thickened fluid to test him; so We make  him hearing, knowing. 

[076_003]3 Lo! We have shown him the way, whether he be grateful or disbelieving. 

[076_004]4 Lo! We have prepared for disbelievers manacles and carcans and a raging  fire. 

[076_005]5 Lo! the righteous shall drink of a cup whereof the mixture is of Kafur, 

[076_006]6 A spring wherefrom the slaves of Allah drink, making it gush forth  abundantly, 

[076_007]7 (Because) they perform the vow and fear a day whereof the evil is wide- spreading, 

[076_008]8 And feed with food the needy wretch, the orphan and the prisoner, for love  of Him, 

[076_009]9 (Saying): We feed you, for the sake of Allah only. We wish for no reward  nor thanks from you; 

[076_010]10 Lo! we fear from our Lord a day of frowning and of fate. 

[076_011]11 Therefor Allah hath warded off from them the evil of that day, and hath  made them find brightness and joy; 

[076_012]12 And hath awarded them for all that they endured, a Garden and silk attire; 

[076_013]13 Reclining therein upon couches, they will find there neither (heat of) a sun  nor bitter cold. 

[076_014]14 The shade thereof is close upon them and the clustered fruits thereof bow  down. 

[076_015]15 Goblets of silver are brought round for them, and beakers (as) of glass 

[076_016]16 (Bright as) glass but (made) of silver, which they (themselves) have  measured to the measure (of their deeds). 

[076_017]17 There are they watered with a cup whereof the mixture is of Zanjabil, 

[076_018]18 (The water of) a spring therein, named Salsabil. 

[076_019]19 There wait on them immortal youths, whom, when thou seest, thou wouldst  take for scattered pearls. 

[076_020]20 When thou seest, thou wilt see there bliss and high estate. 

[076_021]21 Their raiment will be fine green silk and gold embroidery. Bracelets of silver  will they wear. Their Lord will slake their thirst with a pure drink. 

[076_022]22 (And it will be said unto them): Lo! this is a reward for you. Your endeavour  (upon earth) hath found acceptance. 

[076_023]23 Lo! We, even We, have revealed unto thee the Qur'an, a revelation; 

[076_024]24 So submit patiently to thy Lord's command, and obey not of them any guilty  one or disbeliever. 

[076_025]25 Remember the name of thy Lord at morn and evening. 

[076_026]26 And worship Him (a portion) of the night. And glorify Him through the  livelong night. 

[076_027]27 Lo! these love fleeting life, and put behind them (the remembrance of) a  grievous day. 

[076_028]28 We, even We, created them, and strengthened their frame. And when We  will, We can replace them, bringing others like them in their stead. 

[076_029]29 Lo! this is an Admonishment, that whosoever will may choose a way unto  his Lord. 

[076_030]30 Yet ye will not, unless Allah willeth. Lo! Allah is Knower, Wise. 

[076_031]31 He maketh whom He will to enter His mercy, and for evil-doers hath  prepared a painful doom.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

77. al-Mursalat: The Emissaries

[077_001]1 By the emissary winds, (sent) one after another 

[077_002]2 By the raging hurricanes, 

[077_003]3 By those which cause earth's vegetation to revive; 

[077_004]4 By those who winnow with a winnowing, 

[077_005]5 By those who bring down the Reminder, 

[077_006]6 To excuse or to warn, 

[077_007]7 Surely that which ye are promised will befall. 

[077_008]8 So when the stars are put out, 

[077_009]9 And when the sky is riven asunder, 

[077_010]10 And when the mountains are blown away, 

[077_011]11 And when the messengers are brought unto their time appointed - 

[077_012]12 For what day is the time appointed ? 

[077_013]13 For the Day of Decision. 

[077_014]14 And what will convey unto thee what the Day of Decision is! - 

[077_015]15 Woe unto the repudiators on that day! 

[077_016]16 Destroyed We not the former folk, 

[077_017]17 Then caused the latter folk to follow after ? 

[077_018]18 Thus deal We ever with the guilty. 

[077_019]19 Woe unto the repudiators on that day! 

[077_020]20 Did We not create you from a base fluid 

[077_021]21 Which We laid up in a safe abode 

[077_022]22 For a known term ? 

[077_023]23 Thus We arranged. How excellent is Our arranging! 

[077_024]24 Woe unto the repudiators on that day! 

[077_025]25 Have We not made the earth a receptacle 

[077_026]26 Both for the living and the dead, 

[077_027]27 And placed therein high mountains and given you to drink sweet water  therein ? 

[077_028]28 Woe unto the repudiators on that day! 

[077_029]29 (It will be said unto them:) Depart unto that (doom) which ye used to deny; 

[077_030]30 Depart unto the shadow falling threefold, 

[077_031]31 (Which yet is) no relief nor shelter from the flame. 

[077_032]32 Lo! it throweth up sparks like the castles, 

[077_033]33 (Or) as it might be camels of bright yellow hue. 

[077_034]34 Woe unto the repudiators on that day! 

[077_035]35 This is a day wherein they speak not, 

[077_036]36 Nor are they suffered to put forth excuses. 

[077_037]37 Woe unto the repudiators on that day! 

[077_038]38 This is the Day of Decision, We have brought you and the men of old  together. 

[077_039]39 If now ye have any wit, outwit Me. 

[077_040]40 Woe unto the repudiators on that day! 

[077_041]41 Lo! those who kept their duty are amid shade and fountains, 

[077_042]42 And fruits such as they desire. 

[077_043]43 (Unto them it is said:) Eat, drink and welcome, O ye blessed, in return for  what ye did. 

[077_044]44 Thus do We reward the good. 

[077_045]45 Woe unto the repudiators on that day! 

[077_046]46 Eat and take your ease (on earth) a little. Lo! ye are guilty. 

[077_047]47 Woe unto the repudiators on that day! 

[077_048]48 When it is said unto them: Bow down, they bow not down! 

[077_049]49 Woe unto the repudiators on that day! 

[077_050]50 In what statement, after this, will they believe ?

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

78. an-Naba': The Tidings

[078_001]1 Whereof do they question one another ? 

[078_002]2 (It is) of the awful tidings, 

[078_003]3 Concerning which they are in disagreement. 

[078_004]4 Nay, but they will come to know! 

[078_005]5 Nay, again, but they will come to know! 

[078_006]6 Have We not made the earth an expanse, 

[078_007]7 And the high hills bulwarks ? 

[078_008]8 And We have created you in pairs, 

[078_009]9 And have appointed your sleep for repose, 

[078_010]10 And have appointed the night as a cloak, 

[078_011]11 And have appointed the day for livelihood. 

[078_012]12 And We have built above you seven strong (heavens), 

[078_013]13 And have appointed a dazzling lamp, 

[078_014]14 And have sent down from the rainy clouds abundant water, 

[078_015]15 Thereby to produce grain and plant, 

[078_016]16 And gardens of thick foliage. 

[078_017]17 Lo! the Day of Decision is a fixed time, 

[078_018]18 A day when the trumpet is blown and ye come in multitudes, 

[078_019]19 And the heaven is opened and becometh as gates, 

[078_020]20 And the hills are set in motion and become as a mirage. 

[078_021]21 Lo! hell lurketh in ambush, 

[078_022]22 A home for the rebellious. 

[078_023]23 They will abide therein for ages. 

[078_024]24 Therein taste they neither coolness nor (any) drink 

[078_025]25 Save boiling water and a paralysing cold: 

[078_026]26 Reward proportioned (to their evil deeds). 

[078_027]27 For lo! they looked not for a reckoning; 

[078_028]28 They called Our revelations false with strong denial. 

[078_029]29 Everything have We recorded in a Book. 

[078_030]30 So taste (of that which ye have earned). No increase do We give you save of  torment. 

[078_031]31 Lo! for the duteous is achievement - 

[078_032]32 Gardens enclosed and vineyards, 

[078_033]33 And maidens for companions, 

[078_034]34 And a full cup. 

[078_035]35 There hear they never vain discourse, nor lying - 

[078_036]36 Requital from thy Lord - a gift in payment - 

[078_037]37 Lord of the heavens and the earth, and (all) that is between them, the  Beneficent; with Whom none can converse. 

[078_038]38 On the day when the angels and the Spirit stand arrayed, they speak not,  saving him whom the Beneficent alloweth and who speaketh right. 

[078_039]39 That is the True Day. So whoso will should seek recourse unto his Lord. 

[078_040]40 Lo! We warn you of a doom at hand, a day whereon a man will look on that  which his own hands have sent before, and the disbeliever will cry: "Would that I  were dust!"

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

79. an-Nazi`at: Those Who Pull Out

[079_001]1 By those who drag forth to destruction, 

[079_002]2 By the meteors rushing, 

[079_003]3 By the lone stars floating, 

[079_004]4 By the angels hastening, 

[079_005]5 And those who govern the event, 

[079_006]6 On the day when the first trump resoundeth. 

[079_007]7 And the second followeth it, 

[079_008]8 On that day hearts beat painfully 

[079_009]9 While eyes are downcast 

[079_010]10 (Now) they are saying: Shall we really be restored to our first state 

[079_011]11 Even after we are crumbled bones ? 

[079_012]12 They say: Then that would be a vain proceeding. 

[079_013]13 Surely it will need but one shout, 

[079_014]14 And lo! they will be awakened. 

[079_015]15 Hath there come unto thee the history of Moses ? 

[079_016]16 How his Lord called him in the holy vale of Tuwa, 

[079_017]17 (Saying:) Go thou unto Pharaoh - Lo! he hath rebelled - 

[079_018]18 And say (unto him): Hast thou (will) to grow (in grace) ? 

[079_019]19 Then I will guide thee to thy Lord and thou shalt fear (Him). 

[079_020]20 And he showed him the tremendous token. 

[079_021]21 But he denied and disobeyed, 

[079_022]22 Then turned he away in haste, 

[079_023]23 Then gathered he and summoned 

[079_024]24 And proclaimed: "I (Pharaoh) am your Lord the Highest." 

[079_025]25 So Allah seized him (and made him) an example for the after (life) and for  the former. 

[079_026]26 Lo! herein is indeed a lesson for him who feareth. 

[079_027]27 Are ye the harder to create, or is the heaven that He built ? 

[079_028]28 He raised the height thereof and ordered it; 

[079_029]29 And He made dark the night thereof, and He brought forth the morn thereof. 

[079_030]30 And after that He spread the earth, 

[079_031]31 And produced therefrom the water thereof and the pasture thereof, 

[079_032]32 And He made fast the hills, 

[079_033]33 A provision for you and for your cattle. 

[079_034]34 But when the great disaster cometh, 

[079_035]35 The day when man will call to mind his (whole) endeavour, 

[079_036]36 And hell will stand forth visible to him who seeth, 

[079_037]37 Then, as for him who rebelled 

[079_038]38 And chose the life of the world, 

[079_039]39 Lo! hell will be his home. 

[079_040]40 But as for him who feared to stand before his Lord and restrained his soul  from lust, 

[079_041]41 Lo! the Garden will be his home. 

[079_042]42 They ask thee of the Hour: when will it come to port ? 

[079_043]43 Why (ask they) ? What hast thou to tell thereof ? 

[079_044]44 Unto thy Lord belongeth (knowledge of) the term thereof. 

[079_045]45 Thou art but a warner unto him who feareth it. 

[079_046]46 On the day when they behold it, it will be as if they had but tarried for an  evening or the morn thereof.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

80. `Abasa: He Frowned

[080_001]1 He frowned and turned away 

[080_002]2 Because the blind man came unto him. 

[080_003]3 What could inform thee but that he might grow (in grace) 

[080_004]4 Or take heed and so the reminder might avail him ? 

[080_005]5 As for him who thinketh himself independent, 

[080_006]6 Unto him thou payest regard. 

[080_007]7 Yet it is not thy concern if he grow not (in grace). 

[080_008]8 But as for him who cometh unto thee with earnest purpose 

[080_009]9 And hath fear, 

[080_010]10 From him thou art distracted. 

[080_011]11 Nay, but verily it is an Admonishment, 

[080_012]12 So let whosoever will pay heed to it, 

[080_013]13 On honoured leaves 

[080_014]14 Exalted, purified, 

[080_015]15 (Set down) by scribes 

[080_016]16 Noble and righteous. 

[080_017]17 Man is (self-)destroyed: how ungrateful! 

[080_018]18 From what thing doth He create him ? 

[080_019]19 From a drop of seed. He createth him and proportioneth him, 

[080_020]20 Then maketh the way easy for him, 

[080_021]21 Then causeth him to die, and burieth him; 

[080_022]22 Then, when He will, He bringeth him again to life. 

[080_023]23 Nay, but (man) hath not done what He commanded him. 

[080_024]24 Let man consider his food: 

[080_025]25 How We pour water in showers 

[080_026]26 Then split the earth in clefts 

[080_027]27 And cause the grain to grow therein 

[080_028]28 And grapes and green fodder 

[080_029]29 And olive-trees and palm-trees 

[080_030]30 And garden-closes of thick foliage 

[080_031]31 And fruits and grasses: 

[080_032]32 Provision for you and your cattle. 

[080_033]33 But when the Shout cometh 

[080_034]34 On the day when a man fleeth from his brother 

[080_035]35 And his mother and his father 

[080_036]36 And his wife and his children, 

[080_037]37 Every man that day will have concern enough to make him heedless (of  others). 

[080_038]38 On that day faces will be bright as dawn, 

[080_039]39 Laughing, rejoicing at good news; 

[080_040]40 And other faces, on that day, with dust upon them, 

[080_041]41 Veiled in darkness, 

[080_042]42 Those are the disbelievers, the wicked.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

81. at-Takwir: The Cessation

[081_001]1 When the sun is overthrown, 

[081_002]2 And when the stars fall, 

[081_003]3 And when the hills are moved, 

[081_004]4 And when the camels big with young are abandoned, 

[081_005]5 And when the wild beasts are herded together, 

[081_006]6 And when the seas rise, 

[081_007]7 And when souls are reunited, 

[081_008]8 And when the girl-child that was buried alive is asked 

[081_009]9 For what sin she was slain, 

[081_010]10 And when the pages are laid open, 

[081_011]11 And when the sky is torn away, 

[081_012]12 And when hell is lighted, 

[081_013]13 And when the Garden is brought nigh, 

[081_014]14 (Then) every soul will know what it hath made ready. 

[081_015]15 Oh, but I call to witness the planets, 

[081_016]16 The stars which rise and set, 

[081_017]17 And the close of night, 

[081_018]18 And the breath of morning 

[081_019]19 That this is in truth the word of an honoured messenger, 

[081_020]20 Mighty, established in the presence of the Lord of the Throne, 

[081_021]21 (One) to be obeyed, and trustworthy; 

[081_022]22 And your comrade is not mad. 

[081_023]23 Surely he beheld Him on the clear horizon. 

[081_024]24 And he is not avid of the Unseen. 

[081_025]25 Nor is this the utterance of a devil worthy to be stoned. 

[081_026]26 Whither then go ye ? 

[081_027]27 This is naught else than a reminder unto creation, 

[081_028]28 Unto whomsoever of you willeth to walk straight. 

[081_029]29 And ye will not, unless (it be) that Allah willeth, the Lord of Creation.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

82. al-Infitar: The Cleaving Asunder

[082_001]1 When the heaven is cleft asunder, 

[082_002]2 When the planets are dispersed, 

[082_003]3 When the seas are poured forth, 

[082_004]4 And the sepulchres are overturned, 

[082_005]5 A soul will know what it hath sent before (it) and what left behind. 

[082_006]6 O man! What hath made thee careless concerning thy Lord, the Bountiful, 

[082_007]7 Who created thee, then fashioned, then proportioned thee ? 

[082_008]8 Into whatsoever form He will, He casteth thee. 

[082_009]9 Nay, but ye deny the Judgment. 

[082_010]10 Lo! there are above you guardians, 

[082_011]11 Generous and recording, 

[082_012]12 Who know (all) that ye do. 

[082_013]13 Lo! the righteous verily will be in delight. 

[082_014]14 And lo! the wicked verily will be in hell; 

[082_015]15 They will burn therein on the Day of Judgment, 

[082_016]16 And will not be absent thence. 

[082_017]17 Ah, what will convey unto thee what the Day of Judgment is! 

[082_018]18 Again, what will convey unto thee what the Day of Judgment is! 

[082_019]19 A day on which no soul hath power at all for any (other) soul. The (absolute)  command on that day is Allah's.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

83. at-Tatfif: The Defrauders

[083_001]1 Woe unto the defrauders: 

[083_002]2 Those who when they take the measure from mankind demand it full, 

[083_003]3 But if they measure unto them or weight for them, they cause them loss. 

[083_004]4 Do such (men) not consider that they will be raised again 

[083_005]5 Unto an Awful Day, 

[083_006]6 The day when (all) mankind stand before the Lord of the Worlds ? 

[083_007]7 Nay, but the record of the vile is in Sijjin - 

[083_008]8 Ah! what will convey unto thee what Sijjin is! - 

[083_009]9 A written record. 

[083_010]10 Woe unto the repudiators on that day! 

[083_011]11 Those who deny the Day of Judgment 

[083_012]12 Which none denieth save each criminal transgressor, 

[083_013]13 Who, when thou readest unto him Our revelations, saith: (Mere) fables of the  men of old. 

[083_014]14 Nay, but that which they have earned is rust upon their hearts. 

[083_015]15 Nay, but surely on that day they will be covered from (the mercy of) their  Lord. 

[083_016]16 Then lo! they verily will burn in hell, 

[083_017]17 And it will be said (unto them): This is that which ye used to deny. 

[083_018]18 Nay, but the record of the righteous is in 'Illiyin - 

[083_019]19 Ah, what will convey unto thee what 'Illiyin is! - 

[083_020]20 A written record, 

[083_021]21 Attested by those who are brought near (unto their Lord). 

[083_022]22 Lo! the righteous verily are in delight, 

[083_023]23 On couches, gazing, 

[083_024]24 Thou wilt know in their faces the radiance of delight. 

[083_025]25 They are given to drink of a pure wine, sealed, 

[083_026]26 Whose seal is musk - for this let (all) those strive who strive for bliss - 

[083_027]27 And mixed with water of Tasnim, 

[083_028]28 A spring whence those brought near (to Allah) drink. 

[083_029]29 Lo! the guilty used to laugh at those who believed, 

[083_030]30 And wink one to another when they passed them; 

[083_031]31 And when they returned to their own folk, they returned jesting; 

[083_032]32 And when they saw them they said: Lo! these have gone astray. 

[083_033]33 Yet they were not sent as guardians over them. 

[083_034]34 This day it is those who believe who have the laugh of disbelievers, 

[083_035]35 On high couches, gazing. 

[083_036]36 Are not the disbelievers paid for what they used to do ?

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

84. al-Inshiqaq: The Rending

[084_001]1 When the heaven is split asunder 

[084_002]2 And attentive to her Lord in fear, 

[084_003]3 And when the earth is spread out 

[084_004]4 And hath cast out all that was in her, and is empty 

[084_005]5 And attentive to her Lord in fear! 

[084_006]6 Thou, verily, O man, art working toward thy Lord a work which thou wilt  meet (in His presence). 

[084_007]7 Then whoso is given his account in his right hand 

[084_008]8 He truly will receive an easy reckoning 

[084_009]9 And will return unto his folk in joy. 

[084_010]10 But whoso is given his account behind his back, 

[084_011]11 He surely will invoke destruction 

[084_012]12 And be thrown to scorching fire. 

[084_013]13 He verily lived joyous with his folk, 

[084_014]14 He verily deemed that he would never return (unto Allah). 

[084_015]15 Nay, but lo! his Lord is ever looking on him! 

[084_016]16 Oh, I swear by the afterglow of sunset, 

[084_017]17 And by the night and all that it enshroudeth, 

[084_018]18 And by the moon when she is at the full, 

[084_019]19 That ye shall journey on from plane to plane. 

[084_020]20 What aileth them, then, that they believe not 

[084_021]21 And, when the Qur'an is recited unto them, worship not (Allah) ? 

[084_022]22 Nay, but those who disbelieve will deny; 

[084_023]23 And Allah knoweth best what they are hiding. 

[084_024]24 So give them tidings of a painful doom, 

[084_025]25 Save those who believe and do good works, for theirs is a reward unfailing.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

85. al-Buruj: the Constellations

[085_001]1 By the heaven, holding mansions of the stars, 

[085_002]2 And by the Promised Day. 

[085_003]3 And by the witness and that whereunto he beareth testimony, 

[085_004]4 (Self-)destroyed were the owners of the ditch 

[085_005]5 Of the fuel-fed fire, 

[085_006]6 When they sat by it, 

[085_007]7 And were themselves the witnesses of what they did to the believers. 

[085_008]8 They had naught against them save that they believed in Allah, the Mighty,  the Owner of Praise, 

[085_009]9 Him unto Whom belongeth the Sovereignty of the heavens and the earth; and  Allah is of all things the Witness. 

[085_010]10 Lo! they who persecute believing men and believing women and repent not,  theirs verily will be the doom of hell, and theirs the doom of burning. 

[085_011]11 Lo! those who believe and do good works, theirs will be Gardens underneath  which rivers flow. That is the Great Success. 

[085_012]12 Lo! the punishment of thy Lord is stern. 

[085_013]13 Lo! He it is Who produceth, then reproduceth, 

[085_014]14 And He is the Forgiving, the Loving, 

[085_015]15 Lord of the Throne of Glory, 

[085_016]16 Doer of what He will. 

[085_017]17 Hath there come unto thee the story of the hosts 

[085_018]18 Of Pharaoh and (the tribe of) Thamud ? 

[085_019]19 Nay, but those who disbelieve live in denial 

[085_020]20 And Allah, all unseen, surroundeth them. 

[085_021]21 Nay, but it is a glorious Qur'an. 

[085_022]22 On a guarded tablet.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

86. at-Tariq: The Night-Comer

[086_001]1 By the heaven and the Morning Star 

[086_002]2  - Ah, what will tell thee what the Morning Star is! 

[086_003]3 - The piercing Star! 

[086_004]4 No human soul but hath a guardian over it. 

[086_005]5 So let man consider from what he is created. 

[086_006]6 He is created from a gushing fluid 

[086_007]7 That issued from between the loins and ribs. 

[086_008]8 Lo! He verily is Able to return him (unto life) 

[086_009]9 On the day when hidden thoughts shall be searched out. 

[086_010]10 Then will he have no might nor any helper. 

[086_011]11 By the heaven which giveth the returning rain, 

[086_012]12 And the earth which splitteth (with the growth of trees and plants) 

[086_013]13 Lo! this (Qur'an) is a conclusive word, 

[086_014]14 It is no pleasantry. 

[086_015]15 Lo! they plot a plot (against thee, O Muhammad) 

[086_016]16 And I plot a plot (against them). 

[086_017]17 So give a respite to the disbelievers. Deal thou gently with them for a while.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

87. al-A`la: The Most High

[087_001]1 Praise the name of thy Lord the Most High, 

[087_002]2 Who createth, then disposeth; 

[087_003]3 Who measureth, then guideth; 

[087_004]4 Who bringeth forth the pasturage, 

[087_005]5 Then turneth it to russet stubble. 

[087_006]6 We shall make thee read (O Muhammad) so that thou shalt not forget 

[087_007]7 Save that which Allah willeth. Lo! He knoweth the disclosed and that which  still is hidden; 

[087_008]8 And We shall ease thy way unto the state of ease. 

[087_009]9 Therefor remind (men), for of use is the reminder. 

[087_010]10 He will heed who feareth, 

[087_011]11 But the most hapless will flout it, 

[087_012]12 He who will be flung to the great Fire 

[087_013]13 Wherein he will neither die nor live. 

[087_014]14 He is successful who groweth, 

[087_015]15 And remembereth the name of his Lord, so prayeth, 

[087_016]16 But ye prefer the life of the world 

[087_017]17 Although the Hereafter is better and more lasting. 

[087_018]18 Lo! This is in the former scrolls. 

[087_019]19 The Books of Abraham and Moses.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

88. al-Ghashiya: The Overwhelming Calamity

[088_001]1 Hath there come unto thee tidings of the Overwhelming ? 

[088_002]2 On that day (many) faces will be downcast, 

[088_003]3 Toiling, weary, 

[088_004]4 Scorched by burning fire, 

[088_005]5 Drinking from a boiling spring, 

[088_006]6 No food for them save bitter thorn-fruit 

[088_007]7 Which doth not nourish nor release from hunger. 

[088_008]8 In that day other faces will be calm, 

[088_009]9 Glad for their effort past, 

[088_010]10 In a high Garden 

[088_011]11 Where they hear no idle speech, 

[088_012]12 Wherein is a gushing spring, 

[088_013]13 Wherein are couches raised 

[088_014]14 And goblets set at hand 

[088_015]15 And cushions ranged 

[088_016]16 And silken carpets spread. 

[088_017]17 Will they not regard the camels, how they are created ? 

[088_018]18 And the heaven, how it is raised ? 

[088_019]19 And the hills, how they are set up ? 

[088_020]20 And the earth, how it is spread ? 

[088_021]21 Remind them, for thou art but a remembrancer, 

[088_022]22 Thou art not at all a warder over them. 

[088_023]23 But whoso is averse and disbelieveth, 

[088_024]24 Allah will punish him with direst punishment. 

[088_025]25 Lo! unto Us is their return 

[088_026]26 And Ours their reckoning.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

89. al-Fajr: The Dawn

[089_001]1 By the Dawn 

[089_002]2 And ten nights, 

[089_003]3 And the Even and the Odd, 

[089_004]4 And the night when it departeth, 

[089_005]5 There surely is an oath for thinking man. 

[089_006]6 Dost thou not consider how thy Lord dealt with (the tribe of) A'ad, 

[089_007]7 With many-columned Iram, 

[089_008]8 The like of which was not created in the lands; 

[089_009]9 And with (the tribe of) Thamud, who clove the rocks in the valley; 

[089_010]10 And with Pharaoh, firm of might, 

[089_011]11 Who (all) were rebellious (to Allah) in these lands, 

[089_012]12 And multiplied iniquity therein ? 

[089_013]13 Therefore thy Lord poured on them the disaster of His punishment. 

[089_014]14 Lo! thy Lord is ever watchful. 

[089_015]15 As for man, whenever his Lord trieth him by honouring him, and is gracious  unto him, he saith: My Lord honoureth me. 

[089_016]16 But whenever He trieth him by straitening his means of life, he saith: My  Lord despiseth me. 

[089_017]17 Nay, but ye (for your part) honour not the orphan 

[089_018]18 And urge not on the feeding of the poor. 

[089_019]19 And ye devour heritages with devouring greed. 

[089_020]20 And love wealth with abounding love. 

[089_021]21 Nay, but when the earth is ground to atoms, grinding, grinding, 

[089_022]22 And thy Lord shall come with angels, rank on rank, 

[089_023]23 And hell is brought near that day; on that day man will remember, but how  will the remembrance (then avail him) ? 

[089_024]24 He will say: Ah, would that I had sent before me (some provision) for my  life! 

[089_025]25 None punisheth as He will punish on that day! 

[089_026]26 None bindeth as He then will bind. 

[089_027]27 But ah! thou soul at peace! 

[089_028]28 Return unto thy Lord, content in His good pleasure! 

[089_029]29 Enter thou among My bondmen! 

[089_030]30 Enter thou My Garden!

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

90. al-Balad: The City

[090_001]1 Nay, I swear by this city - 

[090_002]2 And thou art an indweller of this city - 

[090_003]3 And the begetter and that which he begat, 

[090_004]4 We verily have created man in an atmosphere: 

[090_005]5 Thinketh he that none hath power over him ? 

[090_006]6 And he saith: I have destroyed vast wealth: 

[090_007]7 Thinketh he that none beholdeth him ? 

[090_008]8 Did We not assign unto him two eyes 

[090_009]9 And a tongue and two lips, 

[090_010]10 And guide him to the parting of the mountain ways ? 

[090_011]11 But he hath not attempted the Ascent - 

[090_012]12 Ah, what will convey unto thee what the Ascent is! - 

[090_013]13 (It is) to free a slave, 

[090_014]14 And to feed in the day of hunger. 

[090_015]15 An orphan near of kin, 

[090_016]16 Or some poor wretch in misery, 

[090_017]17 And to be of those who believe and exhort one another to perseverance and  exhort one another to pity. 

[090_018]18 Their place will be on the right hand. 

[090_019]19 But those who disbelieve Our revelations, their place will be on the left hand. 

[090_020]20 Fire will be an awning over them.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

91. ash-Shams: The Sun

[091_001]1 By the sun and his brightness, 

[091_002]2 And the moon when she followeth him, 

[091_003]3 And the day when it revealeth him, 

[091_004]4 And the night when it enshroudeth him, 

[091_005]5 And the heaven and Him Who built it, 

[091_006]6 And the earth and Him Who spread it, 

[091_007]7 And a soul and Him Who perfected it 

[091_008]8 And inspired it (with conscience of) what is wrong for it and (what is) right  for it. 

[091_009]9 He is indeed successful who causeth it to grow, 

[091_010]10 And he is indeed a failure who stunteth it. 

[091_011]11 (The tribe of) Thamud denied (the truth) in their rebellious pride, 

[091_012]12 When the basest of them broke forth 

[091_013]13 And the messenger of Allah said: It is the she-camel of Allah, so let her  drink! 

[091_014]14 But they denied him, and they hamstrung her, so Allah doomed them for  their sin and rased (their dwellings). 

[091_015]15 He dreadeth not the sequel (of events).

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

92. al-Layl: The Night

[092_001]1 By the night enshrouding 

[092_002]2 And the day resplendent 

[092_003]3 And Him Who hath created male and female, 

[092_004]4 Lo! your effort is dispersed (toward divers ends). 

[092_005]5 As for him who giveth and is dutiful (toward Allah) 

[092_006]6 And believeth in goodness; 

[092_007]7 Surely We will ease his way unto the state of ease. 

[092_008]8 But as for him who hoardeth and deemeth himself independent, 

[092_009]9 And disbelieveth in goodness; 

[092_010]10 Surely We will ease his way unto adversity. 

[092_011]11 His riches will not save him when he perisheth. 

[092_012]12 Lo! Ours it is (to give) the guidance 

[092_013]13 And lo! unto Us belong the latter portion and the former. 

[092_014]14 Therefor have I warned you of the flaming Fire 

[092_015]15 Which only the most wretched must endure, 

[092_016]16 He who denieth and turneth away. 

[092_017]17 Far removed from it will be the righteous 

[092_018]18 Who giveth his wealth that he may grow (in goodness). 

[092_019]19 And none hath with him any favour for reward, 

[092_020]20 Except as seeking (to fulfil) the purpose of his Lord Most High. 

[092_021]21 He verily will be content.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

93. ad-Duha: The Early Hours

[093_001]1 By the morning hours 

[093_002]2 And by the night when it is stillest, 

[093_003]3 Thy Lord hath not forsaken thee nor doth He hate thee, 

[093_004]4 And verily the latter portion will be better for thee than the former, 

[093_005]5 And verily thy Lord will give unto thee so that thou wilt be content. 

[093_006]6 Did He not find thee an orphan and protect (thee) ? 

[093_007]7 Did He not find thee wandering and direct (thee) ? 

[093_008]8 Did He not find thee destitute and enrich (thee) ? 

[093_009]9 Therefor the orphan oppress not, 

[093_010]10 Therefor the beggar drive not away, 

[093_011]11 Therefor of the bounty of thy Lord be thy discourse.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

94. al-Inshirah: The Expansion

[094_001]1 Have We not caused thy bosom to dilate, 

[094_002]2 And eased thee of the burden 

[094_003]3 Which weighed down thy back; 

[094_004]4 And exalted thy fame ? 

[094_005]5 But lo! with hardship goeth ease, 

[094_006]6 Lo! with hardship goeth ease; 

[094_007]7 So when thou art relieved, still toil 

[094_008]8 And strive to please thy Lord.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

95. at-Tin: The Fig

[095_001]1 By the fig and the olive, 

[095_002]2 By Mount Sinai, 

[095_003]3 And by this land made safe; 

[095_004]4 Surely We created man of the best stature 

[095_005]5 Then we reduced him to the lowest of the low, 

[095_006]6 Save those who believe and do good works, and theirs is a reward unfailing. 

[095_007]7 So who henceforth will give the lie to thee about the judgment ? 

[095_008]8 Is not Allah the most conclusive of all judges ?

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

96. al-`Alaq: The Clot

[096_001]1 Read: In the name of thy Lord Who createth, 

[096_002]2 Createth man from a clot. 

[096_003]3 Read: And thy Lord is the Most Bounteous, 

[096_004]4 Who teacheth by the pen, 

[096_005]5 Teacheth man that which he knew not. 

[096_006]6 Nay, but verily man is rebellious 

[096_007]7 That he thinketh himself independent! 

[096_008]8 Lo! unto thy Lord is the return. 

[096_009]9 Hast thou seen him who dissuadeth 

[096_010]10 A slave when he prayeth ? 

[096_011]11 Hast thou seen if he relieth on the guidance (of Allah) 

[096_012]12 Or enjoineth piety ? 

[096_013]13 Hast thou seen if he denieth (Allah's guidance) and is froward ? 

[096_014]14 Is he then unaware that Allah seeth ? 

[096_015]15 Nay, but if he cease not We will seize him by the forelock - 

[096_016]16 The lying, sinful forelock - 

[096_017]17 Then let him call upon his henchmen! 

[096_018]18 We will call the guards of hell. 

[096_019]19 Nay, Obey not thou him. But prostrate thyself, and draw near (unto Allah).

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

97. al-qadr: The Majesty

[097_001]1 Lo! We revealed it on the Night of Predestination. 

[097_002]2 Ah, what will convey unto thee what the Night of Power is! 

[097_003]3 The Night of Power is better than a thousand months. 

[097_004]4 The angels and the Spirit descend therein, by the permission of their Lord,  with all decrees. 

[097_005]5 (The night is) Peace until the rising of the dawn.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

98. al-Bayyinah: The Proof

[098_001]1 Those who disbelieve among the People of the Scripture and the idolaters  could not have left off (erring) till the clear proof came unto them, 

[098_002]2 A messenger from Allah, reading purified pages 

[098_003]3 Containing correct scriptures. 

[098_004]4 Nor were the People of the Scripture divided until after the clear proof came  unto them. 

[098_005]5 And they are ordered naught else than to serve Allah, keeping religion pure  for Him, as men by nature upright, and to establish worship and to pay the poor-due.  That is true religion. 

[098_006]6 Lo! those who disbelieve, among the People of the Scripture and the  idolaters, will abide in fire of hell. They are the worst of created beings. 

[098_007]7 (And) lo! those who believe and do good works are the best of created  beings. 

[098_008]8 Their reward is with their Lord: Gardens of Eden underneath which rivers  flow, wherein they dwell for ever. Allah hath pleasure in them and they have pleasure  in Him. This is (in store) for him who feareth his Lord.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

99. al-Zilzal: The Shaking

[099_001]1 When Earth is shaken with her (final) earthquake 

[099_002]2 And Earth yieldeth up her burdens, 

[099_003]3 And man saith: What aileth her ? 

[099_004]4 That day she will relate her chronicles, 

[099_005]5 Because thy Lord inspireth her. 

[099_006]6 That day mankind will issue forth in scattered groups to be shown their  deeds. 

[099_007]7 And whoso doeth good an atom's weight will see it then, 

[099_008]8 And whoso doeth ill an atom's weight will see it then.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

100. al-`Adiyat: The Assaulters

[100_001]1 By the snorting courses, 

[100_002]2 Striking sparks of fire 

[100_003]3 And scouring to the raid at dawn, 

[100_004]4 Then, therewith, with their trail of dust, 

[100_005]5 Cleaving, as one, the centre (of the foe), 

[100_006]6 Lo! man is an ingrate unto his Lord 

[100_007]7 And lo! he is a witness unto that; 

[100_008]8 And lo! in the love of wealth he is violent. 

[100_009]9 Knoweth he not that, when the contents of the graves are poured forth 

[100_010]10 And the secrets of the breasts are made known, 

[100_011]11 On that day will their Lord be perfectly informed concerning them.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

101. al-Qari`ah: The Terrible Calamity

[101_001]1 The Calamity! 

[101_002]2 What is the Calamity ? 

[101_003]3 Ah, what will convey unto thee what the Calamity is! 

[101_004]4 A day wherein mankind will be as thickly-scattered moths 

[101_005]5 And the mountains will become as carded wool. 

[101_006]6 Then, as for him whose scales are heavy (with good works), 

[101_007]7 He will live a pleasant life. 

[101_008]8 But as for him whose scales are light, 

[101_009]9 A bereft and Hungry One will be his mother, 

[101_010]10 Ah, what will convey unto thee what she is! - 

[101_011]11 Raging Fire.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

102. at-Takathur: Worldly Gain

[102_001]1 Rivalry in worldly increase distracteth you 

[102_002]2 Until ye come to the graves. 

[102_003]3 Nay, but ye will come to know! 

[102_004]4 Nay, but ye will come to know! 

[102_005]5 Nay, would that ye knew (now) with a sure knowledge! 

[102_006]6 For ye will behold hell-fire. 

[102_007]7 Aye, ye will behold it with sure vision. 

[102_008]8 Then, on that day, ye will be asked concerning pleasure.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

103. al-`Asr: Time

[103_001]1 By the declining day, 

[103_002]2 Lo! man is a state of loss, 

[103_003]3 Save those who believe and do good works, and exhort one another to truth  and exhort one another to endurance.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

104. al-Humazah: The Slanderer

[104_001]1 Woe unto every slandering traducer, 

[104_002]2 Who hath gathered wealth (of this world) and arranged it. 

[104_003]3 He thinketh that his wealth will render him immortal. 

[104_004]4 Nay, but verily he will be flung to the Consuming One. 

[104_005]5 Ah, what will convey unto thee what the Consuming One is! 

[104_006]6 (It is) the fire of Allah, kindled, 

[104_007]7 Which leapeth up over the hearts (of men). 

[104_008]8 Lo! it is closed in on them 

[104_009]9 In outstretched columns.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

105. al-Fil: The Elephant

[105_001]1 Hast thou not seen how thy Lord dealt with the owners of the Elephant ? 

[105_002]2 Did He not bring their stratagem to naught, 

[105_003]3 And send against them swarms of flying creatures, 

[105_004]4 Which pelted them with stones of baked clay, 

[105_005]5 And made them like green crops devoured (by cattle) ?

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

106. al-Quraysh: The Quraish

[106_001]1 For the taming of Qureysh. 

[106_002]2 For their taming (We cause) the caravans to set forth in winter and summer. 

[106_003]3 So let them worship the Lord of this House, 

[106_004]4 Who hath fed them against hunger and hath made them safe from fear.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

107. al-Ma`un: The Daily Necessaries

[107_001]1 Hast thou observed him who belieth religion ? 

[107_002]2 That is he who repelleth the orphan, 

[107_003]3 And urgeth not the feeding of the needy. 

[107_004]4 Ah, woe unto worshippers 

[107_005]5 Who are heedless of their prayer; 

[107_006]6 Who would be seen (at worship) 

[107_007]7 Yet refuse small kindnesses!

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

108. al-Kauthar: Abundance

[108_001]1 Lo! We have given thee Abundance; 

[108_002]2 So pray unto thy Lord, and sacrifice. 

[108_003]3 Lo! it is thy insulter (and not thou) who is without posterity.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

109. al-Kafirun: The Unbelievers

[109_001]1 Say: O disbelievers! 

[109_002]2 I worship not that which ye worship; 

[109_003]3 Nor worship ye that which I worship. 

[109_004]4 And I shall not worship that which ye worship. 

[109_005]5 Nor will ye worship that which I worship. 

[109_006]6 Unto you your religion, and unto me my religion.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

110. an-Nasr: The Help

[110_001]1 When Allah's succour and the triumph cometh 

[110_002]2 And thou seest mankind entering the religion of Allah in troops, 

[110_003]3 Then hymn the praises of thy Lord, and seek forgiveness of Him. Lo! He is  ever ready to show mercy.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

111. al-Lahab: The Flame

[111_001]1 The power of Abu Lahab will perish, and he will perish. 

[111_002]2 His wealth and gains will not exempt him. 

[111_003]3 He will be plunged in flaming Fire, 

[111_004]4 And his wife, the wood-carrier, 

[111_005]5 Will have upon her neck a halter of palm-fibre.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

112. al-Ikhlas: The Unity

[112_001]1 Say: He is Allah, the One! 

[112_002]2 Allah, the eternally Besought of all! 

[112_003]3 He begetteth not nor was begotten. 

[112_004]4 And there is none comparable unto Him.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

113. al-Falaq: The Daybreak

[113_001]1 Say: I seek refuge in the Lord of the Daybreak 

[113_002]2 From the evil of that which He created; 

[113_003]3 From the evil of the darkness when it is intense, 

[113_004]4 And from the evil of malignant witchcraft, 

[113_005]5 And from the evil of the envier when he envieth.

The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, by M.M. Pickthall, at sacred-texts.com

114. an-Nas: The Men

[114_001]1 Say: I seek refuge in the Lord of mankind, 

[114_002]2 The King of mankind, 

[114_003]3 The God of mankind, 

[114_004]4 From the evil of the sneaking whisperer, 

[114_005]5 Who whispereth in the hearts of mankind, 

[114_006]6 Of the jinn and of mankind


===== BOOK: pifb.txt =====


The Pink Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

The Pink Fairy Book

Edited by Andrew Lang

New York, London: Longmans, Green

[1897]

The Pink Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

Contents

[*Preface]

[*The Cat's Elopement.]

[*How the Dragon was Tricked]

[*The Goblin and the Grocer]

[*The House in the Wood]

[*Uraschimataro and the Turtle]

[*The Slaying of the Tanuki]

[*The Flying Trunk]

[*The Snow Man.]

[*The Shirt-Collar]

[*The Princess in the Chest]

[*The Three Brothers]

[*The Snow-queen]

[*The Fir-Tree]

[*Hans, the Mermaid's Son]

[*Peter Bull]

[*The Bird 'Grip']

[*Snowflake]

[*I know what I have learned]

[*The Cunning Shoemaker]

[*The King who would have a Beautiful Wife]

[*Catherine and her Destiny]

[*How the Hermit helped to win the King's Daughter]

[*The Water of Life]

[*The Wounded Lion]

[*The Man without a Heart]

[*The Two Brothers]

[*Master and Pupil]

[*The Golden Lion]

[*The Sprig of Rosemary]

[*The White Dove]

[*The Troll's Daughter]

[*Esben and the Witch]

[*Princess Minon-Minette]

[*Maiden Bright-eye]

[*The Merry Wives]

[*King Lindorm]

[*The Jackal, the Dove, and the Panther]

[*The Little Hare]

[*The Sparrow with the Slit Tongue]

[*The Story of Ciccu]

[*Don Giovanni de la Fortuna]

The Pink Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f00]

Preface

All people in the world tell nursery tales to their children. The Japanese tell them, the Chinese, the Red Indians by their camp fires, the Eskimo in their dark dirty winter huts. The Kaffirs of South Africa tell them, and the modern Greeks, just as the old Egyptians did, when Moses had not been many years rescued out of the bulrushes. The Germans, French, Spanish, Italians, Danes, Highlanders tell them also, and the stories are apt to be like each other everywhere. A child who has read the Blue and Red and Yellow Fairy Books will find some old friends with new faces in the Pink Fairy Book, if he examines and compares. But the Japanese tales will probably be new to the young student; the Tanuki is a creature whose acquaintance he may not have made before. He may remark that Andersen wants to 'point a moral,' as well as to 'adorn a tale;' that he is trying to make fun of the follies of mankind, as they exist in civilised countries. The Danish story of 'The Princess in the Chest' need not be read to a very nervous child, as it rather borders on a ghost story. It has been altered, and is really much more horrid in the language of the Danes, who, as history tells us, were not a nervous or timid people. I am quite sure that this story is not true. The other Danish and Swedish stories are not alarming. They are translated by Mr. W. A. Craigie. Those from the Sicilian (through the German) are translated, like the African tales (through the French) and the Catalan tales, and the Japanese stories (the latter through the German), and an old French story, by Mrs. Lang. Miss Alma Alleyne did the stories from Andersen, out of the German. Mr. Ford, as usual, has drawn the monsters and mermaids, the princes and giants, and the beautiful princesses, who, the Editor thinks, are, if possible, prettier than ever. Here, then, are fancies brought from all quarters: we see that black, white, and yellow peoples are fond of just the same kinds of adventures. Courage, youth, beauty, kindness, have many trials, but they always win the battle; while witches, giants, unfriendly cruel people, are on the losing hand. So it ought to be, and so, on the whole, it is and will be; and that is all the moral of fairy tales. We cannot all be young, alas ! and pretty, and strong; but nothing prevents us from being kind, and no kind man, woman, or beast or bird, ever comes to anything but good in these oldest fables of the world. So far all the tales are true, and no further.

The Pink Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f01]

The Cat's Elopement

[From the Japanische Marchen und Sagen, von David Brauns (Leipzig: Wilhelm Friedrich).]

Once upon a time there lived a cat of marvellous beauty, with a skin as soft and shining as silk, and wise green eyes, that could see even in the dark. His name was Gon, and he belonged to a music teacher, who was so fond and proud of him that he would not have parted with him for anything in the world.

Now not far from the music master's house there dwelt a lady who possessed a most lovely little pussy cat called Koma. She was such a little dear altogether, and blinked her eyes so daintily, and ate her supper so tidily, and when she had finished she licked her pink nose so delicately with her little tongue, that her mistress was never tired of saying, 'Koma, Koma, what should I do without you?'

Well, it happened one day that these two, when out for an evening stroll, met under a cherry tree, and in one moment fell madly in love with each other. Gon had long felt that it was time for him to find a wife, for all the ladies in the neighbourhood paid him so much attention that it made him quite shy; but he was not easy to please, and did not care about any of them. Now, before he had time to think, Cupid had entangled him in his net, and he was filled with love towards Koma. She fully returned his passion, but, like a woman, she saw the difficulties in the way, and consulted sadly with Gon as to the means of overcoming them. Gon entreated his master to set matters right by buying Koma, but her mistress would not part from her. Then the music master was asked to sell Gon to the lady, but he declined to listen to any such suggestion, so everything remained as before.

At length the love of the couple grew to such a pitch that they determined to please themselves, and to seek their fortunes together. So one moonlight night they stole away, and ventured out into an unknown world. All day long they marched bravely on through the sunshine, till they had left their homes far behind them, and towards evening they found themselves in a large park. The wanderers by this time were very hot and tired, and the grass looked very soft and inviting, and the trees cast cool deep shadows, when suddenly an ogre appeared in this Paradise, in the shape of a big, big dog! He came springing towards them showing all his teeth, and Koma shrieked, and rushed up a cherry tree. Gon, however, stood his ground boldly, and prepared to give battle, for he felt that Koma's eyes were upon him, and that he must not run away. But, alas! his courage would have availed him nothing had his enemy once touched him, for he was large and powerful, and very fierce. From her perch in the tree Koma saw it all, and screamed with all her might, hoping that some one would hear, and come to help. Luckily a servant of the princess to whom the park belonged was walking by, and he drove off the dog, and picking up the trembling Gon in his arms, carried him to his mistress.

So poor little Koma was left alone, while Gon was borne away full of trouble, not in the least knowing what to do. Even the attention paid him by the princess, who was delighted with his beauty and pretty ways, did not console him, but there was no use in fighting against fate, and he could only wait and see what would turn up.

The princess, Gon's new mistress, was so good and kind that everybody loved her, and she would have led a happy life, had it not been for a serpent who had fallen in love with her, and was constantly annoying her by his presence. Her servants had orders to drive him away as often as he appeared; but as they were careless, and the serpent very sly, it sometimes happened that he was able to slip past them, and to frighten the princess by appearing before her. One day she was seated in her room, playing on her favourite musical instrument, when she felt something gliding up her sash, and saw her enemy making his way to kiss her cheek. She shrieked and threw herself backwards, and Gon, who had been curled up on a stool at her feet, understood her terror, and with one bound seized the snake by his neck. He gave him one bite and one shake, and flung him on the ground, where he lay, never to worry the princess any more. Then she took Gon in her arms, and praised and caressed him, and saw that he had the nicest bits to eat, and the softest mats to lie on; and he would have had nothing in the world to wish for if only he could have seen Koma again.

Time passed on, and one morning Gon lay before the house door, basking in the sun. He looked lazily at the world stretched out before him, and saw in the distance a big ruffian of a cat teasing and ill-treating quite a little one. He jumped up, full of rage, and chased away the big cat, and then he turned to comfort the little one, when his heart nearly burst with joy to find that it was Koma. At first Koma did not know him again, he had grown so large and stately; but when it dawned upon her who it was, her happiness knew no bounds. And they rubbed their heads and their noses again and again, while their purring might have been heard a mile off.

Paw in paw they appeared before the princess, and told her the story of their life and its sorrows. The princess wept for sympathy, and promised that they should never more be parted, but should live with her to the end of their days. By-and-bye the princess herself got married, and brought a prince to dwell in the palace in the park. And she told him all about her two cats, and how brave Gon had been, and how he had delivered her from her enemy the serpent.

And when the prince heard, he swore they should never leave them, but should go with the princess wherever she went. So it all fell out as the princess wished; and Gon and Koma had many children, and so had the princess, and they all played together, and were friends to the end of their lives.

The Pink Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f02]

How the Dragon Was Tricked

From Griechtsche und Albanesische Marchen, von J. G. von Hahn. (Leipzig: Engelmann. 1864.)

Once upon a time there lived a man who had two sons but they did not get on at all well together, for the younger was much handsomer than his elder brother who was very jealous of him. When they grew older, things became worse and worse, and at last one day as they were walking through a wood the elder youth seized hold of the other, tied him to a tree, and went on his way hoping that the boy might starve to death.

However, it happened that an old and humpbacked shepherd passed the tree with his flock, and seeing the prisoner, he stopped and said to him, 'Tell me, my son why are you tied to that tree?'

'Because I was so crooked,' answered the young man; 'but it has quite cured me, and now my back is as straight as can be.'

'I wish you would bind me to a tree,' exclaimed the shepherd, 'so that my back would get straight.'

'With all the pleasure in life,' replied the youth. 'If you will loosen these cords I will tie you up with them as firmly as I can.'

This was soon done, and then the young man drove off the sheep, leaving their real shepherd to repent of his folly; and before he had gone very far he met with a horse boy and a driver of oxen, and he persuaded them to turn with him and to seek for adventures.

By these and many other tricks he soon became so celebrated that his fame reached the king's ears, and his majesty was filled with curiosity to see the man who had managed to outwit everybody. So he commanded his guards to capture the young man and bring him before him.

And when the young man stood before the king, the king spoke to him and said, 'By your tricks and the pranks that you have played on other people, you have, in the eye of the law, forfeited your life. But on one condition I will spare you, and that is, if you will bring me the flying horse that belongs to the great dragon. Fail in this, and you shall be hewn in a thousand pieces.'

'If that is all,' said the youth, 'you shall soon have it.'

So he went out and made his way straight to the stable where the flying horse was tethered. He stretched his hand cautiously out to seize the bridle, when the horse suddenly began to neigh as loud as he could. Now the room in which the dragon slept was just above the stable, and at the sound of the neighing he woke and cried to the horse, 'What is the matter, my treasure? is anything hurting you?' After waiting a little while the young man tried again to loose the horse, but a second time it neighed so loudly that the dragon woke up in a hurry and called out to know why the horse was making such a noise. But when the same thing happened the third time, the dragon lost his temper, and went down into the stable and took a whip and gave the horse a good beating. This offended the horse and made him angry, and when the young man stretched out his hand to untie his head, he made no further fuss, but suffered himself to be led quietly away. Once clear of the stable the young man sprang on his back and galloped off, calling over his shoulder, 'Hi! dragon! dragon! if anyone asks you what has become of your horse, you can say that I have got him!'

But the king said, 'The flying horse is all very well, but I want something more. You must bring me the covering with the little bells that lies on the bed of the dragon, or I will have you hewn into a thousand pieces.'

'Is that all?' answered the youth. 'That is easily done.'

And when night came he went away to the dragon's house and climbed up on to the roof. Then he opened a little window in the roof and let down the chain from which the kettle usually hung, and tried to hook the bed covering and to draw it up. But the little bells all began to ring, and the dragon woke and said to his wife, 'Wife, you have pulled off all the bed-clothes!' and drew the covering towards him, pulling, as he did so, the young man into the room. Then the dragon flung himself on the youth and bound him fast with cords saying as he tied the last knot, 'To-morrow when I go to church you must stay at home and kill him and cook him, and when I get back we will eat him together.'

So the following morning the dragoness took hold of the young man and reached down from the shelf a sharp knife with which to kill him. But as she untied the cords the better to get hold of him, the prisoner caught her by the legs, threw her to the ground, seized her and speedily cut her throat, just as she had been about to do for him, and put her body in the oven. Then he snatched up the covering and carried it to the king.

The king was seated on his throne when the youth appeared before him and spread out the covering with a deep bow. 'That is not enough,' said his majesty; 'you must bring me the dragon himself, or I will have you hewn into a thousand pieces.'

'It shall be done,' answered the youth; 'but you must give me two years to manage it, for my beard must grow so that he may not know me.'

'So be it,' said the king.

And the first thing the young man did when his beard was grown was to take the road to the dragon's house and on the way he met a beggar, whom he persuaded to change clothes with him, and in the beggar's garments he went fearlessly forth to the dragon.

He found his enemy before his house, very busy making a box, and addressed him politely, 'Good morning, your worship. Have you a morsel of bread?'

'You must wait,' replied the dragon, 'till I have finished my box, and then I will see if I can find one.'

'What will you do with the box when it is made?' inquired the beggar.

'It is for the young man who killed my wife, and stole my flying horse and my bed covering,' said the dragon.

'He deserves nothing better,' answered the beggar, 'for it was an ill deed. Still that box is too small for him, for he is a big man.'

'You are wrong,' said the dragon. 'The box is large enough even for me.'

'Well, the rogue is nearly as tall as you,' replied the beggar, 'and, of course, if you can get in, he can. But I am sure you would find it a tight fit.'

'No, there is plenty of room,' said the dragon, tucking himself carefully inside.

But no sooner was he well in, than the young man clapped on the lid and called out, 'Now press hard, just to see if he will be able to get out.'

The dragon pressed as hard as he could, but the lid never moved.

'It is all right,' he cried; 'now you can open it.'

But instead of opening it, the young man drove in long nails to make it tighter still; then he took the box on his back and brought it to the king. And when the king heard that the dragon was inside, he was so excited that he would not wait one moment, but broke the lock and lifted the lid just a little way to make sure he was really there. He was very careful not to leave enough space for the dragon to jump out, but unluckily there was just room for his great mouth, and with one snap the king vanished down his wide red jaws. Then the young man married the king's daughter and ruled over the land, but what he did with the dragon nobody knows.

The Pink Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f03]

The Goblin and the Grocer

Translated from the German of Hans Andersen.

There was once a hard-working student who lived in an attic, and he had nothing in the world of his own. There was also a hard-working grocer who lived on the first floor, and he had the whole house for his own.

The Goblin belonged to him, for every Christmas Eve there was waiting for him at the grocer's a dish of jam with a large lump of butter in the middle.

The grocer could afford this, so the Goblin stayed in the grocer's shop; and this teaches us a good deal. One evening the student came in by the back door to buy a candle and some cheese; he had no one to send, so he came himself.

He got what he wanted, paid for it, and nodded a good evening to the grocer and his wife (she was a woman who could do more than nod; she could talk).

When the student had said good night he suddenly stood still, reading the sheet of paper in which the cheese had been wrapped.

It was a leaf torn out of an old book--a book of poetry

'There's more of that over there!' said the grocer 'I gave an old woman some coffee for the book. If you like to give me twopence you can have the rest.'

'Yes,' said the student, 'give me the book instead of the cheese. I can eat my bread without cheese. It would be a shame to leave the book to be torn up. You are a clever and practical man, but about poetry you understand as much as that old tub over there!'

And that sounded rude as far as the tub was concerned, but the grocer laughed, and so did the student. It was only said in fun.

But the Goblin was angry that anyone should dare to say such a thing to a grocer who owned the house and sold the best butter.

When it was night and the shop was shut, and everyone was in bed except the student, the Goblin went upstairs and took the grocer's wife's tongue. She did not use it when she was asleep, and on whatever object in the room he put it that thing began to speak, and spoke out its thoughts and feelings just as well as the lady to whom it belonged. But only one thing at a time could use it, and that was a good thing, or they would have all spoken together.

The Goblin laid the tongue on the tub in which were the old newspapers.

'Is it true,' he asked, ' that you know nothing about poetry?'

'Certainly not!' answered the tub. 'Poetry is something that is in the papers, and that is frequently cut out. I have a great deal more in me than the student has, and yet I am only a small tub in the grocer's shop.'

And the Goblin put the tongue on the coffee-mill, and how it began to grind! He put it on the butter-cask, and on the till, and all were of the same opinion as the waste-paper tub. and one must believe the majority.

'Now I will tell the student!' and with these words he crept softly up the stairs to the attic where the student lived.

There was a light burning, and the Goblin peeped through the key-hole and saw that he was reading the torn book that he had bought in the shop.

But how bright it was! Out of the book shot a streak of light which grew into a large tree and spread its branches far above the student. Every leaf was alive, and every flower was a beautiful girl's head, some with dark and shining eyes, others with wonderful blue ones. Every fruit was a glittering star, and there was a marvellous music in the student's room. The little Goblin had never even dreamt of such a splendid sight, much less seen it.

He stood on tiptoe gazing and gazing, till the candle in the attic was put out; the student had blown it out and had gone to bed, but the Goblin remained standing outside listening to the music, which very softly and sweetly was now singing the student a lullaby.

'I have never seen anything like this!' said the Goblin. 'I never expected this! I must stay with the student.'

The little fellow thought it over, for he was a sensible Goblin. Then he sighed, 'The student has no jam!'

And on that he went down to the grocer again. And it was a good thing that he did go back, for the tub had nearly worn out the tongue. It had read everything that was inside it, on the one side, and was just going to turn itself round and read from the other side when the Goblin came in and returned the tongue to its owner.

But the whole shop, from the till down to the shavings, from that night changed their opinion of the tub, and they looked up to it, and had such faith in it that they were under the impression that when the grocer read the art and drama critiques out of the paper in the evenings, it all came from the tub.

But the Goblin could no longer sit quietly listening to the wisdom and intellect downstairs. No, as soon as the light shone in the evening from the attic it seemed to him as though its beams were strong ropes dragging him up, and he had to go and peep through the key-hole. There he felt the sort of feeling we have looking at the great rolling sea in a storm, and he burst into tears. He could not himself say why he wept, but in spite of his tears he felt quite happy. How beautiful it must be to sit under that tree with the student, but that he could not do; he had to content himself with the key-hole and be happy there!

There he stood out on the cold landing, the autumn wind blowing through the cracks of the floor. It was cold--very cold, but he first found it out when the light in the attic was put out and the music in the wood died away. Ah ! then it froze him, and he crept down again into his warm corner; there it was comfortable and cosy.

When Christmas came, and with it the jam with the large lump of butter, ah! then the grocer was first with him.

But in the middle of the night the Goblin awoke, hearing a great noise and knocking against the shutters--people hammering from outside. The watchman was blowing his horn: a great fire had broken out; the whole town was in flames.

Was it in the house? or was it at a neighbour's? Where was it?

The alarm increased. The grocer's wife was so terrified that she took her gold earrings out of her ears and put them in her pocket in order to save something. The grocer seized his account books. and the maid her black silk dress.

Everyone wanted to save his most valuable possession; so did the Goblin, and in a few leaps he was up the stairs and in the student's room. He was standing quietly by the open window looking at the fire that was burning in the neighbour's house just opposite. The Goblin seized the book lying on the table, put it in his red cap, and clasped it with both hands. The best treasure in the house was saved, and he climbed out on to the roof with it--on to the chimney. There he sat, lighted up by the flames from the burning house opposite, both hands holding tightly on his red cap, in which lay the treasure; and now he knew what his heart really valued most--to whom he really belonged. But when the fire was put out, and the Goblin thought it over--then--

'I will divide myself between the two,' he said. 'I cannot quite give up the grocer, because of the jam!'

And it is just the same with us. We also cannot quite give up the grocer--because of the jam.

The Pink Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f04]

The House in the Wood

From the German of Grimm.

A poor woodcutter lived with his wife and three daughters in a little hut on the borders of a great forest.

One morning as he was going to his work, he said to his wife, 'Let our eldest daughter bring me my lunch into the wood; and so that she shall not lose her way, I will take a bag of millet with me, and sprinkle the seed on the path.'

When the sun had risen high over the forest, the girl set out with a basin of soup. But the field and wood sparrows, the larks and finches, blackbirds and green finches had picked up the millet long ago, and the girl could not find her way.

She went on and on, till the sun set and night came on. The trees rustled in the darkness, the owls hooted, and she began to be very much frightened. Then she saw in tile distance a light that twinkled between the trees. 'There must be people living yonder,' she thought, 'who will take me in for the night,' and she began walking towards it.

Not long afterwards she came to a house with lights in the windows.

She knocked at the door, and a gruff voice called, 'Come in!'

The girl stepped into the dark entrance, and tapped at the door of the room.

'Just walk in,' cried the voice, and when she opened the door there sat an old gray-haired man at the table. His face was resting on his hands, and his white beard flowed over the table almost down to the ground.

By the stove lay three beasts, a hen, a cock, and a brindled cow. The girl told the old man her story, and asked for a night's lodging.

The man said:

Pretty cock, Pretty hen, And you, pretty brindled cow, What do you say now?

'Duks,' answered the beasts; and that must have meant, 'We are quite willing,' for the old man went on, 'Here is abundance; go into the back kitchen and cook us a supper.'

The girl found plenty of everything in the kitchen, and cooked a good meal, but she did not think of the beasts.

She placed the full dishes on the table, sat down opposite the gray-haired man, and ate till her hunger was appeased.

When she was satisfied, she said, 'But now I am so tired, where is a bed in which I can sleep? '

The beasts answered:

You have eaten with him, You have drunk with him, Of us you have not thought, Sleep then as you ought!

Then the old man said, 'Go upstairs, and there you will find a bedroom; shake the bed, and put clean sheets on, and go to sleep.'

The maiden went upstairs, and when she had made the bed, she lay down.

After some time the gray-haired man came, looked at her by the light of his candle, and shook his head. And when he saw that she was sound asleep, he opened a trapdoor and let her fall into the cellar.

The woodcutter came home late in the evening, and reproached his wife for leaving him all day without food.

'No, I did not,' she answered; 'the girl went off with your dinner. She must have lost her way, but will no doubt come back to-morrow.'

But at daybreak the woodcutter started off into the wood, and this time asked his second daughter to bring his food. 'I will take a bag of lentils,' said he; 'they are larger than millet, and the girl will see them better and be sure to find her way.'

At midday the maiden took the food, but the lentils had all gone; as on the previous day, the wood birds had eaten them all.

The maiden wandered about the wood till nightfall, when she came in the same way to the old man's house, and asked for food and a night's lodging.

The man with the white hair again asked the beasts:

Pretty cock, Pretty hen, And you, pretty brindled cow, What do you say now?

The beasts answered, 'Duks,' and everything happened as on the former day.

The girl cooked a good meal, ate and drank with the old man, and did not trouble herself about the animals.

And when she asked for a bed, they replied:

You have eaten with him You have drunk with him, Of us you have not thought, Now sleep as you ought!

And when she was asleep, the old man shook his head over her, and let her fall into the cellar.

On the third morning the woodcutter said to his wife, 'Send our youngest child to-day with my dinner. She is always good and obedient, and will keep to the right path, and not wander away like her sisters, idle drones!'

But the mother said, 'Must I lose my dearest child too?'

'Do not fear,' he answered; 'she is too clever and intelligent to lose her way. I will take plenty of peas with me and strew them along; they are even larger than lentils, and will show her the way.'

But when the maiden started off with the basket on her arm, the wood pigeons had eaten up the peas, and she did not know which way to go. She was much distressed, and thought constantly of her poor hungry father and her anxious mother. At last, when it grew dark, she saw the little light, and came to the house in the wood. She asked prettily if she might stay there for the night, and the man with the white beard asked his beasts again:

Pretty cock, Pretty hen, And you, pretty brindled cow, What do you say now?

'Duks,' they said. Then the maiden stepped up to the stove where the animals were lying, and stroked the cock and the hen, and scratched the brindled cow between its horns.

And when at the bidding of the old man she had prepared a good supper, and the dishes were standing on the table, she said, 'Shall I have plenty while the good beasts have nothing? There is food to spare outside; I will attend to them first.'

Then she went out and fetched barley and strewed it before the cock and hen, and brought the cow an armful of sweet-smelling hay.

'Eat that, dear beasts,' she said,' and when you are thirsty you shall have a good drink.'

Then she fetched a bowl of water, and the cock and hen flew on to the edge, put their beaks in, and then held up their heads as birds do when they drink, and the brindled cow also drank her fill. When the beasts were satisfied, the maiden sat down beside the old man at the table and ate what was left for her. Soon the cock and hen began to tuck their heads under their wings, and the brindled cow blinked its eyes, so the maiden said, 'Shall we not go to rest now?'

Pretty cock, Pretty hen, And you, pretty brindled cow, What do you say now?

The animals said, 'Duks:

You have eaten with us, You have drunk with us, You have tended us right, So we wish you good night.'

The maiden therefore went upstairs, made the bed and put on clean sheets and fell asleep. She slept peacefully till midnight, when there was such a noise in the house that she awoke. Everything trembled and shook; the animals sprang up and dashed themselves in terror against the wall; the beams swayed as if they would be torn from their foundations, it seemed as if the stairs were tumbling down, and then the roof fell in with a crash. Then all became still, and as no harm came to the maiden she lay down again and fell asleep. But when she awoke again in broad daylight, what a sight met her eyes! She was lying in a splendid room furnished with royal splendour; the walls were covered with golden flowers on a green ground; the bed was of ivory and the counterpane of velvet, and on a stool near by lay a pair of slippers studded with pearls. The maiden thought she must be dreaming, but in came three servants richly dressed, who asked what were her commands. 'Go,' said the maiden, 'I will get up at once and cook the old man's supper for him, and then I will feed the pretty cock and hen and the brindled cow.'

But the door opened and in came a handsome young man, who said, 'I am a king's son, and was condemned by a wicked witch to live as an old man in this wood with no company but that of my three servants, who were transformed into a cock, a hen, and a brindled cow. The spell could only be broken by the arrival of a maiden who should show herself kind not only to men but to beasts. You are that maiden, and last night at midnight we were freed, and this poor house was again transformed into my royal palace.

As they stood there the king's son told his three servants to go and fetch the maiden's parents to be present at the wedding feast.

'But where are my two sisters?' asked the maid.

'I shut them up in the cellar, but in the morning they shall be led forth into the forest and shall serve a charcoal burner until they have improved, and will never again suffer poor animals to go hungry.'

The Pink Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f05]

Uraschimataro and the Turtle

From the Japanische Marchen und Sagen, von David Brauns (Leipzig: Wilhelm Friedrich).

There was once a worthy old couple who lived on the coast, and supported themselves by fishing. They had only one child, a son, who was their pride and joy, and for his sake they were ready to work hard all day long, and never felt tired or discontented with their lot. This son's name was Uraschimataro, which means in Japanese, 'Son of the island,' and he was a fine well-grown youth and a good fisherman, minding neither wind nor weather. Not the bravest sailor in the whole village dared venture so far out to sea as Uraschimataro, and many a time the neighbours used to shake their heads and say to his parents, 'If your son goes on being so rash, one day he will try his luck once too often, and the waves will end by swallowing him up.' But Uraschimataro paid no heed to these remarks, and as he was really very clever in managing a boat, the old people were very seldom anxious about him.

One beautiful bright morning, as he was hauling his well-filled nets into the boat, he saw lying among the fishes a tiny little turtle. He was delighted with his prize, and threw it into a wooden vessel to keep till he got home, when suddenly the turtle found its voice, and tremblingly begged for its life. 'After all,' it said, 'what good can I do you? I am so young and small, and I would so gladly live a little longer. Be merciful and set me free, and I shall know how to prove my gratitude.'

Now Uraschimataro was very good-natured, and besides, he could never bear to say no, so he picked up the turtle, and put it back into the sea.

Years flew by, and every morning Uraschimataro sailed his boat into the deep sea. But one day as he was making for a little bay between some rocks, there arose a fierce whirlwind, which shattered his boat to pieces, and she was sucked under by the waves. Uraschimataro himself very nearly shared the same fate. But he was a powerful swimmer, and struggled hard to reach the shore. Then he saw a large turtle coming towards him, and above the howling of the storm he heard what it said: 'I am the turtle whose life you once saved. I will now pay my debt and show my gratitude. The land is still far distant, and without my help you would never get there. Climb on my back, and I will take you where you will.' Uraschimataro did not wait to be asked twice, and thankfully accepted his friend's help. But scarcely was he seated firmly on the shell, when the turtle proposed that they should not return to the shore at once, but go under the sea, and look at some of the wonders that lay hidden there.

Uraschimataro agreed willingly, and in another moment they were deep, deep down, with fathoms of blue water above their heads. Oh, how quickly they darted through the still, warm sea! The young man held tight, and marvelled where they were going and how long they were to travel, but for three days they rushed on, till at last the turtle stopped before a splendid palace, shining with gold and silver, crystal and precious stones, and decked here and there with branches of pale pink coral and glittering pearls. But if Uraschimataro was astonished at the beauty of the outside, he was struck dumb at the sight of the hall within, which was lighted by the blaze of fish scales.

'Where have you brought me?' he asked his guide in a low voice.

'To the palace of Ringu, the house of the sea god, whose subjects we all are,' answered the turtle. 'I am the first waiting maid of his daughter, the lovely princess Otohime, whom you will shortly see.'

Uraschimataro was still so puzzled with the adventures that had befallen him, that he waited in a dazed condition for what would happen next. But the turtle, who had talked so much of him to the princess that she had expressed a wish to see him, went at once to make known his arrival. And directly the princess beheld him her heart was set on him, and she begged him to stay with her, and in return promised that he should never grow old, neither should his beauty fade. 'Is not that reward enough?' she asked, smiling, looking all the while as fair as the sun itself. And Uraschimataro said 'Yes,' and so he stayed there. For how long? That he only knew later.

His life passed by, and each hour seemed happier than the last, when one day there rushed over him a terrible longing to see his parents. He fought against it hard, knowing how it would grieve the princess, but it grew on him stronger and stronger, till at length he became so sad that the princess inquired what was wrong. Then he told her of the longing he had to visit his old home, and that he must see his parents once more. The princess was almost frozen with horror, and implored him to stay with her, or something dreadful would be sure to happen. 'You will never come back, and we shall meet again no more,' she moaned bitterly. But Uraschimataro stood firm and repeated, 'Only this once will I leave you, and then will I return to your side for ever.' Sadly the princess shook her head, but she answered slowly, 'One way there is to bring you safely back, but I fear you will never agree to the conditions of the bargain.'

'I will do anything that will bring me back to you,' exclaimed Uraschimataro, looking at her tenderly, but the princess was silent: she knew too well that when he left her she would see his face no more. Then she took from a shelf a tiny golden box, and gave it to Uraschimataro, praying him to keep it carefully, and above all things never to open it. 'If you can do this,' she said as she bade him farewell, 'your friend the turtle will meet you at the shore, and will carry you back to me.'

Uraschimataro thanked her from his heart, and swore solemnly to do her bidding. He hid the box safely in his garments, seated himself on the back of the turtle, and vanished in the ocean path, waving his hand to the princess. Three days and three nights they swam through the sea, and at length Uraschimataro arrived at the beach which lay before his old home. The turtle bade him farewell, and was gone in a moment.

Uraschimataro drew near to the village with quick and joyful steps. He saw the smoke curling through the roof, and the thatch where green plants had thickly sprouted. He heard the children shouting and calling, and from a window that he passed came the twang of the koto, and everything seemed to cry a welcome for his return. Yet suddenly he felt a pang at his heart as he wandered down the street. After all, everything was changed. Neither men nor houses were those he once knew. Quickly he saw his old home; yes, it was still there, but it had a strange look. Anxiously he knocked at the door, and asked the woman who opened it after his parents. But she did not know their names, and could give him no news of them.

Still more disturbed, he rushed to the burying ground, the only place that could tell him what he wished to know. Here at any rate he would find out what it all meant. And he was right. In a moment he stood before the grave of his parents, and the date written on the stone was almost exactly the date when they had lost their son, and he had forsaken them for the Daughter of the Sea. And so he found that since he had deft his home, three hundred years had passed by.

Shuddering with horror at his discovery he turned back into the village street, hoping to meet some one who could tell him of the days of old. But when the man spoke, he knew he was not dreaming, though he felt as if he had lost his senses.

In despair he bethought him of the box which was the gift of the princess. Perhaps after all this dreadful thing was not true. He might be the victim of some enchanter's spell, and in his hand lay the countercharm. Almost unconsciously he opened it, and a purple vapour came pouring out. He held the empty box in his hand, and as he looked he saw that the fresh hand of youth had grown suddenly shrivelled, like the hand of an old, old man. He ran to the brook, which flowed in a clear stream down from the mountain. and saw himself reflected as in a mirror. It was the face of a mummy which looked back at him. Wounded to death, he crept back through the village, and no man knew the old, old man to be the strong handsome youth who had run down the street an hour before. So he toiled wearily back, till he reached the shore, and here he sat sadly on a rock, and called loudly on the turtle. But she never came back any more, but instead, death came soon, and set him free. But before that happened, the people who saw him sitting lonely on the shore had heard his story, and when their children were restless they used to tell them of the good son who from love to his parents had given up for their sakes the splendour and wonders of the palace in the sea, and the most beautiful woman in the world besides.

The Pink Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f06]

The Slaying of the Tanuki

From the Japanische Murchen und Sagen.

Near a big river, and between two high mountains, a man and his wife lived in a cottage a long, long time ago. A dense forest lay all round the cottage, and there was hardly a path or a tree in the whole wood that was not familiar to the peasant from his boyhood. In one of his wanderings he had made friends with a hare, and many an hour the two passed together, when the man was resting by the roadside, eating his dinner.

Now this strange friendship was observed by the Tanuki, a wicked, quarrelsome beast, who hated the peasant, and was never tired of doing him an ill turn. Again and again he had crept to the hut, and finding some choice morsel put away for the little hare, had either eaten it if he thought it nice, or trampled it to pieces so that no one else should get it, and at last the peasant lost patience, and made up his mind he would have the Tanuki's blood.

So for many days the man lay hidden, waiting for the Tanuki to come by, and when one morning he marched up the road thinking of nothing but the dinner he was going to steal, the peasant threw himself upon him and bound his four legs tightly, so that he could not move. Then he dragged his enemy joyfully to the house, feeling that at length he had got the better of the mischievous beast which had done him so many ill turns. 'He shall pay for them with his skin,' he said to his wife. 'We will first kill him, and then cook him.' So saying, he hanged the Tanuki, head downwards, to a beam, and went out to gather wood for a fire.

Meanwhile the old woman was standing at the mortar pounding the rise that was to serve them for the week with a pestle that made her arms ache with its weight. Suddenly she heard something whining and weeping in the corner, and, stopping her work, she looked round to see what it was. That was all that the rascal wanted, and he put on directly his most humble air, and begged the woman in his softest voice to loosen his bonds, which her hurting him sorely. She was filled with pity for him, but did not dare to set him free, as she knew that her husband would be very angry. The Tanuki, however, did not despair, and seeing that her heart was softened, began his prayers anew. 'He only asked to have his bonds taken from him,' he said. 'He would give his word not to attempt to escape, and if he was once set free he could soon pound her rice for her.' 'Then you can have a little rest,' he went on, 'for rice pounding is very tiring work, and not at all fit for weak women.' These last words melted the good woman completely, and she unfastened the bonds that held him. Poor foolish creature! In one moment the Tanuki had seized her, stripped off all her clothes, and popped her in the mortar. In a few minutes more she was pounded as fine as the rice; and not content with that, the Tanuki placed a pot on the hearth and made ready to cook the peasant a dinner from the flesh of his own wife!

When everything was complete he looked out of the door, and saw the old man coming from the forest carrying a large bundle of wood. Quick as lightning the Tanuki not only put on the woman's clothes, but, as he was a magician, assumed her form as well. Then he took the wood, kindled the fire, and very soon set a large dinner before the old man, who was very hungry, and had forgotten for the moment all about his enemy. But when the Tanuki saw that he had eaten his fill and would be thinking about his prisoner, he hastily shook off the clothes behind a door and took his own shape. Then he said to the peasant, 'You are a nice sort of person to seize animals and to talk of killing them! You are caught in your own net. It is your own wife that you have eaten, and if you want to find her bones you have only to look under the floor.' With these words he turned and made for the forest.

The old peasant grew cold with horror as he listened, and seemed frozen to the place where he stood. When he had recovered himself a little, he collected the bones of his dead wife, buried them in the garden, and swore over the grave to be avenged on the Tanuki. After everything was done he sat himself down in his lonely cottage and wept bitterly, and the bitterest thought of all was that he would never be able to forget that he had eaten his own wife.

While he was thus weeping and wailing his friend the hare passed by, and, hearing the noise, pricked up his ears and soon recognised the old man's voice. He wondered what had happened, and put his head in at the door and asked if anything was the matter. With tears and groans the peasant told him the whole dreadful story, and the hare, filled with anger and compassion, comforted him as best he could, and promised to help him in his revenge. 'The false knave shall not go unpunished,' said he.

So the first thing he did was to search the house for materials to make an ointment, which he sprinkled plentifully with pepper and then put in his pocket. Next he took a hatchet, bade farewell to the old man, and departed to the forest. He bent his steps to the dwelling of the Tanuki and knocked at the door. The Tanuki, who had no cause to suspect the hare, was greatly pleased to see him, for he noticed the hatchet at once, and began to lay plots how to get hold of it.

To do this he thought he had better offer to accompany the hare, which was exactly what the hare wished and expected, for he knew all the Tanuki's cunning, and understood his little ways. So he accepted the rascal's company with joy, and made himself very pleasant as they strolled along. When they were wandering in this manner through the forest the hare carelessly raised his hatchet in passing, and cut down some thick boughs that were hanging over the path, but at length, after cutting down a good big tree, which cost him many hard blows, he declared that it was too heavy for him to carry home, and he must just leave it where it was. This delighted the greedy Tanuki, who said that they would be no weight for him, so they collected the large branches, which the hare bound tightly on his back. Then he trotted gaily to the house, the hare following after with his lighter bundle.

By this time the hare had decided what he would do, and as soon as they arrived, he quietly set on fire the wood on the back of the Tanuki. The Tanuki, who was busy with something else, observed nothing, and only called out to ask what was the meaning of the crackling that he heard. 'It is just the rattle of the stones which are rolling down the side of the mountain,' the hare said; and the Tanuki was content, and made no further remarks, never noticing that the noise really sprang from the burning boughs on his back, until his fur was in flames, and it was almost too late to put it out. Shrieking with pain, he let fall the burning wood from his back, and stamped and howled with agony. But the hare comforted him, and told him that he always carried with him an excellent plaster in case of need, which would bring him instant relief, and taking out his ointment he spread it on a leaf of bamboo, and laid it on the wound. No sooner did it touch him than the Tanuki leapt yelling into the air, and the hare laughed, and ran to tell his friend the peasant what a trick he had played on their enemy. But the old man shook his head sadly, for he knew that the villain was only crushed for the moment, and that he would shortly be revenging himself upon them. No, the only way every to get any peace and quiet was to render the Tanuki harmless for ever. Long did the old man and the hare puzzle together how this was to be done, and at last they decided that they would make two boats, a small one of wood and a large one of clay. Then they fell to work at once, and when the boats were ready and properly painted, the hare went to the Tanuki, who was still very ill, and invited him to a great fish-catching. The Tanuki was still feeling angry with the hare about the trick he had played him, but he was weak and very hungry, so he gladly accepted the proposal, and accompanied the hare to the bank of the river, where the two boats were moored, rocked by the waves. They both looked exactly alike, and the Tanuki only saw that one was bigger than the other, and would hold more fish, so he sprang into the large one, while the hare climbed into the one which was made of wood. They loosened their moorings, and made for the middle of the stream, and when they were at some distance from the bank, the hare took his oar, and struck such a heavy blow at the other boat, that it broke in two. The Tanuki fell straight into the water, and was held there by the hare till he was quite dead. Then he put the body in his boat and rowed to land, and told the old man that his enemy was dead at last. And the old man rejoiced that his wife was avenged, and he took the hare into his house, and they lived together all their days in peace and quietness upon the mountain.

The Pink Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f07]

The Flying Trunk

Translated from the German of Hans Andersen.

There was once a merchant who was so rich that he could have paved the whole street, and perhaps even a little side-street besides, with silver. But he did not do that; he knew another way of spending his money. If he spent a shilling he got back a florin-such an excellent merchant he was till he died.

Now his son inherited all this money. He lived very merrily; he went every night to the theatre, made paper kites out of five-pound notes, and played ducks and drakes with sovereigns instead of stones. In this way the money was likely to come soon to an end, and so it did.

At last he had nothing left but four shillings, and he had no clothes except a pair of slippers and an old dressing-gown.

His friends did not trouble themselves any more about him; they would not even walk down the street with him.

But one of them who was rather good-natured sent him an old trunk with the message, 'Pack up!" That was all very well, but he had nothing to pack up, so he got into the trunk himself.

It was an enchanted trunk, for as soon as the lock was pressed it could fly. He pressed it, and away he flew in it up the chimney, high into the clouds, further and further away. But whenever the bottom gave a little creak he was in terror lest the trunk should go to pieces, for then he would have turned a dreadful somersault-just think of it!

In this way he arrived at the land of the Turks. He hid the trunk in a wood under some dry leaves, and then walked into the town. He could do that quite well, for all the Turks were dressed just as he was-in a dressing-gown and slippers.

He met a nurse with a little child.

'Halloa! you Turkish nurse,' said he, 'what is that great castle there close to the town? The one with the windows so high up?'

'The sultan's daughter lives there,' she replied. 'It is prophesied that she will be very unlucky in her husband, and so no one is allowed to see her except when the sultan and sultana are by.'

'Thank you,' said the merchant's son, and he went into the wood, sat himself in his trunk, flew on to the roof, and crept through the window into the princess's room.

She was lying on the sofa asleep, and was so beautiful that the young merchant had to kiss her. Then she woke up and was very much frightened, but he said he was a Turkish god who had come through the air to see her, and that pleased her very much.

They sat close to each other, and he told her a story about her eyes. They were beautiful dark lakes in which her thoughts swam about like mermaids. And her forehead was a snowy mountain, grand and shining. These were lovely stories.

Then he asked the princess to marry him, and she said yes at once.

'But you must come here on Saturday,' she said, 'for then the sultan and the sultana are coming to tea with me. They will be indeed proud that I receive the god of the Turks. But mind you have a really good story ready, for my parents like them immensely. My mother likes something rather moral and high-flown, and my father likes something merry to make him laugh.'

'Yes, I shall only bring a fairy story for my dowry,' said he, and so they parted. But the princess gave him a sabre set with gold pieces which he could use.

Then he flew away, bought himself a new dressing-gown, and sat down in the wood and began to make up a story, for it had to be ready by Saturday, and that was no easy matter.

When he had it ready it was Saturday.

The sultan, the sultana, and the whole court were at tea with the princess.

He was most graciously received.

'Will you tell us a story?' said the sultana; 'one that is thoughtful and instructive?'

'But something that we can laugh at,' said the sultan.

'Oh, certainly,' he replied, and began: 'Now, listen attentively. There was once a box of matches which lay between a tinder-box and an old iron pot, and they told the story of their youth.

'"We used to be on the green fir-boughs. Every morning and evening we had diamond-tea, which was the dew, and the whole day long we had sunshine, and the little birds used to tell us stories. We were very rich, because the other trees only dressed in summer, but we had green dresses in summer and in winter. Then the woodcutter came, and our family was split up. We have now the task of making light for the lowest people. That is why we grand people are in the kitchen."

'"My fate was quite different," said the iron pot, near which the matches lay.

'"Since I came into the world I have been many times scoured, and have cooked much. My only pleasure is to have a good chat with my companions when I am lying nice and clean in my place after dinner."

'"Now you are talking too fast," spluttered the fire.

'"Yes, let us decide who is the grandest!" said the matches.

'"No, I don't like talking about myself," said the pot.

'"Let us arrange an evening's entertainment. I will tell the story of my life.

'"On the Baltic by the Danish shore-"

'What a beautiful beginning!" said all the plates. "That's a story that will please us all."

'And the end was just as good as the beginning. All the plates clattered for joy.

'"Now I will dance," said the tongs, and she danced. Oh! how high she could kick!

'The old chair-cover in the corner split when he saw her.

'The urn would have sung but she said she had a cold; she could not sing unless she boiled.

'In the window was an old quill pen. There was nothing remarkable about her except that she had been dipped too deeply into the ink. But she was very proud of that.

'"If the urn will not sing," said she, "outside the door hangs a nightingale in a cage who will sing."

'"I don't think it's proper," said the kettle, "that such a foreign bird should be heard."

'"Oh, let us have some acting," said everyone. "Do let us!"

'Suddenly the door opened and the maid came in. Everyone was quite quiet. There was not a sound. But each pot knew what he might have done, and how grand he was.

'The maid took the matches and lit the fire with them. How they spluttered and flamed, to be sure! "Now everyone can see," they thought, "that we are the grandest! How we sparkle! What a light-"

'But here they were burnt out.'

'That was a delightful story!' said the sultana. 'I quite feel myself in the kitchen with the matches. Yes, now you shall marry our daughter.'

'Yes, indeed,' said the sultan, 'you shall marry our daughter on Monday.' And they treated the young man as one of the family.

The wedding was arranged, and the night before the whole town was illuminated.

Biscuits and gingerbreads were thrown among the people, the street boys stood on tiptoe crying hurrahs and whistling through their fingers. It was all splendid.

'Now I must also give them a treat,' thought the merchant's son. And so he bought rockets, crackers, and all the kinds of fireworks you can think of, put them in his trunk, and flew up with them into the air.

Whirr-r-r, how they fizzed and blazed!

All the Turks jumped so high that their slippers flew above their heads; such a splendid glitter they had never seen before.

Now they could quite well understand that it was the god of the Turks himself who was to marry the princess.

As soon as the young merchant came down again into the wood with his trunk he thought, 'Now I will just go into the town to see how the show has taken.'

And it was quite natural that he should want to do this.

Oh! what stories the people had to tell!

Each one whom he asked had seen it differently, but they had all found it beautiful.

'I saw the Turkish god himself,' said one. 'He had eyes like glittering stars, and a beard like foaming water.'

'He flew away in a cloak of fire,' said another. They were splendid things that he heard, and the next day was to be his wedding day.

Then he went back into the wood to sit in his trunk; but what had become of it? The trunk had been burnt. A spark of the fireworks had set it alight, and the trunk was in ashes. He could no longer fly, and could never reach his bride.

She stood the whole day long on the roof and waited; perhaps she is waiting there still.

But he wandered through the world and told stories; though they are not so merry as the one he told about the matches.

The Pink Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f08]

The Snow-man

Translated from the German of Hans Andersen.

'How astonishingly cold it is! My body is cracking all over!' said the Snow-man. 'The wind is really cutting one's very life out! And how that fiery thing up there glares!' He meant the sun, which was just setting. 'It sha'n't make me blink, though, and I shall keep quite cool and collected.'

Instead of eyes he had two large three-cornered pieces of slate in his head; his mouth consisted of an old rake, so that he had teeth as well.

He was born amidst the shouts and laughter of the boys, and greeted by the jingling bells and cracking whips of the sledges.

The sun went down, the full moon rose, large, round, clear and beautiful, in the dark blue sky.

'There it is again on the other side!' said the Snow-man, by which he meant the sun was appearing again. 'I have become quite accustomed to its glaring. I hope it will hang there and shine, so that I may be able to see myself. I wish I knew, though, how one ought to see about changing one's position. I should very much like to move about. If I only could, I would glide up and down the ice there, as I saw the boys doing; but somehow or other, I don't know how to run.'

'Bow-wow!' barked the old yard-dog; he was rather hoarse and couldn't bark very well. His hoarseness came on when he was a house-dog and used to lie in front of the stove. 'The sun will soon teach you to run! I saw that last winter with your predecessor, and farther back still with his predecessors! They have all run away!'

'I don't understand you, my friend,' said the Snow-man. 'That thing up there is to teach me to run?' He meant the moon. 'Well, it certainly did run just now, for I saw it quite plainly over there, and now here it is on this side.'

'You know nothing at all about it,' said the yard-dog. 'Why, you have only just been made. The thing you see there is the moon; the other thing you saw going down the other side was the sun. He will come up again tomorrow morning, and will soon teach you how to run away down the gutter. The weather is going to change; I feel it already by the pain in my left hind-leg; the weather is certainly going to change.'

'I can't understand him,' said the Snow-man; 'but I have an idea that he is speaking of something unpleasant. That thing that glares so, and then disappears, the sun, as he calls it, is not my friend. I know that by instinct.'

'Bow-wow!' barked the yard-dog, and walked three times round himself, and then crept into his kennel to sleep. The weather really did change. Towards morning a dense damp fog lay over the whole neighbourhood; later on came an icy wind, which sent the frost packing. But when the sun rose, it was a glorious sight. The trees and shrubs were covered with rime, and looked like a wood of coral, and every branch was thick with long white blossoms. The most delicate twigs, which are lost among the foliage in summer-time, came now into prominence, and it was like a spider's web of glistening white. The lady-birches waved in the wind; and when the sun shone, everything glittered and sparkled as if it were sprinkled with diamond dust, and great diamonds were lying on the snowy carpet.

'Isn't it wonderful?' exclaimed a girl who was walking with a young man in the garden. They stopped near the Snow-man, and looked at the glistening trees. 'Summer cannot show a more beautiful sight,' she said, with her eyes shining.

'And one can't get a fellow like this in summer either,' said the young man, pointing to the Snow-man. 'He's a beauty!'

The girl laughed, and nodded to the Snow-man, and then they both danced away over the snow.

'Who were those two?' asked the Snow-man of the yard-dog. 'You have been in this yard longer than I have. Do you know who they are?'

'Do I know them indeed?' answered the yard-dog. 'She has often stroked me, and he has given me bones. I don't bite either of them!'

'But what are they?' asked the Snow-man.

'Lovers!' replied the yard-dog. 'They will go into one kennel and gnaw the same bone!'

'Are they the same kind of beings that we are?' asked the Snow-man.

'They are our masters,' answered the yard-dog. 'Really people who have only been in the world one day know very little.' That's the conclusion I have come to. Now I have age and wisdom; I know everyone in the house, and I can remember a time when I was not lying here in a cold kennel. Bow-wow!'

'The cold is splendid,' said the Snow-man. 'Tell me some more. But don't rattle your chain so, it makes me crack!'

'Bow-wow!' barked the yard-dog. 'They used to say I was a pretty little fellow; then I lay in a velvet-covered chair in my master's house. My mistress used to nurse me, and kiss and fondle me, and call me her dear, sweet little Alice! But by-and-by I grew too big, and I was given to the housekeeper, and I went into the kitchen. You can see into it from where you are standing; you can look at the room in which I was master, for so I was when I was with the housekeeper. Of course it was a smaller place than upstairs, but it was more comfortable, for I wasn't chased about and teased by the children as I had been before. My food was just as good, or even better. I had my own pillow, and there was a stove there, which at this time of year is the most beautiful thing in the world. I used to creep right under that stove. Ah me! I often dream of that stove still! Bow-wow!'

'Is a stove so beautiful?' asked the Snow-man. 'Is it anything like me?'

'It is just the opposite of you! It is coal-black, and has a long neck with a brass pipe. It eats firewood, so that fire spouts out of its mouth. One has to keep close beside it-quite underneath is the nicest of all. You can see it through the window from where you are standing.'

And the Snow-man looked in that direction, and saw a smooth polished object with a brass pipe. The flicker from the fire reached him across the snow. The Snow-man felt wonderfully happy, and a feeling came over him which he could not express; but all those who are not snow-men know about it.

'Why did you leave her?' asked the Snow-man. He had a feeling that such a being must be a lady. 'How could you leave such a place?'

'I had to!' said the yard-dog. 'They turned me out of doors, and chained me up here. I had bitten the youngest boy in the leg, because he took away the bone I was gnawing; a bone for a bone, I thought! But they were very angry, and from that time I have been chained here, and I have lost my voice. Don't you hear how hoarse I am? Bow-wow! I can't speak like other dogs. Bow-wow! That was the end of happiness!'

The Snow-man, however, was not listening to him any more; he was looking into the room where the housekeeper lived, where the stove stood on its four iron legs, and seemed to be just the same size as the Snow-man.

'How something is cracking inside me!' he said. 'Shall I never be able to get in there? It is certainly a very innocent wish, and our innocent wishes ought to be fulfilled. I must get there, and lean against the stove, if I have to break the window first!'

'You will never get inside there!' said the yard-dog; 'and if you were to reach the stove you would disappear. Bow-wow!'

'I'm as good as gone already!' answered the Snow-man. 'I believe I'm breaking up!'

The whole day the Snow-man looked through the window; towards dusk the room grew still more inviting; the stove gave out a mild light, not at all like the moon or even the sun; no, as only a stove can shine, when it has something to feed upon. When the door of the room was open, it flared up-this was one of its peculiarities; it flickered quite red upon the Snow-man's white face.

'I can't stand it any longer!' he said. 'How beautiful it looks with its tongue stretched out like that!'

It was a long night, but the Snow-man did not find it so; there he stood, wrapt in his pleasant thoughts, and they froze, so that he cracked.

Next morning the panes of the kitchen window were covered with ice, and the most beautiful ice-flowers that even a snow-man could desire, only they blotted out the stove. The window would not open; he couldn't see the stove which he thought was such a lovely lady. There was a cracking and cracking inside him and all around; there was just such a frost as a snow-man would delight in. But this Snow-man was different: how could he feel happy?

'Yours is a bad illness for a Snow-man!' said the yard-dog. 'I also suffered from it, but I have got over it. Bow-wow!' he barked. 'The weather is going to change!' he added.

The weather did change. There came a thaw.

When this set in the Snow-man set off. He did not say anything, and he did not complain, and those are bad signs.

One morning he broke up altogether. And lo! where he had stood there remained a broomstick standing upright, round which the boys had built him!

'Ah! now I understand why he loved the stove,' said the yard-dog. 'That is the raker they use to clean out the stove! The Snow-man had a stove-raker in his body! That's what was the matter with him! And now it's all over with him! Bow-wow!'

And before long it was all over with the winter too! 'Bow-wow!' barked the hoarse yard-dog.

But the young girl sang:

Woods, your bright green garments don! Willows, your woolly gloves put on! Lark and cuckoo, daily sing-- February has brought the spring! My heart joins in your song so sweet; Come out, dear sun, the world to greet!

And no one thought of the Snow-man.

The Pink Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f09]

The Shirt-collar

Translated from the German of Hans Andersen.

There was once a fine gentleman whose entire worldly possessions consisted of a boot-jack and a hair-brush; but he had the most beautiful shirt-collar in the world, and it is about this that we are going to hear a story.

The shirt-collar was so old that he began to think about marrying; and it happened one day that he and a garter came into the wash-tub together.

'Hulloa!' said the shirt-collar, 'never before have I seen anything so slim and delicate, so elegant and pretty! May I be permitted to ask your name?'

'I shan't tell you,' said the garter.

'Where is the place of your abode?' asked the shirt-collar.

But the garter was of a bashful disposition, and did not think it proper to answer.

'Perhaps you are a girdle?' said the shirt-collar, 'an under girdle? for I see that you are for use as well as for ornament, my pretty miss!'

'You ought not to speak to me!' said the garter' 'I'm sure I haven't given you any encouragement!'

'When anyone is as beautiful as you,' said the shirt-collar, 'is not that encouragement enough?'

'Go away, don't come so close!' said the garter. 'You seem to be a gentleman!'

'So I am, and a very fine one too!' said the shirt-collar; 'I possess a boot-jack and a hair-brush!'

That was not true; it was his master who owned these things; but he was a terrible boaster.

'Don't come so close,' said the garter. 'I'm not accustomed to such treatment!'

'What affectation!' said the shirt-collar. And then they were taken out of the wash-tub, starched, and hung on a chair in the sun to dry, and then laid on the ironing-board. Then came the glowing iron.

'Mistress widow!' said the shirt-collar, 'dear mistress widow! I am becoming another man, all my creases are coming out; you are burning a hole in me! Ugh! Stop, I implore you!'

'You rag!' said the iron, travelling proudly over the shirt-collar, for it thought it was a steam engine and ought to be at the station drawing trucks.

'Rag!' it said.

The shirt-collar was rather frayed out at the edge, so the scissors came to cut off the threads.

'Oh!' said the shirt-collar, 'you must be a dancer! How high you can kick! That is the most beautiful thing I have ever s een! No man can imitate you!'

'I know that!' said the scissors.

'You ought to be a duchess!' said the shirt-collar. 'My worldly possessions consist of a fine gentleman, a boot-jack, and a hair-brush. If only I had a duchy!'

'What! He wants to marry me?' said the scissors, and she was so angry that she gave the collar a sharp snip, so that it had to be cast aside as good for nothing.

'Well, I shall have to propose to the hair-brush!' thought the shirt-collar. 'It is really wonderful what fine hair you have, madam! Have you never thought of marrying?'

'Yes, that I have!' answered the hair-brush; 'I'm engaged to the boot-jack!'

'Engaged!' exclaimed the shirt-collar. And now there was no one he could marry, so he took to despising matrimony.

Time passed, and the shirt-collar came in a rag-bag to the paper-mill. There was a large assortment of rags, the fine ones in one heap, and the coarse ones in another, as they should be. They had all much to tell, but no one more than the shirt-collar, for he was a hopeless braggart.

'I have had a terrible number of love affairs!' he said. 'They give me no peace. I was such a fine gentleman, so stiff with starch! I had a boot-jack and a hair-brush, which I never used! You should just have seen me then! Never shall I forget my first love! She was a girdle, so delicate and soft and pretty! She threw herself into a wash-tub for my sake! Then there was a widow, who glowed with love for me. But I left her alone, till she became black. Then there was the dancer, who inflicted the wound which has caused me to be here now; she was very violent! My own hair-brush was in love with me, and lost all her hair in consequence. Yes, I have experienced much in that line; but I grieve most of all for the garter,-I mean, the girdle, who threw herself into a wash-tub. I have much on my conscience; it is high time for me to become white paper!'

And so he did! he became white paper, the very paper on which this story is printed. And that was because he had boasted so terribly about things which were not true. We should take this to heart, so that it may not happen to us, for we cannot indeed tell if we may not some day come to the rag-bag, and be made into white paper, on which will be printed our whole history, even the most secret parts, so that we too go about the world relating it, like the shirt-collar.

The Pink Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f10]

The Princess in the Chest

Translated from the Danish.

There were once a king and a queen who lived in a beautiful castle, and had a large, and fair, and rich, and happy land to rule over. From the very first they loved each other greatly, and lived very happily together, but they had no heir.

They had been married for seven years, but had neither son nor daughter, and that was a great grief to both of them. More than once it happened that when the king was in a bad temper, he let it out on the poor queen, and said that here they were now, getting old, and neither they nor the kingdom had an heir, and it was all her fault. This was hard to listen to, and she went and cried and vexed herself.

Finally, the king said to her one day, 'This can't be borne any longer. I go about childless, and it's your fault. I am going on a journey and shall be away for a year. If you have a child when I come back again, all will be well, and I shall love you beyond all measure, and never more say an angry word to you. But if the nest is just as empty when I come home, then I must part with you.'

After the king had set out on his journey, the queen went about in her loneliness, and sorrowed and vexed herself more than ever. At last her maid said to her one day, 'I think that some help could be found, if your majesty would seek it.' Then she told about a wise old woman in that country, who had helped many in troubles of the same kind, and could no doubt help the queen as well, if she would send for her. The queen did so, and the wise woman came, and to her she confided her sorrow, that she, was childless, and the king and his kingdom had no heir.

The wise woman knew help for this. 'Out in the king's garden,' said she, 'under the great oak that stands on the left hand, just as one goes out from the castle, is a little bush, rather brown than green, with hairy leaves and long spikes. On that bush there are just at this moment three buds. If your majesty goes out there alone, fasting, before sunrise, and takes the middle one of the three buds, and eats it, then in six months you will bring a princess into the world. As soon as she is born, she must have a nurse, whom I shall provide, and this nurse must live with the child in a secluded part of the palace; no other person must visit the child; neither the king nor the queen must see it until it is fourteen years old, for that would cause great sorrow and misfortune.'

The queen rewarded the old woman richly, and next morning, before the sun rose, she was down in the garden, found at once the little bush with the three buds, plucked the middle one and ate it. It was sweet to taste, but afterwards was as bitter as gall. Six months after this, she brought into the world a little girl. There was a nurse in readiness, whom the wise woman had provided, and preparations were made for her living with the child, quite alone, in a secluded wing of the castle, looking out on the pleasure-park. The queen did as the wise woman had told her; she gave up the child immediately, and the nurse took it and lived with it there.

When the king came home and heard that a daughter had been born to him, he was of course very pleased and happy, and wanted to see her at once.

The queen had then to tell him this much of the story, that it had been foretold that it would cause great sorrow and misfortune if either he or she got a sight of the child until it had completed its fourteenth year.

This was a long time to wait. The king longed so much to get a sight of his daughter, and the queen no less than he, but she knew that it was not like other children, for it could speak immediately after it was born, and was as wise as older folk. This the nurse had told her, for with her the queen had a talk now and again, but there was no one who had ever seen the princess. The queen had also seen what the wise woman could do, so she insisted strongly that her warning should be obeyed. The king often lost his patience, and was determined to see his daughter, but the queen always put him off the idea, and so things went on, until the very day before the princess completed her fourteenth year.

The king and the queen were out in the garden then, and the king said, 'Now I can't and I won't wait any longer. I must see my daughter at once. A few hours, more or less, can't make any difference.'

The queen begged him to have patience till the morning. When they had waited so long, they could surely wait a single day more. But the king was quite unreasonable. 'No nonsense,' said he; 'she is just as much mine as yours, and I will see her,' and with that he went straight up to her room.

He burst the door open, and pushed aside the nurse, who tried to stop him, and there he saw his daughter. She was the loveliest young princess, red and white, like milk and blood, with clear blue eyes and golden hair, but right in the middle of her forehead there was a little tuft of brown hair.

The princess went to meet her father, fell on his neck and kissed him, but with that she said, 'O father, father! what have you done now? to-morrow I must die, and you must choose one of three things: either the land must be smitten with the black pestilence, or you must have a long and bloody war, or you must as soon as I am dead, lay me in a plain wooden chest, and set it in the church, and for a whole year place a sentinel beside it every night.'

The king was frightened indeed, and thought she was raving, but in order to please her, he said, 'Well, of these three things I shall choose the last; if you die, I shall lay you at once in a plain wooden chest, and have it set in the church, and every night I shall place a sentinel beside it. But you shall not die, even if you are ill now.'

He immediately summoned all the best doctors in the country, and they came with all their prescriptions and their medicine bottles, but next day the princess was stiff and cold in death. All the doctors could certify to that and they all put their names to this and appended their seals, and then they had done all they could.

The king kept his promise. The princess's body was lain the same day in a plain wooden chest, and set in the chapel of the castle, and on that night and every night after it, a sentinel was posted in the church, to keep watch over the chest.

The first morning when they came to let the sentinel out, there was no sentinel there. They thought he had just got frightened and run away, and next evening a new one was posted in the church. In the morning he was also gone. So it went every night. When they came in the morning to let the sentinel out, there was no one there, and it was impossible to discover which way he had gone if he had run away. And what should they run away for, every one of them, so that nothing more was over heard or seen of them, from the hour that they were set on guard beside the princess's chest?

It became now a general belief that the princess's ghost walked, and ate up all those who were to guard her chest, and very soon there was no one left who would be placed on this duty, and the king's soldiers deserted the service, before their turn came to be her bodyguard. The king then promised a large reward to the soldier who would volunteer for the post. This did for some time, as there were found a few reckless fellows, who wished to earn this good payment. But they never got it, for in the morning, they too had disappeared like the rest.

So it had gone on for something like a whole year; every night a sentinel had been placed beside the chest, either by compulsion or of his own free will, but not a single one of the sentinels was to be seen, either on the following day or any time thereafter. And so it had also gone with one, on the night before a certain day, when a merry young smith came wandering to the town where the king's castle stood. It was the capital of the country, and people of every king came to it to get work. This smith, whose name was Christian, had come for that same purpose. There was no work for him in the place he belonged to, and he wanted now to seek a place in the capital.

There he entered an inn where he sat down in the public room, and got something to eat. Some under-officers were sitting there, who were out to try to get some one enlisted to stand sentry. They had to go in this way, day after day, and hitherto they had always succeeded in finding one or other reckless fellow. But on this day they had, as yet, found no one. It was too well known how all the sentinels disappeared, who were set on that post, and all that they had got hold of had refused with thanks. These sat down beside Christian, and ordered drinks, and drank along with him. Now Christian was a merry fellow who liked good company; he could both drink and sing, and talk and boast as well, when he got a little drop in his head. He told these under-officers that he was one of that kind of folk who never are afraid of anything. Then he was just the kind of man they liked, said they, and he might easily earn a good penny, before he was a day older, for the king paid a hundred dollars to anyone who would stand as sentinel in the church all night, beside his daughter's chest.

Christian was not afraid of that he wasn't afraid of anything, so they drank another bottle of wine on this, and Christian went with them up to the colonel, where he was put into uniform with musket, and all the rest, and was then shut up in the church, to stand as sentinel that night.

It was eight o'clock when he took up his post, and for the first hour he was quite proud of his courage; during the second hour he was well pleased with the large reward that he would get, but in the third hour, when it was getting near eleven, the effects of the wine passed off, and he began to get uncomfortable, for he had heard about this post; that no one had ever escapeed alive from it, so far as was known. But neither did anyone know what had become of all the sentinels. The thought of this ran in his head so much, after the wine was out of it, that he searched about everywhere for a way of escape, and finally, at eleven o'clock, he found a little postern in the steeple which was not locked, and out at this he crept, intending to run away.

At the same moment as he put his foot outside the church door, he saw standing before him a little man, who said, 'Good evening, Christian, where are you going?'

With that he felt as if he were rooted to the spot and could not move.

'Nowhere,' said he.

'Oh, yes,' said the little man, 'You were just about to run away, but you have taken upon you to stand sentinel in the church to-night, and there you must stay.'

Christian said, very humbly, that he dared not, and therefore wanted to get away, and begged to be let go.

'No,' said the little one, 'you must remain at your post, but I shall give you a piece of good advice; you shall go up into the pulpit, and remain standing there. You need never mind what you see or hear, it will not be able to do you any harm, if you remain in your place until you hear the lid of the chest slam down again behind the dead; then all danger is past, and you can go about the church, wherever you please.'

The little man then pushed him in at the door again, and locked it after him. Christian made haste to get up into the pulpit, and stood there, without noticing anything, until the clock struck twelve. Then the lid of the princess's chest sprang up, and out of it there came something like the princess, dressed as you see in the picture. It shrieked and howled, 'Sentry, where are you? Sentry, where are you? If you don't come, you shall get the most cruel death anyone had ever got.'

It went all round the church, and when it finally caught sight of the smith, up in the pulpit, it came rushing thither and mounted the steps. But it could not get up the whole way, and for all that it stretched and strained, it could not touch Christian, who meanwhile stood and trembled up in the pulpit. When the clock struck one, the appearance had to go back into the chest again, and Christian heard the lid slam after it. After this there was dead silence in the church. He lay down where he was and fell asleep, and did not awake before it was bright daylight, and he heard steps outside, and the noise of the key being put into the lock. Then he came down from the pulpit, and stood with his musket in front of the princess's chest.

It was the colonel himself who came with the patrol, and he was not a little surprised when he found the recruit safe and sound. He wanted to have a report, but Christian would give him none, so he took him straight up to the king, and announced for the first time that here was the sentinel who had stood guard in the church over-night. The king immediately got out of bed, and laid the hundred dollars for him on the table, and then wanted to question him. 'Have you seen anything?' said he. 'Have you seen my daughter?' 'I have stood at my post,' said the young smith, 'and that is quite enough; I undertook nothing more.' He was not sure whether he dared tell what he had seen and heard, and besides he was also a little conceited because he had done what no other man had been able to do, or had had courage for. The king professed to be quite satisfied, and asked him whether he would engage himself to stand on guard again the following night. 'No, thank you,' said Christian, 'I will have no more of that!'

'As you please,' said the king, 'you have behaved like a brave fellow, and now you shall have your breakfast. You must be needing something to strengthen you after that turn.'

The king had breakfast laid for him, and sat down at the table with him in person; he kept constantly filling his glass for him and praising him, and drinking his health. Christian needed no pressing, but did full justice both to the food and drink, and not least to the latter. Finally he grew bold, and said that if the king would give him two hundred dollars for it, he was his man to stand sentry next night as well.

When this was arranged, Christian bade him 'Good-day,' and went down among the guards, and then out into the town along with other soldiers and under-officers. He had his pocket full of money, and treated them, and drank with them and boasted and made game of the good-for-nothings who were afraid to stand on guard, because they were frightened that the dead princess would eat them. See whether she had eaten him! So the day passed in mirth and glee, but when eight o'clock came, Christian was again shut up in the church, all alone.

Before he had been there two hours, he got tired of it, and thought only of getting away. He found a little door behind the altar which was not locked, and at ten o'clock he slipped out at it, and took to his heels and made for the beach. He had got half-way thither, when all at once the same little man stood in front of him and said, 'Good evening, Christian, where are you going?' 'I've leave to go where I please,' said the smith, but at the same time he noticed that he could not move a foot. 'No, you have undertaken to keep guard to-night as well,' said the little man, 'and you must attend to that.' He then took hold of him, and however unwilling he was, Christian had to go with him right back to the same little door that he had crept out at. When they got there, the little man said to him, 'Go in front of the altar now, and take in your hand the book that is lying there. There you shall stay till you hear the lid of the chest slam down over the dead. In that way you will come to no harm.'

With that the little man shoved him in at the door, and locked it. Christian then immediately went in front of the altar, and took the book in his hand, and stood thus until the clock struck twelve, and the appearance sprang out of the chest. 'Sentry, where are you? Sentry, where are you?' it shrieked, and then rushed to the pulpit, and right up into it. But there was no one there that night. Then it howled and shrieked again,

My father has set no sentry in, War and Pest this night begin.

At the same moment, it noticed the smith standing in front of the altar, and came rushing towards him. 'Are you there?' it screamed; 'now I'll catch you.' But it could not come up over the step in front of the altar, and there it continued to howl, and scream, and threaten, until the clock struck one, when it had to go into the chest again, and Christian heard the lid slam above it. That night, however, it had not the same appearance as on the previous one; it was less ugly.

When all was quiet in the church, the smith lay down before the altar and slept calmly till the following morning, when the colonel came to fetch him. He was taken up to the king again, and things went on as the day before. He got his money, but would give no explanation whether he had seen the king's daughter, and he would not take the post again, he said. But after he had got a good breakfast, and tasted well of the king's wines, he undertook to go on guard again the third night, but he would not do it for less than the half of the kingdom, he said, for it was a dangerous post, and the king had to agree, and promise him this.

The remainder of the day went like the previous one. He played the boastful soldier, and the merry smith, and he had comrades and boon-companions in plenty. At eight o'clock he had to put on his uniform again, and was shut up in the church. He had not been there for an hour before he had come to his senses, and thought, 'It's best to stop now, while the game is going well.' The third night, he was sure, would be the worst; he had been drunk when he promised it, and the half of the kingdom, the king could never have been in earnest about that! So he decided to leave, without waiting so long as on the previous nights. In that way he would escape the little man who had watched him before. All the doors and posterns were locked, but he finally though of creeping up to a window, and opening that, and as the clock struck nine, he crept out there. It was fairly high in the wall, but he got to the ground with no bones broken, and started to run. He got down to the shore without meeting anyone, and there he got into a boat, and pushed off from land. He laughed immensely to himself at the thought of how cleverly he had managed and how he had cheated the little man. Just then he heard a voice from the shore, 'Good evening, Christian, where are you going?' He gave no answer. 'To-night your legs will be too short,' he thought, and pulled at the oars. But he then felt something lay hold of the boat, and drag it straight in to shore, for all that he sat and struggled with the oars.

The man then laid hold of him, and said, 'You must remain at your post, as you have promised,' and whether he liked it or not, Christian had just to go back with him the whole way to the church.

He could never get in at that window again, Christian said; it was far too high up.

'You must go in there, and you shall go in there,' said the little man, and with that he lifted him up on to the window-sill. Then he said to him: 'Notice well now what you have to do. This evening you must stretch yourself out on the left-hand side of her chest. The lid opens to the right, and she comes out to the left. When she has got out of the chest and passed over you, you must get into it and lie there, and that in a hurry, without her seeing you. There you must remain lying until day dawns, and whether she threatens you or entreats you, you must not come out of it, or give her any answer. Then she has no power over you, and both you and she are freed.'

The smith then had to go in at the window, just as he came out, and went and laid himself all his length on the left side of the princess's chest, close up to it, and there he lay stiff as a rock until the clock struck twelve. Then the lid sprang up to the right, and the princess came out, straight over him, and rushed round the church, howling and shrieking 'Sentry, where are you? Sentry, where are you?' She went towards the altar, and right up to it, but there was no one there; then she screamed again,

My father has set no sentry in, War and Pest will now begin.

Then she went round the whole church, both up and down, sighing and weeping,

My father has set no sentry in, War and Pest will now begin.

Then she went away again, and at the same moment the clock in the tower struck one.

Then the smith heard in the church a soft music, which grew louder and louder, and soon filled the whole building. He heard also a multitude of footsteps, as if the church was being filled with people. He heard the priest go through the service in front of the altar, and there was singing more beautiful than he had ever heard before. Then he also heard the priest offer up a prayer of thanksgiving because the land had been freed from war and pestilence, and from all misfortune, and the king's daughter delivered from the evil one. Many voices joined in, and a hymn of praise was sung; then he heard the priest again, and heard his own name and that of the princess, and thought that he was being wedded to her. The church was packed full, but he could see nothing. Then he heard again the many footsteps as ol' folk leaving the church, while the music sounded fainter and fainter, until it altogether died away. When it was silent, the light of day began to break in through the windows.

The smith sprang up out of the chest and fell on his knees and thanked God. The church was empty, but up in front of the altar lay the princess, white and red, like a human being, but sobbing and crying, and shaking with cold in her white shroud. The smith took his sentry coat and wrapped it round her; then she dried her tears, and took his hand and thanked him, and said that he had now freed her from all the sorcery that had been in her from her birth, and which had come over her again when her father broke the command against seeing her until she had completed her fourteenth year.

She said further, that if he who had delivered her would take her in marriage, she would be his. If not, she would go into a nunnery, and he could marry no other as long as she lived, for he was wedded to her with the service of the dead, which he had heard.

She was now the most beautiful young princess that anyone could wish to see, and he was now lord of half the kingdom, which had been promised him for standing on guard the third nigh. So they agreed that they would have each other, and love each other all their days.

With the first sunbeam the watch came and opened the church, and not only was the colonel there, but the king in person, come to see what had happened to the sentinel. He found them both sitting hand in hand on the step in front of the altar, and immediately knew his daughter again, and took her in his arms, thanking God and her deliverer. He made no objections to what they had arranged, and so Christian the smith held his wedding with the princess, and got half the kingdom at once, and the whole of it when the king died.

As for the other sentries, with so many doors and windows open, no doubt they had run away, and gone into the Prussian service. And as for what Christian said he saw, he had been drinking more wine than was good for him.

The Pink Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f11]

The Three Brothers

Translated from the German of the Brothers Grimm.

There was once a man who had three sons, and no other possessions beyond the house in which he lived. Now the father loved his three sons equally, so that he could not make up his mind which of them should have the house after his death, because he did not wish to favour any one more than the others. And he did not want to sell the house, because it had belonged to his family for generations; otherwise he could have divided the money equally amongst them. At last an idea struck him, and he said to his sons: 'You must all go out into the owrld, and look about you, and each learn a trade, and then, when you return, whoever can produce the best masterpiece shall have the house.'

The sons were quite satisfied. The eldest wished to be a blacksmith, the second a barber, and the third a fencing-master. They appointed a time when they were to return home, and then they all set out.

It so happened that each found a good master, where he learnt all that was necessary for his trade in the best possible way. The blacksmith had to shoe the king's horses, and thought to himself, 'Without doubt the house will be yours!' The barber shaved the best men in the kingdom, and he, too, made sure that the house would be his. The fencing-master received many a blow, but he set his teeth, and would not allow himself to be troubled by them, for he thought to himself, 'If you are afraid of a blow you will never get the house.'

When the appointed time had come the three brothers met once more, and they sat down and discussed the best opportunity of showing off their skill. Just then a hare came running across the field towards them. 'Look!' said the barber, 'here comes something in the nick of time!' seized basin and soap, made a lather whilst the hare was approaching, and then, as it ran at full tilt, shaved its moustaches, without cutting it or injuring a single hair on its body.

'I like that very much indeed,' said the father. 'Unless the others exert themselves to the utmost, the house will be yours.'

Soon after they saw a man driving a carriage furiously towards them. 'Now, father, you shall see what I can do!' said the blacksmith, and he sprang after the carriage, tore off the four shoes of the horse as it was going at the top of its speed, and shod it with four new ones without checking its pace. 'You are a clever fellow!' said the father, 'and know your trade as well as your brother. I really don't know to which of you I shall give the house.'

Then the third son said, 'Father, let me also show you something;' and, as it was beginning to rain, he drew his sword and swung it in cross cuts above his head, so that not a drop fell on him, and the rain fell heavier and heavier, till at last it was coming down like a waterspout, but he swung his sword faster and faster, and kept as dry as if he were under cover.

When the father saw this he was astonished, and said, 'You have produced the greatest masterpiece: the house is yours.'

Both the other brothers were quite satisfied, and praised him too, and as they were so fond of each other they all three remained at home and plied their trades: and as they were so experienced and skilful they earned a great deal of money. So they lived happily together till they were quite old, and when one was taken ill and died the two others were so deeply grieved that they were also taken ill and died too. And so, because they had all been so clever, and so fond of each other, they were all laid in one grave.

The Pink Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f12]

The Snow-queen

Translated from the German of Hans Andersen by Miss Alma Alleyne.

There was once a dreadfully wicked hobgoblin. One day he was in capital spirits because he had made a looking-glass which reflected everything that was good and beautiful in such a way that it dwindled almost to nothing, but anything that was bad and ugly stood out very clearly and looked much worse. The most beautiful landscapes looked like boiled spinach, and the best people looked repulsive or seemed to stand on their heads with no bodies; their faces were so changed that they could not be recognised, and if anyone had a freckle you might be sure it would be spread over the nose and mouth.

That was the best part of it, said the hobgoblin.

But one day the looking-glass was dropped, and it broke into a million-billion and more pieces.

And now came the greatest misfortune of all, for each of the pieces was hardly as large as a grain of sand and they flew about all over the world, and if anyone had a bit in his eye there it stayed, and then he would see everything awry, or else could only see the bad sides of a case. For every tiny splinter of the glass possessed the same power that the whole glass had.

Some people got a splinter in their hearts, and that was dreadful, for then it began to turn into a lump of ice.

The hobgoblin laughed till his sides ached, but still the tiny bits of glass flew about.

And now we will hear all about it.

In a large town, where there were so many people and houses that there was not room enough for everybody to have gardens, lived two poor children. They were not brother and sister, but they loved each other just as much as if they were. Their parents lived opposite one another in two attics, and out on the leads they had put two boxes filled with flowers. There were sweet peas in it, and two rose trees, which grow beautifully, and in summer the two children were allowed to take their little chairs and sit out under the roses. Then they had splendid games.

In the winter they could not do this, but then they put hot pennies against the frozen window-panes, and made round holes to look at each other through.

His name was Kay, and hers was Gerda.

Outside it was snowing fast.

'Those are the white bees swarming,' said the old grandmother.

'Have they also a queen bee?' asked the little boy, for he knew that the real bees have one.

'To be sure,' said the grandmother. 'She flies wherever they swarm the thickest. She is larger than any of them, and never stays upon the earth, but flies again up into the black clouds. Often at midnight she flies through the streets, and peeps in at all the windows, and then they freeze in such pretty patterns and look like flowers.'

'Yes, we have seen that,' said both children; they knew that it was true.

'Can the Snow-queen come in here?' asked the little girl.

'Just let her!' cried the boy, 'I would put her on the stove, and melt her!'

But the grandmother stroked his hair, and told some more stories.

In the evening, when little Kay was going to bed, he jumped on the chair by the window, and looked through the little hole. A few snow-flakes were falling outside, and one of the, the largest, lay on the edge of one of the window-boxes. The snow-flake grew larger and larger till it took the form of a maiden, dressed in finest white gauze.

She was so beautiful and dainty, but all of ice, hard bright ice.

Still she was alive; her eyes glittered like two clear stars, but there was no rest or peace in them. She nodded at the window, and beckoned with her hand. The little boy was frightened, and sprang down from the chair. It seemed as if a great white bird had flown past the window.

The next day there was a harder frost than before.

Then came the spring, then the summer, when the roses grew and smelt more beautifully than ever.

Kay and Gerda were looking at one of their picture-books--the clock in the great church-tower had just struck five, when Kay exclaimed, 'Oh! something has stung my heart, and I've got something in my eye!'

The little girl threw her arms round his neck; he winked hard with both his eyes; no, she could see nothing in them.

'I think it is gone now,' said he; but it had not gone. It was one of the tiny splinters of the glass of the magic mirror which we have heard about, that turned everything great and good reflected in it small and ugly. And poor Kay had also a splinter in his heart, and it began to change into a lump of ice. It did not hurt him at all, but the splinter was there all the same.

'Why are you crying?' he asked; 'it makes you look so ugly! There's nothing the matter with me. Just look! that rose is all slug-eaten, and this one is stunted! What ugly roses they are!'

And he began to pull them to pieces.

'Kay, what are you doing?' cried the little girl.

And when he saw how frightened she was, he pulled off another rose, and ran in at his window away from dear little Gerda.

When she came later on with the picture book, he said that it was only fit for babies, and when his grandmother told them stories, he was always interrupting with, 'But--' and then he would get behind her and put on her spectacles, and speak just as she did. This he did very well, and everybody laughed. Very soon he could imitate the way all the people in the street walked and talked.

His games were now quite different. On a winter's day he would take a burning glass and hold it out on his blue coat and let the snow-flakes fall on it.

'Look in the glass, Gerda! Just see how regular they are! They are much more interesting than real flowers. Each is perfect; they are all made according to rule. If only they did not melt!'

One morning Kay came out with his warm gloves on, and his little sledge hung over his shoulder. He shouted to Gerda, 'I am going to the market-place to play with the other boys,' and away he went.

In the market-place the boldest boys used often to fasten their sledges to the carts of the farmers, and then they got a good ride.

When they were in the middle of their games there drove into the square a large sledge, all white, and in it sat a figure dressed in a rough white fur pelisse with a white fur cap on.

The sledge drove twice round the square, and Kay fastened his little sledge behind it and drove off. It went quicker and quicker into the next street. The driver turned round, and nodded to Kay ina friendly way as if they had known each other before. Every time that Kay tried to unfasten his sledge the driver nodded again, and Kay sat still once more. Then they drove out of the town, and the snow began to fall so thickly that the little boy could not see his hand before him, and on and on they went. He quickly unfastened the cord to get loose from the big sledge, but it was of no use; his little sledge hung on fast, and it went on like the wind.

Then he cried out, but nobody heard him. He was dreadfully frightened.

The snowflakes grew larger and larger till they looked like great white birds. All at once they flew aside, the large sledge stood still, and the figure who was driving stood up. The fur cloak and cap were all of snow. It was a lady, tall and slim, and glittering. It was the Snow-queen.

'We have come at a good rate,' she said; 'but you are almost frozen. Creep in under my cloak.'

And she set him close to her in the sledge and drew the cloak over him. He felt as though he were sinking into a snow-drift.

'Are you cold now?' she asked, and kissed his forehead. The kiss was cold as ice and reached down to his heart, which was already half a lump of ice.

'My sledge! Don't forget my sledge!' He thought of that first, and it was fastened to one of the great white birds who flew behind with the sledge on its back.

The Snow-queen kissed Kay again, and then he forgot all about little Gerda, his grandmother, and everybody at home.

'Now I must not kiss you any more,' she said, 'or else I should kiss you to death.'

Then away they flew over forests and lakes, over sea and land. Round them whistled the cold wind, the wolves howled, and the snow hissed; over them flew the black shrieking crows. But high up the moon shone large and bright, and thus Kay passed the long winter night. In the day he slept at the Snow-queen's feet.

But what happened to little Gerda when Kay did not come back?

What had become of him? Nobody knew. The other boys told how they had seen him fasten his sledge on to a large one which had driven out of the town gate.

Gerda cried a great deal. The winter was long and dark to her.

Then the spring came with warm sunshine. 'I will go and look for Kay,' said Gerda.

So she went down to the river and got into a little boat that was there. Presently the stream began to carry it away.

'Perhaps the river will take me to Kay,' thought Gerda. She glided down, past trees and fields, till she came to a large cherry garden, in which stood a little house with strange red and blue windows and a straw roof. Before the door stood two wooden soldiers, who were shouldering arms.

Gerda called to them, but they naturally did not answer. The river carried the boat on to the land.

Gerda called out still louder, and there came out of the house a very old woman. She leant upon a crutch, and she wore a large sun-hat which was painted with the most beautiful flowers.

'You poor little girl!' said the old woman.

And then she stepped into the water, brought the boat in close with her crutch, and lifted little Gerda out.

'And now come and tell me who you are, and how you came here,' she said.

Then Gerda told her everything, and asked her if she had seen Kay. But she said he had not passed that way yet, but he would soon come.

She told Gerda not to be sad, and that she should stay with her and take of the cherry trees and flowers, which were better than any picture-bok, as they could each tell a story.

She then took Gerda's hand and led her into the little house and shut the door.

The windows were very high, and the panes were red, blue, and yellow, so that the light came through in curious colours. On the table were the most delicious cherries, and the old woman let Gerda eat as many as she liked, while she combed her hair with a gold comb as she ate.

The beautiful sunny hair rippled and shone round the dear little face, which was so soft and sweet. 'I have always longed to have a dear little girl just like you, and you shall see how happy we will be together.'

And as she combed Gerda's hair, Gerda thought less and less about Kay, for the old woman was a witch, but not a wicked witch, for she only enchanted now and then to amuse herself, and she did want to keep little Gerda very much.

So she went into the garden and waved her stick over all the rose bushes and blossoms and all; they sank down into the black earth, and no one could see where they had been.

The old woman was afraid that if Gerda saw the roses she would begin to think about her own, and then would remember Kay and run away.

Then she led Gerda out into the garden. How glorious it was, and what lovely scents filled the air! All the flowers you can think of blossomed there all the year round.

Gerda jumped for joy and played there till the sun set behind the tall cherry trees, and then she slept in a beautiful bed with red silk pillows filled with violets, and she slept soundly and dreamed as a queen does on her wedding day.

The next day she played again with the flowers in the warm sunshine, and so many days passed by. Gerda knew every flower, but although there were so many, it seemed to her as if one were not there, though she could not remember which.

She was looking one day at the old woman's sun-hat which had hte painted flowers on it, and there she saw a rose.

The witch had forgotten to make that vanish when she had made the other roses disappear under the earth. it was so difficult to think of everything.

'Why, there are no roses here!' cried Gerda,, and she hunted amongst all the flowers, but not one was to be found. Then she sat down and cried, but her tears fell just on the spot where a rose bush had sunk, and when her warm tears watered the earth, the bush came up in full bloom just as it had been before. Gerda kissed the roses and thought of the lovely roses at home, and with them came the thought of little Kay.

'Oh, what have I been doing!' said the little girl. 'I wanted to look for Kay.'

She ran to the end of the garden. The gate was shut, but she pushed against the rusty lock so that it came open.

She ran out with her little bare feet. No one came after her. At last she could not run any longer, and she sat down on a large stone. When she looked round she saw that the summer was over; it was late autumn. It had not changed in the beautiful garden, where were sunshine and flowers all the year round.

'Oh, dear, how late I have made myself!' said Gerda. 'It's autumn already! I cannot rest!' And she sprang up to run on.

Oh, how tired and sore her little feet grew, and it became colder and colder.

She had to rest again, and there on the snow in front of her was a large crow.

It had been looking at her for some time, and it nodded its head and said, 'Caw! caw! good day.' Then it asked the little girl why she was alone in the world. She told the crow her story, and asked if he had seen Kay.

The crow nodded very thoughtfully and said, 'It might be! It might be!'

'What! Do you think you have?' cried the little girl, and she almost squeezed the crow to death as she kissed him.

'Gently, gently!' said the crow. 'I think--I know I think--it might be little Kay, but now he has forgotten you for the princess!'

'Does he live with a princess?' asked Gerda.

'Yes, listen,' said the crow. Then he told her all he knew.

'In the kingdom in which we are now sitting lives a princess who is dreadfully clever. She has read all the newspapers in the world and has forgotten them again. She is as clever as that. The other day she came to the throne, and that is not so pleasant as people think. Then she began to say, "Why should I not marry?" But she wanted a husband who could answer when he was spoken to, not one who would stand up stiffly and look respectable--that would be too dull.

'When she told all the Court ladies, they were delighted. You can believe every word I say,' said the crow, 'I have a tame sweetheart in the palace, and she tells me everything.'

Of course his sweetheart was a crow.

'The newspapers came out next morning with a border of hearts round it, and the princess's monogram on it, and inside you could read that every good-looking young man might come into the palace and speak to the princess, and whoever should speak loud enough to be heard would be well fed and looked after, and the one who spoke best should become the princess's husband. Indeed,' said the crow, 'you can quite believe me. It is as true as that I am sitting here.

'Young men came in streams, and there was such a crowding and a mixing together! But nothing came of it on the first nor on the second day. They could all speak quite well when they were in the street, but as soon as they came inside the palace door, and saw the guards in silver, and upstairs the footmen in gold, and the great hall all lighted up, then their wits left them! And when they stood in front of the throne where the princess was sitting, then they could not think of anything to say except to repeat the last word she had spoken, and she did not much care to hear that again. It seemed as if they were walking in their sleep until they came out into the street again, when they could speak once more. There was a row stretching from the gate of the town up to the castle.

'They were hungry and thirsty, but in the palace they did not even get a glass of water.

'A few of the cleverest had brought some slices of bread and butter with them, but they did not share them with their neighbour, for they thought, "If he looks hungry, the princess will not take him!"'

'But what about Kay?' asked Gerda. 'When did he come? Was he in the crowd?'

'Wait a bit; we are coming to him! On the third day a little figure came without horse or carriage and walked jauntily up to the palace. His eyes shone as yours do; he had lovely curling hair, but quite poor clothes.'

'That was Kay!' cried Gerda with delight. 'Oh, then I have found him!' and she clapped her hands.

'He had a little bundle on his back,' said the crow.

'No, it must have been his skates, for he went away with his skates!'

'Very likely,' said the crow, 'I did not see for certain. But I know this from my sweetheart, that when he came to the palace door and saw the royal guards in silver, and on the stairs the footmen in gold, he was not the least bit put out. He nodded to them, saying, "It must be rather dull standing on the stairs; I would rather go inside!"

'The halls blazed with lights; councillors and ambassadors were walking about in noiseless shoes carrying gold dishes. It was enough to make one nervous! His boots creaked dreadfully loud, but he was not frightened.'

'That must be Kay!' said Gerda. 'I know he had new boots on; I have heard them creaking in his grandmother's room!'

'They did creak, certainly!' said the crow. 'And, not one bit afraid, up he went to the princess, who was sitting on a large pearl as round as a spinning wheel. All the ladies-in-waiting were standing round, each with their attendants, and the lords-in-waiting with their attendants. The nearer they stood to the door the prouder they were.'

'It must have been dreadful!' said little Gerda. 'And Kay did win the princess?'

'I heard from my tame sweetheart that he was merry and quick-witted; he had not come to woo, he said, but to listen to the princess's wisdom. And the end of it was that they fell in love with each other.'

'Oh, yes; that was Kay!' said Gerda. 'He was so clever; he could do sums with fractions. Oh, do lead me to the palace!'

'That's easily said!' answered the crow, 'but how are we to manage that? I must talk it over with my tame sweetheart. She may be able to advise us, for I must tell you that a little girl like you could never get permission to enter it.'

'Yes, I will get it!' said Gerda. 'When Kay hears that I am there he will come out at once and fetch me!'

'Wait for me by the railings,' said the crow, and he nodded his head and flew away.

It was late in the evening when he came back.

'Caw, caw!' he said, 'I am to give you her love, and here is a little roll for you. She took it out of the kitchen; there's plenty there, and you must be hungry. You cannot come into the palace. The guards in silver and the footmen in gold would not allow it. But don't cry! You shall get in all right. My sweetheart knows a little back-stairs which leads to the sleeping-room, and she knows where to find the key.'

They went into the garden, and when the lights in the palace were put out one after the other, the crow led Gerda to a back-door.

Oh, how Gerda's heart beat with anxiety and longing! It seemed as if she were going to do something wrong, but she only wanted to know if it were little Kay. Yes, it must be he! She remembered so well his clever eyes, his curly hair. She could see him smiling as he did when they were at home under the rose trees! He would be so pleased to see her, and to hear how they all were at home.

Now they were on the stairs; a little lamp was burning, and on the landing stood the tame crow. She put her head on one side and looked at Gerda, who bowed as her grandmother had taught her.

'My betrothed has told me many nice things about you, my dear young lady,' she said. 'Will you take the lamp while I go in front? We go this way so as to meet no one.'

Through beautiful rooms they came to the sleeping-room. In the middle of it, hung on a thick rod of gold, were two beds, shaped like lilies, one all white, in which lay the princess, and the other red, in which Gerda hoped to find Kay. She pushed aside the curtain, and saw a brown neck. Oh, it was Kay! She called his name out loud, holding the lamp towards him.

He woke up, turned his head and--it was not Kay!

It was only his neck that was like Kay's, but he was young and handsome. The princess sat up in her lily-bed and asked who was there.

Then Gerda cried, and told her story and all that the crows had done.

'You poor child!' said the prince and princess, and they praised the crows, and said that they were not angry with them, but that they must not do it again. Now they should have a reward.

'Would you like to fly away free?' said the princess, 'or will you have a permanent place as court crows with what you can get in the kitchen?'

And both crows bowed and asked for a permanent appointment, for they thought of their old age.

And they put Gerda to bed, and she folded her hands, thinking, as she fell asleep, 'How good people and animals are to me!'

The next day she was dressed from head to foot in silk and satin. They wanted her to stay on in the palace, but she begged for a little carriage and a horse, and a pair of shoes so that she might go out again into the world to look for Kay.

They gave her a muff as well as some shoes; she was warmly dressed, and when she was ready, there in front of the door stood a coach of pure gold, with a coachman, footmen and postilions with gold crowns on.

The prince and princess helped her into the carriage and wished her good luck.

The wild crow who was now married drove with her for the first three miles; the other crow could not come because she had a bad headache.

'Good-bye, good-bye!' called the prince and princess; and little Gerda cried, and the crow cried.

When he said good-bye, he flew on to a tree and waved with his black wings as long as the carriage, which shone like the sun, was in sight.

They came at last to a dark wood, but the coach lit it up like a torch. When the robbers saw it, they rushed out, exclaiming, 'Gold! gold!'

They seized the horses, killed the coachman, footmen and postilions, and dragged Gerda out of the carriage.

'She is plump and tender! I will eat her!' said the old robber-queen, and she drew her long knife, which glittered horribly. 'You shall not kill her!' cried her little daughter. 'She shall play with me. She shall give me her muff and her beautiful dress, and she shall sleep in my bed.'

The little robber-girl was as big as Gerda, but was stronger, broader, with dark hair and black eyes. She threw her arms round Gerda and said, 'They shall not kill you, so long as you are not naughty. Aren't you a princess?'

'No,' said Gerda, and she told all that had happened to her, and how dearly she loved little Kay.

The robber-girl looked at her very seriously, and nodded her head, saying, 'They shall not kill you, even if you are naughty, for then I will kill you myself!'

And she dried Gerda's eyes, and stuck both her hands in the beautiful warm muff.

The little robber-girl took Gerda to a corner of the robbers' camp where she slept.

All round were more than a hundred wood-pigeons which seemed to be asleep, but they moved a little when the two girls came up.

There was also, near by, a reindeer which the robber-girl teased by tickling it with her long sharp knife.

Gerda lay awake for some time.

'Coo, coo!' said the wood-pigeons. 'We have seen little Kay. A white bird carried his sledge; he was sitting in the Snow-queen's carriage which drove over the forest when our little ones were in the nest. She breathed on them, and all except we two died. Coo, coo!'

'What are you saying over there?' cried Gerda. 'Where was the Snow-queen going to? Do you know at all?'

'She was probably travelling to Lapland, where there is always ice and snow. Ask the reindeer.'

'There is capital ice and snow there!' said the reindeer. 'One can jump about there in the great sparkling valleys. There the Snow-queen has her summer palace, but her best palace is up by the North Pole, on the island called Spitzbergen.'

'O Kay, my little Kay!' sobbed Gerda.

'You must lie still,' said the little robber-girl, 'or else I shall stick my knife into you!'

In the morning Gerda told her all that the wood-pigeons had said. She nodded. 'Do you know where Lapland is?' she asked the reindeer.

'Who should know better than I?' said the beast, and his eyes sparkled. 'I was born and bred there on the snow-fields.'

'Listen!' said the robber-girl to Gerda; 'you see that all the robbers have gone; only my mother is left, and she will fall asleep in the afternoon--then I will do something for you!'

When her mother had fallen asleep, the robber-girl went up to the reindeer and said, 'I am going to set you free so that you can run to Lapland. But you must go quickly and carry this little girl to the Snow-queen's palace, where her playfellow is. You must have heard all that she told about it, for she spoke loud enough!'

The reindeer sprang high for joy. The robber-girl lifted little Gerda up, and had the foresight to tie her on firmly, and even gave her a little pillow for a saddle. 'You must have your fur boots,' she said, 'for it will be cold; but I shall keep your muff, for it is so cosy! But, so that you may not freeze, here are my mother's great fur gloves; they will come up to your elbows. Creep into them!'

And Gerda cried for joy.

'Don't make such faces!' said the little robber-girl. 'You must look very happy. And here are two loaves and a sausage; now you won't be hungry!'

They were tied to the reindeer, the little robber-girl opened the door, made all the big dogs come away, cut through the halter with her sharp knife, and said to the reindeer, 'Run now! But take great care of the little girl.'

And Gerda stretched out her hands with the large fur gloves towards the little robber-girl and said, 'Good-bye!'

Then the reindeer flew over the ground, through the great forest, as fast as he could.

The wolves howled, the ravens screamed, the sky seemed on fire.

'Those are my dear old northern lights,' said the reindeer; 'see how they shine!'

And then he ran faster still, day and night.

The loaves were eaten, and the sausage also, and then they came to Lapland.

They stopped by a wretched little house; the roof almost touched the ground, and the door was so low that you had to creep in and out.

There was no one in the house except an old Lapland woman who was cooking fish over an oil-lamp. The reindeer told Gerda's whole history, but first he told his own, for that seemed to him much more important, and Gerda was so cold that she could not speak.

'Ah, you poor creatures!' said the Lapland woman; 'you have still further to go! You must go over a hundred miles into Finland, for there the Snow-queen lives, and every night she burns Bengal lights. I will write some words on a dried stock-fish, for I have no paper, and you must give it to the Finland woman, for she can give you better advice than I can.'

And when Gerda was warmed and had had something to eat and drink, the Lapland woman wrote on a dried stock-fish, and begged Gerda to take care of it, tied Gerda securely on the reindeer's back, and away they went again.

The whole night was ablaze with northern lights, and then they came to Finland and knocked at the Finland woman's chimney, for door she had none.

Inside it was so hot that the Finland woman wore very few clothes; she loosened Gerda's clothes and drew off her fur gloves and boots. She laid a piece of ice on the reindeer's head, and then read what was written on the stock-fish. She read it over three times till she knew it by heart, and then put the fish in the saucepan, for she never wasted anything.

Then the reindeer told his story, and afterwards little Gerda's and the Finland woman blinked her eyes but said nothing.

'You are very clever,' said the reindeer. 'I know. Cannot you give the little girl a drink so that she may have the strength of twelve men and overcome the Snow-queen?'

'The strength of twelve men!' said the Finland woman; 'that would not help much. Little Kay is with the Snow-queen and he likes everything there very much and thinks it the best place in the world. But that is because he has a splinter of glass in his heart and a bit in his eye. If these do not come out, he will never be free, and the Snow-queen will keep her power over him.'

'But cannot you give little Gerda something so that she can have power over her?'

'I can give her no greater power than she has already; don't you see how great it is? Don't you see how men and beasts must help her when she wanders into the wide world with her bare feet? She is powerful already, because she is a dear little innocent child. If she cannot by herself conquer the Snow-queen and take away the glass splinters from little Kay, we cannot help her! The Snow-queen's garden begins two miles from here. You can carry the little maiden so far; put her down by the large bush with red berries growing in the snow. Then you must come back here as fast as you can.'

Then the Finland woman lifted little Gerda on the reindeer and away he sped.

'Oh, I have left my gloves and boots behind!' cried Gerda. She missed them in the piercing cold, but the reindeer did not dare to stop. On he ran till he came to the bush with red berries. Then he set Gerda down and kissed her mouth, and great big tears ran down his cheeks, and then he ran back. There stood poor Gerda, without shoes or gloves in the middle of the bitter cold of Finland.

She ran on as fast as she could. A regiment of gigantic snowflakes came against her, but they melted when they touched her, and she went on with fresh courage.

And now we must see what Kay was doing. He was not thinking of Gerda, and never dreamt that she was standing outside the palace.

The walls of the palace were built of driven snow, and the doors and windows of piercing winds. There were more than a hundred halls in it all of frozen snow. The largest was several miles long; the bright Northern lights lit them up, and very large and empty and cold and glittering they were! In the middle of the great hall was a frozen lake which had cracked in a thousand pieces; each piece was exactly like the other. Here the Snow-queen used to sit when she was at ahome.

Little Kay was almost blue and black with cold, but he did not feel it, for she had kissed away his feelings and his heart was a lump of ice.

He was pulling about some sharp, flat pieces of ice, and trying to fit one into the other. He thought each was most beautiful, but that was because of the splinter of glass in his eye. He fitted them into a great many shapes, but he wanted to make them spell the word 'Love.' The Snow-queen had said, 'If you can spell out that word you shalt be your own master. I will give you the whole world and a new pair of skates.'

But he could not do it.

'Now I must fly to warmer countries,' said the Snow-queen. 'I must go and powder my black kettles!' (This was what she called Mount Etna and Mount Vesuvius.) 'It does the lemons and grapes good.'

And off she flew, and Kay sat alone in the great hall trying to do his puzzle.

He sat so still that you would have thought he was frozen.

Then it happened that little Gerda stepped into the hall. The biting cold winds became quiet as if they had fallen asleep when she appeared in the great, empty, freezing hall.

She caught sight of Kay; she recognised him, and ran and put her arms round his neck, crying, 'Kay! dear little Kay! I have found you at last!'

But he sat quite still and cold. Then Gerda wept hot tears which fell on his neck and thawed his heart and swept away the bit of the looking-glass. He looked at her and then he burst into tears. He cried so much that the glass splinter swam out of his eye; then he knew her, and cried out, 'Gerda! dear little Gerda! Where have you been so long? and where have I been?'

And he looked round him.

'How cold it is here! How wide and empty!' and he threw himself on Gerda, and she laughed and wept for joy. It was such a happy time that the pieces of ice even danced round them for joy, and when they were tired and lay down again they formed themselves into the letters that the Snow-queen had said he must spell in order to become his own master and have the whole world and a new pair of skates.

And Gerda kissed his cheeks and they grew rosy; she kissed his eyes and they sparkled like hers; she kissed his hands and feet and he became warm and glowing. The Snow-queen might come home now; his release--the word 'Love'--stood written in sparkling ice.

They took each other's hands and wandered out of the great palace; they talked about the grandmother and the roses on the leads, wherever they came the winds hushed and the sun came out. When they reached the bush with red berries there stood the reindeer waiting for them.

He carried Kay and Gerda first to the Finland woman, who warmed them in her hot room and gave them advice for their journey home.

Then they went to the Lapland woman, who gave them new clothes and mended their sleigh. The reindeer ran with them until they came to the green fields fresh with the spring green. Here he said good-bye.

They came to the forest, which was bursting into bud, and out of it came a splendid horse which Gerda knew; it was the one which had drawn the gold coach ridden by a young girl with a red cap on and pistols in her belt. It was the little robber girl who was tired of being at home and wanted to go out into the world. She and Gerda knew each other at once.

'You are a nice fellow!' she said to Kay. 'I should like to know if you deserve to be run all over the world!'

But Gerda patted her cheeks and asked after the prince and princess.

'They are travelling about,' said the robber girl.

'And the crow?' asked Gerda.

'Oh, the crow is dead!' answered the robber-girl. 'His tame sweetheart is a widow and hops about with a bit of black crape round her leg. She makes a great fuss, but that's all nonsense. But tell me what happened to you, and how you caught him.'

And Kay and Gerda told her all.

'Dear, dear!' said the robber-girl, shook both their hands, and promised that if she came to their town she would come and see them. Then she rode on.

But Gerda and Kay went home hand in hand. There they found the grandmother and everything just as it had been, but when they went through the doorway they found they were grown-up.

There were the roses on the leads; it was summer, warm, glorious summer.

The Pink Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f13]

The Fir-tree

Translated from the German of Hans Christian Andersen.

There was once a pretty little fir-tree in a wood. It was in a capital position, for it could get sun, and there was enough air, and all around grew many tall companions, both pines and firs. It did not heed the warm sun and the fresh air, or notice the little peasant children who ran about chattering when they came out to gather wild strawberries and raspberries. Often they found a whole basketful and strung strawberries on a straw; they would sit down by the little fir-tree and say, 'What a pretty little one this is!' The tree did not like that at all.

By the next year it had grown a whole ring taller, and the year after that another ring more, for you can always tell a fir-tree's age from its rings.

'Oh! if I were only a great tree like the others!' sighed the little fir-tree, 'then I could stretch out my branches far and wide and look out into the great world! The birds would build their nests in my branches, and when the wind blew I would bow to it politely just like the others!' It took no pleasure in the sunshine, nor in the birds, nor in the rose-coloured clouds that sailed over it at dawn and at sunset. Then the winter came, and the snow lay white and sparkling all around, and a hare would come and spring right over the little fir-tree, which annoyed it very much. But when two more winters had passed the fir-tree was so tall that the hare had to run round it. 'Ah! to grow and grow, and become great and old! that is the only pleasure in life,' thought the tree. In the autumn the woodcutters used to come and hew some of the tallest trees; this happened every year, and the young fir-tree would shiver as the magnificent trees fell crashing and crackling to the ground, their branches hewn off, and the great trunks left bare, so that they were almost unrecognisable. But then they were laid on waggons and dragged out of the wood by horses. 'Where are they going? What will happen to them?'

In spring, when the swallows and storks came, the fir-tree asked them, 'Do you know where they were taken? Have you met them?'

The swallows knew nothing of them, but the stork nodded his head thoughtfully, saying, 'I think I know. I met many new ships as I flew from Egypt; there were splendid masts on the ships. I'll wager those were they! They had the scent of fir-trees. Ah! those are grand, grand!'

'Oh! if I were only big enough to sail away over the sea too! What sort of thing is the sea? what does it look like?'

'Oh! it would take much too long to tell you all that,' said the stork, and off he went.

'Rejoice in your youth,' said the sunbeams, 'rejoice in the sweet growing time, in the young life within you.'

And the wind kissed it and the dew wept tears over it, but the fir-tree did not understand.

Towards Christmas-time quite little trees were cut down, some not as big as the young fir-tree, or just the same age, and now it had no peace or rest for longing to be away. These little trees, which were chosen for their beauty, kept all their branches; they were put in carts and drawn out of the wood by horses.

'Whither are those going?' asked the fir-tree; 'they are no bigger than I, and one there was much smaller even! Why do they keep their branches? Where are they taken to?'

'We know! we know!' twittered the sparrows. 'Down there in the city we have peeped in at the windows, we know where they go! They attain to the greatest splendour and magnificence you can imagine! We have looked in at the windows and seen them planted in the middle of the warm room and adorned with the most beautiful things-golden apples, sweet-meats, toys and hundreds of candles.'

'And then?' asked the fir-tree, trembling in every limb with eagerness, 'and then? what happens then?'

'Oh, we haven't seen anything more than that. That was simply matchless!'

'Am I too destined to the same brilliant career?' wondered the fir-tree excitedly. 'That is even better than sailing over the sea! I am sick with longing. If it were only Christmas! Now I am tall and grown-up like those which were taken away last year. Ah, if I were only in the cart! If I were only in the warm room with all the splendour and magnificence! And then? Then comes something better, something still more beautiful, else why should they dress us up? There must be something greater, something grander to come--but what? Oh! I am pining away! I really don't know what's the matter with me!'

'Rejoice in us,' said the air and sunshine, 'rejoice in your fresh youth in the free air!'

But it took no notice, and just grew and grew; there it stood fresh and green in winter and summer, and all who saw it said, 'What a beautiful tree!' And at Christmas-time it was the first to be cut down. The axe went deep into the pith; the tree fell to the ground with a groan; it felt bruised and faint. It could not think of happiness, it was sad at leaving its home, the spot where it had sprung up; it knew, too, that it would never see again its dear old companions, or the little shrubs and flowers, perhaps not even the birds. Altogether the parting was not pleasant.

When the tree came to itself again it was packed in a yard with other trees, and a man was saying, 'This is a splendid one, we shall only want this.'

Then came two footmen in livery and carried the fir-tree to a large and beautiful room. There were pictures hanging on the walls, and near the Dutch stove stood great Chinese vases with lions on their lids; there were armchairs, silk-covered sofas, big tables laden with picture-books and toys, worth hundreds of pounds-at least, so the children said. The fir-tree was placed in a great tub filled with sand, but no one could see that it was a tub, for it was all hung with greenery and stood on a gay carpet. How the tree trembled! What was coming now? On its brances they hung little nets cut out of coloured paper, each full of sugarplums; gilt apples and nuts hung down as if they were growing, over a hundred red, blue, and white tapers were fastened among the branches. Dolls as life-like as human beings--the fir-tree had never seen any before were suspended among the green, and right up at the top was fixed a gold tinsel star; it was gorgeous, quite unusually gorgeous!

'To-night,' they all said, 'to-night it will be lighted!'

'Ah!' thought the tree, 'if it were only evening! Then the tapers would soon be lighted. What will happen then? I wonder whether the trees will come from the wood to see me, or if the sparrows will fly against the window panes? Am I to stand here decked out thus through winter and summer?'

It was not a bad guess, but the fir-tree had real bark-ache from sheer longing, and bark-ache in trees is just as bad as head-ache in human beings.

Now the tapers were lighted. What a glitter! What splendour! The tree quivered in all its branches so much, that one of the candles caught the green, and singed it. 'Take care!' cried the young ladies, and they extinguished it.

Now the tree did not even dare to quiver. It was really terrible! It was so afraid of losing any of its ornaments, and it was quite bewildered by all the radiance.

And then the folding doors were opened, and a crowd of children rushed in, as though they wanted to knock down the whole tree, whilst the older people followed soberly. The children stood quite silent, but only for a moment, and then they shouted again, and danced round the tree, and snatched off one present after another.

'What are they doing?' thought the tree. 'What is going to happen?' And the tapers burnt low on the branches, and were put out one by one, and then the children were given permission to plunder the tree. They rushed at it so that all its boughs creaked; if it had not been fastened by the gold star at the top to the ceiling, it would have been overthrown.

The children danced about with their splendid toys, and no one looked at the tree, except the old nurse, who came and peeped amongst the boughs, just to see if a fig or an apple had been forgotten.

'A story! a story!' cried the children, and dragged a little stout man to the tree; he sat down beneath it, saying, 'Here we are in the greenwood, and the tree will be delighted to listen! But I am only going to tell one story. Shall it be Henny Penny or Humpty Dumpty who fell downstairs, and yet gained great honour and married a princess?'

'Henny Penny!' cried some; 'Humpty Dumpty!' cried others; there was a perfect babel of voices! Only the fir-tree kept silent, and thought, 'Am I not to be in it? Am I to have nothing to do with it?'

But it had already been in it, and played out its part. And the man told them about Humpty Dumpty who fell downstairs and married a princess. The children clapped their hands and cried, 'Another! another!' They wanted the story of Henny Penny also, but they only got Humpty Dumpty. The fir-tree stood quite astonished and thoughtful; the birds in the wood had never related anything like that. 'Humpty Dumpty fell downstairs and yet married a princess! yes, that is the way of the world!' thought the tree, and was sure it must be true, because such a nice man had told the story. 'Well, who knows? Perhaps I shall fall downstairs and marry a princess.' And it rejoiced to think that next day it would be decked out again with candles, toys, glittering ornaments, and fruits. 'To-morrow I shall quiver again with excitement. I shall enjoy to the full all my splendour. To-morrow I shall hear Humpty Dumpty again, and perhaps Henny Penny too.' And the tree stood silent and lost in thought all through the night.

Next morning the servants came in. 'Now the dressing up will begin again,' thought the tree. But they dragged it out of the room, and up the stairs to the lumber-room, and put it in a dark corner, where no ray of light could penetrate. 'What does this mean?' thought the tree. 'What am I to do here? What is there for me to hear?' And it leant against the wall, and thought and thought. And there was time enough for that, for days and nights went by, and no one came; at last when some one did come, it was only to put some great boxes into the corner. Now the tree was quite covered; it seemed as if it had been quite forgotten.

'Now it is winter out-doors,' thought the fir-tree. 'The ground is hard and covered with snow, they can't plant me yet, and that is why I am staying here under cover till the spring comes. How thoughtful they are! Only I wish it were not so terribly dark and lonely here; not even a little hare! It was so nice out in the wood, when the snow lay all around, and the hare leapt past me; yes, even when he leapt over me: but I didn't like it then. It's so dreadfully lonely up here.'

'Squeak, squeak!' said a little mouse, stealing out, followed by a second. They sniffed at the fir-tree, and then crept between its boughs. 'It's frightfully cold,' said the little mice. 'How nice it is to be here! Don't you think so too, you old fir-tree?'

'I'm not at all old,' said the tree; 'there are many much older than I am.'

'Where do you come from?' asked the mice, 'and what do you know?' They were extremely inquisitive. 'Do tell us about the most beautiful place in the world. Is that where you come from? Have you been in the storeroom, where cheeses lie on the shelves, and hams hang from the ceiling, where one dances on tallow candles, and where one goes in thin and comes out fat?'

'I know nothing about that,' said the tree. 'But I know the wood, where the sun shines, and the birds sing.' And then it told them all about its young days, and the little mice had never heard anything like that before, and they listened with all their ears, and said: 'Oh, how much you have seen! How lucky you have been!'

'I?' said the fir-tree, and then it thought over what it had told them. 'Yes, on the whole those were very happy times.' But then it went on to tell them about Christmas Eve, when it had been adorned with sweet-meats and tapers.

'Oh!' said the little mice, 'how lucky you have been, you old fir-tree!'

'I'm not at all old' said the tree. 'I only came from the wood this winter. I am only a little backward, perhaps, in my growth.'

'How beautifully you tell stories!' said the little mice. And next evening they came with four others, who wanted to hear the tree's story, and it told still more, for it remembered everything so clearly and thought: 'Those were happy times! But they may come again. Humpty dumpty fell downstairs, and yet he married a princess; perhaps I shall also marry a princess!' And then it thought of a pretty little birch-tree that grew out in the wood, and seemed to the fir-tree a real princess, and a very beautiful one too.

'Who is Humpty Dumpty?' asked the little mice.

And then the tree told the whole story; it could remember every single word, and the little mice were ready to leap on to the topmost branch out of sheer joy! Next night many more mice came, and on Sunday even two rats; but they did not care about the story, and that troubled the little mice, for now they thought less of it too.

'Is that the only story you know?' asked the rats.

'The only one,' answered the tree. 'I heard that on my happiest evening, but I did not realise then how happy I was.'

'That's a very poor story. Don't you know one about bacon or tallow candles? a storeroom story?'

'No,' said the tree.

'Then we are much obliged to you,' said the rats, and they went back to their friends.

At last the little mice went off also, and the tree said, sighing: 'Really it was very pleasant when the lively little mice sat round and listened whilst I told them stories. But now that's over too. But now I will think of the time when I shall be brought out again, to keep up my spirits.'

But when did that happen? Well, it was one morning when they came to tidy up the lumber-room; they threw it really rather roughly on the floor, but a servant dragged it off at once downstairs, where there was daylight once more.

'Now life begins again!' thought the tree. It felt the fresh air, the first rays of the sun, and there it was out in the yard! Everything passed so quickly; the tree quite forgot to notice itself, there was so much to look at all around. The yard opened on a garden full of flowers; the roses were so fresh and sweet, hanging over a little trellis, the lime-trees were in blossom, and the swallows flew about, saying: 'Quirre-virre-vil, my husband has come home;' but it was not the fir-tree they meant.

'Now I shall live,' thought the tree joyfully, stretching out its branches wide; but, alas! they were all withered and yellow; and it was lying in a corner among weeds and nettles. The golden star was still on its highest bough, and it glittered in the bright sunlight. In the yard some of the merry children were playing, who had danced so gaily round the tree at Christmas. One of the little ones ran up, and tore off the gold star.

'Look what was left on the ugly old fir-tree!' he cried, and stamped on the boughs so that they cracked under his feet.

And the tree looked at all the splendour and freshness of the flowers in the garden, and then looked at itself, and wished that it had been left lying in the dark corner of the lumber-room; it thought of its fresh youth in the wood, of the merry Christmas Eve, and of the little mice who had listened so happily to the story of Humpty Dumpty.

'Too late! Too late!' thought the old tree. 'If only I had enjoyed myself whilst I could. Now all is over and gone.'

And a servant came and cut the tree into small pieces, there was quite a bundle of them; they flickered brightly under the great copper in the brew-house; the tree sighed deeply, and each sigh was like a pistol-shot; so the children who were playing there ran up, and sat in front of the fire, gazing at it, anad crying, 'Piff! puff! bang!' But for each report, which was really a sigh, the tree was thinking of a summer's day in the wood, or of a winter's night out there, when the stars were shining; it thought of Christmas Eve, and of Humpty Dumpty, which was the only story it had heard, or could tell, and then the tree had burnt away.

The children played on in the garden, and the youngest had the golden star on his breast, which the tree had worn on the happiest evening of its life; and now that was past--and the tree had passed away--and the story too, all ended and done with.

And that's the way with all stories!

Here our Danish author ends. This is what people call sentiment, and I hope you enjoy it!

The Pink Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f14]

Hans, the Mermaid's Son

Translated from the Danish.

In a village there once lived a smith called Basmus, who was in a very poor way. He was still a young man, and a strong handsome fellow to boot, but he had many little children and there was little to be earned by his trade. He was, however, a diligent and hard-working man, and when he had no work in the smithy he was out at sea fishing, or gathering wreckage on the shore.

It happened one time that he had gone out to fish in good weather, all alone in a little boat, but he did not come home that day, nor the following one, so that all believed he had perished out at sea. On the third day, however, Basmus came to shore again and had his boat full of fish, so big and fat that no one had ever seen their like. There was nothing the matter with him, and he complained neither of hunger or thirst. He had got into a fog, he said, and could not find land again. What he did not tell, however, was where he had been all the time; that only came out six years later, when people got to know that he had been caught by a mermaid out on the deep sea, and had been her guest during the three days that he was missing. From that time forth he went out no more to fish; nor, indeed, did he require to do so, for whenever he went down to the shore it never failed that some wreckage was washed up, and in it all kinds of valuable things. In those days everyone took what they found and got leave to keep it, so that the smith grew more prosperous day by day.

When seven years had passed since the smith went out to sea, it happened one morning, as he stood in the smithy, mending a plough, that a handsome young lad came in to him and said, 'Good-day, father; my mother the mermaid sends her greetings, and says that she has had me for six years now, and you can keep me for as long.'

He was a strange enough boy to be six years old, for he looked as if he were eighteen, and was even bigger and stronger than lads commonly are at that age.

'Will you have a bite of bread?' said the smith.

'Oh, yes,' said Hans, for that was his name.

The smith then told his wife to cut a piece of bread for him. She did so, and the boy swallowed it at one mouthful and went out again to the smithy to his father.

'Have you got all you can eat?' said the smith.

'No,' said Hans, 'that was just a little bit.'

The smith went into the house and took a whole loaf, which he cut into two slices and put butter and cheese between them, and this he gave to Hans. In a while the boy came out to the smithy again.

'Well, have you got as much as you can eat?' said the smith.

'No, not nearly,' said Hans; 'I must try to find a better place than this, for I can see that I shall never get my fill here.'

Hans wished to set off at once, as soon as his father would make a staff for him of such a kind as he wanted.

'It must be of iron,' said he, 'and one that can hold out.'

The smith brought him an iron rod as thick as an ordinary staff, but Hans took it and twisted it round his finger, so that wouldn't do. Then the smith came dragging one as thick as a waggon-pole, but Hans bent it over his knee and broke it like a straw. The smith then had to collect all the iron he had, and Hans held it while his father forged for him a staff, which was heavier than the anvil. When Hans had got this he said, 'Many thanks, father; now I have got my inheritance.' With this he set off into the country, and the smith was very pleased to be rid of that son, before he ate him out of house and home.

Hans first arrived at a large estate, and it so happened that the squire himself was standing outside the farmyard.

'Where are you going?' said the squire.

'I am looking for a place,' said Hans, 'where they have need of strong fellows, and can give them plenty to eat.'

'Well,' said the squire, 'I generally have twenty-four men at this time of the year, but I have only twelve just now, so I can easily take you on.'

'Very well,' said Hans, 'I shall easily do twelve men's work, but then I must also have as much to eat as the twelve would.'

All this was agreed to, and the squire took Hans into the kitchen, and told the servant girls that the new man was to have as much food as the other twelve. It was arranged that he should have a pot to himself, and he could then use the ladle to take his food with.

It was in the evening that Hans arrived there, so he did nothing more that day than eat his supper--a big pot of buck-wheat porridge, which he cleaned to the bottom and was then so far satisfied that he said he could sleep on that, so he went off to bed. He slept both well and long, and all the rest were up and at their work while he was still sleeping soundly. The squire was also on foot, for he was curious to see how the new man would behave who was both to eat and work for twelve.

But as yet there was no Hans to be seen, and the sun was already high in the heavens, so the squire himself went and called on him.

'Get up, Hans,' he cried; 'you are sleeping too long.'

Hans woke up and rubbed his eyes. 'Yes, that's true,' he said, 'I must get up and have my breakfast.'

So he rose and dressed himself, and went into the kitchen, where he got his pot of porridge; he swallowed all of this, and then asked what work he was to have.

He was to thresh that day, said the squire; the other twelve men were already busy at it. There were twelve threshing-floors, and the twelve men were at work on six of them--two on each. Hans must thresh by himself all that was lying upon the other six floors. He went out to the barn and got hold of a flail. Then he looked to see how the others did it and did the same, but at hte first stroke he smashed the flail in pieces. There were several flails hanging there, and Hans took the one after the other, but they all went the same way, every one flying in splinters at the first stroke. He then looked round for something else to work with, and found a pair of strong beams lying near. Next he caught sight of a horse-hide nailed up on the barn-door. With the beams he made a flail, using the skin to tie them together. The one beam he used as a handle, and the other to strike with, and now that was all right. But the barn was too low, there was no room to swing the flail, and the floors were too small. Hans, however, found a remedy for this--he simply lifted the whole roof off the barn, and set it down in the field beside. He then emptied down all the corn that he could lay his hands on and threshed away. He went through one lot after another, and it was ll the same to him what he got hold of, so before midday he had threshed all the squire's grain, his rye and wheat and barley and oats, all mixed through each other. When he was finished with this, he lifted the roof up on the barn again, like setting a lid on a box, and went in and told the squire that the job was done.

The squire opened his eyes at this announcement; and came out to see if it was really true. It was true, sure enough, but he was scarcely delighted with the mixed grain that he got from all his crops. However, when he saw the flail that Hans had used, and learned how he had made room for himself to swing it, he was so afraid of the strong fellow, that he dared not say anything, except that it was a good thing he had got it threshed; but it had still to be cleaned.

'What does that mean?' asked Hans.

It was explained to him that the corn and the chaff had to be separated; as yet both were lying in one heap, right up to the roof. Hans began to take up a little and sift it in his hands, but he soon saw that this would never do. He soon thought of a plan, however; he opened both barn-doors, and then lay down at one end and blew, so that all the chaff flew out and lay like a sand-bank at the other end of the barn, and the grain was as clean as it could be. Then he reported to the squire that that job also was done. The squire said that that was well; there was nothing more for him to do that day. Off went Hans to the kitchen, and got as much as he could eat; then he went and took a midday nap which lasted till supper-time.

Meanwhile the squire was quite miserable, and made his moan to his wife, saying that she must help him to find some means to getting rid of this strong fellow, for he durst not give him his leave. She sent for the steward, and it was arranged that next day all the men should go to the forest for fire-wood, and that they should make a bargain among them, that the one who came home last with his load should be hanged. They thought they could easily manage that it would be Hans who would lose his life, for the others would be early on the road, while Hans would certainly oversleep himself. In the evening, therefore, the men sat and talked together, saying that next morning they must set out early to the forest, and as they had a hard day's work and a long journey before them, they would, for their amusement, make a compact, that whichever of them came home last with his load should lose his life on the gallows. So Hans had no objections to make.

Long before the sun was up next morning, all the twelve men were on foot. They took all the best horses and carts, and drove off to the forest. Hans, however, lay and slept on, and the squire said, 'Just let him lie.'

At last, Hans thought it was time to have his breakfast, so he got up and put on his clothes. He took plenty of time to his breakfast, and then went out to get his horse and cart ready. The others had taken everything that was any good, so that he had a difficulty in scraping together four wheels of different sizes and fixing them to an old cart, and he could find no other horses than a pair of old hacks. He did not know where it lay, but he followed the track of the other carts, and in that way came to it all right. On coming to the gate leading into the forest, he was unfortunate enough to break it in pieces, so he took a huge stone that was lying on the field, seven ells long, and seven ells broad, and set this in the gap, then he went on and joined the others. These laughed at him heartily, for they had laboured as hard as they could since daybreak, and had helped each other to fell trees and put them on the carts, so that all of these were now loaded except one.

Hans got hold of a woodman's axe and proceeded to fell a tree, but he destroyed the edge and broke the shaft at the first blow. He therefore laid down the axe, put his arms round the tree, and pulled it up by the roots. This he threw upon his cart, and then another and another, and thus he went on while all the others forgot their work, and stood with open mouths, gazing at this strange woodcraft. All at once they began to hurry; the last cart was loaded, and they whipped up their horses, so as to be the first to arrive home.

When Hans had finished his work, he again put his old hacks into the cart, but they could not move it from the spot. He was annoyed at this, and took them out again, twisted a rope round the cart, and all the trees, lifted the whole affair on his back, and set off home, leading the horses behind him by the rein. When he reached the gate, he found the whole row of carts standing there, unable to get any further for the stone which lay in the gap.

'What!' said Hans, 'can twelve men not move that stone?' With that he lifted it and threw it out of hte way, and went on with his burden on his back, and the horses behind him, and arrived at the farm long before any of the others. The squire was walking about there, looking and looking, for he was very curious to know what had happened. Finally, he caught sight of Hans coming along in this fashion, and was so frightened that he did not know what to do, but he shut the gate and put on the bar. When Hans reached the gate of the courtyard, he laid down the trees and hammered at it, but no one came to open it. He then took the trees and tossed them over the barn into the yard, and the cart after them, so that every wheel flew off in a different direction.

When the squire saw this, he thought to himself, 'The horses will come the same way if I don't open the door,' so he did this.

'Good day, master,' said Hans, and put the horses into the stable, and went into the kitchen, to get something to eat. At length the other men came home with their loads. When they came in, Hans said to them, 'Do you remember the bargain we made last night? Which of you is it that's going to be hanged?' 'Oh,' said they, 'that was only a joke; it didn't mean anything.' 'Oh well, it doesn't matter, 'said Hans, and there was no more about it.

The squire, however, and his wife and the steward, had much to say to each other about the terrible man they had got, and all were agreed that they must get rid of him in some way or other. The steward said that he would manage this all right. Next morning they were to clean the well, and they would use of that opportunity. They would get him down into the well, and then have a big mill-stone ready to throw down on top of him--that would settle him. After that they could just fill in the well, and then escape being at any expense for his funeral. Both the squire and his wife thought this a splendid idea, and went about rejoicing at the thought that now they would get rid of Hans.

But Hans was hard to kill, as we shall see. He slept long next morning, as he always did, and finally, as he would not waken by himself, the squire had to go and call him. 'Get up, Hans, you are sleeping too long,' he cried. Hans woke up and rubbed his eyes. 'That's so,' said he, 'I shall rise and have my breakfast.' He got up then and dressed himself, while the breakfast stood waiting for him. When he had finished the whole of this, he asked what he was to do that day. He was told to help the other men to clean out the well. That was all right, and he went out and found the other men waiting for him. To these he said that they could choose whichever task they liked--either to go down into the well and fill the buckets while he pulled them up, or pull them up, and he alone would go down to the bottom of the well. They answered that they would rather stay above-ground, as there would be no room for so many of them down in the well.

Hans therefore went down alone, and began to clean out the well, but the men had arranged how they were to act, and immediately each of them seized a stone from a heap of huge blocks, and threw them down above him, thinking to kill him with these. Hans, however, gave no more heed to this than to shout up to them, to keep the hens away from the well, for they were scraping gravel down on the top of him.

They then saw that they could not kill him with little stones, but they had still the big one left. The whole twelve of them set to work with poles and rollers and rolled the big mill-stone to the brink of the well. It was with the greatest difficulty that they got it thrown down there, and now they had no doubt that he had got all that he wanted. But the stone happened to fall so luckily that his head went right through the hole in the middle of the mill-stone, so that it sat round his neck like a priest's collar. At this, Hans would stay down no longer. He came out of the well, with the mill-stone round his neck, ad went straight to the squire and complained that the other men were trying to make a fool of him. He would not be their priest, he said; he had too little learning for that. Saying this, he bent down his head and shook the stone off, so that it crushed one of the squire's big toes.

The squire went limping in to his wife, and the steward was sent for. He was told that he must devise some plan for getting rid of this terrible person. The scheme he had devised before had been of no use, and now good counsel was scarce.

'Oh, no' said the steward, 'there are good enough ways yet. The squire can send him this evening to fish in Devilmoss Lake: he will never escape alive from there, for no one can go there by night for Old Eric.'

That was a grand idea, both the squire and his wife thought, and so he limped out again to Hans, and said that he would punish his men for having tried to make a fool of him. Meanwhile, Hans could do a little job where he would be free from these rascals. He should go out on the lake and fish there that night, and would then be free from all work on the following day.

'All right,' said Hans; 'I am well content with that, but I must have something with me to eat--a baking of bread, a cask of butter, a barrel of ale, and a keg of brandy. I can't do with less than that.'

The squire said that he could easily get all that, so Hans got all of these tied up together, hung them over his shoulder on his good staff, and tramped away to Devilmoss Lake.

There he got into the boat, rowed out upon the lake, and got everything ready to fish. As he now lay out there in the middle of the lake, and it was pretty late in the evening, he thought he would have something to eat first, before starting to work. Just as he was at his busiest with this, Old Eric rose out of the lake, caught him by the cuff of the neck, whipped him out of the boat, and dragged him down to the bottom. It was a lucky thing that Hans had his walking-stick with him that day, and had just time to catch hold of it when he felt Old Eric's claws in his neck, so when they got down to the bottom he said, 'Stop now, just wait a little; here is solid ground.' With that he caught Old Eric by the back of the neck with one hand, and hammered away on his back with the staff, till he beat him out as flat as a pancake. Old Eric then began to lament and howl, begging him just to let him go, and he would never come back to the lake again.

'No, my good fellow,' said Hans, 'you won't get off until you promise to bring all the fish in the lake up to the squire's courtyard, before to-morrow morning.'

Old Eric eagerly promised this, if Hans would only let him go; so Hans rowed ashore, ate up the rest of his provisions, and went home to bed.

Next morning, when the squire rose and opened his front door, the fish came tumbling into the porch, and the whole yard was crammed full of them. He ran in again to his wife, for he could never devise anything himself, and said to her, 'What shall we do with him now? Old Eric hasn't taken him. I am certain that all the fish are out of the lake, for the yard is just filled with them.'

'Yes, that's a bad business,' said she; 'you must see if you can't get him sent to Purgatory, to demand tribute.' The squire therefore made his way to the men's quarters, to speak to Hans, and it took him all his time to push his way along the walls, under the eaves, on account of the fish that filled the yard. He thanked Hans for having fished so well, and said that now he had an errand for him, which he could only give to a trusty servant, and that was to journey to Purgatory, and demand three years tribute, which, he said, was owing to him from that quarter.

'Willingly,' said Hans; 'but what road do I go, to get there?'

The squire stood, and did not know what to say, and had first to go in to his wife to ask her.

'Oh, what a fool you are!' said she, 'can't you direct him straight forward, south through the wood? Whether he gets there or not, we shall be quit of him.'

Out goes the squire again to Hans.

'The way lies straight forward, south through the wood,' said he.

Hans then must have his provisions for the journey; two bakings of bread, two casks of butter, two barrels of ale, and two kegs of brandy. He tied all these up together, and got them on his shoulder hanging on his good walking-stick, and off he tramped southward.

After he had got through the wood, there was more than one road, and he was in doubt which of them was the right one, so he sat down and opened up his bundle of provisions. He found he had left his knife at home, but by good chance, there was a plough lying close at hand, so he took the coulter of this to cut the bread with. As he sat there and took his bite, a man came riding past him.

'Where are you from?' said Hans.

'From Purgatory,' said the man.

'Then stop and wait a little,' said Hans; but the man was in a hurry, and would not stop, so Hans ran after him and caught the horse by the tail. This brought it down on its hind legs, and the man went flying over its head into a ditch. 'Just wait a little,' said Hans; 'I am going the same way.' He got his provisions tied up again, and laid them on the horse's back; then he took hold of the reins and said to the man, 'We two can go along together on foot.'

As they went on their way Hans told the stranger both about the errand he had on hand and the fun he had had with Old Eric. The other said but little but he was well acquainted with the way, and it was no long time before they arrived at the gate. There both horse and rider disappeared, and Hans was left alone outside. 'They will come and let me in presently,' he thought to himself; but no one came. He hammered at the gate; still no one appeared. Then he got tired of waiting, and smashed at the gate with his staff until he knocked it in pieces and got inside. A whole troop of little demons came down upon him and asked what he wanted. His master's compliments, said Hans, and he wanted three years' tribute. At this they howled at him, and were about to lay hold of him and drag him off; but when they had got some raps from his walking-stick they let go again, howled still louder than before, and ran in to Old Eric, who was still in bed, after his adventure in the lake. They told him that a messenger had come from the squire at Devilmoss to demand three years' tribute. He had knocked the gate to pieces and bruised their arms and legs with his iron staff.

'Give him three years'! give him ten!' shouted Old Eric, 'only don't let him come near me.'

So all the little demons came dragging so much silver and gold that it was something awful. Hans filled his bundle with gold and silver coins, put it on his neck, and tramped back to his master, who was scared beyond all measure at seeing him again.

But Hans was also tired of service now. Of all the gold and silver he brought with him he let the squire keep one half, and he was glad enough, both for the money and at getting rid of Hans. The other half he took home to his father the smith in Furreby. To him also he said, 'Farewell;' he was now tired of living on shore among mortal men, and preferred to go home again to his mother. Since that time no one has ever seen Hans, the Mermaid's son.

The Pink Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f15]

Peter Bull

From the Danish.

There once lived in Denmark a peasant and his wife who owned a very good farm, but had no children. They often lamented to each other that they had no one of their own to inherit all the wealth that they possessed. They continued to prosper, and became rich people, but there was no heir to it all.

One year it happened that they owned a pretty little bull-calf, which they called Peter. It was the prettiest little creature they had ever seen--so beautiful and so wise that it understood everything that was said to it, and so gentle and so full of play that both the man and his wife came to be as fond of it as if it had been their own child.

One day the man said to his wife, 'I wonder, now, whether our parish clerk could teach Peter to talk; in that case we could not do better than adopt him as our son, and let him inherit all that we possess.'

'Well, I don't know,' said his wife, 'our clerk is tremendously learned, and knows much more than his Paternoster, and I could almost believe that he might be able to teach Peter to talk, for Peter has a wonderfully good head too. You might at least ask him about it.'

Off went the man to the clerk, and asked him whether he thought he could teach a bull-calf that they had to speak, for they wished so much to have it as their heir.

The clerk was no fool; he looked round about to see that no one could overhear them, and said, 'Oh, yes, I can easily do that, but you must not speak to anyone about it. It must be done in all secrecy, and the priest must not know of it, otherwise I shall get into trouble, as it is forbidden. It will also cost you something, as some very expensive books are required.'

That did not matter at all, the man said; they would not care so very much what it cost. The clerk could have a hundred dollars to begin with to buy the books. He also promised to tell no one about it, and to bring the calf round in the evening.

He gave the clerk the hundred dollars on the spot, and in the evening took the calf round to him, and the clerk promised to do his best with it. In a week's time he came back to the clerk to hear about the calf and see how it was thriving. The clerk, however, said that he could not get a sight of it, for then Peter would long after him and forget all that he had already learned. He was getting on well with his learning, but another hundred dollars were needed, as they must have more books. The peasant had the money with him, so he gave it to the clerk, and went home again with high hopes.

In another week the man came again to learn what progress Peter had made now.

'He is getting on very well,' said the clerk.

'I suppose he can't say anything yet?' said the man.

'Oh, yes,' said the clerk, 'he can say "Moo" now.'

'Do you think he will get on with his learning?' asked the peasant.

'Oh, yes,' said the clerk, 'but I shall want another hundred dollars for books. Peter can't learn well out of the ones that he has got.'

'Well, well,' said the man, 'what must be spent shall be spent.'

So he gave the clerk the third hundred dollars for books, and a cask of good old ale for Peter. The clerk drank the ale himself, and gave the calf milk, which he thought would be better for it.

Some weeks passed, during which the peasant did not come round to ask after the calf, being frightened lest it should cost him another hundred dollars, for he had begun to squirm a bit at having to part with so much money. Meanwhile the clerk decided that the calf was as fat as it could be, so he killed it. After he had got all the beef out of the way he went inside, put on his black clothes, and made his way to the peasant's house.

As soon as he had said 'Good-day' he asked, 'Has Peter come home here?'

'No, indeed, he hasn't,' said the man; 'surely he hasn't run away?'

'I hope,' said the clerk, 'that he would not behave so contemptibly after all the trouble I have had to teach him, and all that I have spent upon him. I have had to spend at least a hundred dollars of my own money to buy books for him before I got him so far on. He could say anything he liked now, so he said to-day that he longed to see his parents again. I was willing to give him that pleasure, but I was afraid that he wouldn't be able to find the way here by himself, so I made myself ready to go with him. When we had got outside the house I remembered that I had left my stick inside, and went in again to get it. When I came out again Peter had gone off on his own account. I thought he would be here, and if he isn't I don't know where he is.'

The peasant and his wife began to lament bitterly that Peter had run away in this fashion just when they were to have so much joy of him, and after they had spent so much on his education. The worst of it was that now they had no heir after all. The clerk comforted them as best he could; he also was greatly distressed that Peter should have behaved in such a way just when he should have gained honour from his pupil. Perhaps he had only gone astray, and he would advertise him at church next Sunday, and find out where anyone had seen him. Then he bade them 'Good-bye,' and went home nad dined on a good fat veal roast.

Now it so happened that the clerk took in a newspaper, and one day he chanced to read in its columns of a new merchant who had settled in a town at some distance, and whose name was 'Peter Bull.' He put the newspaper in his pocket, and went round to the sorrowing couple who had lost their heir. He read the paragraph to them, and added, 'I wonder, now, whether that could be your bull-calf Peter?'

'Yes, of course it is,' said the man; 'who else would it be?'

His wife then spoke up and said, 'You must set out, good man, and see about him, for it is him, I am perfectly certain. Take a good sum of money with you, too; for who knows but what he may want some cash now that he has turned a merchant!'

Next day the man got a bag of money on his back and a sandwich in his pocket, and his pipe in his mouth, and set out for the town where the new merchant lived. It was no short way, and he travelled for many days before he finally arrived there. He reached it one morning, just at daybreak, found out the right place, and asked if the merchant was at home. Yes, he was, said the people, but he was not up yet.

'That doesn't matter,' said the peasant, 'for I am his father. Just show me up to his bedroom.'

He was shown up to the room, and as soon as he entered it, ad caught sight of the merchant, he recognised him at once. He had the same broad forehead, the same thick neck, and same red hair, but in other respects he was now like a human being. The peasant rushed straight up to him and took a firm hold of him. 'O Peter,' said he, 'what a sorrow you have caused us, both myself and your mother, by running off like this just as we had got you well educated! Get up, now, so that I can see you properly, and have a talk with you.'

The merchant thought that it was a lunatic who had made his way in to him, and thought it best to take things quietly.

'All right,' said he, 'I shall do so at once.' He got out of bed and made haste to dress himself.

'Ay,' said the peasant, 'now I can see how clever our clerk is. He has done well by you, for now you look just like a human being. If one didn't know it, one would never think that it was you we got from the red cow; will you come home with me now?'

'No,' said the merchant, 'I can't find time just now. I have a big business to look after.'

'You could have the farm at once, you know,' said the peasant, 'and we old people would retire. But if you would rather stay in business, of course you may do so. Are you in want of anything?'

'Oh, yes,' said the merchant; 'I want nothing so much as money. A merchant has always a use for that.'

'I can well believe that,' said the peasant, 'for you had nothing at all to start with. I have brought some with me for that very end.' With that he emptied his bag of money out upon the table, so that it was all covered with bright dollars.

When the merchant saw what kind of man he had before him he began to speak him fair, and invited him to stay with him for some days, so that they might have some more talk together.

'Very well,' said the peasant, 'but you must call me "Father."'

'I have neither father nor mother alive,' said Peter Bull.

'I know that,' said the man; 'your real father was sold at Hamburg last Michaelmas, and your real mother died while calving in spring; but my wife and I have adopted you as our own, and you are our only heir, so you must call me "Father."'

Peter Bull was quite willing to do so, and it was settled that he should keep the money, while the peasant made his will and left to him all that he had, before he went home to his wife, and told her the whole story. She was delighted to hear that it was true enough about Peter Bull--that he was no other than their own bull-calf.

'You must go at once and tell the clerk,' said she, 'and pay him the hundred dollars of his own money that he spent upon our son. He has earned them well, and more besides, for all the joy he has given us in having such a son and heir.'

The man agreed with this, and thanked the clerk for all he had done, and gave him two hundred dollars. Then he sold the farm, and removed with his wife to the town where their dear son and heir was living. To him they gave all their wealth, and lived with him till their dying day.

The Pink Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f16]

The Bird 'Grip'

Translated from the Swedish.

It happened once that a king, who had a great kingdom and three sons, became blind, and no human skill or art could restore to him his sight. At last there came to the palace an old woman, who told him that in the whole world there was only one thing that could give him back his sight, and that was to get the bird Grip; his song would open the King's eyes.

When the king's eldest son heard this he offered to bring the bird Grip, which was kept in a cage by a king in another country, and carefully guarded as his greatest treasure. The blind king was greatly rejoiced at his son's resolve, fitted him out in the best way he could, and let him go. When the prince had ridden some distance he came to an inn, in which there were many guests, all of whom were merry, and drank and sang and played at dice. This joyous life pleased the prince so well that he stayed in the inn, took part in the playing and drinking, and forgot both his blind father and the bird Grip.

Meanwhile the king waited with both hope and anxiety for his son's return, but as time went on and nothing was heard of him, the second prince asked leave to go in search of his brother, as well as to bring the bird Grip. The king granted his request, and fitted him out in the finest fashion. But when the prince came to the inn and found his brother among his merry companions, he also remained there and forgot both the bird Grip and his blind father.

When the king noticed that neither of his sons returned, although a long time had passed since the second one set out, he was greatly distressed, for not only had he lost all hope of getting back his sight, but he had also lost his two eldest sons. The youngest now came to him, and offered to go in search of his brothers and to bring the bird Grip; he was quite certain that he would succeed in this. The king was unwilling to risk his third son on such an errand, but he begged so long that his father had at last to consent. This prince also was fitted out in the finest manner, like his brothers, and so rode away.

He also turned into the same inn as his brothers, and when these saw him they assailed him with many entreaties to remain with them and share their merry life. But he answered that now, when he had found them, his next task was to get the bird Grip, for which his blind father was longing, and so he had not a single hour to spare with them in the inn. He then said farewell to his brothers, and rode on to find another inn in which to pass the night. When he had ridden a long way, and it began to grow dark, he came to a house which lay deep in the forest. Here he was received in a very friendly manner by the host, who put his horse into the stable, and led the prince himself into the guest-chamber, where he ordered a maid-servant to lay the cloth and set down the supper. It was now dark, and while the girl was laying the cloth and setting down the dishes, and the prince had begun to appease his hunger, he heard the most piteous shrieks and cries from the next room. He sprang up from the table and asked the girl what those cries were, and whether he had fallen into a den of robbers. The girl answered that these shrieks were heard every night, but it was no living being who uttered them; it was a dead man, who life the host had taken because he could not pay for the meals he had had in the inn. The host further refused to bury the dead man, as he had left nothing to pay the expenses of the funeral, and every night he went and scourged the dead body of his victim.

When she had said this she lifted the cover off one of the dishes, and the prince saw that there lay on it a knife and an axe. He understood then that the host meant to ask him by this what kind of death he preferred to die, unless he was willing to ransom his life with his money. He then summoned the host, gave him a large sum for his own life, and paid the dead man's debt as well, besides paying him for burying the body, which the murderer now promised to attend to.

The prince, however, felt that his life was not safe in this murderer's den, and asked the maid to help him to escape that night. She replied that the attempt to do so might cost her her own life, as the key of the stable in which the prince's horse stood lay under the host's pillow; but, as she herself was a prisoner there, she would help him to escape if he would take her along with him. He promised to do so, and they succeeded in getting away from the inn, and rode on until they came to another far away from it, where the prince got a good place for the girl before proceeding on his journey.

As he now rode all alone through a forest there met him a fox, who greeted him in a friendly fashion, and asked him where he was going, and on what errand he was bent. The prince answered that his errand was too important to be confided to everyone that he met.

'You are right in that,' said the fox, 'for it relates to the bird Grip, which you want to take and bring home to your blind father; I could help you in this, but in that case you must follow my counsel.'

The prince thought that this was a good offer, especially as the fox was ready to go with him and show him the way to the castle, where the bird Grip sat in his cage, and so he promised to obey the fox's instructions. When they had traversed the forest together they saw the castle at some distance. Then the fox gave the prince three grains of gold, one of which he was to throw into the guard-room, another into the room where the bird Grip sat, and the third into its cage. He could then take the bird, but he must beware of stroking it; otherwise it would go ill with him.

The prince took the grains of gold, and promised to follow the fox's directions faithfully. When he came to the guard-room of the castle he threw one of the grains in there, and the guards at once fell asleep. The same thing happened with those who kept watch in the room beside the bird Grip, and when he threw the third grain into its cage the bird also fell asleep. When the prince got the beautiful bird into his hand he could not resist the temptation to stroke it, whereupon it awoke and began to scream. At this the whole castle woke up, and the prince was taken prisoner.

As he now sat in his prison, and bitterly lamented that his own disobedience had brought himself into trouble, and deprived his father of the chance of recovering his sight, the fox suddenly stood in front of him. The prince was very pleased to see it again, and received with great meekness all its reproaches, as well as promised to be more obedient in the future, if the fox would only help him out of his fix. The fox said that he had come to assist him, but he could do no more than advise the prince, when he was brought up for trial, to answer 'yes' to all the judge's questions, and everything would go well. The prince faithfully followed his instructions, so that when the judge asked him whether he had meant to steal the bird Grip he said 'Yes,' and when the judge asked him if he was a master-thief he again answered 'Yes.'

When the king heard that he admitted being a master-thief, he said that he would forgive him the attempt to steal the bird if he would go to the next kingdom and carry off the world's most beautiful princess, and bring her to him. To this also the prince said 'Yes.'

When he left the castle he met the fox, who went along with him to the next kingdom, and when they came near the castle there, gave him three grains of gold--one to throw into the guard-room, another into the princess's chamber, and the third into her bed. At the same time he strictly warned him not to kiss the princess. The prince went into the castle, and did with the grains of gold as the fox had told him, so that sleep fell upon everyone there; but when he had taken the princess into his arms he forgot the fox's warning, at the sight of her beauty, and kissed her. Then both she and all the others in the castle woke; the prince was taken prisoner, and put into a strong dungeon.

Here the fox again came to him and reproached him with his disobedience, but promised to help him out of this trouble also if he would answer 'yes' to everything they asked him at his trial. The prince willingly agreed to this, and admitted to the judge that he had meant to steal the princess, and that he was a master-thief.

When the king learned this he said he would forgive his offence if he would go to the next kingdom and steal the horse with the four golden shoes. To this also the prince said 'Yes.'

When he had gone a little way from the castle he met the fox, and they continued on their journey together. When they reached the end of it the prince for the third time received three grains of gold from the fox, with directions to throw one into the guard-chamber, another into the stable, and the third into the horse's stall. But the fox told him that above the horse's stall hung a beautiful golden saddle, which he must not touch, if he did not want to bring himself into new troubles worse than those he had escaped from, for then the fox could help him no longer.

The prince promised to be firm this time. He threw the grains of gold in the proper places, and untied the horse, but with that he caught sight of the golden saddle, and thought that none but it could suit so beautiful a horse, especially as it had golden shoes. But just as he stretched out his hand to take it he received from some invisible being so hard a blow on the arm that it was made quite numb. This recalled to him his promise and his danger, so he led out the horse without looking at the golden saddle again.

The fox was waiting for him outside the castle, and the prince confessed to him that he had very nearly given way to temptation this time as well. 'I know that,' said the fox, 'for it was I who struck you over the arm.'

As they now went on together the prince said that he could not forget the beautiful princess, and asked the fox whether he did not think that she ought to ride home to his father's palace on this horse with the golden shoes. The fox agreed that this would be excellent; if the prince would now go and carry her off he would give him three grains of gold for that purpose. The prince was quite ready, and promised to keep better command of himself this time, and not kiss her.

He got the grains of gold and entered the castle, where he carried off the princess, set her on the beautiful horse, and held on his way. When they came near to the castle where the bird Grip sat in his cage he again asked the fox for three grains of gold. These he got, and with them he was successful in carrying off the bird.

He was now full of joy, for his blind father would now recover his sight, while he himself owned the world's most beautiful princess and the horse with the golden shoes.

The prince and princess travelled on together with mirth and happiness, and the fox followed them until they came to the forest where the prince first met with him.

'Here our ways part,' said the fox. 'You have now got all that your heart desired, and you will have a prosperous journey to your father's palace if only you do not ransom anyone's life with money.'

The prince thanked the fox for all his help, promised to give heed to his warning, said farewell to him, and rode on, with the princess by his side and the bird Grip on his wrist.

They soon arrived at the inn where the two eldest brothers had stayed, forgetting their errand. But now no merry song or noise of mirth was heard from it. When the prince came nearer he saw two gallows erected, and when he entered the inn along with the princess he saw that all the rooms were hung with black, and that everything inside foreboded sorrow and death. He asked the reason of this, and was told that two princes were to be hanged that day for debt; they had spent all their money in feasting and playing, and were now deeply in debt to the host, and as no one could be found to ransom their lives they were about to be hanged according to the law.

The prince knew that it was his two brothers who had thus forfeited their lives and it cut him to the heart to think that two princes should suffer such a shameful death; and, as he had sufficient money with him, he paid their debts, and so ransomed their lives.

At first the brothers were grateful for their liberty, but when they saw the youngest brother's treasures they became jealous of his good fortune, and planned how to bring him to destruction, and then take the bird Grip, the princess, and the horse with the golden shoes, and convey them to their blind father. After they had agreed on how to carry out their treachery they enticed the prince to a den of lions and threw him down among them. Then they set the princess on horseback, took the bird Grip, and rode homeward. The princess wept bitterly, but they told her that it would cost her her life if she did not say that the two brothers had won all the treasures.

When they arrived at their father's palace there was great rejoicing, and everyone praised the two princes for their courage and bravery.

When the king inquired after the youngest brother they answered that he had led such a life in the inn that he had been hanged for debt. The king sorrowed bitterly over this, because the youngest prince was his dearest son, and the joy over the treasures soon died away, for the bird Grip would not sing so that the king might recover his sight, the princess wept night and day, and no one dared to venture so close to the horse as to have a look at his golden shoes.

Now when the youngest prince was thrown down into the lions' den he found the fox sitting there, and the lions, instead of tearing him to pieces, showed him the greatest friendliness. Nor was the fox angry with him for having forgot his last warning. He only said that sons who could so forget their old father and disgrace their royal birth as those had done would not hesitate to betray their brother either. Then he took the prince up out of the lion's den and gave him directions what to do now so as to come by his rights again.

The prince thanked the fox with all his heart for his true friendship, but the fox answered that if he had been of any use to him he would now for his own part ask a service of him. The prince replied that he would do him any service that was in his power.

'I have only one thing to ask of you,' said the fox, 'and that is, that you should cut off my head with your sword.'

The prince was astonished, and said that he could not bring himself to cut the had off his truest friend, and to this he stuck in spite of all the fox's declarations that it was the greatest service he could do him. At this the fox became very sorrowful, and declared that the prince's refusal to grant his request now compelled him to do a deed which he was very unwilling to do--if the prince would not cut off his head, then he must kill the prince himself. Then at last the prince drew his good sword and cut off the fox's head, and the next moment a youth stood before him.

'Thanks,' said he, 'for this service, which has freed me from a spell that not even death itself could loosen. I am the dead man who lay unburied in the robber's inn, where you ransomed me and gave me honourable burial, and therefore I have helped you in your journey.'

With this they parted and the prince, disguising himself as a horse-shoer, went up to his father's palace and offered his services there.

The king's men told him that a horse-shoer was indeed wanted at the palace, but he must be one who could lift up the feet of the horse with the golden shoes, and such a one they had not yet been able to find. The prince asked to see the horse, and as soon as he entered the stable the steed began to neigh in a friendly fashion, and stood as quiet and still as a lamb while the prince lifted up his hoofs, one after the other, and showed the king's men the famous golden shoes.

After this the king's men began to talk about the bird Grip, and how strange it was that he would not sing, however well he was attended to. The horse-shoer then said that he knew the bird very well; he had seen it when it sat in its cage in another king's palace, and if it did not sing now it must be because it did not have all that it wanted. He himself knew so much about the bird's ways that if he only got to see it he could tell at once what it lacked.

The king's men now took counsel whether they ought to take the stranger in before the king, for in his chamber sat the bird Grip along with the weeping princess. It was decided to risk doing so, and the horse-shoer was led into the king's chamber, where he had no sooner called the bird by its name than it began to sing and the princess to smile. Then the darkness cleared away from the king's eyes, and the more the bird sang the more clearly did he see, till at last in the strange horse-shoer he recognised his youngest son. Then the princess told the king how treacherously his eldest sons had acted, and he had them banished from his kingdom; but the youngest prince married the princess, and got the horse with the golden shoes and half the kingdom from his father, who kept for himself so long as he lived the bird Grip, which now sang with all its heart to the king and all his court.

The Pink Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f17]

Snowflake Slavonic story.

Contes Populaires Slaves, traduits par Louis Leger. Paris: Leroux, Editeur.

Once upon a time there lived a peasant called Ivan, and he had a wife whose name was Marie. They would have been quite happy except for one thing: they had no children to play with, and as they were now old people they did not find that watching the children of their neighbours at all made up to them for having one of their own.

One winter, which nobody living will ever forget, the snow lay so deep that it came up to the knees of even the tallest man. When it had all fallen, and the sun was shining again, the children ran out into the street to play, and the old man and his wife sat at their window and gazed at them. The children first made a sort of little terrace, and stamped it hard and firm, and then they began to make a snow woman. Ivan and Marie watched them, the while thinking about many things.

Suddenly Ivan's face brightened, and, looking at his wife, he said, 'Wife, why shouldn't we make a snow woman too?'

'Why not?' replied Marie, who happened to be in a very good temper; 'it might amuse us a little. But there is no use making a woman. Let us make a little snow child, and pretend it is a living one.'

'Yes, let us do that,' said Ivan, and he took down his cap and went into the garden with his old wife.

Then the two set to work with all their might to make a doll out of the snow. They shaped a little body and two little hands and two little feet. On top of all they placed a ball of snow, out of which the head was to be.

'What in the world are you doing?' asked a passer-by.

'Can't you guess?' returned Ivan.

'Making a snow-child,' replied Marie.

They had finished the nose and the chin. Two holes were left for the eyes, and Ivan carefully shaped out the mouth. No sooner had he done so than he felt a warm breath upon his cheek. He started back in surprise and looked--and behold! the eyes of the child met his, and its lips, which were as red as raspberries, smiled at him!

'What is it?' cried Ivan, crossing himself. 'Am I mad, or is the thing bewitched?'

The snow-child bent its head as if it had been really alive. It moved its little arms and its little legs in the snow that lay about it just as the living children did theirs.

'Ah! Ivan, Ivan,' exclaimed Marie, trembling with joy, 'heaven has sent us a child at last!' And she threw herself upon Snowflake (for that was the snow-child's name) and covered her with kisses. And the loose snow fell away from Snowflake as an egg shell does from an egg, and it was a little girl whom Marie held in her arms.

'Oh! my darling Snowflake!' cried the old woman, and led her into the cottage.

And Snowflake grew fast; each hour as well as each day made a difference, and every day she became more and more beautiful. The old couple hardly knew how to contain themselves for joy, and thought of nothing else. The cottage was always full of village children, for they amused Snowflake, and there was nothing in the world they would not have done to amuse her. She was their doll, and they were continually inventing new dresses for her, and teaching her songs or playing with her. Nobody knew how clever she was! She noticed everything, and could learn a lesson in a moment. Anyone would have taken her for thirteen at least! And, besides all that, she was so good and obedient; and so pretty, too! Her skin was as white as snow, her eyes as blue as forget-me-nots, and her hair was long and golden. Only her cheeks had no colour in them, but were as fair as her forehead.

So the winter went on, till at last the spring sun mounted higher in the heavens and began to warm the earth. The grass grew green in the fields, and high in the air the larks were heard singing. The village girls met and danced in a ring, singing, 'Beautiful spring, how came you here? How came you here? Did you come on a plough, or was it a harrow?' Only Snowflake sat quite still by the window of the cottage.

'What is the matter, dear child?' asked Marie. 'Why are you so sad? Are you ill? or have they treated you unkindly?'

'No,' replied Snowflake, 'it is nothing, mother; no one has hurt me; I am well.'

The spring sun had chased away the last snow from its hiding place under the hedges; the fields were full of flowers; nightingales sang in the trees, and all the world was gay. But the gayer grew the birds and the flowers the sadder became Snowflake. She hid herself from her playmates, and curled herself up where the shadows were deepest, like a lily amongst its leaves. Her only pleasure was to lie amid the green willows near some sparkling stream. At the dawn and at twilight only she seemed happy. When a great storm broke, and the earth was white with hail, she became bright and joyous as the Snowflake of old; but when the clouds passed, and the hail melted beneath the sun, Snowflake would burst into tears and weep as a sister would weep over her brother.

The spring passed, and it was the eve of St. John, or Midsummer Day. This was the greatest holiday of the year, when the young girls met in the woods to dance and play. They went to fetch Snowflake, and said to Marie: 'Let her come and dance with us.'

But Marie was afraid; she could not tell why, only she could not bear the child to go. Snowflake did not wish to go either, but they had no excuse ready. So Marie kissed the girl and said: 'Go, my Snowflake, and be happy with your friends, and you, dear children, be careful of her. You know she is the light of my eyes to me.'

'Oh, we will take care of her,' cried the girls gaily, and they ran off to the woods. There they wore wreaths, gathered nosegays, and sang songs some sad, some merry. And whatever they did Snowflake did too.

When the sun set they lit a fire of dry grass, and placed themselves in a row, Snowflake being the last of all. 'Now, watch us,' they said, 'and run just as we do.'

And they all began to sing and to jump one after another across the fire.

Suddenly, close behind them, they heard a sigh, then a groan. 'Ah!' They turned hastily and looked at each other. There was nothing. They looked again. Where was Snowflake? She has hidden herself for fun, they thought, and searched for her everywhere. 'Snowflake! Snowflake!' But there was no answer. 'Where can she be? Oh, she must have gone home.' They returned to the village, but there was no Snowflake.

For days after that they sought her high and low. They examined every bush and every hedge, but there was no Snowflake. And long after everyone else had given up hope Ivan and Marie would wander through the woods crying 'Snowflake, my dove, come back, come back!' And sometimes they thought they heard a call, but it was never the voice of Snowflake.

And what had become of her? Had a fierce wild beast seized her and dragged her into his lair in the forest? Had some bird carried her off across the wide blue sea?

No, no beast had touched her, no bird had borne her away. With the first breath of flame that swept over her when she ran with her friends Snowflake had melted away, and a little soft haze floating upwards was all that remained of her.

The Pink Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f18]

I Know What I Have Learned

From the Danish.

There was once a man who had three daughters, and they were all married to trolls, who lived underground. One day the man thought that he would pay them a visit, and his wife gave him some dry bread to eat by the way. After he had walked some distance he grew both tired and hungry, so he sat down on the east side of a mound and began to eat his dry bread. The mound then opened, and his youngest daughter came out of it, and said, 'Why, father! why are you not coming in to see me?'

'Oh,' said he, 'if I had known that you lived here, and had seen any entrance, I would have come in.'

Then he entered the mound along with her.

The troll came home soon after this, and his wife told him that her father was come, and asked him to go and buy some beef to make broth with.

'We can get it easier than that!' said the troll.

He fixed an iron spike into one of the beams of the roof, and ran his head against this till he had knocked several large pieces off his head. He was just as well as ever after doing this, and they got their broth without further trouble.

The troll then gave the old man a sackful of money, and laden with this he betook himself homewards. When he came near his home he remembered that he had a cow about to calve, so he laid down the money on the ground, ran home as fast as he could, and asked his wife whether the cow had calved yet.

'What kind of a hurry is this to come home in?' said she. 'No, the cow has not calved yet.'

'Then you must come out and help me in with a sackful of money,' said the man.

'A sackful of money?' cried his wife.

'Yes, a sackful of money,' said he. 'Is that so very wonderful?'

His wife did not believe very much what he told her, but she humoured him, and went out with him.

When they came to the spot where he had left it there was no money there; a thief had come along and stolen it. His wife then grew angry and scolded him heartily.

'Well, well!' said he, 'hang the money! I know what I have learned.'

'What have you learned?' said she.

'Ah! I know that,' said the man.

After some time had passed the man had a mind to visit his second eldest daughter. His wife again gave him some dry bread to eat, and when he grew tired and hungry he sat down on the east side of a mound and began to eat it. As he sat there his daughter came up out of the mound, and invited him to come inside, which he did very willingly.

Soon after this the troll came home. It was dark by that time, and his wife bade him go and buy some candles.

'Oh, we shall soon get a light,' said the troll. With that he dipped his fingers into the fire, and they then gave light without being burned in the least.

The old man got two sacks of money here, and plodded away homewards with these. When he was very nearly home he again thought of the cow that was with calf, so he laid down the money, ran home, and asked his wife whether the cow had calved yet.

'Whatever is the matter with you?' said she. 'You come hurrying as if the whole house was about to fall. You may set your mind at rest: the cow has not calved yet.'

The man now asked her to come and help him home with the two sacks of money. She did not believe him very much, but he continued to assure her that it was quite true, till at last she gave in and went with him. When they came to the spot there had again been a thief there and taken the money. It was no wonder that the woman was angry about this, but the man only said, 'Ah, if you only knew what I have learned.'

A third time the man set out--to visit his eldest daughter. When he came to a mound he sat down on the east side of it and ate the dry bread which his wife had given him to take with him. The daughter then came out of the mound and invited her father to come inside.

In a little the troll came home, and his wife asked him to go and buy some fish.

'We can get them much more easily than that,' said the troll. 'Give me your dough trough and your ladle.'

They seated themselves in the trough, and rowed out on the lake which was beside the mound. When they had got out a little way the troll said to his wife, 'Are my eyes green?'

'No, not yet,' said she.

He rowed on a little further and asked again, 'Are my eyes not green yet?'

'Yes,' said his wife, 'they are green now.'

Then the troll sprang into the water and ladled up so many fish that in a short time the trough could hold no more. They then rowed home again, and had a good meal off the fish.

The old man now got three sacks full of money, and set off home with them. When he was almost home the cow again came into his head, and he laid down the money. This time, however, he took his wooden shoes and laid them above the money, thinking that no one would take it after that. Then he ran home and asked his wife whether the cow had calved. It had not, and she scolded him again for behaving in this way, but in the end he persuaded her to go with him to help him with the three sacks of money.

When they came to the spot they found only the wooden shoes, for a thief had come along in the meantime and taken all the money. The woman was very angry, and broke out upon her husband; but he took it all very quietly, and only said, 'Hang the money! I know what I have learned.'

'What have you learned I should like to know?' said his wife.

'You will see that yet,' said the man.

One day his wife took a fancy for broth, and said to him, 'Oh, go to the village, and buy a piece of beef to make broth.'

'There's no need of that,' said he; 'we can get it an easier way.' With that he drove a spike into a beam, and ran his head against it, and in consequence had to lie in bed for a long time afterwards.

After he had recovered from this his wife asked him one day to go and buy candles, as they had none.

'No,' he said, 'there's no need for that;' and he stuck his hand into the fire. This also made him take to bed for a good while.

When he had got better again his wife one day wanted fish, and asked him to go and buy some. The man, however, wished again to show what he had learned, so he asked her to come along with him and bring her dough trough and a ladle. They both seated themselves in this, and rowed upon the lake. When they had got out a little way the man said, 'Are my eyes green?'

'No,' said his wife; 'why should they be?'

They rowed a little further out, and he asked again, 'Are my eyes not green yet?'

'What nonsense is this?' said she; 'why should they be green?'

'Oh, my dear,' said he, 'can't you just say that they are green?'

'Very well,' said she, 'they are green.'

As soon as he heard this he sprang out into the water with the ladle for the fishes, but he just got leave to stay there with them!

The Pink Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f19]

The Cunning Shoemaker

Sicilianische Mahrchen.

Once upon a time there lived a shoemaker who could get no work to do, and was so poor that he and his wife nearly died of hunger. At last he said to her, 'It is no use waiting on here--I can find nothing; so I shall go down to Mascalucia, and perhaps there I shall be more lucky.'

So down he went to Mascalucia, and walked through the streets crying, 'Who wants some shoes?' And very soon a window was pushed up, and a woman's head was thrust out of it.

'Here are a pair for you to patch,' she said. And he sat down on her doorstep and set about patching them.

'How much do I owe you?' she asked when they were done.

'A shilling.'

'Here is eighteenpence, and good luck to you.' And he went his way. He turned into the next street and set up his cry again, and it was not long before another window was pushed up and another head appeared.

'Here are some shoes for you to patch.'

And the shoemaker sat down on the doorstep and patched them.

'How much do I owe you?' asked the woman when the shoes were finished.

'A florin.'

'Here is a crown piece, and good luck to you.' And she shut the window.

'Well,' thought the shoemaker, 'I have done finely. But I will not go back to my wife just yet, as, if I only go on at this rate, I shall soon have enough money to buy a donkey.'

Having made up his mind what was best to do, he stayed in the town a few days longer till he had four gold pieces safe in his purse. Then he went to the market and for two of them he bought a good strong donkey, and, mounting on its back, he rode home to Catania. But as he entered a thick wood he saw in the distance a band of robbers who were coming quickly towards him.

'I am lost,' thought he; 'they are sure to take from me all the money that I have earned, and I shall be as poor as ever I was. What can I do?' However, being a clever little man and full of spirit, he did not lose heart, but, taking five florins, he fastened them out of sight under the donkey's thick mane. Then he rode on.

Directly the robber came up to him they seized him exactly as he had foretold and took away all his money.

'Oh, dear friends!' he cried, wringing his hands, 'I am only a poor shoemaker, and have nothing but this donkey left in the world.'

As he spoke the donkey gave himself a shake, and down fell the five florins.

'Where did that come from?' asked the robbers.

'Ah,' replied the shoemaker, 'you have guessed my secret. The donkey is a golden donkey, and supplies me with all my money.'

'Sell him to us,' said the robbers. 'We will give you any price you like.'

The shoemaker at first declared that nothing would induce him to sell him, but at last he agreed to hand him over to the robbers for fifty gold pieces. 'But listen to what I tell you,' said he. 'You must each take it in turn to own him for a night and a day, or else you will all be fighting over the money.'

With these words they parted, the robbers driving the donkey to their cave in the forest and the shoemaker returning home, very pleased with the success of his trick. He just stopped on the way to pick up a good dinner, and the next day spent most of his gains in buying a small vineyard.

Meanwhile the robbers had arrived at the cave where they lived, and the captain, calling them all round him, announced that it as his right to have the donkey for the first night. His companions agreed, and then he told his wife to put a mattress in the stable. She asked if he had gone out of his mind, but he answered crossly, 'What is that to you? Do as you are bid, and to-morrow I will bring you some treasures.'

Very early the captain awoke and searched the stable, but could find nothing, and guessed that Master Joseph had been making fun of them. 'Well,' he said to himself, 'if I have been taken in, the others shall not come off any better.'

So, when one of his men arrived and asked him eagerly how much money he had got, he answered gaily, 'Oh, comrade, if you only knew! But I shall say nothing about it till everyone has had his turn!'

One after another they all took the donkey, but no money was forthcoming for anybody. At length, when all the band had been tricked, they held a council, and resolved to march to the shoemaker's house and punish him well for his cunning. Just as before, the shoemaker saw them a long way off, and began to think how he could outwit them again. When he had hit upon a plan he called his wife, and said to her, 'Take a bladder and fill it with blood, and bind it round your neck. When the robbers come and demand the money they gave me for the donkey I shall shout to you and tell you to get it quickly. You must argue with me, and decline to obey me, and then I shall plunge my knife into the bladder, and you must fall to the ground as if you were dead. There you must lie till I play on my guitar; then get up and begin to dance.'

The wife made haste to do as she was bid, and there was no time to lose, for the robbers were drawing very near the house. They entered with a great noise, and overwhelmed the shoemaker with reproaches for having deceived them about the donkey.

'The poor beast must have lost its power owing to the change of masters,' said he; 'but we will not quarrel about it. You shall have back the fifty gold pieces that you gave for him. Aite,' he cried to his wife, 'go quickly to the chest upstairs, and bring down the money for these gentlemen.'

'Wait a little,' answered she; 'I must first bake this fish. It will be spoilt if I leave it now.'

'Go this instant, as you are bid,' shouted the shoemaker, stamping as if he was in a great passion; but, as she did not stir, he drew his knife, and stabbed her in the neck. The blood spurted out freely, and she fell to the ground as if she was dead.

'What have you done?' asked the robbers, looking at him in dismay. 'The poor woman was doing nothing.'

'Perhaps I was hasty, but it is easily set right,' replied the shoemaker, taking down his guitar and beginning to play. Hardly had he struck the first notes than his wife sat up; then got on her feet and danced.

The robbers stared with open mouths, and at last they said, 'Master Joseph, you may keep the fifty gold pieces. But tell us what you will take for your guitar, for you must sell it to us?'

'Oh, that is impossible!' replied the shoemaker, 'for every time I have a quarrel with my wife I just strike her dead, and so give vent to my anger. This has become such a habit with me that I don't think I could break myself of it; and, of course, if I got rid of the guitar I could never bring her back to life again.'

However, the robbers would not listen to him, and at last he consented to take forty gold pieces for the guitar.

Then they all returned to their cave in the forest, delighted with their new purchase, and longing for a chance of trying its powers. But the captain declared that the first trial belonged to him, and after that the others might have their turn.

That evening he called to his wife and said, 'What have you got for supper?'

'Macaroni,' answered she.

'Why have you not boiled a fish?' he cried, and stabber in the neck so that she fell dead. The captain, who was not in the least angry, seized the guitar and began to play; but, let him play as loud as he would, the dead woman never stirred. 'Oh, lying shoemaker! Oh, abominable knave! Twice has he got the better of me. But I will pay him out!'

So he raged and swore, but it did him no good. The fact remained that he had killed his wife and could not bring her back again.

The next morning came one of the robbers to fetch the guitar, and to hear what had happened.

'Well, how have you got on?'

'Oh, splendidly! I stabbed my wife, and then began to play, and now she is as well as ever.'

'Did you really? Then this evening I will try for myself.'

Of course the same thing happened over again, till all the wives had been killed secretly, and when there were no more left they whispered to each other the dreadful tale, and swore to be avenged on the shoemaker.

The band lost no time in setting out for his house, and, as before, the shoemaker saw them coming from afar. He called to his wife, who was washing in the kitchen: 'Listen, Aita: when the robbers come and ask for me say I have gone to the vineyard. Then tell the dog to call me, and chase him from the house.'

When he had given these directions he ran out of the back door and hid behind a barrel. A few minutes later the robbers arrived, and called loudly for the shoemaker.

'Alas! good gentlemen, he is up in the vineyard, but I will send the dog after him at once. Here! now quickly to the vineyard, and tell your master some gentlemen are here who wish to speak to him. Go as fast as you can.' And she opened the door and let the dog out.

'You can really trust the dog to call your husband?' asked the robbers.

'Dear me, yes! He understands everything, and will always carry any message I give him.'

By-and-bye the shoemaker came in and said, 'Good morning, gentlemen; the dog tells me you wish to speak to me.'

'Yes, we do,' replied the robber; 'we have come to speak to you about that guitar. It is your fault that we have murdered all our wives; and, though we played as you told us, none of them ever came back to life.'

'You could not have played properly,' said the shoemaker. 'It was your own fault.'

'Well, we will forget all about it,' answered the robbers, 'if you will only sell us your dog.'

'Oh, that is impossible! I should never get on without him.'

But the robbers offered him forty gold pieces, and at last he agreed to let them have the dog.

So they departed, taking the dog with them, and when they got back to their cave the captain declared that it was his right to have the first trial.

He then called his daughter, and said to her, 'I am going to the inn; if anybody wants me, loose the dog, and send him to call me.'

About an hour after some one arrived on business, and the girl untied the dog and said, 'Go to the inn and call my father!' The dog bounded off, but ran straight to the shoemaker.

When the robber got home and found no dog he thought 'He must have gone back to his old master,' and, though night had already fallen, he went off after him.

'Master Joseph, is the dog here?' asked he.

'Ah! yes, the poor beast is so fond of me! You must give him time to get accustomed to new ways.'

So the captain brought the dog back, and the following morning handed him over to another of the band, just saying that the animal really could do what the shoemaker had said.

The second robber carefully kept his own counsel, and fetched the dog secretly back from the shoemaker, and so on through the whole band. At length, when everybody had suffered, they met and told the whole story, and next day they all marched off in fury to the man who had made game of them. After reproaching him with having deceived them, they tied him up in a sack, and told him they were going to throw him into the sea. The shoemaker lay quite still, and let them do as they would.

They went on till they came to a church, and the robbers said, 'The sun is hot and the sack is heavy; let us leave it here and go in and rest.' So they put the sack down by the roadside, and went into the church.

Now, on a hill near by there was a swineherd looking after a great herd of pigs and whistling merrily.

When Master Joseph heard him he cried out as loud as he could, 'I won't; I won't, I say.'

'What won't you do?' asked the swineherd.

'Oh,' replied the shoemaker. 'They want me to marry the king's daughter, and I won't do it.'

'How lucky you are!' sighed the swineherd. 'Now, if it were only me!'

'Oh, if that's all!' replied the cunning shoemaker, 'get you into this sack, and let me out.'

Then the swineherd opened the sack and took the place of the shoemaker, who went gaily off, driving the pigs before him.

When the robbers were rested they came out of the church, took up the sack, and carried it to the sea, where they threw it in, and it sank directly. As they came back they met the shoemaker, and stared at him with open mouths.

'Oh, if you only knew how many pigs live in the sea,' he cried. 'And the deeper you go the more there are. I have just brought up these, and mean to return for some more.'

'There are still some left there?'

'Oh, more than I could count,' replied the shoemaker. 'I will show you what you must do.' Then he led the robbers back to the shore. 'Now,' said he, 'you must each of you tie a stone to your necks, so that you may be sure to go deep enough, for I found the pigs that you saw very deep down indeed.'

Then the robbers all tied stones round their necks, and jumped in, and were drowned, and Master Joseph drove his pigs home, and was a rich man to the end of his days.

The Pink Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f20]

The King Who Would Have a Beautiful Wife

Sicilianische Mahrchen.

Fifty years ago there lived a king who was very anxious to get married; but, as he was quite determined that his wife should be as beautiful as the sun, the thing was not so easy as it seemed, for no maiden came up to his standard. Then he commanded a trusty servant to search through the length and breadth of the land till he found a girl fair enough to be queen, and if he had the good luck to discover one he was to bring her back with him.

The servant set out at once on his journey, and sought high and low-in castles and cottages; but though pretty maidens were plentiful as blackberries, he felt sure that none of them would please the king.

One day he had wandered far and wide, and was feeling very tired and thirsty. By the roadside stood a tiny little house, and here he knocked and asked for a cup of water. Now in this house dwelt two sisters, and one was eighty and the other ninety years old. They were very poor, and earned their living by spinning. This had kept their hands very soft and white, like the hands of a girl, and when the water was passed through the lattice, and the servant saw the small, delicate fingers, he said to himself: 'A maiden must indeed be lovely if she has a hand like that.' And he made haste back, and told the king.

'Go back at once,' said his majesty, 'and try to get a sight of her.'

The faithful servant departed on his errand without losing any time, and again he knocked at the door of the little house and begged for some water. As before, the old woman did not open the door, but passed the water through the lattice.

'Do you live here alone?' asked the man.

'No,' replied she, 'my sister lives with me. We are poor girls, and have to work for our bread.'

'How old are you?'

'I am fifteen, and she is twenty.'

Then the servant went back to the king, and told him all he knew. And his majesty answered: 'I will have the fifteen-year-old one. Go and bring her here.'

The servant returned a third time to the little house and knocked at the door. In reply to his knock the lattice window was pushed open, and a voice inquired what it was he wanted.

'The king has desired me to bring back the youngest of you to become his queen,' he replied.

'Tell his majesty I am ready to do his bidding, but since my birth no ray of light has fallen upon my face. If it should ever do so I shall instantly grow black. Therefore beg, I pray you, his most gracious majesty to send this evening a shut carriage, and I will return in it to the castle.

When the king heard this he ordered his great golden carriage to be prepared, and in it to be placed some magnificent robes; and the old woman wrapped herself in a thick veil, and was driven to the castle.

The king was eagerly awaiting her, and when she arrived he begged her politely to raise her veil and let him see her face.

But she answered: 'Here the tapers are too bright and the light too strong. Would you have me turn black under your very eyes?'

And the king believed her words, and the marriage took place without the veil being once lifted. Afterwards, when they were alone, he raised the corner, and knew for the first time that he had wedded a wrinkled old woman. And, in a furious burst of anger, he dashed open the window and flung her out. But, luckily for her, her clothes caught on a nail in the wall, and kept her hanging between heaven and earth.

While she was thus suspended, expecting every moment to be dashed to the ground, four fairies happened to pass by.

'Look, sisters,' cried one, 'surely that is the old woman that the king sent for. Shall we wish that her clothes may give way, and that she should be dashed to the ground?'

'Oh no! no!' exclaimed another. 'Let us wish her something good. I myself will wish her youth.'

'And I beauty.'

'And I wisdom.'

'And I a tender heart.'

So spake the fairies, and went their way, leaving the most beautiful maiden in the world behind them.

The next morning when the king looked from his window he saw this lovely creature hanging on the nail. 'Ah! what have I done? Surely I must have been blind last night!'

And he ordered long ladders to be brought and the maiden to be rescued. Then he fell on his knees before her, and prayed her to forgive him, and a great feast was made in her honour.

Some days after came the ninety-year-old sister to the palace and asked for the queen.

'Who is that hideous old witch?' said the king.

'Oh, an old neighbour of mine, who is half silly,' she replied.

But the old woman looked at her steadily, and knew her again, and said: 'How have you managed to grow so young and beautiful? I should like to be young and beautiful too.'

This question she repeated the whole day long, till at length the queen lost patience and said: 'I had my old head cut off, and this new head grew in its place.'

Then the old woman went to a barber, and spoke to him, saying, 'I will give you all you ask if you will only cut off my head, so that I may become young and lovely.'

'But, my good woman, if I do that you will die!'

But the old woman would listen to nothing; and at last the barber took out his knife and struck the first blow at her neck.

'Ah!' she shrieked as she felt the pain.

'Il faut souffrir pour etre belle,' said the barber, who had been in France.

And at the second blow her head rolled off, and the old woman was dead for good and all.

The Pink Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f21]

Catherine and Her Destiny

Sicilianische Mahrchen von Laura Gonzenbach. Leipzig, Engelmann, 1870.

Long ago there lived a rich merchant who, besides possessing more treasures than any king in the world, had in his great hall three chairs, one of silver, one of gold, and one of diamonds. But his greatest treasure of all was his only daughter, who was called Catherine.

One day Catherine was sitting in her own room when suddenly the door flew open, and in came a tall and beautiful woman holding in her hands a little wheel.

'Catherine,' she said, going up to the girl, 'which would you rather have-a happy youth or a happy old age?'

Catherine was so taken by surprise that she did not know what to answer, and the lady repeated again, 'Which would you rather have-a happy youth or a happy old age?'

Then Catherine thought to herself, 'If I say a happy youth, then I shall have to suffer all the rest of my life. No, I would bear trouble now, and have something better to look forward to.' So she looked up and replied, 'Give me a happy old age.'

'So be it,' said the lady, and turned her wheel as she spoke, vanishing the next moment as suddenly as she had come.

Now this beautiful lady was the Destiny of poor Catherine.

Only a few days after this the merchant heard the news that all his finest ships, laden with the richest merchandise, had been sunk in a storm, and he was left a beggar. The shock was too much for him. He took to his bed, and in a short time he was dead of his disappointment.

So poor Catherine was left alone in the world without a penny or a creature to help her. But she was a brave girl and full of spirit, and soon made up her mind that the best thing she could do was to go to the nearest town and become a servant. She lost no time in getting herself ready, and did not take long over her journey; and as she was passing down the chief street of the town a noble lady saw her out of the window, and, struck by her sad face, said to her: 'Where are you going all alone, my pretty girl?'

'Ah, my lady, I am very poor, and must go to service to earn my bread.'

'I will take you into my service,' said she; and Catherine served her well.

Some time after her mistress said to Catherine, 'I am obliged to go out for a long while, and must lock the house door, so that no thieves shall get in.'

So she went away, and Catherine took her work and sat down at the window. Suddenly the door burst open, and in came her Destiny.

'Oh! so here you are, Catherine! Did you really think I was going to leave you in peace?' And as she spoke she walked to the linen press where Catherine's mistress kept all her finest sheets and underclothes, tore everything in pieces, and flung them on the floor. Poor Catherine wrung her hands and wept, for she thought to herself, 'When my lady comes back and sees all this ruin she will think it is my fault,' and starting up, she fled through the open door. Then Destiny took all the pieces and made them whole again, and put them back in the press, and when everything was tidy she too left the house.

When the mistress reached home she called Catherine, but no Catherine was there. 'Can she have robbed me?' thought the old lady, and looked hastily round the house; but nothing was missing. She wondered why Catherine should have disappeared like this, but she heard no more of her, and in a few days she filled her place.

Meanwhile Catherine wandered on and on, without knowing very well where she was going, till at last she came to another town. Just as before, a noble lady happened to see her passing her window, and called out to her, 'Where are you going all alone, my pretty girl?'

And Catherine answered, 'Ah, my lady, I am very poor, and must go to service to earn my bread.'

'I will take you into my service,' said the lady; and Catherine served her well, and hoped she might now be left in peace. But, exactly as before, one day that Catherine was left in the house alone her Destiny came again and spoke to her with hard words: 'What! are you here now?' And in a passion she tore up everything she saw, till in sheer misery poor Catherine rushed out of the house. And so it befell for seven years, and directly Catherine found a fresh place her Destiny came and forced her to leave it.

After seven years, however, Destiny seemed to get tired of persecuting her, and a time of peace set in for Catherine. When she had been chased away from her last house by Destiny's wicked pranks she had taken service with another lady, who told her that it would be part of her daily work to walk to a mountain that overshadowed the town, and, climbing up to the top, she was to lay on the ground some loaves of freshly baked bread, and cry with a loud voice, 'O Destiny, my mistress,' three times. Then her lady's Destiny would come and take away the offering. 'That will I gladly do,' said Catherine.

So the years went by, and Catherine was still there, and every day she climbed the mountain with her basket of bread on her arm. She was happier than she had been, but sometimes, when no one saw her, she would weep as she thought over her old life, and how different it was to the one she was now leading. One day her lady saw her, and said, 'Catherine, what is it? Why are you always weeping?' And then Catherine told her story.

'I have got an idea,' exclaimed the lady. 'To-morrow, when you take the bread to the mountain, you shall pray my Destiny to speak to yours, and entreat her to leave you in peace. Perhaps something may come of it!'

At these words Catherine dried her eyes, and next morning, when she climbed the mountain, she told all she had suffered, and cried, 'O Destiny, my mistress, pray, I entreat you, of my Destiny that she may leave me in peace.'

And Destiny answered, 'Oh, my poor girl, know you not your Destiny lies buried under seven coverlids, and can hear nothing? But if you will come to-morrow I will bring her with me.'

And after Catherine had gone her way her lady's Destiny went to find her sister, and said to her, 'Dear sister, has not Catherine suffered enough? It is surely time for her good days to begin?'

And the sister answered, 'To-morrow you shall bring her to me, and I will give her something that may help her out of her need.'

The next morning Catherine set out earlier than usual for the mountain, and her lady's Destiny took the girl by the hand and led her to her sister, who lay under the seven coverlids. And her Destiny held out to Catherine a ball of silk, saying, 'Keep this--it may be useful some day;' then pulled the coverings over her head again.

But Catherine walked sadly down the hill, and went straight to her lady and showed her the silken ball, which was the end of all her high hopes.

'What shall I do with it?' she asked. 'It is not worth sixpence, and it is no good to me!'

'Take care of it,' replied her mistress. 'Who can tell how useful it may be?'

A little while after this grand preparations were made for the king's marriage, and all the tailors in the town were busy embroidering fine clothes. The wedding garment was so beautiful nothing like it had ever been seen before, but when it was almost finished the tailor found that he had no more silk. The colour was very rare, and none could be found like it, and the king made a proclamation that if anyone happened to possess any they should bring it to the court, and he would give them a large sum.

'Catherine!' exclaimed the lady, who had been to the tailors and seen the wedding garment, 'your ball of silk is exactly the right colour. Bring it to the king, and you can ask what you like for it.'

Then Catherine put on her best clothes and went to the court, and looked more beautiful than any woman there.

'May it please your majesty,' she said, 'I have brought you a ball of silk of the colour you asked for, as no one else has any in the town.'

'Your majesty,' asked one of the courtiers, 'shall I give the maiden its weight in gold?'

The king agreed, and a pair of scales were brought; and a handful of gold was placed in one scale and the silken ball in the other. But lo! let the king lay in the scales as many gold pieces as he would, the silk was always heavier still. Then the king took some larger scales, and heaped up all his treasures on one side, but the silk on the other outweighed them all. At last there was only one thing left that had not been put in, and that was his golden crown. And he took it from his head and set it on top of all, and at last the scale moved and the ball had founds its balance.

'Where got you this silk?' asked the king.

'It was given me, royal majesty, by my mistress,' replied Catherine.

'That is not true,' said the king, 'and if you do not tell me the truth I will have your head cut off this instant.'

So Catherine told him the whole story, and how she had once been as rich as he.

Now there lived at the court a wise woman, and she said to Catherine, 'You have suffered much, my poor girl, but at length your luck has turned, and I know by the weighing of the scales through the crown that you will die a queen.'

'So she shall,' cried the king, who overheard these words; 'she shall die my queen, for she is more beautiful than all the ladies of the court, and I will marry no one else.'

And so it fell out. The king sent back the bride he had promised to wed to her own country, and the same Catherine was queen at the marriage feast instead, and lived happy and contented to the end of her life.

The Pink Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f22]

How the Hermit Helped to Win the King's Daughter

Sicilianische Mahrchen

Long ago there lived a very rich man who had three sons. When he felt himself to be dying he divided his property between them, making them share alike, both in money and lands. Soon after he died the king set forth a proclamation through the whole country that whoever could build a ship that should float both on land and sea should have his daughter to wife.

The eldest brother, when he heard it, said to the other, 'I think I will spend some of my money in trying to build that ship, as I should like to have the king for my father-in-law.' So he called toether all the shipbuilders in the land, and gave them orders to begin the ship without delay. And trees were cut down, and great preparations made, and in a few days everybody knew what it was all for; and there was a crowd of old people pressing round the gates of the yard, where the young man spent the most of his day.

'Ah, master, give us work,' they said, 'so that we may earn our bread.'

But he only gave them hard words, and spoke roughly to them. 'You are old, and have lost your strength; of what use are you?' And he drove them away. Then came some boys and prayed him, "master, give us work,' but he answered them, 'Of what use can you be, weaklings as you are! Get you gone!' And if any presented themselves that were not skilled workmen he would have none of them.

At last there knocked at the gate a little old man with a long white beard, and said, 'Will you give me work, so that I may earn my bread?' But he was only driven away like the rest.

The ship took a long while to build, and cost a great deal of money, and when it was launched a sudden squall rose, and it fell to pieces, and with it all the young man's hopes of winning the princess. By this time he had not a penny left, so he went back to his two brothers and told his tale. And the second brother said to himself as he listened, 'Certainly he has managed very badly, but I should like to see if I can't do better, and win the princess for my own self.' So he called together all the shipbuilders throughout the country, and gave them orders to build a ship which should float on the land as well as on the sea. But his heart was no softer than his brother's, and every man that was not a skilled workman was chased away with hard words. Last came the white-bearded man, but he fared no better than the rest.

When the ship was finished the launch took place, and everything seemed going smoothly when a gale sprang up, and the vessel was dashed to pieces on the rocks. The young man had spent his whole fortune on it, and now it was all swallowed up, was forced to beg shelter from his youngest brother. When he told his story the youngest said to himself, 'I am not rich enough to support us all three. I had better take my turn, and if I manage to win the princess there will be her fortune as well as my own for us to live on.' So he called together all the shipbuilders in the kingdom, and gave orders that a new ship should be built. Then all the old people came and asked for work, and he answered cheerfully, 'Oh, yes, there is plenty for everybody;' and when the boys begged to be allowed to help he found something that they could do. And when the old man with the long white beard stood before him, praying that he might earn his bread, he replied, 'Oh, father, I could not suffer you to work, but you shall be overseer, and look after the rest.'

Now the old man was a holy hermit, and when he saw how kind-hearted the youth was he determined to do all he could for him to gain the wish of his heart.

By-and-bye, when the ship was finished, the hermit said to his young friend, 'Now you can go and claim the king's daughter, for hte ship will float both by land and sea.'

'Oh, good father,' cried the young man, 'you will not forsake me? Stay with me, I pray you, and lead me to the king!'

'If you wish it, I will,' said the hermit, 'on condition that you will give me half of anything you get.'

'Oh, if that is all,' answered he, 'it is easily promised!' And they set out together on the ship.

After they had gone some distance they saw a man standing in a thick fog, which he was trying to put into a sack.

'Oh, good father,' exclaimed the youth, 'what can he be doing?'

'Ask him,' said the old man.

'What are you doing, my fine fellow?'

'I am putting the fog into my sack. That is my business.'

'Ask him if he will come with us,' whispered the hermit.

And the man answered: 'If you will give me enough to eat and drink I will gladly stay with you.'

So they took him on their ship, and the youth said, as they started off again, 'Good father, before we were two, and now we are three!'

After they had travelled a little further they met a man who had torn up half the forest, and was carrying all the trees on his shoulders.

'Good father,' exclaimed the youth, 'only look! What can he have done that for?'

'Ask him why he has torn up all those trees.'

And the man replied, 'Why, I've merely been gathering a handful of brushwood.'

'Beg him to come with us,' whispered the hermit.

And the strong man answered: 'Willingly, as long as you give me enough to eat and drink.' And he came on the ship.

And the youth said to the hermit, 'Good father, before we were three, and now we are four.'

The ship travelled on again, and some miles further on they saw a man drinking out of a stream till he had nearly drunk it dry.

'Good father,' said the youth, 'just look at that man! Did you ever see anybody drink like that?'

'Ask him why he does it,' answered the hermit.

'Why, there is nothing very odd in taking a mouthful of water!' replied the man, standing up.

'Beg him to come with us.' And the youth did so.

'With pleasure, as long as you give me enough to eat and drink.' And the youth whispered to the hermit, 'Good father, before we were four, and now we are five.'

A little way along they noticed another man in the middle of a stream, who was shooting into the water.

'Good father,' said the youth, 'what can he be shooting at?'

'Ask him,' answered the hermit.

'Hush, hush!' cried the man; 'now you have frightened it away. In the Underworld sits a quail on a tree, and I wanted to shoot it. That is my business. I hit everything I aim at.'

'Ask him if he will come with us.'

And the man replied, 'With all my heart, as long as I get enough to eat and drink.'

So they took him into the ship, and the young man whispered, 'Good father, before we were five, and now we are six.'

Off they went again, and before they had gone far they met a man striding towards them whose steps were so long that while one foot was on the north of the island the other was right down in the south.

'Good father, look at him! What long steps he takes!'

'Ask him why he does it,' replied the hermit.

'Oh, I am only going out for a little walk,' answered he.

'Ask him if he will come with us.'

'Gladly, if you will give me as much as I want to eat and drink,' said he, climbing up into the ship.

And the young man whispered, 'Good father, before we were six, and now we are seven.' But the hermit knew what he was about, and why he gathered these strange people into the ship.

After many days, at last they reached the town where lived the king and his daughter. They stopped the vessel right in front of the palace, and the young man went in and bowed low before the king.

'O Majesty, I have done your bidding, and now is the ship built that can travel over land and sea. Give me my reward, and let me have your daughter to wife.'

But the king said to himself, 'What! am I to wed my daughter to a man of whom I know nothing. Not even whether he be rich or poor--a knight or a beggar.'

And aloud he spake: It is not enough that you have managed to build the ship. You must find a runner who shall take this letter to the ruler of the Underworld, and bring me the answer back in an hour.'

'That is not in the bond,' answered the young man.

'Well, do as you like,' replied the king, 'only you will not get my daughter.'

The young man went out, sorely troubled, to tell his old friend what had happened.

'Silly boy!' cried the hermit, 'Accept his terms at once. And send off the long-legged man with the letter. He will take it in no time at all.' So the youth's heard leapt for joy, and he returned to the king. 'Majesty, I accept your terms. HEre is the messenger who will do what you wish.'

The king had no choice but to give the man the letter, and he strode off, making short work of the distance that lay between the palace and the Underworld. He soon found the ruler, who looked at the letter, and said to him, 'Wait a little while i write the answer;' but the man was soo tired with his quick walk that he went sound asleep and forgot all about his errand.

All this time the youth was anxiously counting the minutes till he could get back, and stood with his eyes fixed on the road down which his messenger must come.

'What can be keeping him,' he said to the hermit when the hour was nearly up. Then the hermit sent for the man who could hit everything he aimed at, and said to him, 'Just see why the messenger stays so long.'

'Oh, he is sound asleep in the palace of the Underworld. However, I can wake him.'

Then he drew his bow, and shot an arrow straight into the man's knee. The messenger awoke with such a start, and when he saw that the hour had almost run out he snatched up the answer and rushed back with such speed that the clock had not yet struck when he entered the palace.

Now the young man thought he was sure of his bride, but the king said, "Still you have not done enough. Before I give you my daughter you must find a man who can drink half the contents of my cellar in one day.'

'That is not in the bond,' complained the poor youth.

'Well, do as you like, only you will not get my daughter.'

The young man went sadly out, and asked the hermit what he was to do.

'Silly boy!' said he. 'Why, tell the man to do it who drinks up everything.'

So they sent for the man and said, 'Do you think you are able to drink half the royal cellar in one day?'

'Dear me, yes, and as much more as you want,' answered he. 'I am never satisfied.'

The king was not pleased at the young man agreeing so readily, but he had no choice, and ordered the servant to be taken downstairs. Oh, how he enjoyed himself! All day long he drank, and drank, and drank, till instead of half the cellar, he had drunk the whole, and there was not a cask but what stood empty. And when the king saw this he said to the youth, 'You ahve conquered, and I can no longer withhold my daughter. But, as her dowry, I shall only give so much as one man can carry away.'

'But,' answered he, 'let a man be ever so strong, he cannot carry more than a hundredweight, and what is that for a king's daughter?'

'Well, do as you like; I have said my say. It is your affair--not mine.'

The young man was puzzled, and did not know what to reply, for, though he would gladly have married the princess without a sixpence, he had spent all his money in building the ship, and knew he could not give her all she wanted. So he went to the hermit and said to him, 'The king will only give for her dowry as much as a man can carry. I have no money of my own left, and my brothers have none either.'

'Silly boy! Why, you have only got to fetch the man who carried half the forest on his shoulders.'

And the youth was glad, and called the strong man, and told him what he must do. 'Take everything you can, till you are bent double. Never mind if you leave the palace bare.'

The strong man promised, and nobly kept his word. He piled all he could see on his back--chairs, tables, wardrobes, chests of gold and silver--till there was nothing left to pile. At last he took the king's crown, and put it on the top. He carried his burden to the ship and stowed his treasures away, and the youth followed, leading the king's daughter. But the king was left raging in his empty palace, and he called together his army, and got ready his ships of war, in order that he might go after the vessel and bring back what had been taken away.

And the king's ships sailed very fast, and soon caught up the little vessel, and the sailors all shouted for joy. Then the hermit looked out and saw how near they were, and he said to the youth, 'Do you see that?'

The youth shrieked and cried, 'Ah, good father, it is a fleet of ships, and they are chasing us, and in a few moments they will be upon us.'

But the hermit bade him call the man who had the fog in his sack, and the sack was opened and the fog flew out, and hung right round the king's ships, so that they could see nothing. So they sailed back to the palace, and told the king what strange things had happened. Meanwhile the young man's vessel reached home in safety.

'Well, here you are once more' said the hermit; 'and now you can fulfil the promise you made me to give me the half of all you had.'

'That will I do with all my heart,' answered the youth, and began to divide all his treasures, putting part on one side for himself and setting aside the other for his friend. 'Good father, it is finished,' said he at length; 'there is nothing more left to divide.'

'Nothing more left!' cried the hermit. 'Why, you have forgotten the best thing of all!'

'What can that be?' asked he. 'We have divided everything.'

'And the king's daughter?' said the hermit.

Then the young man's heart stood still, for he loved her dearly. But he answered, 'It is well; I have sworn, and I will keep my word,' and drew his sword to cut her in pieces. When the hermit saw that he held his honour dearer than his wife he lifted his hand and cried, 'Hold! she is yours, and all the treasures too. I gave you my help because you had pity on those that were in need. And when you are in need yourself, call upon me, and I will come to you.'

As he spoke he softly touched their heads and vanished.

The next day the wedding took place, and the two brothers came to the house, and they all lived happily together, but they never forgot the holy man who had been such a good friend.

The Pink Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f23]

The Water of Life

Cuentos Populars Catalans, per lo Dr. D. Francisco de S. Maspous y Labros. Barcelona, 1885.

Three brothers and one sister lived together in a small cottage, and they loved one another dearly. One day the eldest brother, who had never done anything but amuse himself from sunrise to sunset, said to the rest, 'Let us all work hard, and perhaps we shall grow rich, and be able to build ourselves a palace.'

And his brothers and sister answered joyfully, 'Yes, we will all work!'

So they fell to working with all their might, till at last they became rich, and were able to build themselves a beautiful palace; and everyone came from miles round to see its wonders, and to say how splendid it was. No one thought of finding any faults, till at length an old woman, who had been walking through the rooms with a crowd of people, suddenly exclaimed, 'Yes, it is a splendid palace, but there is still something it needs!'

'And what may that be?'

'A church.'

When they heard this the brothers set to work again to earn some more money, and when they had got enough they set about building a church, which should be as large and beautiful as the palace itself.

And after the church was finished greater numbers of people than ever flocked to see the palace and the church and vast gardens and magnificent halls.

But one day, as the brothers were as usual doing the honours to their guests, an old man turned to them and said, 'Yes, it is all most beautiful, but there is still something it needs!'

'And what may that be?'

'A pitcher of the water of life, a branch of the tree the smell of whose flowers gives eternal beauty, and the talking bird.'

'And where am I to find all those?'

'Go to the mountain that is far off yonder, and you will find what you seek.'

After the old man had bowed politely and taken farewell of them the eldest brother said to the rest, 'I will go in search of the water of life, and the talking bird, and the tree of beauty.'

'But suppose some evil thing befalls you?' asked his sister. 'How shall we know?'

'You are right,' he replied; ' I had not thought of that!'

Then they followed the old man, and said to him, 'My eldest brother wishes to seek for the water of life, and the tree of beauty, and the talking bird, that you tell him are needful to make our palace perfect. But how shall we know if any evil thing befall him?'

So the old man took them a knife, and gave it to them, saying, 'Keep this carefully, and as long as the blade is bright all is well; but if the blade is bloody, then know that evil has befallen him.'

The brothers thanked him, and departed, and went straight to the palace, where they found the young man making ready to set out for the mountain where the treasures he longed for lay hid.

And he walked, and he walked, and he walked, till he had gone a great way, and there he met a giant.

'Can you tell me how much further I have still to go before I reach that mountain yonder?'

'And why do you wish to go there?'

'I am seeking the water of life, the talking bird, and a branch of the tree of beauty.'

'Many have passed by seeking those treasures, but none have ever come back; and you will never come back either, unless you mark my words. Follow this path, and when you reach the mountain you will find it covered with stones. Do not stop to look at them, but keep on your way. As you go you will hear scoffs and laughs behind you; it will be the stones that mock. Do not heed them; above all, do not turn round. If you do you will become as one of them. Walk straight on till you get to the top, and then take all you wish for.'

The young man thanked him for his counsel, and walked, and walked, and walked, till he reached the mountain. And as he climbed he heard behind him scoffs and jeers, but he kept his ears steadily closed to them. At last the noise grew so loud that he lost patience, and he stooped to pick up a stone to hurl into the midst of the clamour, when suddenly his arm seemed to stiffen, and the next moment he was a stone himself!

That day his sister, who thought her brother's steps were long in returning, took out the knife and found the blade was red as blood. Then she cried out to her brothers that something terrible had come to pass.

'I will go and find him,' said the second. And he went. And he walked, and he walked, and he walked, till he met the giant, and asked him if he had seen a young man travelling towards the mountain.

And the giant answered, 'Yes, I have seen him pass, but I have not seen him come back. The spell must have worked upon him.'

'Then what can I do to disenchant him, and find the water of life, the talking bird, and a branch of the tree of beauty?'

'Follow this path, and when you reach the mountain you will find it covered with stones. Do not stop to look at them, but climb steadily on. Above all, heed not the laughs and scoffs that will arise on all sides, and never turn round. And when you reach the top you can then take all you desire.'

The young man thanked him for his counsel, and set out for the mountain. But no sooner did he reach it than loud jests and gibes broke out on every side, and almost deafened him. For some time he let them rail, and pushed boldly on, till he had passed the place which his brother had gained; then suddenly he thought that among the scoffing sounds he heard his brother's voice. He stopped and looked back; and another stone was added to the number.

Meanwhile the sister left at home was counting the days when her two brothers should return to her. The time seemed long, and it would be hard to say how often she took out the knife and looked at its polished blade to make sure that this one at least was still safe. The blade was always bright and clear; each time she looked she had the happiness of knowing that all was well, till one evening, tired and anxious, as she frequently was at the end of the day, she took it from its drawer, and behold! the blade was red with blood. Her cry of horror brought her youngest brother to her, and, unable to speak, she held out the knife!

'I will go,' he said.

So he walked, and he walked, and he walked, until he met the giant, and he asked, 'Have two young men, making for yonder mountain, passed this way?'

And the giant answered, 'Yes, they have passed by, but they never came back, and by this I know that the spell has fallen upon them.'

'Then what must I do to free them, and to get the water of life, and the talking bird, and the branch of the tree of beauty?'

'Go to the mountain, which you will find so thickly covered with stones that you will hardly be able to place your feet, and walk straight forward, turning neither to the right hand nor to the left, and paying no heed to the laughs and scoffs which will follow you, till you reach the top, and then you may take all that you desire.'

The young man thanked the giant for his counsel, and set forth to the mountain. And when he began to climb there burst forth all around him a storm of scoffs and jeers; but he thought of the giant's words, and looked neither to the right hand nor to the left, till the mountain top lay straight before him. A moment now and he would have gained it, when, through the groans and yells, he heard his brothers' voices. He turned, and there was one stone the more.

And all this while his sister was pacing up and down the palace, hardly letting the knife out of her hand, and dreading what she knew she would see, and what she did see. The blade grew red before her eyes, and she said, 'Now it is my turn.'

So she walked, and she walked, and she walked till she came to the giant, and prayed him to tell her if he had seen three young men pass that way seeking the distant mountain.

'I have seen them pass, but they have never returned, and by this I know that the spell has fallen upon them.'

'And what must I do to set them free, and to find the water of life, and the talking bird, and a branch of the tree of beauty?'

'You must go to that mountain, which is so full of stones that your feet will hardly find a place to tread, and as you climb you will hear a noise as if all the stones in the world were mocking you; but pay no heed to anything you may hear, and, once you gain the top, you have gained everything.'

The girl thanked him for his counsel, and set out for the mountain; and scarcely had she gone a few steps upwards when cries and screams broke forth around her, and she felt as if each stone she trod on was a living thing. But she remembered the words of the giant, and knew not what had befallen her brothers, and kept her face steadily towards the mountain top, which grew nearer and nearer every moment. But as she mounted the clamour increased sevenfold: high above them all rang the voices of her three brothers. But the girl took no heed, and at last her feet stood upon the top.

Then she looked round, and saw, lying in a hollow, the pool of the water of life. And she took the brazen pitcher that she had brought with her, and filled it to the brim. By the side of the pool stood the tree of beauty, with the talking bird on one of its boughs; and she caught the bird, and placed it in a cage, and broke off one of the branches.

After that she turned, and went joyfully down the hill again, carrying her treasures, but her long climb had tired her out, and the brazen pitcher was very heavy, and as she walked a few drops of the water spilt on the stones, and as it touched them they changed into young men and maidens, crowding about her to give thanks for their deliverance.

So she learnt by this how the evil spell might be broken, and she carefully sprinkled every stone till there was not one left--only a great company of youths and girls who followed her down the mountain.

When they arrived at the palace she did not lose a moment in planting the branch of the tree of beauty and watering it with the water of life. And the branch shot up into a tree, and was heavy with flowers, and the talking bird nestled in its branches.

Now the fame of these wonders was noised abroad, and the people flocked in great numbers to see the three marvels, and the maiden who had won them; and among the sightseers came the king's son, who would not go till everything was shown him, and till he had heard how it had all happened. And the prince admired the strangeness and beauty of the treasures in the palace, but more than all he admired the beauty and courage of the maiden who had brought them there. So he went home and told his parents, and gained their consent to wed her for his wife.

Then the marriage was celebrated in the church adjoining the palace. Then the bridegroom took her to his own home, where they lived happy for ever after.

The Pink Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f24]

The Wounded Lion

Cuentos Populars Catalans.

There was once a girl so poor that she had nothing to live on, and wandered about the world asking for charity. One day she arrived at a thatched cottage, and inquired if they could give her any work. The farmer said he wanted a cowherd, as his own had left him, and if the girl liked the place she might take it. So she became a cowherd.

One morning she was driving her cows through the meadows when she heard near by a loud groan that almost sounded human. She hastened to the spot from which the noise came, and found it proceeded from a lion who lay stretched upon the ground.

You can guess how frightened she was! But the lion seemed in such pain that she was sorry for him, and drew nearer and nearer till she saw he had a large thorn in one foot. She pulled out the thorn and bound up the place, and the lion was grateful, and licked her hand by way of thanks with his big rough tongue.

When the girl had finished she went back to find the cows, but they had gone, and though she hunted everywhere she never found them; and she had to return home and confess to her master, who scolded her bitterly, and afterwards beat her. Then he said, 'Now you will have to look after the asses.'

So every day she had to take the asses to the woods to feed, until one morning, exactly a year after she had found the lion, she heard a groan which sounded quite human. She went straight to the place from which the noise came, and, to her great surprise, beheld the same lion stretched on the ground with a deep wound across his face.

This time she was not afraid at all, and ran towards him, washing the wound and laying soothing herbs upon it; and when she had bound it up the lion thanked her in the same manner as before.

After that she returned to her flock, but they were nowhere to be seen. She searched here and she searched there, but they had vanished completely!

Then she had to go home and confess to her master, who first scolded her and afterwards beat her. 'Now go,' he ended, 'and look after the pigs!'

So the next day she took out the pigs, and found them such good feeding grounds that they grew fatter every day.

Another year passed by, and one morning when the maiden was out with her pigs she heard a groan which sounded quite human. She ran to see what it was, and found her old friend the lion, wounded through and through, fast dying under a tree.

She fell on her knees before him and washed his wounds one by one, and laid healing herbs upon them. And the lion licked her hands and thanked her, and asked if she would not stay and sit by him. But the girl said she had her pigs to watch, and she must go and see after them.

So she ran to the place where she had left them, but they had vanished as if the earth had swallowed them up. She whistled and called, but only the birds answered her.

Then she sank down on the ground and wept bitterly, not daring to return home until some hours had passed away.

And when she had had her cry out she got up and searched all up and down the wood. But it was no use; there was not a sign of the pigs.

At last she thought that perhaps if she climbed a tree she might see further. But no sooner was she seated on the highest branch than something happened which put the pigs quite out of her head. This was a handsome young man who was coming down the path; and when he had almost reached the tree he pulled aside a rock and disappeared behind it.

The maiden rubbed her eyes and wondered if she had been dreaming. Next she thought, 'I will not stir from here till I see him come out, and discover who he is.' Accordingly she waited, and at dawn the next morning the rock moved to one side and a lion came out.

When he had gone quite out of sight the girl climbed down from the tree and went to the rock, which she pushed aside, and entered the opening before her. The path led to a beautiful house. She went in, swept and dusted the furniture, and put everything tidy. Then she ate a very good dinner, which was on a shelf in the corner, and once more clambered up to the top of her tree.

As the sun set she saw the same young man walking gaily down the path, and, as before, he pushed aside the rock and disappeared behind it.

Next morning out came the lion. He looked sharply about him on all sides, but saw no one, and then vanished into the forest.

The maiden then came down from the tree and did exactly as she had done the day before. Thus three days went by, and every day she went and tidied up the palace. At length, when the girl found she was no nearer to discovering the secret, she resolved to ask him, and in the evening when she caught sight of him coming through the wood she came down from the tree and begged him to tell her his name.

The young man looked very pleased to see her, and said he thought it must be she who had secretly kept his house for so many days. And he added that he was a prince enchanted by a powerful giant, but was only allowed to take his own shape at night, for all day he was forced to appear as the lion whom she had so often helped; and, more than this, it was the giant who had stolen the oxen and the asses and the pigs in revenge for her kindness.

And the girl asked him, 'What can I do to disenchant you?'

But he said he was afraid it was very difficult, because the only way was to get a lock of hair from the head of a king's daughter, to spin it, and to make from it a cloak for the giant, who lived up on the top of a high mountain.

'Very well,' answered the girl, 'I will go to the city, and knock at the door of the king's palace, and ask the princess to take me as a servant.'

So they parted, and when she arrived at the city she walked about the streets crying, 'Who will hire me for a servant? Who will hire me for a servant?' But, though many people liked her looks, for she was clean and neat, the maiden would listen to none, and still continued crying, 'Who will hire me for a servant? Who will hire me for a servant?'

At last there came the waiting-maid of the princess.

'What can you do?' she said; and the girl was forced to confess that she could do very little.

'Then you will have to do scullion's work, and wash up dishes,' said she; and they went straight back to the palace.

Then the maiden dressed her hair afresh, and made herself look very neat and smart, and everyone admired and praised her, till by-and-bye it came to the ears of the princess. And she sent for the girl, and when she saw her, and how beautifully she had dressed her hair, the princess told her she was to come and comb out hers.

Now the hair of the princess was very thick and long, and shone like the sun. And the girl combed it and combed it till it was brighter than ever. And the princess was pleased, and bade her come every day and comb her hair, till at length the girl took courage, and begged leave to cut off one of the long, thick locks.

The princess, who was very proud of her hair, did not like the idea of parting with any of it, so she said no. But the girl could not give up hope, and each day she entreated to be allowed to cut off just one tress. At length the princess lost patience, and exclaimed, 'You may have it, then, on condition that you shall find the handsomest prince in the world to be my bridegroom!'

And the girl answered that she would, and cut off the lock, and wove it into a coat that glittered like silk, and brought it to the young man, who told her to carry it straight to the giant. But that she must be careful to cry out a long way off what she had with her, or else he would spring upon her and run her through with his sword.

So the maiden departed and climbed up the mountain, but before she reached the top the giant heard her footsteps, and rushed out breathing fire and flame, having a sword in one hand and a club in the other. But she cried loudly that she had brought him the coat, and then he grew quiet, and invited her to come into his house.

He tried on the coat, but it was too short, and he threw it off, and declared it was no use. And the girl picked it up sadly, and returned quite in despair to the king's palace.

The next morning, when she was combing the princess's hair, she begged leave to cut off another lock. At first the princess said no, but the girl begged so hard that at length she gave in on condition that she should find her a prince as bridegroom.

The maiden told her that she had already found him, and spun the lock into shining stuff, and fastened it on to the end of the coat. And when it was finished she carried it to the giant.

This time it fitted him, and he was quite pleased, and asked her what he could give her in return. And she said that the only reward he could give her was to take the spell off the lion and bring him back to his own shape.

For a long time the giant would not hear of it, but in the end he gave in, and told her exactly how it must all be done. She was to kill the lion herself and cut him up very small; then she must burn him, and cast his ashes into the water, and out of the water the prince would come free from enchantment for ever.

But the maiden went away weeping, lest the giant should have deceived her, and that after she had killed the lion she would find she had also slain the prince.

Weeping she came down the mountain, and weeping she joined the prince, who was awaiting her at the bottom; and when he had heard her story he comforted her, and bade her be of good courage, and to do the bidding of the giant.

And the maiden believed what the prince told her; and in the morning when he put on his lion's form she took a knife and slew him, and cut him up very small, and burnt him, and cast his ashes into the water, and out of the water came the prince, beautiful as the day, and as glad to look upon as the sun himself.

Then the young man thanked the maiden for all she had done for him, and said she should be his wife and none other. But the maiden only wept sore, and answered that that she could never be, for she had given her promise to the princess when she cut off her hair that the prince should wed her and her only.

But the prince replied, 'If it is the princess, we must go quickly. Come with me.'

So they went together to the king's palace. And when the king and queen and princess saw the young man a great joy filled their hearts, for they knew him for the eldest son, who had long ago been enchanted by a giant and lost to them.

And he asked his parents' consent that he might marry the girl who had saved him, and a great feast was made, and the maiden became a princess, and in due time a queen, and she richly deserved all the honours showered upon her.

The Pink Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f25]

The Man Without a Heart

Once upon a time there were seven brothers, who were orphans, and had no sister. Therefore they were obliged to do all their own housework. This they did not like at all; so after much deliberation they decided to get married. There were, unfortunately, no young girls to be found in the place where they lived; but the elder brothers agreed to go out into the world and seek for brides, promising to bring back a very pretty wife for the youngest also if he would meanwhile stay at home and take care of the house. He consented willingly, and the six young men set off in good spirits.

On their way they came to a small cottage standing quite by itself in a wood; and before the door stood an old, old man, who accosted the brothers saying, 'Hullo, you young fellows! Whither away so fast and cheerily?'

'We are going to find bonny brides for ourselves, and one for our youngest brother at home,' they replied.

'Oh! dear youths,' said the old man, 'I am terribly lonely here; pray bring a bride for me also; only remember, she must be young and pretty.'

'What does a shrivelled old grey thing like that want with a pretty young bride?' thought the brothers, and went on their way.

Presently they came to a town where were seven sisters, as young and as lovely as anyone could wish. Each brother chose one, and the youngest they kept for their brother at home. Then the whole party set out on the return journey, and again their path led through the wood and past the old man's cottage.

There he stood before the door, and cried: 'Oh! you fine fellows, what a charming bride you have brought me!'

'She is not for you, said the young men. 'She is for our youngest brother, as we promised.'

'What!' said the old man, 'promised! I'll make you eat your promises!' And with that he took his magic wand, and, murmuring a charm, he touched both brothers and brides, and immediately they were turned into grey stones.

Only the youngest sister he had not bewitched. He took her into the cottage, and from that time she was obliged to keep house for him. She was not very unhappy, but one thought troubled her. What if the old man should die and leave her here alone in the solitary cottage deep in the heart of the wood! She would be as 'terribly lonely' as he had formerly been.

One day she told him of her fear.

'Don't be anxious,' he said. 'You need neither fear my death nor desire it, for I have no heart in my breast! However, if I should die, you will find my wand above the door, and with it you can set free your sisters and their lovers. Then you will surely have company enough.'

'Where in all the world do you keep your heart, if not in your breast?' asked the girl.

'Do you want to know everything?' her husband said. 'Well, if you must know, my heart is in the bed-cover.'

When the old man had gone out about his business his bride passed her time in embroidering beautiful flowers on the bed quilt to make his heart happy. The old man was much amused. He laughed, and said to her: 'You are a good child, but I was only joking. My heart is really in--in--'

'Now where is it, dear husband?'

'It is in the doorway,' he replied.

Next day, while he was out, the girl decorated the door with gay feathers and fresh flowers, and hung garlands upon it. And on his return the old fellow asked what it all meant.

'I did it to show my love for your heart,' said the girl.

And again the old man smiled, saying, 'You are a dear child, but my heart is not in the doorway.'

Then the poor young bride was very vexed, and said, 'Ah, my dear! you really have a heart somewhere, so you may die and leave me all alone.'

The old man did his best to comfort her by repeating all he had said before, but she begged him afresh to tell her truly where his heart was and at last he told her.

'Far, far from here,' said he, 'in a lonely spot, stands a great church, as old as old can be. Its doors are of iron, and round it runs a deep moat, spanned by no bridge. Within that church is a bird which flies up and down; it never eats, and never drinks, and never dies. No one can catch it, and while that bird lives so shall I, for in it is my heart.'

It made the little bride quite sad to think she could do nothing to show her love for the old man's heart. She used to think about it as she sat all alone during the long days, for her husband was almost always out.

One day a young traveller came past the house, and seeing such a pretty girl he wished her 'Good day.'

She returned his greeting, and as he drew near she asked him whence he came and where he was going.

'Alas!' sighed the youth, 'I am very sorrowful. I had six brothers, who went away to find brides for themselves and one for me; but they have never come home, so now I am going to look for them.'

'Oh, good friend,' said the girl, 'you need go no farther. Come, sit down, eat and drink, and afterwards I'll tell you all about it.'

She gave him food, and when he had finished his meal she told him how his brothers had come to the town where she lived with her sisters, how they had each chosen a bride, and, taking herself with them, had started for home. She wept as she told how the others were turned to stone, and how she was kept as the old man's bride. She left out nothing, even telling him the story of her husband's heart. When the young man heard this he said: 'I shall go in search of the bird. It may be that God will help me to find and catch it.'

'Yes, do go,' she said; 'it will be a good deed, for then you can set your brothers and my sisters free.' Then she hid the young man, for it was now late, and her husband would soon be home.

Next morning, when the old man had gone out, she prepared a supply of provisions for her guest, and sent him off on his travels, wishing him good luck and success.

He walked on and on till he thought it must be time for breakfast; so he opened his knapsack, and was delighted to find such a store of good things. 'What a feast!' he exclaimed; 'will anyone come and share it?'

'Moo-oo,' sounded close behind him, and looking round he saw a great red ox, which said, 'I have much pleasure in accepting your kind invitation.'

'I'm delighted to see you. Pray help yourself. All I have is at your service,' said the hospitable youth. And the ox lay down comfortably, licking his lips, and made a hearty meal.

'Many thanks to you,' said the animal as it rose up. 'When you are in danger or necessity call me, even if only by a thought,' and it disappeared among the bushes.

The young man packed up all the food that was left, and wandered on till the shortening shadows and his own hunger warned him that it was midday. he laid the cloth on the ground and spread out his provisions, saying at the same time: 'Dinner is ready, and anyone who wishes to share it is welcome.'

Then there was a great rustling in the undergrowth, and out ran a wild boar, grunting, 'Umph, umph, umph; someone said dinner was ready. Was it you? and did you mean me to come?'

'By all means. Help yourself to what I have,' said the young traveller. And the two enjoyed their meal together.

Afterwards the boar got up, saying, 'Thank you; when in need you be you must quickly call for me,' and he rolled off.

For a long time the youth walked on. By evening he was miles away. He felt hungry again, and, having still some provisions left, thought he had better make ready his supper. When it was all spread out he cried as before, 'Anyone who cares to share my meal is welcome.'

He heard a sound overhead like the flapping of wings, and a shadow was cast upon the ground. Then a huge griffin appeared, saying: 'I heard someone giving an invitation to eat; is there anything for me?'

'Why not?' said the youth. 'Come down and take all you want. There won't be much left after this.'

So the griffin alighted and ate his fill, saying, as he flew away, 'Call me if you need me.'

'What a hurry he was in!' the youth said to himself. 'He might have been able to direct me to the church, for I shall never find it alone.'

He gathered up his things, and started to walk a little farther before resting. He had not gone far when all of a sudden he saw the church!

He soon came to it, or rather to the wide and deep moat which surrounded it without a single bridge by which to cross.

It was too late to attempt anything now; and, besides, the poor youth was very tired, so he lay down on the ground and fell fast asleep.

Next morning, when he awoke, he began to wish himself over the moat; and the thought occurred to him that if only the red ox were there, and thirsty enough to drink up all the water in the moat, he might walk across it dry shod.

Scarcely had the thought crossed his brain before the ox appeared and began to drink up the water.

The grateful youth hastened across as soon as the moat was dry, but found it impossible to penetrate the thick walls and strong iron doors of the church.

'I believe that big boar would be of more use here than I am,' he thought, and lo! at the wish the wild boar came and began to push hard against the wall. He managed to loosen one stone with his tusks, and, having made a beginning, stone after stone was poked out till he had made quite a large hole, big enough to let a man go through.

The young man quickly entered the church, and saw a bird flying about, but he could not catch it.

'Oh!' he exclaimed, 'if only the griffin were here, he would soon catch it.'

At these words the griffin appeared, and, seizing the bird, gave it to the youth, who carried it off carefully, while the griffin flew away.

The young man hurried home as fast as possible, and reached the cottage before evening. He told his story to the little bride, who, after giving him some food and drink, hid him with his bird beneath the bed.

Presently the old man came home, and complained of feeling ill. Nothing, he said, would go well with him any more: his 'heart bird' was caught.

The youth under the bed heard this, and thought, 'This old fellow has done me no particular harm, but then he has bewitched my brothers and their brides, and has kept my bride for himself, and that is certainly bad enough.'

So he pinched the bird, and the old man cried, 'Ah! I feel death gripping me! Child, I am dying!'

With these words he fell fainting from his chair, and as the youth, before he knew what he was doing, had squeezed the bird to death, the old man died also.

Out crept the young man from under the bed, and the girl took the magic wand (which she found where the old man had told her), and, touching the twelve grey stones, transformed them at once into the six brothers and their brides.

Then there was great joy, and kissing and embracing. And there lay the old man, quite dead, and no magic wand could restore him to life, even had they wished it.

After that they all went away and were married, and lived many years happily together.

The Pink Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f26]

The Two Brothers

Sicilianische Malirchen. L. Gonzenbach.

Long ago there lived two brothers, both of them very handsome, and both so very poor that they seldom had anything to eat but the fish which they caught. One day they had been out in their boat since sunrise without a single bite, and were just thinking of putting up their lines and going home to bed when they felt a little feeble tug, and, drawing in hastily, they found a tiny fish at the end of the hook.

'What a wretched little creature!' cried one brother. 'However, it is better than nothing, and I will bake him with bread crumbs and have him for supper.'

'Oh, do not kill me yet!' begged the fish; 'I will bring you good luck--indeed I will!'

'You silly thing!' said the young man; 'I've caught you, and I shall eat you.'

But his brother was sorry for the fish, and put in a word for him.

'Let the poor little fellow live. He would hardly make one bite, and, after all, how do we know we are not throwing away our luck! Put him back into the sea. It will be much better.'

'If you will let me live,' said the fish, 'you will find on the sands to-morrow morning two beautiful horses splendidly saddled and bridled, and on them you can go through the world as knights seeking adventures.'

'Oh dear, what nonsense!' exclaimed the elder; 'and, besides, what proof have we that you are speaking the truth?'

But again the younger brother interposed: 'Oh, do let him live! You know if he is lying to us we can always catch him again. It is quite worth while trying.'

At last the young man gave in, and threw the fish back into the sea; and both brothers went supperless to bed, and wondered what fortune the next day would bring.

At the first streaks of dawn they were both up, and in a very few minutes were running down to the shore. And there, just as the fish had said, stood two magnificent horses, saddled and bridled, and on their backs lay suits of armour and under-dresses, two swords, and two purses of gold.

'There!' said the younger brother. 'Are you not thankful you did not eat that fish? He has brought us good luck, and there is no knowing how great we may become! Now, we will each seek our own adventures. If you will take one road I will go the other.'

'Very well,' replied the elder; 'but how shall we let each other know if we are both living?'

'Do you see this fig-tree?' said the younger. 'Well, whenever we want news of each other we have only to come here and make a slit with our swords in the back. If milk flows, it is a sign that we are well and prosperous; but if, instead of milk, there is blood, then we are either dead or in great danger.'

Then the two brothers put on their armour, buckled their swords, and pocketed their purees; and, after taking a tender farewell of each other, they mounted their horses and went their various ways.

The elder brother rode straight on till he reached the borders of a strange kingdom. He crossed the frontier, and soon found himself on the banks of a river; and before him, in the middle of the stream, a beautiful girl sat chained to a rock and weeping bitterly. For in this river dwelt a serpent with seven heads, who threatened to lay waste the whole land by breathing fire and flame from his nostrils unless the king sent him every morning a man for his breakfast. This had gone on so long that now there were no men left, and he had been obliged to send his own daughter instead, and the poor girl was waiting till the monster got hungry and felt inclined to eat her.

When the young man saw the maiden weeping bitterly he said to her, 'What is the matter, my poor girl?'

'Oh!' she answered, 'I am chained here till a horrible serpent with seven heads comes to eat me. Oh, sir, do not linger here, or he will eat you too.'

'I shall stay,' replied the young man, 'for I mean to set you free.'

'That is impossible. You do not know what a fearful monster the serpent is; you can do nothing against him.'

'That is my affair, beautiful captive,' answered he; 'only tell me, which way will the serpent come?'

'Well, if you are resolved to free me, listen to my advice. Stand a little on one side, and then, when the serpent rises to the surface, I will say to him, "O serpent, to-day you can eat two people. But you had better begin first with the young man, for I am chained and cannot run away." When he hears this most likely he will attack you.'

So the young man stood carefully on one side, and by-and-bye he heard a great rushing in the water; and a horrible monster came up to the surface and looked out for the rock where the king's daughter was chained, for it was getting late and he was hungry.

But she cried out, 'O serpent, to-day you can eat two people. And you had better begin with the young man, for I am chained and cannot run away.'

Then the serpent made a rush at the youth with wide open jaws to swallow him at one gulp, but the young man leaped aside and drew his sword, and fought till he had cut off all the seven heads. And when the great serpent lay dead at his feet he loosed the bonds of the king's daughter, and she flung herself into his arms and said, 'You have saved me from that monster, and now you shall be my husband, for my father has made a proclamation that whoever could slay the serpent should have his daughter to wife.'

But he answered, 'I cannot become your husband yet, for I have still far to travel. But wait for me seven years and seven months. Then, if I do not return, you are free to marry whom you will. And in case you should have forgotten, I will take these seven tongues with me so that when I bring them forth you may know that I am really he who slew the serpent.'

So saying he cut out the seven tongues, and the princess gave him a thick cloth to wrap them in; and he mounted his horse and rode away.

Not long after he had gone there arrived at the river a slave who had been sent by the king to learn the fate of his beloved daughter. And when the slave saw the princess standing free and safe before him, with the body of the monster lying at her feet, a wicked plan came into his head, and he said, 'Unless you promise to tell your father it was I who slew the serpent, I will kill you and bury you in this place, and no one will ever know what befell.'

What could the poor girl do? This time there was no knight to come to her aid. So she promised to do as the slave wished, and he took up the seven heads and brought the princess to her father.

Oh, how enchanted the king was to see her again, and the whole town shared his joy!

And the slave was called upon to tell how he had slain the monster, and when he had ended the king declared that he should have the princess to wife.

But she flung herself at her father's feet, and prayed him to delay. 'You have passed your royal word, and cannot go back from it Yet grant me this grace, and let seven years and seven months go by before you wed me. When they are over, then I will marry the slave.' And the king listened to her, and seven years and seven months she looked for her bridegroom, and wept for him night and day.

All this time the young man was riding through the world, and when the seven years and seven months were over he came back to the town where the princess lived--only a few days before the wedding. And he stood before the king, and said to him: 'Give me your daughter, O king, for I slew the seven-headed serpent. And as a sign that my words are true, look on these seven tongues, which I cut from his seven heads, and on this embroidered cloth, which was given me by your daughter.'

Then the princess lifted up her voice and said, 'Yes, dear father, he has spoken the truth, and it is he who is my real bridegroom. Yet pardon the slave, for he was sorely tempted.'

But the king answered, 'Such treachery can no man pardon. Quick, away with him, and off with his head!'

So the false slave was put to death, that none might follow in his footsteps, and the wedding feast was held, and the hearts of all rejoiced that the true bridegroom had come at last.

These two lived happy and contentedly for a long while, when one evening, as the young man was looking from the window, he saw on a mountain that lay out beyond the town a great bright light.

'What can it be?' he said to his wife.

'Ah! do not look at it,' she answered, 'for it comes from the house of a wicked witch whom no man can manage to kill.' But the princess had better have kept silence, for her words made her husband's heart burn within him, and he longed to try his strength against the witch's cunning. And all day long the feeling grew stronger, till the next morning he mounted his horse, and in spite of his wife's tears, he rode off to the mountain.

The distance was greater than he thought, and it was dark before he reached the foot of the mountain; indeed, he could not have found the road at all had it not been for the bright light, which shone like the moon on his path. At length he came to the door of a fine castle, which had a blaze streaming from every window. He mounted a flight of steps and entered a hall where a hideous old woman was sitting on a golden chair.

She scowled at the young man and said, 'With a single one of the hairs of my head I can turn you into stone.'

'Oh, what nonsense!' cried he. 'Be quiet, old woman. What could you do with one hair?' But the witch pulled out a hair and laid it on his shoulder, and his limbs grew cold and heavy, and he could not stir.

Now at this very moment the younger brother was thinking of him, and wondering how he had got on during all the years since they had parted. 'I will go to the fig-tree,' he said to himself, 'to see whether he is alive or dead.' So he rode through the forest till he came where the fig-tree stood, and cut a slit in the bark, and waited. In a moment a little gurgling noise was heard, and out came a stream of blood, running fast. 'Ah, woe is me!' he cried bitterly. 'My brother is dead or dying! Shall I ever reach him in time to save his life?' Then, leaping on his horse, he shouted, 'Now, my steed, fly like the wind!' and they rode right through the world, till one day they came to the town where the young man and his wife lived. Here the princess had been sitting every day since the morning that her husband had left her, weeping bitter tears, and listening for his footsteps. And when she saw his brother ride under the balcony she mistook him for her own husband, for they were so alike that no man might tell the difference, and her heart bounded, and, leaning down, she called to him, 'At last! at last! how long have I waited for thee!' When the younger brother heard these words he said to himself, 'So it was here that my brother lived, and this beautiful woman is my sister-in-law,' but he kept silence, and let her believe he was indeed her husband. Full of joy, the princess led him to the old king, who welcomed him as his own son, and ordered a feast to be made for him. And the princess was beside herself with gladness, but when she would have put her arms round him and kissed him he held up his hand to stop her, saying, 'Touch me not,' at which she marvelled greatly.

In this manner several days went by. And one evening, as the young man leaned from the balcony, he saw a bright light shining on the mountain.

'What can that be?' he said to the princess.

'Oh, come away,' she cried; 'has not that light already proved your bane? Do you wish to fight a second time with that old witch?'

He marked her words, though she knew it not, and they taught him where his brother was, and what had befallen him. So before sunrise he stole out early, saddled his horse, and rode off to the mountain. But the way was further than he thought, and on the road he met a little old man who asked him whither he was going.

Then the young man told him his story, and added. 'Somehow or other I must free my brother, who has fallen into the power of an old witch.'

'I will tell you what you must do,' said the old man. 'The witch's power lies in her hair; so when you see her spring on her and seize her by the hair, and then she cannot harm you. Be very careful never to let her hair go, bid her lead you to your brother, and force her to bring him back to life. For she has an ointment that will heal all wounds, and even wake the dead. And when your brother stands safe and well before you, then cut off her head, for she is a wicked woman.'

The young man was grateful for these words, and promised to obey them. Then he rode on, and soon reached the castle. He walked boldly up the steps and entered the hall, where the hideous old witch came to meet him. She grinned horribly at him, and cried out, 'With one hair of my head I can change you into stone.'

'Can you, indeed?' said the young man, seizing her by the hair. 'You old wretch! tell me what you have done with my brother, or I will cut your head off this very instant.' Now the witch's strength was all gone from her, and she had to obey.

'I will take you to your brother,' she said, hoping to get the better of him by cunning, 'but leave me alone. You hold me so tight that I cannot walk.'

'You must manage somehow,' he answered, and held her tighter than ever. She led him into a large hall filled with stone statues, which once had been men, and, pointing out one, she said, 'There is your brother.'

The young man looked at them all and shook his head. 'My brother is not here. Take me to him, or it will be the worse for you.' But she tried to put him off with other statues, though it was no good, and it was not until they had reached the last hall of all that he saw his brother lying on the ground.

'That is my brother,' said he. 'Now give me the ointment that will restore him to life.'

Very unwillingly the old witch opened a cupboard close by filled with bottles and jars, and took down one and held it out to the young man. But he was on the watch for trickery, and examined it carefully, and saw that it had no power to heal. This happened many times, till at length she found it was no use, and gave him the one he wanted. And when he had it safe he made her stoop down and smear it over his brother's face, taking care all the while never to loose her hair, and when the dead man opened his eyes the youth drew his sword and cut off her head with a single blow. Then the elder brother got up and stretched himself, and said, 'Oh, how long I have slept! And where am I?'

'The old witch had enchanted you, but now she is dead and you are free. We will wake up the other knights that she laid under her spells, and then we will go.'

This they did, and, after sharing amongst them the jewels and gold they found in the castle, each man went his way. The two brothers remained together, the elder tightly grasping the ointment which had brought him back to life.

They had much to tell each other as they rode along, and at last the younger man exclaimed, 'O fool, to leave such a beautiful wife to go and fight a witch! She took me for her husband, and I did not say her nay.'

When the elder brother heard this a great rage filled his heart, and, without saying one word, he drew his sword and slew his brother, and his body rolled in the dust. Then he rode on till he reached his home, where his wife was still sitting, weeping bitterly. When she saw him she sprang up with a cry, and threw herself into his arms. 'Oh, how long have I waited for thee! Never, never must you leave me any more!'

When the old king heard the news he welcomed him as a son, and made ready a feast, and all the court sat down. And in the evening, when the young man was alone with his wife, she said to him, 'Why would you not let me touch you when you came back, but always thrust me away when I tried to put my arms round you or kiss you?'

Then the young man understood how true his brother had been to him, and he sat down and wept and wrung his hands because of the wicked murder that he had done. Suddenly he sprang to his feet, for he remembered the ointment which lay hidden in his garments, and he rushed to the place where his brother still lay. He fell on his knees beside the body, and, taking out the salve, he rubbed it over the neck where the wound was gaping wide, and the skin healed and the sinews grew strong, and the dead man sat up and looked round him. And the two brothers embraced each other, and the elder asked forgiveness for his wicked blow; and they went back to the palace together, and were never parted any more.

The Pink Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f27]

Master and Pupil

From the Danish.

There was once a man who had a son who was very clever at reading, and took great delight in it. He went out into the world to seek service somewhere, and as he was walking between some mounds he met a man, who asked him where he was going.

'I am going about seeking for service,' said the boy.

'Will you serve me?' asked the man.

'Oh, yes; just as readily you as anyone else,' said the boy.

'But can you read?' asked the man.

'As well as the priest,' said the boy.

Then I can't have you,' said the man. 'In fact, I was just wanting a boy who couldn't read. His only work would be to dust my old books.'

The man then went on his way, and left the boy looking after him.

'It was a pity I didn't get that place,' thought he 'That was just the very thing for me.'

Making up his mind to get the situation if possible, he hid himself behind one of the mounds, and turned his jacket outside in, so that the man would not know him again so easily. Then he ran along behind the mounds, and met the man at the other end of them.

'Where are you going, my little boy?' said the man, who did not notice that it was the same one he had met before.

'I am going about seeking for service?' said the boy.

'Will you serve me?' asked the man.

'Oh, yes; just as readily you as anyone else,' said the boy.

'But can you read?' said the man.

'No, I don't know a single letter,' said the boy.

The man then took him into his service, and all the work he had to do was to dust his master's books. But as he did this he had plenty of time to read them as well, and he read away at them until at last he was just as wise as his master--who was a great wizard--and could perform all kinds of magic. Among other feats, he could change himself into the shape of any animal, or any other thing that he pleased.

When he had learned all this he did not think it worth while staying there any longer, so he ran away home to his parents again. Soon after this there was a market in the next village, and the boy told his mother that he had learned how to change himself into the shape of any animal he chose.

'Now,' said he, 'I shall change myself to a horse, and father can take me to market and sell me. I shall come home again all right.'

His mother was frightened at the idea, but the boy told her that she need not be alarmed; all would be well. So he changed himself to a horse, such a fine horse, too, that his father got a high price for it at the market; but after the bargain was made, and the money paid, the boy changed again to his own shape, when no one was looking, and went home.

The story spread all over the country about the fine horse that had been sold and then had disappeared, and at last the news came to the ears of the wizard.

'Aha!' said he, 'this is that boy of mine, who befooled me and ran away; but I shall have him yet.'

The next time that there was a market the boy again changed himself to a horse, and was taken thither by his father. The horse soon found a purchaser, and while the two were inside drinking the luck-penny the wizard came along and saw the horse. He knew at once that it was not an ordinary one, so he also went inside, and offered the purchaser far more than he had paid for it, so the latter sold it to him.

The first thing the wizard now did was to lead the horse away to a smith to get a red-hot nail driven into its mouth, because after that it could not change its shape again. When the horse saw this it changed itself to a dove, and flew up into the air. The wizard at once changed himself into a hawk, and flew up after it. The dove now turned into a gold ring, and fell into a girl's lap. The hawk now turned into a man, and offered the girl a great sum of money for the gold ring, but she would not part with it, seeing that it had fallen down to her, as it were, from Heaven. However, the wizard kept on offering her more and more for it, until at last the gold ring grew frightened, and changed itself into a grain of barley, which fell on the ground. The man then turned into a hen, and began to search for the grain of barley, but this again changed itself to a pole-cat, and took off the hen's head with a single snap.

The wizard was now dead, the pole-cat put on human shape, and the youth afterwards married the girl, and from that time forward let all his magic arts alone.

The Pink Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f28]

The Golden Lion

Sicilianische Mahrchen. L. Gonzenbach.

There was once a rich merchant who had three sons, and when they were grown up the eldest said to him, 'Father, I wish to travel and see the world. I pray you let me.'

So the father ordered a beautiful ship to be fitted up, and the young man sailed away in it. After some weeks the vessel cast anchor before a large town, and the merchant's son went on shore.

The first thing he saw was a large notice written on a board saying that if any man could find the king's daughter within eight days he should have her to wife, but that if he tried and failed his head must be the forfeit.

'Well,' thought the youth as he read this proclamation, 'that ought not to be a very difficult matter;' and he asked an audience of the king, and told him that he wished to seek for the princess.

'Certainly,' replied the king. 'You have the whole palace to search in; but remember, if you fail it will cost you your head.'

So saying, he commanded the doors to be thrown open, and food and drink to be set before the young man, who, after he had eaten, began to look for the princess. But though he visited every corner and chest and cupboard, she was not in any of them, and after eight days he gave it up and his head was cut off.

All this time his father and brothers had had no news of him, and were very anxious. At last the second son could bear it no longer, and said, 'Dear father, give me, I pray you, a large ship and some money, and let me go and seek for my brother.'

So another ship was fitted out, and the young man sailed away, and was blown by the wind into the same harbour where his brother had landed.

Now when he saw the first ship lying at anchor his heart beat high, and he said to himself, 'My brother cannot surely be far off,' and he ordered a boat and was put on shore.

As he jumped on to the pier his eye caught the notice about the princess, and he thought, 'He has undertaken to find her, and has certainly lost his head. I must try myself, and seek him as well as her. It cannot be such a very difficult matter.' But he fared no better than his brother, and in eight days his head was cut off.

So now there was only the youngest at home, and when the other two never came he also begged for a ship that he might go in search of his lost brothers. And when the vessel started a high wind arose, and blew him straight to the harbour where the notice was set.

'Oho!' said he, as he read, 'whoever can find the king's daughter shall have her to wife. It is quite clear now what has befallen my brothers. But in spite of that I think I must try my luck,' and he took the road to the castle.

On the way he met an old woman, who stopped and begged.

'Leave me in peace, old woman,' replied he.

'Oh, do not send me away empty,' she said. 'You are such a handsome young man you will surely not refuse an old woman a few pence.'

'I tell you, old woman, leave me alone.'

'You are in some trouble?' she asked. 'Tell me what it is, and perhaps I can help you.'

Then he told her how he had set his heart on finding the king's daughter.

'I can easily manage that for you as long as you have enough money.'

'Oh, as to that, I have plenty,' answered he.

'Well, you must take it to a goldsmith and get him to make it into a golden lion, with eyes of crystal; and inside it must have something that will enable it to play tunes. When it is ready bring it to me.'

The young man did as he was bid, and when the lion was made the old woman hid the youth in it, and brought it to the king, who was so delighted with it that he wanted to buy it. But she replied, 'It does not belong to me, and my master will not part from it at any price.'

'At any rate, leave it with me for a few days,' said he; 'I should like to show it to my daughter.'

'Yes, I can do that,' answered the old woman; 'but to-morrow I must have it back again. And she went away.

The king watched her till she was quite out of sight, so as to make sure that she was not spying upon him; then he took the golden lion into his room and lifted some loose boards from the floor. Below the floor there was a staircase, which he went down till he reached a door at the foot. This he unlocked, and found himself in a narrow passage closed by another door, which he also opened. The young man, hidden in the golden lion, kept count of everything, and marked that there were in all seven doors. After they had all been unlocked the king entered a lovely hall, where the princess was amusing herself with eleven friends. All twelve girls wore the same clothes, and were as like each other as two peas.

'What bad luck!' thought the youth. 'Even supposing that I managed to find my way here again, I don't see how I could ever tell which was the princess.'

And he stared hard at the princess as she clapped her hands with joy and ran up to them, crying, ' Oh, do let us keep that delicious beast for to-night; it will make such a nice plaything.'

The king did not stay long, and when he left he handed over the lion to the maidens, who amused themselves with it for some time, till they got sleepy, and thought it was time to go to bed. But the princess took the lion into her own room and laid it on the floor.

She was just beginning to doze when she heard a voice quite close to her, which made her jump. 'O lovely princess, if you only knew what I have gone through to find you!' The princess jumped out of bed screaming, 'The lion! the lion!' but her friends thought it was a nightmare, and did not trouble themselves to get up.

'O lovely uprincess!' continued the voice, 'fear nothing! I am the son of a rich merchant, and desire above all things to have you for my wife. And in order to get to you I have hidden myself in this golden lion.'

'What use is that?' she asked. 'For if you cannot pick me out from among my companions you will still lose your head.'

'I look to you to help me,' he said. 'I have done so much for you that you might do this one thing for me.'

'Then listen to me. On the eighth day I will tie a white sash round my waist, and by that you will know me.'

The next morning the king came very early to fetch the lion, as the old woman was already at the palace asking for it. When they were safe from view she let the young man out, and he returned to the king and told him that he wished to find the princess.

'Very good,' said the king, who by this time was almost tired of repeating the same words; 'but if you fail your head will be the forfeit.'

So the youth remained quietly in the castle, eating and looking at all the beautiful things around him, and every now and then pretending to be searching busily in all the closets and corners. On the eighth day he entered the room where the king was sitting. 'Take up the floor in this place,' he said. The king gave a cry, but stopped himself, and asked, 'What do you want the floor up for? There is nothing there.'

But as all his courtiers were watching him he did not like to make any more objections, and ordered the floor to be taken up, as the young man desired. The youth then want straight down the staircase till he reached the door; then he turned and demanded that the key should be brought. So the king was forced to unlock the door, and the next and the next and the next, till all seven were open, and they entered into the hall where the twelve maidens were standing all in a row, so like that none might tell them apart. But as he looked one of them silently drew a white sash from her pocket and slipped it round her waist, and the young man sprang to her and said, 'This is the princess, and I claim her for my wife.' And the king owned himself beaten, and commanded that the wedding feast should be held.

After eight days the bridal pair said farewell to the king, and set sail for the youth's own country, taking with them a whole shipload of treasures as the princess's dowry. But they did not forget the old woman who had brought about all their happiness, and they gave her enough money to make her comfortable to the end of her days.

The Pink Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f29]

The Sprig of Rosemary

Cuentos Populars Catalans, per lo Dr. D. Francisco de S. Maspons y Labros (Barcelona: Libreria de Don Alvar Verdaguer 1885).

Once upon a time there lived a man with one daughter and he made her work hard all the day. One morning when she had finished everything he had set her to do, he told her to go out into the woods and get some dry leaves and sticks to kindle a fire.

The girl went out, and soon collected a large bundle, and then she plucked at a sprig of sweet-smelling rosemary for herself. But the harder she pulled the firmer seemed the plant, and at last, determined not to be beaten, she gave one great tug, and the rosemary remained in her hands.

Then she heard a voice close to her saying, 'Well?' and turning she saw before her a handsome young man, who asked why she had come to steal his firewood.

The girl, who felt much confused, only managed to stammer out as an excuse that her father had sent her.

'Very well,' replied the young man; 'then come with me.'

So he took her through the opening made by the torn-up root, and they travelled till they reached a beautiful palace, splendidly furnished, but only lighted from the top. And when they had entered he told her that he was a great lord, and that never had he seen a maiden so beautiful as she, and that if she would give him her heart they would be married and live happy for ever after.

And the maiden said 'yes, she would,' and so they were married.

The next day the old dame who looked after the house handed her all the keys, but pointed her out one that she would do well never to use, for if she did the whole palace would fall to the ground, and the grass would grow over it, and the damsel herself would be remembered no more.

The bride promised to be careful, but in a little while, when there was nothing left for her to do, she began to wonder what could be in the chest, which was opened by the key. As everybody knows, if we once begin to think we soon begin to do, and it was not very long before the key was no longer in the maiden's hand but in the lock of the chest. But the lock was stiff and resisted all her efforts, and in the end she had to break it. And what was inside after all? Why, nothing but a serpent's skin, which her husband, who was, unknown to her, a magician, put on when he was at work; and at the sight of it the girl was turning away in disgust, when the earth shook violently under her feet, the palace vanished as if it had never been, and the bride found herself in the middle of a field, not knowing where she was or whither to go. She burst into a flood of bitter tears, partly at her own folly, but more for the loss of her husband, whom she dearly loved. Then, breaking a sprig of rosemary off a bush hard by, she resolved, cost what it might, to seek him through the world till she found him. So she walked and she walked and she walked, till she arrived at a house built of straw. And she knocked at the door, and asked if they wanted a servant. The mistress said she did, and if the girl was willing she might stay. But day by day the poor maiden grew more and more sad, till at last her mistress begged her to say what was the matter. Then she told her story--how she was going through the world seeking after her husband.

And her mistress answered her, 'Where he is, none can tell better than the Sun, the Moon, and the Wind, for they go everywhere!'

On hearing these words the damsel set forth once more, and walked till she reached the Golden Castle, where lived the Sun. And she knocked boldly at the door, saying, 'All hail, O Sun! I have come to ask if, of your charity, you will help me in my need. By my own fault have I fallen into these straits, and I am weary, for I seek my husband through the wide world.'

'Indeed!' spoke the Sun. 'Do you, rich as you are, need help? But though you live in a palace without windows, the Sun enters everywhere, and he knows you.'

Then the bride told him the whole story. and did not hide her own ill-doing. And the Sun listened, and was sorry for her; and though he could not tell her where to go, he gave her a nut, and bid her open it in a time of great distress. The damsel thanked him with all her heart, and departed, and walked and walked and walked, till she came to another castle, and knocked at the door which was opened by an old woman.

'All hail!' said the girl. 'I have come, of your charity, to ask your help!'

'It is my mistress, the Moon, you seek. I will tell her of your prayer.'

So the Moon came out, and when she saw the maiden she knew her again, for she had watched her sleeping both in the cottage and in the palace. And she spake to her and said:

'Do you, rich as you are, need help?'

Then the girl told her the whole story, and the Moon listened, and was sorry for her; and though she could not tell her where to find her husband, she gave her an almond, and told her to crack it when she was in great need. So the damsel thanked her, and departed, and walked and walked and walked till she came to another castle. And she knocked at the door, and said:

'All hail! I have come to ask if, of your charity, you will help me in my need.'

'It is my lord, the Wind, that you want,' answered the old woman who opened it. 'I will tell him of your prayer.'

And the Wind looked on her and knew her again, for he had seen her in the cottage and in the palace, and he spake to her and said:

'Do you, rich as you are, want help ?'

And she told him the whole story. And the Wind listened, and was sorry for her, and he gave her a walnut that she was to eat in time of need. But the girl did not go as the Wind expected. She was tired and sad, and knew not where to turn, so she began to weep bitterly. The Wind wept too for company, and said:

'Don't be frightened; I will go and see if I can find out something.'

And the Wind departed with a great noise and fuss, and in the twinkling of an eye he was back again, beaming with delight.

'From what one person and another have let fall,' he exclaimed, 'I have contrived to learn that he is in the palace of the king, who keeps him hidden lest anyone should see him; and that to-morrow he is to marry the princess, who, ugly creature that she is, has not been able to find any man to wed her.'

Who can tell the despair which seized the poor maiden when she heard this news! As soon as she could speak she implored the Wind to do all he could to get the wedding put off for two or three days, for it would take her all that time to reach the palace of the king.

The Wind gladly promised to do what he could, and as he travelled much faster than the maiden he soon arrived at the palace, where he found five tailors working night and day at the wedding clothes of the princess.

Down came the Wind right in the middle of their lace and satin and trimmings of pearl! Away they all went whiz! through the open windows, right up into the tops of the trees, across the river, among the dancing ears of corn! After them ran the tailors, catching, jumping, climbing, but all to no purpose! The lace was torn, the satin stained, the pearls knocked off! There was nothing for it but to go to the shops to buy fresh, and to begin all over again! It was plainly quite impossible that the wedding clothes could be ready next day.

However, the king was much too anxious to see his daughter married to listen to any excuses, and he declared that a dress must be put together somehow for the bride to wear. But when he went to look at the princess, she was such a figure that he agreed that it would be unfitting for her position to be seen in such a gown, and he ordered the ceremony and the banquet to be postponed for a few hours, so that the tailors might take the dress to pieces and make it fit.

But by this time the maiden had arrived footsore and weary at the castle, and as soon as she reached the door she cracked her nut and drew out of it the most beautiful mantle in the world. Then she rang the bell, and asked:

'Is not the princess to be married to-day?'

'Yes, she is.'

'Ask her if she would like to buy this mantle.'

And when the princess saw the mantle she was delighted, for her wedding mantle had been spoilt with all the other things, and it was too late to make another. So she told the maiden to ask what price she would, and it should be given her.

The maiden fixed a large sum, many pieces of gold, but the princess had set her heart on the mantle, and gave it readily.

Now the maiden hid her gold in the pocket of her dress, and turned away from the castle. The moment she was out of sight she broke her almond, and drew from it the most magnificent petticoats that ever were seen. Then she went back to the castle, and asked if the princess wished to buy any petticoats. No sooner did the princess cast her eyes on the petticoats than she declared they were even more beautiful than the mantle, and that she would give the maiden whatever price she wanted for them. And the maiden named many pieces of gold, which the princess paid her gladly, so pleased was she with her new possessions.

Then the girl went down the steps where none could watch her and cracked her walnut, and out came the most splendid court dress that any dressmaker had ever invented; and, carrying it carefully in her arms, she knocked at the door, and asked if the princess wished to buy a court dress.

When the message was delivered the princess sprang to her feet with delight, for she had been thinking that after all it was not much use to have a lovely mantle and elegant petticoats if she had no dress, and she knew the tailors would never be ready in time. So she sent at once to say she would buy the dress, and what sum did the maiden want for it.

This time the maiden answered that the price of the dress was the permission to see the bridegroom.

The princess was not at all pleased when she heard the maiden's reply, but, as she could not do without the dress, she was forced to give in, and contented herself with thinking that after all it did not matter much.

So the maiden was led to the rooms which had been given to her husband. And when she came near she touched him with the sprig of rosemary that she carried; and his memory came back, and he knew her, and kissed her, and declared that she was his true wife, and that he loved her and no other.

Then they went back to the maiden's home, and grew to be very old, and lived happy all the days of their life.

The Pink Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f30]

The White Dove

From the Danish.

A king had two sons. They were a pair of reckless fellows, who always had something foolish to do. One day they rowed out alone on the sea in a little boat. It was beautiful weather when they set out, but as soon as they had got some distance from the shore there arose a terrific storm. The oars went overboard at once, and the little boat was tossed about on the rolling billows like a nut-shell. The princes had to hold fast by the seats to keep from being thrown out of the boat.

In the midst of all this they met a wonderful vessel--it was a dough-trough, in which there sat an old woman. She called to them, and said that they could still get to shore alive if they would promise her the son that was next to come to their mother the queen.

'We can't do that,' shouted the princes; 'he doesn't belong to us so we can't give him away.'

'Then you can rot at the bottom of the sea, both of you,' said the old woman; 'and perhaps it may be the case that your mother would rather keep the two sons she has than the one she hasn't got yet.'

Then she rowed away in her dough-trough, while the storm howled still louder than before, and the water dashed over their boat until it was almost sinking. Then the princes thought that there was something in what the old woman had said about their mother, and being, of course, eager to save their lives, they shouted to her, and promised that she should have their brother if she would deliver them from this danger. As soon as they had done so the storm ceased and the waves fell. The boat drove ashore below their father's castle, and both princes were received with open arms by their father and mother, who had suffered great anxiety for them.

The two brothers said nothing about what they had promised, neither at that time nor later on when the queen's third son came, a beautiful boy, whom she loved more than anything else in the world. He was brought up and educated in his father's house until he was full grown, and still his brothers had never seen or heard anything about the witch to whom they had promised him before he was born.

It happened one evening that there arose a raging storm, with mist and darkness. It howled and roared around the king's palace, and in the midst of it there came a loud knock on the door of the hall where the youngest prince was. He went to the door and found there an old woman with a dough- trough on her back, who said to him that he must go with her at once; his brothers had promised him to her if she would save their lives.

'Yes,' said he; 'if you saved my brothers' lives, and they promised me to you, then I will go with you.'

They therefore went down to the beach together, where he had to take his seat in the trough, along with the witch, who sailed away with him, over the sea, home to her dwelling.

The prince was now in the witch's power, and in her service. The first thing she set him to was to pick feathers. 'The heap of feathers that you see here,' said she, 'you must get finished before I come home in the evening, otherwise you shall be set to harder work.' He started to the feathers, and picked and picked until there was only a single feather left that had not passed through his hands. But then there came a whirlwind and sent all the feathers flying, and swept them along the floor into a heap, where they lay as if they were trampled together. He had now to begin all his work over again, but by this time it only wanted an hour of evening, when the witch was to be expected home, and he easily saw that it was impossible for him to be finished by that time.

Then he heard something tapping at the window pane, and a thin voice said, 'Let me in, and I will help you.' It was a white dove, which sat outside the window, and was pecking at it with its beak. He opened the window, and the dove came in and set to work at once, and picked all the feathers out of the heap with its beak. Before the hour was past the feathers were all nicely arranged: the dove flew out at the window, and at, the same moment the witch came in at the door.

'Well, well,' said she, 'it was more than I would have expected of you to get all the feathers put in order so nicely. However, such a prince might be expected to have neat fingers.'

Next morning the witch said to the prince, 'To-day you shall have some easy work to do. Outside the door I have some firewood lying; you must split that for me into little bits that I can kindle the fire with. That will soon be done, but you must be finished before I come home.'

The prince got a little axe and set to work at once. He split and clove away, and thought that he was getting on fast; but the day wore on until it was long past midday, and he was still very far from having finished. He thought, in fact, that the pile of wood rather grew bigger than smaller, in spite of what he took off it; so he let his hands fall by his side, and dried the sweat from his forehead, and was ill at ease, for he knew that it would be bad for him if he was not finished with the work before the witch came home.

Then the white dove came flying and settled down on the pile of wood, and cooed and said, 'Shall I help you?'

'Yes,' said the prince, 'many thanks for your help yesterday, and for what you offer to-day.' Thereupon the little dove seized one piece of wood after another and split it with its beak. The prince could not take away the wood as quickly as the dove could split it, and in a short time it was all cleft into little sticks.

The dove then flew up on his shoulder and sat there and the prince thanked it, and stroked and caressed its white feathers, and kissed its little red beak. With that it was a dove no longer, but a beautiful young maiden, who stood by his side. She told him then that she was a princess whom the witch had stolen, and had changed to this shape, but with his kiss she had got her human form again; and if he would be faithful to her, and take her to wife, she could free them both from the witch's power.

The prince was quite captivated by the beautiful princess, and was quite willing to do anything whatsoever to get her for himself.

She then said to him, 'When the witch comes home you must ask her to grant you a wish, when you have accomplished so well all that she has demanded of you. When she agrees to this you must ask her straight out for the princess that she has flying about as a white dove. But just now you must take a red silk thread and tie it round my little finger, so that you may be able to recognise me again, into whatever shape she turns me.'

The prince made haste to get the silk thread tied round her little white finger; at the same moment the princess became a dove again and flew away, and immediately after that the old witch came home with her dough-trough on he back.

'Well,' said she, 'I must say that you are clever at your work, and it is something, too, that such princely hands are not accustomed to.'

'Since you are so well pleased with my work, said the prince, 'you will, no doubt, be willing to give me a little pleasure too, and give me something that I have taken a fancy to.'

'Oh yes, indeed,' said the old woman; 'what is it that you want?'

'I want the princess here who is in the shape of a white dove,' said the prince.

'What nonsense!' said the witch. 'Why should you imagine that there are princesses here flying about in the shape of white doves? But if you will have a princess, you can get one such as we have them.' She then came to him, dragging a shaggy little grey ass with long ears. 'Will you have this?' said she; 'you can't get any other princess!'

The prince used his eyes and saw the red silk thread on one of the ass's hoofs, so he said, 'Yes, just let me have it.'

'What will you do with it ?' asked the witch.

'I will ride on it,' said the prince; but with that the witch dragged it away again, and came back with an old, wrinkled, toothless hag, whose hands trembled with age. 'You can have no other princess,' said she. 'Will you have her?'

'Yes, I will,' said the prince, for he saw the red silk thread on the old woman's finger.

At this the witch became so furious that she danced about and knocked everything to pieces that she could lay her hands upon, so that the splinters flew about the ears of the prince and princess, who now stood there in her own beautiful shape.

Then their marriage had to be celebrated, for the witch had to stick to what she had promised, and he must get the princess whatever might happen afterwards.

The princess now said to him, 'At the marriage feast you may eat what you please, but you must not drink anything whatever, for if you do that you will forget me.'

This, however, the prince forgot on the wedding day, and stretched out his hand and took a cup of wine; but the princess was keeping watch over him, and gave him a push with her elbow, so that the wine flew over the table- cloth.

Then the witch got up and laid about her among the plates and dishes, so that the pieces flew about their ears, just as she had done when she was cheated the first time.

They were then taken to the bridal chamber, and the door was shut. Then the princess said, 'Now the witch has kept her promise, but she will do no more if she can help it, so we must fly immediately. I shall lay two pieces of wood in the bed to answer for us when the witch speaks to us. You can take the flower-pot and the glass of water that stands in the window, and we must slip out by that and get away.'

No sooner said than done. They hurried off out into the dark night, the princess leading, because she knew the way, having spied it out while she flew about as a dove.

At midnight the witch came to the door of the room and called in to them, and the two pieces of wood answered her, so that she believed they were there, and went away again. Before daybreak she was at the door again and called to them, and again the pieces of wood answered for them. She thus thought that she had them, and when the sun rose the bridal night was past: she had then kept her promise, and could vent her anger and revenge on both of them. With the first sunbeam she broke into the room, but there she found no prince and no princess--nothing but the two pieces of firewood, which lay in the bed, and stared, and spoke not a word. These she threw on the floor, so that they were splintered into a thousand pieces, and off she hastened after the fugitives.

With the first sunbeam the princess said to the prince, 'Look round; do you see anything behind us?'

'Yes, I see a dark cloud, far away,' said he.

'Then throw the flower-pot over your head,' said she. When this was done there was a large thick forest behind them.

When the witch came to the forest she could not get through it until she went home and brought her axe to cut a path.

A little after this the princess said again to the prince, 'Look round; do you see anything behind us?'

'Yes,' said the prince, 'the big black cloud is there again.'

'Then throw the glass of water over your head,' said she.

When he had done this there was a great lake behind them, and this the witch could not cross until she ran home again and brought her dough-trough.

Meanwhile the fugitives had reached the castle which was the prince's home. They climbed over the garden wall, ran across the garden, and crept in at an open window. By this time the witch was just at their heels, but the princess stood in the window and blew upon the witch; hundreds of white doves flew out of her mouth, fluttered and flapped around the witch's head until she grew so angry that she turned into flint, and there she stands to this day, in the shape of a large flint stone, outside the window.

Within the castle there was great rejoicing over the prince and his bride. His two elder brothers came and knelt before him and confessed what they had done, and said that he alone should inherit the kingdom, and they would always be his faithful subjects.

The Pink Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f31]

The Troll's Daughter

From the Danish.

There was once a lad who went to look for a place. As he went along he met a man, who asked him where he was going. He told him his errand, and the stranger said, 'Then you can serve me; I am just in want of a lad like you, and I will give you good wages--a bushel of money the first year, two the second year, and three the third year, for you must serve me three years, and obey me in everything, however strange it seems to you. You need not be afraid of taking service with me, for there is no danger in it if you only know how to obey.'

The bargain was made, and the lad went home with the man to whom he had engaged himself. It was a strange place indeed, for he lived in a bank in the middle of the wild forest, and the lad saw there no other person than his master. The latter was a great troll, and had marvellous power over both men and beasts.

Next day the lad had to begin his service. The first thing that the troll set him to was to feed all the wild animals from the forest. These the troll had tied up, and there were both wolves and bears, deer and hares, which the troll had gathered in the stalls and folds in his stable down beneath the ground, and that stable was a mile long. The boy, however, accomplished all this work on that day, and the troll praised him and said that it was very well done.

Next morning the troll said to him, 'To-day the animals are not to be fed; they don't get the like of that every day. You shall have leave to play about for a little, until they are to be fed again.'

Then the troll said some words to him which he did not understand, and with that the lad turned into a hare, and ran out into the wood. He got plenty to run for, too, for all the hunters aimed at him, and tried to shoot him, and the dogs barked and ran after him wherever they got wind of him. He was the only animal that was left in the wood now, for the troll had tied up all the others, and every hunter in the whole country was eager to knock him over. But in this they met with no success; there was no dog that could overtake him, and no marksman that could hit him. They shot and shot at him, and he ran and ran. It was an unquiet life, but in the long run he got used to it, when he saw that there was no danger in it, and it even amused him to befool all the hunters and dogs that were so eager after him.

Thus a whole year passed, and when it was over the troll called him home, for he was now in his power like all the other animals. The troll then said some words to him which he did not understand, and the hare immediately became a human being again. 'Well, how do you like to serve me?' said the troll, 'and how do you like being a hare?'

The lad replied that he liked it very well; he had never been able to go over the ground so quickly before. The troll then showed him the bushel of money that he had already earned, and the lad was well pleased to serve him for another year.

The first day of the second year the boy had the same work to do as on the previous one--namely, to feed all the wild animals in the troll's stable. When he had done this the troll again said some words to him, and with that he became a raven, and flew high up into the air. This was delightful, the lad thought; he could go even faster now than when he was a hare, and the dogs could not come after him here. This was a great delight to him, but he soon found out that he was not to be left quite at peace, for all the marksmen and hunters who saw him aimed at him and fired away, for they had no other birds to shoot at than himself, as the troll had tied up all the others.

This, however, he also got used to, when he saw that they could never hit him, and in this way he flew about all that year, until the troll called him home again, said some strange words to him, and gave him his human shape again. 'Well, how did you like being a raven?' said the troll.

'I liked it very well,' said the lad, 'for never in all my days have I been able to rise so high.' The troll then showed him the two bushels of money which he had earned that year, and the lad was well content to remain in his service for another year.

Next day he got his old task of feeding all the wild beasts. When this was done the troll again said some words to him, and at these he turned into a fish, and sprang into the river. He swam up and he swam down, and thought it was pleasant to let himself drive with the stream. In this way he came right out into the sea, and swam further and further out. At last he came to a glass palace, which stood at the bottom of the sea. He could see into all the rooms and halls, where everything was very grand; all the furniture was of white ivory, inlaid with gold and pearl. There were soft rugs and cushions of all the colours of the rainbow, and beautiful carpets that looked like the finest moss, and flowers and trees with curiously crooked branches, both green and yellow, white and red, and there were also little fountains which sprang up from the most beautiful snail-shells, and fell into bright mussel-shells, and at the same time made a most delightful music, which filled the whole palace.

The most beautiful thing of all, however, was a young girl who went about there, all alone. She went about from one room to another, but did not seem to be happy with all the grandeur she had about her. She walked in solitude and melancholy, and never even thought of looking at her own image in the polished glass walls that were on every side of her, although she was the prettiest creature anyone could wish to see. The lad thought so too while he swam round the palace and peeped in from every side.

'Here, indeed, it would be better to be a man than such a poor dumb fish as I am now,' said he to himself; 'if I could only remember the words that the troll says when he changes my shape, then perhaps I could help myself to become a man again.' He swam and he pondered and he thought over this until he remembered the sound of what the troll said, and then he tried to say it himself. In a moment he stood in human form at the bottom of the sea.

He made haste then to enter the glass palace, and went up to the young girl and spoke to her.

At first he nearly frightened the life out of her, but he talked to her so kindly and explained how he had come down there that she soon recovered from her alarm, and was very pleased to have some company to relieve the terrible solitude that she lived in. Time passed so quickly for both of them that the youth (for now he was quite a young man, and no more a lad) forgot altogether how long he had been there.

One day the girl said to him that now it was close on the time when he must become a fish again--the troll would soon call him home, and he would have to go, but before that he must put on the shape of the fish, otherwise he could not pass through the sea alive. Before this, while he was staying down there, she had told him that she was a daughter of the same troll whom the youth served, and he had shut her up there to keep her away from everyone. She had now devised a plan by which they could perhaps succeed in getting to see each other again, and spending the rest of their lives together. But there was much to attend to, and he must give careful heed to all that she told him.

She told him then that all the kings in the country round about were in debt to her father the troll, and the king of a certain kingdom, the name of which she told him, was the first who had to pay, and if he could not do so at the time appointed he would lose his head. 'And he cannot pay,' said she; 'I know that for certain. Now you must, first of all, give up your service with my father; the three years are past, and you are at liberty to go. You will go off with your six bushels of money, to the kingdom that I have told you of, and there enter the service of the king. When the time comes near for his debt becoming due you will be able to notice by his manner that he is ill at ease. You shall then say to him that you know well enough what it is that is weighing upon him--that it is the debt which he owes to the troll and cannot pay, but that you can lend him the money. The amount is six bushels--just what you have. You shall, however, only lend them to him on condition that you may accompany him when he goes to make the payment, and that you then have permission to run before him as a fool. When you arrive at the troll's abode, you must perform all kinds of foolish tricks, and see that you break a whole lot of his windows, and do all other damage that you can. My father will then get very angry, and as the king must answer for what his fool does he will sentence him, even although he has paid his debt, either to answer three questions or to lose his life. The first question my father will ask will be, "Where is my daughter?" Then you shall step forward and answer "She is at the bottom of the sea." He will then ask you whether you can recognise her, and to this you will answer "Yes." Then he will bring forward a whole troop of women, and cause them to pass before you, in order that you may pick out the one that you take for his daughter. You will not be able to recognise me at all, and therefore I will catch hold of you as I go past, so that you can notice it, and you must then make haste to catch me and hold me fast. You have then answered his first question. His next question will be, "Where is my heart?" You shall then step forward again and answer, "It is in a fish." "Do you know that fish?" he will say, and you will again answer "Yes." He will then cause all kinds of fish to come before you, and you shall choose between them. I shall take good care to keep by your side, and when the right fish comes I will give you a little push, and with that you will seize the fish and cut it up. Then all will be over with the troll; he will ask no more questions, and we shall be free to wed.'

When the youth had got all these directions as to what he had to do when he got ashore again the next thing was to remember the words which the troll said when he changed him from a human being to an animal; but these he had forgotten, and the girl did not know them either. He went about all day in despair, and thought and thought, but he could not remember what they sounded like. During the night he could not sleep, until towards morning he fell into a slumber, and all at once it flashed upon him what the troll used to say. He made haste to repeat the words, and at the same moment he became a fish again and slipped out into the sea. Immediately after this he was called upon, and swam through the sea up the river to where the troll stood on the bank and restored him to human shape with the same words as before.

'Well, how do you like to be a fish?' asked the troll.

It was what he had liked best of all, said the youth, and that was no lie, as everybody can guess.

The troll then showed him the three bushels of money which he had earned during the past year; they stood beside the other three, and all the six now belonged to him.

'Perhaps you will serve me for another year yet,' said the troll, 'and you will get six bushels of money for it; that m&kes twelve in all, and that is a pretty penny.'

'No,' said the youth; he thought he had done enough, and was anxious to go to some other place to serve, and learn other people's ways; but he would, perhaps, come back to the troll some other time.

The troll said that he would always be welcome; he had served him faithfully for the three years they had agreed upon, and he could make no objections to his leaving now.

The youth then got his six bushels of money, and with these he betook himself straight to the kingdom which his sweetheart had told him of. He got his money buried in a lonely spot close to the king's palace, and then went in there and asked to be taken into service. He obtained his request, and was taken on as stableman, to tend the king's horses.

Some time passed, and he noticed how the king always went about sorrowing and grieving, and was never glad or happy. One day the king came into the stable, where there was no one present except the youth, who said straight out to him that, with his majesty's permission, he wished to ask him why he was so sorrowful.

'It's of no use speaking about that,' said the king; 'you cannot help me, at any rate.'

'You don't know about that,' said the youth; ' I know well enough what it is that lies so heavy on your mind, and I know also of a plan to get the money paid.'

This was quite another case, and the king had more talk with the stableman, who said that he could easily lend the king the six bushels of money, but would only do it on condition that he should be allowed to accompany the king when he went to pay the debt, and that he should then be dressed like the king's court fool, and run before him. He would cause some trouble, for which the king would be severely spoken to, but he would answer for it that no harm would befall him.

The king gladly agreed to all that the youth proposed, and it was now high time for them to set out.

When they came to the troll's dwelling it was no longer in the bank, but on the top of this there stood a large castle which the youth had never seen before. The troll could, in fact, make it visible or invisible, just as he pleased, and, knowing as much as he did of the troll's magic arts, the youth was not at all surprised at this.

When they came near to this castle, which looked as if it was of pure glass, the youth ran on in front as the king's fool. Heran sometimes facing forwards, sometimes backwards, stood sometimes on his head, and sometimes on his feet, and he dashed in pieces so many of the troll's big glass windows and doors that it was something awful to see, and overturned everything he could, and made a fearful disturbance.

The troll came rushing out, and was so angry and furious, and abused the king with all his might for bringing such a wretched fool with him, as he was sure that he could not pay the least bit of all the damage that had been done when he could not even pay off his old debt.

The fool, however, spoke up, and said that he could do so quite easily, and the king then came forward with the six bushels of money which the youth had lent him. They were measured and found to be correct. This the troll had not reckoned on, but he could make no objection against it. The old debt was honestly paid, and the king got his bond back again.

But there still remained all the damage that had been done that day, and the king had nothing with which to pay for this. The troll, therefore, sentenced the king, either to answer three questions that he would put to him, or have his head taken off, as was agreed on in the old bond.

There was nothing else to be done than to try to answer the troll's riddles. The fool then stationed himself just by the king's side while the troll came forward with his questions. He first asked, 'Where is my daughter?'

The fool spoke up and said, 'She is at the bottom of the sea.'

'How do you know that?' said the troll.

'The little fish saw it,' said the fool.

'Would you know her?' said the troll.

'Yes, bring her forward,' said the fool.

The troll made a whole crowd of women go past them, one after the other, but all these were nothing but shadows and deceptions. Amongst the very last was the troll's real daughter, who pinched the fool as she went past him to make him aware of her presence. He thereupon caught her round the waist and held her fast, and the troll had to admit that his first riddle was solved.

Then the troll asked again: 'Where is my heart?'

'It is in a fish,' said the fool.

'Would you know that fish?' said the troll.

'Yes, bring it forward,' said the fool.

Then all the fishes came swimming past them, and meanwhile the troll's daughter stood just by the youth's side. When at last the right fish came swimming along she gave him a nudge, and he seized it at once, drove his knife into it, and split it up, took the heart out of it, and cut it through the middle.

At the same moment the troll fell dead and turned into pieces of flint. With that a,ll the bonds that the troll had bound were broken; all the wild beasts and birds which he had caught and hid under the ground were free now, and dispersed themselves in the woods and in the air.

The youth and his sweetheart entered the castle, which was now theirs, and held their wedding; and all the kings roundabout, who had been in the troll's debt, and were now out of it, came to the wedding, and saluted the youth as their emperor, and he ruled over them all, and kept peace between them, and lived in his castle with his beautiful empress in great joy and magnificence. And if they have not died since they are living there to this day.

The Pink Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f32]

Esben and the Witch

From the Danish.

There was once a man who had twelve sons: the eleven eldest were both big and strong, but the twelfth, whose name was Esben, was only a little fellow. The eleven eldest went out with their father to field and forest, but Esben preferred to stay at home with his mother, and so he was never reckoned at all by the rest, but was a sort of outcast among them.

When the eleven had grown up to be men they decided to go out into the world to try their fortune, and they plagued their father to give them what they required for the journey. The father was not much in favour of this, for he was now old and weak, and could not well spare them from helping him with his work, but in the long run he had to give in. Each one of the eleven got a fine white horse and money for the journey, and so they said farewell to their father and their home, and rode away.

As for Esben, no one had ever thought about him; his brothers had not even said farewell to him.

After the eleven were gone Esben went to his father and said, 'Father, give me also a horse and money; I should also like to see round about me in the world.'

'You are a little fool,' said his father. 'If I could have let you go, and kept your eleven brothers at home, it would have been better for me in my old age.'

'Well, you will soon be rid of me at any rate,' said Esben.

As he could get no other horse, he went into the forest, broke off a branch, stripped the bark off it, so that it became still whiter than his brothers' horses, and, mounted on this. rode off after his eleven brothers.

The brothers rode on the whole day, and towards evening they came to a great forest, which they entered. Far within the wood they came to a little house, and knocked at the door. There came an old, ugly, bearded hag, and opened it, and they asked her whether all of them could get quarters for the night.

'Yes,' said the old, bearded hag, 'you shall all have quarters for the night, and, in addition, each of you shall have one of my daughters.'

The eleven brothers thought that they had come to very hospitable people. They were well attended to, and when they went to bed, each of them got one of the hag's daughters.

Esben had been coming along behind them, and had followed the same way, and had also found the same house in the forest. He slipped into this, without either the witch or her daughters noticing him, and hid himself under one of the beds. A little before midnight he crept quietly out and wakened his brothers. He told these to change night-caps with the witch's daughters. The brothers saw no reason for this, but, to get rid of Esben's persistence, they made the exchange, and slept soundly again.

When midnight came Esben heard the old witch come creeping along. She had a broad-bladed axe in her hand, and went over all the eleven beds. It was so dark that she could not see a hand's breadth before her, but she felt her way, and hacked the heads off all the sleepers who had the men's night-caps on--and these were her own daughters. As soon as she had gone her way Esben wakened his brothers, and they hastily took their horses and rode off from the witch's house, glad that they had escaped so well. They quite forgot to thank Esben for what he had done for them.

When they had ridden onwards for some time they reached a king's palace, and inquired there whether they could be taken into service. Quite easily, they were told, if they would be stablemen, otherwise the king had no use for them. They were quite ready for this, and got the task of looking after all the king's horses.

Long after them came Esben riding on his stick, and he also wanted to get a place in the palace, but no one had any use for him, and he was told that he could just go back the way he had come. However, he stayed there and occupied himself as best he could. He got his food, but nothing more, and by night he lay just where he could.

At this time there was in the palace a knight who was called Sir Red. He was very well liked by the king, but hated by everyone else, for he was wicked both in will and deed. This Sir Red became angry with the eleven brothers, because they would not always stand at attention for him, so he determined to avenge himself on them.

One day, therefore, he went to the king, and said that the eleven brothers who had come to the palace a little while ago, and served as stablemen, could do a great deal more than they pretended. One day he had heard them say that if they liked they could get for the king a wonderful dove which had a feather of gold and a feather of silver time about. But they would not procure it unless they were threatened with death.

The king then had the eleven brothers called before him, and said to them, 'You have said that you can get me a dove which has feathers of gold and silver time about.'

All the eleven assured him that they had never said anything of the kind, and they did not believe that such a dove existed in the whole world.

'Take your own mind of it,' said the king; 'but if you don't get that dove within three days you shall lose your heads, the whole lot of you.'

With that the king let them go, and there was great grief among them; some wept and others lamented.

At that moment Esben came along, and, seeing their sorrowful looks, said to them, 'Hello, what's the matter with you?'

'What good would it do to tell you, you little fool? You can't help us.'

'Oh, you don't know that,' answered Esben. 'I have helped you before.'

In the end they told him how unreasonable the king was, and how he had ordered them to get for him a dove with feathers of gold and silver time about.

'Give me a bag of peas' said Esben, 'and I shall see what I can do for you.'

Esben got his bag of peas; then he took his white stick, and said,

Fly quick, my little stick, Carry me across the stream.

Straightway the stick carried him across the river and straight into the old witch's courtyard. Esben had noticed that she had such a dove; so when he arrived in the courtyard he shook the peas out of the bag, and the dove came fluttering down to pick them up. Esben caught it at once, put it into the bag, and hurried off before the witch caught sight of him; but the next moment she came running, and shouted after him, ' I Hey is that you, Esben.?'

'Ye--e--s!'

'Is it you that has taken my dove?'

'Ye--e--s!'

'Was it you that made me kill my eleven daughters?'

'Ye--e--s!'

'Are you coming back again?'

'That may be,' said Esben.

'Then you'll catch it,' shouted the witch.

The stick carried Esben with the dove back to the king's palace, and his brothers were greatly delighted. The king thanked them many times for the dove, and gave them in return both silver and gold. At this Sir Red became still more embittered, and again thought of how to avenge himself on the brothers.

One day he went to the king and told him that the dove was by no means the best thing that the brothers could get for him; for one day he had heard them talking quietly among themselves, and they had said that they could procure a boar whose bristles were of gold and silver time about.

The king again summoned the brothers before him, and asked whether it was true that they had said that they could get for him a boar whose bristles were of gold and silver time about.

'No,' said the brothers; they had never said nor thought such a thing, and they did not believe that there was such a boar in the whole world.

'You must get me that boar within three days,' said the king, 'or it will cost you your heads.'

With that they had to go. This was still worse than before, they thought. Where could they get such a marvellous boar? They all went about hanging their heads; but when only one day remained of the three Esben came along. When he saw his brothers' sorrowful looks he cried, 'Hallo, what's the matter now?'

'Oh, what's the use of telling you?' said his brothers. 'You can't help us, at any rate.'

'Ah, you don't know that,' said Esben; 'I've helped you before.'

In the end they told him how Sir Red had stirred up the king against them, so that he had ordered them to get for him a boar with bristles of gold and silver time about.

'That's all right,' said Esben; 'give me a sack of malt, and it is not quite impossible that I may be able to help you.'

Esben got his sack of malt; then he took his little white stick, set himself upon it, and said,

Fly quick, my little stick, Carry me across the stream.

Off went the stick with him, and very soon he was again in the witch's courtyard. There he emptied out the malt, and next moment came the boar, which had every second bristle of gold and of silver. Esben at once put it into his sack and hurried off before the witch should catch sight of him; but the next moment she came running, and shouted after him, 'Hey! is that you, Esben?'

'Ye--e--s!'

'Is it you that has taken my pretty boar?'

'Ye--e--s!'

'It was also you that took my dove?'

'Ye--e--s!'

'And it was you that made me kill my eleven daughters?'

'Ye--e--s!'

'Are you coming back again?'

'That may be,' said Esben.

'Then you'll catch it,' said the witch.

Esben was soon back at the palace with the boar, and his brothers scarcely knew which leg to stand on, so rejoiced were they that they were safe again. Not one of them, however, ever thought of thanking Esben for what he had done for them.

The king was still more rejoiced over the boar than he had been over the dove, and did not know what to give the brothers for it. At this Sir Red was again possessed with anger and envy, and again he went about and planned how to get the brothers into trouble.

One day he went again to the king and said, 'These eleven brothers have now procured the dove and the boar, but they can do much more than that; I know they have said that if they liked they could get for the king a lamp that can shine over seven kingdoms.'

'If they have said that,' said the king, 'they shall also be made to bring it to me. That would be a glorious lamp for me.'

Again the king sent a message to the brothers to come up to the palace. They went accordingly, although very unwillingly, for they suspected that Sir Red had fallen on some new plan to bring them into trouble.

As soon as they came before the king he said to them,

'You brothers have said that you could, if you liked, get for me a lamp that can shine over seven kingdoms. That lamp must be mine within three days, or it will cost you your lives.'

The brothers assured him that they had never said so, and they were sure that no such lamp existed, but their words were of no avail.

'The lamp!' said the king, 'or it will cost you your heads.'

The brothers were now in greater despair than ever. They did not know what to do, for such a lamp no one had ever heard of. But just as things looked their worst along came Esben.

'Something wrong again?' said he. 'What's the matter with you now?'

'Oh, it's no use telling you,' said they. 'You can't help us, at any rate.'

'Oh, you might at least tell me,' said Esben; 'I have helped you before.'

In the end they told him that the king had ordered them to bring him a lamp which could shine over seven kingdoms, but such a lamp no one had ever heard tell of.

'Give me a bushel of salt,' said Esben, 'and we shall see how matters go.'

He got his bushel of salt, and then mounted his little white stick, and said,

Fly quick, my little stick, Carry me across the stream.

With that both he and his bushel of salt were over beside the witch's courtyard. But now matters were less easy, for he could not get inside the yard, as it was evening and the gate was locked. Finally he hit upon a plan; he got up on the roof and crept down the chimney.

He searched all round for the lamp, but could find it nowhere, for the witch always had it safely guarded, as it was one of her most precious treasures. When he became tired of searching for it he crept into the baking- oven, intending to lie down there and sleep till morning; but just at that moment he heard the witch calling from her bed to one of her daughters, and telling her to make some porridge for her. She had grown hungry, and had taken such a fancy to some porridge. The daughter got out of bed, kindled the fire, and put on a pot with water in it.

'You mustn't put any salt in the porridge, though,' cried the witch.

'No, neither will I,' said the daughter; but while she was away getting the meal Esben slipped out of the oven and emptied the whole bushel of salt into the pot. The daughter came back then and put in the meal, and after it had boiled a little she took it in to her mother. The witch took a spoonful and tasted it.

'Uh!' said she; 'didn't I tell you not to put any salt in it, and it's just as salt as the sea.'

So the daughter had to go and make new porridge, and her mother warned her strictly not to put any salt in it. But now there was no water in the house, so she asked her mother to give her the lamp, so that she could go to the well for more.

'There you have it, then,' said the witch; 'but take good care of it.'

The daughter took the lamp which shone over seven kingdoms, and went out to the well for water, while Esben slipped out after her. When she was going to draw the water from the well she set the lamp down on a stone beside her. Esben watched his chance, seized the lamp, and gave her a push from behind, so that she plumped head first into the well. Then he made off with the lamp. But the witch got out of her bed and ran after him, crying:

'Hey! is that you again, Esben?'

'Ye--e--s!'

'Was it you that took my dove?'

'Ye--e--s!'

'Was it also you that took my boar?'

'Ye--e--s!'

'And it was you that made me kill my eleven daughters?'

'Ye--e--s!'

'And now you have taken my lamp, and drowned my twelfth daughter in the well?'

'Ye--e--s!'

'Are you coming back again?'

'That may be,' said Esben.

'Then you'll catch it,' said the witch.

It was only a minute before the stick had again landed Esben at the king's palace, and the brothers were then freed from their distress. The king gave them many fine presents, but Esben did not get even so much as thanks from them.

Never had Sir Red been so eaten up with envy as he was now, and he racked his brain day and night to find something quite impossible to demand from the brothers.

One day he went to the king and told him that the lamp the brothers had procured was good enough, but they could still get for him something that was far better. The king asked what that was.

'It is,' said Sir Red, 'the most beautiful coverlet that any mortal ever heard tell of. It also has the property that, when anyone touches it, it sounds so that it can be heard over eight kingdoms.'

'That must be a splendid coverlet,' said the king, and he at once sent for the brothers.

'You have said that you know of a coverlet, the most beautiful in the whole world, and which sounds over eight kingdoms when anyone touches it. You shall procure it for me, or else lose your lives,' said he.

The brothers answered him that they had never said a word about such a coverlet, did not believe it existed, and that it was quite impossible for them to procure it. But the king would not hear a word; he drove them away, telling them that if they did not get it very soon it would cost them their heads.

Things looked very black again for the brothers, for they were sure there was no escape for them. The youngest of them, indeed, asked where Esben was, but the others said that that little fool could scarcely keep himself in clothes, and it was not to be expected that he could help them. Not one of them thought it worth while to look for Esben, but he soon came along of himself.

'Well, what's the matter now?' said he.

'Oh, what's the use of telling you?' said the brothers. 'You can't help us, at any rate.'

'Ah! who knows that?' said Esben. 'I have helped you before.'

In the end the brothers told him about the coverlet which, when one touched it, sounded so that it could be heard over eight kingdoms. Esben thought that this was the worst errand that he had had yet, but he could not do worse than fail, and so he would make the attempt.

He again took his little white stick, set himself on it, and said,

Fly quick, my little stick, Carry me across the stream.

Next moment he was across the river and beside the witch's house. It was evening, and the door was locked, but he knew the way down the chimney. When he had got into the house, however, the worst yet remained to do, for the coverlet was on the bed in which the witch lay and slept. He slipped into the room without either she or her daughter wakening; but as soon as he touched the coverlet to take it it sounded so that it could be heard over eight kingdoms. The witch awoke, sprang out of bed, and caught hold of Esben. He struggled with her, but could not free himself, and the witch called to her daughter, 'Come and help me; we shall put him into the little dark room to be fattened. Ho, ho! now I have him!'

Esben was now put into a little dark hole, where he neither saw sun nor moon, and there he was fed on sweet milk and nut-kernels. The daughter had enough to do cracking nuts for him, and at the end of fourteen days she had only one tooth left in her mouth; she had broken all the rest with the nuts. In this time however, she had taken a liking to Esben, and would willingly have set him free, but could not.

When some time had passed the witch told her daughter to go and cut a finger off Esben, so that she could see whether he was nearly fat enough yet. The daughter went and told Esben, and asked him what she should do. Esben told her to take an iron nail and wrap a piece of skin round it: she could then give her mother this to bite at.

The daughter did so, but when the witch bit it she cried, 'Uh! no, no! This is nothing but skin and bone; he must be fattened much longer yet.'

So Esben was fed for a while longer on sweet milk and nut-kernels, until one day the witch thought that now he must surely be fat enough, and told her daughter again to go and cut a finger off him. By this time Esben was tired of staying in the dark hole, so he told her to go and cut a teat off a cow, and give it to the witch to bite at. This the daughter did, and the witch cried, 'Ah! now he is fat--so fat that one can scarcely feel the bone in him. Now he shall be killed.'

Now this was just the very time that the witch had to go to Troms Church, where all the witches gather once every year, so she had no time to deal with Esben herself. She therefore told her daughter to heat up the big oven while she was away, take Esben out of his prison, and roast him in there before she came back. The daughter promised all this, and the witch went off on her journey.

The daughter then made the oven as hot as could be, and took Esben out of his prison in order to roast him. She brought the oven spade, and told Esben to seat himself on it, so that she could shoot him into the oven. Esben accordingly took his seat on it, but when she had got him to the mouth of the oven he spread his legs out wide, so that she could not get him pushed in.

'You mustn't sit like that,' said she.

'How then?' said Esben.

'You must cross your legs,' said the daughter; but Esben could not understand what she meant by this.

'Get out of the way,' said she, 'and I will show you how to place yourself.'

She seated herself on the oven spade, but no sooner had she done so than Esben laid hold of it, shot her into the oven, and fastened the door of it. Then he ran and seized the coverlet, but as soon as he did so it sounded so that it could be heard over eight kingdoms, and the witch, who was at Troms Church, came flying home, and shouted, 'Hey! is that you again, Esben ?'

'Ye--e--s!'

'It was you that made me kill my eleven daughters?'

'Ye--e--s!'

'And took my dove?'

'Ye--e--s!'

'And my beautiful boar?'

'Ye--e--s!'

'And drowned my twelfth daughter in the well, and took my lamp?'

'Ye--e--s!'

'And now you have roasted my thirteenth and last daughter in the oven, and taken my coverlet?'

'YeAeAs!'

'Are you coming back again?'

'No, never again,' said Esben.

At this the witch became so furious that she sprang into numberless pieces of flint, and from this come all the flint stones that one finds about the country.

Esben had found again his little stick, which the witch had taken from him, so he said,

Fly quick, my little stick, Carry me across the stream.

Next moment he was back at the king's palace. Here things were in a bad way, for the king had thrown all the eleven brothers into prison, and they were to be executed very shortly because they had not brought him the coverlet. Esben now went up to the king and gave him the coverlet, with which the king was greatly delighted. When he touched it it could be heard over eight kingdoms, and all the other kings sat and were angry because they had not one like it.

Esben also told how everything had happened, and how Sir Red had done the brothers all the ill he could devise because he was envious of them. The brothers were at once set at liberty, while Sir Red, for his wickedness, was hanged on the highest tree that could be found, and so he got the reward he deserved.

Much was made of Esben and his brothers, and these now thanked him for all that he had done for them. The twelve of them received as much gold and silver as they could carry, and betook themselves home to their old father. When he saw again his twelve sons, whom he had never expected to see more, he was so glad that he wept for joy. The brothers told him how much Esben had done, and how he had saved their lives, and from that time forward he was no longer the butt of the rest at home.

The Pink Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f33]

Princess Minon-minette

Bibliotheque des Fees et aes Genies

Once upon a time there lived a young king whose name was Souci, and he had been brought up, ever since he was a baby, by the fairy Inconstancy. Now the fairy Girouette had a kind heart, but she was a very trying person to live with, for she never knew her own mind for two minutes together, and as she was the sole ruler at Court till the prince grew up everything was always at sixes and sevens. At first she determined to follow the old custom of keeping the young king ignorant of the duties he would have to perform some day; then, quite suddenly, she resigned the reins of government into his hands; but, unluckily, it was too late to train him properly for the post. However, the fairy did not think of that, but, carried away by her new ideas, she hastily formed a Council, and named as Prime Minister the excellent 'Ditto,' so called because he had never been known to contradict anybody.

Young Prince Souci had a handsome face, and at the bottom a good deal of common sense; but he had never been taught good manners, and was shy and awkward; and had, besides, never learned how to use his brains.

Under these circumstances it is not surprising that the Council did not get through much work. Indeed, the affairs of the country fell into such disorder that at last the people broke out into open rebellion, and it was only the courage of the king, who continued to play the flute while swords and spears were flashing before the palace gate, that prevented civil war from being declared.

No sooner was the revolt put down than the Council turned their attention to the question of the young king's marriage. Various princesses were proposed to him, and the fairy, who was anxious to get the affair over before she left the Court for ever, gave it as her opinion that the Princess Diaphana would make the most suitable wife. Accordingly envoys were sent to bring back an exact report of the princess's looks and ways, and they returned saying that she was tall and well made, but so very light that the equerries who accompanied her in her walks had to be always watching her, lest she should suddenly be blown away. This had happened so often that her subjects lived in terror of losing her altogether, and tried everything they could think of to keep her to the ground. They even suggested that she should carry weights in her pockets, or have them tied to her ankles; but this idea was given up, as the princess found it so uncomfortable. At length it was decided that she was never to go out in a wind, and in order to make matters surer still the equerries each held the end of a string which was fastened to her waist.

The Council talked over this report for some days, and then the king made up his mind that he would judge for himself, and pretend to be his own ambassador. This plan was by no means new, but it had often succeeded, and, anyhow, they could think of nothing better.

Such a splendid embassy had never before been seen in any country. The kingdom was left in the charge of the Prime Minister, who answered 'Ditto' to everything; but the choice was better than it seemed, for the worthy man was much beloved by the people, as he agreed with all they said, and they left him feeling very pleased with themselves and their own wisdom.

When the king arrived at Diaphana's Court he found a magnificent reception awaiting him, for, though they pretended not to know who he was, secrets like this are never hidden. Now the young king had a great dislike to long ceremonies, so he proposed that his second interview with the princess should take place in the garden. The princess made some difficulties, but, as the weather was lovely and very still, she at last consented to the king's wishes. But no sooner had they finished their first bows and curtseys than a slight breeze sprung up, and began to sway the princess, whose equerries had retired out of respect. The king went forward to steady her, but the wind that he caused only drove her further away from him. He rushed after her exclaiming, 'O princess! are you really running away from me?'

'Good gracious, no!' she replied. 'Run a little quicker and you will be able to stop me, and I shall be for ever grateful. That is what comes of talking in a garden,' she added in disgust; 'as if one wasn't much better in a room that was tightly closed all round.'

The king ran as fast as he could, but the wind ran faster still, and in a moment the princess was whirled to the bottom of the garden, which was bounded by a ditch. She cleared it like a bird, and the king, who was obliged to stop short at the edge, saw the lovely Diaphana flying over the plain, sometimes driven to the right, sometimes to the left, till at last she vanished out of sight.

By this time the whole court were running over the plain, some on foot and some on horseback, all hurrying to the help of their princess, who really was in some danger, for the wind was rising to the force of a gale. The king looked on for a little, and then returned with his attendants to the palace, reflecting all the while on the extreme lightness of his proposed bride and the absurdity of having a wife that rose in the air better than any kite. He thought on the whole that it would be wiser not to wait longer, but to depart at once, and he started on horseback at the very moment when the princess had been found by her followers, wet to the skin, and blown against a rick. Souci met the carriage which was bringing her home, and stopped to congratulate her on her escape, and to advise her to put on dry clothes. Then he continued his journey.

It took a good while for the king to get home again, and he was rather cross at having had so much trouble for nothing. Besides which, his courtiers made fun at his adventure, and he did not like being laughed at, though of course they did not dare to do it before his face. And the end of it was that very soon he started on his travels again, only allowing one equerry to accompany him, and even this attendant he managed to lose the moment he had left his own kingdom behind him.

Now it was the custom in those days for princes and princesses to be brought up by fairies, who loved them as their own children, and did not mind what inconvenience they put other people to for their sakes, for all the world as if they had been real mothers. The fairy Aveline, who lived in a country that touched at one point the kingdom of King Souci, had under her care the lovely Princess Minon-Minette, and had made up her mind to marry her to the young king, who, in spite of his awkward manners, which could be improved, was really very much nicer than most of the young men she was likely to meet.

So Aveline made her preparations accordingly, and began by arranging that the equerry should lose himself in the forest, after which she took away the king's sword and his horse while he lay asleep under a tree. Her reason for this was that she felt persuaded that, finding himself suddenly alone and robbed of everything, the king would hide his real birth, and would have to fall back on his powers of pleasing, like other men, which would be much better for him.

When the king awoke and found that the tree to which he had tied his horse had its lowest branch broken, and that nothing living was in sight, he was much dismayed, and sought high and low for his lost treasure, but all in vain. After a time he began to get hungry, so he decided that he had better try to find his way out of the forest, and perhaps he might have a chance of getting something to eat. He had only gone a few steps when he met Aveline, who had taken the shape of an old woman with a heavy bundle of faggots on her back. She staggered along the path and almost fell at his feet, and Souci, afraid that she might have hurt herself, picked her up and set her on her feet again before passing on his way. But he was not to be let off so easy.

'What about my bundle?' cried the old woman. 'Where is your politeness? Really, you seem to have been very nicely brought up! What have they taught you?'

'Taught me? Nothing,' replied he.

'I can well believe it!' she said. 'You don't know even how to pick up a bundle. Oh, you can come near; I am cleverer than you, and know how to pick up a bundle very well.'

The king blushed at her words, which he felt had a great deal of truth in them, and took up the bundle meekly.

Aveline, delighted at the success of her first experiment, hobbled along after him, chattering all the while, as old women do.

'I wish,' she said, 'that all kings had done as much once in their lives. Then they would know what a lot of trouble it takes to get wood for their fires.'

Souci felt this to be true, and was sorry for the old woman.

'Where are we going to?' asked he.

'To the castle of the White Demon; and if you are in want of work I will find you something to do.'

'But I can't do anything,' he said, 'except carry a bundle, and I shan't earn much by that.'

'Oh, you are learning,' replied the old woman, 'and it isn't bad for a first lesson.' But the king was paying very little attention to her, for he was rather cross and very tired. Indeed, he felt that he really could not carry the bundle any further, and was about to lay it down when up came a young maiden more beautiful than the day, and covered with precious stones. She ran to them, exclaiming to the old woman,

'Oh, you poor thing! I was just coming after you to see if I could help you.'

'Here is a young man,' replied the old woman, 'who will be quite ready to give you up the bundle. You see he does not look as if he enjoyed carrying it.'

'Will you let me take it, sir?' she asked.

But the king felt ashamed of himself, and held on to it tightly, while the presence of the princess put him in a better temper.

So they all travelled together till they arrived at a very ordinary-looking house, which Aveline pointed out as the castle of the White Demon, and told the king that he might put down his bundle in the courtyard. The young man was terribly afraid of being recognised by someone in this strange position, and would have turned on his heel and gone away had it not been for the thought of Minon-Minette. Still, he felt very awkward and lonely, for both the princess and the old woman had entered the castle without taking the slightest notice of the young man, who remained where he was for some time, not quite knowing what he had better do. At length a servant arrived and led him up into a beautiful room filled with people, who were either playing on musical instruments or talking in a lively manner, which astonished the king, who stood silently listening, and not at all pleased at the want of attention paid him.

Matters went on this way for some time. Every day the king fell more and more in love with Minon-Minette, and every day the princess seemed more and more taken up with other people. At last, in despair, the prince sought out the old woman, to try to get some advice from her as to his conduct, or, anyway, to have the pleasure of talking about Minon-Minette.

He found her spinning in an underground chamber, but quite ready to tell him all he wanted to know. In answer to his questions he learned that in order to win the hand of the princess it was not enough to be born a prince, for she would marry nobody who had not proved himself faithful, and had, besides, all those talents and accomplishments which help to make people happy.

For a moment Souci was very much cast down on hearing this, but then he plucked up. 'Tell me what I must do in order to win the heart of the princess, and no matter how hard it is I will do it. And show me how I can repay you for your kindness, and you shall have anything I can give you. Shall I bring in your bundle of faggots every day?'

'It is enough that you should have made the offer,' replied the old woman; and she added, holding out a skein of thread, 'Take this; one day you will be thankful for it, and when it becomes useless your difficulties will be past.'

'Is it the skein of my life?' he asked.

'It is the skein of your love's ill-luck,' she said.

And he took it and went away.

Now the fairy Girouette, who had brought up Souci, had an old friend called Grimace, the protectress of Prince Fluet. Grimace often talked over the young prince's affairs with Girouette, and, when she decided that he was old enough to govern his own kingdom, consulted Girouette as to a suitable wife. Girouette, who never stopped to think or to make inquiries, drew such a delightful picture of Minon-Minette that Grimace determined to spare no pains to bring about the marriage, and accordingly Fluet was presented at court. But though the young man was pleasant and handsome, the princess thought him rather womanish in some ways, and displayed her opinion so openly as to draw upon herself and Aveline the anger of the fairy, who declared that Minon-Minette should never know happiness till she had found a bridge without an arch and a bird without feathers. So saying, she also went away.

Before the king set out afresh on his travels Aveline had restored to him his horse and his sword, and though these were but small consolation for the absence of the princess, they were better than nothing, for he felt that somehow they might be the means of leading him back to her.

After crossing several deserts the king arrived at length in a country that seemed inhabited, but the instant he stepped over the border he was seized and flung into chains, and dragged at once to the capital. He asked his guards why he was treated like this, but the only answer he got was that he was in the territory of the Iron King, for in those days countries had no names of their own, but were called after their rulers.

The young man was led into the presence of the Iron King, who was seated on a black throne in a hall also hung with black, as a token of mourning for all the relations whom he had put to death.

'What are you doing in my country?' he cried fiercely.

'I came here by accident,' replied Souci, 'and if I ever escape from your clutches I will take warning by you and treat my subjects differently.'

'Do you dare to insult me in my own court?' cried the king. 'Away with him to Little Ease!'

Now Little Ease was an iron cage hung by four thick chains in the middle of a great vaulted hall, and the prisoner inside could neither sit, nor stand, nor lie; and, besides that, he was made to suffer by turns unbearable heat and cold, while a hundred heavy bolts kept everything safe. Girouette, whose business it was to see after Souci, had forgotten his existence in the excitement of some new idea, and he would not have been alive long to trouble anybody if Aveline had not come to the rescue and whispered in his ear, 'And the skein of thread?' He took it up obediently, though he did not see how it would help him but he tied it round one of the iron bars of his cage, which seemed the only thing he could do, and gave a pull. To his surprise the bar gave way at once, and he found he could break it into a thousand pieces. After this it did not take him long to get out of his cage, or to treat the closely barred windows of the hall in the same manner. But even after he had done all this freedom appeared as far from him as ever, for between him and the open country was a high wall, and so smooth that not even a monkey could climb it. Then Souci's heart died within him. He saw nothing for it but to submit to some horrible death, but he determined that the Iron King should not profit more than he could help, and flung his precious thread into the air, saying, as he did so, 'O fairy, my misfortunes are greater than your power. I am grateful for your goodwill, but take back your gift!' The fairy had pity on his youth and want of faith, and took care that one end of the thread remained in his hand. He suddenly felt a jerk, and saw that the thread must have caught on something, and this thought filled him with the daring that is born of despair. 'Better,' he said to himself, 'trust to a thread than to the mercies of a king;' and, gliding down, he found himself safe on the other side of the wall. Then he rolled up the thread and put it carefully into his pocket, breathing silent thanks to the fairy.

Now Minon-Minette had been kept informed by Aveline of the prince's adventures, and when she heard of the way in which he had been treated by the Iron King she became furious, and began to prepare for war. She made her plans with all the secrecy she could, but when great armies are collected people are apt to suspect a storm is brewing, and of course it is very difficult to keep anything hidden from fairy godmothers. Anyway, Grimace soon heard of it, and as she had never forgiven Minon-Minette for refusing Prince Fluet, she felt that here was her chance of revenge.

Up to this time Aveline had been able to put a stop to many of Grimace's spiteful tricks, and to keep guard over Minon-Minette, but she had no power over anything that happened at a distance; and when the princess declared her intention of putting herself at the head of her army, and began to train herself to bear fatigue by hunting daily, the fairy entreated her to be careful never to cross the borders of her dominions without Aveline to protect her. The princess at once gave her promise, and all went well for some days. Unluckily one morning, as Minon-Minette was cantering slowly on her beautiful white horse, thinking a great deal about Souci and not at all of the boundaries of her kingdom (of which, indeed, she was very ignorant), she suddenly found herself in front of a house made entirely of dead leaves, which somehow brought all sorts of unpleasant things into her head. She remembered Aveline's warning, and tried to turn her horse, but it stood as still as if it had been marble. Then the princess felt that she was slowly, and against her will, being dragged to the ground. She shrieked, and clung tightly to the saddle, but it was all in vain; she longed to fly, but something outside herself proved too strong for her, and she was forced to take the path that led to the House of Dead Leaves.

Scarcely had her feet touched the threshold than Grimace appeared. 'So here you are at last, Minon-Minette! I have been watching for you a long time, and my trap was ready for you from the beginning. Come here, my darling! I will teach you to make war on my friends! Things won't turn out exactly as you fancied. What you have got to do now is to go on your knees to the king and crave his pardon, and before he consents to a peace you will have to implore him to grant you the favour of becoming his wife. Meanwhile you will have to be my servant.'

From that day the poor princess was put to the hardest and dirtiest work, and each morning something more disagreeable seemed to await her. Besides which, she had no food but a little black bread, and no bed but a little straw. Out of pure spite she was sent in the heat of the day to look after the geese, and would most likely have got a sunstroke if she had not happened to pick up in the fields a large fan, with which she sheltered her face. To be sure, a fan seems rather an odd possession for a goose girl, but the princess did not think of that, and she forgot all her troubles when, on opening the fan to use it as a parasol, out tumbled a letter from her lover. Then she felt sure that the fairy had not forgotten her, and took heart.

When Grimace saw that Minon-Minette still managed to look as white as snow, instead of being burnt as brown as a berry, she wondered what could have happened, and began to watch her closely. The following day, when the sun was at its highest and hottest, she noticed her draw a fan from the folds of her dress and hold it before her eyes. The fairy, in a rage, tried to snatch it from her, but the princess would not let it go. 'Give me that fan at once!' cried Grimace.

'Never while I live!' answered the princess, and, not knowing where it would be safest, placed it under her feet. In an instant she felt herself rising from the ground, with the fan always beneath her, and while Grimace was too much blinded by her fury to notice what was going on the princess was quickly soaring out of her reach.

All this time Souci had been wandering through the world with his precious thread carefully fastened round him, seeking every possible and impossible place where his beloved princess might chance to be. But though he sometimes found traces of her, or even messages scratched on a rock, or cut in the bark of a tree, she herself was nowhere to be found. 'If she is not on the earth,' said Souci to himself, 'perhaps she is hiding somewhere in the air. It is there that I shall find her.' So, by the help of his thread, he tried to mount upwards, but he could go such a little way, and hurt himself dreadfully when he tumbled back to earth again. Still he did not give up, and after many days of efforts and tumbles he found to his great joy that he could go a little higher and stay up a little longer than he had done at first, and by-and-bye he was able to live in the air altogether. But alas! the world of the air seemed as empty of her as the world below, and Souci was beginning to despair, and to think that he must go and search the world that lay in the sea. He was floating sadly along, not paying any heed to where he was going, when he saw in the distance a beautiful, bright sort of bird coming towards him. His heart beat fast--he did not know why--and as they both drew near the voice of the princess exclaimed, 'Behold the bird without feathers and the bridge without an arch!'

So their first meeting took place in the air, but it was none the less happy for that; and the fan grew big enough to hold the king as well as Aveline, who had hastened to give them some good advice. She guided the fan above the spot where the two armies lay encamped before each other ready to give battle. The fight was long and bloody, but in the end the Iron King was obliged to give way and surrender to the princess, who set him to keep King Souci's sheep, first making him swear a solemn oath that he would treat them kindly.

Then the marriage took place, in the presence of Girouette, whom they had the greatest trouble to find, and who was much astonished to discover how much business had been got through in her absence.

The Pink Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f34]

Maiden Bright-eye

From the Danish

Once, upon a time there was a man and his wife who had two children, a boy and a girl. The wife died, and the man married again. His new wife had an only daughter, who was both ugly and untidy, whereas her stepdaughter was a beautiful girl, and was known as Maiden Bright-eye. Her stepmother was very cruel to her on this account; she had always to do the hardest work, and got very little to eat, and no attention paid to her; but to her own daughter she was all that was good. She was spared from all the hardest of the housework, and had always the prettiest clothes to wear.

Maiden Bright-eye had also to watch the sheep, but of course it would never do to let her go idle and enjoy herself too much at this work, so she had to pull heather while she was out on the moors with them. Her stepmother gave her pancakes to take with her for her dinner, but she had mixed the flour with ashes, and made them just as bad as she could.

The little girl came out on the moor and began to pull heather on the side of a little mound, but next minute a little fellow with a red cap on his head popped up out of the mound and said:

'Who's that pulling the roof off my house?'

'Oh, it's me, a poor little girl,' said she; 'my mother sent me out here, and told me to pull heather. If you will be good to me I will give you a bit of my dinner.'

The little fellow was quite willing, and she gave him the biggest share of her pancakes. They were not particularly good, but when one is hungry anything tastes well. After he had got them all eaten he said to her:

'Now, I shall give you three wishes, for you are a very nice little girl; but I will choose the wishes for you. You are beautiful, and much more beautiful shall you be; yes, so lovely that there will not be your like in the world. The next wish shall be that every time you open your mouth a gold coin shall fall out of it, and your voice shall be like the most beautiful music. The third wish shall be that you may be married to the young king, and become the queen of the country. At the same time I shall give you a cap, which you must carefully keep, for it can save you, if you ever are in danger of your life, if you just put it on your head.

Maiden Bright-eye thanked the little bergman ever so often, and drove home her sheep in the evening. By that time she had grown so beautiful that her people could scarcely recognise her. Her stepmother asked her how it had come about that she had grown so beautiful. She told the whole story--for she always told the truth--that a little man had come to her out on the moor and had given her all this beauty. She did not tell, however, that she had given him a share of her dinner.

The stepmother thought to herself, 'If one can become so beautiful by going out there, my own daughter shall also be sent, for she can well stand being made a little prettier.'

Next morning she baked for her the finest cakes, and dressed her prettily to go out with the sheep. But she was afraid to go away there without having a stick to defend herself with if anything should come near her.

She was not very much inclined for pulling the heather, as she never was in the habit of doing any work, but she was only a minute or so at it when up came the same little fellow with the red cap, and said:

'Who's that pulling the roof off my house?'

'What's that to you?' said she.

'Well, if you will give me a bit of your dinner I won't do you any mischief,' said he.

'I will give you something else in place of my dinner,' said she. 'I can easily eat it myself; but if you will have something you can have a whack of my stick,' and with that she raised it in the air and struck the bergman over the head with it.

'What a wicked little girl you are!' said he; 'but you shall be none the better of this. I shall give you three wishes, and choose them for you. First, I shall say, "Ugly are you, but you shall become so ugly that there will not be an uglier one on earth." Next I shall wish that every time you open your mouth a big toad may fall out of it, and your voice shall be like the roaring of a bull. In the third place I shall wish for you a violent death.'

The girl went home in the evening, and when her mother saw her she was as vexed as she could be, and with good reason, too; but it was still worse when she saw the toads fall out of her mouth and heard her voice.

Now we must hear something about the stepson. He had gone out into the world to look about him, and took service in the king's palace. About this time he got permission to go home and see his sister, and when he saw how lovely and beautiful she was, he was so pleased and delighted that when he came back to the king's palace everyone there wanted to know what he was always so happy about. He told them that it was because he had such a lovely sister at home.

At last it came to the ears of the king what the brother said about his sister, and, besides that, the report of her beauty spread far and wide, so that the youth was summoned before the king, who asked him if everything was true that was told about the girl. He said it was quite true, for he had seen her beauty with his own eyes, and had heard with his own ears how sweetly she could sing and what a lovely voice she had.

The king then took a great desire for her, and ordered her brother to go home and bring her back with him, for he trusted no one better to accomplish that errand. He got a ship, and everything else that he required, and sailed home for his sister. As soon as the stepmother heard what his errand was she at once said to herself, 'This will never come about if I can do anything to hinder it. She must not be allowed to come to such honour.'

She then got a dress made for her own daughter, like the finest robe for a queen, and she had a mask prepared and put upon her face, so that she looked quite pretty, and gave her strict orders not to take it off until the king had promised to wed her.

The brother now set sail with his two sisters, for the stepmother pretended that the ugly one wanted to see the other a bit on her way. But when they got out to sea, and Maiden Bright-eye came up on deck, the sister did as her mother had instructed her--she gave her a push and made her fall into the water. When the brother learned what had happened he was greatly distressed, and did not know what to do. He could not bring himself to tell the truth about what had happened, nor did he expect that the king would believe it. In the long run he decided to hold on his way, and let things go as they liked. What he had expected happened-- the king received his sister and wedded her at once, but repented it after the first night, as he could scarcely put down his foot in the morning for all the toads that were about the room, and when he saw her real face he was so enraged against the brother that he had him thrown into a pit full of serpents. He was so angry, not merely because he had been deceived, but because he could not get rid of the ugly wretch that was now tied to him for life.

Now we shall hear a little about Maiden Bright-eye When she fell into the water she was fortunate enough to get the bergman's cap put on her head, for now she was in danger of her life, and she was at once transformed into a duck. The duck swam away after the ship, and came to the king's palace on the next evening. There it waddled up the drain, and so into the kitchen, where her little dog lay on the hearth-stone; it could not bear to stay in the fine chambers along with the ugly sister, and had taken refuge down here. The duck hopped up till it could talk to the dog.

'Good evening,' it said.

'Thanks, Maiden Bright-eye,' said the dog.

'Where is my brother?'

'He is in the serpent-pit.'

'Where is my wicked sister?'

'She is with the noble king.'

'Alas! alas! I am here this evening, and shall be for two evenings yet, and then I shall never come again.'

When it had said this the duck waddled off again. Several of the servant girls heard the conversation, and were greatly surprised at it, and thought that it would be worth while to catch the bird next evening and see into the matter a little more closely. They had heard it say that it would come again.

Next evening it appeared as it had said, and a great many were present to see it. It came waddling in by the drain, and went up to the dog, which was lying on the hearth-stone.

'Good evening,' it said.

'Thanks, Maiden Bright-eye,' said the dog.

'Where is my brother?'

'He is in the serpent-pit.'

'Where is my wicked sister?'

'She is with the noble king.'

'Alas! alas! I am here this evening, and shall be for one evening yet, and then I shall never come again.'

After this it slipped out, and no one could get hold of it. But the king's cook thought to himself, 'I shall see if I can't get hold of you to-morrow evening.'

On the third evening the duck again came waddling in by the drain, and up to the dog on the hearth-stone.

'Good evening,' it said.

'Thanks, Maiden Bright-eye,' said the dog.

'Where is my brother?'

'He is in the serpent-pit.'

'Where is my wicked sister?'

'She is with the noble king.'

'Alas! alas! now I shall never come again.' With this it slipped out again, but in the meantime the cook had posted himself at the outer end of the drain with a net, which he threw over it as it came out. In this way he caught it, and came in to the others with the most beautiful duck they had ever seen- -with so many golden feathers on it that everyone marvelled. No one, however, knew what was to be done with it; but after what they had heard they knew that there was something uncommon about it, so they took good care of it.

At this time the brother in the serpent-pit dreamed that his right sister had come swimming to the king's palace in the shape of a duck, and that she could not regain her own form until her beak was cut off. He got this dream told to some one, so that the king at last came to hear of it, and had him taken up out of the pit and brought before him. The king then asked him if he could produce to him his sister as beautiful as he had formerly described her. The brother said he could if they would bring him the duck and a knife.

Both of them were brought to him, and he said, 'I wonder how you would look if I were to cut the point off your beak.'

With this he cut a piece off the beak, and there came a voice which said, 'Oh, oh, you cut my little finger!'

Next moment Maiden Bright-eye stood there, as lovely and beautiful as he had seen her when he was home. This was his sister now, he said; and the whole story now came out of how the other had behaved to her. The wicked sister was put into a barrel with spikes round it which was dragged off by six wild horses, and so she came to her end. :But the king was delighted with Maiden Bright-eye, and immediately made her his queen, while her brother became his prime minister.

The Pink Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f35]

The Merry Wives

From the Danish

There lay three houses in a row, in one of which there lived a tailor, in another a carpenter, and in the third a smith. All three were married, and their wives were very good friends. They often talked about how stupid their husbands were, but they could never agree as to which of them had the most stupid one; each one stuck up for her own husband, and maintained that it was he.

The three wives went to church together every Sunday, and had a regular good gossip on the way, and when they were coming home from church they always turned into the tavern which lay by the wayside and drank half a pint together. This was at the time when half a pint of brandy cost threepence, so that was just a penny from each of them.

But the brandy went up in price, and the taverner said that he must have fourpence for the half-pint.

They were greatly annoyed at this, for there were only the three of them to share it, and none of them was willing to pay the extra penny.

As they went home from the church that day they decided to wager with each other as to whose husband was the most stupid, and the one who, on the following Sunday, should be judged to have played her husband the greatest trick should thereafter go free from paying, and each of the two others would give twopence for their Sunday's half-pint.

Next day the tailor's wife said to her husband, 'I have some girls coming to-day to help to card my wool there is a great deal to do, and we must be very busy. I am so annoyed that our watchdog is dead, for in the evening the young fellows will come about to get fun with the girls, and they will get nothing done. If we had only had a fierce watchdog he would have kept them away.'

'Yes,' said the man, 'that would have been a good thing.'

'Listen, good man,' said the wife, 'you must just be the watchdog yourself, and scare the fellows away from the house.'

The husband was not very sure about this, although otherwise he was always ready to give in to her.

'Oh yes, you will see it will work all right,' said the wife.

And so towards evening she got the tailor dressed up in a shaggy fur coat, tied a black woollen cloth round his head, and chained him up beside the dog's kennel.'

There he stood and barked and growled at everyone that moved in his neighbourhood. The neighbour wives knew all about this, and were greatly amused at it.

On the day after this the carpenter had been out at work, and came home quite merry; but as soon as he entered the house his wife clapped her hands together and cried, 'My dear, what makes you look like that? You are ill.'

The carpenter knew nothing about being ill; he only thought that he wanted something to eat, so he sat down at the table and began his dinner.

His wife sat straight in front of him, with her hands folded, and shook her head, and looked at him with an anxious air.

'You are getting worse, my dear,' she said; 'you are quite pale now; you have a serious illness about you; I can see it by your looks.'

The husband now began to grow anxious, and thought that perhaps he was not quite well.

'No, indeed,' said she; 'it's high time that you were in bed.'

She then got him to lie down, and piled above him all the bedclothes she could find, and gave him various medicines, while he grew worse and worse.

'You will never get over it,' said she; 'I am afraid you are going to die.'

'Do you think so?' said the carpenter; 'I can well believe it, for I am indeed very poorly.'

In a little while she said again, 'Ah, now I must part with you. Here comes Death. Now I must close your eyes.' And she did so.

The carpenter believed everything that his wife said, and so he believed now that he was dead, and lay still and let her do as she pleased.

She got her neighbours summoned, and they helped to lay him in the coffin--it was one of those he himself had made; but his wife had bored holes in it to let him get some air. She made a soft bed under him, and put a coverlet over him, and she folded his hands over his breast; but instead of a flower or a psalm-book, she gave him a pint-bottle of brandy in his hands. After he had lain for a little he took a little pull at this, and then another and another, and he thought this did him good, and soon he was sleeping sweetly, and dreaming that he was in heaven.

Meanwhile word had gone round the village that the carpenter was dead, and was to be buried next day.

It was now the turn of the smith's wife. Her husband was lying sleeping off the effects of a drinking bout, so she pulled off all his clothes and made him black as coal from head to foot, and then let him sleep till far on in the day.

The funeral party had already met at the carpenter's, and marched oft towards the church with the coffin, when the smith's wife came rushing in to her husband.

'Gracious, man,' said she, 'you are lying there yet? You are sleeping too long. You know you are going to the funeral.'

The smith was quite confused; he knew nothing about any funeral.

'It's our neighbour the carpenter,' said his wife, 'who is to be buried to-day. They are already half-way to church with him.'

'All right,' said the smith, 'make haste to help me on with my black clothes.'

'What nonsense!' said his wife, 'you have them on already. Be off with you now.'

The smith looked down at his person and saw that he was a good deal blacker than he usually was, so he caught up his hat and ran out after the funeral. This was already close to the church, and the smith wanted to take part in carrying the coffin, like a good neighbour. So he ran with all his might, and shouted after them, 'Hey! wait a little; let me get a hold of him!'

The people turned round and saw the black figure coming, and thought it was the devil himself, who wanted to get hold of the carpenter, so they threw down the coffin and took to their heels.

The lid sprang off the coffin with the shock, and the carpenter woke up and looked out. He remembered the whole affair; he knew that he was dead and was going to be buried, and recognising the smith, he said to him, in a low voice, 'My good neighbour, if I hadn't been dead already, I should have laughed myself to death now to see you coming like this to my funeral.'

From that time forth the carpenter's wife drank free of expense every Sunday, for the others had to admit that she had fooled her husband the best.

The Pink Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f36]

King Lindorm

From the Swedish.

There once lived a king and a queen who ruled over a very great kingdom. They had large revenues, and lived happily with each other; but, as the years went past, the king's heart became heavy, because the queen had no children. She also sorrowed greatly over it, because, although the king said nothing to her about this trouble, yet she could see that it vexed him that they had no heir to the kingdom; and she wished every day that she might have one.

One day a poor old woman came to the castle and asked to speak with the queen. The royal servants answered that they could not let such a poor beggar-woman go in to their royal mistress. They offered her a penny, and told her to go away. Then the woman desired them to tell the queen that there stood at the palace gate one who would help her secret sorrow. This message was taken to the queen, who gave orders to bring the old woman to her. This was done, and the old woman said to her:

'I know your secret sorrow, O queen, and am come to help you in it. You wish to have a son; you shall have two if you follow my instructions.'

The queen was greatly surprised that the old woman knew her secret wish so well, and promised to follow her advice.

'You must have a bath set in your room, O queen,' said she, 'and filled with running water. When you have bathed in this you will find. under the bath two red onions. These you must carefully peel and eat, and in time your wish will be fulfilled.'

The queen did as the poor woman told her; and after she had bathed she found the two onions under the bath. They were both alike in size and appearance. When she saw these she knew that the woman had been something more than she seemed to be, and in her delight she ate up one of the onions, skin and all. When she had done so she remembered that the woman had told her to peel them carefully before she ate them. It was now too late for the one of them, but she peeled the other and then ate it too.

In due time it happened as the woman had said; but the first that the queen gave birth to was a hideous lindorm, or serpent. No one saw this but her waiting-woman, who threw it out of the window into the forest beside the castle. The next that came into the world was the most beautiful little prince, and he was shown to the king and queen, who knew nothing about his brother the lindorm.

There was now joy in all the palace and over the whole country on account of the beautiful prince; but no one knew that the queen's first-born was a lindorm, and lay in the wild forest. Time passed with the king, the queen, and the young prince in all happiness and prosperity, until he was twenty years of his age. Then his parents said to him that he should journey to another kingdom and seek for himself a bride, for they were beginning to grow old, and would fain see their son married. before they were laid in their grave. The prince obeyed, had his horses harnessed to his gilded chariot, and set out to woo his bride. But when he came to the first cross-ways there lay a huge and terrible lindorm right across the road, so that his horses had to come to a standstill.

'Where are you driving to? ' asked the lindorm with a hideous voice.

'That does not concern you,' said the prince. 'I am the prince, and can drive where I please.'

'Turn back,' said the lindorm. 'I know your errand, but you shall get no bride until I have got a mate and slept by her side.'

The prince turned home again, and told the king and the queen what he had met at the cross-roads; but they thought that he should try again on the following day, and see whether he could not get past it, so that he might seek a bride in another kingdom.

The prince did so, but got no further than the first cross-roads; there lay the lindorm again, who stopped him in the same way as before.

The same thing happened on the third day when the prince tried to get past: the lindorm said, with a threatening voice, that before the prince could get a bride he himself must find a mate. When the king and queen heard this for the third time they could think of no better plan than to invite the lindorm to the palace, and they should find him a mate. They thought that a lindorm would be quite well satisfied with anyone that they might give him, and so they would get some slave-woman to marry the monster. The lindorm came to the palace and received a bride of this kind, but in the morning she lay torn in pieces. So it happened every time that the king and queen compelled any woman to be his bride.

The report of this soon spread over al1 the country. Now it happened that there was a man who had married a second time, and his wife heard of the lindorm with great delight. Her husband had a daughter by his first wife who was more beautiful than all other maidens, and so gentle and good that she won the heart of all who knew her. His second wife, however, had also a grown-up daughter, who by herself would have been ugly and disagreeable enough, but beside her good and beautiful stepsister seemed still more ugly and wicked, so that all turned from her with loathing.

The stepmother had long been annoyed that her husband's daughter was so much more beautiful than her own, and in her heart she conceived a bitter hatred for her stepdaughter. When she now heard that there was in the king's palace a lindorm which tore in pieces all the women that were married to him, and demanded a beautiful maiden for his bride, she went to the king, and said that her stepdaughter wished to wed the lindorm, so that the country's only prince might travel and seek a bride. At this the king was greatly delighted, and gave orders that the young girl should be brought to the palace.

When the messengers came to fetch her she was terribly frightened, for she knew that it was her wicked stepmother who in this way was aiming at her life. She begged that she might be allowed to spend another night in her father's house. This was granted her, and she went to her mother's grave. There she lamented her hard fate in being given over to the lindorm, and earnestly prayed her mother for counsel. How long she lay there by the grave and wept one cannot tell, but sure it is that she fell asleep and slept until the sun rose. Then she rose up from the grave, quite happy at heart, and began to search about in the fields. There she found three nuts, which she carefully put away in her pocket.

'When I come into very great danger I must break one of these,' she said to herself. Then she went home, and set out quite willingly with the king's messengers.

When these arrived at the palace with the beautiful young maiden everyone pitied her fate; but she herself was of good courage, and asked the queen for another bridal chamber than the one the lindorm had had before. She got this, and then she requested them to put a pot full of strong lye on the fire and lay down three new scrubbing brushes. The queen gave orders that everything should be done as she desired; and then the maiden dressed herself in seven clean snow-white shirts, and held her wedding with the lindorm.

When they were left alone in the bridal chamber the lindorm, in a threatening voice, ordered her to undress herself.

'Undress yourself first!' said she.

'None of the others bade me do that,' said he in surprise.

'But I bid you,' said she.

Then the lindorm began to writhe, and groan, and breathe heavily; and after a little he had cast his outer skin, which lay on the floor, hideous to behold. Then his bride took off one of her snow-white shirts, and cast it on the lindorm's skin. Again he ordered her to undress, and again she commanded him to do so first. He had to obey, and with groaning and pain cast off one skin after another, and for each skin the maiden threw off one of her shirts, until there lay on the floor seven lindorm skins and six snow-white shirts; the seventh she still had on. The lindorm now lay before her as a formless, slimy mass, which she with all her might began to scrub with the lye and new scrubbing brushes.

When she had nearly worn out the last of these there stood before her the loveliest youth in the world. He thanked her for having saved him from his enchantment, and told her that he was the king and queen's eldest son, and heir to the kingdom. Then he asked her whether she would keep the promise she had made to the lindorm, to share everything with him. To this she was well content to answer 'Yes.'

Each time that the lindorm had held his wedding one of the king's retainers was sent next morning to open the door of the bridal chamber and see whether the bride was alive. This next morning also he peeped in at the door, but what he saw there surprised him so much that he shut the door in a hurry, and hastened to the king and queen, who were waiting for his report. He told them of the wonderful sight he had seen. On the floor lay seven lindorm skins and six snow-white shirts, and beside these three worn-out scrubbing brushes, while in the bed a beautiful youth was lying asleep beside the fair young maiden.

The king and queen marvelled greatly what this could mean; but just then the old woman who was spoken of in the beginning of the story was again brought in to the queen. She reminded her how she had not followed her instructions, but had eaten the first onion with all its skins, on which account her first-born had been a lindorm. The waiting-woman was then summoned, and admitted that she had thrown it out through the window into the forest. The king and queen now sent for their eldest son and his young bride. They took them both in their arms, and asked him to tell about his sorrowful lot during the twenty years he had lived in the forest as a hideous lindorm. This he did, and then his parents had it proclaimed over the whole country that he was their eldest son, and along with his spouse should inherit the country and kingdom after them.

Prince Lindorm and his beautiful wife now lived in joy and prosperity for a time in the palace; and when his father was laid in the grave, not long after this, he obtained the whole kingdom. Soon afterwards his mother also departed from this world.

Now it happened that an enemy declared war against the young king; and, as he foresaw that it would be three years at the least before he could return to his country and his queen, he ordered all his servants who remained at home to guard her most carefully. That they might be able to write to each other in confidence, he had two seal rings made, one for himself and one for his young queen, and issued an order that no one, under pain of death, was to open any letter that was sealed with one of these. Then he took farewell of his queen, and marched out to war.

The queen's wicked stepmother had heard with great grief that her beautiful stepdaughter had prospered so well that she had not only preserved her life, but had even become queen of the country. She now plotted continually how she might destroy her good fortune. While King Lindorm was away at the war the wicked woman came to the queen, and spoke fair to her, saying that she had always foreseen that her stepdaughter was destined to be something great in the world, and that she had on this account secured that she should be the enchanted prince's bride. The queen, who did not imagine that any person could be so deceitful, bade her stepmother welcome, and kept her beside her.

Soon after this the queen had two children, the prettiest boys that anyone could see. When she had written a letter to the king to tell him of this her stepmother asked leave to comb her hair for her, as her own mother used to do. The queen gave her permission, and the stepmother combed her hair until she fell asleep. Then she took the seal ring off her neck, and exchanged the letter for another, in which she had written that the queen had given birth to two whelps.

When the king received. this letter he was greatly distressed, but he remembered how he himself had lived for twenty years as a lindorm, and had been freed from the spell by his young queen. He therefore wrote back to his most trusted retainer that the queen and her two whelps should be taken care of while he was away.

The stepmother, however, took this letter as well, and wrote a new one, in which the king ordered that the queen and the two little princes should be burnt at the stake. This she also sealed with the queen's seal, which was in all respects like the king's.

The retainer was greatly shocked and grieved at the king's orders, for which he could discover no reason; but, as he had not the heart to destroy three innocent beings, he had a great fire kindled, and in this he burned a sheep and two lambs, so as to make people believe that he had carried out the king's commands. The stepmother had made these known to the people, adding that the queen was a wicked sorceress.

The faithful servant, however, told the queen that it was the king's command that during the years he was absent in the war she should keep herself concealed in the castle, so that no one but himself should see her and the little princes.

The queen obeyed, and no one knew but that both she and her children had been burned. But when the time came near for King Lindorm to return home from the war the old retainer grew frightened because he had not obeyed his orders. He therefore went to the queen, and told her everything, at the same time showing her the king's letter containing the command to burn her and the princes. He then begged her to leave the palace before the king returned.

The queen now took her two little sons, and wandered out into the wild forest. They walked all day without ending a human habitation, and became very tired. The queen then caught sight of a man who carried some venison. He seemed very poor and wretched, but the queen was glad to see a human being, and asked him whether he knew where she and her little children could get a house over their heads for the night.

The man answered that he had a little hut in the forest, and that she could rest there; but he also said that he was one who lived entirely apart from men, and owned no more than the hut, a horse, and a dog, and supported himself by hunting.

The queen followed him to the hut and rested there overnight with her children, and when she awoke in the morning the man had already gone out hunting. The queen then began to put the room in order and prepare food, so that when the man came home he found everything neat and tidy, and this seemed to give him some pleasure. He spoke but little, however, and all that he said about himself was that his name was Peter.

Later in the day he rode out into the forest, and the queen thought that he looked very unhappy. While he was away she looked about her in the hut a little more closely, and found a tub full of shirts stained with blood, lying among water. She was surprised at this, but thought that the man would get the blood on his shirt when he was carrying home venison. She washed the shirts, and hung them up to dry, and said nothing to Peter about the matter.

After some time had passed she noticed that every day he came riding home from the forest he took off a blood-stained shirt and put on a clean one. She then saw that it was something else than the blood of the deer that stained his shirts, so one day she took courage and asked him about it.

At first he refused to tell her, but she then related to him her own story, and how she had succeeded in delivering the lindorm. He then told her that he had formerly lived a wild life, and had finally entered into a written contract * with the Evil Spirit. Before this contract had expired he had repented and turned from his evil ways, and withdrawn himself to this solitude. The Evil One had then lost all power to take him, but so long as he had the contract he could compel him to meet him in the forest each day at a certain time, where the evil spirits then scourged him till he bled.

Next day, when the time came for the man to ride into the forest, the queen asked him to stay at home and look after the princes, and she would go to meet the evil spirits in his place. The man was amazed, and said that this would not only cost her her life, but would also bring upon him a greater misfortune than the one he was already under. She bade him be of good courage, looked to see that she had the three nuts which she had found beside her mother's grave, mounted her horse, and rode out into the forest. When she had ridden for some time the evil spirits came forth and said, 'Here comes Peter's horse and Peter's hound; but Peter himself is not with them.'

Then at a distance she heard a terrible voice demanding to know what she wanted.

'I have come to get Peter's contract,' said she.

At this there arose a terrible uproar among the evil spirits, and the worst voice among them all said, 'Ride home and tell Peter that when he comes to-morrow he shall get twice as many strokes as usual.'

The queen then took one of her nuts and cracked it, and turned her horse about. At this sparks of fire flew out of all the trees, and the evil spirits howled as if they were being scourged back to their abode.

Next day at the same time the queen again rode out into the forest; but on this occasion the spirits did not dare to come so near her. They would not, however, give up the contract, but threatened both her and the man. Then she cracked her second nut, and all the forest behind her seemed to be in fire and flames, and the evil spirits howled even worse than on the previous day; but the contract they would not give up.

The queen had only one nut left now, but even that she was ready to give up in order to deliver the man. This time she cracked the nut as soon as she came near the place where the spirits appeared, and what then happened to them she could not see, but amid wild screams and howls the contract was handed to her at the end of a long branch. The queen rode happy home to the hut, and happier still was the man, who had been sitting there in great anxiety, for now he was freed from all the power of the evil spirits.

Meanwhile King Lindorm had come home from the war, and the first question he asked when he entered the palace was about the queen and the whelps. The attendants were surprised: they knew of no whelps. The queen had had two beautiful princes; but the king had sent orders that all these were to be burned.

The king grew pale with sorrow and anger, and ordered them to summon his trusted retainer, to whom he had sent the instructions that the queen and the whelps were to be carefully looked after. The retainer, however, showed him the letter in which there was written that the queen and her children were to be burned, and everyone then understood that some great treachery had been enacted.

When the king's trusted retainer saw his master's deep sorrow he confessed to him that he had spared the lives of the queen and the princes, and had only burned a sheep and two lambs, and had kept the queen and her children hidden in the palace for three years, but had sent her out into the wild forest just when the king was expected home. When the king heard this his sorrow was lessened, and he said that he would wander out into the forest and search for his wife and children. If he found them he would return to his palace; but if he did not find them he would never see it again, and in that case the faithful retainer who had saved the lives of the queen and the princes should be king in his stead.

The king then went forth alone into the wild forest, and wandered there the whole day without seeing a single human being. So it went with him the second day also, but on the third day he came by roundabout ways to the little hut. He went in there, and asked for leave to rest himself for a little on the bench. The queen and the princes were there, but she was poorly clad and so sorrowful that the king did not recognise her, neither did he think for a moment that the two children, who were dressed only in rough skins, were his own sons.

He lay down on the bench, and, tired as he was, he soon fell asleep. The bench was a narrow one, and as he slept his arm fell down and hung by the side of it.

'My son, go and lift your father's arm up on the bench,' said the queen to one of the princes, for she easily knew the king again, although she was afraid to make herself known to him. The boy went and took the king's arm, but, being only a child, he did not lift it up very gently on to the bench.

The king woke at this, thinking at first that he had fallen into a den of robbers, but he decided to keep quiet and pretend that he was asleep until he should find out what kind of folk were in the house. He lay still for a little, and, as no one moved in the room, he again let his arm glide down off the bench. Then he heard a woman's voice say, 'My son, go you and lift your father's arm up on the bench, but don't do it so rough!y as your brother did.' Then he felt a pair of little hands softly clasping his arm; he opened his eyes, and saw his queen and her children.

He sprang up and caught all three in his arms, and afterwards took them, along with the man and his horse and his hound, back to the palace with great joy. The most unbounded rejoicing reigned there then, as well as over the whole kingdom, but the wicked stepmother was burned.

King Lindorm lived long and happily with his queen, and there are some who say that if they are not dead now they are still living to this day.

The Pink Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f37]

The Jackal, the Dove, and the Panther

Contes populaires des Bassoutos. Recueillis et traduits par E. Jacottet. Paris: Leroux, Editeur.

There was once a dove who built a nice soft nest as a home for her three little ones. She was very proud of their beauty, and perhaps talked about them to her neighbours more than she need have done, till at last everybody for miles round knew where the three prettiest baby doves in the whole country-side were to be found.

One day a jackal who was prowling about in search of a dinner came by chance to the foot of the rock where the dove's nest was hidden away, and he suddenly bethought himself that if he could get nothing better he might manage to make a mouthful of one of the young doves. So he shouted as loud as he could, 'Ohe, ohe, mother dove.'

And the dove replied, trembling with fear, 'What do you want, sir?'

'One of your children,' said he; 'and if you don't throw it to me I will eat up you and the others as well.'

Now, the dove was nearly driven distracted at the jackal's words; but, in order to save the lives of the other two, she did at last throw the little one out of the nest. The jackal ate it up, and went home to sleep.

Meanwhile the mother dove sat on the edge of her nest, crying bitterly, when a heron, who was flying slowly past the rock, was filled with pity for her, and stopped to ask, 'What is the matter, you poor dove?'

And the dove answered, 'A jackal came by, and asked me to give him one of my little ones, and said that if I refused he would jump on my nest and eat us all up.'

But the heron replied, 'You should not have believed him. He could never have jumped so high. He only deceived you because he wanted something for supper.' And with these words the heron flew off.

He had hardly got out of sight when again the jackal came creeping slowly round the foot of the rock. And when he saw the dove he cried out a second time, 'Ohe, ohe, mother dove! give me one of your little ones, or I will jump on your nest and eat you all up.'

This time the dove knew better, and she answered boldly, 'Indeed, I shall do nothing of the sort,' though her heart beat wildly with fear when she saw the jackal preparing for a spring.

However, he only cut himself against the rock, and thought he had better stick to threats, so he started again with his old cry, 'Mother dove, mother dove! be quick and give me one of your little ones, or I will eat you all up.'

But the mother dove only answered as before, 'Indeed, I shall do nothing of the sort, for I know we are safely out of your reach.'

The jackal felt it was quite hopeless to get what he wanted, and asked, 'Tell me, mother dove, how have you suddenly become so wise ?'

'It was the heron who told me,' replied she.

'And which way did he go?' said the jackal.

'Down there among the reeds. You can see him if you look,' said the dove.

Then the jackal nodded good-bye, and went quickly after the heron. He soon came up to the great bird, who was standing on a stone on the edge of the river watching for a nice fat fish. 'Tell me, heron,' said he, 'when the wind blows from that quarter, to which side do you turn?'

'And which side do you turn to?' asked the heron.

The jackal answered, 'I always turn to this side.'

'Then that is the side I turn to,' remarked the heron.

'And when the rain comes from that quarter, which side do you turn to?'

And the heron replied, 'And which side do you turn to?'

'Oh, I always turn to this side,' said the jackal.

'Then that is the side I turn to,' said the heron.

'And when the rain comes straight down, what do you do?'

'What do you do yourself?' asked the heron.

'I do this,' answered the jackal. 'I cover my head with my paws.'

'Then that is what I do,' said the heron. 'I cover my head with my wings,' and as he spoke he lifted his large wings and spread them completely over his head.

With one bound the jackal had seized him by the neck, and began to shake him.

'Oh, have pity, have pity!' cried the heron. 'I never did you any harm.'

'You told the dove how to get the better of me, and I am going to eat you for it.'

'But if you will let me go,' entreated the heron, 'I will show you the place where the panther has her lair.'

'Then you had better be quick about it,' said the jackal, holding tight on to the heron until he had pointed out the panther's den. 'Now you may go, my friend, for there is plenty of food here for me.'

So the jackal came up to the panther, and asked politely, 'Panther, would you like me to look after your children while you are out hunting?'

'I should be very much obliged,' said the panther; 'but be sure you take care of them. They always cry all the time that I am away.'

So saying she trotted off, and the jackal marched into the cave, where he found ten little panthers, and instantly ate one up. By-and-bye the panther returned from hunting, and said to him, 'Jackal, bring out my little ones for their supper.'

The jackal fetched them out one by one till he had brought out nine, and he took the last one and brought it out again, so the whole ten seemed to be there, and the panther was quite satisfied.

Next day she went again to the chase, and the jackal ate up another little panther, so now there were only eight. In the evening, when she came back, the panther said, 'Jackal, bring out my little ones!'

And the jackal brought out first one and then another, and the last one he brought out three times, so that the whole ten seemed to be there.

The following day the same thing happened, and the next and the next and the next, till at length there was not even one left, and the rest of the day the jackal busied himself with digging a large hole at the back of the den.

That night, when the panther returned from hunting, she said to him as usual, 'Jackal, bring out my little ones.'

But the jackal replied: 'Bring out your little ones, indeed! Why, you know as well as I do that you have eaten them all up.'

Of course the panther had not the least idea what the jackal meant by this, and only repeated, 'Jackal, bring out my children.' As she got no answer she entered the cave, but found no jackal, for he had crawled through the hole he had made and escaped. And, what was worse, she did not find the little ones either.

Now the panther was not going to let the jackal get off like that, and set off at a trot to catch him. The jackal, however, had got a good start, and he reached a place where a swarm of bees deposited their honey in the cleft of a rock. Then he stood still and waited till the panther came up to him: 'Jackal, where are my little ones?' she asked.

And the jackal answered: 'They are up there. It is where I keep school.'

The panther looked about, and then inquired, 'But where? I see nothing of them.'

'Come a little this way,' said the jackal, 'and you will hear how beautifully they sing.'

So the panther drew near the cleft of the rock.

'Don't you hear them?' said the jackal; 'they are in there,' and slipped away while the panther was listening to the song of the children.

She was still standing in the same place when a baboon went by. 'What are you doing there, panther?'

'I am listening to my children singing. It is here that the jackal keeps his school.'

Then the baboon seized a stick, and poked it in the cleft of the rock, exclaiming, 'Well, then, I should like to see your children!'

The bees flew out in a huge swarm, and made furiously for the panther, whom they attacked on all sides, while the baboon soon climbed up out of the way, crying, as he perched himself on the branch of a tree, 'I wish you joy of your children!' while from afar the jackal's voice was heard exclaiming: 'Sting, her well! don't let her go!'

The panther galloped away as if she was mad, and flung herself into the nearest lake, but every time she raised her head, the bees stung her afresh so at last the poor beast was drowned altogether.

The Pink Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f38]

The Little Hare

Contes populaires des Bassoutos. Recueillis et traduits par E. Jacottet. Paris: Leroux, Editeur.

A long, long way off, in a land where water is very scarce, there lived a man and his wife and several children. One day the wife said to her husband, 'I am pining to have the liver of a nyamatsane for my dinner. If you love me as much as you say you do, you will go out and hunt for a nyamatsane, and will kill it and get its liver. If not, I shall know that your love is not worth having.'

'Bake some bread,' was all her husband answered, 'then take the crust and put it in this little bag.'

The wife did as she was told, and when she had finished she said to her husband, 'The bag is all ready and quite full.'

'Very well,' said he, 'and now good-bye; I am going after the nyamatsane.'

But the nyamatsane was not so easy to find as the woman had hoped. The husband walked on and on and on without ever seeing one, and every now and then he felt so hungry that he was obliged to eat one of the crusts of bread out of his bag. At last, when he was ready to drop from fatigue, he found himself on the edge of a great marsh, which bordered on one side the country of the nyamatsanes. But there were no more nyamatsanes here than anywhere else. They had all gone on a hunting expedition, as their larder was empty, and the only person left at home was their grandmother, who was so feeble she never went out of the house. Our friend looked on this as a great piece of luck, and made haste to kill her before the others returned, and to take out her liver, after which he dressed himself in her skin as well as he could. He had scarcely done this when he heard the noise of the nyamatsanes coming back to their grandmother, for they were very fond of her, and never stayed away from her longer than they could help. They rushed clattering into the hut, exclaiming, 'We smell human flesh! Some man is here,' and began to look about for him; but they only saw their old grandmother, who answered, in a trembling voice, 'No, my children, no! What should any man be doing here?' The nyamatsanes paid no attention to her, and began to open all the cupboards, and peep under all the beds, crying out all the while, 'A man is here! a man is here!' but they could find nobody, and at length, tired out with their long day's hunting, they curled themselves up and fell asleep.

Next morning they woke up quite refreshed, and made ready to start on another expedition; but as they did not feel happy about their grandmother they said to her, 'Grandmother, won't you come to-day and feed with us?' And they led their grandmother outside, and all of them began hungrily to eat pebbles. Our friend pretended to do the same, but in reality he slipped the stones into his pouch, and swallowed the crusts of bread instead. However, as the nyamatsanes did not see this they had no idea that he was not really their grandmother. When they had eaten a great many pebbles they thought they had done enough for that day, and all went home together and curled themselves up to sleep. Next morning when they woke they said, 'Let us go and amuse ourselves by jumping over the ditch,' and every time they cleared it with a bound. Then they begged their grandmother to jump over it too, end with a tremendous effort she managed to spring right over to the other side. After this they had no doubt at all of its being their true grandmother, and went off to their hunting, leaving our friend at home in the hut.

As soon as they had gone out of sight our hero made haste to take the liver from the place where he had hid it, threw off the skin of the old nyamatsane, and ran away as hard as he could, only stopping to pick up a very brilliant and polished little stone, which he put in his bag by the side of the liver.

Towards evening the nyamatsanes came back to the hut full of anxiety to know how their grandmother had got on during their absence. The first thing they saw on entering the door was her skin lying on the floor, and then they knew that they had been deceived, and they said to each other, 'So we were right, after all, and it was human flesh we smelt.' Then they stooped down to find traces of the man's footsteps, and when they had got them instantly set out in hot pursuit.

Meanwhile our friend had journeyed many miles, and was beginning to feel quite safe and comfortable, when, happening to look round, he saw in the distance a thick cloud of dust moving rapidly. His heart stood still within him, and he said to himself, 'I am lost. It is the nyamatsanes, and they will tear me in pieces,' and indeed the cloud of dust was drawing near with amazing quickness, and the nyamatsanes almost felt as if they were already devouring him. Then as a last hope the man took the little stone that he had picked up out of his bag and flung it on the ground. The moment it touched the soil it became a huge rock, whose steep sides were smooth as glass, and on the top of it our hero hastily seated himself. It was in vain that the nyamatsanes tried to climb up and reach him; they slid down again much faster than they had gone up; and by sunset they were quite worn out, and fell asleep at the foot of the rock.

No sooner had the nyamatsanes tumbled off to sleep than the man stole softly down and fled away as fast as his legs would carry him, and by the time his enemies were awake he was a very long way off. They sprang quickly to their feet and began to sniff the soil round the rock, in order to discover traces of his footsteps, and they galloped after him with terrific speed. The chase continued for several days and nights; several times the nyamatsanes almost reached him, and each time he was saved by his little pebble.

Between his fright and his hurry he was almost dead of exhaustion when he reached his own village, where the nyamatsanes could not follow him, because of their enemies the dogs, which swarmed over all the roads. So they returned home.

Then our friend staggered into his own hut and called to his wife: 'Ichou! how tired I am! Quick, give me something to drink. Then go and get fuel and light a fire.'

So she did what she was bid, and then her husband took the nyamatsane's liver from his pouch and said to her, 'There, I have brought you what you wanted, and now you know that I love you truly.'

And the wife answered, 'It is well. Now go and take out the children, so that I may remain alone in the hut,' and as she spoke she lifted down an old stone pot and put on the liver to cook. Her husband watched her for a moment, and then said, 'Be sure you eat it all yourself. Do not give a scrap to any of the children, but eat every morsel up.' So the woman took the liver and ate it all herself.

Directly the last mouthful had disappeared she was seized with such violent thirst that she caught up a great pot full of water and drank it at a single draught. Then, having no more in the house, she ran in next door and said, 'Neighbour, give me, I pray you, something to drink.' The neighbour gave her a large vessel quite full, and the woman drank it off at a single draught, and held it out for more.

But the neighbour pushed her away, saying, 'No, I shall have none left for my children.'

So the woman went into another house, and drank all the water she could find; but the more she drank the more thirsty she became. She wandered in this manner through the whole village till she had drunk every water-pot dry. Then she rushed off to the nearest spring, and swallowed that, and when she had finished all the springs and wells about she drank up first the river and then a lake. But by this time she had drunk so much that she could not rise from the ground.

In the evening, when it was time for the animals to have their drink before going to bed, they found the lake quite dry, and they had to make up their minds to be thirsty till the water flowed again and the streams were full. Even then, for some time, the lake was very dirty, and the lion, as king of the beasts, commanded that no one should drink till it was quite clear again.

But the little hare, who was fond of having his own way, and was very thirsty besides, stole quietly off when all the rest were asleep in their dens, and crept down to the margin of the lake and drank his fill. Then he smeared the dirty water all over the rabbit's face and paws, so that it might look as if it were he who had been disobeying Big Lion's orders.

The next day, as soon as it was light, Big Lion marched straight for the lake, and all the other beasts followed him. He saw at once that the water had been troubled again, and was very angry.

'Who has been drinking my water?' said he; and the little hare gave a jump, and, pointing to the rabbit, he answered, 'Look there! it must be he! Why, there is mud all over his face and paws!'

The rabbit, frightened out of his wits, tried to deny the fact, exclaiming, 'Oh, no, indeed I never did;' but Big Lion would not listen, and commanded them to cane him with a birch rod.

Now the little hare was very much pleased with his cleverness in causing the rabbit to be beaten instead of himself, and went about boasting of it. At last one of the other animals overheard him, and called out, 'Little hare, little hare! what is that you are saying?'

But the little hare hastily replied, 'I only asked you to pass me my stick.'

An hour or two later, thinking that no one was near him, he said to himself again, 'It was really I who drank up the water, but I made them think it was the rabbit.'

But one of the beasts whose ears were longer than the rest caught the words, and went to tell Big Lion about it. Do you hear what the little hare is saying?'

So Big Lion sent for the little hare, and asked him what he meant by talking like that.

The little hare saw that there was no use trying to hide it, so he answered pertly, 'It was I who drank the water, but I made them think it was the rabbit.' Then he turned and ran as fast as he could, with all the other beasts pursuing him.

They were almost up to him when he dashed into a very narrow cleft in the rock, much too small for them to follow; but in his hurry he had left one of his long ears sticking out, which they just managed to seize. But pull as hard as they might they could not drag him out of the hole, and at last they gave it up and left him, with his ear very much torn and scratched.

When the last tail was out of sight the little hare crept cautiously out, and the first person he met was the rabbit. He had plenty of impudence, so he put a bold face on the matter, and said, 'Well, my good rabbit, you see I have had a beating as well as you.'

But the rabbit was still sore and sulky, and he did not care to talk, so he answered, coldly, 'You have treated me very badly. It was really you who drank that water, and you accused me of having done it.'

'Oh, my good rabbit, never mind that! I've got such a wonderful secret to tell you! Do you know what to do so as to escape death?'

'No, I don't.'

'Well, we must begin by digging a hole.'

So they dug a hole, and then the little hare said, 'The next thing is to make a fire in the hole,' and they set to work to collect wood, and lit quite a large fire.

When it was burning brightly the little hare said to the rabbit, 'Rabbit, my friend, throw me into the fire, and when you hear my fur crackling, and I call "Itchi, Itchi," then be quick and pull me out.'

The rabbit did as he was told, and threw the little hare into the fire; but no sooner did the little hare begin to feel the heat of the flames than he took some green bay leaves he had plucked for the purpose and held them in the middle of the fire, where they crackled and made a great noise. Then he called loudly 'Itchi, Itchi! Rabbit, my friend, be quick, be quick! Don't you hear how my skin is crackling ?'

And the rabbit came in a great hurry and pulled him out.

Then the little hare said, 'Now it is your turn!' and he threw the rabbit in the fire. The moment the rabbit felt the flames he cried out 'Itchi, Itchi, I am burning; pull me out quick, my friend!'

But the little hare only laughed, and said, 'No, you may stay there! It is your own fault. Why were you such a fool as to let yourself be thrown in? Didn't you know that fire burns?' And in a very few minutes nothing was left of the rabbit but a few bones.

When the fire was quite out the little hare went and picked up one of these bones, and made a flute out of it, and sang this song:

Pii, pii, O flute that I love, Pii, pii, rabbits are but little boys. Pii, pii, he would have burned me if he could; Pii, pii, but I burned him, and he crackled finely.

When he got tired of going through the world singing this the little hare went back to his friends and entered the service of Big Lion. One day he said to his master, 'Grandfather, shall I show you a splendid way to kill game?'

'What is it?' asked Big Lion.

'We must dig a ditch, and then you must lie in it and pretend to be dead.'

Big Lion did as he was told, and when he had lain down the little hare got up on a wall blew a trumpet and shouted--

Pii, pii, all you animals come and see, Big Lion is dead, and now peace will be.

Directly they heard this they all came running. The little hare received them and said, 'Pass on, this way to the lion.' So they all entered into the Animal Kingdom. Last of all came the monkey with her baby on her back. She approached the ditch, and took a blade of grass and tickled Big Lion's nose, and his nostrils moved in spite of his efforts to keep them still. Then the monkey cried, 'Come, my baby, climb on my back and let us go. What sort of a dead body is it that can still feel when it is tickled?' And she and her baby went away in a fright. Then the little hare said to the other beasts, 'Now, shut the gate of the Animal Kingdom.' And it was shut, and great stones were rolled against it. When everything was tight closed the little hare turned to Big Lion and said 'Now!' and Big Lion bounded out of the ditch and tore the other animals in pieces.

But Big Lion kept all the choice bits for himself, and only gave away the little scraps that he did not care about eating; and the little hare grew very angry, and determined to have his revenge. He had long ago found out that Big Lion was very easily taken in; so he laid his plans accordingly. He said to him, as if the idea had just come into his head, 'Grandfather, let us build a hut,' and Big Lion consented. And when they had driven the stakes into the ground, and had made the walls of the hut, the little hare told Big Lion to climb upon the top while he stayed inside. When he was ready he called out, 'Now, grandfather, begin,' and Big Lion passed his rod through the reeds with which the roofs are always covered in that country. The little hare took it and cried, 'Now it is my turn to pierce them,' and as he spoke he passed the rod back through the reeds and gave Big Lion's tail a sharp poke.

'What is pricking me so?' asked Big Lion.

'Oh, just a little branch sticking out. I am going to break it,' answered the little hare; but of course he had done it on purpose, as he wanted to fix Big Lion's tail so firmly to the hut that he would not be able to move. In a little while he gave another prick, and Big Lion called again, 'What is pricking me so?'

This time the little hare said to himself, 'He will find out what I am at. I must try some other plan. 'So he called out, 'Grandfather, you had better put your tongue here, so that the branches shall not touch you.' Big Lion did as he was bid, and the little hare tied it tightly to the stakes of the wall. Then he went outside and shouted, 'Grandfather, you can come down now,' and Big Lion tried, but he could not move an inch.

Then the little hare began quietly to eat Big Lion's dinner right before his eyes, and paying no attention at all to his growls of rage. When he had quite done he climbed up on the hut, and, blowing his flute, he chanted 'Pii, pii, fall rain and hail,' and directly the sky was full of clouds, the thunder roared, and huge hailstones whitened the roof of the hut. The little hare, who had taken refuge within, called out again, 'Big Lion, be quick and come down and dine with me.' But there was no answer, not even a growl, for the hailstones had killed Big Lion.

The little hare enjoyed himself vastly for some time, living comfortably in the hut, with plenty of food to eat and no trouble at all in getting it. But one day a great wind arose, and flung down the Big Lion's half-dried skin from the roof of the hut. The little hare bounded with terror at the noise, for he thought Big Lion must have come to life again; but on discovering what had happened he set about cleaning the skin, and propped the mouth open with sticks so that he could get through. So, dressed in Big Lion's skin, the little hare started on his travels.

The first visit he paid was to the hyaenas, who trembled at the sight of him, and whispered to each other, 'How shall we escape from this terrible beast?' Meanwhile the little hare did not trouble himself about them, but just asked where the king of the hyaenas lived, and made himself quite at home there. Every morning each hyaena thought to himself, 'To-day he is certain to eat me;' but several days went by, and they were all still alive. At length, one evening, the little hare, looking round for something to amuse him, noticed a great pot full of boiling water, so he strolled up to one of the hyaenas and said, 'Go and get in.' The hyaena dared not disobey, and in a few minutes was scalded to death. Then the little hare went the round of the village, saying to every hyaena he met, 'Go and get into the boiling water,' so that in a little while there was hardly a male left in the village.

One day all the hyaenas that remained alive went out very early into the fields, leaving only one little daughter at home. The little hare, thinking he was all alone, came into the enclosure, and, wishing to feel what it was like to be a hare again, threw off Big Lion's skin, and began to jump and dance, singing--

I am just the little hare, the little hare, the little hare; I am just the little hare who killed the great hyaenas.

The little hyaena gazed at him in surprise, saying to herself, 'What! was it really this tiny beast who put to death all our best people?' when suddenly a gust of wind rustled the reeds that surrounded the enclosure, and the little hare, in a fright, hastily sprang back into Big Lion's skin.

When the hyaenas returned to their homes the little hyaena said to her father: 'Father, our tribe has very nearly been swept away, and all this has been the work of a tiny creature dressed in the lion's skin.'

But her father answered, 'Oh, my dear child, you don't know what you are talking about.'

She replied, 'Yes, father, it is quite true. I saw it with my own eyes.'

The father did not know what to think, and told one of his friends, who said, 'To-morrow we had better keep watch ourselves.'

And the next day they hid themselves and waited till the little hare came out of the royal hut. He walked gaily towards the enclosure, threw off, Big Lion's skin, and sang and danced as before--

I am just the little hare, the little hare, the little hare, I am just the little hare, who killed the great hyaenas.

That night the two hyaenas told all the rest, saying, 'Do you know that we have allowed ourselves to be trampled on by a wretched creature with nothing of the lion about him but his skin?'

When supper was being cooked that evening, before they all went to bed, the little hare, looking fierce and terrible in Big Lion's skin, said as usual to one of the hyaenas 'Go and get into the boiling water.' But the hyaena never stirred. There was silence for a moment; then a hyaena took a stone, and flung it with all his force against the lion's skin. The little hare jumped out through the mouth with a single spring, and fled away like lightning, all the hyaenas in full pursuit uttering great cries. As he turned a corner the little hare cut off both his ears, so that they should not know him, and pretended to be working at a grindstone which lay there.

The hyaenas soon came up to him and said, 'Tell me, friend, have you seen the little hare go by?'

'No, I have seen no one.'

'Where can he be?' said the hyaenas one to another. 'Of course, this creature is quite different, and not at all like the little hare.' Then they went on their way, but, finding no traces of the little hare, they returned sadly to their village, saying, 'To think we should have allowed ourselves to be swept away by a wretched creature like that!'

The Pink Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f39]

The Sparrow with the Slit Tongue

From the Japanische Marchen und Sagen.

A long long time ago, an old couple dwelt in the very heart of a high mountain. They lived together in peace and harmony, although they were very different in character, the man being good-natured and honest, and the wife being greedy and quarrelsome when anyone came her way that she could possibly quarrel with.

One day the old man was sitting in front of his cottage, as he was very fond of doing, when he saw flying towards him a little sparrow, followed by a big black raven. The poor little thing was very much frightened and cried out as it flew, and the great bird came behind it terribly fast, flapping its wings and craning its beak, for it was hungry and wanted some dinner. But as they drew near the old man, he jumped up, and beat back the raven, which mounted, with hoarse screams of disappointment, into the sky, and the little bird, freed from its enemy, nestled into the old man's hand, and he carried it into the house. He stroked its feathers, and told it not to be afraid, for it was quite safe; but as he still felt its heart beating, he put it into a cage, where it soon plucked up courage to twitter and hop about. The old man was fond of all creatures, and every morning he used to open the cage door, and the sparrow flew happily about until it caught sight of a cat or a rat or some other fierce beast, when it would instantly return to the cage, knowing that there no harm could come to it.

The woman, who was always on the look-out for something to grumble at, grew very jealous of her husband's affection for the bird, and would gladly have done it some harm had she dared. At last, one morning her opportunity came. Her husband had gone to the town some miles away down the mountain, and would not be back for several hours, but before he left he did not forget to open the door of the cage. The sparrow hopped about as usual, twittering happily, and thinking no evil, and all the while the woman's brow became blacker and blacker, and at length her fury broke out. She threw her broom at the bird, who was perched on a bracket high up on the wall. The broom missed the bird, but knocked down and broke the vase on the bracket, which did not soothe the angry woman. Then she chased it from place to place, and at last had it safe between her fingers, almost as frightened as on the day that it had made its first entrance into the hut.

By this time the woman was more furious than ever. If she had dared, she would have killed the sparrow then and there, but as it was she only ventured to slit its tongue. The bird struggled and piped, but there was no one to hear it, and then, crying out loud with the pain, it flew from the house and was lost in the depths of the forest.

By-and-bye the old man came back, and at once began to ask for his pet. His wife, who was still in a very bad temper, told him the whole story, and scolded him roundly for being so silly as to make such a fuss over a bird. But the old man, who was much troubled, declared she was a bad, hard-hearted woman, to have behaved so to a poor harmless bird; then he left the house, and went into the forest to seek for his pet. He walked many hours, whistling and calling for it, but it never came, and he went sadly home, resolved to be out with the dawn and never to rest till he had brought the wanderer back. Day after day he searched and called; and evening after evening he returned in despair. At length he gave up hope, and made up his mind that he should see his little friend no more.

One hot summer morning, the old man was walking slowly under the cool shadows of the big trees, and without thinking where he was going, he entered a bamboo thicket. As the bamboos became thinner, he found himself opposite to a beautiful garden, in the centre of which stood a tiny spick-and-span little house, and out of the house came a lovely maiden, who unlatched the gate and invited him in the most hospitable way to enter and rest. 'Oh, my dear old friend,' she exclaimed, 'how glad I am you have found me at last! I am your little sparrow, whose life you saved, and whom you took such care of.'

The old man seized her hands eagerly, but no time was given him to ask any questions, for the maiden drew him into the house, and set food before him, and waited on him herself.

While he was eating, the damsel and her maids took their lutes, and sang and danced to him, and altogether the hours passed so swiftly that the old man never saw that darkness had come, or remembered the scolding he would get from his wife for returning home so late.

Thus, in dancing and singing, and talking over the days when the maiden was a sparrow hopping in and out of her cage, the night passed away, and when the first rays of sun broke through the hedge of bamboo, the old man started up, thanked his hostess for her friendly welcome, and prepared to say farewell. 'I am not going to let you depart like that,' said she; 'I have a present for you, which you must take as a sign of my gratitude.' And as she spoke, her servants brought in two chests, one of them very small, the other large and heavy. 'Now choose which of them you will carry with you.' So the old man chose the small chest, and hid it under his cloak, and set out on his homeward way.

But as he drew near the house his heart sank a little, for he knew what a fury his wife would be in, and how she would abuse him for his absence. And it was even worse than he expected. However, long experience had taught him to let her storm and say nothing, so he lit his pipe and waited till she was tired out. The woman was still raging, and did not seem likely to stop, when her husband, who by this time had forgotten all about her, drew out the chest from under his cloak, and opened it. Oh, what a blaze met his eyes! gold and precious stones were heaped up to the very lid, and lay dancing in he sunlight. At the sight of these wonders even the scolding tongue ceased, and the woman approached, and took the stones in her hand, setting greedily aside those that were the largest and most costly. Then her voice softened, and she begged him quite politely to tell her where he had spent his evening, and how he had come by these wonderful riches. So he told her the whole story, and she listened with amazement, till he came to the choice which had been given him between the two chests. At this her tongue broke loose again, as she abused him for his folly in taking the little one, and she never rested till her husband had described the exact way which led to the sparrow-princess's house. When she had got it into her head, she put on her best clothes and set out at once. But in her blind haste she often missed the path, and she wandered for several hours before she at length reached the little house. She walked boldly up to the door and entered the room as if the whole place belonged to her, and quite frightened the poor girl, who was startled at the sight of her old enemy. However, she concealed her feelings as well as she could, and bade the intruder welcome, placing before her food and wine, hoping that when she had eaten and drunk she might take her leave. But nothing of the sort.

'You will not let me go without a little present?' said the greedy wife, as she saw no signs of one being offered her. 'Of course not,' replied the girl, and at her orders two chests were brought in, as they had been before. The old woman instantly seized the bigger, and staggering under the weight of it, disappeared into the forest, hardly waiting even to say good-bye.

It was a long way to her own house, and the chest seemed to grow heavier at every step. Sometimes she felt as if it would be impossible for her to get on at all, but her greed gave her strength, and at last she arrived at her own door. She sank down on the threshold, overcome with weariness, but in a moment was on her feet again, fumbling with the lock of the chest. But by this time night had come, and there was no light in the house, and the woman was in too much hurry to get to her treasures, to go and look for one. At length, however, the lock gave way, and the lid flew open, when, O horror! instead of gold and jewels, she saw before her serpents with glittering eyes and forky tongues. And they twined themselves about her and darted poison into her veins, and she died, and no man regretted her.

The Pink Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f40]

The Story of Ciccu

From Sicilianische Mahrchen.

Once upon a time there lived a man who had three sons. The eldest was called Peppe, the second Alfin, and the youngest Ciccu. They were all very poor, and at last things got so bad that they really had not enough to eat. So the father called his sons, and said to them, ' My dear boys, I am too old to work any more, and there is nothing left for me but to beg in the streets.'

'No, no!' exclaimed his sons; 'that you shall never do. Rather, if it must be, would we do it ourselves. But we have thought of a better plan than that.'

'What is it?' asked the father.

'Well, we will take you in the forest, where you shall cut wood, and then we will bind it up in bundles and sell it in the town.' So their father let them do as they said, and they all made their way into the forest; and as the old man was weak from lack of food his sons took it in turns to carry him on their backs. Then they built a little hut where they might take shelter, and set to work. Every morning early the father cut his sticks, and the sons bound them in bundles, and carried them to the town, bringing back the food the old man so much needed.

Some months passed in this way, and then the father suddenly fell ill, and knew that the time had come when he must die. He bade his sons fetch a lawyer, so that he might make his will, and when the man arrived he explained his wishes.

'I have,' said he, 'a little house in the village, and over it grows a fig-tree. The house I leave to my sons, who are to live in it together; the fig-tree I divide as follows. To my son Peppe I leave the branches. To my son Alfin I leave the trunk. To my son Ciccu I leave the fruit. Besides the house and tree, I have an old coverlet, which I leave to my eldest son. And an old purse, which I leave to my second son. And a horn, which I leave to my youngest son. And now farewell.'

Thus speaking, he laid himself down, and died quietly. The brothers wept bitterly for their father, whom they loved, and when they had buried him they began to talk over their future lives. 'What shall we do now?' said they. 'Shall we live in the wood, or go back to the village?' And they made up their minds to stay where they were and continue to earn their living by selling firewood.

One very hot evening, after they had been working hard all day, they fell asleep under a tree in front of the hut. And as they slept there came by three fairies, who stopped to look at them.

'What fine fellows!' said one. 'Let us give them a present.'

'Yes, what shall it be?' asked another.

'This youth has a coverlet over him,' said the first fairy. 'When he wraps it round him, and wishes himself in any place, he will find himself there in an instant.'

Then said the second fairy: 'This youth has a purse in his hand. I will promise that it shall always give him as much gold as he asks for.'

Last came the turn of the third fairy. 'This one has a horn slung round him. When he blows at the small end the seas shall be covered with ships. And if he blows at the wide end they shall all be sunk in the waves.' So they vanished, without knowing that Ciccu had been awake and heard all they said.

The next day, when they were all cutting wood, he said to his brothers, 'That old coverlet and the purse are no use to you; I wish you would give them to me. I have a fancy for them, for the sake of old times.' Now Peppe and Alfin were very fond of Ciccu, and never refused him anything, so they let him have the coverlet and the purse without a word. When he had got them safely Ciccu went on, 'Dear brothers, I am tired of the forest. I want to live in the town, and work at some trade.'

'O Ciccu! stay with us,' they cried. 'We are very happy here; and who knows how we shall get on elsewhere?'

'We can always try,' answered Ciccu; 'and if times are bad we can come back here and take up wood-cutting.' So saying he picked up his bundle of sticks, and his brothers did the same.

But when they reached the town they found that the market was overstocked with firewood, and they did not sell enough to buy themselves a dinner, far less to get any food to carry home. They were wondering sadly what they should do when Ciccu said, 'Come with me to the inn and let us have something to eat.' They were so hungry by this time that they did not care much whether they paid for it or not, so they followed Ciccu, who gave his orders to the host. 'Bring us three dishes, the nicest that you have, and a good bottle of wine.'

'Ciccu! Ciccu!' whispered his brothers, horrified at this extravagance, 'are you mad? How do you ever mean to pay for it?'

'Let me alone,' replied Ciccu; 'I know what I am about.' And when they had finished their dinner Ciccu told the others to go on, and he would wait to pay the bill.

The brothers hurried on, without needing to be told twice, 'for,' thought they, 'he has no money, and of course there will be a row.'

When they were out of sight Ciccu asked the landlord how much he owed, and then said to his purse, 'Dear purse, give me, I pray you, six florins,' and instantly six florins were in the purse. Then he paid the bill and joined his brothers.

'How did you manage?' they asked.

'Never you mind,' answered he. 'I have paid every penny,' and no more would he say. But the other two were very uneasy, for they felt sure something must be wrong, and the sooner they parted company with Ciccu the better. Ciccu understood what they were thinking, and, drawing forty gold pieces from his pocket, he held out twenty to each, saying, 'Take these and turn them to good account. I am going away to seek my own fortune.' Then he embraced them, and struck down another road.

He wandered on for many days, till at length he came to the town where the king had his court. The first thing Ciccu did was to order himself some fine clothes, and then buy a grand house, just opposite the palace.

Next he locked his door, and ordered a shower of gold to cover the staircase, and when this was done, the door was flung wide open, and everyone came and peeped at the shining golden stairs. Lastly the rumour of these wonders reached the ears of the king, who left his palace to behold these splendours with his own eyes. And Ciccu received him with all respect, and showed him over the house.

When the king went home he told such stories of what he had seen that his wife and daughter declared that they must go and see them too. So the king sent to ask Ciccu's leave, and Ciccu answered that if the queen and the princess would be pleased to do him such great honour he would show them anything they wished. Now the princess was as beautiful as the sun, and when Ciccu looked upon her his heart went out to her, and he longed to have her to wife. The princess saw what was passing in his mind, and how she could make use of it to satisfy her curiosity as to the golden stairs; so she praised him and flattered him, and put cunning questions, till at length Ciccu's head was quite turned, and he told her the whole story of the fairies and their gifts. Then she begged him to lend her the purse for a few days, so that she could have one made like it, and so great was the love he had for her that he gave it to her at once.

The princess returned to the palace, taking with her the purse, which she had not the smallest intention of ever restoring to Ciccu. Very soon Ciccu had spent all the money he had by him, and could get no more without the help of his purse. Of course, he went at once to the king's daughter, and asked her if she had done with it, but she put him off with some excuse, and told him to come back next day. The next day it was the same thing, and the next, till a great rage filled Ciccu's heart instead of the love that had been there. And when night came he took in his hand a thick stick, wrapped himself in the coverlet, and wished himself in the chamber of the princess. The princess was asleep, but Ciccu seized her arm and pulled her out of bed, and beat her till she gave back the purse. Then he took up the coverlet, and wished he was safe in his own house.

No sooner had he gone than the princess hastened to her father and complained of her sufferings. Then the king rose up in a fury, and commanded Ciccu to be brought before him. 'You richly deserve death,' said he, 'but I will allow you to live if you will instantly hand over to me the coverlet, the purse, and the horn.'

What could Ciccu do? Life was sweet, and he was in the power of the king; so he gave up silently his ill-gotten goods, and was as poor as when he was a boy.

While he was wondering how he was to live it suddenly came into his mind that this was the season for the figs to ripen, and he said to himself, 'I will go and see if the tree has borne well.' So he set off home, where his brothers still lived, and found them living very uncomfortably, for they had spent all their money, and did not know how to make any more. However, he was pleased to see that the fig-tree looked in splendid condition, and was full of fruit. He ran and fetched a basket, and was just feeling the figs, to make sure which of them were ripe, when his brother Peppe called to him, 'Stop! The figs of course are yours, but the branches they grow on are mine, and I forbid you to touch them.'

Ciccu did not answer, but set a ladder against the tree, so that he could reach the topmost branches, and had his foot already on the first rung when he heard the voice of his brother Alfin: 'Stop! the trunk belongs to me, and I forbid you to touch it!'

Then they began to quarrel violently, and there seemed no chance that they would ever cease, till one of them said, 'Let us go before a judge.' The others agreed, and when they had found a man whom they could trust Ciccu told him the whole story.

'This is my verdict,' said the judge. 'The figs in truth belong to you, but you cannot pluck them without touching both the trunk and the branches. Therefore you must give your first basketful to your brother Peppe, as the price of his leave to put your ladder against the tree; and the second basketful to your brother Alfin, for leave to shake his boughs. The rest you can keep for yourself.'

And the brothers were contented, and returned home, saying one to the other, 'We will each of us send a basket of figs to the king. Perhaps he will give us something in return, and if he does we will divide it faithfully between us.' So the best figs were carefully packed in a basket, and Peppe set out with it to the castle.

On the road he met a little old man who stopped and said to him, 'What have you got there, my fine fellow?'

'What is that to you?' was the answer; 'mind your own business.' But the old man only repeated his question, and Peppe, to get rid of him, exclaimed in anger, 'Dirt.'

'Good,' replied the old man; 'dirt you have said, and dirt let it be.'

Peppe only tossed his head and went on his way till he got to the castle, where he knocked at the door. 'I have a basket of lovely figs for the king,' he said to the servant who opened it, 'if his majesty will be graciously pleased to accept them with my humble duty.'

The king loved figs, and ordered Peppe to be admitted to his presence, and a silver dish to be brought on which to put the figs. When Peppe uncovered his basket sure enough a layer of beautiful purple figs met the king's eyes, but underneath there was nothing but dirt. 'How dare you play me such a trick?' shrieked the king in a rage. 'Take him away, and give him fifty lashes.' This was done, and Peppe returned home, sore and angry, but determined to say nothing about his adventure. And when his brothers asked him what had happened he only answered, 'When we have all three been I will tell you.'

A few days after this more figs were ready for plucking, and Alfin in his turn set out for the palace. He had not gone far down the road before he met the old man, who asked him what he had in his basket.

'Horns,' answered Alfin, shortly.

'Good,' replied the old man; 'horns you have said, and horns let it be.'

When Alfin reached the castle he knocked at the door and said to the servant: 'Here is a basket of lovely figs, if his majesty will be good enough to accept them with my humble duty.'

The king commanded that Alfin should be admitted to his presence, and a silver dish to be brought on which to lay the figs. When the basket was uncovered some beautiful purple figs lay on the top, but underneath there was nothing but horns. Then the king was beside himself with passion, and screamed out, 'Is this a plot to mock me? Take him away, and give him a hundred and fifty lashes!' So Alfin went sadly home, but would not tell anything about his adventures, only saying grimly, 'Now it is Ciccu's turn.'

Ciccu had to wait a little before he gathered the last figs on the tree, and these were not nearly so good as the first set. However, he plucked them, as they had agreed, and set out for the king's palace. The old man was still on the road, and he came up and said to Ciccu, 'What have you got in that basket?'

'Figs for the king,' answered he.

'Let me have a peep,' and Ciccu lifted the lid. 'Oh, do give me one, I am so fond of figs,' begged the little man.

'I am afraid if I do that the hole will show,' replied Ciccu, but as he was very good-natured he gave him one. The old man ate it greedily and kept the stalk in his hand, and then asked for another and another and another till he had eaten half the basketful. 'But there are not enough left to take to the king,' murmured Ciccu.

'Don't be anxious,' said the old man, throwing the stalks back into the basket; 'just go on and carry the basket to the castle, and it will bring you luck.'

Ciccu did not much like it; however he went on his way, and with a trembling heart rang the castle bell. 'Here are some lovely figs for the king,' said he, 'if his majesty will graciously accept them with my humble duty.'

When the king was told that there was another man with a basket of figs he cried out, 'Oh, have him in, have him in! I suppose it is a wager!' But Ciccu uncovered the basket, and there lay a pile of beautiful ripe figs. And the king was delighted, and emptied them himself on the silver dish, and gave five florins to Ciccu, and offered besides to take him into his service. Ciccu accepted gratefully, but said he must first return home and give the five florins to his brothers.

When he got home Peppe spoke: 'Now we will see what we each have got from the king. I myself received from him fifty lashes.'

'And I a hundred and fifty,' added Alfin.

'And I five florins and some sweets, which you can divide between you, for the king has taken me into his service.' Then Ciccu went back to the Court and served the king, and the king loved him.

The other two brothers heard that Ciccu had become quite an important person, and they grew envious, and thought how they could put him to shame. At last they came to the king and said to him, 'O king! your palace is beautiful indeed, but to be worthy of you it lacks one thing--the sword of the Man-eater.'

'How can I get it?' asked the king.

'Oh, Ciccu can get it for you; ask him.'

So the king sent for Ciccu and said to him, 'Ciccu, you must at any price manage to get the sword of the Man-eater.'

Ciccu was very much surprised at this sudden command, and he walked thoughtfully away to the stables and began to stroke his favourite horse, saying to himself, 'Ah, my pet, we must bid each other good-bye, for the king has sent me away to get the sword of the Maneater.' Now this horse was not like other horses, for it was a talking horse, and knew a great deal about many things, so it answered, 'Fear nothing, and do as I tell you. Beg the king to give you fifty gold pieces and leave to ride me, and the rest will be easy.' Ciccu believed what the horse said, and prayed the king to grant him what he asked. Then the two friends set out, but the horse chose what roads he pleased, and directed Ciccu in everything.

It took them many days' hard riding before they reached the country where the Man-eater lived, and then the horse told Ciccu to stop a group of old women who were coming chattering through the wood, and offer them each a shilling if they would collect a number of mosquitos and tie them up in a bag. When the bag was full Ciccu put it on his shoulder and stole into the house of the Man-eater (who had gone to look for his dinner) and let them all out in his bedroom. He himself hid carefully under the bed and waited. The Man-eater came in late, very tired with his long walk, and flung himself on the bed, placing his sword with its shining blade by his side. Scarcely had he lain down than the mosquitos began to buzz about and bite him, and he rolled from side to side trying to catch them, which he never could do, though they always seemed to be close to his nose. He was so busy over the mosquitos that he did not hear Ciccu steal softly out, or see him catch up the sword. But the horse heard and stood ready at the door, and as Ciccu came flying down the stairs and jumped on his back he sped away like the wind, and never stopped till they arrived at the king's palace.

The king had suffered much pain in his absence, thinking that if the Man-eater ate Ciccu, it would be all his fault. And he was so overjoyed to have him safe that he almost forgot the sword which he had sent him to bring. But the two brothers did not love Ciccu any better because he had succeeded when they hoped he would have failed, and one day they spoke to the king. 'It is all very well for Ciccu to have got possession of the sword, but it would have been far more to your majesty's honour if he had captured the Man-eater himself.' The king thought upon these words, and at last he said to Ciccu, 'Ciccu, I shall never rest until you bring me back the Man-eater himself. You may have any help you like, but somehow or other you must manage to do it.' Ciccu felt very much cast, down at these words, and went to the stable to ask advice of his friend the horse. 'Fear nothing,' said the horse; 'just say you want me and fifty pieces of gold.' Ciccu did as he was bid, and the two set out together.

When they reached the country of the Man-eater, Ciccu made all the church bells toll and a proclamation to be made. 'Ciccu, the servant of the king, is dead.' The Man-eater soon heard what everyone was saying, and was glad in his heart, for he thought, 'Well, it is good news that the thief who stole my sword is dead.' But Ciccu bought an axe and a saw, and cut down a pine tree in the nearest wood, and began to hew it into planks.

'What are you doing in my wood?' asked the Maneater, coming up.

'Noble lord,' answered Ciccu, 'I am making a coffin for the body of Ciccu, who is dead.'

'Don't be in a hurry,' answered the Man-eater, who of course did not know whom he was talking to, 'and perhaps I can help you ;' and they set to work sawing and fitting, and very soon the coffin was finished.

Then Ciccu scratched his ear thoughtfully, and cried, 'Idiot that I am! I never took any measures. How am I to know if it is big enough? But now I come to think of it, Ciccu was about your size. I wonder if you would be so good as just to put yourself in the coffin, and see if there is enough room.'

'Oh, delighted!' said the Man-eater, and laid himself at full length in the coffin. Ciccu clapped on the lid, put a strong cord round it, tied it fast on his horse, and rode back to the king. And when the king saw that he really had brought back the Man-eater, he commanded a huge iron chest to be brought, and locked the coffin up inside.

Just about this time the queen died, and soon after the king thought he should like to marry again. He sought everywhere, but he could not hear of any princess that took his fancy. Then the two envious brothers came to him and said, 'O king! there is but one woman that is worthy of being your wife, and that is she who is the fairest in the whole world.'

'But where can I find her?' asked the king

'Oh, Ciccu will know, and he will bring her to you.'

Now the king had got so used to depending on Ciccu, that he really believed he could do everything. So he sent for him and said, 'Ciccu, unless within eight days you bring me the fairest in the whole world, I will have you hewn into a thousand pieces.' This mission seemed to Ciccu a hundred times worse than either of the others, and with tears in his eyes he took his way to the stables.

'Cheer up,' laughed the horse; 'tell the king you must have some bread and honey, and a purse of gold, and leave the rest to me.'

Ciccu did as he was bid, and they started at a gallop.

After they had ridden some way, they saw a swarm of bees lying on the ground, so hungry and weak that they were unable to fly. 'Get down, and give the poor things some honey,' said the horse, and Ciccu dismounted. By-and-bye they came to a stream, on the bank of which was a fish, flapping feebly about in its efforts to reach the water. 'Jump down, and throw the fish into the water; he will be useful to us,' and Ciccu did so. Farther along the hillside they saw an eagle whose leg was caught in a snare. 'Go and free that eagle from the snare; he will be useful to us; ' and in a moment the eagle was soaring up into the sky.

At length they came to the castle where the fairest in the world lived with her parents. Then said the horse, 'You must get down and sit upon that stone, for I must enter the castle alone. Directly you see me come tearing by with the princess on my back, jump up behind, and hold her tight, so that she does not escape you. If you fail to do this, we are both lost.' Ciccu seated himself on the stone, and the horse went on to the courtyard of the castle, where he began to trot round in a graceful and elegant manner. Soon a crowd collected first to watch him and then to pat him, and the king and queen and princess came with the rest. The eyes of the fairest in the world brightened as she looked, and she sprang on the horse's saddle, crying, 'Oh, I really must ride him a little!' But the horse made one bound forward, and the princess was forced to hold tight by his mane, lest she should fall off. And as they dashed past the stone where Ciccu was waiting for them, he swung himself up and held her round the waist. As he put his arms round her waist, the fairest in the world unwound the veil from her head and cast it to the ground, and then she drew a ring from her finger and flung it into the stream. But she said nothing, and they rode on fast, fast.

The king of Ciccu's country was watching for them from the top of a tower, and when he saw in the distance a cloud of dust, he ran down to the steps so as to be ready to receive them. Bowing low before the fairest in the world, he spoke: 'Noble lady, will you do me the honour to become my wife?'

But she answered, 'That can only be when Ciccu brings me the veil that I let fall on my way here.'

And the king turned to Ciccu and said, 'Ciccu, if you do not find the veil at once, you shall lose your head.'

Ciccu, who by this time had hoped for a little peace, felt his heart sink at this fresh errand, and he went into the stable to complain to the faithful horse.

'It will be all right,' answered the horse when he had heard his tale; 'just take enough food for the day for both of us, and then get on my back.'

They rode back all the way they had come till they reached the place where they had found the eagle caught in the snare; then the horse bade Ciccu to call three times on the king of the birds, and when he replied, to beg him to fetch the veil which the fairest in the world had let fall.

'Wait a moment,' answered a voice that seemed to come from somewhere very high up indeed. 'An eagle is playing with it just now, but he will be here with it in an instant;' and a few minutes after there was a sound of wings, and an eagle came fluttering towards them with the veil in his beak. And Ciccu saw it was the very same eagle that he had freed from the snare. So he took the veil and rode back to the king.

Now the king was enchanted to see him so soon, and took the veil from Ciccu and flung it over the princess, crying, 'Here is the veil you asked for, so I claim you for my wife.'

'Not so fast,' answered she. 'I can never be your wife till Ciccu puts on my finger the ring I threw into the stream. Ciccu, who was standing by expecting something of the sort, bowed his head when he heard her words, and went straight to the horse.

'Mount at once,' said the horse; 'this time it is very simple,' and he carried Ciccu to the banks of the little stream. 'Now, call three times on the emperor of the fishes, and beg him to restore you the ring that the princess dropped.

Ciccu did as the horse told him, and a voice was heard in answer that seemed to come from a very long way off.

'What is your will?' it asked; and Ciccu replied that he had been commanded to bring back the ring that the princess had flung away, as she rode past.

'A fish is playing with it just now,' replied the voice; 'however, you shall have it without delay.'

And sure enough, very soon a little fish was seen rising to the surface with the lost ring in his mouth. And Ciccu knew him to be the fish that he had saved from death, and he took the ring and rode back with it to the king.

'That is not enough,' exclaimed the princess when she saw the ring; 'before we can be man and wife, the oven must be heated for three days and three nights, and Ciccu must jump in.' And the king forgot how Ciccu had served him, and desired him to do as the princess had said.

This time Ciccu felt that no escape was possible, and he went to the horse and laid his hand on his neck. 'Now it is indeed good-bye, and there is no help to be got even from you,' and he told him what fate awaited him.

But the horse said, 'Oh, never lose heart, but jump on my back, and make me go till the foam flies in flecks all about me. Then get down, and scrape off the foam with a knife. This you must rub all over you, and when you are quite covered, you may suffer yourself to be cast into the oven, for the fire will not hurt you, nor anything else.' And Ciccu did exactly as the horse bade him, and went back to the king, and before the eyes of the fairest in the world he sprang into the oven.

And when the fairest in the world saw what he had done, love entered into her heart, and she said to the king, 'One thing more: before I can be your wife, you must jump into the oven as Ciccu has done.'

'Willingly,' replied the king, stooping over the oven. But on the brink he paused a moment and called to Ciccu, 'Tell me, Ciccu, how did you manage to prevent the fire burning you?'

Now Ciccu could not forgive his master, whom he had served so faithfully, for sending him to his death without a thought, so he answered, 'I rubbed myself over with fat, and I am not even singed.'

When he heard these words, the king, whose head was full of the princess, never stopped to inquire if they could be true, and smeared himself over with fat, and sprang into the oven. And in a moment the fire caught him, and he was burned up.

Then the fairest in the world held out her hand to Ciccu and smiled, saying, 'Now we will be man and wife.' So Ciccu married the fairest in the world, and became king of the country.

The Pink Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f41]

Don Giovanni De La Fortuna

Sicilianische Mahrchen

There was once a man whose name was Don Giovanni de la Fortuna, and he lived in a beautiful house that his father had built, and spent a great deal of money. Indeed, he spent so much that very soon there was none left, and Don Giovanni, instead of being a rich man with everything he could wish for, was forced to put on the dress of a pilgrim, and to wander from place to place begging his bread.

One day he was walking down a broad road when he was stopped by a handsome man he had never seen before, who, little as Don Giovanni knew it, was the devil himself.

'Would you like to be rich,' asked the devil, 'and to lead a pleasant life?'

'Yes, of course I should,' replied the Don.

'Well, here is a purse; take it and say to it, "Dear purse, give me some money," and you will get as much as you can want But the charm will only work if you promise to remain three years, three months, and three days without washing and without combing and without shaving your beard or changing your clothes. If you do all this faithfully, when the time is up you shall keep the purse for yourself, and I will let you off any other conditions.'

Now Don Giovanni was a man who never troubled his head about the future. He did not once think how very uncomfortable he should be all those three years, but only that he should be able, by means of the purse, to have all sorts of things he had been obliged to do without; so he joyfully put the purse in his pocket and went on his way. He soon began to ask for money for the mere pleasure of it, and there was always as much as he needed. For a little while he even forgot to notice how dirty he was getting, but this did not last long, for his hair became matted with dirt and hung over his eyes, and his pilgrim's dress was a mass of horrible rags and tatters.

He was in this state when, one morning, he happened to be passing a fine palace; and, as the sun was shining bright and warm, he sat down on the steps and tried to shake off some of the dust which he had picked up on the road. But in a few minutes a maid saw him, and said to her master, 'I pray you, sir, to drive away that beggar who is sitting on the steps, or he will fill the whole house with his dirt.'

So the master went out and called from some distance off, for he was really afraid to go near the man, 'You filthy beggar, leave my house at once!'

'You need not be so rude,' said Don Giovanni; 'I am not a beggar, and if I chose I could force you and your wife to leave your house.'

'What is that you can do?' laughed the gentleman.

'Will you sell me your house?' asked Don Giovanni. 'I will buy it from you on the spot.'

'Oh, the dirty creature is quite mad!' thought the gentleman. 'I shall just accept his offer for a joke.' And aloud he said: ' All right; follow me, and we will go to a lawyer and get him to make a contract.' And Don Giovanni followed him, and an agreement was drawn up by which the house was to be sold at once, and a large sum of money paid down in eight days. Then the Don went to an inn, where he hired two rooms, and, standing in one of them, said to his purse, ' Dear purse, fill this room with gold;' and when the eight days were up it was so full you could not have put in another sovereign.

When the owner of the house came to take away his money Don Giovanni led him into the room and said: 'There, just pocket what you want.' The gentleman stared with open mouth at the astonishing sight; but he had given his word to sell the house, so he took his money, as he was told, and went away with his wife to look for some place to live in. And Don Giovanni left the inn and dwelt in the beautiful rooms, where his rags and dirt looked sadly out of place. And every day these got worse and worse.

By-and-bye the fame of his riches reached the ears of the king, and, as he himself was always in need of money, he sent for Don Giovanni, as he wished to borrow a large sum. Don Giovanni readily agreed to lend him what he wanted, and sent next day a huge waggon laden with sacks of gold.

'Who can he be?' thought the king to himself. 'Why, he is much richer than I!'

The king took as much as he had need of; then ordered the rest to be returned to Don Giovanni, who refused to receive it, saying, 'Tell his majesty I am much hurt at his proposal. I shall certainly not take back that handful of gold, and, if he declines to accept it, keep it yourself.'

The servant departed and delivered the message, and the king wondered more than ever how anyone could be so rich. At last he spoke to the queen: 'Dear wife, this man has done me a great service, and has, besides, behaved like a gentleman in not allowing me to send back the money. I wish to give him the hand of our eldest daughter.'

The queen was quite pleased at this idea, and again messenger was sent to Don Giovanni, offering him the hand of the eldest princess.

'His majesty is too good,' he replied. 'I can only humbly accept the honour.'

The messenger took back this answer, but a second time returned with the request that Don Giovanni would present them with his picture, so that they might know what sort of a person to expect. But when it came, and the princess saw the horrible figure, she screamed out, 'What! marry this dirty beggar? Never, never!'

'Ah, child,' answered the king, 'how could I ever guess that the rich Don Giovanni would ever look like that? But I have passed my royal word, and I cannot break it, so there is no help for you.'

'No, father; you may cut off my head, if you choose, but marry that horrible beggar--I never will!'

And the queen took her part, and reproached her husband bitterly for wishing his daughter to marry a creature like that.

Then the youngest daughter spoke: 'Dear father, do not look so sad. As you have given your word, I will marry Don Giovanni.' The king fell on her neck, and thanked her and kissed her, but the queen and the elder girl had nothing for her but laughs and jeers.

So it was settled, and then the king bade one of his lords go to Don Giovanni and ask him when the wedding day was to be, so that the princess might make ready.

'Let it be in two months,' answered Don Giovanni, for the time was nearly up that the devil had fixed, and he wanted a whole month to himself to wash off the dirt of the past three years.

The very minute that the compact with the devil had come to an end his beard was shaved, his hair was cut, and his rags were burned, and day and night he lay in a bath of clear warm water. At length he felt he was clean again, and he put on splendid clothes, and hired a beautiful ship, and arrived in state at the king's palace.

The whole of the royal family came down to the ship to receive him, and the whole way the queen and the elder princess teased the sister about the dirty husband she was going to have. But when they saw how handsome he really was their hearts were filled with envy and anger, so that their eyes were blinded, and they fell over into the sea and were drowned. And the youngest daughter rejoiced in the good luck that had come to her, and they had a splendid wedding when the days of mourning for her mother and sister were ended.

Soon after the old king died, and Don Giovanni became king. And he was rich and happy to the end of his days, for he loved his wife, and his purse always gave him money.

 

 

End of The Pink Fairy Book

 

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: pjc.txt =====


    
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ

  

From the Meditations of

  

Anne Catherine Emmerich

  

London, Burns and Lambert

  

[1862]

  

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, September, 2004, by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the United States because it was published prior to 1923.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 5]

  

PREFACE TO THE FRENCH TRANSLATION.

  

BY THE ABBE DE CAZALES.

THE writer of this Preface was travelling in Germany, when he chanced to meet with a book, entitled, The History of the Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, from, the Meditations of Anne Catherine Emmerich, which appeared to him both interesting and edifying. Its style was unpretending, its ideas simple, its tone unassuming, its sentiments unexaggerated, and its every sentence expressive of the most complete and entire submission to the Church. Yet, at the same time, it would have been difficult anywhere to meet with a more touching and life-like paraphrase of the Gospel narrative. He thought that a book possessing such qualities deserved to be known on this side the Rhine, and that there could be no reason why it should not be valued for its own sake, independent of the somewhat singular source whence it emanated.

Still, the translator has by no means disguised to himself that this work is written, in the first place, for Christians; that is to say, for men who have the right to be very diffident in giving credence to particulars concerning facts which are articles of faith; and although he is aware that St. Bonaventure and many others, in their paraphrases of the Gospel history, have mixed up traditional details with those given in the sacred text, even these examples have not wholly reassured him. St. Bonaventure professed only to give a paraphrase, whereas these revelations appear to be something more. It is certain that the holy maiden herself gave them no higher title than that of dreams, and that the transcriber of her narratives treats as blasphemous the idea of regarding them

[p. 6]

in any degree as equivalent to a fifth Gospel; still it is evident that the confessors who exhorted Sister Emmerich to relate what she saw, the celebrated poet who passed four years near her couch, eagerly transcribing all he heard her say, and the German Bishops, who encouraged the publication of his book, considered it as something more than a paraphrase. Some explanations are needful on this head.

The writings of many Saints introduce us into a now, and, if I may be allowed the expression, a miraculous world. In all ages there have been revelations about the past, the present, the future, and even concerning things absolutely inaccessible to the human intellect. In the present day men are inclined to regard these revelations as simple hallucinations, or as caused by a sickly condition of body.

The Church, according to the testimony of her most approved writers, recognises three descriptions of ecstasy; of which the first is simply natural, and entirely brought about by certain physical tendencies and a highly imaginative mind; the second divine or angelic, arising from intercourse held with the supernatural world; and the third produced by infernal agency. [*1] Lest we should here write a book instead of a preface, we will not enter into any development of this doctrine, which appears to us highly philosophical, and without which no satisfactory explanation can be given on the subject of the soul of man and its various states.

The Church directs certain means to be employed to ascertain by what spirit these ecstasies are produced, according to the maxim of St. John: 'Try the spirits, if they be of God.' When circumstances or events claiming to be supernatural have been properly examined according to certain rules, the Church has in all ages made a selection from them

Many persons who have been habitually in a state of ecstasy have been canonised, and their books approved.

[p. 7]

[paragraph continues] But this approbation has seldom amounted to more than a declaration that these books contained nothing contrary to faith, and that they were likely to promote a spirit of piety among the faithful. For the Church is only founded on the word of Christ and on the revelations made to the Apostles. Whatever may since have been revealed to certain saints possesses purely a relative value, the reality of which may even be disputed--it being one of the admirable characteristics of the Church, that, though inflexibly one in dogma, she allows entire liberty to the human mind in all besides. Thus, we may believe private revelations, above all, when those persons to whom they were made have been raised by the Church to the rank of Saints publicly honoured, invoked, and venerated; but, even in these cases, we may, without ceasing to be perfectly orthodox, dispute their authenticity and divine origin. It is the place of reason to dispute and to select as it sees best.

With regard to the rule for discerning between the good and the evil spirit, it is no other, according to all theologians, than that of the Gospel. A fructibus eorum, cognoscetis eos. By their fruits you shall know them. It must be examined in the first place whether the person who professes to have revelations mistrusts what passes within himself; whether he would prefer a more common path; whether far from boasting of the extraordinary graces which he receives, he seeks to hide them, and only makes them known through obedience; and, finally, whether he is continually advancing in humility, mortification, and charity. Next, the revelations themselves must be very closely examined into; it must be seen whether there is anything in them contrary to faith; whether they are conformable to Scripture and Apostolical tradition; and whether they are related in a headstrong spirit, or in a spirit of entire submission to the Church.

Whoever reads the life of Anne Catherine Emmerich, and her book, will be satisfied that no fault can be found in any of these respects either with herself or with her revelations. Her book resembles in many points the writings of a great number of saints, and her life also bears the

[p. 8]

most striking similitude to theirs. To be convinced of this fact, we need but study the writings or what is related of Saints Francis of Assissium, Bernard, Bridget, Hildegarde, Catherine of Genoa, Catherine of Sienna, Ignatius, John of the Cross, Teresa, and an immense number of other holy persons who are less known.. So much being conceded, it is clear that in considering Sister Emmerich to have been inspired by God's Holy Spirit, we are not ascribing more merit to her book than is allowed by the Church to all those of the same class. They are all edifying, and may serve to promote piety, which is their sole object. We must not exaggerate their importance by holding as an absolute fact that they proceed from divine inspiration, a favour so great that its existence in any particular case should not be credited save with the utmost circumspection.

With regard, however, to our present publication, it may be urged that, considering the superior talents of the transcriber of Sister Emmerich's narrations, the language and expressions which he has made use of may not always have been identical with those which she employed. We have no hesitation whatever in allowing the force of this argument. Most fully do we believe in the entire sincerity of M. Clement Brentano, because we both know and love him, and, besides, his exemplary piety and the retired life which he leads, secluded from a world in which it would depend but on himself to hold the highest place, are guarantees amply sufficient to satisfy any impartial mind of his sincerity. A poem such as he might publish, if he only pleased, would cause him to be ranked at once among the most eminent of the German poets, whereas the office which he has taken upon himself of secretary to a poor visionary has brought him nothing but contemptuous raillery. Nevertheless, we have no intention to assert that in giving the conversations and discourses of Sister Emmerich that order and coherency in which they were greatly wanting, and writing them down in his own way, he may not unwittingly have arranged, explained, and embellished them. But this would not have the

[p. 9]

effect of destroying the originality of the recital, or impugning either the sincerity of the nun, or that of the writer.

The translator professes to be unable to understand how any man can write for mere writing's sake, and without considering the probable effects which his work will produce. This book, such as it is, appears to him to be at once unusually edifying, and highly poetical. It is perfectly clear that it has, properly speaking, no literary pretensions whatever. Neither the uneducated maiden whose visions are here related, nor the excellent Christian writer who has published them in so entire a spirit of literary disinterestedness, ever had the remotest idea of such a thing. And yet there are not, in our opinion, many highly worked-up compositions calculated to produce an effect in any degree comparable to that which will be brought about by the perusal of this unpretending little work. It is our hope that it will make a strong impression even upon worldlings, and that in many hearts it will prepare the way for better ideas,--perhaps even for a lasting change of life.

In the next place, we are not sorry to call public attention in some degree to all that class of phenomena which preceded the foundation of the Church, which has since been perpetuated uninterruptedly, and which too many Christians are disposed to reject altogether, either through ignorance and want of reflection, or purely through human respect. This is a field which has hitherto been but little explored historically, psychologically, and physiologically; and it would be well if reflecting minds were to bestow upon it a careful and attentive investigation. To our Christian readers we must remark that this work has received the approval of ecclesiastical authorities. It has been prepared for the press under the superintendence of the two late Bishops of Ratisbonne, Sailer and Wittman. These names are but little known in France; but in Germany they are identical with learning, piety, ardent charity, and a life wholly devoted to the maintenance and propagation of the Catholic faith. Many French priests have

[p. 10]

given their opinion that the translation of a book of this character could not but tend to nourish piety, without, however, countenancing that weakness of spirit which is disposed to lend more importance in some respects to private than to general revelations, and consequently to substitute matters which we are simply permitted to believe, in the place of those which are of faith.

We feel convinced that no one will take offence at certain details given on the subject of the outrages which were suffered by our divine Lord during the course of his passion. Our readers will remember the words of the psalmist: 'I am a worm and no man; the reproach of men, and the outcast of the people;' and those of the apostle: 'Tempted in all things like as we are, without sin.' Did we stand in need of a precedent, we should request our readers to remember how plainly and crudely Bossuet describes the same scenes in the most eloquent of his four sermons on the Passion of our Lord. On the other hand, there have been so many grand platonic or rhetorical sentences in the books published of late years, concerning that abstract entity, on which the writers have been pleased to bestow the Christian title of the Word, or Logos, that it may be eminently useful to show the Man-God, the Word made flesh, in all the reality of his life on earth, of his humiliation, and of his sufferings. It must be evident that the cause of truth, and still more that of edification, will not be the losers.

Footnotes

^6:1 See, on this head, the work of Cardinal Bona, De Descretione Spirituum.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 11]

  

INTRODUCTION.

THE following meditations will probably rank high among many similar works which the contemplative love of Jesus has produced; but it is our duty, here plainly to affirm that they have no pretensions whatever to be regarded as history. They are but intended to take one of the lowest places among those numerous representations of the Passion which have been given us by pious writers and artists, and to be considered at the very utmost as the Lenten meditations of a devout nun, related, in all simplicity, and written down in the plainest and most literal language, from her own dictation. To these meditations, she herself never attached more than a mere human value, and never related them except through obedience, and upon the repeated commands of the directors of her conscience.

The writer of the following pages was introduced to this holy religious by Count Leopold de Stolberg. [*1] Dean Bernard Overberg, her director extraordinary, and Bishop Michael Sailer, [*2] who had often been her counsellor and consoler, urged her to relate to us in detail all that she experienced; and the latter, who survived her, took the deepest interest in the arrangement and publication of the notes taken down from her dictation. These illustrious and holy men, now dead, and whose memory is blessed, were in continual communion of prayer with Anne Catherine,

[p. 12]

whom they loved and respected, on account of the singular graces with which God had favoured her. The editor of this book received equal encouragement, and met with no less sympathy in his labours, from the late Bishop of Ratisbonne, Mgr. Wittman. [*1] This holy Bishop, who was so deeply versed in the ways of Divine grace, and so well acquainted with its effects on certain souls, both from his private investigations of the subject, and his own experience, took the most lively interest in all that concerned Anne Catherine, and on hearing of the work in which the editor of this book was engaged, he strongly exhorted him to publish it. 'These things have not been communicated to you for nothing,' would he often say; 'God has his views in all. Publish something at least of what you know, for you will thereby benefit many souls.' He at the same time brought forward various instances from his own experience and that of others, showing the benefit which had been derived from the study of works of a similar character. He delighted in calling such privileged souls as Anne Catherine the marrow of the bones of the Church, according to the expression of St. John Chrysostom, medulla enim hujus mundi sunt, and he encouraged the publication of their lives and writings as far as lay in. his power.

The editor of this book being taken by a kind friend to the dying bed of the holy Bishop, had no reason whatever to expect to be recognised, as he had only once in his life conversed with him for a few minutes; nevertheless the dying saint knew him again, and after a few most kind words blessed and exhorted him to continue his work for the glory of God.

Encouraged by the approbation of such men, we therefore yield to the wishes of many virtuous friends in publishing the Meditations on the Passion, of this humble religious, to whom God granted the favour of being at times simple, ingenuous, and ignorant as a child, while at others

[p. 13]

she was clear-sighted, sensible, possessed of a deep insight into the most mysterious and hidden things, and consumed with burning and heroic zeal, but ever forgetful of self, deriving her whole strength from Jesus alone, and steadfast in the most perfect humility and entire self-abnegation.

We give our readers a slight sketch of her life, intending at some future they to publish her biography more in full.

Footnotes

^11:1 The Count de Stolberg is one of the most eminent converts whom the Catholic Church has made from Protestantism. He died in 1819.

^11:2 The Bishop of Ratisbonne, one of the most celebrated defenders of the faith in Germany.

^12:1 Mgr. Wittman was the worthy successor of Sailer, and a man of eminent sanctity, whose memory is held in veneration by all the Catholics of the south of Germany.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 14] [p. 15]

  

LIFE

  

OF

  

ANNE CATHERINE EMMERICH,

  

RELIGIOUS OF THE ORDER OF ST. AUGUSTINE, AT THE CONVENT OF AGNETENBERG, DULMEN, WESTPHALIA.

ANNE CATHERINE EMMERICH was born at Flamske, a village situated about a mile and a half from Coesfeld, in the bishopric of Munster, on the 8th of September 1774, and was baptised in the church of St. James at Coesfeld. Her parents, Bernard Emmerich and Anne Hiller, were poor peasants, but distinguished for their piety and virtue.

The childhood of Anne Catherine bore a striking resemblance to that of the Venerable Anne Garzias de St. Barthelemi, of Dominica del Paradiso, and of several other holy persons born in the same rank of life as herself. Her angel-guardian used to appear to her as a child; and when she was taking care of sheep in the fields, the Good Shepherd himself, under the form of a young shepherd, would frequently come to her assistance. From childhood she was accustomed to have divine knowledge imparted to her in visions of all kinds, and was often favoured by visits from the Mother of God and Queen of Heaven, who, under the form of a sweet, lovely, and majestic lady, would bring the Divine Child to be, as it were, her companion, and would assure her that she loved and would ever protect her. Many of the saints would also appear to her, and receive from her hands the garlands of flowers which she had prepared in honour of their festivals. All these

[p. 16]

favours and visions surprised the child less than if an earthly princess and the lords and ladies of her court had come to visit her. Nor was she, later in life, more surprised at these celestial visits, for her innocence caused her to feel far more at her ease with our Divine Lord, his Blessed Mother and the Saints, than she could ever be with even the most kind and amiable of her earthly companions. The names of Father, Mother, Brother, and Spouse, appeared to her expressive of the real connections subsisting between God and man, since the Eternal Word had been pleased to be born of a woman, and so to become our Brother, and these sacred titles were not mere words in her mouth.

While yet a child, she used to speak with innocent cardour and simplicity of all that she saw, and her listeners would be filled with admiration at the histories she would relate from Holy Writ; but their questions and remarks having sometimes disturbed her peace of mind, she determined to keep silence on such subjects for the future. In her innocence of heart, she thought that it was not right to talk of things of this sort, that other persons never did so, and that her speech should be only Yea, yea, and Nay, nay, or Praise be to Jesus Christ. The visions with which she was favoured were so like realities, and appeared to her so sweet and delightful, that she supposed all Christian children were favoured with the same; and she concluded that those who never talked on such subjects were only more discreet and modest than herself, so she resolved to keep silence also, to be like them.

Almost from her cradle she possessed the gift of distinguishing what was good or evil, holy or profane, blessed or accursed, in material as well as in spiritual things, thus resembling St. Sibyllina of Pavia, Ida of Louvain, Ursula Benincasa, and some other holy souls. In her earliest childhood she used to bring out of the fields useful herbs, which no one had ever before discovered to be good for anything, and plant them near her father's cottage, or in some spot where she was accustomed to work and play; while on the other hand she would root up all poisonous plants, and particularly those ever used for superstitious

[p. 17]

practices or in dealings with the devil. Were she by chance in a place where some great crime had been committed, she would hastily run away, or begin to pray and do penance. She used also to perceive by intuition when she was in a consecrated spot, return thanks to God, and be filled with a sweet feeling of peace. When a priest passed by with the Blessed Sacrament, even at a great distance from her home or from the place where she was taking care of her flock, she would feel a strong attraction in the direction whence he was coming, run to meet him, and be kneeling in the road, adoring the Blessed Sacrament, long before he could reach the spot.

She knew when any object was consecrated, and experienced a feeling of disgust and repugnance when in the neighbourhood of old pagan cemeteries, whereas she was attracted to the sacred remains of the saints as steel by the magnet. When relies were shown to her, she knew what saints they had belonged to, and could give not only accounts of the minutest and hitherto unknown particulars of their lives, but also histories of the relies themselves, and of the places where they had been preserved. During her whole life she had continual intercourse with the souls in purgatory; and all her actions and prayers were offered for the relief of their sufferings. She was frequently called upon to assist them, and even reminded in some miraculous manner, if she chanced to forget them. Often, while yet very young, she used to be awakened out of her sleep by bands of suffering souls, and to follow them on cold winter's nights with bare feet, the whole length of the Way of the Cross to Coesfeld, though the ground was covered with snow.

From her infancy to the day of her death she was indefatigable in relieving the sick, and in dressing and curing wounds and ulcers, and she was accustomed to give to the poor every farthing she possessed. So tender was her conscience, that the slightest sin she fell into caused her such pain as to make her ill, and absolution then always restored her immediately to health.

The extraordinary nature of the favours bestowed on

[p. 18]

her by Almighty God was no hindrance in the way of her devoting herself to hard labour, like any other peasant-girl; and we may also be allowed to observe that a certain degree of the spirit of prophecy is not unusually to be found among her country men and women. She was taught in the school of suffering and mortification, and there learned lessons of perfection. She allowed herself no more sleep or food than was absolutely necessary; passed whole hours in prayer every night; and in winter often knelt out of doors on the snow. She slept on the ground on planks arranged in the form of a cross. Her food and drink consisted of what was rejected by others; she always kept the best parts even of that for the poor and sick, and when she did not know of any one to give them to, she offered them to God in a spirit of child-like faith, begging him to give them to some person who was more in need than herself. When there was anything to be seen or heard which had no reference to God or religion, she found some excuse for avoiding the spot to which others were hastening, or, if there, closed her eyes and ears. She was accustomed to say that useless actions were sinful, and that when we denied our bodily senses any gratification of this kind, we were amply repaid by the progress which we made in the interior life, in the same manner as pruning renders vines and other fruit-trees more productive. From her early youth, and wherever she went, she had frequent symbolical visions, which showed her in parables, as it were, the object of her existence, the means of attaining it, and her future sufferings, together with the dangers and conflicts which she would have to go through.

She was in her sixteenth year, when one day, whilst at work in the fields with her parents and sisters, she heard the bell ringing at the Convent of the Sisters of the Annunciation, at Coesfeld. This sound so inflamed her secret desire to become a nun, and had so great an effect upon her, that she fainted away, and remained ill and weak for a long time after. When in her eighteenth year she was apprenticed at Coesfeld to a dressmaker, with whom she passed two years, and then returned to her parents. She

[p. 19]

asked to be received at the Convents of the Augustinians at Borken, of the Trappists at Darfeld, and of the Poor Clares at Munster; but her poverty, and that of these convents, always presented an insuperable obstacle to her being received. At the age of twenty, having saved twenty thalers (about 3l. English), which she had earned by her sewing, she went with this little sum--a perfect fortune for a poor peasant-girl--to a pious organist of Coesfeld, whose daughter she had known when she first lived in the town. Her hope was that, by learning to play on the organ; she might succeed in obtaining admittance into a convent. But her irresistible desire to serve the poor and give them everything she possessed left her no time to learn music, and before long she had so completely stripped herself of everything, that her good mother was obliged to bring her bread, milk, and eggs, for her own wants and those of the poor, with whom she shared everything. Then her mother said: 'Your desire to leave your father and myself, and enter a convent, gives us much pain; but you are still my beloved child, and when I look at your vacant seat at home, and reflect that you have given away all your savings, so as to be now in want, my heart is filled with sorrow, and I have now brought you enough to keep you for some time.' Anne Catherine replied: 'Yes, dear mother, it is true that I have nothing at all left, because it was the holy will of God that others should be assisted by me; and since I have given all to him, he will now take care of me, and bestow his divine assistance upon us all.' She remained some years at Coesfeld, employed in labour, good works, and prayer, being always guided by the same inward inspirations. She was docile and submissive as a child in the hands of her guardian-angel.

Although in this brief sketch of her life we are obliged to omit many interesting circumstances, there is one which we must not pass over in silence. When about twenty-four years of age, she received a favour from our Lord, which has been granted to many persons devoted in an especial manner to meditation on his painful Passion; namely, to experience the actual and visible sufferings of

[p. 20]

his sacred Head, when crowned with thorns. The following is the account she herself has given of the circumstances under which so mysterious a favour was bestowed upon her: 'About four years previous to my admittance into the convent, consequently in 1798, it happened that I was in the Jesuits' Church at Coesfeld, at about twelve o'clock in the day, kneeling before a crucifix and absorbed in meditation, when all on a sudden I felt a strong but pleasant heat in my head, and I saw my Divine Spouse, under the form of a young man clothed with light, come towards me from the altar, where the Blessed Sacrament was preserved in the tabernacle. In his left hand he held a crown of flowers, in his right hand a crown of thorns, and he bade me choose which I would have. I chose the crown of thorns; he placed it on my head, and I pressed it down with both hands. Then he disappeared, and I returned to myself, feeling, however, violent pain around my head. I was obliged to leave the church, which was going to be closed. One of my companions was kneeling by my side, and as I thought she might have seen what happened to me, I asked her when we got home whether there was not a wound on my forehead, and spoke to her in general terms of my vision, and of the violent pain which had followed it. She could see nothing outwardly, but was not astonished at what I told her, because she knew that I was sometimes in an extraordinary state, without her being able to understand the cause. The next day my forehead and temples were very much swelled, and I suffered terribly. This pain and swelling often returned, and sometimes lasted whole days and nights. I did not remark that there was blood on my head until my companions told me I had better put on a clean cap, because mine was covered with red spots. I let them think whatever they liked about it, only taking care to arrange my head-dress so as to hide the blood which flowed from my head, and I continued to observe the same precaution even after I entered the convent, where only one person perceived the blood, and she never betrayed my secret.'

Several other contemplative persons, especially devoted

[p. 21]

to the passion of our Lord, have been admitted to the privilege of suffering the torture inflicted by the crown of thorns, after having seen a vision in which the two crowns were offered them to choose between, for instance, among others, St. Catherine of Sienna, and Pasithea of Crogis, a Poor Clare of the same town, who died in 1617.

The writer of these pages may here be allowed to remark that he himself has, in full daylight, several times seen blood flow down the forehead and face, and even beyond the linen wrapped round the neck of Anne Catherine. Her desire to embrace a religious life was at length gratified. The parents of a young person whom the Augustinian nuns of Dulmen wished to receive into their order, declared that they would not give their consent except on condition that Anne Catherine was taken at the same time. The nuns yielded their assent, though somewhat reluctantly, on account of their extreme poverty; and on the 13th November 1802, one week before the feast of the Presentation of the Blessed Virgin, Anne Catherine entered on her novitiate. At the present day vocations are not so severely tested as formerly; but in her case, Providence imposed special trials, for which, rigorous as they were, she felt she never could be too grateful. Sufferings or privations, which a soul, either alone or in union with others, imposes upon herself, for God's greater glory, are easy to bear; but there is one cross more nearly resembling the cross of Christ than any other, and that is, lovingly and patiently to submit to unjust punishments, rebuffs, or accusations. It was the will of God that during her year's novitiate she should, independently of the will of any creature, be tried as severely as the most strict mistress of novices could have clone before any mitigations had been allowed in the rules. She learned to regard her companions as instruments in the hands of God for her sanctification; and at a later period of her life many other things appeared to her in the same light. But as it was necessary that her fervent soul should be constantly tried in the school of the Cross, God was pleased that she should remain in it all her life.

[p. 22]

In many ways her position in the convent was excessively painful. Not one of her companions, nor even any-priest or doctor, could understand her case. She had learned, when living among poor peasants, to hide the wonderful gifts which God had bestowed on her; but the case was altered now that she was in familiar intercourse with a large number of nuns, who, though certainly good and pious, were filled with ever-increasing feelings of curiosity, and even of spiritual jealousy in her regard. Then, the contracted ideas of the community, and the complete ignorance of the nuns concerning all those exterior phenomena by which the interior life manifests itself, gave her much to endure, the more so, as these phenomena displayed themselves in the most unusual and astonishing manner. She heard everything that was said against her, even when the speakers were at one end of the convent and she at the other, and her heart was most deeply wounded as if by poisoned arrows. Yet she bore all patiently and lovingly without showing that she knew what was said of her. More than once charity impelled her to cast herself at the feet of some nun who was particularly prejudiced against her, and ask her pardon with tears. Then, she was suspected of listening at the doors, for the private feelings of dislike entertained against her became known, no one knew how, and the nuns felt uncomfortable and uneasy, in spite of themselves, when in her company.

Whenever the rule (the minutest point of which was Sacred in her eyes) was neglected in the slightest degree, she beheld in spirit each infringement, and at times was inspired to fly to the spot where the rule was being broken by some infringement of the vow of poverty, or disregard of the hours of silence, and she would then repeat suitable passages from the rule, without having ever learned them. She thus became an object of aversion to all those religious who broke the rule; and her sudden appearances among them had almost the effect of apparitions. God had bestowed upon her the gift of tears to so great an extent, that she often passed whole hours in the church weeping

[p. 23]

over the sins and ingratitude of men, the sufferings of the Church, the imperfections of the community, and her own faults. But these tears of sublime sorrow could be understood by none but God, before whom she shed them, and men attributed them to mere caprice, a spirit of discontent, or some other similar cause. Her confessor had enjoined that she should receive the holy communion more frequently than the other nuns, because, so ardently did she hunger after the bread of angels, that she had been more than once near dying. These heavenly sentiments awakened feelings of jealousy in her sisters, who sometimes even accused her of hypocrisy.

The favour which had been shown her in her admittance into the convent, in spite of her poverty, was also made a subject of reproach. The thought of being thus an occasion of sin to others was most painful to her, and she continually besought God to permit her to bear herself the penalty of this want of charity in her regard. About Christmas, of the year 1802, she had a very severe illness, which began by a violent pain about her heart.

This pain did not leave her even when she was cured, and she bore it in silence until the year 1812, when the mark of a cross was imprinted exteriorly in the same place, as we shall relate further on. Her weakness and delicate health caused her to be looked upon more as burdensome, than useful to the community; and this, of course, told against her in all ways, yet she was never weary of working and serving the others, nor was she ever so happy as at this period of her life--spent in privations and sufferings of every description.

On the 13th of November 1803, at the age of twenty-nine, she pronounced her solemn vows, and became the spouse of Jesus Christ, in the Convent of Agnetenberg, at Dulmen. 'When I had pronounced my vows,' she says, 'my relations were again extremely kind to me. My father and my eldest brother brought me two pieces of cloth. My father, a good, but stem man, and who had been much averse to my entering the convent, had told me, when we parted, that he would willingly pay for my

[p. 24]

burial, but that he would give nothing for the convent, and he kept his word, for this piece of cloth was the winding-sheet used for my spiritual burial in the convent.'

'I was not thinking of myself,' she says again, 'I was thinking of nothing but our Lord and my holy vows. My companions could not understand me; nor could I explain my state to them. God concealed from them many of the favours which he bestowed upon me, otherwise they would have had very false ideas concerning me. Notwithstanding all my trials and sufferings, I was never more rich interiorly, and my soul was perfectly flooded with happiness. My cell only contained one chair without a seat, and another without a back; yet in my eyes, it was magnificently furnished, and when there I often thought myself in Heaven. Frequently during the night, impelled by love and by the mercy of God, I poured forth the feelings of my soul by conversing with him in loving and familiar language, as I had always done from my childhood, and then those who were watching me would accuse me of irreverence and disrespect towards God. Once, I happened to say that it appeared to me that I should be guilty of greater disrespect did I receive the Body of our Lord without having conversed familiarly with him, and I was severely reprimanded. Amid all these trials, I yet lived in peace with God and with all his creatures. When I was working in the garden, the birds would come and rest on my head and shoulders, and we would together sing the praises of God. I always beheld my angel-guardian at my side, and although the devil used frequently to assault and terrify me in various ways, he was never permitted to do me much harm. 'My desire for the Blessed Sacrament was so irresistible, that often at night I left my cell and went to the church, if it was open; but if not, I remained at the door or by the walls, even in winter, kneeling or prostrate, with my arms extended in ecstasy. The convent chaplain, who was so charitable as to come early to give me the Holy Communion, used to find me in this state, but as soon as he was come and had opened, the church, I always recovered, and hastened to the holy

[p. 25]

table, there to receive my Lord and my God. When I was sacristan, I used all on a sudden to feel myself ravished in spirit, and ascend to the highest parts of the church, on to cornices, projecting parts of the building, and mouldings, where it seemed impossible for any being to get by human means. Then I cleaned and arranged everything, and it appeared to me that I was surrounded by blessed spirits, who transported me about and held me up in their hands. Their presence did not cause me the least uneasiness, for I had been accustomed to it from my childhood, and I used to have the most sweet and familiar intercourse with them. It was only when I was in the company of certain men that I was really alone; and so great was then my feeling of loneliness that I could not help crying like a child that has strayed from home.'

We now proceed to her illnesses, omitting any description of some other remarkable phenomena of her ecstatic life, only recommending the reader to compare the accounts we have already given with what is related of St. Mary Magdalen of Pazzi.

Anne Catherine had always been weak and delicate, and yet had been, from her earliest childhood, in the habit of practising many mortifications, of fasting and of passing the night in watching and prayer in the open air. She had been accustomed to continual hard labour in the fields, at all seasons of the year, and her strength was also necessarily much tried by the exhausting and supernatural states through which she so frequently passed. At the convent she continued to work in the garden and in the house, whilst her spiritual labours and sufferings were ever an the increase, so that it is by no means surprising that she was frequently ill; but her illnesses arose from yet another cause. We have learned, from careful observations made every day for the space of four years, and also from what she herself was unwillingly forced to admit, that during the whole course of her life, and especially during that part of it which she spent at the convent, when she enjoyed the highest spiritual favours, a great portion of her illnesses and sufferings came from taking upon herself the

[p. 26]

sufferings of others. Sometimes she asked for the illness of a person who did not bear it patiently, and relieved him of the whole or of a part of his sufferings, by taking them upon herself; sometimes, wishing to expiate a sin or put an end to some suffering, she gave herself up into the hands of God, and be, accepting her sacrifice, permitted her thus, in union with the merits of his passion, to expiate the sin by suffering some illness corresponding to it. She had consequently to bear, not only her own maladies, but those also of others--to suffer in expiation of the sins of her brethren, and of the faults and negligences of certain portions of the Christian community--and, finally, to endure many and various sufferings in satisfaction for the souls of purgatory. All these sufferings appeared like real illnesses, which took the most opposite and variable forms, and she was placed entirely under the care of the doctor, who endeavoured by earthly remedies to cure illnesses which in reality were the very sources of her life. She said on this subject--'Repose in suffering has always appeared to me the most desirable condition possible. The angels themselves would envy us, were envy not an imperfection. But for sufferings to be really meritorious we must patiently and gratefully accept unsuitable remedies and comforts, and all other additional trials. I did not myself fully understand my state, nor know what it was to lead to. In my soul I accepted my different sufferings, but in my body it was my duty to strive against them. I had given myself wholly and entirely to my Heavenly Spouse, and his holy will was being accomplished in me; but I was living on earth, where I was not to rebel against earthly wisdom and earthly prescriptions. Even had I fully comprehended my state, and had both time and power to explain it, there was no one near who would have been able to understand me. A doctor would simply have concluded that I was entirely mad, and would have increased his expensive and painful remedies tenfold. I have suffered much in this way during the whole of my life, and particularly when I was at the convent, from having unsuitable remedies administered to me. Often, when

[p. 27]

my doctors and nurses had reduced me to the last agony, and that I was near death, God took pity on me, and sent me some supernatural assistance, which effected an entire cure.'

Four years before the suppression of her convent she went to Flamske for two days to visit her parents. Whilst there she went once to kneel and pray for some hours before the miraculous Cross of the Church of St. Lambert, at Coesfeld. She besought the Almighty to bestow the gifts of peace and unity upon her convent, offered him the Passion of Jesus Christ for that intention, and implored him to allow her to feel a portion of the sufferings which were endured by her Divine Spouse on the Cross. From the time that she made this prayer her hands and feet became burning and painful, and she suffered constantly from fever, which she believed was the cause of the pain in her hands and feet, for she did not dare to think that her prayer had been granted. Often she was unable to walk, and the pain in her hands prevented her from working as usual in the garden. On the 3d December 1811, the convent was suppressed, [*1] and the church closed. The nuns dispersed in all directions, but Anne Catherine remained, poor and ill. A kindhearted servant belonging to the monastery attended upon her out of charity, and an aged emigrant priest, who said Mass in the convent, remained also with her. These three individuals, being the poorest of the Community, did not leave the convent until the spring of 1812. She was still very unwell, and could not be moved without great difficulty. The priest lodged with a poor widow who lived in the neighbourhood, and Anne Catherine had in the same house a wretched little room on the ground-floor, which looked on the street. There she lived, in poverty and sickness, until the autumn of 1813. Her ecstasies in prayer, and her spiritual intercourse with the invisible world, became more and more frequent. She was about to be called to a state with which she was herself but imperfectly acquainted, and in order

[p. 28]

to enter which she did nothing but submissively abandon herself to the will of God. Our Lord was pleased about this time to imprint upon her virginal body the stigmas of his cross and of his crucifixion, which were to the Jews a stumbling-block, and to the Gentiles folly, and to many persons who call themselves Christians, both the one and the other. From her very earliest childhood she had besought our Lord to impress the marks of his cross deeply upon her heart, that so she might never forget his infinite love for men; but she had never thought of receiving any outward marks. Rejected by the world, she prayed more fervently than ever for this end. On the 28th of August, the feast of St. Augustine, the patron of her order, as she was making this prayer in bed, ravished in ecstasy and her arms stretched forth, she beheld a young man approach her surrounded with light. It was under this form that her Divine Spouse usually appeared to her, and he now made upon her body with his right hand the mark of a common cross. From this time there was a mark like a cross upon her bosom, consisting of two bands crossed, about three inches, long and one wide. Later the skin often rose in blisters on this place, as if from a burn, and when these blisters burst a burning colourless liquid issued from them, sometimes in such quantities as to soak through several sheets. She was long without perceiving what the case really was, and only thought that she was in a strong perspiration. The particular meaning of this mark has never been known.

Some weeks later, when making the same prayer, she fell into an ecstasy, and beheld the same apparition, which presented her with a little cross of the shape described in her accounts of the Passion. She eagerly received and fervently pressed it to her bosom, and then returned it. She said that this cross was as soft and white as wax, but she was not at first aware that it had made an external mark upon her bosom. A short time after, having gone with her landlady's little girl to visit an old hermitage near Dulmen, she all on a sudden fell into an ecstasy, fainted away, and on her recovery was taken home by a poor peasant

[p. 29]

woman. The sharp pain which she felt in her chest continued to increase, and she saw that there was what looked like a cross, about three inches in length, pressed tightly upon her breast-bone, and looking red through the skin. As she had spoken about her vision to a nun with whom she was intimate, her extraordinary state began to be a good deal talked of. On All Souls' day, 1812, she went out for the last time, and with much difficulty succeeded in reaching the church. From that time till the end of the year she seemed to be dying, and received the last Sacraments. At Christmas a smaller cross appeared on the top of that upon her chest. It was the same shape as the larger one, so that the two together formed a double forked cross. Blood flowed from this cross every Wednesday, so as to leave the impression of its shape on paper laid over it. After a time this happened on Fridays instead. In 1814 this flow of blood took place less frequently, but the cross became as red as fire every Friday. At a later period of her life more blood flowed from this cross, especially every Good Friday; but no attention was paid to it. On the 30th March 1821, the writer of these pages saw this cross of a deep red colour, and bleeding all over. In its usual state it was colourless, and its position only marked by slight cracks in the skin. . . . Other Ecstaticas have received similar marks of the Cross; among others, Catherine of Raconis, Marina de l'Escobar, Emilia Bichieri, S. Juliani Falconieri, &c.

She received the stigmas on the last days of the year 1812. On the 29th December, about three o'clock in the afternoon, she was lying on her bed in her little room, extremely ill, but in a state of ecstasy and with her arms extended, meditating on the sufferings of her Lord, and beseeching him to allow her to suffer with him. She said five Our Fathers in honour of the Five Wounds, and felt her whole heart burning with love. She then saw a light descending towards her, and distinguished in the midst of it the resplendent form of her crucified Saviour, whose wounds shone like so many furnaces of light. Her heart was overflowing with joy and sorrow, and, at the sight of

[p. 30]

the sacred wounds, her desire to suffer with her Lord became intensely violent. Then triple rays, pointed like arrows, of the colour of blood, darted forth from the hands, feet, and side of the sacred apparition, and struck her hands, feet, and right side. The triple rays from the side formed a point like the head of a lance. The moment these rays touched her, drops of blood flowed from the wounds which they made. Long did she remain in a state of insensibility, and when she recovered her senses she did not know who had lowered her outstretched arms. It was with astonishment that she beheld blood flowing from the palms of her hands, and felt violent pain in her feet and side. It happened that her landlady's little daughter came into her room, saw her hands bleeding, and ran to tell her mother, who with great anxiety asked Anne Catherine what had happened, but was begged by her not to speak about it. She felt, after having received the stigmas, that an entire change had taken place in her body; for the course of her blood seemed to have changed, and to flow rapidly towards the stigmas. She herself used to say: 'No words can describe in what manner it flows.'

We are indebted to a curious incident for our knowledge of the circumstances which we have here related. On the 15th December 1819, she had a detailed vision of all that had happened to herself, but so that she thought it concerned some other nun who she imagined must be living not far off, and who she supposed had experienced the same things as herself. She related all these details with a very strong feeling of compassion, humbling herself, without knowing it, before her own patience and sufferings. It was most touching to hear her say: 'I ought never to complain any more, now that I have seen the sufferings of that poor nun; her heart is surrounded with a crown of thorns, but she bears it placidly and with a smiling countenance. It is shameful indeed for me to complain, for she has a far heavier burden to bear than I have.'

These visions, which she afterwards recognised to be her own history, were several times repeated, and it is from them that the circumstances under which she received the

[p. 31]

stigmas became known. Otherwise she would not have related so many particulars about what her humility never permitted her to speak of, and concerning which, when asked by her spiritual superiors whence her wounds proceeded, the utmost she said was: 'I hope that they come from the hand of God.'

The limits of this work preclude us from entering upon the subject of stigmas in general, but we may observe that the Catholic Church has produced a certain number of persons, St. Francis of Assissium being the first, who have attained to that degree of contemplative love of Jesus which is the most sublime effect of union with his sufferings, and is designated by theologians, Vulnus divinum, Plago amoris viva. There are known to have been at least fifty. Veronica Giuliani, a Capuchiness, who died at Citta di Castello in 1727, is the last individual of the class who has been canonised (on the 26th May 1831). Her biography, published at Cologne in 1810, gives a description of the state of persons with stigmas, which in many ways is applicable to Anne Catherine. Colomba Schanolt, who died at Bamberg in 1787, Magdalen Lorger, who died at Hadamar in 1806, both Dominicanesses, and Rose Serra, a Capuchiness at Ozieri in Sardinia, who received the stigmas in 1801, are those of our own times of whom we know the most. Josephine Kumi, of the Convent of Wesen, near Lake Wallenstadt in Switzerland, who was still living in 1815, also belonged to this class of persons, but we are not entirely certain whether she had the stigmas.

Anne Catherine being, as we have said, no longer able to walk or rise from her bed, soon became unable also to eat. Before long she could take nothing but a little wine and water, and finally only pure water; sometimes, but very rarely, she managed to swallow the juice of a cherry or a plum, but she immediately vomited any solid food, taken in ever so small a quantity. This inability to take food, or rather this faculty of living for a great length of time upon nothing but water, we are assured by learned doctors is not quite unexampled in the history of the sick.

[p. 32]

Theologians will be perfectly aware that there are many instances of contemplative ascetics, and particularly of persons frequently in a state of ecstasy and who have received the stigmas, remaining long without taking any other food than the Blessed Sacrament; for instance, B. Nicholas of Flue, St. Liduvina of Schiedam, St. Catherine of Sienna, St. Angela of Foligno, and St. Louise de l'Ascension. All the phenomena exhibited in the person of Anne Catherine remained concealed even from those who had the most intercourse with her, until the 25th February 1813, when they were discovered accidentally by one of her old convent companions. By the end of March, the whole town talked of them. On the 23d of March, the physician of the neighbourhood forced her to undergo an examination. Contrary to his expectation, he was convinced of the truth, drew up an official report of what be had seen, became her doctor and her friend, and remained such to her death. On the 28th of March, commissioners were appointed to examine into her case by the spiritual authorities of Munster. The consequence of this was that Anne Catherine was henceforth looked upon kindly by her superiors, and acquired the friendship of the late Dean Overberg, who from that time paid her every year a visit of several days' duration, and was her consoler and spiritual director. The medical counsellor from Druffel, who was present at this examination in the capacity of doctor, never ceased to venerate her. In 1814, he published in the Medical Journal of Salzbourg a detailed account of the phenomena which he had remarked in the person of Anne Catherine, and to this we refer those of our readers who desire more particulars upon the subject. On the 4th of April, M. Gamier, the Commissary-General of the French police, came from Munster to see her; he inquired minutely into her case, and having learned that she neither prophesied nor spoke on politics, declared that there was no occasion for the police to occupy themselves about her. In 1826, he still spoke of her at Paris with respect and emotion.

On the 22d of July 1813, Overberg came to see her,

[p. 33]

with Count de Stolberg and his family. They remained two days with her, and Stolberg, in a letter which has been several times printed, bore witness to the reality of the phenomena observed in Anne Catherine, and gave expression to his intense veneration for her. He remained her friend as long as he lived, and the members of his family never ceased recommending themselves to her prayers. On the 29th of September 1813, Overberg took the daughter of the Princess Galitzin (who died in 1806) to visit her, and they saw with their own eyes blood flow copiously from her stigmas. This distinguished lady repeated her visit, and, after becoming Princess of Salm, never varied in her sentiments, but, together with her family, remained in constant communion of prayer with Anne Catherine. Many other persons in all ranks of life were, in like manner, consoled and edified by visiting her bed of suffering. On the 23d of October 1813, she was carried to another lodging, the window of which looked out upon a garden. The condition of the saintly nun became day by day more painful. Her stigmas were a source of indescribable suffering to her, down to the moment of her death. Instead of allowing her thoughts to dwell upon those graces to the interior presence of which they bore such miraculous outward testimony, she learned from them lessons of humility, by considering them as a heavy cross laid upon her for her sins. Her suffering body itself was to preach Jesus crucified. It was difficult indeed to be an enigma to all persons, an object of suspicion to the greatest number, and of respect mingled with fear to some few, without yielding to sentiments of impatience, irritability, or pride. Willingly would she have lived in entire seclusion from the world, but obedience soon compelled her to allow herself to be examined and to have judgment passed upon her by a vast number of curious persons. Suffering, as she was, the most excruciating pains, she was not even allowed to be her own mistress, but was regarded as something which every one fancied he had a right to look at and to pass judgment upon,--often with no good results to any one, but greatly to the prejudice of her soul

[p. 34]

and body, because she was thus deprived of so much rest and recollection of spirit. There seemed to be no bounds to what was expected of her, and one fat man, who had some difficulty in ascending her narrow winding staircase, was heard to complain that a person like Anne Catherine, who ought to be exposed on the public road, where every one could see her, should remain in a lodging so difficult to reach. In former ages, persons in her state underwent in private the examination of the spiritual authorities, and carried out their painful vocation beneath the protecting shadow of hallowed walls; but our suffering heroine had been cast forth from the cloister into the world at a time when pride, coldness of heart, and incredulity were all the vogue; marked with the stigmas of the Passion of Christ, she was forced to wear her bloody robe in public, under the eyes of men who scarce believed in the Wounds of Christ, far less in those which were but their images.

Thus this holy woman, who in her youth had been in the habit of praying for long hours before pictures of all the stages of Christ's painful Passion, or before wayside crosses, was herself made like unto a cross on the public road, insulted by one passer by, bathed in warm tears of repentance by a second, regarded as a mere physical curiosity by a third, and venerated by a fourth, whose innocent hands would bring flowers to lay at her feet.

In 1817 her aged mother came from the country to die by her side. Anne Catherine showed her all the love she could by comforting and praying for her, and closing her eyes with her own hands--those hands marked with the stigmas on the 13th of March of the same year. The inheritance left to Anne Catherine by her mother was more than sufficient for one so imbued with the spirit of mortification and suffering; and in her turn she left it unimpaired to her friends. It consisted of these three sayings:--'Lord, thy will, not mine, be done;' 'Lord, give me patience, and then strike hard;' 'Those things which are not good to put in the pot are at least good to put beneath it.' The meaning of this last proverb was: If things are not fit to be eaten, they may at least be burned,

[p. 35]

in order that food may be cooked; this suffering does not nourish my heart, but by bearing it patiently, I may at least increase the fire of divine love, by which alone life can profit us anything. She often repeated these proverbs, and then thought of her mother with gratitude. Her father had died some little time before.

The writer of these pages became acquainted with her state first through reading a copy of that letter of Stolberg, to which we have already alluded, and afterwards through conversation with a friend who had passed several weeks with her. In September 1818 he was invited by Bishop Sailer to meet him at the Count de Stolberg's, in Westphalia; and he went in the first place to Sondermuhlen to see the count, who introduced him to Overberg, from whom he received a letter addressed to Anne Catherine's doctor. He paid her his first visit on the 1711 of September 1818; and she allowed him to pass several hours by her side each day, until the arrival of Sailer. From the very beginning, she gave him her confidence to a remarkable extent, and this in the most touching and ingenuous manner. No doubt she was conscious that by relating without reserve the history of all the trials, joys, and sorrows of her whole life, she was bestowing a most precious spiritual alms upon him. She treated him with the most generous hospitality, and had no hesitation in doing so, because he did not oppress her and alarm her humility by excessive admiration. She laid open her interior to him in the same charitable spirit as a pious solitary would in the morning offer the flowers and fruit which had grown in his garden during the night to some way-worn traveller, who, having lost his road in the desert of the world, finds him sitting near his hermitage. Wholly devoted to her God, she spoke in this open manner as a child would have done, unsuspectingly, with no feelings of mistrust, and with no selfish end in view. May God reward her!

Her friend daily wrote down all the observations that he made concerning her, and all that she told him about her life, whether interior or exterior. Her words were

[p. 36]

characterised alternately by the most childlike simplicity and the most astonishing depth of thought, and they fore. shadowed, as it were, the vast and sublime spectacle which later was unfolded, when it became evident that the past, the present, and the future, together with all that pertained to the sanctification, profanation, and judgment of souls, formed before and within her an allegorical and historical drama, for which the different events of the ecclesiastical year furnished subjects, and which it divided into scenes, so closely linked together were all the prayers and sufferings which she offered in sacrifice for the Church militant.

On the 22d of October 1818 Sailer came to see her, and having remarked that she was lodging at the back of a public-house, and that men were playing at nine-pins under her window, said in the playful yet thoughtful manner which was peculiar to him: 'See, see; all things are as they should be--the invalid nun, the spouse of our Lord, is lodging in a public-house above the ground where men are playing at nine-pins, like the soul of man in his body.' His interview with Anne Catherine was most affecting; it was indeed beautiful to behold these two souls, who were both on fire with the love of Jesus, and conducted by grace through such different paths, meet thus at the foot of the Cross, the visible stamp of which was borne by one of them. On Friday, the 23d of October, Sailer remained alone with her during nearly the whole of the day; he saw blood flow from her head, her hands, and her feet, and he was able to bestow upon her great consolation in her interior trials. He most earnestly recommended her to tell everything without reserve to the writer of these pages, and he came to an understanding upon the subject with her ordinary director. He heard her confession, gave her the Holy Communion on Saturday, the 24th, and then continued his journey to the Count de Stolberg's. On his return, at the beginning of November, he again passed a day with her. He remained her friend until death, prayed constantly for her, and asked her prayers whenever he found himself in trying or

[p. 37]

difficult positions. The writer of these pages remained until January. He returned again in May 1819, and continued to watch Anne Catherine almost uninterruptedly until her death.

The saintly maiden continually besought the Almighty to remove the exterior stigmas, on account of the trouble and fatigue which they occasioned, and her prayer was granted at the end of seven years. Towards the conclusion of the year 1819, the blood first flowed less frequently from her wounds, and then ceased altogether. On the 25th of December, scabs fell from her feet and hands, and there only remained white scars, which became red on certain days, but the pain she suffered was undiminished in the slightest degree. The mark of the cross, and the wound on her right side, were often to be seen as before but not at any stated times. On certain days she always had the most painful sensations around her head, as though a crown of thorns were being pressed upon it. On these occasions she could not lean her head against anything nor even rest it on her hand, but had to remain for long hours, sometimes even for whole nights, sitting up in her bed, supported by cushions, whilst her pallid face, and the irrepressible groans of pain which escaped her, made her like an awful living representation of suffering. After she had been in this state, blood invariably flowed more or less copiously from around her head. Sometimes her head-dress only was soaked with it, but sometimes the blood would flow down her face and neck. On Good Friday, April 19th, 1819, all her wounds re-opened and bled, and closed again on the following days. A most rigorous inquiry into her state was made by some doctors and naturalists. For that end she was placed alone in a strange house, where she remained from the 7th to the 29th of August; but this examination appears to have produced no particular effects in any way. She was brought back to her own dwelling on the 29th of August, and from that time until she died she was left in peace, save that she was occasionally annoyed by private disputes and public insults. On this subject Overberg wrote her the

[p. 38]

following words: 'What have you had to suffer personally of which you can complain? I am addressing a soul desirous of nothing so much as to become more and more like to her divine Spouse. Have you not been treated far more gently than was your adorable Spouse? Should it not be a subject of rejoicing to you, according to the spirit, to have been assisted to resemble him more closely, and thus to be more pleasing in his eyes? You had suffered much with Jesus, but hitherto insults had been for the most part spared you. With the crown of thorns you had not worn the purple mantle and the robe of scorn, much less had you yet heard the cry, Away with him! Crucify him! Crucify him! I cannot doubt but that these sentiments are yours. Praise be to Jesus Christ.'

On Good Friday, the 30th of March 1820, blood flowed from her head, feet, hands, chest, and side. It happened that when she fainted, one of the persons who were with her, knowing that the application of relies relieved her, placed near her feet a piece of linen in which some were wrapped, and the blood which came from her wounds reached this piece of linen after a time. In the evening, when this same piece of linen with the relies was being, placed on her chest and shoulders, in which she was suffering much, she suddenly exclaimed, while in a state of ecstasy: 'It is most wonderful, but I see my Heavenly Spouse lying in the tomb in the earthly Jerusalem; and I also see him living in the heavenly Jerusalem surrounded by adoring saints, and in the midst of these saints I see a person who is not a saint--a nun. Blood flows from her head, her side, her hands, and her feet, and the saints are above the bleeding parts.'

On the 9th February 1821 she fell into an ecstasy at the time of the funeral of a very holy priest. Blood flowed from her forehead, and the cross on her breast bled also. Some one asked her, 'What is the matter with you?' She smiled, and spoke like one awakening from a dream: 'We were by the side of the body. I have been accustomed lately to hear sacred music, and the De Profundis made a great impression upon me.' She died upon the same

[p. 39]

day three years later. In 1821, a few weeks before Easter, she told us that it had been said to her during her prayer, 'Take notice, you will suffer on the real anniversary of the Passion, and not on the day marked this year in the Ecclesiastical Calendar.' On Friday, the 30th of March, at ten o'clock in the morning, she sank down senseless. Her face and bosom were bathed in blood, and her body appeared covered with bruises like what the blows of a whip would have inflicted. At twelve o'clock in the day, she stretched herself out in the form of a cross, and her arms were so extended as to be perfectly dislocated. A few minutes before two o'clock, drops of blood flowed from her feet and hands. On Good Friday, the 20th of April, she was simply in a state of quiet contemplation. This remarkable exception to the general rule seemed to be an effect of the providence of God, for, at the hour when her wounds usually bled, a number of curious and ill-natured individuals came to see her with the intention of causing her fresh annoyances, by publishing what they saw; but they thus were made unintentionally to contribute to her peace, by saying that her wounds had ceased to bleed.

On the 19th of February 1822 she was again warned that she would suffer on the last Friday of March, and not on Good Friday.

On Friday the 15th, and again on Friday the 29th, the cross on her bosom and the wound of her side bled. Before the 29th, she more than once felt as though a stream of fire were flowing rapidly from her heart to her side, and down her arms and legs to the stigmas, which looked red and inflamed. On the evening of Thursday the 28th, she fell into a state of contemplation on the Passion, and remained in it until Friday evening. Her chest, head, and side bled; all the veins of her hands were swollen, and there was a painful spot in the centre of them, which felt damp, although blood did not flow from it. No blood flowed from the stigmas excepting upon the 3d of March, the day of the finding of the Holy Cross. She had also a vision of the discovery of the true cross by St. Helena, and imagined herself to be lying in the excavation near the

[p. 40]

cross. Much blood came in the morning from her head and side, and in the afternoon from her hands and feet, and it seemed to her as though she were being made the test of whether the cross was really the Cross of Jesus Christ, and that her blood was testifying to its identity.

In the year 1823, on Holy Thursday and Good Friday, which came on the 27th and 28th of March, she had visions of the Passion, during which blood flowed from all her wounds, causing her intense pain. Amid these awful sufferings, although ravished in spirit, she was obliged to speak and give answers concerning all her little household affairs, as if she had been perfectly strong and well, and she never let fall a complaint, although nearly dying. This was the last time that her blood gave testimony to the reality of her union with the sufferings of him who has delivered himself up wholly and entirely for our salvation. Most of the phenomena of the ecstatic life which are shown us in the lives and writings of Saints Bridget, Gertrude, Mechtilde, Hildegarde, Catherine of Sienna, Catherine of Genoa, Catherine of Bologna, Colomba da Rieti, Lidwina of Schiedam, Catherine Vanini, Teresa of Jesus, Anne of St. Bartholomew, Magdalen of Pazzi, Mary Villana, Mary Buonomi, Marina d'Escobar, Crescentia de Kaufbeuern, and many other nuns of contemplative orders, are also to be found in the history of the interior life of Anne Catherine Emmerich. The same path was marked out for her by God. Did she, like these holy women, attain the end? God alone knows. Our part is only to pray that such may have been the case, and we are allowed to hope it. Those among our readers who are not acquainted with the ecstatic life from the writings of those who have lived it, will find information on this subject in the Introduction of Goerres to the writings of Henry Suso, published at Ratisbonne in 1829.

Since many pious Christians, in order to render their life one perpetual act of adoration, endeavour to see in their daily employments a symbolical representation of some manner of honouring God, and offer it to him in

[p. 41]

union with the merits of Christ, it cannot appear extra. ordinary that those holy souls who pass from an active life to one of suffering and contemplation, should sometimes see their spiritual labours under the form of those earthly occupations which formerly filled their days. Then their acts were prayers; now their prayers are acts; but the form remains the same. It was thus that Anne Catherine, in her ecstatic life, beheld the series of her prayers for the Church under the forms of parables bearing reference to agriculture, gardening, weaving, sowing, or the care of sheep. All these different occupations were arranged, according to their signification, in the different periods of the common as well as the ecclesiastical year, and were pursued under the patronage and with the assistance of the saints of each day, the special graces of the corresponding feasts of the Church being also applied to them. The signification of this circle of symbols had reference to all the active part of her interior life. One example will help to explain our meaning. When Anne Catherine, while yet a child, was employed in weeding, she besought God to root up the cockle from the field of the Church. If her hands were stung by the nettles, or if she was obliged to do afresh the work of idlers, she offered to God her pain and her fatigue, and besought him, in the name of Jesus Christ, that the pastor of souls might not become weary, and that none of them might cease to labour zealously and diligently. Thus her manual labour became a prayer.

I will now give a corresponding example of her life of contemplation and ecstasy. She had been ill several times, and in a state of almost continual ecstasy, during which she often moaned, and moved her hands like a person employed in weeding. She complained one morning that her hands and arms smarted and itched, and on examination they were found to be covered with blisters, like what would have been produced by the stinging of nettles. She then begged several persons of her acquaintance to join their prayers to hers for a certain intention. The next day her hands were inflamed and painful, as they would

[p. 42]

have been after hard work; and when asked the cause, she replied: 'Ah! I have had so many nettles to root up in the vineyard, because those whose duty it was to do it only pulled off the stems, and I was obliged to draw the roots with much difficulty out of a stony soil.' The person who had asked her the question began to blame these careless workmen, but he felt much confused when she replied: 'You were one of them,--those who only pull off the stems of the nettles, and leave the roots in the earth, are persons who pray carelessly.' It was afterwards discovered that she had been praying for several dioceses which were shown to her under the figure of vineyards laid waste, and in which labour was needed. The real inflammation of her hands bore testimony to this symbolical rooting up of the nettles; and we have, perhaps, reason to hope that the churches shown to her under the appearances of vineyards experienced the good effects of her prayer and spiritual labour; for since the door is opened to those who knock, it must certainly be opened above all to those who knock with such energy as to cause their fingers to be wounded.

Similar reactions of the spirit upon the body are often found in the lives of persons subject to ecstasies, and are by no means contrary to faith. St. Paula, if we may believe St. Jerome, visited the holy places in spirit just as if she had visited them bodily; and a like thing happened to St. Colomba of Rieti and St. Lidwina of Schiedam. The body of the latter bore traces of this spiritual journey, as if she had really travelled; she experienced all the fatigue that a painful journey would cause: her feet were wounded and covered with marks which looked as if they had been made by stones or thorns, and finally she had a sprain from which she long suffered.

She was led on this journey by her guardian angel, who told her that these corporeal wounds signified that she had been ravished in body and spirit.

Similar hurts were also to be seen upon the body of Anne Catherine immediately after some of her visions. Lidwina began her ecstatic journey by following her good

[p. 43]

angel to the chapel of the Blessed Virgin before Schiedam; Anne Catherine began hers by following her angel guardian either to the chapel which was near her dwelling, or else to the Way of the Cross of Coesfeld.

Her journeys to the Holy Land were made, according to the accounts she gave of them, by the most opposite roads; sometimes even she went all round the earth, when the task spiritually imposed upon her required it. In the course of these journeys from her home to the most distant countries., she carried assistance to many persons, exercising in their regard works of mercy, both corporal and spiritual, and this was done frequently in parables. At the end of a year she would go over the same ground again, see the same persons, and give an account of their spiritual progress or of their relapse into sin. Every part of this labour always bore some reference to the Church, and to the king dom. of God upon earth.

The end of these daily pilgrimages which she made in spirit was invariably the Promised Land, every part of which she examined in detail, and which she saw sometimes in its present state, and sometimes as it was at, different periods of sacred history; for her distinguishing characteristic and special privilege was an intuitive knowledge of the history of the Old and New Testaments, and of that of the members of the Holy Family, and of all the saints whom she was contemplating in spirit. She saw the signification of all the festival days of the ecclesiastical year under both a devotional and an historical point of view. She saw and described, day by day, with the minutest detail, and by name, places, persons, festivals, customs, and miracles, all that happened during the public life of Jesus until the Ascension, and the history of the apostles for several weeks after the Descent of the Holy Ghost. She regarded all her visions not as mere spiritual enjoyments, but as being, so to speak, fertile fields, plentifully strewn with the merits of Christ, and which had not as yet been cultivated; she was often engaged in spirit in praying that the fruit of such and such Sufferings of our Lord might be given to the Church, and she would beseech God to apply to his

[p. 44]

[paragraph continues] Church the merits of our Saviour which were its inheritance, and of which she would, as it were, take possession, in its name, with the most touching simplicity and ingenuousness.

She never considered her visions to have any reference to her exterior Christian life, nor did she regard them as being of any historical value. Exteriorly she knew and believed nothing but the catechism, the common history of the Bible, the gospels for Sundays and festivals, and the Christian almanack, which to her far-sighted vision was an inexhaustible mine of hidden riches, since it gave her in a few pages a guiding thread which led her through all time, and by means of which she passed from mystery to mystery, and solemnised each with all the saints, in order to reap the fruits of eternity in time, and to preserve and distribute them in her pilgrimage around the ecclesiastical year, that so the will of God might be accomplished on earth as it is in Heaven. She had never read the Old or the New Testaments, and when she was tired of relating her visions, she would sometimes say: 'Read that in the Bible,' and then be astonished to learn that it was not there; 'for,' she would add, 'people are constantly saying in these days that you need read nothing but the Bible, which contains everything, &c. &c.'

The real task of her life was to suffer for the Church and for some of its members, whose distress was shown her in spirit, or who asked her prayers without knowing that this poor sick nun had something more to do for them than to say the Pater noster, but that all their spiritual and corporal sufferings became her own, and that she had to endure patiently the most terrible pains, without being assisted, like the contemplatives of former days, by the sympathising prayers of an entire community. In the age when she lived, she had no other assistance than that of medicine. While thus enduring sufferings which she had taken upon herself for others, she often turned her thoughts to the corresponding sufferings of the Church, and when thus suffering, for one single person, she would likewise offer all she endured for the whole Church.

[p. 45]

The following is a remarkable instance of the sort:--During several weeks she had every symptom of consumption; violent irritation of the lungs, excessive perspiration, which soaked her whole bed, a racking cough, continual expectoration, and a strong continual fever. So fearful were her sufferings that her death was hourly expected and even desired. It was remarked that she had to struggle strangely against a strong temptation to irritability. Did she yield for an instant, she burst into tears, her sufferings increased tenfold, and she seemed unable to exist unless she immediately gained pardon in the sacrament of penance. She had also to combat a feeling of aversion to a certain person whom she had not seen for years. She was in despair because this person, with whom nevertheless she declared she had nothing in common, was always before her eyes in the most evil dispositions, and she wept bitterly, and with much anxiety of conscience, saying that she would not commit sin, that her grief must be evident to all, and other things which were quite unintelligible to the persons listening to her. Her illness continued to increase, and she was thought to be on the point of death. At this moment one of her friends saw her, to his great surprise, suddenly raise herself up on her bed, and say:--

'Repeat with me the prayers for those in their last agony.' He did as requested, and she answered the Litany in a firm voice. After some little time, the bell for the agonising was heard, and a person came in to ask Anne Catherine's prayers for his sister, who was just dead. Anne Catherine asked for details concerning her illness and death, as if deeply interested in the subject, and the friend above-mentioned heard the account given by the new comer of a consumption resembling in the minutest particulars the illness of Anne Catherine herself. The deceased woman had at first been in so much pain and so disturbed in mind that she had seemed quite unable to prepare herself for death; but during the last fortnight she had been better, had made her peace with God, having in the first place been reconciled to a person with whom

[p. 46]

she was at enmity, and had died in peace, fortified by the last sacraments, and attended by her former enemy. Anne Catherine gave a small sum of money for the burial and funeral-service of this person. Her sweatings, cough, and fever now left her, and she resembled a person exhausted with fatigue, whose linen has been changed, and who has been placed on a fresh bed. Her friend said to her, 'When this fearful illness came upon you, this woman grew better, and her hatred for another was the only obstacle to her making peace with God. You took upon yourself, for the time, her feelings of hatred, she died in good dispositions, and now you seem tolerably well again. Are you still suffering on her account?' 'No, indeed!' she replied; 'that would be most unreasonable; but how can any person avoid suffering when even the end of his little finger is in pain? We are all one body in Christ.' 'By the goodness of God,' said her friend, 'you are now once more somewhat at ease.' 'Not for very long, though,' she replied with a smile; 'there are other persons who want my assistance.' Then she turned round on her bed, and rested awhile.

A very few days later, she began to feel intense pain in all her limbs, and symptoms of water on the chest manifested themselves. We discovered the sick person for whom Anne Catherine was suffering, and we saw that his sufferings suddenly diminished or immensely increased in exact inverse proportion to those of Anne Catherine.

Thus did charity compel her to take upon herself the illnesses and even the temptations of others, that they might be able in peace to prepare themselves for death. She was compelled to suffer in silence, both to conceal the weaknesses of her neighbour, and not to be regarded as mad herself; she war, obliged to receive all the aid that medicine could afford her for an illness thus taken voluntarily for the relief of others, and to be reproached for temptations which were not her own; finally, it was necessary that she should appear perverted in the eyes of men, that so those for whom she was suffering might be converted before God.

[p. 47]

One day a friend in deep affliction was sitting by her bedside, when she suddenly fell into a state of ecstasy, and began to pray aloud: 'O, my sweet Jesus, permit me to carry that heavy stone!' Her friend asked her what was the matter. 'I am on my way to Jerusalem,' she replied, 'and I see a poor man walking along with the greatest difficulty, for there is a large stone upon his breast, the weight of which nearly crushes him.' Then again, after a few moments, she exclaimed: 'Give me that heavy stone, you cannot carry it any farther; give it to me.' All on a sudden she sank down fainting, as if crushed beneath some heavy burden, and at the same moment her friend felt himself relieved from the weight of sorrow which oppressed him, and his heart overflowing with extraordinary happiness. Seeing her in such a state of suffering, he asked her what the matter was, and she looking at him with a smile, replied: 'I cannot remain here any longer. Poor man, you must take back your burden.' Instantly her friend felt all the weight of his affliction return to him, whilst she, becoming as well again as before, continued her journey in spirit to Jerusalem.

We will give one more example of her spiritual exertions. One morning she gave her friend a little bag containing some rye-flour and eggs, and pointed out to him a small house where a poor woman, who was in a consumption, was living with her husband and two little children. He was to tell her to boil and take them, as when boiled they would be good for her chest. The friend, on entering the cottage, took the bag from under his cloak, when the poor mother, who, flushed with fever, was lying on a mattress between her half-naked children, fixed her bright eyes upon him, and holding out her thin hands, exclaimed: 'O, sir, it must be God or Sister Emmerich who sends you to me! You are bringing me some rye-flour and eggs.' Here the poor woman, overcome by her feelings, burst into tears, and then began to cough so violently that she had to make a sign to her husband to speak for her. He said that the previous night Gertrude had been much disturbed, and had talked a great

[p. 48]

deal in her sleep, and that on awaking she had told him her dream in these words: 'I thought that I was standing at the door with you, when the holy nun came out of the door of the next house, and I told you to look at her. She stopped in front of us, and said to me: "Ah, Gertrude, you look very ill; I will send you some rye-flour and eggs, which will relieve your chest." Then I awoke.' Such was the simple tale of the poor man; he and his wife both eagerly expressed their gratitude, and the bearer of Anne Catherine's alms left the house much overcome. He did not tell her anything of this when he saw her, but a few days after, she sent him again to the same place with a similar present, and he then asked her how it was she knew that poor woman? 'You know,' she replied, 'that I pray every evening for all those who suffer; I should like to go and relieve them, and I generally dream that I am going from one abode of suffering to another, and that I assist them to the best of my power. In this way I went in my dream to that poor woman's house; she was standing at the door with her husband, and I said to her: "Ah, Gertrude, you look very ill; I will send you some rye-flour and eggs, which will relieve your chest." And this I did through you, the next morning.' Both persons had remained in their beds, and dreamed the same thing, and the dream came true. St. Augustin, in his City of God, book xviii., c. 18, relates a similar thing of two philosophers, who visited each other in a dream, and explained some passages of Plato, both remaining asleep in their own houses.

These sufferings, and this peculiar species of active labour, were like a single ray of light, which enlightened her whole life. Infinite was the number of spiritual labours and sympathetic sufferings which came from all parts and entered into her heart--that heart so burning with love of Jesus Christ. Like St. Catherine of Sienna and some other ecstatics, she often felt the most profound feeling of conviction that our Saviour had taken her heart out of her bosom, and placed his own there instead for a time.

[p. 49]

The following fragment will give some idea of the mysterious symbolism by which she was interiorly directed. During a portion of the year 1820 she performed many labours in spirit, for several different parishes; her prayers being represented under the figure of most severe labour in a vineyard. What we have above related concerning the nettles is of the same character.

On the 6th of September her heavenly guide said to her: '"You weeded, dug around, tied, and pruned the vine; you ground down the weeds so that they could never spring up any more; and then you went away joyfully and rested from your prayers. Prepare now to labour hard from the feast of the Nativity of the Blessed Virgin to that of St. Michael; the grapes are ripening and must be well watched." Then he led me,' she continued, 'to the vineyard of St. Liboire, and showed me the vines at which I had worked. My labour had been successful, for the grapes were getting their colour and growing large, and in some parts the red juice was running down on the ground from them. My guide said to me: "When the virtues of the good begin to shine forth in public, they have to combat bravely, to be oppressed, to be tempted, and to suffer persecution. A hedge must be planted around the vineyard in order that the ripe grapes may not be destroyed by thieves and wild beasts, i.e. by temptation and persecution." He then showed me how to build a wall by heaping up stones, and to raise a thick hedge of thorns all around. As my hands bled from such severe labour, God, in order to give me strength, permitted me to see the mysterious signification of the vine, and of several other fruit trees. Jesus Christ is the true Vine, who is to take root and grow in us; all useless wood must be cut away, in order not to waste the sap, which is to become the wine, and in the Most Blessed Sacrament the Blood of Christ. The pruning of the vine has to be done according to certain rules which were made known to me. This pruning is, in a spiritual sense, the cutting off whatever is useless, penance and mortification, that so the true Vine may grow in us, and bring forth

[p. 50]

fruit. in the place of corrupt nature, which only bean wood and leaves. The pruning is done according to fixed rules, for it is only required that certain useless shoots should be cut off in man, and to lop off more would be to mutilate in a guilty manner. No pruning should ever be done upon the stock which has been planted in humankind through the Blessed Virgin, and is to remain in it for ever. The true Vine unites heaven to earth, the Divinity to humanity; and it is the human part that is to be pruned, that so the divine alone may grow. I saw so many other things relating to the vine that a book as large as the Bible could not contain them. One day, when I was suffering acute pain in my chest, I besought our Lord with groans not to give me a burthen above my strength to bear; and then my Heavenly Spouse appeared, and said to me, . . . "I have laid thee on my nuptial couch, which is a couch of suffering; I have given thee suffering and expiation for thy bridal garments and jewels. Thou must suffer, but I will not forsake thee; thou art fastened to the Vine, and thou wilt not be lost." Then I was consoled for all my sufferings. It was likewise explained to me why in ray visions relating to the feasts of the family of Jesus, such, for instance, as those of St. Anne, St. Joachim, St. Joseph, &c., I always saw the Church of the festival under the figure of a shoot of the vine. The same was the case on the festivals of St. Francis of Assissium, St. Catherine of Sienna, and of all the saints who have had the stigmas.

'The signification of my sufferings in all my limbs was explained to me in the following vision: I saw a gigantic human body in a horrible state of mutilation, and raised upwards towards the sky. There were no fingers or toes on the hands and feet, the body was covered with frightful wounds, some of which were fresh and bleeding, others covered with dead flesh or turned into excrescences. The whole of one aide was black, gangrened, and as it were half eaten away. I suffered as though it had been my own body that was in this state, and then my guide said to me, "This is the body of the Church, the body of all

[p. 51]

men and thine also." Then, pointing to each wound, he showed me at the same time some part of the world; I saw an infinite number of men and nations separated from the Church, all in their own peculiar way, and I felt pain as exquisite from this separation as if they had been torn from my body. Then my guide said to me: "Let thy sufferings teach thee a lesson, and offer them to God in union with those of Jesus for all who are separated. Should not one member call upon another, and suffer in order to cure and unite it once more to the body? When those parts which are most closely united to the body detach themselves, it is as though the flesh were torn from around the heart. In my ignorance, I thought that he was speaking of those brethren who are not in communion with us, but my guide added: "Who are our brethren? It is not our blood relations who are the nearest to our hearts, but those who are our brethren in the blood of Christ--the children of the Church who fall away." He showed me that the black and gangrened side of the body would soon be cured; that the putrified flesh which had collected around the wounds represented heretics who divide one from the other in proportion as they increase; that the dead flesh was the figure of all. who are spiritually dead, and who are void of any feeling; and that the ossified parts represented obstinate and hardened heretics. I saw and felt in this manner every wound and its signification. The body reached up to heaven. It was the body of the Bride of Christ, and most painful to behold. I wept bitterly, but feeling at once deeply grieved and strengthened by sorrow and , I began again to labour with all my strength.'

Sinking beneath the weight of life and of the task imposed upon her she often besought God to deliver her, and she then would appear to be on the very brink of the grave. But each time she would say: 'Lord, not my will but thine be done! If my prayers and sufferings are useful let me live a thousand years, but grant that I may die rather than ever offend thee.' Then she would receive orders to live, and arise, taking up her cross, once more to

[p. 52]

bear it in patience and suffering after her Lord. From time to time the road of life which she was pursuing used to be shown to her, leading to the top of a mountain on which was a shining and resplendent city--the heavenly Jerusalem. Often she would think she had arrived at that blissful abode, which seemed to be quite near her, and her joy would be great. But all on a sudden she would discover that she was still separated from it by a valley, and then she would have to descend precipices. and follow indirect paths, labouring, suffering, and performing deeds of charity everywhere. She had to direct wanderers into the right road, raise up the fallen, sometimes even carry the paralytic, and drag the unwilling by force, and all these deeds of charity were as so many fresh weights fastened to her cross. Then she walked with more difficulty, bending beneath her burden and sometimes even falling to the ground.

In 1823 she repeated more frequently than usual that she could not perform her task in her present situation, that she had not strength for it, and that it was in a peaceful convent that she needed to have lived and died. She added that God would soon take her to himself, and that she had besought him to permit her to obtain by her prayers in the next world what her weakness would not permit her to accomplish in this. St. Catherine of Sienna, a short time before death, made a similar prayer.

Anne Catherine had previously had a vision concerning what her prayers might obtain after death, with regard to things that were not in existence during her life. The year 1823, the last of which she completed the whole circle, brought her immense labours. She appeared desirous to accomplish her entire task, and thus kept the promise which she had previously made of relating the history of the whole Passion. It formed the subject of her Lenten meditations during this year, and of them the present volume is composed. But she did not on this account take less part in the fundamental mystery of this penitential season, or in the different mysteries of each of the festival days of the Church, if indeed the words to 

[p. 53]

take part be sufficient to express the wonderful manner in which she rendered visible testimony to the mystery celebrated in each festival by a sudden change in her corporal and spiritual life. See on this subject the chapter entitled Interruption of the Pictures of the Passion.

Every one of the ceremonies and festivals of the Church was to her far more than the consecration of a remembrance. She beheld in the historical foundation of each solemnity an act of the Almighty, done in time for the reparation of fallen humanity. Although these divine acts appeared to her stamped with the character of eternity, yet she was well aware that in order for man to profit by them in the bounded and narrow sphere of time, he must, as it were, take possession of them in a series of successive moments, and that for this purpose they had to be repeated and renewed in the Church, in the order established by Jesus Christ and the Holy Spirit. All festivals and solemnities were in her eyes eternal graces which returned at fixed epochs in every ecclesiastical year, in the same manner as the fruits and harvests of the earth come in their seasons in the natural year.

Her zeal and gratitude in receiving and treasuring up these graces were untiring, nor was she less eager and zealous in offering them to those who neglected their value. In the same manner as her compassion for her crucified Saviour had pleased God and obtained for her the privilege of being marked with the stigmas of the Passion as with a seal of the most perfect love, so all the sufferings of the Church and of those who were in affliction were repeated in the different states of her body and soul. And all these wonders took place within her, unknown to those who were around her; nor was she herself even more fully conscious of them than is the bee of the effects of its work, while yet she was tending and cultivating, with all the care of an industrious and faithful gardener, the fertile garden of the ecclesiastical year. She lived on its fruits, and distributed them to others; she strengthened herself and her friends with the flowers and herbs which she cultivated; or, rather, she herself was in this garden like a

[p. 54]

sensitive plant, a sunflower, or some wonderful plant in which, independent of her own will, were reproduced all the seasons of the year, all the hours of the day, and all the changes of the atmosphere.

At the end of the ecclesiastical year of 1823, she had for the last time a vision on the subject of making up the accounts of that year. The negligences of the Church militant and of her servants were shown to Anne Catherine, under various symbols; she saw how many graces had not been cooperated with, or been rejected to a greater or less extent, and how many had been entirely thrown away. It was made known to her how our Blessed Redeemer had deposited for each year in the garden of the Church a complete treasure of his merits, sufficient for every requirement, and for the expiation of every sin. The strictest account was to be given of all graces which had been neglected, wasted, or wholly rejected, and the Church-militant was punished for this negligence or infidelity of her servants by being oppressed by her enemies, or by temporal humiliations. Revelations of this description raised to excess her love for the Church, her mother. She passed days and nights in praying for her, in offering to God the merits of Christ, with continual groans, and in imploring mercy. Finally, on these occasions, she gathered together all her courage, and offered to take upon herself both the fault and the punishment, like a child presenting itself before the king's throne, in order to suffer the punishment she had incurred. It was then said to her, 'See how wretched and miserable thou art thyself; thou who art desirous to satisfy for the sins of others.' And to her great terror she beheld herself as one mournful mass of infinite imperfection. But still her love remained undaunted, and burst forth in these words, 'Yes, I am full of misery and sin; but I am thy spouse, O my Lord, and my Saviour! My faith in thee and in the redemption which thou hast brought us covers all my sins as with thy royal mantle. I will not leave thee until thou hast accepted my sacrifice, for the superabundant treasure of thy merits is closed to none of thy faithful

[p. 55]

servants.' At length her prayer became wonderfully energetic, and to human ears there was like a dispute and combat with God, in which she was carried away and urged on by the violence of love. If her sacrifice was accepted, her energy seemed to abandon her, and she was left to the repugnance of human nature for suffering. When she had gone through this trial, by keeping her eyes fixed on her Redeemer in the Garden of Olives, she next had to endure indescribable sufferings of every description, bearing them all with wonderful patience and sweetness. We used to see her remain several days together, motionless and insensible, looking like a dying lamb. Did we ask her how she was, she would half open her eyes, and reply with a sweet smile, 'My sufferings are most salutary.'

At the beginning of Advent, her sufferings were a little soothed by sweet visions of the preparations made by the Blessed Virgil, to leave her home, and then of her whole journey with St. Joseph to Bethlehem. She accompanied them each day to the humble inns where they rested for the night, or went on before them to prepare their lodgings. During this time she used to take old pieces of linen, and at night, while sleeping, make them into baby clothes and caps for the children of poor women, the times of whose confinements were near at hand. The next day she would be surprised to see all these things neatly arranged in her drawers. This happened to her every year about the same time, but this year she had more fatigue and less consolation. Thus, at the hour of our Saviour's birth, when she was usually perfectly overwhelmed with joy, she could only crawl with the greatest difficulty to the crib where the Child Jesus was lying, and bring him no present but myrrh, no offering but her cross, beneath the weight of which she sank down half dying at his feet. It seemed as though she were for the last time making up her earthly accounts with God, and for the last time also offering herself in the place of a countless number of men who were spiritually and corporally afflicted. Even the little that is known of the manner in which she took upon herself

[p. 56]

the sufferings of others is almost incomprehensible. She very truly said: 'This year the Child Jesus has only brought me a cross and instruments of suffering.'

She became each day more and more absorbed in her sufferings, and although she continued to see Jesus travelling from city to city during his public life, the utmost she ever said on the subject was, briefly to name in which direction he was going. Once, she asked suddenly in a scarcely audible voice, 'What day is it?' When told that it was the 14th of January, she added: 'Had I but a few days more, I should have related the entire life of our Saviour, but now it. is no longer possible for me to do so.' These words were the more incomprehensible as she did not appear to know even which year of the public life of Jesus she was then contemplating in spirit. In 1820 she had related the history of our Saviour down to the Ascension, beginning at the 28th of July of the third year of the public life of Jesus, after which she returned to the first year of the life of Jesus, and had continued down to the 10th of January of the third year of his public life. On the 27th of April 1823, in consequence of a journey made by the writer, an interruption of her narrative took place, and lasted down to the 21st of October. She then took up the thread of her narrative where she had left it, and continued it to the last weeks of her life. When she spoke of a few days being wanted, her friend himself did not know how far her narrative went, not having had leisure to arrange what he had written. After her death he became convinced that if she had been able to speak during the last fourteen days of her life, 'she would have brought it down to the 28th of July of the third year of the public life of our Lord, consequently to where she had taken it up in 1820.

Her condition daily became more frightful. She, who usually suffered in silence, uttered stifled groans, so awful was the anguish she endured. On the 15th of January she said: 'The Child Jesus brought me great sufferings at Christmas. I was once more by his manger at Bethlehem. He was burning with fever, and showed me his sufferings

[p. 57]

and those of his mother. They were so poor that they had no food but a wretched piece of bread. He bestowed still greater sufferings upon me, and said to me: "Thou art mine; thou art my spouse; suffer as I suffered, without asking the reason why." I do not know what my sufferings are to be, nor how long they will last. I submit blindly to my martyrdom, whether for life or for death: I only desire that the hidden designs of God may be accomplished in me. On the other hand, I am calm, and I have consolations in my sufferings. Even this morning I was very happy. Blessed be the holy Name of God!'

Her sufferings continued, if possible, to increase. Sitting up, and with her eyes closed, she fell from one side to another, while smothered groans escaped her lips. If she laid down, she was in danger of being stifled; her breathing was hurried and oppressed, and all her nerves and muscles were shaken and trembled with anguish. After violent retching, she suffered terrible pain in her bowels, so much so that it was feared gangrene must be forming there. Her throat was parched and burning, her mouth swollen, her cheeks crimson with fever, her hands white as ivory. The scars of the stigmas shone like silver beneath her distended skin. Her pulse gave from 160 to 180 pulsations per minute. Although unable to speak from her excessive suffering, she bore every duty perfectly in mind. On the evening of the 26th, she said to her friend, 'To-day is the ninth day, you must pay for the wax taper and novena at the chapel of St. Anne.' She was alluding to a novena which she had asked to have made for her intention, and she was afraid lest her friends should forget it. On the 27th, at two o'clock in the afternoon, she received Extreme Unction, greatly to the relief both of her soul and body. In the evening her friend, the excellent cure of H------, prayed at her bedside, which was an immense comfort to her. She said to him: 'How good and beautiful all this is!' And again: 'May God be a thousand times praised and thanked!'

The approach of death did not wholly interrupt the wonderful union of her life with that of the Church. A

[p. 58]

friend having visited her on the 1st of February in the evening, had placed himself behind her bed where she could not see him, and was listening with the utmost compassion to her low moans and interrupted breathing, when suddenly all became silent, and he thought that she was dead. At this moment the evening bell ringing for the matins of the Purification was heard. It was the opening of this festival which had caused her soul to be ravished in ecstasy. Although still in a very alarming state, she let some sweet and loving words concerning the Blessed Virgin escape her lips during the night and day of the festival. Towards twelve o'clock in the day, she said in a voice already changed by the near approach of death, 'It was long since I had felt so well. I have been ill quite a week, have I not? I feel as though I knew nothing about this world of darkness! O, what light the Blessed Mother of God showed me! She took me with her, and how willingly would I have remained with her!' Here she recollected herself for a moment, and then Said, placing her finger on her lip: 'But I must not speak of these things.' From that time she said that the slightest word in her praise greatly increased her sufferings.

The following days she was worse. On the 7th, in the evening, being rather more calm, she said: 'Ah, my sweet Lord Jesus, thanks be to thee again and again for every part of my life. Lord, thy will and not mine be done.' On the 8th of February, in the evening, a priest was praying near her bed, when she gratefully kissed his hand, begged him to assist at her death, and said, 'O Jesus, I live for thee, I die for thee. O Lord, praise be to thy holy name, I no longer see or hear!' Her friends wished to change her position, and thus ease her pain a little; but she said, 'I am on the Cross, it will soon all be over, leave me in peace.' She had received all the last Sacraments, but she wished to accuse herself once more in confession of a slight fault which she had already many times confessed; it was probably of the same nature as a sin which she had committed in her childhood, of which she often accused herself, and which consisted in having gone through

[p. 59]

a hedge into a neighbour's garden, and coveted some apples which had fallen on the ground. She had only looked at them; for, thank God, she said, she did not touch them, but she thought that was a sin against the tenth commandment. The priest gave her a general absolution; after which she stretched herself out, and those around her thought that she was dying. A person who had often given her pain now drew near her bed and asked her pardon. She looked at him in surprise, and said with the most expressive accent of truth, 'I have nothing to forgive any living creature.'

During the last days of her life, when her death was momentarily expected, several of her friends remained constantly in the room adjoining hers. They were speaking in a low tone, and so that she could not hear them, of her patience, faith, and other virtues, when all on a sudden they heard her dying voice saying: 'Ah, for the love of God, do not praise me--that keeps me here, because I then have to suffer double. O my God! how many fresh flowers are falling upon me!' She always saw flowers as the forerunners and figures of sufferings. Then she rejected all praises, with the most profound conviction of her own unworthiness, saying: 'God alone is good: everything must be paid, down to the last farthing. I am poor and loaded with sin, and I can only make up for having been praised by sufferings united to those of Jesus Christ. Do not praise me, but let me die in ignominy with Jesus on the cross.'

Boudon, in his life of Father Surin, relates a similar trait of a dying man, who had been thought to have lost the sense of hearing, but who energetically rejected a word of praise pronounced by those who were surrounding his bed.

A few hours before death, for which she was longing, saying, 'O Lord assist me; come, O Lord Jesus? a word of praise appeared to detain her, and she most energetically rejected it by making the following act of humility: 'I cannot die if so many good persons think well of me through a mistake; I beg of you to tell them all that I am

[p. 60]

a wretched sinner! Would that I could proclaim so as to be heard by all men, how great a sinner I am! I am far beneath the good thief who was crucified by the side of Jesus, for he and all his contemporaries had not so terrible an account as we shall have to render of all the graces which have been bestowed upon the Church.' After this declaration, she appeared to grow calm, and she said to the priest who was comforting her: 'I feel now as peaceful and as much filled with hope and confidence as if I had never committed a sin.' Her eyes turned lovingly towards the cross which was placed at the foot of her bed, her breathing became accelerated, she often drank some liquid; and when the little crucifix was held to her, she from humility only kissed the feet. A friend who was kneeling by her bedside in tears, had the comfort of often holding her the water with which to moisten her lips. As she had laid her hand, on which the white sear of the wound was most distinctly visible, on the counterpane, he took hold of that hand, which was already cold, and as he inwardly wished for some mark of farewell from her, she slightly pressed his. Her face was calm and serene, bearing an expression of heavenly gravity, and which can only be compared to that of a valiant wrestler who after making unheard-of efforts to gain the victory, sinks back and dies in the very act of seizing the prize. The priest again read through the prayers for persons in their last agony, and she then felt an inward inspiration to pray for a pious young friend whose feast day it was. Eight o'clock struck; she breathed more freely for the space of a few minutes, and then cried three times with a deep groan: 'O Lord, assist me Lord, Lord, come!' The priest rang his bell, and said, 'She is dying.' Several relations and friends who were in the next room came in and knelt down to pray. She was then holding in her hand a lighted taper, which the priest was supporting. She breathed forth several slight sighs, and then her pure soul escaped her chaste lips, and hastened, clothed in the nuptial garment, to appear in heavenly hope before the Divine Bridegroom, and be united for ever to that blessed company of virgins who

[p. 61]

follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth. Her lifeless body sank gently back on the pillows at half-past eight o'clock, P.M., on the 9th February 1824.

A person who had taken great interest in her during life wrote as follows: 'After her death, I drew near to her bed. She was supported by pillows, and lying on her left side. Some crutches, which had been prepared for her by her friends on one occasion when she had been able to take a few turns in the room, were hanging over her head, crossed, in a corner. Near them hung a little oil painting representing the death of the Blessed Virgin, which had been given her by the Princess of Salm. The expression of her countenance was perfectly sublime, and bore the traces of the spirit of self-sacrifice, the patience and resignation of her whole life; she looked as though she had died for the love of Jesus, in the very act of performing some work of charity for others. Her right hand was resting on the counterpane--that hand on which God had bestowed the unparalleled favour of being able at once to recognise by the touch anything that was holy, or that had been consecrated by the Church--a favour which perhaps no one had ever before enjoyed to so great an extent--a favour by which the interests of religion might be inconceivably promoted, provided it was made use of with discretion, and which surely had not been bestowed upon a poor ignorant peasant girl merely for her own personal gratification. For the last time I took in mine the band marked with a sign so worthy of our utmost veneration, the hand which was as a spiritual instrument in the instant recognition of whatever was holy, that it might be honoured even in a grain of sand--the charitable industrious hand, which had so often fed the hungry and clothed the naked--this hand was now cold and lifeless. A great favour had been withdrawn from earth, God had taken from us the hand of his spouse, who had rendered testimony to, prayed, and suffered for the truth. It appeared as though it had not been without meaning, that she had resignedly laid down upon her bed the hand which was the outward expression of a particular privilege granted by

[p. 62]

[paragraph continues] Divine grace. Fearful of having the strong impression made upon me by the sight of her countenance diminished by the necessary but disturbing preparations which were being made around her bed, I thoughtfully left her room. If, I said to myself--if, like so many holy solitaries, she had died alone in a grave prepared by her own hands, her friends--the birds--would have covered her with flowers and leaves; if, like other religious, she had died among virgins consecrated to God, and that their tender care and respectful veneration had followed her to the grave, as was the case, for example, with St. Columba of Rieti, it would have been edifying and pleasing to those who loved her; but doubtless such honours rendered to her lifeless remains would not have been conformable to her love for Jesus, whom she so much desired to resemble in death as in life.'

The same friend later wrote as follows: 'Unfortunately there was no official post-mortem examination of her body, and none of those inquiries by which she had been so tormented during life were instituted after her death. The friends who surrounded her neglected to examine her body, probably for fear of coming upon some striking phenomenon, the discovery of which might have caused much annoyance in various ways. On Wednesday the 11th of February her body was prepared for burial. A pious female, who would not give up to any one the task of rendering her this last mark of affection, described to me as follows the condition in which she found her: "Her feet were crossed like the feet of a crucifix. The places of the stigmas were more red than usual. When we raised her head blood flowed from her nose and mouth. All her limbs remained flexible and with none of the stiffness of death even till the coffin was closed." On Friday the 13th of February she was taken to the grave, followed by the entire population of the place. She reposes in the cemetery, to the left of the cross, on the side nearest the hedge. In the grave in front of hers there rests a good old peasant of Welde, and in the grave behind a poor but virtuous female from Dernekamp.

'On the evening of the day when she was buried, a

[p. 63]

rich man went, not to Pilate, but to the cure of the place. He asked for the body of Anne Catherine, not to place it in a new sepulchre, but to buy it at a high price for a Dutch doctor. The proposal was rejected as it deserved, but it appears that the report spread in the little town that the body had been taken away, and it is said that the people went in great numbers to the cemetery to ascertain whether the grave had been robbed.'

To these details we will add the following extract from an account printed in December 1824, in the Journal of Catholic Literature of Kerz. This account was written by a person with whom we are unacquainted, but who appears to have been well informed: 'About six or seven weeks after the death of Anne Catherine Emmerich, a report having got about that her body had been stolen away, the grave and coffin were opened in secret, by order of the authorities, in the presence of seven witnesses. They found with surprise not unmixed with joy that corruption had not yet begun its work on the body of the pious maiden. Her features and countenance were smiling like those of a person who is dreaming sweetly. She looked as though she had but just been placed in the coffin, nor did her body exhale any corpse-like smell. It is good to keep the secret of the king, says Jesus the son of Sirach; but it is also good to reveal to the world the greatness of the mercy of God.'

We have been told that a stone has been placed over her grave. We lay upon it these pages; may they contribute to immortalise the memory of a person who has relieved so many pains of soul and body, and that of the spot where her mortal remains lie awaiting the Day of Resurrection.

Footnotes

^27:1 Under the Government of Jerome Bonaparte. King of Westphalia. (Abbe Cazales)

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 64] [p. 65]

  

TO THE READER

WHOEVER compares the following meditations with the short history of the Last Supper given in the Gospel will discover some slight differences between them. An explanation should be given of this, although it can never be sufficiently impressed upon the reader that these writings have no pretensions whatever to add an iota to Sacred Scripture as interpreted by the Church.

Sister Emmerich saw the events of the Last Supper take place in the following order:--The Paschal Lamb was immolated and prepared in the supper-room; our Lord held a discourse on that occasion--the guests were dressed as travellers, and ate, standing, the lamb and other food prescribed by the law--the cup of wine was twice presented to our Lord, but he did not drink of it the second time; distributing it to his Apostles with these words: I shall drink no more of the fruit of the vine, &c. Then they sat down; Jesus spoke of the traitor; Peter feared lest it should be himself; Judas received from our Lord the piece of bread dipped, which was the sign that it was he; preparations were made for the washing of the feet; Peter strove against his feet being washed; then came the institution of the Holy Eucharist: Judas communicated, and afterwards left the apartment; the oils were consecrated, and instructions given concerning them; Peter and the other Apostles received ordination; our Lord made his final discourse; Peter protested that he would never abandon him; and then the Supper concluded. By adopting this order, it appears, at first, as though it were in contradiction to the passages of St. Matthew (xxxi. 29), and of St. Mark (xiv. 26), in which the words: I will drink no more of the fruit of the vine,

[p. 66]

[paragraph continues] &c., come after the consecration, but in St. Luke, they come before. On the contrary, all that concerns the traitor Judas comes here, as in St. Matthew and St. Mark, before the consecration; whereas in St. Luke, it does not come till afterwards. St. John, who does not relate the history of the institution of the Holy Eucharist, gives us to understand that Judas went out immediately after Jesus had given him the bread; but it appears most probable, from the accounts of the other Evangelists, that Judas received the Holy Communion under both forms, and several of the fathers--St. Augustin, St. Gregory the Great, and St. Leo the Great--as well as the tradition of the Catholic Church, tell us expressly that such was the case. Besides, were the order in which St. John presents events taken literally, he would contradict, not only St. Matthew and St. Mark, but himself, for it must follow, from verse 10, chap. xiii., that Judas also had his feet washed. Now, the washing of the feet took place after the eating of the Paschal Lamb, and it was necessarily whilst it was being eaten that Jesus presented the bread to the traitor. It is plain that the Evangelists here, as in several other parts of their writings, gave their attention to the sacred narrative as a whole, and did not consider themselves bound to relate every detail in precisely the same order, which fully explains the apparent contradictions of each other, which are to be found in their Gospels. The following pages will appear to the attentive reader rather a simple and natural concordance of the Gospels than a history differing in any point of the slightest importance than that of Scripture.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 67]

  

MEDITATION I.

  

Preparations for the Pasch.

Holy Thursday, the 13th of Nisan (29th of March).

YESTERDAY evening it was that the last great public repast of our Lord and his friends took place in the house of Simon the Leper, at Bethania, and Mary Magdalen for the last time anointed the feet of Jesus with precious ointment. Judas was scandalised upon this occasion, and hastened forthwith to Jerusalem again to conspire with the high-priests for the betrayal of Jesus into their hands. After the repast, Jesus returned to the house of Lazarus, and some of the Apostles went to the inn situated beyond Bethania. During the night Nicodemus again came to Lazarus' house, had a long conversation with our Lord, and returned before daylight to Jerusalem, being accompanied part of the way by Lazarus.

The disciples had already asked Jesus where he would eat the Pasch. To-day, before dawn, our Lord sent for Peter, James, and John, spoke to them at some length concerning all they had to prepare and order at Jerusalem, and told them that when ascending Mount Sion, they would meet the man carrying a pitcher of water. They were already well acquainted with this man, for at the last Pasch, at Bethania, it had been him who prepared the meal for Jesus, and this is why St. Matthew says: a certain man. They were to follow him home, and say to him: The Master saith, My time is near at hand, with thee I make the pasch with my disciples (Matt. xxvi. 18). They were then to be shown the supper-room, and make all necessary preparations.

[p. 68]

I saw the two Apostles ascending towards Jerusalem, along a ravine, to the south of the Temple, and in the direction of the north side of Sion. On the southern side of the mountain on which the Temple stood, there were some rows of houses; and they walked opposite these houses, following the stream of an intervening torrent. When they had reached the summit of Mount Sion, which is higher than the mountain of the Temple, they turned their steps towards the south, and, just at the beginning of a small ascent, met the man who had been named to them; they followed and spoke to him as Jesus had commanded. He was much gratified by their words, and answered, that a supper had already been ordered to be prepared at his house (probably by Nicodemus), but that he had not been aware for whom, and was delighted to learn that it was for Jesus. This man's name was Heli, and he was the brother-in-law of Zachary of Hebron, in whose house Jesus had in the preceding year announced the death of John the Baptist. He had only one son, who was a Levite, and a friend of St. Luke, before the latter was called by our Lord, and five daughters, all of whom were unmarried. He went up every year with his servants for the festival of the Pasch, hired a room and prepared the Pasch for persons who had no friend in the town to lodge with. This year he had hired a supper-room which belonged to Nicodemus and Joseph of Arimathea. He showed the two Apostles its position and interior arrangement.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

MEDITATION II.

  

The Supper-Room.

ON the southern side of Mount Sion, not far from the ruined Castle of David, and the market held on the ascent leading to that Castle, there stood, towards the east, an ancient and solid building, between rows of thick trees, in the midst of a spacious court surrounded by strong walls. To the right and left of the entrance, other buildings were

[p. 69]

to be seen adjoining the wall, particularly to the right, where stood the dwelling of the major-domo, and close to it the house in which the Blessed Virgin and the holy women spent most of their time after the death of Jesus. The supper-room, which was originally larger, had formerly been inhabited by David's brave captains, who had there learned the use of arms.

Previous to the building of the Temple, the Ark of the Covenant had been deposited there for a considerable length of time, and traces of its presence were still to be found in an underground room. I have also seen the Prophet Malachy hidden beneath this same roof: he there wrote his prophecies concerning the Blessed Sacrament and the Sacrifice of the New Law. Solomon held this house in honour, and performed within its walls some figurative and symbolical action, which I have forgotten. When a great part of Jerusalem was destroyed by the Babylonians, this house was spared. I have seen many other things concerning this same house, but I only remember what I have now told.

This building was in a very dilapidated state when it became the property of Nicodemus and Joseph of Arimathea, who arranged the principal building in a very suitable manner, and let it as a supper-room to strangers coming to Jerusalem for the purpose of celebrating the festival of the Pasch. Thus it was that our Lord had made use of it the previous year. Moreover, the house and surrounding buildings served as warehouses for monuments and other stones, and as workshops for the labourers; for Joseph of Arimathea possessed valuable quarries in his own country, from which he had large blocks of stone brought, that his workmen might fashion them, under his own eye, into tombs, architectural ornaments, and columns, for sale. Nicodemus had a share in this business, and used to spend many leisure hours himself in sculpturing. He worked in the room, or in a subterraneous apartment which was beneath it, excepting at the times of the festivals; and this occupation having brought him, into connection with Joseph of Arimathea, they had

[p. 70]

become friends, and often joined together in various transactions.

This morning, whilst Peter and John were conversing with the man who had hired the supper-room, I saw Nicodemus in the buildings to the left of the court, where a great many stones which filled up the passages leading to the supper-room had been placed. A week before, I had seen several persons engaged in putting the stones on one side, cleaning the court, and preparing the supper-room for the celebration of the Pasch; it even appears to me that there were among them some disciples of our Lord, perhaps Aram and Themein, the cousins of Joseph of Arimathea.

The supper-room, properly so called, was nearly in the centre of the court; its length was greater than its width; it was surrounded by a row of low pillars, and if the spaces between the pillars had been cleared, would have formed a part of the large inner room, for the whole edifice was, as it were, transparent; only it was usual, except on special occasions, for the passages to be closed up. The room was lighted by apertures at the top of the walls. In front, there was first a vestibule, into which three doors gave entrance; next, the large inner room, where several lamps hung from the platform; the walls were ornamented for the festival, half way up, with beautiful matting or tapestry, and an aperture had been made in the roof, and covered over with transparent blue gauze.

The back part of this room was separated from the rest by a curtain, also of blue transparent gauze. This division of the supper-room into three parts gave a resemblance to the Temple--thus forming the outer Court, the Holy, and the Holy of Holies. In the last of these divisions, on both sides, the dresses and other things necessary for the celebration of the feast were placed. In the centre there was a species of altar. A stone bench raised on three steps, and of a rectangular triangular shape, came out of the wall; it must have constituted the upper part of the oven used for roasting the Paschal Lamb, for to-day the steps were quite heated during the repast. I cannot describe in detail

[p. 71]

all that there was in this part of the room, but all kinds of arrangements were being made there for preparing the Paschal Supper. Above this hearth or altar, there was a species of niche in the wall, in front of which I saw an image of the Paschal Lamb, with a knife in its throat, and the blood appearing to flow drop by drop upon the altar; but I do not remember distinctly how that was done. In a niche in the wall there were three cupboards of various colours, which turned like our tabernacles, for opening or closing. A number of vessels used in the celebration of the Pasch were kept in them; later, the Blessed Sacrament was placed there.

In the rooms at the sides of the supper-room, there were some couches, on which thick coverlids rolled up were placed, and which could be used as beds. There were spacious cellars beneath the whole of this building. The Ark of the Covenant was formerly deposited under the very spot where the hearth was afterwards built. Five gutters, under the house, served to convey the refuse to the slope of the hill, on the -upper part of which the house was built. I had previously seen Jesus preach and perform miraculous cures there, and the disciples frequently passed the night in the side rooms.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

MEDITATION III.

  

Arrangements for eating the Paschal Lamb.

WHEN the disciples had spoken to Heli of Hebron, the latter went back into the house by the court, but they turned to the right, and hastened down the north side of the hill, through Sion. They passed over a bridge, and walking along a road covered with brambles, reached the other side of the ravine, which was in front of the Temple, and of the row of houses which were to the south of that building. There stood the house of the aged Simeon, who died in the Temple after the presentation of our Lord; and his sons, some of whom were disciples of Jesus in

[p. 72]

secret, were actually living there. The Apostles spoke to one of them, a tall dark-complexioned man, who held some office in the Temple. They went with him to the eastern side of the Temple, through that part of Ophel by which Jesus made his entry into Jerusalem on Palm-Sunday, and thence to the cattle-market, which stood in the town, to the north of the Temple. In the southern part of this market I saw little enclosures in which some beautiful lambs were gambolling about. Here it was that lambs for the Pasch were bought. I saw the son of Simeon enter one of these enclosures; and the lambs gambolled round him as if they knew him. He chose out four, which were carried to the supper-room. In the afternoon I saw him in the supper-room, engaged in preparing the Paschal Lamb.

I saw Peter and John go to several different parts of the town, and order various things. I saw them also standing opposite the door of a house situated to the north of Mount Calvary, where the disciples of Jesus lodged the greatest part of the time, and which belonged to Seraphia (afterwards called Veronica). Peter and John sent some disciples from thence to the supper-room, giving them several commissions, which I have forgotten.

They also went into Seraphia's house, where they had several arrangements to make. Her husband, who was a member of the council, was usually absent and engaged in business; but even when he was at home she saw little of him. She was a woman of about the age of the Blessed Virgin, and had long been connected with the Holy Family; for when the Child Jesus remained the three days in Jerusalem after the feast, she it was who supplied him with food.

The two Apostles took from thence, among other things, the chalice of which our Lord made use in the institution of the Holy Eucharist.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 73]

  

MEDITATION IV.

  

The Chalice used at the Last Supper.

THE chalice which the Apostles brought from Veronica's house was wonderful and mysterious in its appearance. It had been kept a long time in the Temple among other precious objects of great antiquity, the use and origin of which had been forgotten. The same has been in some degree the case in the Christian Church, where many consecrated jewels have been forgotten and fallen into disuse with time. Ancient vases and jewels, buried beneath the Temple, had often been dug up, sold, or reset. Thus it was that, by God's permission, this holy vessel, which none had ever been able to melt down on account of its being made of some unknown material, and which had been found by the priests in the treasury of the Temple among other objects no longer made use of, had been sold to some antiquaries. It was bought by Seraphia, was several times made use of by Jesus in the celebration of festivals, and, from the day of the Last Supper, became the exclusive property of the holy Christian community. This vessel was not always the same as when used by our Lord at his Last Supper, and perhaps it was upon that occasion that the various pieces which composed it were first put together. The great chalice stood upon a plate, out of which a species of tablet could also be drawn, and around it there were six little glasses. The great chalice contained another smaller vase; above it there was a small plate, and then came a round cover. A spoon was inserted in the foot of the chalice, and could be easily drawn out for use. All these different vessels were covered with fine linen, and, if I am not mistaken, were wrapped up in a case made of leather. The great chalice was composed of the cup and of the foot, which last must have been joined on to it at a later period, for it was of a different material. The cup was pear-shaped, massive, dark-coloured, and highly polished, with gold ornaments, and two small handles by which it could be lifted. The

[p. 74]

foot was of virgin gold, elaborately worked, ornamented with a serpent and a small bunch of grapes, and enriched with precious stones.

The chalice was left in the Church of Jerusalem, in the hands of St. James the Less; and I see that it is still preserved in that town--it will reappear some day, in the same manner as before. Other Churches took the little cups which surrounded it; one was taken to Antioch, and another to Ephesus. They belonged to the patriarchs, who drank some mysterious beverage out of them when they received or gave a Benediction, as I have seen many times.

The great chalice had formerly been in the possession of Abraham; Melchisedech brought it with him from the land of Semiramis to the land of Canaan, when he was beginning to found some settlements on the spot where Jerusalem was afterwards built; he made use of it then for offering sacrifice, when he offered bread and wine in the presence of Abraham, and he left it in the possession of that holy patriarch. This same chalice had also been preserved in Noah's Ark.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

MEDITATION V.

  

Jesus goes up to Jerusalem.

IN the morning, while the Apostles were engaged at Jerusalem in preparing for the Pasch, Jesus, who had remained at Bethania, took an affecting leave of the holy women, of Lazarus, and of his Blessed Mother, and gave them some final instructions. I saw our Lord conversing apart with his Mother, and he told her, among other things, that he had sent Peter, the apostle of faith, and John, the apostle of love, to prepare for the Pasch at Jerusalem. He said, in speaking of Magdalen, whose grief was excessive, that her love was great, but still somewhat human, and that on this account her sorrow made her beside herself. He spoke also of the schemes of the traitor

[p. 75]

[paragraph continues] Judas, and the Blessed Virgin prayed for him. Judas had again left Bethania to go to Jerusalem, under pretence of paying some debts that were due. He spent his whole day in hurrying backwards and forwards from one Pharisee to another, and making his final agreements with them He was shown the soldiers who had been engaged to seize the person of our Divine Saviour, and he so arranged his journeys to and fro as to be able to account for his absence. I beheld all his wicked schemes and all his thoughts. He was naturally active and obliging, but these good qualities were choked by avarice, ambition, and envy, which passions he made no effort to control. In our Lord's absence he had even performed miracles and healed the sick.

When our Lord announced to his Blessed Mother what was going to take place, she besought him, in the most touching terms, to let her die with him. But he exhorted her to show more calmness in her sorrow than the other women, told her that he should rise again, and named the very spot where he should appear to her. She did not weep much, but her grief was indescribable, and there was something almost awful in her look of deep recollection. Our Divine Lord returned thanks, as a loving Son, for all the love she had borne him, and pressed her to his heart. He also told her that he would make the Last Supper with her, spiritually, and named the hour at which she would receive his precious Body and Blood. Then once more he, in touching language, bade farewell to all, and gave them different instructions.

About twelve o'clock in the day, Jesus and the nine Apostles went from Bethania up to Jerusalem, followed by seven disciples, who, with the exception of Nathaniel and Silas, came from Jerusalem and the neighbourhood. Among these were John, Mark, and the son of the poor widow who, the Thursday previous, had offered her mite in the Temple, whilst Jesus was preaching there. Jesus had taken him into his company a few days before. The holy women set off later.

Jesus and his companions walked around Mount Olivet, about the valley of Josaphat, and even as far as Mount

[p. 76]

[paragraph continues] Calvary. During the whole of this walk, be continued giving them instructions. He told the Apostles, among other things, that until then he had given them his bread and his wine, but that this day he was going to give them his Body and Blood, his whole self-all that he had and all that he was. The countenance of our Lord bore so touching an expression whilst he was speaking, that his whole soul seemed to breathe forth from his lips, and he appeared to be languishing with love and desire for the moment when he should give himself to man. His disciples did not understand him, but thought that he was speaking of the Paschal Lamb. No words can give an adequate idea of the love and resignation which were expressed in these last discourses of our Lord at Bethania, and on his way to Jerusalem.

The seven disciples who had followed our Lord to Jerusalem did not go there in his company, but carried the ceremonial habits for the Pasch to the supper-room, and then returned to the house of Mary, the mother of Mark. When Peter and John came to the supper-room with the chalice, all the ceremonial habits were already in the vestibule, whither they had been brought by his disciples and some companions. They had also hung the walls with drapery, cleared the higher openings in the sides, and put up three lamps. Peter and John then went to the Valley of Josaphat, and summoned our Lord and the twelve Apostles. The disciples and friends who were also to make their Pasch in the supper-room, came later.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

MEDITATION VI.

  

The Last Pasch.

JESUS and his disciples ate the Paschal Lamb in the supper-room. They divided into three groups. Jesus ate the Paschal Lamb with the twelve Apostles in the supper-room, properly so called; Nathaniel with twelve other disciples in one of the lateral rooms, and Eliacim (the son

[p. 77]

of Cleophas and Mary, the daughter of Heli), who had been a disciple of John the Baptist, with twelve more, in another side-room

Three lambs were immolated for them in the Temple, but there was a fourth lamb which was immolated in the supper-room, and was the one eaten by Jesus with his Apostles. Judas was not aware of this circumstance, because being engaged in plotting his betrayal of our Lord, he only returned a few moments before the repast, and after the immolation of the lamb had taken place. Most touching was the scene of the immolation of the lamb to be eaten by Jesus and his Apostles; it took place in the vestibule of the supper-room. The Apostles and disciples were present, singing the 118th Psalm. Jesus spoke of a new period then beginning, and said that the sacrifice of Moses and the figure of the Paschal Lamb were about to receive their accomplishment, but that on this very account, the lamb was to be immolated in the same manner as formerly in Egypt, and that they were really about to go forth from the house of bondage.

The vessels and necessary instruments were prepared, and then the attendants brought a beautiful little lamb, decorated with a crown, which was sent to the Blessed Virgin in the room where she had remained with the other holy women. The lamb was fastened with its back against a board by a cord around its body, and reminded me of Jesus tied to the pillar and scourged. The son of Simeon held the lamb's head; Jesus made a slight incision in its neck with the point of a knife, Which he then gave to the son of Simeon, that he might complete killing it. Jesus appeared to inflict the wound with a feeling of repugnance, and he was quick in his movements, although his countenance was grave, and his manner such as to inspire respect. The blood flowed into a basin, and the attendants brought a branch of hyssop, which Jesus dipped in it. Then he went to the door of the room, stained the side-posts and the lock with blood, and placed the branch which had been dipped in blood above the door. He then spoke to the disciples, and told them, among other things,

[p. 78]

that the exterminating angel would pass by, that they would adore in that room without fear or anxiety, when he, the true Paschal Lamb, should have been immolated--that a new epoch, and a new sacrifice were about to begin, which would last to the end of the world.

They then went to the other side of the room, near the hearth where the Ark of the Covenant had formerly stood. Fire had already been lighted there, and Jesus poured some blood upon the hearth, consecrating it as an altar; and the remainder of the blood and the fat were thrown on the fire beneath the altar, after which Jesus, followed by his Apostles, walked round the supper-room, singing some psalms, and consecrating it as a new Temple. The doors were all closed during this time. Meanwhile the son of Simeon had completed the preparation of the lamb. He passed a stake through its body, fastening the front legs on a cross piece of wood, and stretching the hind ones along the stake. It bore a strong resemblance to Jesus on the cross, and was placed in the oven, to be there roasted with the three other lambs brought from the Temple.

The Paschal Lambs of the Jews were all immolated in the vestibule of the Temple, but in different parts, according as the persons who were to eat them were rich, or poor, or Strangers. [*1] The Paschal Lamb belonging to Jesus was not immolated in the Temple, but everything else was done strictly according to the law. Jesus again addressed his disciples, saying that the lamb was but a figure, that he himself would next day be the true Paschal Lamb, together with other things which I have forgotten.

When Jesus had finished his instructions concerning the Paschal Lamb and its signification, the time being come, and Judas also returned, the tables were set out. The disciples put on travelling dresses which were in the vestibule, different shoes, a white robe resembling a shirt, and a cloak, which was short in front and longer behind,

[p. 79]

their sleeves were large and turned back, and they girded up their clothes around the waist. Each party went to their own table; and two sets of disciples in the side rooms, and our Lord and his Apostles in the supper-room. They held staves in their hands, and went two and two to the table, where they remained standing, each in his own place, with the stave resting on his arms, and his hands upraised.

The table was narrow, and about half a foot higher than the knees of a man; in shape it resembled a horseshoe, and opposite Jesus, in the inner part of the half-circle, there was a space left vacant, that the attendants might be able to set down the dishes. As far as I can remember, John, James the Greater, and James the Less sat on the right-hand of Jesus; after them Bartholomew, and then, round the corner, Thomas and Judas Iscariot. Peter, Andrew, and Thaddeus sat on the left of Jesus; next came Simon, and then (round the corner) Matthew and Philip.

The Paschal Lamb was placed on a dish in the centre of the table. Its head rested on its front legs, which were fastened to a cross-stick, its hind legs being stretched out, and the dish was garnished with garlic. By the side there was a dish with the Paschal roast meat, then came a plate with green vegetables balanced against each other, and another plate with small bundles of bitter herbs, which had the appearance of aromatic herbs. Opposite Jesus there was also one dish with different herbs, and a second containing a brown-coloured sauce or beverage. The guests had before them some round loaves instead of plates, and they used ivory knives.

After the prayer, the major-domo laid the knife for cutting the lamb on the table before Jesus, who placed a cup of wine before him, and filled six other cups, each one of which stood between two Apostles. Jesus blessed the wine and drank, and the Apostles drank two together out of one cup. Then our Lord proceeded to cut up the lamb; his Apostles presented their pieces of bread in turn, and each received his share. They ate it in haste,

[p. 80]

separating the flesh from the bone, by means of their ivory knives, and the bones were afterwards burnt. They also ate the garlic and green herbs in haste, dipping them in the sauce. All this time they remained standing, only leaning slightly on the backs of their seats. Jesus broke one of the loaves of unleavened bread, covered up a part of it, and divided the remainder among his Apostles. Another cup of wine was brought, but Jesus drank not of it: 'Take this,' he said, 'and divide it among you, for I will not drink from henceforth, of the fruit of the vine, until that day when I shall drink it with you new in the kingdom of my Father' (Matt. xxvi. 2 9). When they had drunk the wine, they sang a hymn; then Jesus prayed or taught, and they again washed their hands. After this they sat down.

Our Lord cut up another lamb, which was carried to the holy women in one of the buildings of the court, where they were seated at table. The Apostles ate some more vegetables and lettuce. The countenance of our Divine Saviour bore an indescribable expression of serenity and recollection, greater than I had ever before Seen. He bade the Apostles forget all their cares. The Blessed Virgin also, as she sat at table with the other women, looked most placid and calm. When the other women came up, and took hold of her veil to make her turn round and speak to them, her every movement expressed the sweetest self-control and placidity of spirit.

At first Jesus conversed lovingly and calmly with his disciples, but after a while he became grave and sad: 'Amen, Amen, I say to you, that one of you is about to betray me:' he said, 'he that dippeth his hand with me in the dish' (Matt. xxvi. 21, 23). Jesus was then distributing the lettuce, of which there was only one dish, to those Apostles who were by his side, and be had given Judas, who was nearly opposite to him, the office of distributing it to the others. When Jesus spoke of a traitor, an expression which filled all the Apostles with fear, he said: 'he that dippeth his hand with me in the dish,' which means: I one of the twelve who are eating

[p. 81]

and drinking with me--one of those with whom I am eating bread.' He did not plainly point out Judas to the others by these words; for to dip the hand in the same dish was an expression used to signify the most friendly and intimate intercourse. He was desirous, however, to give a warning to Judas, who was then really dipping his hand in the dish with our Saviour, to distribute the lettuce. Jesus continued to speak: 'The Son of man indeed goeth,' he said, 'as it is written of him: but woe to that man by whom the Son of man shall be betrayed: It were better for him if that man had not been born.'

The Apostles were very much troubled, and each one of them exclaimed: 'Lord, is it I?' for they were all perfectly aware that they did not entirely understand his words. Peter leaned towards John, behind Jesus, and made him a sign to ask our Lord who the traitor was to be, for, having so often been reproved by our Lord, he trembled lest it should be himself who was referred to. John was seated at the right hand of Jesus, and as all were leaning on their left arms, using the right to eat, his head was close to the bosom of Jesus. He leaned then on his breast and said: 'Lord, who is it?' I did not see Jesus say to him with his lips: 'He it is to whom I shall reach bread dipped.' I do not know whether he whispered it to him, but John knew it, when Jesus having dipped the bread, which was covered with lettuce, gave it tenderly to Judas, who also asked: 'Is it I, Lord?' Jesus looked at him with love, and answered him in general terms. Among the Jews, to give 'bread dipped was a mark of friendship and confidence; Jesus on this occasion gave Judas the morsel, in order thus to warn him, without making known his guilt to the others. But the heart of Judas burned with anger, and during the whole time of the repast, I saw a frightful little figure seated at his feet, and sometimes ascending to his heart. I did not see John repeat to Peter what he had learned from Jesus, but he set his fears at rest by a look.

Footnotes

^78:1 She here again explained the manner in which the families assembled together, and in what numbers. But the writer has forgotten her words.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 82]

  

MEDITATION VII.

  

The Washing of the Feet.

THEY arose from table, and whilst they were arranging their clothes, as they usually did before making their solemn prayer, the major-domo came in with two servants to take away the table. Jesus, standing in the midst of his Apostles, spoke to them long, in a most solemn manner. I could not repeat exactly his whole discourse, but I remember he spoke of his kingdom, of his going to his Father, of what he, would leave them now that he was about to be taken away, &c. He also gave them some instructions concerning penance, the confession of sin, repentance, and justification.

I felt that these instructions referred to the washing of the feet, and I saw that all the Apostles acknowledged their sins and repented of them, with the exception of Judas. This discourse was long and solemn. When it was concluded, Jesus sent John and James the Less to fetch water from the vestibule, and he told the Apostles to arrange the seats in a half circle. He went himself into the vestibule, where he girded himself with a towel. During this time, the Apostles spoke among themselves, and began speculating as to which of them would be the greatest, for our Lord having expressly announced that he was about to leave them and that his kingdom was near at hand, they felt strengthened anew in their idea that he had secret plans, and that he was referring to some earthly triumph which would be theirs at the last moment.

Meanwhile Jesus, in the vestibule, told John to take a basin, and James a pitcher filled with water, with which they followed him into the room, where the major-domo had placed another empty basin.

Jesus, on returning to his disciples in so humble a manner, addressed them a few words of reproach on the subject of the dispute which had arisen between them, and said among other things, that he himself was their servant, and that they were to sit down, for him to wash

[p. 83]

their feet. They sat down, therefore, in the same order as they had sat at table. Jesus went from one to the other, poured water from the basin which John carried on the feet of each, and then, taking the end of the towel wherewith he was girded, wiped them. Most loving and tender was the manner of our Lord while thus humbling himself at the feet of his Apostles.

Peter, when his turn came, endeavoured through humility to prevent Jesus from washing his feet: 'Lord,' he exclaimed, 'dost thou wash my feet?' Jesus answered: 'What I do, thou knowest not now, but thou shall know hereafter.' It appeared to me that he said to him privately: 'Simon, thou hast merited for my Father to reveal to thee who I am, whence I come, and whither I am going, thou alone hast expressly confessed it, therefore upon thee will I build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. My power will remain with thy successors to the end of the world.'

Jesus showed him to the other Apostles, and said, that when he should be no more present among them, Peter was to fill his place in their regard. Peter said: 'Thou shalt never wash my feet!' Our Lord replied: 'If I wash thee not, thou shalt have no part with me.' Then Peter exclaimed: 'Lord, not only my feet, but also my hands and my head.' Jesus replied: 'He that is washed, needeth not but to wash his feet, but is clean wholly. And you are clean, but not all.'

By these last words he referred to Judas. He had spoken of the washing of the feet as signifying purification from daily faults, because the feet, which are continually in contact with the earth, are also continually liable to be soiled, unless great care is taken.

This washing of the feet was spiritual, and served as a species of absolution. Peter, in his zeal, saw nothing in it but too great an act of abasement on the part of his Master; he knew not that to save him Jesus would the very next day humble himself oven to the ignominious death of the cross.

When Jesus washed the feet of Judas, it was in the

[p. 84]

most loving and affecting manner; he bent his sacred face even on to the feet of the traitor; and in a low voice bade him now at least enter into himself, for that he had been a faithless traitor for the last year. Judas appeared to be anxious to pay no heed whatever to his words, and spoke to John, upon which Peter became angry, and exclaimed: 'Judas, the Master speaks to thee!' Then Judas made our Lord some vague, evasive reply, such as, 'Heaven forbid, Lord!' The others had not remarked that Jesus was speaking to Judas, for his words were uttered in a low voice, in order not to be heard by them, and besides, they were all engaged in putting on their shoes. Nothing in the whole course of the Passion grieved Jesus so deeply as the treason of Judas.

Jesus finally washed the feet of John and James.

He then spoke again on the subject of humility, telling them that he that was the greatest among them war, to be as their servant, and that henceforth they were to wash one another's feet. Then he put on his garments, and the Apostles let down their clothes, which they had girded up before eating the Paschal Lamb.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

MEDITATION VIII.

  

Institution of the Holy Eucharist.

By command of our Lord, the major-domo had again laid out the table, which he had raised a little; then, having placed it once more in the middle of the room, he stood one urn filled with wine, and another with water underneath it. Peter and John went into the part of the room near the hearth, to get the chalice which they had brought from Seraphia's house, and which was still wrapped up in its covering. They carried it between them as if they had been carrying a tabernacle, and placed it on the table before Jesus. An oval plate stood there, with three fine white azymous loaves, placed on a piece of linen, by the side of the half loaf which Jesus had set aside during

[p. 85]

the Paschal meal, also a jar containing wine and water, and three boxes, one filled with thick oil, a second with liquid oil, and the third empty.

In earlier times, it had been the practice for all at table to eat of the same loaf and drink of the same cup at the end of the meal, thereby to express their friendship and brotherly love, and to welcome and bid farewell to each other. I think Scripture must contain something upon this subject.

On the day of the Last Supper, Jesus raised this custom (which had hitherto been no more than a symbolical and figurative rite) to the dignity of the holiest of sacraments. One of the charges brought before Caiphas, on occasion of the treason of Judas, was, that Jesus had introduced a novelty into the Paschal ceremonies, but Nicodemus proved from Scripture that it was an ancient practice.

Jesus was seated between Peter and John, the doors were closed, and everything was done in the most mysterious and imposing manner. When the chalice was taken out of its covering, Jesus prayed, and spoke to his Apostles with the utmost solemnity. I saw him giving them an explanation of the Supper, and of the entire ceremony, and I was forcibly reminded of a priest teaching others to say Mass.

He then drew a species of shelf with grooves from the board on which the jars stood, and taking a piece of white linen with which the chalice was covered, spread it over the board and shelf. I then saw him lift a round plate, which he placed on this same shelf, off the top of the chalice. He next took the azymous loaves from beneath the linen with which they were covered, and placed them before him on the board; then be took out of the chalice a smaller vase, and ranged the six little glasses on each side of it. Then he blessed the bread and also the oil, to the best of my belief, after which he lifted up the paten with the loaves upon it, in his two hands, raised his eyes, prayed offered, and replaced the paten on the table, covering it up again. He then took the chalice, had some wine

[p. 86]

poured into it by Peter, and some water, which he first blessed, by John, adding to it a little more water, which he poured into a small spoon, and after this he blessed the chalice, raised it up with a prayer, made the oblation, and replaced it on the table.

John and Peter poured some water on his hands, which he held over the plate on which the azymous loaves had been placed; then he took a little of the water which had been poured on his hands, in the spoon that be had taken out of the lower part of the chalice, and poured it on theirs. After this, the vase was passed round the table, and all the Apostles washed their hands in it. I do not remember whether this was the precise order in which these ceremonies were performed; all I know is, that they reminded me in a striking manner of the holy sacrifice of the Mass.

Meanwhile, our Divine Lord became more and more tender and loving in his demeanour; he told his Apostles that he was about to give them all that he had, namely, his entire self, and he looked as though perfectly transformed by love. I saw him becoming transparent, until he resembled a luminous shadow. He broke the bread into several pieces, which he laid together on the paten, and then took a corner of the first piece and dropped it into the chalice. At the moment when he was doing this, I seemed to see the Blessed Virgin receiving the Holy Sacrament in a spiritual manner, although she was not present in the supper-room. I do not know how it was done, but I thought I saw her enter without touching the ground, and come before our Lord to receive the Holy Eucharist; after which I saw her no more. Jesus had told her in the morning, at Bethania, that he would keep the Pasch with her spiritually, and he had named the hour at which she was to betake herself to prayer, in order to receive it in spirit.

Again he prayed and taught; his words came forth from his lips like fire and light, and entered into each of the Apostles, with the exception of Judas. He took the paten with the pieces of bread (I do not know whether he had placed it on the chalice) and said: 'Take and eat;

[p. 87]

this is my Body which is given for you.' He stretched forth his right hand as if to bless, and, whilst he did so, a brilliant light came from him, his words were luminous, the bread entered the mouths of the Apostles as a brilliant substance, and light seemed to penetrate and surround them all, Judas alone remaining dark. Jesus presented the bread first to Peter, next to John [*1] and then he made a sign to Judas to approach. Judas was thus the third who received the Adorable Sacrament, but the words of our Lord appeared to turn aside from the mouth of the traitor, and come back to their Divine Author. So perturbed was I in spirit at this sight, that my feelings cannot be described. Jesus said to him: 'That which thou dost, do quickly.' He then administered the Blessed Sacrament to the other Apostles, who approached two and two.

Jesus raised the chalice by its two handles to a level with his face, and pronounced the words of consecration. Whilst doing so, he appeared wholly transfigured, as it were transparent, and as though entirely passing into what he was going to give his Apostles. He made Peter and John drink from the chalice which he held in his hand, and then placed it again on the table. John poured the Divine Blood from the chalice into the smaller glasses, and Peter presented them to the Apostles, two of whom drank together out of the same cup. I think, but am not quite certain, that Judas also partook of the chalice; he did not return to his place, but immediately left the supper-room, and the other Apostles thought that Jesus had given him some commission to do. He left without praying or making any thanksgiving, and hence you may perceive how sinful it is to neglect returning thanks either after receiving our daily food, or after partaking of the Life-Giving Bread of Angels. During the entire meal, I had seen a frightful little figure, with one foot like a dried bone, remaining close to Judas, but when he had reached the door,

[p. 88]

[paragraph continues] I beheld three devils pressing round him; one entered into his mouth, the second urged him on, and the third preceded him. It was night, and they seemed to be lighting him, whilst he hurried onward like a madman.

Our Lord poured a few drops of the Precious Blood remaining in the chalice into the little vase of which I have already spoken, and then placed his fingers over the chalice, while Peter and John poured water and wine upon them. This done, he caused them to drink again from the chalice, and what remained of its contents was poured into the smaller glasses, and distributed to the other Apostles. Then Jesus wiped the chalice, put into it the little vase containing the remainder of the Divine Blood, and placed over it the paten with the fragments of the consecrated bread, after which he again put on the cover, wrapped up the chalice, and stood it in the midst of the six small cups. I saw the Apostles receive in communion these remains of the Adorable Sacrament, after the Resurrection.

I do not remember seeing our Lord himself eat and drink of the consecrated elements, neither did I see Melchisedech, when offering the bread and wine, taste of them himself. It was made known to me why priests partake of them, although Jesus did not.

Here Sister Emmerich looked suddenly up, and appeared to be listening. Some explanation was given her on this subject, but the following words were all that she could repeat to us: 'If the office of distributing it had been given to angels, they would not have partaken, but if priests did not partake, the Blessed Eucharist would be lost-- it is through their participation that it is preserved.'

There was an indescribable solemnity and order in all the actions of Jesus during the institution of the Holy Eucharist, and his every movement was most majestic. I saw the Apostles noting things down in the little rolls of parchment which they carried on their persons. Several times during the ceremonies I remarked that they bowed to each other, in the same way that our priests do.

Footnotes

^87:1 She was not certain that the Blessed Sacrament was administered in the order given above, for on another occasion she had seen John the last to receive.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 89]

  

MEDITATION IX.

  

Private Instructions and Consecrations.

Jesus gave his Apostles some private instructions; he told them how they were to preserve the Blessed Sacrament in memory of him, even to the end of the world; he taught them the necessary forms for making use of and communicating it, and in what manner they were, by degrees, to teach and publish this mystery; finally he told them when they were to receive what remained of the consecrated Elements, when to give some to the Blessed Virgin, and how to consecrate, themselves, after he should have sent them the Divine Comforter. He then spoke concerning the priesthood, the sacred unction, and the preparation of the Chrism and Holy Oils. [*1] He had there three boxes, two of which contained a mixture of oil and balm. He taught them how to make this mixture, what parts of the body were to be anointed with them, and upon what occasions. I remember, among other things, that he mentioned a case in which the Holy Eucharist could not be administered; perhaps what he said had reference to Extreme Unction, for my recollections on this point are not very clear. He spoke of different kinds of anointing, and in particular of that of kings, and he said that even wicked kings who were anointed, derived from it especial powers. He put ointment and oil in the empty box, and mixed them together, but I cannot say for certain

[p. 90]

whether it was at this moment, or at the time of the consecration of the bread, that he blessed the oil.

I then saw Jesus anoint Peter and John, on whose hands he had already poured the water which had flowed on his own, and two whom he had given to drink out of the chalice. Then he laid his hands on their shoulders and heads, while they, on their part, joined their hands and crossed their thumbs, bowing down profoundly before him--I am not sure whether they did not even kneel. He anointed the thumb and fore-finger of each of their hands, and marked a cross on their heads with Chrism. He said also that this would remain with them unto the end of the world.

James the Less, Andrew, James the Greater, and Bartholomew, were also consecrated. I saw likewise that on Peter's bosom he crossed a sort of stole worn round the neck, whilst on the others he simply placed it crosswise, from the right shoulder to the left side. I do not know whether this was done at the time of the institution of the Blessed Sacrament, or only for the anointing.

I understood that Jesus communicated to them by this unction something essential and supernatural, beyond my power to describe. He told them that when they should have received the Holy Spirit they were to consecrate the bread and wine, and anoint the other Apostles. It was made known to me then that, on the day of Pentecost, Peter and John imposed their hands upon the other Apostles, and a week later upon several of the disciples. After the Resurrection, John gave the Adorable Sacrament for the first time to the Blessed Virgin. This event was solemnised as a festival among the Apostles. It is a festival no longer kept in the Church on earth, but I see it celebrated in the Church triumphant. For the first few days after Pentecost I saw only Peter and John consecrate the Blessed Eucharist, but after that the others also consecrated.

Our Lord next proceeded to bless fire in a brass vessel, and care was taken that it should not go out, but it was kept near the spot where the Blessed Sacrament had been

[p. 91]

deposited, in one division of the ancient Paschal hearth, and fire was always taken from it when needed for spiritual purposes.

All that Jesus did upon this occasion was done in private, and taught equally in private. The Church has retained all that was essential of these secret instructions, and, under the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, developed and adapted them to all her requirements.

Whether Peter and John were both consecrated bishops, or Peter alone as bishop and John as priest, or to what dignity the other four Apostles were raised, I cannot pretend to say. But the different ways in which our Lord arranged the Apostles' stoles appear to indicate different degrees of consecration.

When these holy ceremonies were concluded, the chalice (near which the blessed Chrism also stood) was re-covered, and the Adorable Sacrament carried by Peter and John into the back part of the room, which was divided off by a curtain, and from thenceforth became the Sanctuary. The spot where the Blessed Sacrament was deposited was not very far above the Paschal stove. Joseph of Arimathea and Nicodemus took care of the Sanctuary and of the supper-room during the absence of the Apostles.

Jesus again instructed his Apostles for a considerable length of time, and also prayed several times. He frequently appeared to be conversing with his Heavenly Father, and to be overflowing with enthusiasm and love. The Apostles also were full of joy and zeal, and asked him various questions which he forthwith answered. The scriptures must contain much of this last discourse and conversation. He told Peter and John different things to be made known later to the other Apostles, who in their turn were to communicate them to the disciples and holy women, according to the capacity of each for such knowledge. He had a private conversation with John, whom he told that his life would be longer than the lives of the others. He spoke to him also concerning seven Churches, some crowns and angels, and instructed him in the meaning of certain mysterious figures, which signified, to the

[p. 92]

beat of my belief, different epochs. The other Apostles were slightly jealous of this confidential communication being made to John.

Jesus spoke also of the traitor. 'Now he is doing this or that,' he said, and I, in fact, saw Judas doing exactly as he said of him. As Peter was vehemently protesting that he would always remain faithful, our Lord said to him: 'Simon, Simon, behold Satan hath desired to have you that he may sift you as wheat. But I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not: and thou being once converted, confirm thy brethren.'

Again, our Lord said, that whither he was going they could not follow him, when Peter exclaimed: 'Lord, I am ready to go with thee both into prison and to death.' And Jesus replied: 'Amen, amen, I say to thee, Before the cock crow twice, thou shalt deny me thrice.'

Jesus, while making known to his Apostles that trying times were at hand for them, said: 'When I sent you without purse, or scrip, or shoes, did you want anything?' They answered: 'Nothing.' 'But now,' he continued, 'he that hath a purse let him take it, and likewise a scrip, and he that hath not, let him sell his coat and buy a sword. For I say to you, that this that is written must yet be fulfilled in me: AND WITH THE WICKED WAS HE BECKONED. For the things concerning me have an end.' The Apostles only understood his words in a carnal sense, and Peter showed him two swords, which were short and thick, like cleavers. Jesus said: 'It is enough: let us go hence.' Then they sang the thanksgiving hymn, put the table on one side, and went into the vestibule.

There, Jesus found his Mother, Mary of Cleophas, and Magdalen, who earnestly besought him not to go to Mount Olivet, for a report had spread that his enemies were seeking to lay hands on him. But Jesus comforted them in few words, and hastened onward--it being then about nine o'clock. They went down the road by which Peter and John had come to the supper-room, and directed their steps towards Mount Olivet.

I have always seen the Pasch and the institution of

[p. 93]

the Blessed Sacrament take place in the order related above. But my feelings were each time so strongly excited and my emotion so great, that I could not give much attention to all the details, but now I have seen them more distinctly. No words can describe how painful and exhausting is such a sight as that of beholding the hidden recesses of hearts, the love and constancy of our Saviour, and to know at the same time all that is going to befall him. How would it be possible to observe all that is merely external! the heart is overflowing with admiration, gratitude, and love--the blindness of men seems perfectly incomprehensible--and the soul is overwhelmed with sorrow at the thought of the ingratitude of the whole world, and of her own sins 1

The eating of the Paschal Lamb was performed by Jesus rapidly, and in entire conformity with all the legal ordinances. The Pharisees were in the habit of adding some minute and superstitious ceremonies.

Footnotes

^89:1 It was not without surprise that the editor, some years after these things had been related by Sister Emmerich, read, in the Latin edition of the Roman Catechism (Mayence, Muller), in reference to the Sacrament of Confirmation, that, according to the tradition of the holy Pope Fabian, Jesus taught his Apostles in what manner they were to prepare the Holy Chrism, after the institution of the Blessed Sacrament. The Pope says expressly, in the 54th paragraph of his Second Epistle to the Bishops of the East: 'Our predecessors received from the Apostles and delivered to us that our Saviour Jesus Christ, after having made the Last Supper with his Apostles and washed their feet, taught them how to prepare the Holy Chrism.'

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 94] [p. 95]

  

THE PASSION.

'If thou knowest not how to meditate on high and heavenly things, rest on the Passion of Christ, and willingly dwell in his sacred wounds. For, if thou fly devoutly to the wounds and precious stigmas of Jesus, thou shalt feel great comfort in tribulation.' Imit. of Christ, book ii. chap. 1.

  

INTRODUCTION.

ON the evening of the 18th of February, 1823, a friend of Sister Emmerich went up to the bed, where she was lying apparently asleep; and being much struck by the beautiful and mournful expression of her countenance, felt himself inwardly inspired to raise his heart fervently to God, and offer the Passion of Christ to the Eternal Father, in union with the sufferings of all those who have carried their cross after him. While making this short prayer, he chanced to fix his eyes for a moment upon the stigmatised hands of Sister Emmerich. She immediately hid them under the counterpane, starting as if some one had given her a blow. He felt surprised at this, and asked her, 'What has happened to you?' 'Many things,' she answered, in an expressive tone. Whilst he was considering what her meaning could be, she appeared to be asleep. At the end of about a quarter of an hour, she suddenly started up with all the eagerness of a person having a violent struggle with another, stretched out both her arms, clenching her hand, as if to repel an enemy standing on the left side of her bed, and exclaimed in an indignant voice: 'What do you mean by this contract of Magdalum?' Then

[p. 96]

she continued to speak with the warmth of a person who is being questioned during a quarrel--'Yes, it is that accursed spirit--the liar from the beginning--Satan, who is reproaching him about the Magdalum contract, and other things of the same nature, and says that he spent all that money upon himself.' When asked, 'Who has spent money? Who is being spoken to in that way?' she replied, 'Jesus, my adorable Spouse, on Mount Olivet.' Then she again turned to the left, with menacing gestures, and exclaimed, 'What meanest thou, O father of lies, with thy Magdalum contract? Did he not deliver twenty-seven poor prisoners at Thirza, with the money derived from the sale of Magdalum? I saw him, and thou darest to say that he has brought confusion into the whole estate, driven out its inhabitants, and squandered the money for which it was sold? But thy time is come, accursed spirit! thou wilt be chained, and his heel will crush thy head.'

Here she was interrupted by the entrance of another person; her friends thought that she was in delirium, and pitied her. The following morning she owned that the previous night she had imagined herself to be following our Saviour to the Garden of Olives, after the institution of the Blessed Eucharist, but that just at that moment some one having looked at the stigmas on her hands with a degree of veneration, she felt so horrified at this being done in the presence of our Lord, that she hastily hid them, with a feeling of pain. She then related her vision of what took place in the Garden of Olives, and as she continued her narrations the following days, the friend who was listening to her was enabled to connect the different scenes of the Passion together. But as, during Lent, she was also celebrating the combats of our Lord with Satan in the desert, she had to endure in her own person many sufferings and temptations. Hence there were a few pauses in the history of the Passion, which were, however, easily filled up by means of some later communications.

She usually spoke in common German, but when in a state of ecstasy, her language became much purer, and

[p. 97]

her narrations partook at once of child-like simplicity and dignified inspiration. Her friend wrote down all that she had said, directly he returned to his own apartments; for it was seldom that he could so much as even take notes in her presence. The Giver of all good gifts bestowed upon him memory, zeal, and strength to bear much trouble and fatigue, so that he has been enabled to bring this work to a conclusion. His conscience tells him that be has done his best, and he humbly begs the reader, if satisfied with the result of his labours, to bestow upon him the alms of an occasional prayer.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER I.

  

Jesus in the Garden of Olives.

WHEN Jesus left the supper-room with the eleven Apostles, after the institution of the Adorable Sacrament of the Altar, his soul was deeply oppressed and his sorrow on the increase. He led the eleven, by an unfrequented path, to the Valley of Josaphat. As they left the house, I saw the moon, which was not yet quite at the full, rising in front of the mountain.

Our Divine Lord, as he wandered with his Apostles about the valley, told them that here he should one day return to judge the world, but not in a state of poverty and humiliation, as he then was, and that men would tremble with fear, and cry: 'Mountains, fall upon us!' His disciples did not understand him, and thought, by no means for the first time that night, that weakness and exhaustion had affected his brain. He said to them again: 'All you shall be scandalised in me this night. For it is written: I WILL STRIKE THE SHEPHERD, AND THE SHEEP OF THE FLOCK SHALL BE DISPERSED. But after I shall be risen again, I will go before you into Galilee.'

The Apostles were still in some degree animated by

[p. 98]

the spirit of enthusiasm and devotion with which their reception of the Blessed Sacrament and the solemn and affecting words of Jesus had inspired them. They eagerly crowded round him, and expressed their love in a thousand different ways, earnestly protesting that they would never abandon him. But as Jesus continued to talk in the same strain, Peter exclaimed: 'Although all shall be scandalised in thee, I will never be scandalised!' and our Lord answered him: 'Amen, I say to thee, that in this night, before the cock crow, thou wilt deny me thrice.' But Peter still insisted, saying: 'Yea, though I should die with thee, I will not deny thee.' And the others all said the same. They walked onward and stopped, by turns, for the sadness of our Divine Lord continued to increase. The Apostles tried to comfort him by human arguments, assuring him that what he foresaw would not come to pass. They tired themselves in these vain efforts, began to doubt, and were assailed by temptation.

They crossed the brook Cedron, not by the bridge where, a few hours later, Jesus was taken prisoner, but by another, for they had left the direct road. Gethsemani, whither they were going, was about a mile and a half distant from the supper-hall, for it was three quarters of a mile from the supper-hall to the Valley of Josaphat, and about as far from thence to Gethsemani. The place called Gethsemani (where latterly Jesus had several times passed the night with his disciples) was a large garden, surrounded by a hedge, and containing only some fruit trees and flowers, while outside there stood a few deserted unclosed buildings.

The Apostles and several other persons had keys of this garden, which was used sometimes as a pleasure ground, and sometimes as a place of retirement for prayer. Some arbours made of leaves and branches had been raised there, and eight of the Apostles remained in them, and were later joined by others of the disciples. The Garden of Olives was separated by a road from that of Gethsemani, and was open. Surrounded only by an

[p. 99]

earthern wall, and smaller than the Garden of Gethsemani. There were caverns, terraces, and many olive-trees to be seen in this garden, and it was easy to find there a suitable spot for prayer and meditation. It was to the wildest part that Jesus went to pray.

It was about nine o'clock when Jesus reached Gethsemani with his disciples. The moon had risen, and already gave light in the sky, although the earth was still dark. Jesus was most sorrowful, and told his Apostles that danger was at hand. The disciples felt uneasy, and he told eight of those who were following him, to remain in the Garden of Gethsemani whilst he went on to pray. He took with him Peter, James, and John, and going on a little further, entered into the Garden of Olives. No words can describe the sorrow which then oppressed his soul, for the time of trial was near. John asked him how it was that he, who had hitherto always consoled them, could now be so dejected 'My soul is sorrowful even unto death,' was his reply. And he beheld sufferings and temptations surrounding him on all sides, and drawing nearer and nearer, under the forms of frightful figures borne on clouds. Then it was that he said to the three Apostles: 'Stay you here and watch with me. Pray, lest ye enter into temptation.' Jesus went a few steps to the left, down a hill, and concealed himself beneath a rock, in a grotto about six feet deep, while the Apostles remained in, a species of hollow above. The earth sank gradually the further you entered this grotto, and the plants which were hanging from the rock screened its interior like a curtain from persons outside.

When Jesus left his disciples, I saw a number of frightful figures surrounding him in an ever-narrowing circle.

His sorrow and anguish of soul continued to increase, and he was trembling all over when he entered the grotto to pray, like a wayworn traveller hurriedly seeking shelter from a sudden storm, but the awful visions pursued him even there, and became more and more clear and distinct. Alas! this small cavern appeared to contain the awful

[p. 100]

picture of all the sins which had been or were to be committed from the fall of Adam to the end of the world, and of the punishment which they deserved. It was here, on Mount Olivet, that Adam and Eve took refuge when driven out of Paradise to wander homeless on earth, and they had wept and bewailed themselves in this very grotto.

I felt that Jesus, in delivering himself up to Divine Justice in satisfaction for the sins of the world, caused his divinity to return, in some sort, into the bosom of the Holy Trinity, concentrated himself, so to speak, in his pure, loving and innocent humanity, and strong only in his ineffable love, gave it up to anguish and suffering.

He fell on his face, overwhelmed with unspeakable sorrow, and all the sins of the world displayed themselves before him, under countless forms and in all their real deformity. He took them all upon himself, and in his prayer offered his own adorable Person to the justice of his Heavenly Father, in payment for so awful a debt. But Satan, who was enthroned amid all these horrors, and even filled with diabolical joy at the sight of them, let loose his fury against Jesus, and displayed before the eyes of his soul increasing awful visions, at the same time addressing his adorable humanity in words such as these: 'Takest thou even this sin upon thyself? Art thou willing to bear its penalty? Art thou prepared to satisfy for all these sins?'

And now a long ray of light, like a luminous path. in the air, descended from Heaven; it was a procession of angels who came up to Jesus and strengthened and reinvigorated him. The remainder of the grotto was filled with frightful visions of our crimes; Jesus took them all upon himself, but that adorable Heart, which was so filled with the most perfect love for God and man, was flooded with anguish, and overwhelmed beneath the weight of so many abominable crimes. When this huge mass of iniquities, like the waves of a fathomless ocean, had passed over his soul, Satan brought forward innumerable temptations, as he had formerly done in the desert, even daring to adduce various accusations against him. 'And takest

[p. 101]

thou all these things upon thyself,' he exclaimed, 'thou who art not unspotted thyself?' Then he laid to the charge of our Lord, with infernal impudence, a host of imaginary crimes. He reproached him with the faults of his disciples, the scandals which they had caused, and the disturbances which he had occasioned in the world by giving up ancient customs. No Pharisee, however wily and severe, could have surpassed Satan on this occasion; he reproached Jesus with having been the cause of the massacre of the Innocents, as well as of the sufferings of his parents in Egypt, with not having saved John the Baptist from death, with having brought disunion into families, protected men of despicable character, refused to cure various sick persons, injured the inhabitants of Gergesa by permitting men possessed by the devil to overturn their vats, [*1] and demons to make swine cast themselves into the sea; with having deserted his family, and squandered the property of others; in one word Satan, in the hopes of causing Jesus to waver, suggested to him every thought by which he would have tempted at the hour of death an ordinary mortal who might have performed all these actions without a superhuman intention; for it was hidden from him that Jesus was the Son of God, and he tempted him only as the most just of men. Our Divine Saviour permitted his humanity thus to preponderate over his divinity, for he was pleased to endure even those temptations with which holy souls are assailed at the hour of death concerning the merit of their good works. That he might drink the chalice of suffering even to the dregs, he permitted the evil spirit to tempt his sacred humanity, as he would have tempted a man who should wish to attribute to his good works some special value in themselves, over and above what they might have by their union with the merits of our Saviour. There was

[p. 102]

not an action out of which he did not contrive to frame some accusation, and he reproached Jesus, among other things, with having spent the price of the property of Mary Magdalen at Magdalum, which he had received from Lazarus.

Among the sins of the world which Jesus took upon himself, I saw also my own; and a stream, in which I distinctly beheld each of my faults, appeared to flow towards me from out of the temptations with which he was encircled. During this time my eyes were fixed upon my Heavenly Spouse; with him I wept and prayed, and with him I turned towards. the consoling angels. Ah, truly did our ear Lord writhe like a worm beneath the weight of his anguish and sufferings!

Whilst Satan was pouring forth his accusations against Jesus, it was with difficulty that I could restrain my indignation, but when he spoke of the sale of Magdalen's property, I could no longer keep silence, and exclaimed: 'How canst thou reproach him with the sale of this property as with a crime! Did I not myself see our Lord spend the sum which was given him by Lazarus in works of mercy, and deliver twenty-eight debtors imprisoned at Thirza?'

At first Jesus looked calm, as he kneeled down and prayed, but after a time his soul became terrified at the sight of the innumerable crimes of men, and of their ingratitude towards God, and his anguish was so great that he trembled and shuddered as he exclaimed: 'Father, if it is possible, let this chalice pass from me! Father, all things are possible to thee, remove this chalice from me!' But the next moment he added: 'Nevertheless, not my will but thine be done.' His will and that of his Father were one, but now that his love had ordained that he should be left to all the weakness of his human nature, he trembled at the prospect of death.

I saw the cavern in which he was kneeling filled with frightful figures; I saw all the sins, wickedness, vices, and ingratitude of mankind torturing and crushing him to the earth; the horror of death and terror which he felt

[p. 103]

as man at the sight of the expiatory sufferings about to come upon him, surrounded and assailed his Divine Person under the forms of hideous spectres. He fell from side to side, clasping his hands; his body was covered with a cold sweat, and he trembled and shuddered. He then arose, but his knees were shaking and apparently scarcely able to support him; his countenance was pale, and quite altered in appearance, his lips white, and his hair standing on end. It was about half-past ten o'clock when he arose from his knees, and, bathed in a cold sweat, directed his trembling, weak footsteps towards his three Apostles. With difficulty did he ascend the left side of the cavern, and reach a spot where the ground was level, and where they were sleeping, exhausted with fatigue, sorrow and anxiety. He came to them, like a man overwhelmed with bitter sorrow, whom terror urges to seek his friends, but like also to a good shepherd, who, when warned of the approach of danger, hastens to visit his flock, the safety of which is threatened; for he well knew that they also were being tried by suffering and temptation. The terrible visions never left him, even while he was thus seeking his disciples. When he found that they were asleep, he clasped his hands and fell down on his knees beside them, overcome with sorrow and anxiety, and said: 'Simon, sleepest thou?' They awoke, and raised him up, and he, in his desolation of spirit, said to them: 'What? could you not watch one hour with me?' When they looked at him, and saw him pale and exhausted, scarcely able to support himself, bathed in sweat, trembling and shuddering,--when they heard how changed and almost inaudible his voice had become, they did not know what to think, and had he not been still surrounded by a well-known halo of light, they would never have recognised him as Jesus. John said to him: 'Master, what has befallen thee? Must I call the other disciples? Ought we to take to flight?' Jesus answered him: 'Were I to live, teach, and perform miracles for thirty-three years longer, that would not suffice for the accomplishment of what must be fulfilled before this time to-morrow.

[p. 104]

not the eight; I did not bring them hither, because they could not see me thus agonising without being scandalised; they would yield to temptation, forget much of the past, and lose their confidence in me. But you, who have seen the Son of Man transfigured, may also see him under a cloud, and in dereliction of spirit; nevertheless, watch and pray, lest ye fall into temptation, for the spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak.'

By these words he sought at once to encourage them to persevere, and to make known to them the combat which his human nature was sustaining against death, together with the cause of his weakness. In his overwhelming sorrow, he remained with them nearly a quarter of an hour, and spoke to them again. He then returned to the grotto, his mental sufferings being still on the increase, while his disciples, on their part, stretched forth their hands towards him, wept, and embraced each other, asking, 'What can it be? What is happening to him? He appears to be in a state of complete desolation.' After this, they covered their heads, and began to pray, sorrowfully and anxiously.

About an hour and a half had passed since Jesus entered the Garden of Olives. It is true that Scripture tells us he said, 'Could you not watch one hour with me?' but his words should not be taken literally, nor according to our way of counting time. The three Apostles who were with Jesus had prayed at first, but then they had fallen asleep, for temptation had come upon them by reason of their want of trust in God. The other eight, who had remained outside the garden, did not sleep, for our Lord's last words, so expressive of suffering and sadness, had filled their hearts with sinister forebodings, and they wandered about Mount Olivet, trying to find some place of refuge in case of danger.

The town of Jerusalem was very quiet; the Jews were in their houses, engaged in preparing for the feast, but I saw, here and there, some of the friends and disciples of Jesus walking to and fro, with anxious countenances, convening earnestly together, and evidently expecting some

[p. 105]

great event. The Mother of our Lord, Magdalen, Martha, Mary of Cleophas, Mary Salome, and Salome had gone from the supper-hall to the house of Mary, the mother of Mark. Mary was alarmed at the reports which were spreading, and wished to return to the town with her friends, in order to hear something of Jesus. Lazarus, Nicodemus, Joseph of Arimathea, and some relations from Hebron, came to see and endeavour to tranquillise her, for, as they were aware, either from their own knowledge or from what the disciples had told them, of the mournful predictions which Jesus had made in the supper-room, they had made inquiries of some Pharisees of their acquaintance, and had not been able to hear that any conspiracy was on foot for the time against our Lord. Being utterly ignorant of the treason of Judas, they assured Mary that the danger could not yet be very great, and that the enemies of Jesus would not make any attempts upon his person, at least until the festival was over. Mary told them how restless and disturbed in mind Judas had latterly appeared, and how abruptly he had left the supper-room. She felt no doubt of his having gone to betray our Lord, for she had often warned him that he was a son of perdition. The holy women then returned to the house of Mary, the mother of Mark.

When Jesus, unrelieved of all the weight of his sufferings, returned to the grotto, he fell prostrate, with his face on the ground and his arms extended, and prayed to his Eternal Father; but his soul had to sustain a second interior combat, which lasted three-quarters of an hour. Angels came and showed him, in a series of visions, all the sufferings that he was to endure in order to expiate sin; how great was the beauty of man, the image of God, before the fall, and how that beauty was changed and obliterated when sin entered the world. He beheld how all sins originated in that of Adam, the signification and essence of concupiscence, its terrible effects on the powers of the soul, and likewise the signification and essence of all the sufferings entailed by concupiscence. They showed him the satisfaction which he would have to offer to Divine

[p. 106]

[paragraph continues] Justice, and how it would consist of a degree of suffering in his soul and body which would comprehend all the sufferings due to the concupiscence of all mankind, since the debt of the whole human race had to be paid by that humanity which alone was sinless--the humanity of the Son of God. The angels showed him all these things under different forms, and I felt what they were saying, although I heard no voice. No tongue can describe what anguish and what horror overwhelmed the soul of Jesus at the sight of so terrible an expiation--his sufferings were so great, indeed, that a bloody sweat issued forth from all the pores of his sacred body.

Whilst the adorable humanity of Christ was thus crushed to the earth beneath this awful weight of suffering, the angels appeared filled with compassion; there was a pause, and I perceived that they were earnestly desiring to console him, and praying to that effect before the throne of God. For one instant there appeared to be, as it were, a struggle between the mercy and justice of God and that love which was sacrificing itself. I was permitted to see an image of God, not, as before, seated on a throne, but under a luminous form. I beheld the divine nature of the Son in the Person of the Father, and, as it were, withdrawn into his bosom; the Person of the Holy Ghost proceeded from the Father and the Son, it was, so to speak, between them, and yet the whole formed only one God--but these things are indescribable.

All this was more an inward perception than a vision under distinct forms, and it appeared to me that the Divine Will of our Lord withdrew in some sort into the Eternal Father, in order to permit all those sufferings which his human will besought his Father to spare him, to weigh upon his humanity alone. I saw this at the time when the angels, filled with compassion, were desiring to console Jesus, who, in fact, was slightly relieved at that moment. Then all disappeared, and the angels retired from our Lord, whose soul was about to sustain fresh assaults.

When our Redeemer, on Mount Olivet, was pleased to

[p. 107]

experience and overcome that violent repugnance of human nature to suffering and death which constitutes a portion of all sufferings, the tempter was permitted to do to him what he does to all men who desire to sacrifice themselves in a holy cause. In the first portion of the agony, Satan displayed before the eyes of our Lord the enormity of that debt of sin which he was going to pay, and was even bold and malicious enough to seek faults in the very works of our Saviour himself. In the second agony, Jesus beheld, to its fullest extent and in all its bitterness, the expiatory suffering which would be required to satisfy Divine Justice. This was displayed to him by angels; for it belongs not to Satan to show that expiation is possible, and the father of lies and despair never exhibits the works of Divine Mercy before men. Jesus having victoriously resisted all these assaults by his entire and absolute submission to the will of his Heavenly Father, a succession of new and terrifying visions were presented before his eyes, and that feeling of doubt and anxiety which a man on the point of making some great sacrifice always experiences, arose in the soul of our Lord, as he asked himself the tremendous question: 'And what good will result from this sacrifice?' Then a most awful picture of the future was displayed before his eyes and overwhelmed his tender heart with anguish.

When God had created the first Adam, he cast a deep sleep upon him, opened his side, and took one of his ribs, of which he made Eve, his wife and the mother of all the living. Then he brought her to Adam, who exclaimed: 'This now is bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh. . . . Wherefore a man shall leave father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife, and they shall be two in one flesh.' That was the marriage of which it is written: 'This is a great Sacrament, I speak in Christ and in the Church.' Jesus Christ, the second Adam, was pleased also to let sleep come upon him--the sleep of death on the cross, and he was also pleased to let his side be opened, in order that the second Eve, his virgin Spouse, the Church, the mother of all the living, might be formed from it, It was his will

[p. 108]

to give her the blood of redemption, the water of purification, and his spirit--the three which render testimony on earth--and to bestow upon her also the holy Sacraments, in order that she might be pure, holy, and undefiled; he was to be her head, and we were to be her members, under submission to the head, the bone of his bones, and the flesh of his flesh. In taking human nature, that he might suffer death for us, he had also left his Eternal Father, to cleave to his Spouse, the Church, and he became one flesh with her, by feeding her with the Adorable Sacrament of the Altar, in which he unites himself unceasingly with us. He has been pleased to remain on earth with his Church, until we shall all be united together by him within her fold, and he has said: 'The gates of hell shall never prevail against her.' To satisfy his unspeakable love for sinners, our Lord had become man and a brother of these same sinners, that so he might take upon himself the punishment due to all their crimes. He had contemplated with deep sorrow the greatness of this debt and the unspeakable sufferings by which it was to be acquitted. Yet he had most joyfully given himself up to the will of his Heavenly Father as a victim of expiation. Now, however, he beheld all the future sufferings, combats, and wounds of his heavenly Spouse; in one word, he beheld the ingratitude of men.

The soul of Jesus beheld all the future sufferings of his Apostles, disciples, and friends; after which he saw the primitive Church, numbering but few souls in her fold at first, and then in proportion as her numbers increased, disturbed by heresies and schisms breaking out among her children, who repeated the sin of Adam by pride and disobedience. He saw the tepidity, malice, and corruption of an infinite number of Christians, the lies and deceptions of proud teachers, all the sacrileges of wicked priests, the fatal consequences of each sin, and the abomination of desolation in the kingdom of God, in the sanctuary of those ungrateful human beings whom he was about to redeem with his blood at the cost of unspeakable sufferings.

The scandals of all ages, down to the present day and

[p. 109]

oven to the end of the world-every species of error, deception, mad fanaticism, obstinacy, and malice--were displayed before his eyes, and he beheld, as it were floating before him, all the apostates, heresiarchs, and pretended reformers, who deceive men by an appearance of sanctity. The corrupters and the corrupted of all ages outraged and tormented him for not having been crucified after their fashion, or for not having suffered precisely as they settled or imagined he should have done. They vied with each other in tearing the seamless robe of his Church; many ill-treated, insulted, and denied him, and many turned contemptuously away, shaking their heads at him, avoiding his compassionate embrace, and hurrying on to the abyss where they were finally swallowed up. He saw countless numbers of other men who did not dare openly to deny him, but who passed on in disgust at the sight of the wounds of his Church, as the Levite passed by the poor man who had fallen among robbers. Like unto cowardly and faithless children, who desert their mother in the middle of the night, at the sight of the thieves and robbers to whom their negligence or their malice has opened the door, they fled from his wounded Spouse. He beheld all these men, sometimes separated from the True Vine, and taking their rest amid the wild fruit trees, sometimes like lost sheep, left to the mercy of the wolves, led by base hirelings into bad pasturages, and refusing to enter the fold of the Good Shepherd who gave his life for his sheep. They were wandering homeless in the desert in the midst of the sand blown about by the wind, and were obstinately determined not to see his City placed upon a hill, which could not be hidden, the House of his Spouse, his Church built upon a rock, and with which he had promised to remain to the end of ages. They built upon the sand wretched tenements, which they were continually pulling down and rebuilding, but in which there was neither altar nor sacrifice; they had weathercocks on their roofs, and their doctrines changed with the wind, consequently they were for ever in opposition one with the other. They never could come to a mutual understanding,

[p. 110]

and were for ever unsettled, often destroying their own dwellings and hurling the fragments against the Corner-Stone of the Church, which always remained unshaken.

As there was nothing but darkness in the dwellings of these men, many among them, instead of directing their steps towards the Candle placed on the Candlestick in the House of the Spouse of Christ, wandered with closed eyes around the gardens of the Church, sustaining life only by inhaling the sweet odours which were diffused from them far and near, stretching forth their hands towards shadowy idols, and following wandering stars which led them to wells where there was no water. Even when on the very brink of the precipice, they refused to listen to the voice of the Spouse calling them, and, though dying with hunger, derided, insulted, and mocked at those servants and messengers who were sent to invite them to the Nuptial Feast. They obstinately refused to enter the garden, because they feared the thorns of the hedge, although they had neither wheat with which to satisfy their hunger nor wine to quench their thirst, but were simply intoxicated with pride and self-esteem, and being blinded by their own false lights, persisted in asserting that the Church of the Word made flesh was invisible. Jesus beheld them all, he wept over them, and was pleased to suffer for all those who do not see him and who will not carry their crosses after him in his City built upon a hill--his Church founded upon a rock, to which he has given himself in the Holy Eucharist, and against which the gates of Hell will never prevail.

Bearing a prominent place in these mournful visions which were beheld by the soul of Jesus, I saw Satan, who dragged away and strangled a multitude of men redeemed by the blood of Christ and sanctified by the unction of his Sacrament. Our Divine Saviour beheld with bitterest anguish the ingratitude and corruption of the Christians of the first and of all succeeding ages, even to the end of the world, and during the whole of this time the voice of the tempter was incessantly repeating: 'Canst thou resolve to suffer for such ungrateful reprobates?' while the

[p. 111]

various apparitions succeeded each other with intense rapidity, and so violently weighed down and crushed the soul of Jesus, that his sacred humanity was overwhelmed with unspeakable anguish. Jesus--the Anointed of the Lord--the Son of Man--struggled and writhed as he fell on his knees, with clasped hands, as it were annihilated beneath the weight of his suffering. So violent was the struggle which then took place between his human will and his repugnance to suffer so much for such an ungrateful race, that from every pore of his sacred body there burst forth large drops of blood, which fell trickling on to the ground. In his bitter agony, he looked around, as though seeking help, and appeared to take Heaven, earth, and the stars of the firmament to witness of his sufferings.

Jesus, in his anguish of spirit, raised his voice, and gave utterance to several cries of pain. The three Apostles awoke, listened, and were desirous of approaching him, but Peter detained James and John, saying: 'Stay you here; I will join him.' Then I saw Peter hastily run forward and enter the grotto. 'Master,' he exclaimed, 'what has befallen thee?' But at the sight of Jesus, thus bathed in his own blood, and sinking to the ground beneath the weight of mortal fear and anguish, he drew back, and paused for a moment, overcome with terror. Jesus made him no answer, and appeared unconscious of his presence. Peter returned to the other two, and told them that the Lord had not answered him except by groans and sighs. They became more and more sorrowful after this, covered their heads, and sat down to weep and pray.

I then returned to my Heavenly Spouse in his most bitter agony. The frightful visions of the future ingratitude of the men whose debt to Divine Justice he was taking upon himself, continued to become more and more vivid and tremendous. Several times I heard him exclaim: 'O my Father, can I possibly suffer for so ungrateful a race? O my Father, if this chalice may not pass from me, but I must drink it, thy will be done!'

Amid all these apparitions, Satan held a conspicuous

[p. 112]

place, under various forms, which represented different species of sins. Sometimes he appeared under the form of a gigantic black figure, sometimes under those of a tiger, a fox, a wolf, a dragon, or a serpent. Not, however, that he really took any of these shapes, but merely some one of their characteristics, joined with other hideous forms. None of these frightful apparitions entirely resembled any creature, but were symbols of abomination, discord, contradiction, and sin--in one word, were demoniacal to the fullest extent. These diabolical figures urged on, dragged, and tore to pieces, before the very eyes of Jesus, countless numbers of those men for whose redemption he was entering upon the painful way of the Cross. At first I but seldom saw the serpent; soon, however, it made its appearance, with a crown upon its head. This odious reptile was of gigantic size, apparently possessed of unbounded strength, and led forward countless legions of the enemies of Jesus in every age and of every nation. Being armed with all kinds of destructive weapons, they sometimes tore one another in pieces, and then renewed their attacks upon our Saviour with redoubled rage. It was indeed an awful eight; for they heaped upon him the most fearful outrages, cursing, striking, wounding, and tearing him in pieces. Their weapons, swords, and spears flew about in the air, crossing and recrossing continually in all directions, like the flails of threshers in an immense barn; and the rage of each of these fiends seemed exclusively directed against Jesus--that grain of heavenly wheat descended to the earth to die there, in order to feed men eternally with the Bread of Life.

Thus exposed to the fury of these hellish bands, some of which appeared to me wholly composed of blind men, Jesus was as much wounded and bruised as if their blows had been real. I saw him stagger from side to side, sometimes raising himself up, and sometimes falling again, while the serpent, in the midst of the crowds whom it was unceasingly leading forward against Jesus, struck the ground with its tail, and tore to pieces or swallowed all whom it thus knocked to the ground

[p. 113]

It was made known to me that these apparitions were all those persons who in divers ways insult and outrage Jesus, really and truly present in the Holy Sacrament. I recognised among them all those who in any way profane the Blessed Eucharist. I beheld with horror all the outrages thus offered to our Lord, whether by neglect, irreverence, and omission of what was due to him; by open contempt, abuse, and the most awful sacrileges; by the worship of worldly idols; by spiritual darkness and false knowledge; or, finally, by error, incredulity, fanaticism, hatred, and open persecution. Among these men I saw many who were blind, paralysed, deaf, and dumb, and even children;--blind men who would not see the truth; paralytic men who would not advance, according to its directions, on the road leading to eternal life; deaf men who refused to listen to its warnings and threats; dumb men who would never use their voices in its defence; and, finally, children who were led astray by following parents and teachers filled with the love of the world and forgetfulness of God, who were fed on earthly luxuries, drunk with false wisdom, and loathing all that pertained to religion. Among the latter, the sight of whom grieved me especially, because Jesus so loved children, I saw many irreverent, ill-behaved acolytes, who did not honour our Lord in the holy ceremonies in which they took a part. I beheld with terror that many priests, some of whom even fancied themselves full of faith and piety, also outraged Jesus in the Adorable Sacrament. I saw many who believed and taught the doctrine of the Real Presence, but did not sufficiently take it to heart, for they forgot and neglected the palace, throne, and seat of the Living God; that is to say, the church, the altar, the tabernacle, the chalice, the monstrance, the vases and ornaments; in one word, all that is used in his worship, or to adorn his house.

Entire neglect reigned everywhere, all things were left to moulder away in dust and filth, and the worship of God was, if not inwardly profaned, at least outwardly dishonoured. Nor did this arise from real poverty, but from

[p. 114]

indifference, sloth, preoccupation of mind about vain earthly concerns, and often also from egotism and spiritual death; for I saw neglect of this kind in churches the pastors and congregations of which were rich, or at least tolerably well off. I saw many others in which worldly, tasteless, unsuitable ornaments had replaced the magnificent adornments of a more pious age.

I saw that often the poorest of men were better lodged in their cottages than the Master of heaven and earth in his churches. Ah, how deeply did the inhospitality of men grieve Jesus, who had given himself to them to be their Food! Truly, there is no need to be rich in order to receive him who rewards a hundredfold the glass of cold water given to the thirsty; but how shameful is not our conduct when in giving drink to the Divine Lord, who thirsts for our souls, we give him corrupted water in a filthy glass! In consequence of all this neglect, I saw the weak scandalised, the Adorable Sacrament profaned, the churches deserted, and the priests despised. This state of impurity and negligence extended even to the souls of the faithful, who left the tabernacle of their hearts unprepared and uncleansed when Jesus was about to enter them, exactly the same as they left his tabernacle on the altar.

Were I to speak for an entire year, I could never detail all the insults offered to Jesus in the Adorable Sacrament which were made known to me in this way. I saw their authors assault Jesus in bands, and strike him with different arms, corresponding to their various offences. I saw irreverent Christians of all ages, careless or sacrilegious priests, crowds of tepid and unworthy communicants, wicked soldiers profaning the sacred vessels, and servants of the devil making use of the Holy Eucharist in the frightful mysteries of hellish worship. Among these bands I saw a great number of theologians, who had been drawn into heresy by their sins, attacking Jesus in the Holy Sacrament of his Church and snatching out of his Heart, by their seductive words and promises, a number of souls for whom ha had shed his blood. Ah! it was indeed an

[p. 115]

awful sight, for I saw the Church as the body of Christ; and all these bands of men, who were separating themselves from the Church, mangled and tore off whole pieces of his living flesh. Alas! he looked at them in the most touching manner, and lamented that they should thus cause their own eternal loss. He had given his own divine Self to us for our Food in the Holy Sacrament, in order to unite in one body--that of the Church, his Spouse--men who were to an infinite extent divided and separated from each other; and now he beheld himself torn and rent in twain in that very body; for his principal work of love, the Holy Communion, in which men should have been made wholly one, was become, by the malice of false teachers, the subject of separation. I beheld whole nations thus snatched out of his bosom, and deprived of any participation in the treasure of graces left to the Church. Finally, I saw all who were separated from the Church plunged into the depths of infidelity, superstition, heresy, and false worldly philosophy; and they gave vent to their fierce rage by joining together in large bodies to attack the Church, being urged on by the serpent which was disporting itself in the midst of them. Alas! it was as though Jesus himself had been torn in a thousand pieces!

So great was my horror and terror, that my Heavenly Spouse appeared to me, and mercifully placed his hand upon my heart, saying: 'No one has yet seen all these things, and thy heart would burst with sorrow if I did not give thee strength.'

I saw the blood flowing in large drops down the pale face of our Saviour, his hair matted together, and his beard bloody and entangled. After the vision which I have last described, he fled, so to speak, out of the cave, and returned to his disciples. But he tottered as he walked; his appearance was that of a man covered with wounds and bending beneath a heavy burden, and he stumbled at every step.

When he came up to the three Apostles, they were not lying down asleep as they had been the first time, but

[p. 116]

their heads were covered, and they had sunk down on their knees, in an attitude often assumed by the people of that country when in sorrow or desiring to pray. They had fallen asleep, overpowered by grief and fatigue. Jesus, trembling and groaning, drew nigh to them, and they awoke.

But when, by the light of the moon, they saw him standing before them, his face pale and bloody, and his hair in disorder, their weary eyes did not at the first moment recognise him, for he was indescribably changed. He clasped his hands together, upon which they arose and lovingly supported him in their arms, and he told them in sorrowful accents that the next day he should be put to death,--that in one hour's time he should be seized, led before a tribunal, maltreated, outraged, scourged, and finally put to a most cruel death. He besought them to console his Mother, and also Magdalen. They made no reply, for they knew not what to say, so greatly had his appearance and language alarmed them, and they even thought his mind must be wandering. When he desired to return to the grotto, he had not strength to walk. I saw John and James lead him back, and return when he had entered the grotto. It was then about a quarter-past eleven.

During this agony of Jesus, I saw the Blessed Virgin also overwhelmed with sorrow and anguish of soul, in the house of Mary, the mother of Mark. She was with Magdalen and Mary in the garden belonging to the house, and almost prostrate from grief, with her whole body bowed down as she knelt. She fainted several times, for she beheld in spirit different portions of the agony of Jesus. She had sent some messengers to make inquiries concerning him, but her deep anxiety would not suffer her to await their return, and she went with Magdalen and Salome as far as the Valley of Josaphat. She walked along with her head veiled, and her arms frequently stretched forth towards Mount Olivet; for she beheld in spirit Jesus bathed in a bloody sweat, and her gestures were as though she wished with her extended hands to

[p. 117]

wipe the face of her Son. I saw these interior movements of her soul towards Jesus, who thought of her, and turned his eyes in her direction, as if to seek her assistance. I beheld the spiritual communication which they had with each other, under the form of rays passing to and fro between them. Our Divine Lord thought also of Magdalen, was touched by her distress, and therefore recommended his Apostles to console her; for he knew that her love for his adorable Person was greater than that felt for him by any one save his Blessed Mother, and he foresaw that she would suffer much for his sake, and never offend him more.

About this time, the eight Apostles returned to the arbour of Gethsemani, and after talking together for some time, ended by going to sleep. They were wavering, discouraged, and sorely tempted. They had each been seeking for a place of refuge in case of danger, and they anxiously asked one another, 'What shall we do when they have put him to death? We have left all to follow him; we are poor and the offscouring of the world; we gave ourselves up entirely to his service, and now he is so sorrowful and so dejected himself, that he can afford us no consolation.' The other disciples had at first wandered about in various directions, but then, having heard something concerning the awful prophecies which Jesus had made, they had nearly all retired to Bethphage.

I saw Jesus still praying in the grotto, struggling against the repugnance to suffering which belonged to human nature, and abandoning himself wholly to the will of his Eternal Father. Here the abyss opened before him, and he had a vision of the first part of Limbo. He saw Adam and Eve, the patriarchs, prophets, and just men, the parents of his Mother, and John the Baptist, awaiting his arrival in the lower world with such intense longing, that the sight strengthened and gave fresh courage to his loving heart. His death was to open Heaven to these captives,--his death was to deliver them out of that prison in which they were languishing in eager hope! When Jesus had, with deep emotion, looked upon these

[p. 118]

saints of antiquity, angels presented to him all the bands of saints of future ages, who, joining their labours to the merits of his Passion, were, through him, to be united to his Heavenly Father. Most beautiful and consoling was this vision, in which he beheld salvation and sanctification flowing forth in ceaseless streams from the fountain of redemption opened by his death.

The apostles, disciples, virgins, and holy women, the martyrs, confessors, hermits, popes, and bishops, and large bands of religious of both sexes--in one word, the entire army of the blessed--appeared before him. All bore on their heads triumphal crowns, and the flowers of their crowns differed in form, in colour, in odour, and in perfection, according to the difference of the sufferings, labours and victories which had procured them eternal glory. Their whole life, and all their actions, merits, and power, as well as all the glory of their triumph, came solely from their union with the merits of Jesus Christ.

The reciprocal influence exercised by these saints upon each other, and the manner in which they all drank from one sole Fountain--the Adorable Sacrament and the Passion of our Lord-formed a most touching and wonderful spectacle. Nothing about them was devoid of deep meaning,--their works, martyrdom, victories, appearance, and dress,--all, though indescribably varied, was confused together in infinite harmony and unity; and this unity in diversity was produced by the rays of one single Sun, by the Passion of the Lord, of the Word made flesh, in whom was life, the light of men, which shined in darkness, and the darkness did not comprehend it.

The army of the future saints passed before the soul of our Lord, which was thus placed between the desiring patriarchs, and the triumphant band of the future blessed, and these two armies joining together, and completing one another, so to speak, surrounded the loving Heart of our Saviour as with a crown of victory. This most affecting and consoling spectacle bestowed a degree of strength and comfort upon the soul of Jesus. Ah! he so loved his brethren and creatures that, to accomplish the redemption of

[p. 119]

one single soul, he would have accepted with joy all the sufferings to which he was now devoting himself. As these visions referred to the future, they were diffused to a certain height in the air.

But these consoling visions faded away, and the angels displayed before him the scenes of his Passion quite close to the earth, because it was near at hand. I beheld every scene distinctly portrayed, from the kiss of Judas to the last words of Jesus on the cross, and I saw in this single vision all that I see in my meditations on the Passion. The treason of Judas, the flight of the disciples, the insults which were offered our Lord before Annas and Caiphas, Peter's denial, the tribunal of Pilate, Herod's mockery, the scourging and crowning with thorns, the condemnation to death, the carrying of the cross, the linen cloth presented by Veronica, the crucifixion, the insults of the Pharisees, the sorrows of Mary, of Magdalen, and of John, the wound of the lance in his side, after death--in one word, every part of the Passion was shown to him in the minutest detail. He accepted all voluntarily, submitting to everything for the love of man. He saw also and felt the sufferings endured at that moment by his Mother, whose interior union with his agony was so entire that she had fainted in the arms of her two friends.

When the visions of the Passion were concluded, Jesus fell on his face like one at the point of death; the angels disappeared, and the bloody sweat became more copious, so that I saw it had soaked his garment. Entire darkness reigned in the cavern, when I beheld an angel descend to Jesus. This angel was of higher stature than any whom I had before beheld, and his form was also more distinct and more resembling that of a man. He was clothed like a priest in a long floating garment, and bore before him, in his hands, a small vase, in shape resembling the chalice used at the Last Supper. At the top of this chalice, there was a small oval body, about the size of a bean, and which diffused a reddish light. The angel, without touching the earth with his feet, stretched forth his right hand to Jesus, who arose, when he placed the mysterious food in his

[p. 120]

mouth, and gave him to drink from the luminous chalice. Then he disappeared.

Jesus having freely accepted the chalice of his sufferings, and received new strength, remained some minutes longer in the grotto, absorbed in calm meditation, and returning thanks to his Heavenly Father. He was still in deep affliction of spirit, but supernaturally comforted to such a degree as to be able to go to his disciples without tottering as he walked, or bending beneath the weight of his sufferings. His countenance was still pale and altered, but his step was firm and determined. He had wiped his face with a linen cloth, and re-arranged his hair, which hung about his shoulders, matted together and damp with blood.

When Jesus came to his disciples, they were lying, as before, against the wall of the terrace, asleep, and with their heads covered. Our Lord told them that then was not the time for sleep, but that they should arise and pray: 'Behold the, hour is at hand, and the Son of Man shall be betrayed into the hands of sinners,' he said: 'Arise, let us go, behold he is at hand that will betray me. It were better for him, if that man had not been born.' The Apostles arose in much alarm, and looked round with anxiety. When they had somewhat recovered themselves, Peter said warmly: 'Lord, I will call the others, that so we may defend thee.' But Jesus pointed out to them at some distance in the valley, on the other side of the Brook of Cedron, a band of armed men, who were advancing with torches, and he said that one of their number had betrayed him. He spoke calmly, exhorted them to console his Mother, and said: 'Let us go to meet them--I shall deliver myself up without resistance into the hands of my enemies.' He then left the Garden of Olives with the three Apostles, and went to meet the archers on the road which led from that garden to Gethsemani.

When the Blessed Virgin, under the care of Magdalen and Salome, recovered her senses, some disciples, who had seen the soldiers approaching, conducted her back to the house of Mary, the mother of Mark. The archers took a

[p. 121]

shorter road than that which Jesus followed when he left the supper-room.

The grotto in which Jesus had this day prayed was not the one where he usually prayed on Mount Olivet. He commonly went to a cabin at a greater distance off, where, one day, after having cursed the barren fig-tree, he had prayed in great affliction of spirit, with his arms stretched out, and leaning against a rock.

The traces of his body and hands remained impressed on the stone, and were honoured later, but it was not known on what, occasion the miracle had taken place. I have several times seen similar impressions left upon the stone, either by the Prophets of the Old Testament, or by Jesus, Mary, or some of the Apostles, and I have also seen those made by the body of St. Catherine on Mount Sinai. These impressions do not seem deep, but resemble what would be made upon a thick piece of dough, if a person leaned his hand upon it.

Footnotes

^101:1 On the 11th of December 1812, in her visions of the public life of Jesus, she saw our Lord permit the devils whom he had expelled from the men of Gergesa to enter into a herd of swine. She also saw, on this particular occasion, that the possessed men first overturned a large vat filled with some fermented liquid.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER II.

  

Judas and his Band.

JUDAS had not expected that his treason would have produced such fatal results. He had been anxious to obtain the promised reward, and to please the Pharisees by delivering up Jesus into their hands, but he had never calculated on things going so far, or thought that the enemies of his Master would actually bring him to judgment and crucify him; his mind was engrossed with the love of gain alone, and some astute Pharisees and Sadducees, with whom he had established an intercourse, had constantly urged him on to treason by flattering him. He was sick of the fatiguing, wandering, and persecuted life which the Apostles led. For several months past he had continually stolen from the alms which were consigned to his care, and his avarice, grudging the expenses incurred by Magdalen when she poured the precious ointment on the feet of our Lord, incited him to the commission

[p. 122]

of the greatest of crimes. He had always hoped that Jesus would establish a temporal kingdom, and bestow upon him some brilliant and lucrative post in it, but finding himself disappointed, he turned his thoughts to amassing a fortune. He saw that sufferings and persecutions were on the increase for our Lord and his followers, and he sought to make friends with the powerful enemies of our Saviour before the time of danger, for he saw that Jesus did not become a king, whereas the actual dignity and power of the High Priest, and of all who were attached to his service, made a very strong impression upon his mind.

He began to enter by degrees into a close connection with their agents, who were constantly flattering him, and assuring him in strong terms that, in any case, an end would speedily be put to the career of our Divine Lord. He listened more and more eagerly to the criminal suggestions of his corrupt heart, and he had done nothing during the last few days but go backwards and forwards in order to induce the chief priests to come to some agreement. But they were unwilling to act at once, and treated him with contempt. They said that sufficient time would not intervene before the festival day, and that there would be a tumult among the people. The Sanhedrin alone listened to his proposals with some degree of attention. After Judas had sacrilegiously received the Blessed Sacrament, Satan took entire possession of him, and he went off at once to complete his crime. He in the first place sought those persons who had hitherto flattered and entered into agreements with him, and who still received him with pretended friendship. Some others joined the party, and among the number Annas and Caiphas, but the latter treated him with considerable pride and scorn. All these enemies of Christ were extremely undecided and far from feeling any confidence of success, because they mistrusted Judas.

I saw the empire of Hell divided against itself; Satan desired the crime of the Jews, and earnestly longed for the death of Jesus, the Converter of souls, the holy Teacher, the Just Man, who was so abhorrent to him; but at the

[p. 123]

same time he felt an extraordinary interior fear of the death of the innocent Victim, who would not conceal himself from his persecutors. I saw him then, on the one hand, stimulate the hatred and fury of the enemies of Jesus, and on the other, insinuate to some of their number that Judas was a wicked, despicable character, and that the sentence could not be pronounced before the festival, or a sufficient number of witnesses against Jesus be gathered together.

Every one proposed something different, and some questioned Judas, saying: 'Shall we be able to take him? Has he not armed men with him?' And the traitor replied: 'No, he is alone with eleven disciples; he is greatly depressed, and the eleven are timid men.' He told them that now or never was the time to get possession of the person of Jesus, that later he might no longer have it in his power to give our Lord up into their hands, and that perhaps he should never return to him again, because for several days past it had been very clear that the other disciples and Jesus himself suspected and would certainly kill him if he returned to them. He told them likewise that if they did not at once seize the person of Jesus, he would make his escape, and return with an army of his partisans, to have himself proclaimed king. These threats of Judas produced some effect, his proposals were acceded to, and he received the price of his treason-thirty pieces of silver. These pieces were oblong, with holes in their sides, strung together by means of rings in a kind of chain, and bearing certain impressions.

Judas could not help being conscious that they regarded him with contempt and distrust, for their language and gestures betrayed their feelings, and pride suggested to him to give back the money as an offering for the Temple, in order to make them suppose his intentions to have been just and disinterested. But they rejected his proposal, because the price of blood could not be offered in the Temple. Judas saw how much they despised him, and his rage was excessive. He had not expected to reap the bitter fruits of his treason even before it was accomplished, but he had gone so far with these men that he

[p. 124]

was in their power, and escape was no longer possible. They watched him carefully, and would not let him leave their presence, until he had shown them exactly what steps were to be taken in order to secure the person of Jesus. Three Pharisees accompanied him when he went down into a room where the soldiers of the Temple (some only of whom were Jews, and the rest of various nations) were assembled. When everything was settled, and the necessary number of soldiers gathered together, Judas hastened first to the supper-room, accompanied by a servant of the Pharisees, for the purpose of ascertaining whether Jesus had left, as they would have seized his person there without difficulty, if once they had secured the doors. He agreed to send them a messenger with the required information.

A short time before when Judas had received the price of his treason, a Pharisee had gone out, and sent seven slaves to fetch wood with which to prepare the Cross for our Saviour, in case he should be judged, because the next day there would not be sufficient time on account of the commencement of the Paschal festivity. They procured this wood from a spot about three-quarters of a mile distant, near a high wall, where there was a great quantity of other wood belonging to the Temple, and dragged it to a square situated behind the tribunal of Caiphas. The principal piece of the Cross came from a tree formerly growing in the Valley of Josaphat, near the torrent of Cedron, and which, having fallen across the stream, had been used as a sort of bridge. When Nehemias hid the sacred fire and the holy vessels in the pool of Bethsaida, it had been thrown over the spot, together with other pieces of wood,--then later taken away, and left on one side. The Cross was prepared in a very peculiar manner, either with the object of deriding the royalty of Jesus, or from what men might term chance. It was composed of five pieces of wood, exclusive of the inscription. I saw many other things concerning the Cross, and the meaning of different circumstances was also made known to me, but I have forgotten all that.

[p. 125]

Judas returned, and said that Jesus was no longer in the supper-room, but that he must certainly be on Mount Olivet, in the spot where he was accustomed to pray. He requested that only a small number of men might be sent with him, lest the disciples who were on the watch should perceive anything and raise a sedition. Three hundred men were to be stationed at the gates and in the streets of Ophel, a part of the town situated to the south of the Temple, and along the valley of Millo as far as the house of Annas, on the top of Mount Sion, in order to be ready to send reinforcements if necessary, for, he said, all the people of the lower class of Ophel were partisans of Jesus. The traitor likewise bade them be careful, lest he should escape them--since he, by mysterious means, had so often hidden himself in the mountain, and made himself suddenly invisible to those around. He recommended them, besides, to fasten him with a chain, and make use of certain magical forms to prevent his breaking it. The Jews listened to all these pieces of advice with scornful indifference, and replied, 'If we once have him in our hands, we will take care not to let him go.'

Judas next began to make his arrangements with those who were to accompany him. He wished to enter the garden before them, and embrace and salute Jesus as if he were returning to him as his friend and disciple, and then for the soldiers to run forward and seize the person of Jesus. He was anxious that it should be thought they had come there by chance, that so, when they had made their appearance, he might run away like the other disciples and be no more heard of. He likewise thought that, perhaps, a tumult would ensue, that the Apostles might defend themselves, and Jesus pass through the midst of his enemies, as he had so often done before. He dwelt upon these thoughts especially, when his pride was hurt by the disdainful manner of the Jews in his regard; but he did not repent, for he had wholly given himself up to Satan. It was his desire also that the soldiers following him should not carry chains and cords, and his accomplices pretended to accede to all his

[p. 126]

wishes, although in reality they acted with him as with a traitor who was not to be trusted, but to be cast off as Soon as he had done what was wanted. The soldiers received orders to keep close to Judas, watch him carefully, and not let him escape until Jesus was seized, for he had received his reward, and it was feared that he might ran off with the money, and Jesus not be taken after all, or another be taken in his place. The band of men chosen to accompany Judas was composed of twenty soldiers, selected from the temple guard and from others of the military who were under the orders of Annas and Caiphas. They were dressed very much like the Roman soldiers, had morions like them, and wore hanging straps round their thighs, but their beards were long, whereas the Roman soldiers at Jerusalem had whiskers only, and shaved their chins and upper lips. They all had swords, some of them being also armed with spears, and they carried sticks with lanterns and torches; but when they set off they only lighted one. It had at first been intended that Judas should be accompanied by a more numerous escort, but he drew their attention to the fact that so large a number of men would be too easily seen, because Mount Olivet commanded a view of the whole valley. Most of the soldiers remained, therefore, at Ophel, and sentinels were stationed on all sides to put down any attempt which might be made to release Jesus. Judas set off with the twenty soldiers, but he was followed at some distance by four archers, who were only common bailiff, carrying cords and chains, and after them came the six agents with whom Judas had been in communication for some time. One of these was a priest and a confidant of Annas, a second was devoted to Caiphas, the third and fourth were Pharisees, and the other two Sadduceans and Herodians. These six men were courtiers of Annas and Caiphas, acting in the capacity of spies, and most bitter enemies of Jesus.

The soldiers remained on friendly terms with Judas until they reached the spot where the road divides the Garden of Olives from the Garden of Gethsemani, but

[p. 127]

there they refused to allow him to advance alone, and entirely changed their manner, treating him with much insolence and harshness.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER III.

  

Jesus is arrested.

JESUS was standing with his three Apostles on the road between Gethsemani, and the Garden of Olives, when Judas and the band who accompanied him made their appearance. A warm dispute arose between Judas and the soldiers, because he wished to approach first and speak to Jesus quietly as if nothing was the matter, and then for them to come up and seize our Saviour, thus letting him suppose that he had no connection with the affair. But the men answered rudely, 'Not so, friend, thou shalt not escape from our hands until we have the Galilean safely bound,' and seeing the eight Apostles who hastened to rejoin Jesus when they heard the dispute which was going on, they (notwithstanding the opposition of Judas) called up four archers, whom they had left at a little distance, to assist. When by the light of the moon Jesus and the three Apostles first saw the band of armed men, Peter wished to repel them by force of arms, and said: 'Lord, the other eight are close at hand, let us attack the archers,' but Jesus bade him hold his peace, and then turned and walked back a few steps. At this moment four disciples came out of the garden, and asked what was taking place. Judas was about to reply, but the soldiers interrupted, and would not let him speak. These four disciples were James the Less, Philip, Thomas, and Nathaniel; the last named, who was a son of the aged Simeon, had with a few others joined the eight Apostles at Gethsemani, being perhaps sent by the friends of Jesus to know what was going on, or possibly simply incited by curiosity and anxiety. The other disciples were wandering to and fro, on the look out, and ready to fly at a moment's notice.

[p. 128]

Jesus walked up to the soldiers and said in a firm and clear voice, 'Whom seek ye?' The leaders answered, 'Jesus of Nazareth.' Jesus said to them, 'I am he.' Scarcely had he pronounced these words than they all fell to the ground as if struck with apoplexy. Judas, who stood by them, was much alarmed, and as he appeared desirous of approaching, Jesus held out his hand and said: 'Friend, whereto art thou come?' Judas stammered forth something about business which had brought him. Jesus answered in few words, the sense of which was: 'It were better for thee that thou hadst never been born;' however, I cannot remember the words exactly. In the mean time, the soldiers had risen, and again approached Jesus, but they waited for the sign of the kiss, with which Judas had promised to salute his Master that they might recognise him. Peter and the other disciples surrounded Judas, and reviled him in unmeasured terms, calling him thief and traitor; he tried to mollify their wrath by all kinds of lies, but his efforts were vain, for the soldiers came up and offered to defend him, which proceeding manifested the truth at once.

Jesus again asked, 'Whom seek ye?' They replied: 'Jesus of Nazareth.' Jesus made answer, 'I have told you that I am he,' 'if therefore you seek me, let these go their way.' At these words the soldiers fell for the second time to the ground, in convulsions similar to those of epilepsy, and the Apostles again surrounded Judas and expressed their indignation at his shameful treachery. Jesus said to the soldiers, 'Arise,' and they arose, but at first quite speechless from terror. They then told Judas to give them the signal agreed upon instantly, as their orders were to seize upon no one but him whom Judas kissed. Judas therefore approached Jesus, and gave him a kiss, saying, 'Hail Rabbi.' Jesus replied, 'What, Judas, dost thou betray the Son of Man with a kiss?' The soldiers immediately surrounded Jesus, and the archers laid hands upon him. Judas wished to fly, but the Apostles would not allow it; they rushed at the soldiers and cried out, 'Master, shall we strike with the sword?'

[p. 129]

[paragraph continues] Peter, who was more impetuous than the rest, seized the sword, and struck Malchus, the servant of the high priest, who wished to drive away the Apostles, and cut off his right ear; Malchus fell to the ground, and a great tumult ensued.

The archers had seized upon Jesus, and wished to bind him; while Malchus and the rest of the soldiers stood around. When Peter struck the former, the rest were occupied in repulsing those among the disciples who approached too near, and in pursuing those who ran away. Four disciples made their appearance in the distance, and looked fearfully at the scene before them; but the soldiers were still too much alarmed at their late fall to trouble themselves much about them, and besides they did not wish to leave our Saviour without a certain number of men to guard him. Judas fled as soon as he had given the traitorous kiss, but was met by some of the disciples, who overwhelmed him with reproaches. Six Pharisees, however, came to his rescue, and he escaped whilst the archers were busily occupied in pinioning Jesus.

When Peter struck Malchus, Jesus said to him, 'Put up again thy sword into its place; for all that take the sword shall perish with the sword. Thinkest thou that I cannot ask my Father, and he will give me presently more than twelve legions of angels? How then shall the Scriptures be fulfilled, that so it must be done?' Then he said, 'Let me cure this man;' and approaching Malchus, he touched his ear, prayed, and it was healed. The soldiers who were standing near, as well as the archers and the six Pharisees, far from being moved by this miracle, continued to insult our Lord, and said to the bystanders, 'It is a trick of the devil, the powers of witchcraft made the ear appear to be cut off, and now the s a power gives it the appearance of being healed.'

Then Jesus again addressed them, 'You are come out as it were to a robber, with swords and clubs, to apprehend me. I sat daily with you teaching in the Temple, and you laid not hands upon me, but this is your hour and the power of darkness.' The Pharisees ordered him to be bound still more

[p. 130]

strongly, and made answer in a contemptuous tone, 'Ah! thou couldst not overthrow us by thy witchcraft.' Jesus replied, but I do not remember his words, and all the disciples fled. The four archers and the six Pharisees did not fall to the ground at the words of Jesus, because, as was afterwards revealed to me, they as well as Judas, who likewise did not fall, were entirely in the power of 'Satan, whereas all those who fell and rose again were afterwards converted, and became Christians; they had only surrounded Jesus, and not laid hands upon him. Malchus was instantly converted by the cure wrought upon him, and during the time of the Passion his employment was to carry messages backwards and forwards to Mary and the other friends of our Lord.

The archers, who now proceeded to pinion Jesus with the greatest brutality, were pagans of the lowest extraction, short, stout, and active, with sandy complexions, resembling those of Egyptian slaves, and bare legs, arms, and neck.

They tied his hands as tightly as possible with hard new cords, fastening the right-hand wrist under the left elbow, and the left-hand wrist under the right elbow. They encircled his waist with a species of belt studded with iron points, and bound his hands to it with osier bands, while on his neck they put a collar covered with iron points, and to this collar were appended two leathern straps, which were crossed over his chest like a stole and fastened to the belt. They then fastened four ropes to different parts of the belt, and by means of these ropes dragged our Blessed Lord from side to side in the most cruel manner. The ropes were new; I think they were purchased when the Pharisees first determined to arrest Jesus. The Pharisees lighted fresh torches, and the procession started. Ten soldiers walked in front, the archers who held the ropes and dragged Jesus along, followed, and the Pharisees and ten other soldiers brought up the rear. The disciples wandered about at a distance, and wept and moaned as if beside themselves from grief. John alone followed, and walked at no great distance from the

[p. 131]

soldiers, until the Pharisees, seeing him, ordered the guards to arrest him. They endeavoured to obey, but he ran away, leaving in their hands a cloth with which he was covered, and of which they had taken hold when they endeavoured to seize him. He had slipped off his coat, that he might escape more easily from the hands of his enemies, and kept nothing on but a short under garment without sleeves, and the long band which the Jews usually wore, and which was wrapped round his neck, head, and arms. The archers behaved in the most cruel manner to Jesus as they led him along; this they did to curry favour with the six Pharisees, who they well knew perfectly hated and detested our Lord. They led him along the roughest road they could select, over the sharpest stones, and through the thickest mire; they pulled the cords as tightly as possible; they struck him with knotted cords, as a butcher would strike the beast he is about to slaughter; and they accompanied this cruel treatment with such ignoble and indecent insults that I cannot recount them. The feet of Jesus were bare; he wore, besides the ordinary dress, a seamless woollen garment, and a cloak which was thrown over all. I have forgotten to state that when Jesus was arrested, it was done without any order being presented or legal ceremony taking place; he was treated as a person without the pale of the law.

The procession proceeded at a good pace; when they left the road which runs between the Garden of Olives a, that of Gethsemani, they turned to the right, and soon reached a bridge which was thrown over the Torrent of Cedron. When Jesus went to the Garden of Olives with the Apostles, he did not cross this bridge, but went by a private path which ran through the Valley of Josaphat, and led to another bridge more to the south. The bridge over which the soldiers led Jesus was long, being thrown over not only the torrent, which was very large in this part, but likewise over the valley, which extends a considerable distance to the right and to the left, and is much lower than the bed of the river. I saw our Lord fall twice before he reached the bridge, and these falls were caused

[p. 132]

entirely by the barbarous manner in which the soldiers dragged him; but when they were half over the bridge they gave full vent to their brutal inclinations, and struck Jesus with such violence that they threw him off the bridge into the water, and scornfully recommended him to quench his thirst there. If God had not preserved him, he must have been killed by this fall; he fell first on his knee, and then on his face, but saved himself a little by stretching out his hands, which, although so tightly bound before, were loosened, I know not whether by miracle, or whether the soldiers had out the cords before they threw him into the water. The marks of his feet, his elbows, and. his fingers were miraculously impressed on the rock on which he fell, and these impressions were afterwards shown for the veneration of Christians. These stones were less hard than the unbelieving hearts of the wicked men who surrounded Jesus, and bore witness at this terrible moment to the Divine Power which had touched them.

I had not seen Jesus take anything to quench the thirst which had consumed him ever since his agony in the garden, but he drank when he fell into the Cedron, and I heard him repeat these words from the prophetic Psalm, 'In his thirst he will drink water from the torrent' (Psalm cviii.).

The archers still held the ends of the ropes with which Jesus was bound, but it would have been difficult to draw him out of the water on that side, on account of a wall which was built on the shore; they turned back and dragged him quite through the Cedron to the shore, and then made him cross the bridge a second time, accompanying their every action with insults, blasphemies, and blows. His long woollen garment, which was quite soaked through, adhered to his legs, impeded every movement, and rendered it almost impossible for him to walk, and when he reached the end of the bridge he fell quite down. They pulled him up again in the most cruel manner, struck him with cords, and fastened the ends of his wet garment to the belt, abusing him at the same time in the most cowardly manner. It was not quite midnight when I saw the four

[p. 133]

archers inhumanly dragging Jesus over a narrow path, which was choked up with stones, fragments of rock, thistles, and thorns, on the opposite shore of the Cedron. The six brutal Pharisees walked as close to our Lord as they could, struck him constantly with thick pointed sticks, and seeing that his bare and bleeding feet were torn by the stones and briars, exclaimed scornfully: 'His precursor, John the Baptist, has certainly not prepared a good path for him here;' or, 'The words of Malachy, "Behold, I send my angel before thy face, to prepare the way before thee," do not exactly apply now.' Every jest uttered by these men incited the archers to greater cruelty.

The enemies of Jesus remarked that several persons made their appearance in the distance; they were only disciples who had assembled when they heard that their Master was arrested, and who were anxious to discover what the end would be; but the sight of them rendered the Pharisees uneasy, lest any attempt should be made to rescue Jesus, and they therefore sent for a reinforcement of soldiers. At a very short distance from an entrance opposite to the south side of the Temple, which leads through a little village called Ophel. to Mount Sion, where the residences of Annas and Caiphas were situated, I saw a band of about fifty soldiers, who carried torches, and appeared ready for anything; the demeanour of these men was outrageous, and they gave loud shouts, both to announce their arrival, and to congratulate their comrades upon the success of the expedition. This caused a slight confusion among the soldiers who were leading Jesus, and Malchus and a few others took advantage of it to depart, and fly towards Mount Olivet.

When the fresh band of soldiers left Ophel, I saw those disciples who had gathered together disperse; some went one way, and some another. The Blessed Virgin and about nine of the holy women, being filled with anxiety, directed their stops towards the Valley of Josaphat, accompanied by Lazarus, John the son of Mark, the son of Veronica, and the son of Simon. The last-named was at Gethsemani with Nathaniel and the eight Apostles, and had fled when

[p. 134]

the soldiers appeared. He was giving the Blessed Virgin the account of all that had been done, when the fresh band of soldiers joined those who were leading Jesus, and she then heard their tumultuous vociferations, and saw the light of the torches they carried. This sight quite overcame her; she became insensible, and John took her into the house of Mary, the mother of Mark.

The fifty soldiers who were sent to join those who had taken Jesus, were a detachment from a company of three hundred men posted to guard the gates and environs of Ophel; for the traitor Judas had reminded the High Priests that the inhabitants of Ophel (who were principally of the labouring class, and whose chief employment was to bring water and wood to the Temple) were the most attached partisans of Jesus, and might perhaps make some attempts to rescue him. The traitor was aware that Jesus had both consoled, instructed, assisted, and cured the diseases of many of these poor workmen, and that Ophel was the place where he halted during his journey from Bethania to Hebron, when John the Baptist had just been executed. Judas also knew that Jesus had cured many of the masons who were injured by the fall of the Tower of Siloe. The greatest part of the inhabitants of Ophel were converted after the death of our Lord, and joined the first Christian community that was formed after Pentecost, and when the Christians separated from the Jews and erected new dwellings, they placed their huts and tents in the valley which is situated between Mount Olivet and Ophel, and there St. Stephen lived. Ophel was on a hill to the south of the Temple, surrounded by walls, and its inhabitants were very poor. I think it was smaller than Dulmer. [*1]

The slumbers of the good inhabitants of Ophel were disturbed by the noise of the soldiers; they came out of their houses and ran to the entrance of the village to ask the cause of the uproar; but the soldiers received them roughly, ordered them to return home, and in reply to

[p. 135]

their numerous questions, said, 'We have just arrested Jesus, your false prophet--he who has deceived you so grossly; the High Priests are about to judge him, and he will be crucified.' Cries and lamentations arose on all sides; the poor women and children ran backwards and forwards, weeping and wringing their hands; and calling to mind all the benefits they had received from our Lord, they cast themselves on their knees to implore the protection of Heaven. But the soldiers pushed them on one side, struck them, obliged them to return to their houses, and exclaimed, 'What farther proof is required? Does not the conduct of these persons show plainly that the Galilaean incites rebellion?'

They were, however, a little cautious in their expressions and demeanour for fear of causing an insurrection in Ophel, and therefore only endeavoured to drive the inhabitants away from those parts of the village which Jesus was obliged to cross.

When the cruel soldiers who led our Lord were near the gates of Ophel he again fell, and appeared unable to proceed a step farther, upon which one among them, being moved to compassion, said to another, 'You see the poor man is perfectly exhausted, he cannot support himself with the weight of his chains; if we wish to get him to the High Priest alive we must loosen the cords with which his hands are bound, that he may be able to save himself a little when he falls.' The band stopped for a moment, the fetters were loosened, and another kind-hearted soldier brought some water to Jesus from a neighbouring fountain. Jesus thanked him, and spoke of the 'fountains of living water,' of which those who believed in him should drink; but his words enraged the Pharisees still more, and they overwhelmed him with insults and contumelious language. I saw the heart of the soldier who had caused Jesus to be unbound, as also that of the one who brought him water, suddenly illuminated by grace; they were both converted before the death of Jesus, and immediately joined his disciples.

The procession started again, and reached the gate of

[p. 136]

[paragraph continues] Ophel. Here Jesus was again saluted by the cries of grief and sympathy of those who owed him so much gratitude, and the soldiers had considerable difficulty in keeping back the men and women who crowded round from all parts. They clasped their hands, fell on their knees, lamented, and exclaimed, 'Release this man unto us, release him! Who will assist, who will console us, who will cure our diseases? Release him unto us!' It was indeed heartrending to look upon Jesus; his face was white, disfigured, and wounded, his hair dishevelled, his dress wet and soiled, and his savage and drunken guards were dragging him about and striking him with sticks like a poor dumb animal led to the slaughter. Thus was he conducted through the midst of the afflicted inhabitants of Ophel, and the paralytic whom he had cured, the dumb to whom he had restored speech, and the blind whose eyes he had opened, united, but in vain, in offering supplications for his release.

Many persons from among the lowest and most degraded classes had been sent by Annas, Caiphas, and the other enemies of Jesus, to join the procession, and assist the soldiers both in ill-treating Jesus, and in driving away the inhabitants of Ophel. The village of Ophel was seated upon a hill, and I saw a great deal of timber placed there ready for building. The procession had to proceed down a hill, and then pass through a door made in the wall. On one side of this door stood a large building erected originally by Solomon, and on the other the pool of Bethsaida. After passing this, they followed a westerly direction down a steep street called Millo, at the end of which a turn to the south brought them to the house of Annas. The guards never ceased their cruel treatment of our Divine Saviour, and excused such conduct by saying that the crowds who gathered together in front of the procession compelled them to severity. Jesus fell seven times between Mount Olivet and the house of Annas.

The inhabitants of Ophel were still in a state of consternation and grief, when the sight of the Blessed Virgin, who passed through the village accompanied by the holy

[p. 137]

women and some other friends on her way from the Valley of Cedron to the house of Mary the mother of Mark, excited them still more, and they made the place reecho with sobs and lamentations, while they surrounded and almost carried her in their arms. Mary was speechless from grief, and did not open her lips after she reached the house of Mary the mother of Mark, until the arrival of John, who related all he had seen since Jesus left the supper-room; and a little later she was taken to the house of Martha, which was near that of Lazarus. Peter and John, who had followed Jesus at a distance, went in haste to some servants of the High Priest with whom the latter was acquainted, in order to endeavour by their means to obtain admittance into the tribunal where their Master was to be tried. These servants acted as messengers, and had just been ordered to go to the houses of the ancients, and other members of the Council, to summon them to attend the meeting which was convoked. As they were anxious to oblige the Apostles, but foresaw much difficulty in obtaining their admittance into the tribunal, they gave them cloaks similar to those they themselves wore, and made them assist in carrying messages to the members in order that afterwards they might enter the tribunal of Caiphas, and mingle, without being recognised, among the soldiers and false witnesses, as all other persons were to be expelled. As Nicodemus, Joseph of Arimathea, and other well-intentioned persons were members of this Council, the Apostles undertook to let them know what was going to be done in the Council, thus securing the presence of those friends of Jesus whom the Pharisees had purposely omitted to invite. In the mean time Judas wandered up and down the steep and wild precipices at the south of Jerusalem, despair marked on his every feature, and the devil pursuing him to and fro, filling his imagination with still darker visions, and not allowing him a moment's respite.

Footnotes

^134:1 Dulmen is a small town in Westphalia, where Sister Emmerich lived at this time.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 138]

  

CHAPTER IV.

  

Means employed by the enemies of Jesus for carrying out their designs against him.

No sooner was Jesus arrested than Annas and Caiphas were informed, and instantly began to arrange their plans with regard to the course to be pursued. Confusion speedily reigned everywhere--the rooms were lighted up in haste, guards placed at the entrances, and messengers dispatched to different parts of the town to convoke the members of the Council, the Scribes, and all who were to take a part in the trial. Many among them had, however, assembled at the house of Caiphas as soon as the treacherous compact with Judas was completed, and had remained there to await the course of events. The different classes of ancients were likewise assembled, and as the Pharisees, Sadducces, and Herodians were congregated in Jerusalem from all parts of the country for the celebration of the festival, and had long been concerting measures with the Council for the arrest of our Lord, the High Priests now sent for those whom they knew to be the most bitterly opposed to Jesus, and desired them to assemble the witnesses, gather together every possible proof, and bring all before the Council. The proud Sadducces of Nazareth, of Capharnaum, of Thirza, of Gabara, of Jotapata, and of Silo, whom Jesus had so often reproved before the people, were actually dying for revenge. They hastened to all the inns to seek out those persons whom they knew to be enemies of our Lord, and offered them bribes in order to secure their appearance. But, with the exception of a few ridiculous calumnies, which were certain to be disproved as soon as investigated, nothing tangible could be brought forward against Jesus, excepting, indeed, those foolish accusations which he had so often refuted in the synagogue.

The enemies of Jesus hastened, however, to the tribunal of Caiphas, escorted by the Scribes and Pharisees of Jerusalem, and accompanied by many of those merchants whom our Lord drove out of the Temple when

[p. 139]

they were holding market there; m also by the proud doctors whom he had silenced before all the people, and even by some who could not forgive the humiliation of being convicted of error when he disputed with them in the Temple at the age of twelve. There was likewise a large body of impenitent sinners whom he had refused to cure, relapsed sinners whose diseases had returned, worldly young men whom he would not receive as disciples, avaricious persons whom he had enraged by causing the money which they had been in hopes of possessing to be distributed in alms. Others there were whose friends he had cured, and who had thus been disappointed in their expectation of inheriting property; debauchees whose victims he had converted; and many despicable characters who made their fortunes by flattering and fostering the vices of the great.

All these emissaries of Satan were overflowing with rage against everything holy, and consequently with an indescribable hatred of the Holy of the Holies. They were farther incited by the enemies of our Lord, and therefore assembled in crowds round the palace of Caiphas, to bring forward all their false accusations and to endeavour to cover with infamy that spotless Lamb, who took upon himself the sins of the world, and accepted the burden in order to reconcile man with God.

Whilst all these wicked beings were busily consulting as to what was best to be done, anguish and anxiety filled the hearts of the friends of Jesus, for they were ignorant of the mystery which was about to be accomplished, and they wandered about, sighing, and listening to every different opinion. Each word they uttered gave rise to feelings of suspicion on the part of those whom they addressed, and if they were silent, their silence was set down as wrong. Many well-meaning but weak and undecided characters yielded to temptation, were scandalised, and lost their faith; indeed,. the number of those who persevered was very small indeed. Things were the same then as they oftentimes are now, persons were willing to serve God if they met with no opposition from their fellow

[p. 140]

creatures, but were ashamed of the Cross if held in contempt by others. The hearts of some were, however, touched by the patience displayed by our Lord in the midst of his sufferings, and they walked away silent and sad.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER V.

  

A Glance at Jerusalem.

THE customary prayers and preparations for the celebration of the festival being completed, the greatest part of the inhabitants of the densely-populated city of Jerusalem, as also the strangers congregated there, were plunged in sleep after the fatigues of the day, when, all at once, the arrest of Jesus was announced, and every one was aroused, both his friends and foes, and numbers immediately responded to the summons of the High Priest, and left their dwellings to assemble at his court. In some parts the light of the moon enabled them to grope their way in safety along the dark and gloomy streets, but in other parts they were obliged to make use of torches. Very few of the houses were built with their windows looking on the street, and, generally speaking, their doors were in inner courts, which gave the streets a still more gloomy appearance than is usual. at this hour. The steps of all were directed towards Sion, and an attentive listener might have heard persons stop at the doors of their friends, and knock, in order to awaken them--then hurry on, then again stop to question others, and, finally, set off anew in haste towards Sion. Newsmongers and servants were hurrying forward to ascertain what was going on, in order that they might return and give the account to those who remained at home; and the bolting and barricading of doors might be plainly heard, as many persons were much alarmed and feared an insurrection, while a thousand different propositions were made and opinions given, such as the following:--'Lazarus and his sisters will soon know who is this man in whom they have placed such firm reliance.

[p. 141]

[paragraph continues] Joanna, Chusa, Susannah, Mary the mother of Mark, and Salome will repent, but too late, the imprudence of their conduct; Seraphia, the wife of Sirach, win be compelled to make an apology to her husband now, for he has so often reproached her with her partiality for the Galilaean. The partisans of this fanatical man, this inciter of rebellion, pretended to be filled with compassion for all who looked upon things in a different light from themselves, and now they will not know where to hide their heads. He will find no one now to cast garments and strew olive-branches at his feet. Those hypocrites who pretended to be so much better than other persons will receive their deserts, for they are all implicated with the Galilaean. It is a much more serious business an was at first thought. I should like to know how Nicodemus and Joseph of Arimathea will get out of it; the High Priests have mistrusted them for some time; they made common cause with Lazarus: but they are extremely cunning. All will now, however, be brought to light.'

Speeches such as these were uttered by persons who were exasperated, not only against the disciples of Jesus, but likewise with the holy women who had supplied his temporal wants, and had publicly and fearlessly expressed their veneration for his doctrines, and their belief in his Divine mission.

But although many persons spoke of Jesus and his followers in this contemptuous manner, yet there were others who held very different opinions, and of these some were frightened, and others, being overcome with sorrow, sought friends to whom they might unburden their hearts, and before whom they could, without fear, give vent to their feelings; but the number of those sufficiently daring openly to avow their admiration for Jesus was but small.

Nevertheless, it was in parts only of Jerusalem that these disturbances took place--in those parts where the messengers had been sent by the High Priests and the Pharisees, to convoke the members of the Council and to call together the witnesses. It appeared to me that I saw feelings of hatred and fury burst forth in different parts

[p. 142]

of the city, under the form of flames, which flames traversed the streets, united with others which they met, and proceeded in the direction of Sion, increasing every moment, and at last came to a stop beneath the tribunal of Caiphas, where they remained, forming together a perfect whirlwind of fire.

The Roman soldiers took no part in what was going on; they did not understand the excited feelings of the people, but their sentinels were doubled, their cohorts drawn up, and they kept a strict look out; this, indeed, was customary at the time of the Paschal solemnity, on account of the vast number of strangers who were then assembled together. The Pharisees endeavoured to avoid the neighbourhood of the sentinels, for fear of being questioned by them, and of contracting defilement by answering their questions. The High Priests had sent a message to Pilate intimating their reasons for stationing soldiers round Ophel and Sion; but he mistrusted their intentions, as much ill-feeling existed between the Romans and the Jews. He could not sleep, but walked about during the greatest part of the night, hearkening to the different reports and issuing orders consequent on what he heard; his wife slept, but her sleep was disturbed by frightful dreams, and she groaned and wept alternately.

In no part of Jerusalem did the arrest of Jesus produce more touching demonstrations of grief than among the poor inhabitants of Ophel, the greatest part of whom were day-labourers, and the rest principally employed in menial offices in the service of the Temple. The news came unexpectedly upon them; for some time they doubted the truth of the report, and wavered between hope and fear; but the sight of their Master, their Benefactor, their Consoler, dragged through the streets, torn, bruised, and ill-treated in every imaginable way, filled them with horror; and their grief was still farther increased by beholding his afflicted Mother wandering about from street to street, accompanied by the holy women, and endeavouring to obtain some intelligence concerning her Divine Son. These holy women ware often obliged to hide in corners and

[p. 143]

under door-ways for fear of being seen by the enemies of Jesus; but even with these precautions they were oftentimes insulted, and taken for women of bad character--their feelings were frequently harrowed by hearing the malignant words and triumphant expressions of the cruel Jews, and seldom, very seldom, did a word of kindness of pity strike their ears. They were completely exhausted before reaching their place of refuge, but they endeavoured to console and support one another, and wrapped thick veils over their heads. When at last seated, they heard a sudden knock at the door, and listened breathlessly--the knock was repeated, but softly, therefore they made certain that it was no enemy, and yet they opened the door cautiously, fearing a stratagem. It was indeed a friend, and they eagerly questioned him, but derived no consolation from his words; therefore, unable to rest quiet any longer, they issued forth and walked about for a time, and then again returned to their place of refuge--still more heartbroken than before.

The majority of the Apostles, overcome with terror, wore wandering about among the valleys which surround Jerusalem, and at times took refuge in the caverns beneath Mount Olivet. They started if they came in contact with one another, Spoke in trembling tones, and separated on the least noise being heard. First they concealed themselves in one cave and then in another, next they endeavoured to return to the town, while some of their number climbed to the top of Mount Olivet and cast anxious glances at the torches, the light of which they could see glimmering at and about Sion; they listened to every distant sound, made a thousand different conjectures, and then returned to the valley, in hopes of getting some certain intelligence.

The streets in the vicinity of Caiphas's tribunal were brightly illuminated with lamps and torches, but, as the crowds gathered around it, the noise and confusion continued to increase. Mingling with these discordant sounds might be heard the bellowing of the beasts which were tethered on the outside of the walls of Jerusalem. and the

[p. 144]

plaintive bleating of the lambs. There was something most touching in the bleating of these lambs, which were to be sacrificed on the following day in the Temple,--the one Lamb alone who was about to be offered a willing sacrifice opened not his mouth, like a sheep in the hands of the butcher, which resists not, or the lamb which is silent before the shearer; and that Lamb was the Lamb of God-the Lamb without spot--the true Paschal Lamb--Jesus Christ himself.

The sky looked dark, gloomy, and threatening-the moon was red, and covered with livid spots; it appeared as if dreading to reach its full, because its Creator was then to die.

Next I cast a glance outside the town, and, near the south gate, I beheld the traitor, Judas Iscariot, wandering about, alone, and a prey to the tortures of his guilty conscience; he feared even his own shadow, and was followed by many devils, who endeavoured to turn his feelings of remorse into black despair. Thousands of evil spirits were busying themselves in all parts, tempting men first to one sin and then to another. It appeared as if the gates of hell were flung open, and Satan madly striving and exerting his whole energies to increase the heavy load of iniquities which the Lamb without spot had taken upon himself. The angels wavered between joy and grief; they desired ardently to fall prostrate before the throne of God, and to obtain permission to assist Jesus; but at the same time they were filled with astonishment, and could only adore that miracle of Divine justice and mercy which had existed in Heaven for all eternity, and was now about to be accomplished; for the angels believe, like us, in God, the Father Almighty, Creator of Heaven and Earth, and in Jesus Christ, his only Son, our Lord, who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, who began on this night to suffer under Pontius Pilate, and the next day was to be crucified, to die, and be buried; descend into hell, rise again on the third day, ascend into Heaven, be seated at the right hand of God the Father Almighty, and from thence come to judge the

[p. 145]

living and the dead; they likewise believe in the Holy Ghost, the Holy Catholic Church, the communion of Saints, the forgiveness of sins, the resurrection of the body, and life everlasting.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER VI.

  

Jesus before Annas.

IT was towards midnight when Jesus reached the palace of Annas, and his guards immediately conducted him into a very large hall, where Annas, surrounded by twenty-eight councillors, was seated on a species of platform, raised a little above the level of the floor, and placed opposite to the entrance. The soldiers who first arrested Jesus now dragged him roughly to the foot of the tribunal. The room was quite full, between soldiers, the servants of Annas, a number of the mob who had been admitted, and the false witnesses who afterwards adjourned to Caiphas's hall.

Annas was delighted at the thought of our Lord being brought before him, and was looking out for his arrival with the greatest impatience. The expression of his countenance was most repulsive, as it showed in every lineament not only the infernal joy with which he was filled, but likewise all the cunning and duplicity of his heart. He was the president of a species of tribunal instituted for the purpose of examining persons accused of teaching false doctrines; and if convicted there, they were then taken before the High Priest.

Jesus stood before Annas. He looked exhausted and haggard; his garments were covered with mud, his hands manacled, his head bowed down, and he spoke not a word. Annas was a thin ill-humoured-looking old man, with a scraggy beard. His pride and arrogance were great; and as he seated himself he smiled ironically, pretending that he knew nothing at all, and that he was perfectly astonished at finding that the prisoner, whom

[p. 146]

he had just been informed was to be 'brought before him, was no other than Jesus of Nazareth. 'Is it possible,' said he, 'is it possible that thou art Jesus of Nazareth? Where are thy disciples, thy numerous followers? Where is thy kingdom? I fear affairs have not turned out as thou didst expect. The authorities, I presume, discovered that it was quite time to put a stop to thy conduct, disrespectful as it was towards God and his priests, and to such violations of the Sabbath. What disciples hast thou now? Where are they all gone? Thou art silent! Speak out, seducer! speak out, thou inciter of rebellion! Didst thou not eat the Paschal lamb in an unlawful manner, at an improper time, and in an improper place? Dost thou not desire to introduce new doctrines? Who gave thee the right of preaching? Where didst thou study? Speak, what are the tenets of thy religion?'

Jesus then raised his weary head, looked at Annas, and said, 'I have spoken openly to the world; I have always taught in the synagogue, and in the Temple, whither all the Jews resort; and in secret I have spoken nothing. Why askest thou me? Ask them who have heard what I have spoken unto them; behold, they know what things I have said.'

At this answer of Jesus the countenance of Annas flushed with fury and indignation. A base menial who was standing near perceived this, and he immediately struck our Lord on the face with his iron gauntlet, exclaiming at the same moment, 'Answerest thou the High Priest so?' Jesus was so nearly prostrated by the violence of the blow, that when the guards likewise reviled and struck him, he fell quite down, and blood trickled from his face on to the floor. Laughter, insults, and bitter words resounded through the hall. The archers dragged him roughly up again, and he mildly answered, 'If I have spoken evil, give testimony of the evil; but if well, why strikest thou me?'

Annas became still more enraged when he saw the calm demeanour of Jesus, and, turning to the witnesses, he desired them to bring forward their accusations. They

[p. 147]

all began to speak at once:--'He has called himself king; he says that God is his Father; that the Pharisees are an adulterous generation. He causes insurrection among the people; he cures the sick by the help of the devil on the Sabbath-day. The inhabitants of Ophel assembled round him a short time ago, and addressed him by the titles of Saviour and Prophet. He lets himself be called the Son of God; he says that he is sent by God; he predicts the destruction of Jerusalem. He does not fast; he eats with sinners, with pagans, and with publicans, and associates with women of evil repute. A short time ago he said to a man who gave him some water to drink at the gates of Ophel, "that he would give unto him the waters of eternal life, after drinking which he would thirst no more." He seduces the people by words of double meaning,' &c., &c.

These accusations were all vociferated at once; some of the witnesses Stood before Jesus and insulted him while they spoke by derisive gestures, and the archers went so far as oven to strike him, saying at the same time, 'Speak; why dost thou not answer?' Annas and his adherents added mockery to insult, exclaiming at every pause in the accusations, 'This is thy doctrine, then, is it? What canst thou answer to this? Issue thy orders, great King; man sent by God, give proofs of thy mission.' 'Who art thou?' continued Annas, in a tone of cutting contempt; 'by whom art thou sent? Art thou the son of an obscure carpenter, or art thou Elias, who was carried up to heaven in a fiery chariot? He is said to be still living, and I have been told that thou canst make thyself invisible when thou pleasest. Perhaps thou art the prophet Malachy, whose words thou dost so frequently quote. Some say that an angel was his father, and that he likewise is still alive. An impostor as thou art could not have a finer opportunity of taking persons in than by passing thyself off as this prophet. Tell me, without farther preamble, to what order of kings thou dost belong? Thou art greater than Solomon,--at least thou pretendest so to be, and dost even expect to be believed. Be easy, I

[p. 148]

will no longer refuse the title and the sceptre which are so justly thy due.'

Annas then called for the sheet of parchment, about a yard in length, and six inches in width; on this he wrote a series of words in large letters, and each word expressed some different accusation which had been brought against our Lord. He then rolled it up, placed it in a little hollow tube, fastened it carefully on the top of. a reed, and presented this reed to Jesus, saying at the same time, with a contemptuous sneer, 'Behold the sceptre of thy kingdom; it contains thy titles, as also the account of the honours to which thou art entitled, and of thy right to the throne. Take them to; the High Priest, in order that he may acknowledge thy regal dignity, and treat thee according to thy deserts. Tie the hands of this king, and take him before the High Priest.'

The hands of Jesus, which had been loosened, were then tied across his breast in such a manner as to make him hold the pretended sceptre, which contained the accusations of Annas, and he was led to the Court of Caiphas, amidst the hisses, shouts, and blows lavished upon him by the brutal mob.

The house of Annas was not more than three hundred steps from that of Caiphas; there were high walls and common-looking houses on each side of the road, which was lighted up by torches and lanterns placed on poles, and there were numbers of Jews standing about talking m an angry excited manner. The soldiers could scarcely make their way through the crowd, and those who had behaved so shamefully to Jesus at the Court of Annas continued their insults and base usage during the whole of the time spent in walking to the house of Caiphas. I saw money given to those who behaved the worst to Jesus by armed men belonging to the tribunal, and I saw them push out of the way all who looked compassionately at him. The former wore allowed to enter the Court of Caiphas.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 149]

  

CHAPTER VII.

  

The Tribunal of Caiphas.

To enter Caiphas's tribunal persons had to pass through a large court, which maybe called the exterior court; from thence they entered into an inner court, which extended all round the building. The building itself was of far greater length than breadth, and in the front there was a kind of open vestibule surrounded on three sides by columns of no great height. On the fourth side the columns were higher, and behind them was a room almost as large as the vestibule itself, where the seats of the members of the Council were placed on a species of round platform raised, above the level of the floor. That assigned to the High Priest was elevated above the others; the criminal to be tried stood in the centre of the half-circle formed by the seats. The witnesses and accusers stood either by the side or behind the prisoner. There were three doors at the back of the judges` seats which led into another apartment, filled likewise with seats. This room was used for secret consultation. Entrances placed on the right and left hand sides of this room opened into the interior court, which was round, like the back of the building. Those who left the room by the door on the right-hand side saw on the left-hand side of the court the gate which led to a subterranean prison excavated under the room. There were many underground prisons there, and it was in one of these that Peter and John were confined a whole night, when they had cured the lame man in the Temple after Pentecost. Both the house and the courts were filled with torches and lamps, which made them as light as day. There was a large fire lighted in the middle of the porch, on each side of which were hollow pipes to serve as chimneys for the smoke, and round this fire were standing soldiers, menial servants, and witnesses of the lowest class who had received bribes for giving their false testimony. A few women were there likewise, whose employment was to pour out a species of red beverage for the

[p. 150]

soldiers, and to bake cakes, for which services they received a small compensation. The majority of the judges were already seated around Caiphas, the others came in shortly afterwards, and the porch was almost filled, between true and false witnesses, while many other persons likewise endeavoured to come in to gratify their curiosity, but were prevented. Peter and John entered the outer court, in the dress of travellers, a short time before Jesus was led through, and John succeeded in penetrating into the inner court, by means of a servant with whom he was acquainted. The door was instantly closed after him, therefore Peter, who was a little behind, was shut out. He begged the maid-servant to open the door for him, but she refused both his entreaties and those of John, and he must have remained on the outside had not Nicodemus and Joseph of Arimathea, who came up at this moment, taken him with them. The two Apostles then returned the cloaks which they had borrowed, and stationed themselves in a place from whence they could see the judges, and hear everything that was going on. Caiphas was seated in the centre of the raised platform, and seventy of the members of the Sanhedrim were placed around him, while the public officers, the Scribes, and the ancients were standing on either side, and the false witnesses behind them. Soldiers were posted from the base of the platform to the door of the vestibule through which Jesus was to enter. The countenance of Caiphas was solemn in the extreme, but the gravity was accompanied by unmistakable signs of suppressed rage and sinister intentions. He wore a long mantle of a dull red colour, embroidered in flowers and trimmed with golden fringe; it was fastened at the shoulders and on the chest, besides being ornamented in the front with gold clasps. His head-attire was high, and adorned with hanging ribbons, the sides were open, and it rather resembled a bishop's mitre. Caiphas had been waiting with his adherents belonging to the Great Council for some time, and so impatient was he that he arose several times, went into the outer court in his magnificent dress, and asked angrily whether Jesus of Nazareth was come. When

[p. 151]

he saw the procession drawing near he returned to his seat.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER VIII.

  

Jesus before Caiphas.

JESUS was led across the court, and the mob received him with groans and hisses. As he passed by Peter and John, he looked at them, but without turning his head, for fear of betraying them. Scarcely had he reached the council-chamber, than Caiphas exclaimed in a loud tone, 'Thou art come, then, at last, thou enemy of God, thou blasphemer, who dost disturb the peace of this holy night!' The tube which contained the accusations of Annas, and was fastened to the pretended sceptre in the hands of Jesus, was instantly opened and read.

Caiphas made use of the most insulting language, and the archers again struck and abused our Lord, vociferating at the same time, 'Answer at once! Speak out! Art thou dumb?' Caiphas, whose temper was indescribably proud and arrogant, became even more enraged than Annas had been, and asked a thousand questions one after the other, but Jesus stood before him in silence, and with his eyes cast down. The archers endeavoured to force him to speak by repeated blows, and a malicious child pressed his thumb into his lips, tauntingly bidding him to bite. The witnesses were then called for. The first wore persons of the lowest class, whose accusations were as incoherent and inconsistent as those brought forward at the court of Annas, and nothing could be made out of them; Caiphas therefore turned to the principal witnesses, the Pharisees and the Sadducees, who had assembled from all parts of the country. They endeavoured to speak calmly, but their faces and manner betrayed the virulent envy and hatred with which their hearts were overflowing, and they repeated over and over again the same accusations, to which he had already replied so many times: 'That he cured the sick, and cast out devils, by the help of devils--that he

[p. 152]

profaned the Sabbath--incited the people to rebel--called the Pharisees a race of vipers and adulterers--predicted the destruction of Jerusalem--frequented the society of publicans and sinners--assembled the people and gave himself out as a king, a prophet, and the Son of God.' They deposed 'that he was constantly speaking of his kingdom,--that he forbade divorce,--called himself the Bread of Life, and said that whoever did not eat his flesh and drink his blood would not have eternal life.'

Thus did they distort and misinterpret the words he had uttered, the instructions he had given, and the parables by which he had illustrated his instructions, giving them the semblance of crimes. But these witnesses could not agree in their depositions, for one said, 'He calls himself king;' and a second instantly contradicted, saying, 'No, he allows persons to call him so; but directly they attempted to proclaim him, he fled.' Another said, 'He calls himself the Son of God,' but he was interrupted by a fourth, who exclaimed, 'No, he only styles himself the Son of God because he does the will of his Heavenly Father.' Some of the witnesses stated that he had cured them, but that their diseases had returned, and that his pretended cures were only performed by magic. They spoke likewise of the cure of the paralytic man at the pool of Bethsaida, but they distorted the facts so as to give them the semblance of crimes, and even in these accusations they could not agree, contradicting one another. The Pharisees of Sephoris, with whom he had once had a discussion on the subject of divorces, accused him of teaching false doctrines, and a young man of Nazareth, whom he had refused to allow to become one of his disciples, was likewise base enough to bear witness against him.

It was found to be utterly impossible to prove a single fact, and the witnesses appeared to come forward for the sole purpose of insulting Jesus, rather than to demonstrate the truth of their statements. Whilst they were disputing with one another, Caiphas and some of the other members of the Council employed themselves in questioning Jesus, and turning his answers into derision. 'What species of

[p. 153]

king art thou 'Give proofs of thy power! Call the legions of angels of whom thou didst speak in the Garden of Olives! What hast thou done with the money given unto thee by the widows, and other simpletons whom thou didst seduce by thy false doctrines? Answer at once: speak out,--art thou dumb? Thou wouldst have been far wiser to have kept silence when in the midst of the foolish mob: there thou didst speak far too much.'

All these questions were accompanied by blows from the under-servants of the members of the tribunal, and had our Lord not been supported from above, he could not have survived this treatment. Some of the base witnesses endeavoured to prove that he was an illegitimate son; but others declared that his mother was a pious Virgin, belonging to the Temple, and that they afterwards saw her betrothed to a man who feared God. The witnesses upbraided Jesus and his disciples with not having offered sacrifice in the Temple. It is true that I never did see either Jesus or his disciples offer any sacrifice in the Temple, excepting the Paschal lamb; but Joseph and Anna used frequently during their lifetime to offer sacrifice for the Child Jesus. However, even this accusation was puerile, for the Essenians never offered sacrifice, and no one thought the less well of them for not doing so. The enemies of Jesus still continued to accuse him of being a sorcerer, and Caiphas affirmed several times that the confusion in the statements of the witnesses was caused solely by witchcraft.

Some said that he had eaten the Paschal lamb on the previous day, which was contrary to the law, and that the year before he had made different alterations in the manner of celebrating this ceremony. But the witnesses contradicted one another to such a degree that Caiphas and his adherents found, to their very great annoyance and anger, that not one accusation could be really proved. Nicodemus and Joseph of Arimathea were called up, and being commanded to say how it happened that they had allowed him to eat the Pasch on the wrong day in a room which belonged to them, they proved from ancient documents

[p. 154]

that from time immemorial the Galilaeans had been allowed to eat the Pasch a day earlier than the rest of the Jews. They added that every other part of the ceremony had been performed according to the directions given in the law, and that persons belonging to the Temple were present at the supper. This quite puzzled the witnesses, and Nicodemus increased the rage of the enemies of Jesus by pointing out the passages in the archives which proved the right of the Galilaeans, and gave the reason for which this privilege was granted. The reason was this: the sacrifices would not have been finished by the Sabbath if the immense multitudes who congregated together for that purpose had all been obliged to perform the ceremony on the same day; and although the Galilaeans had not always profited by this right, yet its existence was incontestably proved by Nicodemus; and the anger of the Pharisees was heightened by his remarking that the members of the Council had cause to be greatly offended at the gross contradictions in the statements of the witnesses, and that the extraordinary and hurried manner in which the whole affair had been conducted showed that malice and envy were the sole motives which induced the accusers, and made them bring the case forward at a moment when all were busied in the preparations for the most solemn feast of the year. They looked at Nicodemus furiously, and could not reply, but continued to question the witnesses in a still more precipitate and imprudent manner. Two witnesses at last came forward, who said, 'This man said, "I will destroy this Temple made with hands, and within three days I will build another not made with hands."' However, even these witnesses did not agree in their statements, for one said that the accused wished to build a new Temple, and that he had eaten the Pasch in an unusual place, because he desired the destruction of the ancient Temple; but the other said, 'Not so: the edifice where he ate the Pasch was built by human hands, therefore he could not have referred to that.'

The wrath of Caiphas was indescribable; for the cruel treatment which Jesus had suffered, his Divine patience,

[p. 155]

and the contradictions of the witnesses, were beginning to make a great impression on many persons present, a few hisses were heard, and the hearts of some were So touched that they could not silence the voice of their consciences. Ten soldiers left the court under pretext of indisposition, but in reality overcome by their feelings. As they passed by the place where Peter and John were standing, they exclaimed, 'The silence of Jesus of Nazareth, in the midst of such cruel treatment, is superhuman: it would melt a heart of iron: the wonder is, that the earth does not open and swallow such reprobates as his accusers mast be. But tell us, where must we go?' The two Apostles either mistrusted the soldiers, and thought they were only seeking to betray them, or they were fearful of being recognised by those around and denounced as disciples of Jesus, for they only made answer in a melancholy tone: 'If truth calls you, follow it, and all will come right of itself.' The soldiers instantly went out of the room, and left Jerusalem soon after. They met persons on the outskirts of the town, who directed them to the caverns which lay to the south of Jerusalem, on the other side of Mount Sion, where many of the Apostles had taken refuge. These latter were at first alarmed at seeing strangers enter their hiding-place; but the soldiers soon dispelled all fear, and gave them an account of the sufferings of Jesus.

The temper of Caiphas, which was already perturbed, became quite infuriated by the contradictory statements of the two last witnesses, and rising from his seat he approached Jesus, and said: 'Answerest thou nothing to the things which these witness against thee?'

Jesus neither raised his head nor looked at the High Priest, which increased the anger of the latter to the greatest degree; and the archers perceiving this seized our Lord by the hair, pulled his head back, and gave him blows under the chin; but he still kept his eyes cast down. Caiphas raised his hands, and exclaimed in an enraged tone: 'I adjure thee by the living God that thou tell us if thou be Christ the Messiah, the son of the living God?'

A momentary and solemn pause ensued. Then Jesus

[p. 156]

in a majestic and superhuman voice replied, 'Thou hast said it. Nevertheless I say to you, Hereafter you shall see the Son of Man sitting on the right hand of the power of God, and coming in the clouds of Heaven.' Whilst Jesus was pronouncing these words, a bright light appeared to me to surround him; Heaven was opened above his head; I saw the Eternal Father; but no words from a human pen can describe the intuitive view that was then vouchsafed me of him. I likewise saw the angels, and the prayers of the just ascending to the throne of God.

At the same moment I perceived the yawning abyss of hell like a fiery meteor at the feet of Caiphas; it was filled with horrible devils; a slight gauze alone appeared to separate him from its dark flames. I could see the demoniacal fury with which his heart was overflowing, and the whole house looked to me like hell. At the moment that our Lord pronounced the solemn words, 'I am the Christ, the Son of the living God,' hell appeared to be shaken from one extremity to the other, and then, as it were, to burst forth and inundate every person in the house of Caiphas with feelings of redoubled hatred towards our Lord. These things are always shown to me under the appearance of some material object, which renders them less difficult of comprehension, and impresses them in a more clear and forcible manner on the mind, because we ourselves being material beings, facts are more easily illustrated in our regard if manifested through the medium of the senses. The despair and fury which these words produced in hell were shown to me under the appearance of a thousand terrific figures in different places. I remember seeing, among other frightful things, a number of little black objects, like dogs with claws, which walked on their hind legs; I knew at the time what kind of wickedness was indicated by this apparition, but I cannot remember now. I saw these horrible phantoms enter into the bodies of the greatest part of the bystanders, or else place themselves on their head or shoulders. I likewise at this moment saw frightful spectres come out of the sepulchres on the other side of Sion; I believe they were evil spirits. I

[p. 157]

saw in the neighbourhood of the Temple many other apparitions, which resembled prisoners loaded with chains: I do not know whether they were demons, or souls condemned to remain in some particular part of the earth, and who were then going to Limbo, which our Lord's condemnation to death had opened to them.

It is extremely difficult to explain these facts, for fear of scandalising those who have no knowledge of such things; but persons who see feel them, and they often cause the very hair to stand on end on the head. I think that John saw some of these apparitions, for I heard him speak about them afterwards. All whose hearts were not radically corrupted felt excessively terrified at these events, but the hardened were sensible of nothing but an increase of hatred and anger against our Lord.

Caiphas then arose, and, urged on by Satan, took up the end of his mantle, pierced it with his knife, and rent it from one end to the other, exclaiming at the same time, in a loud voice, 'He hath blasphemed, what further need have we of witnesses? Behold, now you have heard the blasphemy: what think you?' All who wore then present arose, and exclaimed with astounding malignancy, 'He is guilty of death!'

During the whole of this frightful scene, the devils were in the most tremendous state of excitement; they appeared to have complete possession not only of the enemies of Jesus, but likewise of their partisans and cowardly followers. The powers of darkness seemed to me to proclaim a triumph over the light, and the few among the spectators whose hearts still retained a glimmering of light were filled with such consternation that, covering their heads, they instantly departed. The witnesses who belonged to the upper classes were less hardened than the others; their consciences were racked with remorse, and they followed the example given by the persons mentioned above, and left the room as quickly as possible, while the rest crowded round the fire in the vestibule, and ate and drank after receiving full pay for their services. The High Priest then addressed the archers, and said, 'I deliver

[p. 158]

this king up into your hands; render the blasphemer the honours which are his due.' After these words he retired with the members of his Council into the round room behind the tribunal, which could not be seen from the vestibule.

In the midst of the bitter affliction which inundated the heart of John, his thoughts were with the Mother of Jesus; he feared that the dreadful news of the condemnation of her Son might be communicated to her suddenly, or that perhaps some enemy might give the information in a heartless manner. He therefore looked at Jesus, and saying in a low voice, 'Lord, thou knowest why I leave thee,' went away quickly to seek the Blessed Virgin, as if he had been sent by Jesus himself. Peter was quite over. come between anxiety and sorrow, which, joined to fatigue, made him chilly; therefore, as the morning was cold, he went up to the fire where many of the common people were warming themselves. He did his best to hide his grief in their presence, as he could not make up his mind to go home and leave his beloved Master.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER IX.

  

The Insults received by Jesus in the Court of Caiphas.

No sooner did Caiphas, with the other members of the Council, leave the tribunal than a crowd of miscreants--the very scum of the people--surrounded Jesus like a swarm of infuriated wasps, and began to heap every imaginable insult upon him. Even during the trial, whilst the witnesses were speaking, the archers and some others could not restrain their cruel inclinations, but pulled out handfuls of his hair and beard, spat upon him, struck him with their fists, wounded him with sharp-pointed sticks, and even ran needles into his body; but when Caiphas left the hall they set no bounds to their barbarity. They first placed a crown, made of straw and the bark of trees, upon his head, and then took it off, saluting him at the

[p. 159]

same time with insulting expressions, like the following: 'Behold the Son of David wearing the crown of his father.' 'A greater than Solomon is here; this is the king who is preparing a wedding feast for his son.' Thus did they turn into ridicule those eternal truths which he had taught under the form of parables to those whom he came from heaven to save; and whilst repeating these scoffing words, they continued to strike him with their fists and sticks, and to spit in his face. Next they put a crown of reeds upon his head, took off his robe and scapular, and then threw an old torn mantle, which scarcely reached his knees, over his shoulders; around his neck they hung a long iron chain, with an iron ring at each end, studded with sharp points, which bruised and tore his knees as he walked. They again pinioned his arms, put a reed into his hand, and covered his Divine countenance with spittle. They had already thrown all sorts of filth over his hair, as well as over his chest, and upon the old mantle. They bound his eyes with a dirty rag, and struck him, crying out at the same time in loud tones,--'Prophesy unto us, O Christ, who is he that struck thee?' He answered not one word, but sighed, and prayed inwardly for them.

After many more insults, they seized the chain which was hanging on his neck, dragged him towards the room into which the Council had withdrawn, and with their sticks forced him in, vociferating at the same time, 'March forward, thou King of Straw! Show thyself to the Council with the insignia of the regal honours we have rendered unto thee.' A large body of councillors, with Caiphas at their head, were still in the room, and they looked with both delight and approbation at the shameful scene which was enacted, beholding with pleasure the most sacred ceremonies turned into derision. The pitiless guards covered him with mud and spittle, and with mock gravity exclaimed, 'Receive the prophetic unction--the regal unction.' Then they impiously parodied the baptismal ceremonies, and the pious act of Magdalen in emptying the vase of perfume on his head. 'How canst thou presume,' they exclaimed, 'to appear before the Council in such a

[p. 160]

condition? Thou dost purify others, and thou art not pure thyself; but we will soon purify thee.' They fetched a basin of dirty water, which they poured over his face and shoulders, whilst they bent their knees before him, and exclaimed, 'Behold thy precious unction, behold the spikenard worth three hundred pence; thou hast been baptised in the pool of Bethsaida.' They intended by this to throw into ridicule the act of respect and veneration shown by Magdalen, when she poured the precious ointment over his head, at the house of the Pharisee.

By their derisive words concerning his baptism in the pool of Bethsaida, they pointed out, although unintentionally, the resemblance between Jesus and the Paschal lamb, for the lambs were washed in the first place in the pond near the Probatica gate, and then brought to the pool of Bethsaida, where they underwent another purification before being taken to the Temple to be sacrificed. The enemies of Jesus likewise alluded to the man who had been infirm for thirty-eight years, and who was cured by Jesus at the pool of Bethsaida; for I saw this man either washed or baptised there; I say either washed or baptised, because I do not exactly remember the circumstances.

They then dragged Jesus round the room, before all the members of the Council, who continued to address him in reproachful and abusive language. Every countenance looked diabolical and enraged, and all around was dark, confused, and terrific. Our Lord, on the contrary, was from the moment that he declared himself to be the Son of God, generally surrounded with a halo of light. Many of the assembly appeared to have a confused knowledge of this fact, and to be filled with consternation at perceiving that neither outrages or ignominies could alter the majestic expression of his countenance.

The halo which shone around Jesus from the moment he declared himself to be the Christ, the Son of the Living God, served but to incite his enemies to greater fury, and. yet it was so resplendent that they could not look at it, and I believe their intention in throwing the dirty rag over his head was to deaden its brightness.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 161]

  

CHAPTER X.

  

The Denial of St. Peter.

AT the moment when Jesus uttered the words, 'Thou hast said it,' and the High Priest rent his garment, the whole room resounded with tumultuous cries. Peter and John, who had suffered intensely during the scene which had just been enacted, and which they had been obliged to witness in silence, could bear the sight no longer. Peter therefore got up to leave the room, and John followed soon after. The latter went to the Blessed Virgin, who was in the house of Martha with the holy women, but Peter's love for Jesus was so great, that he could not make up his mind to leave him; his heart was bursting, and he wept bitterly, although he endeavoured to restrain and hide his tears. It was impossible for him to remain in the tribunal, as his deep emotion at the sight of his beloved Master's sufferings would have betrayed him; therefore he went into the vestibule and approached the fire, around which soldiers and common people were sitting and talking in the most heartless and disgusting manner concerning the sufferings of Jesus, and relating all that they themselves had done to him Peter was silent, but his silence and dejected demeanour made the bystanders suspect something. The portress came up to the fire in the midst of the conversation, cast a bold glance at Peter and said, 'Thou also wast with. Jesus the Galilaean.' These words startled and alarmed Peter; he trembled as to what might ensue if he owned the truth before his brutal companions, and therefore answered quickly, 'Woman, I know him not,' got up, and left the vestibule. At this moment the cock crowed somewhere in the outskirts of the town. I do not remember hearing it, but I felt that it was crowing. As he went out, another maid-servant looked at him, and said to those, who were with her, 'This man was also with him,' and the persons she addressed immediately demanded of Peter whether her words were true, saying, 'Art thou not one

[p. 162]

of this man's disciples?' Peter was even more alarmed than before, and renewed his denial in these words, 'I am not; I know not the man.'

He left the inner court, and entered the exterior court; he was weeping, and so great was his anxiety and grief, that he did not reflect in the least on the words he had just uttered. The exterior court was quite filled with persons, and some had climbed on to the top of the wall to listen to what was going on in the inner court which they were forbidden to enter. A few of the disciples were likewise there, for their anxiety concerning Jesus was so great that they could not make up their minds to remain concealed in the eaves of Hinnom. They came up to Peter, and with many tears questioned him concerning their loved Master, but be was so unnerved and so fearful of betraying himself, that he briefly recommended them to go away, as it was dangerous to remain, and left them instantly. He continued to indulge his violent grief, while they hastened to leave the town. I recognised among these disciples, who were about sixteen in number, Bartholomew, Nathaniel, Saturninus, Judas Barsabeas, Simon, who was afterwards bishop of Jerusalem, Zacheus, and Manahem, the man who was born blind and cured by our Lord.

Peter could not rest anywhere, and his love for Jesus prompted him to return to the inner court, which he was allowed to enter, because Joseph of Arimathea and Nicodemus had, in the first instance, taken him in. He did not reenter the vestibule, but turned to the right and went towards the round room which was behind the tribunal, and in which Jesus was undergoing every possible insult and ignominy from his cruel enemies. Peter walked timidly up to the door, and although perfectly conscious that he was suspected by all present of being a partisan of Jesus, yet he could not remain outside; his love for his Master impelled him forward; he entered the room, advanced, and soon stood in the very midst of the brutal throng who were feasting their cruel eyes on the sufferings of Jesus. They were at that moment dragging him ignominiously

[p. 163]

backwards and forwards with the crown of straw upon his head; he cast a sorrowful and even severe glance upon Peter, which cut him to the heart, but as he was still much alarmed, and at that moment heard some of the bystanders call out, 'Who is that man?' he went back again into the court, and seeing that the persons in the vestibule were watching him, came up to the fire and remained before it for some time. Several persons who had observed his anxious troubled countenance began to speak in opprobrious terms of Jesus, and one of them said to him, 'Thou also art one of his disciples; thou also art a Galilaean; thy very speech betrays thee.' Peter got up, intending to leave the room, when a brother of Malchus came up to him and said, 'Did I not see thee in the garden with him? didst thou not cut off my brother's ear?'

Peter became almost beside himself with terror; he began to curse and to swear 'that he knew not the man,' and ran out of the vestibule into the outer court; the cock then crowed again, and Jesus, who at that moment was led across the court, cast a look of mingled compassion and grief upon his Apostle. This look of our Lord pierced Peter to the very heart,--it recalled to his mind in the most forcible and terrible manner the words addressed to him by our Lord on the previous evening: 'Before the cock crows twice, thou shalt thrice deny me.' He had forgotten all his promises and protestations to our Lord, that he would die rather than deny him--he had forgotten the warning given to him by our Lord;--but when Jesus looked at him, he felt the enormity of his fault, and his heart was nigh bursting with grief. He had denied his Lord, when that beloved Master was outraged, insulted, delivered up into the hands of unjust judges,--when he was suffering all in patience and in silence. His feelings of remorse were beyond expression; he returned to the exterior court, covered his face and wept bitterly; all fear of being recognised was over;--he was ready to proclaim to the whole universe both his fault and his repentance.

What man will dare assert that he would have shown

[p. 164]

more courage than Peter if, with his quick and ardent temperament, he were exposed to such danger, trouble, and sorrow, at a moment, too, when completely unnerved between fear and grief, and exhausted by the sufferings of this sad night? Our Lord left Peter to his own strength, and he was weak, like all who forget the words: 'Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation.'

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XI.

  

Mary in the House of Caiphas.

THE Blessed Virgin was ever united to her Divine Son by interior spiritual communications; she was, therefore, fully aware of all that happened to him--she suffered with him, and joined in his continual prayer for his murderers. But her maternal feelings prompted her to supplicate Almighty God most ardently not to suffer the crime to be completed, and to save her Son from such dreadful torments. She eagerly desired to return to him; and when John, who had left the tribunal at the moment the frightful cry, 'He is guilty of death,' was raised, came to the house of Lazarus to see after her, and to relate the particulars of the dreadful scene he had just witnessed, she, as also Magdalen and some of the other holy women, begged to be taken to the place where Jesus was suffering John, who had only left our Saviour in order to console her whom he loved best next to his Divine Master, instantly acceded to their request, and conducted them through the streets, which were lighted up by the moon alone, and crowded with persons hastening to their homes. The holy women were closely veiled; but the sobs which they could not restrain made many who passed by observe them, and their feelings were harrowed by the abusive epithets they overheard bestowed upon Jesus by those who were conversing on the subject of his arrest. The Blessed Virgin, who ever beheld in spirit the opprobrious treatment her dear Son was receiving, continued

[p. 165]

[paragraph continues] 'to lay up all these things in her heart;' like him she suffered in silence; but more than once she became totally unconscious. Some disciples of Jesus, who were returning from the hall of Caiphas, saw her fainting in the arms of the holy women, and, touched with pity, stopped to look at her compassionately, and saluted her in these words: 'Hail! unhappy Mother--hail, Mother of the Most Holy One of Israel, the most afflicted of all mothers!' Mary raised her head, thanked them gratefully, and continued her sad journey.

When in the vicinity of Caiphas's house, their grief was renewed by the sight of a group of men who were busily occupied under a tent, making the cross ready for our Lord's crucifixion. The enemies of Jesus had given orders that the cross should be prepared directly after his arrest, that they might without delay execute the sentence which they hoped to persuade Pilate to pass on him. The Romans had already prepared the crosses of the two thieves, and the workmen who were making that of Jesus were much annoyed at being obliged to labour at it during the night; they did not attempt to conceal their anger at this, and uttered the most frightful oaths and curses, which pierced the heart of the tender Mother of Jesus through and through; but she prayed for these blind creatures who thus unknowingly blasphemed the Saviour who was about to die for their salvation, and prepared the cross for his cruel execution.

'Mary, John, and the holy women traversed the outer court attached to Caiphas's house. They stopped under the archway of a door which opened into the inner court. Mary's heart was with her Divine Son, and she desired most ardently to see this door opened, that she might again have a chance of beholding him, for she knew that it alone separated her from the prison where he was confined. The door was at length opened, and Peter rushed out, his face covered with his mantle, wringing his hands, and weeping bitterly. By the light of the torches he soon recognised John and the Blessed Virgin, but the sight of them only renewed those dreadful feelings of remorse

[p. 166]

which the look of Jesus had awakened in his breast, Mary approached him instantly, and said, 'Simon, tell me, I entreat you, what is become of Jesus, my Son!' These words pierced his very heart; he could not even look at her, but turned away, and again wrung his hands. Mary drew close to him, and said in a voice trembling with emotion: 'Simon, son of John, why dost thou not answer me?'--'Mother!' exclaimed Peter, in a dejected tone, 'O, Mother, speak not to me--thy Son is suffering more than words can express: speak not to me! They have condemned him to death, and I have denied him. three times.' John came up to ask a few more questions, but Peter ran out of the court as if beside himself, and did not stop for a single moment until he reached the cave at Mount Olivet--that cave on the stones o which the impression of the hands of our Saviour had b en miraculously left. I believe it is the cave in which Adam took refuge to weep after his fall.

The Blessed Virgin was inexpressibly grieved at hearing of the fresh pang inflicted on the loving heart of her Divine Son, the pang of hearing himself denied by that disciple who had first acknowledged him as the Son of the Living God; she was unable to support herself, and fell down on the door-stone, upon which the impression of her feet and hands remains to the present day. I have seen the stones, which are preserved somewhere, but I cannot at this moment remember where. The door was not again shut, for the crowd was dispersing, and when the Blessed Virgin came to herself, she begged to be taken to some place as near as possible to her Divine Son. John, therefore, led her and the holy women to the front of the prison where Jesus was confined. Mary was with Jesus in spirit, and Jesus was with her; but this loving Mother wished to hear with her own ears the voice of her Divine Son. She listened and heard not only his moans, but also the abusive language of those around him. It was impossible for the holy women to remain in the court any longer without attracting attention. The grief of Magdalen was so violent that she was unable to conceal

[p. 167]

it; and although the Blessed Virgin, by a special grace from Almighty God, maintained a calm and dignified exterior in the midst of her sufferings, yet even she was recognised, and overheard harsh words, such as these: 'Is not that the Mother of the Galilaean? Her Son will most certainly be executed, but not before the festival, unless, indeed, he is the greatest of criminals.'

The Blessed Virgin left the court, and went up to the fireplace in the vestibule, where a certain number of persons were still standing. When she reached the spot where Jesus had said that he was the Son of God, and the wicked Jews cried out, 'He is guilty of death,' she again fainted, and John and the holy women carried her away, in appearance more like a corpse than a living person. The bystanders said not a word; they seemed struck with astonishment, and silence, such as might have been produced in hell by the passage of a celestial being, reigned in that vestibule.

The holy women again passed the place where the cross was being prepared; the workmen appeared to find as much difficulty in completing it as the judges had found in pronouncing sentence, and were obliged to fetch fresh wood every moment, for some bits would not fit, and others split; this continued until the different species of wood were placed in the cross according to the intentions of Divine Providence. I saw angels who obliged these men to recommence their work, and who would not let them rest, until all was accomplished in a proper manner; but my remembrance of this vision is indistinct.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XII.

  

Jesus confined in the subterranean Prison.

THE Jews, having quite exhausted their barbarity, shut Jesus up in a little vaulted prison, the remains of which subsist to this day. Two of the archers alone remained with him, and they were soon replaced by two others.

[p. 168]

[paragraph continues] He was still clothed in the old dirty mantle, and covered with the spittle and other filth which they had thrown over him; for they had not allowed him to put on his own clothes again, but kept his hands tightly bound together.

When our Lord entered this prison, he prayed most fervently that his Heavenly Father would accept all that he had already suffered, and all that he was about to suffer, as an expiatory sacrifice, not only for his executioners, but likewise for all who in future ages might have to suffer torments such as he was about to endure, and be tempted to impatience or anger.

The enemies of our Lord did not allow him a moment's respite, even in this dreary prison, but tied him to a pillar which stood in the centre, and would. not allow him to lean upon it, although he was so exhausted from ill treatment, the weight of his chains, and his numerous falls, that he could scarcely support himself on his swollen and torn feet. Never for a moment did they cease insulting him; and when the first set were tired out, others replaced them.

It is quite impossible to describe all that the Holy of Holies suffered from these heartless beings; for the sight affected me so excessively that I became really ill, and I felt as if I could not survive it. We ought, indeed, to be ashamed of that weakness and susceptibility which renders us unable to listen composedly to the descriptions, or speak without repugnance, of those sufferings which our Lord endured so calmly and patiently for our salvation. The horror we feel is as great as that of a murderer who is forced to place his hands upon the wounds he himself has inflicted on his victim. Jesus endured all without opening his mouth; and it was man, sinful man, who perpetrated all these outrages against one who was at once their Brother, their Redeemer, and their God. I, too, am a great sinner, and my sins caused these sufferings. At the day of judgment, when the most hidden things will be manifested, we shall see the share we have had in the torments endured by the Son of God; we shall see how

[p. 169]

far we have caused them by the sins we so frequently commit, and which are, in fact, a species of consent which we give to, and a participation in, the tortures which were inflicted on Jesus by his cruel enemies. If, alas! we reflected seriously on this, we should repeat with much greater fervour the words which we find so often in prayer-books: 'Lord, grant that I may die, rather than ever wilfully offend thee again by sin.'

Jesus continued to pray for his enemies, and they being at last tired out left him in peace for a short time, when he leaned against the pillar to rest, and a bright light shone around him. The day was beginning to dawn,--the day of his Passion, of our Redemption,--and a faint ray penetrating the narrow vent-hole of the prison, fell upon the holy and immaculate Lamb, who had taken upon himself the sins of the world. Jesus turned towards the ray of light, raised his fettered hands, and, in the most touching manner, returned thanks to his Heavenly Father for the dawn of that day, which had been so long desired by the prophets, and for which he himself had so ardently sighed from the moment of his birth on earth, and concerning which he had said to his disciples, 'I have a baptism wherewith I am to be baptised, and how am I straitened until it be accomplished? I prayed with him; but I cannot give the words of his prayer, for I was so completely overcome, and touched to hear him return thanks to his Father for the terrible sufferings which he had already endured for me, and for the still greater which he was about to endure. I could only repeat over and over with the greatest fervour, 'Lord, I beseech thee, give me these sufferings: they belong to me: I have deserved them in punishment for my sins.' I was quite overwhelmed with feelings of love and compassion when I looked upon him thus welcoming the first dawn of the great day of his Sacrifice, and that ray of light which penetrated into his prison might, indeed, be compared to the visit of a judge who wishes to be reconciled to a criminal before the sentence of death which he has pronounced upon him is executed.

[p. 170]

The archers, who were dozing, woke up for a moment, and looked at him with surprise: they said nothing, but appeared to be somewhat astonished and frightened. Our Divine Lord was confined in this prison during an hour, or thereabouts.

Whilst Jesus was in this dungeon, Judas, who had been wandering up and down the valley of Hinnom like a madman, directed his steps towards the house of Caiphas, with the thirty pieces of silver, the reward of his treachery, still hanging to his waist. All was silent around, and he addressed himself to some of the sentinels, without letting them know who he was, and asked what was going to be done to the Galilaean. 'He has been condemned to death, and he will certainly be crucified,' was the reply. Judas walked to and fro, and listened to the different conversations which were held concerning Jesus. Some spoke of the cruel treatment he had received, others of his astonishing patience, while others, again, discoursed concerning the solemn trial which was to take place in the morning before the great Council. Whilst the traitor was listening eagerly to the different opinions given, day dawned; the members of the tribunal commenced their preparations, and Judas slunk behind the building that he might not be seen, for like Cain he sought to hide himself from human eyes, and despair was beginning to take possession of his soul. The place in which he took refuge happened to be the very spot where the workmen had been preparing the wood for making the cross of our Lord; all was in readiness, and the men were asleep by its side. Judas was filled with horror at the sight: he shuddered and fled when he beheld the instrument of that cruel death to which for a paltry sum of money he had delivered up his Lord and Master; he ran to and fro in perfect agonies of remorse, and finally hid himself in an adjoining cave, where he determined to await the trial which was to take place in the morning.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 171]

  

CHAPTER XIII.

  

The Morning Trial.

CAIPHAS, Annas, the ancients, and the scribes assembled again in the morning in the great hall of the tribunal, to have a legal trial, as meetings at night were not lawful, and could only be looked upon in the light of preparatory audiences. The majority of the members had slept in the house of Caiphas, where beds had been prepared for them, but some, and among them Nicodemus and Joseph of Arimathea, had gone home, and returned at the dawn of day. The meeting was crowded, and the members commenced their operations in the most hurried manner possible. They wished to condemn Jesus to death at once, but Nicodemus, Joseph, and some others opposed their wishes and demanded that the decision should be deferred until after the festival, for fear of causing an insurrection among the people, maintaining likewise that no criminal could be justly condemned upon charges which were not proved, and that in the case now before them all the witnesses contradicted one another. The High Priests and their adherents became very angry, and told Joseph and Nicodemus, in plain terms, that they were not surprised at their expressing displeasure at what had been done, because they were themselves partisans of the Galilaean and his doctrines, and were fearful of being convicted. The High Priest even went so far as to endeavour to exclude from the Council all those members who were in the slightest degree favourable to Jesus. These members protested that they washed their hands of all the future proceedings of the Council, and leaving the room went to the Temple, and from this day never again took their seats in the Council. Caiphas then ordered the guards to bring Jesus once more into his presence, and to prepare everything for taking him to Pilate's court directly he should have pronounced sentence. The emissaries of the Council hurried off to the prison, and with their usual brutality untied the hands of Jesus, dragged off the old mantle

[p. 172]

which they had thrown over his shoulders, made him plat on his own soiled garment, and having fastened ropes round his waist, dragged him out of the prison. The appearance of Jesus, when he passed through the midst of the crowd who were already assembled in the front of the house, was that of a victim led to be sacrificed; his countenance was totally changed and disfigured from ill-usage, and his garments stained and torn; but the sight of his sufferings, far from exciting a feeling of compassion in the hard hearted Jews, simply filled them with disgust, and increased their rage. Pity was, indeed, a feeling unknown in their cruel breasts.

Caiphas, who did not make the slightest effort to conceal his hatred, addressed oar Lord haughtily in these words: 'If thou be Christ, tell us plainly.' Then Jesus raised his head, and answered with great dignity and calmness, 'If I shall tell you, you will not believe me; and if I shall also ask you, you will not answer me, nor let me go. But hereafter the Son of Man shall be sitting on the night hand of the power of God.' The High Priests looked at one another, and said to Jesus, with a disdainful laugh, 'Art thou, then, the Son of God?' And Jesus answered, with the voice of eternal truth, 'You say that I am.' At these words they all exclaimed, 'What need we any further testimony? For we ourselves have heard it from his own mouth.'

They all arose instantly and vied with each other as to who should heap the most abusive epithets upon Jesus, whom they termed a low-born miscreant, who aspired to being their Messiah, and pretended to be entitled to sit at the right hand of God. They ordered the archers to tie his hands again, and to fasten a chain round his neck (this was usually done to criminals condemned to death), and they then prepared to conduct him to Pilate's hall, where a messenger had already been dispatched to beg him to have all in readiness for trying a criminal, as it was necessary to make no delay on account of the festival day.

The Jewish Priests murmured among themselves at

[p. 173]

being obliged to apply to the Roman governor for the confirmation of their sentence, but it was necessary, as they had not the right of condemning criminals excepting for things which concerned religion and the Temple alone, and they could not pass a sentence of death. They wished to prove that Jesus was an enemy to the emperor, and this accusation concerned those departments which were under Pilate's jurisdiction. The soldiers were all standing in front of the house, surrounded by a large body of the enemies of Jesus, and of common persons attracted by curiosity. The High Priests and a part of the Council walked at the head of the procession, and Jesus, led by archers, and guarded by soldiers, followed, while the mob brought up the rear. They were obliged to descend Mount Sion, and cross a part of the lower town to reach Pilate's palace, and many priests who had attended the Council went to the Temple directly afterwards, as it was necessary to prepare for the festival.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XIV.

  

The Despair of Judas

WHILST the Jews were conducting Jesus to Pilate, the traitor Judas walked about listening to the conversation of the crowd who followed, and his ears were struck by words such as these: 'They are taking him before Pilate; the High Priests have condemned the Galilaean to death; he will be crucified; they will accomplish his death; he has been already dreadfully ill-treated; his patience is wonderful; he answers not; his only words are that he is the Messiah, and that he will be seated at the right hand of God; they will crucify him on account of those words; had he not said them they could not have condemned him to death. The miscreant who sold him was one of his disciples, and had a short time before eaten the Paschal lamb with him; not for worlds would I have had to do with such an act; however guilty the Galilaean may

[p. 174]

be, he has not at all events sold his friend for money; such an infamous character as this disciple is infinitely more deserving of death.' Then, but too late, anguish, despair, and remorse took possession of the mind of Judas. Satan instantly prompted him to fly. He fled as if a thousand furies were at his heel, and the bag which was hanging at his side struck him as he ran, and propelled him as a spur from hell; but he took it into his hand to prevent its blows. He fled as fast as possible, but where did he fly? Not towards the crowd, that he might cast himself at the feet of Jesus, his merciful Saviour, implore his pardon, and 'beg to die with him,--not to confess his fault with true repentance before God, but to endeavour to unburden himself before the world of his crime, and of the price of his treachery. He ran like one beside himself into the Temple, where several members of the Council had gathered together after the judgment of Jesus. They looked at one another with astonishment; and then turned their haughty countenances, on which a smile of irony was visible, upon Judas. He with a frantic gesture tore the thirty pieces of silver from his side, and holding them forth with his right hand, exclaimed in accents of the most deep despair, 'Take back your silver--that silver with which you bribed me to betray this just man; take back your silver; release Jesus; our compact is at an end; I have sinned grievously, for I have betrayed innocent blood.' The priests answered him in the most contemptuous manner, and, as if fearful of contaminating themselves by the contact of the reward of the traitor, would not touch the silver he tended, but replied, 'What have we to do with thy sin? If thou thinkest to have sold innocent blood, it is thine own affair; we know what we have paid for, and we have judged him worthy of death. Thou hast thy money, say no more.' They addressed these words to him in the abrupt tone in which men usually speak when anxious to get rid of a troublesome person, and instantly arose and walked away. These words tilled Judas with such rage and despair that he became almost frantic: his hair stood

[p. 175]

on end on his head; he rent in two the bag which contained the thirty pieces of silver, cast them down in the Temple, and fled to the outskirts of the town.

I again beheld him rushing to and fro like a madman in the valley of Hinnom: Satan was by his side in a hideous form, whispering in his ear, to endeavour to drive him to despair, all the curses which the prophets had hurled upon this valley, where the Jews formerly sacrificed their children to idols.

It appeared as if all these maledictions were directed against him, as in these words, for instance: 'They shall go forth, and behold the carcases of those who have sinned against me, whose worm dieth not, and whose fire shall never be extinguished.' Then the devil murmured in his ears, 'Cain, where is thy brother Abel? What hast thou done?--his blood cries to me for vengeance: thou art cursed upon earth, a wanderer for ever.' When he reached the torrent of Cedron, and saw Mount Olivet, he shuddered, turned away, and again the words vibrated in his ear, 'Friend, whereto art thou come Judas, dost thou betray the Son of Man with a kiss?' Horror filled his soul, his head began to wander, and the arch fiend again whispered, 'It was here that David crossed the Cedron when he fled from Absalom. Absalom put an end to his life by hanging himself. It was of thee that David spoke when he said: "And they repaid me evil for good; hatred for my love. May the devil stand at his right hand; when he is judged, may he go out condemned. May his days be few, and his bishopric let another take. May the iniquity of his father be remembered in the sight of the Lord; and let not the sin of his mother be blotted out, because he remembered not to show mercy, but persecuted the poor man and the beggar and the broken in heart, to put him to death. And he loved cursing, and it shall come unto him. And he put on cursing like a garment, and it went in like water into his entrails, and like oil into his bones. May it be unto him like, a garment which covereth him; and like a girdle, with which he is girded continually."' Overcome by these terrible thoughts Judas rushed on, and

[p. 176]

reached the foot of the mountain. It was a dreary, desolate spot filled with rubbish and putrid remains; discordant sounds from the city reverberated in his ears, and Satan continually repeated, 'They are now about to put him to death; thou hast sold him. Knowest thou not the words of the law, "He who sells a soul among his brethren, and receives the price of it, let him die the death"? Put an end to thy misery, wretched one; put an end to thy misery.' Overcome by despair Judas tore off his girdle, and hung himself on a tree which grow in a crevice of the rock, and after death his body burst asunder, and his bowels were scattered around.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XV.

  

Jesus is taken before Pilate.

THE malicious enemies of our Saviour led him through the most public part of the town to take him before Pilate. The procession wended its way slowly down the north side of the mountain of Sion, then passed through that section on the eastern side of the Temple, called Acre, towards the palace and tribunal of Pilate, which were seated on the north-west side of the Temple, facing a large square. Caiphas, Annas, and many others of the Chief Council, walked first in festival attire; they were followed by a multitude of scribes and many other Jews, among whom were the false witnesses, and the wicked Pharisees who had taken the most prominent part in accusing Jesus. Our Lord followed at a short distance; he was surrounded by a band of soldiers, and led by the archers. The multitude thronged on all sides and followed the procession, thundering forth the most fearful oaths and imprecations, while groups of persons were hurrying to and fro, pushing and jostling one another. Jesus was stripped of all save his under garment, which was stained and soiled by the filth which had been flung upon it; a long chain was hanging round his neck. which struck his knees as he

[p. 177]

walked; his hands were pinioned as on the previous day, and the archers dragged him by the ropes which were fastened round his waist. He tottered rather than walked, and was almost unrecognisable from the effects of his sufferings during the night;--he was colourless, haggard, his face swollen and even bleeding, and his merciless persecutors continued to torment him each moment more and more. They had gathered together a large body of the dregs of the people, in order to make his present disgraceful entrance into the city a parody on his triumphal entrance on Palm Sunday. They mocked, and with derisive gestures called him king, and tossed in his path stones, bits of wood, and filthy rags; they made game of, and by a thousand taunting speeches mocked him, during this pretended triumphal entry.

In the corner of a building, not far from the house of Caiphas, the afflicted Mother of Jesus, with John and Magdalen, stood watching for him. Her soul was ever united to his; but propelled by her love, she left no means untried which could enable her really to approach him. She remained at the Cenacle for some time after her midnight visit to the tribunal of Caiphas, powerless and speechless from grief; but when Jesus was dragged forth from his prison, to be again brought before his judges, she arose, cast her veil and cloak about her, and said to Magdalen and John: 'Let us follow my Son to Pilate's court; I must again look upon him.' They went to a place through which the procession must pass, and waited for it. The Mother of Jesus knew that her Son was suffering dreadfully, but never could she have conceived the deplorable, the heartrending condition to which he was reduced by the brutality of his enemies. Her imagination had depicted him to her as suffering fearfully, but yet supported and illuminated by sanctity, love, and patience. Now, however, the sad reality burst upon her. First in the procession appeared the priests, those most bitter enemies of her Divine Son. They were decked in flowing robes; but ah, terrible to say, instead of appearing resplendent in their character of priests of the Most High, they were transformed

[p. 178]

into priests of Satan, for no one could look upon their wicked countenances without beholding there, portrayed in vivid colours, the evil passions with which their souls were filled--deceit, infernal cunning, and a raging anxiety to carry out that most tremendous of crimes, the death of their Lord and Saviour, the only Son of God. Next followed the false witnesses, his perfidious accusers, surrounded by the vociferating populace; and last of all--himself--her Son--Jesus, the Son of God, the Son of Man, loaded with chains, scarcely able to support himself, but pitilessly dragged on by his infernal enemies, receiving blows from some, buffets from others, and from the whole assembled rabble curses, abuse, and the most scurrilous language. He would have been perfectly unrecognisable even to her maternal eyes, stripped as he was of all save a torn remnant of his garment, had she not instantly marked the contrast between his behaviour and that of his vile tormentors. He alone in the midst of persecution and suffering looked calm and resigned, and far from returning blow for blow, never raised his hands but in acts of supplication to his Eternal Father for the pardon of his enemies. As he approached, she was unable to restrain herself any longer, but exclaimed in thrilling accents: 'Alas! is that my Son? Ah, yes! I see that it is my beloved Son. O, Jesus, my Jesus!' When the procession was almost opposite, Jesus looked upon her with an expression of the greatest love and compassion; this look was too much for the heartbroken mother: she became for the moment totally unconscious, and John and Magdalen endeavoured to carry her home, but she quickly roused herself, and accompanied the beloved disciple to Pilate's palace.

The inhabitants of the town of Ophel were all gathered together in an open space to meet Jesus, but far from administering comfort, they added a fresh ingredient to his cup of sorrow; they inflicted upon him that sharp pang which must ever be felt by those who see their friends abandon them in the hour of adversity. Jesus had done much for the inhabitants of Ophel, but no sooner

[p. 179]

did they see him reduced to such a state of misery and degradation, than their faith was shaken; they could no longer believe him to be a king, a prophet, the Messiah, and the Son of God. The Pharisees jeered and made game of them, on account of the admiration they had formerly expressed for Jesus. 'Look at your king now,' they exclaimed; 'do homage to him; have you no congratulations to offer him now that he is about to be crowned, and seated on his throne? All his boasted miracles are at an end; the High Priest has put an end to his tricks and witchcraft.'

Notwithstanding the remembrance which these poor people had of the miracles and wonderful cures which had been performed under their very eyes by Jesus; notwithstanding the great benefits he had bestowed upon them their faith was shaken by beholding him thus derided and pointed out as an object of contempt by the High Priest and the members of the Sanhedrim, who were regarded in Jerusalem with the greatest veneration. Some went away doubting, while others remained and endeavoured to join the rabble, but they wore prevented by the guards, who had been sent by the Pharisees, to prevent riots and confusion.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XVI.

  

Description of Pilate's Palace and the adjacent Buildings.

THE palace of the Roman Governor, Pilate, was built on the north-west side of the mountain on which the Temple stood, and to reach it persons were obliged to ascend a flight of marble steps. It overlooked a large square surrounded by a colonnade, under which the merchants sat to sell their various commodities. A parapet, and an entrance at the north, south, east, and west sides alone broke the uniformity of this part of the market-place, which was called the forum, and built on higher ground than the adjacent streets, which sloped down from it. The palace of Pilate was not quite close, but separated

[p. 180]

by a large court, the entrance to which at the eastern side was through a high arch facing a street leading to the door called the 'Probatica,' on the road to the Mount of Olives. The southern entrance was through another arch, which leads to Sion, in the neighbourhood of the fortress of Acre. From the top of the marble steps of Pilate's palace, a person could see across the court as far as the forum, at the entrance of which a few columns and stone seats were placed. It was at these seats that the Jewish priests stopped, in order not to defile themselves by entering the tribunal of Pilate, a line traced on the pavement of the court indicating the precise boundary beyond which they could not pass without incurring defilement. There was a large parapet near the western entrance, supported by the sides of Pilate's Praetorium, which formed a species of porch between it and the square. That part of Pilate's palace which he made use of when acting in the capacity of judge, was called the Praetorium. A number of columns surrounded the parapet of which we have just spoken, and in the centre was an uncovered portion, containing an underground part, where the two thieves condemned to be crucified with our Lord were confined, and this part was filled with Roman soldiers. The pillar upon which our Lord was scourged was placed on the forum itself, not far from this parapet and the colonnade. There were many other columns in this place; those nearest to the palace were made use of for the infliction of various corporal punishments, and the others served as posts to which were fastened the beasts brought for sale. Upon the forum itself, opposite this building, was a platform filled with seats made of stone; and from this platform, which was called Gabbatha, Pilate was accustomed to pronounce sentence on great criminals. The marble staircase ascended by per sons going to the governors palace led likewise to an uncovered terrace, and it was from this terrace that Pilate gave audience to the priests and Pharisees, when they brought forward their accusations against Jesus. They all stood before him in the forum, and refused to advance further than the stone seats before mentioned. A person

[p. 181]

speaking in a loud tone of voice from the terrace could be easily heard by those in the forum.

Behind Pilate's palace there were many other terraces, and likewise gardens, and a country house. The gardens were between the palace of the governor and the dwelling of his wife, Claudia Procles. A large moat separated these buildings from the mountain on which the Temple stood, and on this side might be seen the houses inhabited by those who served in the Temple. The palace of Herod the elder was placed on the eastern side of Pilate's palace; and it was in its inner court that numbers of the Innocents were massacred. At present the appearance of these two buildings is a little altered, as their entrances are changed. Four of the principal streets commenced at this part of the town, and ran in a southerly direction, three leading to the forum and Pilate's palace, and the fourth to the gate through which persons passed on their way to Bethsur. The beautiful house which belonged to Lazarus, and likewise that of Martha, were in a prominent part of this street.

One of these streets was very near to the Temple, and began at the gate which was called Probatica. The pool of Probatica was close to this gate on the right-hand side, and in this pool the sheep were washed for the first time, before being taken to the Temple; while the second and more solemn washing took place in the pool of Bethsaida, which is near the south entrance to the Temple. The second of the above-mentioned streets contained a house belonging to St. Anne, the Mother of the Blessed Virgin, which she usually inhabited when she came up to Jerusalem with her family to offer sacrifice in the Temple. I believe it was in this house that the espousals of St. Joseph and the Blessed Virgin were celebrated.

The forum, as I have already explained, was built on higher ground than the neighbouring streets, and the aqueducts which ran through these streets flowed into the Probatica pool. On Mount Sion, directly opposite to the old castle of King David, stood a building very similar to the forum, while to the south-east might be seen the Cenacle, and a little towards the north the tribunals of

[p. 182]

[paragraph continues] Annas and Caiphas. King David's castle was a deserted fortress, filled with courts, empty rooms, and stables, generally let to travellers. It had long been in this state of ruin, certainly before the time of our Lord's nativity. I saw the Magi with their numerous retinue enter it before going into Jerusalem.

When in meditation I behold the ruins of old castles and temples, see their neglected and forlorn state, and reflect on the uses to which they are now put, so different from the intentions of those who raised them, my mind always reverts to the events of our own days, when so many of the beautiful edifices erected by our pious and zealous ancestors are either destroyed, defaced, or used for worldly, if not wicked purposes. The little church of our convent, in which our Lord deigned to dwell, notwithstanding our unworthiness, and which was to me a paradise upon earth, is now without either roof or windows, and all the monuments are effaced or carried away. Our beloved convent, too, what will be done with it in a short time I that convent, where I was more happy in my little cell with my broken chair, than a king could be on his throne, for from its window I beheld that part of the church which contained the Blessed Sacrament. In a few years, perhaps, no one will know that it ever existed,--no one will know that it once contained hundreds of souls consecrated to God, who spent their days in imploring his mercy upon sinners. But God will know all, he never forgets,--the past and the future are equally present to him. He it is who reveals to me events which took place so long ago, and on the day of judgment, when all must be accounted for, and every debt paid, even to the farthing, he will remember both the good and the evil deeds performed in places long since forgotten. With God there is no exception of persons or places, his eyes see all, even the Vineyard of Naboth. It is a tradition among us that our convent was originally founded by two poor nuns, whose worldly possessions consist ed in a jar of oil and a sack of beans. On the last day God will reward them for the manner in which they put out this small talent to interest,

[p. 183]

and for the large harvest which they reaped and presented to him. It is often said that poor souls remain in purgatory in punishment for what appears to us so small a crime as not having made restitution of a few coppers of which they had unlawful possession. May God therefore have mercy upon those who have seized the property of the poor, or of the Church.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XVII.

  

Jesus before Pilate.

IT was about eight in the morning, according to our method of counting time, when the procession reached the palace of Pilate. Annas, Caiphas, and the chiefs of the Sanhedrim stopped at a part between the forum and the entrance to the Praetorium, where some stone seats were placed for them. The brutal guards dragged Jesus to the foot of the fight of stairs which led to the judgment-seat of Pilate. Pilate was reposing in a comfortable chair, on a terrace which overlooked the forum, and a small three-legged table stood by his side, on which was placed the insignia of his office, and a few other things. He was surrounded by officers and soldiers dressed with the magnificence usual in the Roman army. The Jews and the priests did not enter the Praetorium, for fear of defiling themselves, but remained outside.

When Pilate saw the tumultuous procession enter, and perceived how shamefully the cruel Jews had treated their prisoner, he arose, and addressed them in a tone as contemptuous as could have been assumed by a victorious general towards the vanquished chief of some insignificant village: 'What are you come about so early? Why have you ill-treated this prisoner so shamefully? Is it not possible to refrain from thus tearing to pieces and beginning to execute your criminals even before they are judged? They made no answer, but shouted out to the guards, 'Bring him on--bring him to be judged!' and then, turning

[p. 184]

to Pilate, they said, 'Listen to our accusations against this malefactor; for we cannot enter the tribunal lest we defile ourselves! Scarcely had they finished these words, when a voice was heard to issue from the midst of the dense multitude; it proceeded from a venerable-looking old man, of imposing stature, who exclaimed, 'You are right in not entering the Praetorium, for it has been sanctified by the blood of Innocents; there is but one Person who has a right to enter, and who alone can enter, because he alone is pure as the Innocents who were massacred there.' The person who uttered these words in a loud voice, and then disappeared among the crowd, was a rich man of the name of Zadoc, first-cousin to Obed, the husband of Veronica; two of his children were among the Innocents whom Herod had caused to be butchered at the birth of our Saviour. Since that dreadful moment he had given up the world, and, together with his wife, followed the rules of the Essenians. He had once seen our Saviour at the house of Lazarus, and there heard him discourse, and the sight of the barbarous manner in which he was dragged before Pilate recalled to his mind all he himself had suffered when his babes were so cruelly murdered before his eyes, and he determined to give this public testimony of his belief in the innocence of Jesus. The persecutors of our Lord were far too provoked at the haughty manner which Pilate assumed towards them, and at the humble position they were obliged to occupy, to take any notice of the words of a stranger.

The brutal guards dragged our Lord up the marble staircase, and led him to the end of the terrace, from whence Pilate was conferring with the Jewish priests. The Roman governor had often heard of Jesus, although he had never seen him, and now he was perfectly astonished at the calm dignity of deportment of a man brought before him in so pitiable a condition. The inhuman behaviour of the priests and ancients both exasperated him and increased his contempt for them, and he informed them pretty quickly that he had not the slightest intention of condemning Jesus without satisfactory proofs of the truth

[p. 185]

of their accusations. 'What accusation do you bring against this man?' said he, addressing the priests in the most scornful tone possible. 'If he were not a malefactor we would not have delivered him up to thee,' replied the priests sullenly. 'Take him,' said Pilate, 'and judge you him according to your law.' 'Thou knowest well,' replied they, 'that it is not lawful for us to condemn any man to death.' The enemies of Jesus were furious--they wished to have the trial finished off, and their victim executed as quickly as possible, that they might be ready at the festival-day to sacrifice the Paschal lamb, not knowing, miserable wretches as they were, that he whom they had dragged before the tribunal of an idolatrous judge (into whose house they would not enter, for fear of defiling themselves before partaking of the figurative victim), that he, and he alone, was the true Paschal Lamb, of which the other was only the shadow.

Pilate, however, at last ordered them to produce their accusations. These accusations were three in number, and they brought forward ten witnesses to attest the truth of each. Their great aim was to make Pilate believe that Jesus was the leader of a conspiracy against the emperor, in order that he might condemn him to death as a rebel. They themselves were powerless in such matters, being allowed to judge none but religious offences. Their first endeavour was to convict him of seducing the people, exciting them to rebellion, and of being an enemy to public peace and tranquillity. To prove these charges they brought forward some false witnesses, and declared likewise that he violated the Sabbath, and even profaned it by curing the sick upon that day. At this accusation Pilate interrupted them, and said in a jeering tone, 'It is very evident you were none of you ill yourselves--had you been so you would not have complained of being cured on the Sabbath-day.' 'He seduces the people, and inculcates the most disgusting doctrines. He even says, that no person can attain eternal life unless they eat his flesh and drink his blood.' Pilate was quite provoked at the intense hatred which their words and countenances expressed,

[p. 186]

and, turning from them with a look of scorn, exclaimed, 'You most certainly must wish to follow his doctrines and to attain eternal life, for you are thirsting for both his body and blood.'

The Jews then brought forward the second accusation against Jesus, which was that he forbad the people to pay tribute to the emperor. These words roused the indignation of Pilate, as it was his place to see that all the taxes were properly paid, and he exclaimed in an angry tone, 'That is a lie! I must know more about it than you.' This obliged the enemies of our Lord to proceed to the third accusation, which they did in words such as these: 'Although this man is of obscure birth, he is the chief of a large party. When at their head, he denounces curses upon Jerusalem, and relates parables of double meaning concerning a king who is preparing a wedding feast for his son. The multitude whom he had gathered together on a mountain endeavoured once to make him their king; but it was sooner than he intended: his plans were not matured; therefore he fled and hid himself. Latterly he has come forward much more: it was but the other day that he entered Jerusalem at the head of a tumultuous assembly, who by his orders made the people rend the air with acclamations of "Hosanna to the Son of David! Blessed be the empire of our Father David, which is now beginning." He obliges his partisans to pay him regal honours, and tells them that he is the Christ, the Anointed of the Lord, the Messiah, the king promised to the Jews, and he wishes to be addressed by these fine titles.' Ten witnesses gave testimony concerning these things.

The last accusation-that of Jesus causing himself to be called king--made some impression upon Pilate; he became a little thoughtful, left the terrace and, casting a scrutinising glance on Jesus, went into the adjoining apartment, and ordered the guards to bring him alone into his presence. Pilate was not only superstitious, but likewise extremely weak-minded and susceptible. He had often, during the course of his pagan education, heard mention made of sons of his gods who had dwelt for a

[p. 187]

time upon earth; he was likewise fully aware that the Jewish prophets had long foretold that one should appear in the midst of them who should be the Anointed of the Lord, their Saviour, and Deliverer from slavery; and that many among the people believed this firmly. He remembered likewise that kings from the east had come to Herod, the predecessor of the present monarch of that name, to pay homage to a newly-born king of the Jews, and that Herod had on this account given orders for the massacre of the Innocents. He had often heard of the traditions concerning the Messiah and the king of the Jews, and even examined them with some curiosity; although of course, being a pagan, without the slightest belief. Had he believed at all, he would probably have agreed with the Herodians, and with those Jews who expected a powerful and victorious king. With such impressions, the idea of the Jews accusing the poor miserable individual whom they had brought into his presence of setting himself up as the promised king and Messiah, of course appeared to him absurd; but as the enemies of Jesus brought forward these charges in proof of treason against the emperor, he thought it proper to interrogate him privately concerning them.

'Art thou the king of the Jews?' said Pilate, looking at our Lord, and unable to repress his astonishment at the divine expression of his countenance.

Jesus made answer, 'Sayest thou this thing of thyself, or have others told it thee of me?'

Pilate was offended that Jesus should think it possible for him to believe such a thing, and answered, 'Am I a Jew? Thy own nation and the chief priests have delivered thee up to me as deserving of death: what hast thou done?'

Jesus answered majestically, 'My kingdom is not of this world. If my kingdom were of this world, my servants would certainly strive that I should not be delivered to the Jews; but now my kingdom is not from hence.'

Pilate was somewhat moved by these solemn words, and said to him in a more serious tone, 'Art thou a king, then?'

Jesus answered, 'Thou sayest that I am a king. For 

[p. 188]

this was I born, and for this I came into the world, that I should give testimony to the truth. Every one that is of the truth heareth my voice.'

Pilate looked at him, and rising from his seat said, The truth! what is truth?'

They then exchanged a few more words, which I do not now remember, and Pilate returned to the terrace. The answers and deportment of Jesus were far beyond his comprehension; but he saw plainly that his assumption of royalty would not clash with that of the emperor, for that it was to no worldly kingdom that he laid claim; whereas the emperor cared for nothing beyond this world. He therefore again addressed the chief priests from the terrace, and said, 'I find no cause in him.' The enemies of Jesus became furious, and uttered a thousand different accusations against our Saviour. But he remained silent, solely occupied in praying for his base enemies, and replied not when Pilate addressed him in these words, 'Answerest thou nothing? Behold in how many things they accuse thee!' Pilate was filled with astonishment, and said, 'I see plainly that all they allege is false.' But his accusers, whose anger continued to increase, cried out, 'You find no cause in him?' Is it no crime to incite the people to revolt in all parts of the kingdom?--to spread his false doctrines, not only here, but in Galilee likewise?'

The mention of Galilee made Pilate pause: he reflected for a moment, and then asked, 'Is this man a Galilaean, and a subject of Herod's?' They made answer, 'He is; his parents lived at Nazareth, and his present dwelling is in Capharnaum.'

'Since that is the case,' replied Pilate, 'take him before Herod; he is here for the festival, and can judge him at once, as he is his subject.' Jesus was immediately led out of the tribunal, and Pilate dispatched an officer to Herod, to inform him that Jesus of Nazareth, who was his subject, was about to be brought to him to be judged. Pilate had two reasons for following this line of conduct; in the first place he was delighted to escape having to pass sentence himself, as he felt very uncomfortable about

[p. 189]

the whole affair; and in the second place he was glad of an opportunity of pleasing Herod, with whom he had had a disagreement, for he knew him to be very curious to see Jesus.

The enemies of our Lord were enraged at being thus dismissed by Pilate in the presence of the whole multitude, and gave vent to their anger by ill-treating him even more than before. They pinioned him afresh, and then ceased not overwhelming him with curses and blows as they led him hurriedly through the crowd, towards the palace of Herod, which was situated at no great distance from the forum. Some Roman soldiers had joined the procession.

During the time of the trial Claudia Procles, the wife of Pilate, had sent him frequent messages to intimate that she wished extremely to speak to him; and when Jesus was sent to Herod, she placed herself on a balcony and watched the cruel conduct of his enemies with mingled feelings of fear, grief, and horror.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XVIII.

  

The Origin of the Way of the Cross.

DURING the whole of the scene which we have just described, the Mother of Jesus, with Magdalen and John, had stood in a recess in the forum: they were overwhelmed with the most bitter sorrow, which was but increased by all they heard and saw. When Jesus was taken before Herod, John led the Blessed Virgin and Magdalen over the parts which had been sanctified by his footsteps. They again looked at the house of Caiphas, that of Annas, Ophel, Gethsemani, and the Garden of Olives; they stopped and contemplated each Spot where he had fallen, or where he had suffered particularly; and they wept silently at the thought of all he had undergone. The Blessed Virgin knelt down frequently and kissed the ground where her Son had fallen, while Magdalen wrung her hands in bitter grief, and John, although he could not restrain his own

[p. 190]

tears, endeavoured. to console his companions, supported, and led them on. Thus was the holy devotion of the 'Way of the Cross' first practised; thus were the Mysteries of the Passion of Jesus first honoured, even before that Passion was accomplished, and the Blessed Virgin, that model of spotless purity, was the first to show forth the deep veneration felt by the Church for our dear Lord. How sweet and consoling to follow this Immaculate Mother, passing to and fro, and bedewing the sacred spots with her tears. But, ah! who can describe the sharp, sharp sword of grief which then transfixed her tender soul? She who had once borne the Saviour of the world in her chaste womb, and suckled him for so long,--she who had truly conceived him who was the Word of God, in God from all eternity, and truly God,--she beneath whose heart, full of grace, he had deigned to dwell nine months, who had felt him living within her before he appeared. among men to impart the blessing of salvation and teach them his heavenly doctrines; she suffered with Jesus, sharing with him not only the sufferings of his bitter Passion, but likewise that ardent desire of redeeming fallen man by an ignominious death, which consumed him.

In this touching manner did the most pure and holy Virgin lay the foundation of the devotion called the Way of the Cross; thus at each station, marked by the sufferings of her Son, did she lay up in her heart the inexhaustible merits of his Passion, and gather them up as precious stones or sweet-scented flowers to be presented as a choice offering to the Eternal Father in behalf of all true believers. The grief of Magdalen was so intense as to make her almost like an insane person. The holy and boundless love she felt for our Lord prompted her to cast herself at his feet, and there pour forth the feeling of her heart (as she once poured the precious ointment on his head as he sat at table); but when on the point of following this impulse, a dark gulf appeared to intervene between herself and him. The repentance she felt for her faults was immense, and not less intense was

[p. 191]

her gratitude for their pardon; but when she longed to offer acts of love and thanksgiving as precious incense at the feet of Jesus, she beheld him betrayed, suffering, and about to die for the expiation of her offences which he had taken upon himself, and this sight filled her with horror, and almost rent her soul asunder with feelings of love, repentance, and gratitude. The sight of the ingratitude of those for whom he was about to die increased the bitterness of these feelings tenfold, and every step, word, or movement demonstrated the agony of her soul. The heart of John was filled with love, and he suffered intensely, but he uttered not a word. He supported the Mother of his beloved Master in this her first pilgrimage through the stations of the Way of the Cross, and assisted her in giving the example of that devotion which has since been practised with so much fervour by the members of the Christian Church.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XIX.

  

Pilate and his Wife.

WHILST the Jews were leading Jesus to Herod, I saw Pilate go to his wife, Claudia Procles. She hastened to meet him, and they went together into a small garden-house which was on one of the terraces behind the palace. Claudia appeared to be much excited, and under the influence of fear. She was a tall, fine-looking woman, although extremely pale. Her hair was plaited and slightly ornamented, but partly covered by a long, veil which fell gracefully over her shoulders. She wore earrings, a necklace, and her flowing dress was drawn together and held up by a species of clasp. She conversed with Pilate for a long time, and entreated him by all that he held sacred not to injure Jesus, that Prophet, that saint of saints; and she related the extraordinary dreams or visions which she had had on the previous night concerning him.

Whilst she was speaking I saw the greatest part of

[p. 192]

these visions: the following were the most striking. In the first place, the principal events in the life of our Lord--the annunciation, the nativity, the adoration of the shepherds and that of the kings, the prophecy of Simeon and that. of Anna, the flight into Egypt, the massacre of the Innocents, and our Lord's temptation in the wilderness. She had likewise been shown in her sleep the most striking features of the public life of Jesus. He always appeared to her environed with a resplendent light, but his malicious and cruel enemies were under the most horrible and disgusting forms imaginable. She saw his intense sufferings, his patience, and his inexhaustible love, likewise the anguish of his Mother, and her perfect resignation. These visions filled the wife of Pilate with the greatest anxiety and terror, particularly as they were accompanied by symbols which made her comprehend their meaning, and her tender feelings were barrowed by the sight of such dreadful scenes. She had suffered from them during the whole of the night; they were sometimes obscure, but more often clear and distinct; and when morning dawned and she was roused by the noise of the tumultuous mob who were dragging Jesus to be judged, she glanced at the procession and instantly saw that the unresisting victim in the midst of the crowd, bound, suffering, and so inhumanely treated as to be scarcely recognisable, was no other than that bright and glorious being who had been so often brought before her eyes in the visions of the past night. She was greatly affected by this sight, and immediately sent for Pilate, and gave him an account of all that had happened to her. She spoke with much vehemence and emotion; and although there was a great deal in what she had seen which she could not understand, much less express, yet she entreated and implored. her husband in the most touching terms to grant her request.

Pilate was both astonished and troubled by the words of his wife. He compared the narration with all he had previously heard concerning Jesus; and reflected on the hatred of the Jews, the majestic silence of our Saviour,

[p. 193]

and the mysterious answers he had given to all his questions. He hesitated for some time, but was at last overcome by the entreaties of his wife, and told her that he had already declared his conviction of the innocence of Jesus, and that he would not condemn him, because he saw that the accusations were mere fabrications of his enemies. He spoke of the words of Jesus to himself, promised his wife that nothing should induce him to condemn this just man, and even gave her a ring before they parted as a pledge of his promise.

The character of Pilate was debauched and undecided, but his worst qualities were an extreme pride and meanness which made him never hesitate in the performance of an unjust action, provided it answered his ends. He was excessively superstitious, and when in any difficulty had recourse to charms and spells. He was much puzzled and alarmed about the trial of Jesus; and I saw him running backwards and forwards, offering incense first to one god and then to another, and imploring them to assist him; but Satan filled his imagination with still greater confusion; he first instilled one false idea and then another into his mind. He then had recourse to one of his favourite superstitious practices, that of watching the sacred chickens eat, but in vain,--his mind remained enveloped in darkness, and he became more and more undecided. He first thought that he would acquit our Saviour, whom he well knew to be innocent, but then he feared incurring the wrath of his false gods if he spared him, as he fancied he might be a species of demigod, and obnoxious to them 'It is possible,' said he inwardly, 'that this man may really be that king of the Jews concerning whose coming there are so many prophecies. It was a king of the Jews whom the Magi came from the East to adore. Perhaps he is a secret enemy both of our gods and of the emperor; it might be most imprudent in me to spare his life. Who knows whether his death would not be a triumph to my gods?' Then he remembered the wonderful dreams described to him by his wife, who had never seen Jesus, and he again changed, and decided that it would be safer

[p. 194]

not to condemn him. He tried to persuade himself that he wished to pass a just sentence; but he deceived himself, for when he asked himself, 'What is the truth?' he did not wait for the answer. His mind was filled with confusion, and he was quite at a loss how to act, as his sole desire was to entail no risk upon himself.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XX.

  

Jesus before Herod.

THE palace of the Tetrarch Herod was built on the north side of the forum, in the new town; not very far from that of Pilate. An escort of Roman soldiers, mostly from that part of the country which is situated between Switzerland and Italy, had joined the procession. The enemies of Jesus were perfectly furious at the trouble they were compelled to take in going backwards and forwards, and therefore vented their rage upon him. Pilate's messenger had preceded the procession, consequently Herod was expecting them. He was seated on a pile of cushions, heaped together so as to form a species of throne, in a spacious hall, and surrounded by courtiers and warriors. The Chief Priests entered and placed themselves by his side, leaving Jesus at the entrance. Herod was much elated and pleased at Pilate's having thus publicly acknowledged his right of judging the Galilaeans, and likewise rejoiced at seeing that Jesus who had never deigned to appear before him reduced to such a state of humiliation and degradation. His curiosity had been greatly excited by the high terms in which John the Baptist had announced the coming of Jesus, and he had likewise heard much about him from the Herodians, and through the many spies whom he had sent into different parts: he was therefore delighted at this opportunity of interrogating him in the presence of his courtiers and of the Jewish priests, hoping to make a grand display of his own knowledge and talents. Pilate having sent him word,

[p. 195]

[paragraph continues] 'that he could find no cause in the man,' he concluded that these words were intended as a hint that he (Pilate) wished the accusers to be treated with contempt and mistrust. He, therefore, addressed them in the most haughty distant manner possible, and thereby increased their rage and anger indescribably.

They all began at once to vociferate their accusations, to which Herod hardly listened, being intent solely on gratifying his curiosity by a close examination of Jesus, whom he had so often wished to see. But when he beheld him stripped of all clothing save the remnant of a mantle, scarcely able to stand, and his countenance totally disfigured from the blows he had received, and from the mud and missiles which the rabble had flung at his head, the luxurious and effeminate prince turned away in disgust, uttered the name of God, and said to the priests in a tone of mingled pity and contempt, 'Take him hence, and bring him not back into my presence in such a deplorable state.' The guards took Jesus into the outer court, and procured some water in a basin, with which they cleansed his soiled garments and disfigured countenance; but they could not restrain their brutality even while doing this, and paid no regard to the wounds with which he was covered.

Herod meantime accosted the priests in much the same Strain as Pilate had done. 'Your behaviour vastly resembles that of butchers,' he said, 'and you commence your immolations pretty early in the morning.' The Chief Priests produced their accusations at once. Herod, when Jesus was again brought into his presence, pretended to feel some compassion, and offered him a glass of wine to recruit his strength; but Jesus turned his head away and refused this alleviation.

Herod then began to expatiate with great volubility on all he had heard concerning our Lord. He asked a thousand questions, and exhorted him to work a miracle in his presence; but Jesus answered not a word, and stood before him with his eyes cast down, which conduct both irritated and disconcerted Herod, although he endeavoured to conceal

[p. 196]

his anger, and continued his interrogations. He at first expressed surprise, and made use of persuasive words. 'Is it possible, Jesus of Nazareth,' he exclaimed, 'that it is thou thyself that appearest before me as a criminal? I have heard thy actions so much spoken of. Thou art not perhaps aware that thou didst offend me grievously by setting free the prisoners whom I had confined at Thirza, but possibly thy intentions were good. The Roman governor has now sent thee to me to be judged; what answer canst thou give to all these accusations? Thou art silent? I have heard much concerning thy wisdom, and the religion thou teachest, let me hear thee answer and confound thy enemies. Art thou the king of the Jews? Art thou the Son of God? Who art thou? Thou art said to have performed wonderful miracles; work one now in my presence. I have the power to release thee. Is it true that thou hast restored sight to the blind, raised up Lazarus from the dead, and fed two or three thousand persons with a few loaves? Why dost thou not answer? I recommend thee to work a miracle quickly before me; perhaps thou mayest rejoice afterwards at having complied with my wishes.'

Jesus still kept silence, and Herod continued to question him with even more volubility.

'Who art thou?' said he. 'From whence hast thou thy power? How is it that thou dost no longer possess it? Art thou he whose birth was foretold in such a wonderful manner? Kings from the East came to my father to see a newly-born king of the Jews: is it true that thou wast that child? Didst thou escape when so many children were massacred, and how was thy escape managed? Why hast thou been for so many years unknown? Answer my questions? Art thou a king? Thy appearance certainly is not regal. I have been told that thou wast conducted to the Temple in triumph a short time ago. What was the meaning of such an exhibition?--speak out at once!--Answer me!'

Herod continued to question Jesus in this rapid manner; but our Lord did not vouchsafe a reply. I was shown

[p. 197]

[paragraph continues] (as indeed I already knew) that Jesus was thus silent because Herod was in a state of excommunication, both on account of his adulterous marriage with Herodias, and of his having given orders for the execution of St. John the Baptist. Annas and Caiphas, seeing how indignant Herod was at the silence of Jesus, immediately endeavoured to take advantage of his feelings of wrath, and recommenced their accusations, saying that he had called Herod himself a fox; that his great aim for many years had been the overthrow of Herod's family; that he was endeavouring to establish a new religion, and had celebrated the Pasch on the previous day. Although Herod was extremely enraged at the conduct of Jesus, he did not lose sight of the political ends which he wished to forward. He was determined not to condemn our Lord, both because he experienced a secret and indefinable sensation of terror in his presence, and because he still felt remorse at the thought of having put John the Baptist to death, besides which he detested the High Priests for not having allowed him to take part in the sacrifices on account of his adulterous connection with Herodias.

But his principal reason for determining not to condemn Jesus was, that he wished to make some return to Pilate for his courtesy, and he thought the best return would be the compliment of showing deference to his decision and agreeing with him in opinion. But he spoke in the most contemptuous manner to Jesus, and turning to the guards and servants who surrounded him, and who were about two hundred in number, said: 'Take away this fool, and pay him that homage which is his due; he is mad, rather than guilty of any crime.'

Our Lord was immediately taken into a large court, where every possible insult and indignity was heaped upon him. This court was between the two wings of the palace, and Herod stood a spectator on a platform for some time. Annas and Caiphas wore by his side, endeavouring to persuade him to condemn our Saviour. But their efforts were fruitless, and Herod answered in a tone loud enough to be heard by the Roman soldiers: 'No, I should act quite

[p. 198]

wrongly if I condemned him.' His meaning was, that it would be wrong to condemn as guilty one whom Pilate had pronounced innocent, although he had been so courteous as to defer the final judgment to him.

When the High Priests and the other enemies of Jesus perceived that Herod was determined not to give in to their wishes, they dispatched emissaries to that division of the city called Acre, which was chiefly inhabited by Pharisees, to let them know that they must assemble in the neighbourhood of Pilate's palace, gather together the rabble, and bribe them to make a tumult, and demand the condemnation of our Lord. They likewise sent forth secret agents to alarm the people by threats of the divine vengeance if they did not insist on the execution of Jesus, whom they termed a sacrilegious blasphemer. These agents were ordered likewise to alarm them by intimating that if Jesus were not put to death, he would go over to the Romans, and assist in the extermination of the Jewish nation, for that it was to this he referred when he spoke of his future kingdom They endeavoured to spread a report in other parts of the city, that Herod had condemned him, but still that it was necessary for the people likewise to express their wishes, as his partisans were to be feared; for that if he were released he would join the Romans, make a disturbance on the festival day, and take the most inhuman revenge. Some among them circulated contradictory and alarming reports, in order to excite the people, and cause an insurrection; while others distributed money among the soldiers to bribe them to ill-treat Jesus, so as to cause his death, which they were most anxious should be brought about as quickly as possible, lest Pilate should acquit him.

Whilst the Pharisees wore busying themselves in this manner, our Blessed Saviour was suffering the greatest outrages from the brutal soldiers to whom Herod had delivered him, that they might deride him as a fool. They dragged him into the court, and one of their number having procured a large white sack which had once been filled with cotton, they made a hole in its centre with a

[p. 199]

sword, and then tossed it over the head of Jesus, accompanying each action with bursts of the most contemptuous laughter. Another soldier brought the remnant of an old scarlet cloak, and passed it round his neck, while the rest bent their knee before him--shoved him--abused him--spat upon him--struck him on the cheek, because he had refused to answer their king, mocked him by pretending to pay homage--threw mud upon him--seized him by the waist, pretending to make him dance; then, having thrown him down, dragged him through a gutter which ran on the side of the court, thus causing his sacred head to strike against the column and sides of the wall, and when at last they raised him up, it was only in order to recommence their insults. The soldiers and servants of Herod who were assembled in this court amounted to upwards of two hundred, and all thought to pay court to their monarch by torturing Jesus in some unheard-of way. Many were bribed by the enemies of our Lord to strike him on the head with their sticks, and they took advantage of the confusion and tumult to do so. Jesus looked upon them with compassion; excess of pain drew from him occasional moans and groans, but his enemies rejoiced in his sufferings, and mocked his moans, and not one among the whole assembly showed the slightest degree of compassion. I saw blood streaming from his head, and three times did the blows prostrate him, but angels were weeping at his side, and they anointed his head with heavenly balsam. It was revealed to me that had it not been for this miraculous assistance he must have died from those wounds. The Philistines at Gaza, who gave vent to their wrath by tormenting poor blind Samson, were far less barbarous than these cruel executioners of our Lord.

The priests were, however, impatient to return to the Temple; therefore, having made certain that their orders regarding Jesus would be obeyed, they returned to Herod, and endeavoured to persuade him to condemn our Lord. But he, being determined to do all in his power to please Pilate, refused to accede to their wishes, and sent Jesus back again clothed in the fool's garment.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 200]

  

CHAPTER XXI.

  

Jesus led back from the Court of Herod to that of Pilate.

THE enemies of Jesus were perfectly infuriated at being obliged to take Jesus back, still uncondemned, to Pilate, who had so many times declared his innocence. They led him round by a much longer road, in order in the first place to let the persons of that part of the town see him in the state of ignominy to which he was reduced, and in the second place to give their emissaries more time to stir up the populace.

This road was extremely rough and uneven; and the soldiers, encouraged by the Pharisees, scarcely refrained a moment from tormenting Jesus. The long garment with which he was clothed impeded his steps, and caused him to fall heavily more than once; and his cruel guards, as also many among the brutal populace, instead of assisting him in his state of exhaustion, endeavoured by blows and kicks to force him to rise.

To all these outrages Jesus offered not the smallest resistance; he prayed constantly to his Father for grace and strength that he might not sink under them, but accomplish the work of his Passion for our redemption.

It was about eight o'clock when the procession reached the palace of Pilate. The crowd was dense, and the Pharisees might be seen walking to and fro, endeavouring to incite and infuriate them still more. Pilate, who remembered an insurrection which had taken place the year before at the Paschal time, had assembled upwards of a thousand soldiers, whom he posted around the Praetorium, the Forum, and his palace.

The Blessed Virgin, her elder sister Mary (the daughter of Heli), Mary (the daughter of Cleophas), Magdalen, and about twenty of the holy women, were standing in a room from whence they could see all which took place, and at first John was with them.

The Pharisees led Jesus, still clothed in the fool's garment, through the midst of the insolent mob, and

[p. 201]

had done all in their power to gather together the most vile and wicked of miscreants from among the dregs of the people. A servant sent by Herod had already reached Pilate, with a message to the effect that his master had fully appreciated his polite deference to his opinion, but that be looked upon the far-famed Galilaean as no better than a fool, that he had treated him as such, and now sent him back. Pilate was quite satisfied at finding that Herod had come to the same conclusion as himself, and therefore returned a polite message. From that hour they became friends, having been enemies many years; in fact, ever since the falling-in of the aqueduct. [*1] Jesus was

[p. 202]

again led to the house of Pilate. The archers dragged him up the stairs with their usual brutality; his feet became entangled in his long robe, and he fell upon the white marble steps, which were stained with blood from his sacred head. His enemies had again taken their seats at the entrance of the forum; the mob laughed at his fall, and the archers struck their innocent victim, instead of assisting him to rise. Pilate was reclining on a species of easy-chair, with a little table before him, and surrounded with officers and persons who held strips of parchment covered with writing in their hands. He came forward and said to the accusers of Jesus: 'You have presented unto me. this man, as one that perverteth the people, and behold I, having examined him before you, find no came in this man in those things wherein you accuse him. No, nor Herod neither. For I sent you to him, and behold,

[p. 203]

nothing worthy of death is done to him. I will chastise him, therefore, and release him.'

When the Pharisees heard these words, they became furious, and endeavoured to the utmost of their power to persuade the people to revolt, distributing money among them to effect this purpose. Pilate looked around with contempt, and addressed them in scornful words.

It happened to be the precise time when, according to an ancient custom, the people had the privilege of demanding the deliverance of one prisoner. The Pharisees had dispatched emissaries to persuade the people to demand the death, and not the life, of our Lord. Pilate hoped that they would ask for Jesus, and determined to give them to choose between him and a criminal called Barabbas, who had been convicted of a dreadful murder committed during a sedition, as also of many other crimes, and was, moreover, detested by the people.

There was considerable excitement among the crowd; a certain portion came forward, and their orators, addressing Pilate in a loud voice, said: 'Grant us the favour you have always granted on the festival day.' Pilate made answer: 'It is customary for me to deliver to you a criminal at the Paschal time; whom will you that I release to you, Barabbas, or Jesus that is called Christ?'

Although Pilate did not in his own mind feel at all certain that Jesus was the King of the Jews, yet he called him so, partly because his Roman pride made him take delight in humbling the Jews by calling such a despicable-looking person their king; and partly because he felt a kind of inward belief that Jesus might really be that miraculous king, that Messiah who had been promised. He saw plainly that the priests were incited by envy alone in their accusations against Jesus; this made him most anxious to disappoint them; and the desire was increased by that glimmering of the truth which partly enlightened his mind. There was some hesitation among the crowd when Pilate asked this question, and a few voices answered, 'Barabbas.' A servant sent by Pilate's wife asked for him at this moment; he left the platform, and the messenger

[p. 204]

presented the pledge which he had given her, saying at the same time: 'Claudia Procles begs you to remember your promise this morning.' The Pharisees and the priests walked anxiously and hastily about among the crowd, threatening some and ordering others, although, in fact, little was required to incite the already infuriated multitude.

Mary, with Magdalen, John, and the holy women, stood in a corner of the forum, trembling and weeping; for although the Mother of Jesus was fully aware that the redemption of man could not be brought about by any other means than the death of her Son, yet she was filled with the anguish of a mother, and with a longing desire to save him from those tortures and from that death which he was about to suffer. She prayed God not to allow such a fearful crime to be perpetrated; she repeated the words of Jesus in the Garden of Olives: 'If it is possible, let this chalice pass away.' She still felt a glimmering of hope, because there was a report current that Pilate wished to acquit Jesus. Groups of persons, mostly inhabitants of Capharnaum, where Jesus had taught, and among whom he had wrought so many miraculous cures, were congregated in her vicinity; they pretended not to remember either her or her weeping companions; they simply cast a glance now and then, as if by chance, at their closely-veiled figures. Many thought, as did her companions likewise, that these persons at least would reject Barabbas, and beg for the life of their Saviour and Benefactor; but these hopes were, alas, fallacious.

Pilate sent back the pledge to his wife, as an assurance of his intention to keep his promise. He again came forward on the platform, and seated himself at the little table. The Chief Priests took their seats likewise, and Pilate once more demanded: 'Which of the two am I to deliver up to you?' A general cry resounded through the hall: 'Not this man, but Barabbas!' 'But what am I to do with Jesus, who is called Christ?' replied Pilate. All exclaimed in a tumultuous manner: 'Let him be crucified! let him be crucified!' 'But what evil has he done?' asked

[p. 205]

[paragraph continues] Pilate for the third time. 'I find no cause in him. I will scourge and then acquit him.' But the cry, 'Crucify him! Crucify him!' burst from the crowd, and the sounds echoed like an infernal tempest; the High Priests and the Pharisees vociferated and hurried backwards and forwards as if insane. Pilate at last yielded; his weak pusillanimous character could not withstand such violent demonstrations; he delivered up Barabbas to the people, and condemned Jesus to be scourged.

Footnotes

^201:1 The cause of the quarrel between Pilate and Herod was, according to the account of Sister Emmerich, simply this: Pilate had undertaken to build an aqueduct on the south-east side of the mountain on which the Temple stood, at the edge of the torrent into which the waters of the pool of Bethsaida emptied themselves, and this aqueduct was to carry off the refuse of the Temple. Herod, through the medium of one of his confidants, who was a member of the Sanhedrim, agreed to furnish him with the necessary materials, as also with twenty-eight architects, who were also Herodians. His aim was to set the Jews still more against the Roman governor, by causing the undertaking to fail. He accordingly came to a private understanding with the architects, who agreed to construct the aqueduct in such a manner that it would be certain to fall. When the work was almost finished, and a number of bricklayers from Ophel were busily employed in removing the scaffolding, the twenty-eight builders went on to the top of the Tower of Siloe to contemplate the crash which they knew must take place. Not only did the whole of the building crumble to pieces, fall, and kill ninety-three workmen, but even the tower containing the twenty-eight architects came down, and not one escaped death. This accident occurred a short time previous to the 8th of January, two years after Jesus had commenced preaching; it took place on Herod's birthday, the same day that John the Baptist was beheaded in the Castle of Marcherunt. No Roman officer attended these festivities on account of the affair of the aqueduct, although Pilate had, with hypocritical politeness, been requested to take a part in them. Sister Emmerich saw some of the disciples of Jesus carry the news of this event into Samaria, where he was teaching, on the 8th of January. Jesus went from thence to Hebron, to comfort the family of John; and she saw him, on the 13th of January, cure many among the workmen of Ophel who had been injured by the fall of the aqueduct. We have seen by the relation previously given how little gratitude they [p. 202] showed him. The enmity of Herod towards Pilate was still farther increased by the manner in which the latter revenged himself on the followers of Herod. We will insert here a few details which were communicated at different times to Sister Emmerich. On the 25th of March, of the second year of our Lord's preaching, when Jesus and his disciples were in the neighbourhood of Bethania, they were warned by Lazarus that Judas of Gaulon intended to excite an insurrection against Pilate. On the 28th of March, Pilate issued a proclamation to the effect that he intended to impose a tax, the proceeds of which were partly to cover the expenses he had incurred in raising the building which had just fallen to the ground. This announcement was followed by a sedition headed by Judas of Gaulon, who always stood up for liberty, and who was (unknown to himself) a tool in the hands of the Herodians. The Herodians were rather like our Freemasons. On the 30th of March, at ten o'clock P.M., Jesus, dressed in a dark garment, was teaching in the Temple, with his Apostles and thirty disciples. The revolt of the Galilaeans against Pilate burst forth on this very day, and the rebels set free fifty of their number who had been imprisoned the day before; and many among the Romans were killed. On the 6th of April, Pilate caused the Galilaeans to be massacred at the moment of offering sacrifice, by disguised soldiers whom he had concealed in the Temple. Judas was killed with his companions. This massacre exasperated Herod still more against Pilate, and we have just seen by what means their reconciliation was affected.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXI.

  

The Scourging of Jesus.

THAT most weak and undecided of all judges, Pilate, had several times repeated these dastardly words: 'I find no crime in him: I will chastise him, therefore, and let him go;' to which the Jews had continued to respond, 'Crucify him! Crucify him!' but he determined to adhere to his resolution of not condemning our Lord to death, and ordered him to be scourged according to the manner of the Romans. The guards were therefore ordered to conduct him through the midst of the furious multitude to the forum, which they did with the utmost brutality, at the same time loading him with abuse, and striking him with their staffs. The pillar where criminals were scourged stood to the north of Pilate's palace, near the guard-house, and the executioners Soon arrived, carrying whips, rods, and ropes, which they tossed down at its base. They were six in number, dark, swarthy men, somewhat shorter than Jesus; their chests were covered with a piece of leather, or with some dirty stuff; their loins were girded, and their hairy, sinewy arms bare. They were malefactors from the frontiers of Egypt, who had been condemned for their crimes to hard labour, and were employed principally in making canals, and in erecting public buildings, the most criminal being selected to act as executioners in the Praetorium.

[p. 206]

These cruel men had many times scourged poor criminals to death at this pillar. They resembled wild beasts or demons, and appeared to be half drunk. They struck our Lord with their fists, and dragged him by the cords with which he was pinioned, although he followed them without offering the least resistance, and, finally, they barbarously knocked him down against the pillar. This pillar, placed in the centre of the court, stood alone, and did not serve to sustain any part of the building; it was not very high, for a tall man could touch the summit by stretching out his arm; there was a large iron ring at the top, and both rings and hooks a little lower down. It is quite impossible to describe the cruelty shown by these ruffians towards Jesus: they tore off the mantle with which he had 'been clothed in derision at the court of Herod, and almost threw him prostrate again.

Jesus trembled and shuddered as he stood before the pillar, and took off his garments as quickly as he could, but his hands were bloody and swollen. The only return he made when his brutal executioners struck and abused him was, to pray for them in the most touching manner: he turned his face once towards his Mother, who was standing overcome with grief; this look quite unnerved her: she fainted, and would have fallen, had not the holy women who were there supported her. Jesus put his arms round the pillar, and when his hands were thus raised, the archers fastened them to the iron ring which was at the top of the pillar; they then dragged his arms to such a height that his feet, which were tightly bound to the base of the pillar, scarcely touched the ground. Thus was the Holy of holies violently stretched, without a particle of clothing, on a pillar used for the punishment of the greatest criminals; and then did two furious ruffians who were thirsting for his blood begin in the most barbarous manner to scourge his sacred body from head to foot. The whips or scourges which they first made use of appeared to me to be made of a species of flexible white wood, but perhaps they were composed of the sinews ot the ox, or of strips of leather.

[p. 207]

Our loving Lord, the Son of God, true God and true Man, writhed as a worm under the blows of these barbarians; his mild but deep groans might be heard from afar; they resounded through the air, forming a kind of touching accompaniment to the hissing of the instruments of torture. These groans resembled rather a touching cry of prayer and supplication, than moans of anguish. The clamour of the Pharisees and the people formed another species of accompaniment, which at times as a deafening thunder-storm deadened and smothered these sacred and mournful cries, and in their place might be heard the words, 'Put him to death!' 'Crucify him!' Pilate continued parleying with the people, and when he demanded silence in order to be able to speak, he was obliged to proclaim his wishes to the clamorous assembly by the sound of a trumpet, and at such moments you might again hear the noise of the scourges, the moans of Jesus, the imprecations of the soldiers, and the bleating of the Paschal lambs which were being washed in the Probatica pool, at no great distance from the forum. There was something peculiarly touching in the plaintive bleating of these lambs: they alone appeared to unite their lamentations with the suffering moans of our Lord.

The Jewish mob was gathered together at some distance from the pillar at which the dreadful punishment was taking place, and Roman soldiers were stationed in different parts round about. Many persons were walking to and fro, some in silence, others speaking of Jesus in the most insulting terms possible, and a few appearing touched, and I thought I beheld rays of light issuing from our Lord and entering the hearts of the latter. I saw groups of infamous, bold-looking young men, who wore for the most part busying themselves near the watch-house in preparing fresh scourges, while others went to seek branches of thorns. Several of the servants of the High Priests went up to the brutal executioners and gave them money; as also a large jug filled with a strong bright red liquid, which quite inebriated them, and increased their cruelty tenfold towards their innocent victim. The two ruffians

[p. 208]

continued to strike our Lord with unremitting violence for a quarter of an hour, and were then succeeded by two others. His body was entirely covered with black, blue, and red marks; the blood was trickling down on the ground, and yet the furious cries which issued from among the assembled Jews showed that their cruelty was far from being satiated.

The night had been extremely cold, and the morning was dark and cloudy; a little hail had fallen, which surprised every one, but towards twelve o'clock the day became brighter, and the sun shone forth.

The two fresh executioners commenced scourging Jesus with the greatest possible fury; they made use of a different kind of rod,--a species of thorny stick, covered with knots and splinters. The blows from these sticks tore his flesh to pieces; his blood spouted out so as to stain their arms, and he groaned, prayed, and shuddered. At this moment, some strangers mounted on camels passed through the forum; they stopped for a moment, and were quite overcome with pity and horror at the scene before them, upon which some of the bystanders explained the cause of what they witnessed. Some of these travellers had been baptised by John, and others had heard the sermon of Jesus on the mountain. The noise and the tumult of the mob was even more deafening near the house of Pilate.

Two fresh executioners took the places of the last mentioned, who were beginning to flag; their scourges were composed of small chains, or straps covered with iron hooks, which penetrated to the bone, and tore off large pieces of flesh at every blow. What word, alas! could describe this terrible--this heartrending scene!

The cruelty of these barbarians was nevertheless not yet satiated; they untied Jesus, and again fastened him up with his back turned towards the pillar. As he was totally unable to support himself in an upright position, they passed cords round his waist, under his arms, and above his knees, and having bound his hands tightly into the rings which wore placed at the upper part of the pillar,

[p. 209]

they recommenced scourging him with even greater fury than before; and one among them struck him constantly on the face with a new rod. The body of our Lord was perfectly torn to shreds,--it was but one wound. He looked at his torturers with his eyes filled with blood, as if entreating mercy; but their brutality appeared to increase, and his moans each moment became more feeble.

The dreadful scourging had been continued without intermission for three quarters of an hour, when a stranger of lowly birth, a relation to Ctesiphon, the blind man whom Jesus had cured, rushed from amidst the crowd, and approached the pillar with a knife shaped like a cutlass in his hand. 'Cease!' he exclaimed, in an indignant tone; 'Cease! scourge not this innocent man unto death!' The drunken miscreants, taken by surprise, stopped short, while he quickly severed the cords which bound Jesus to the pillar, and disappeared among the crowd. Jesus fell almost without consciousness on the ground, which was bathed with his blood. The executioners left him there, and rejoined their cruel companions, who were amusing themselves in the guard-house with drinking, and plaiting the crown of thorns.

Our Lord remained for a short time on the ground, at the foot of the pillar, bathed in his own blood, and two or three bold-looking girls came up to gratify their curiosity by looking at him. They gave a glance, and were turning away in disgust, but at the moment the pain of the wounds of Jesus was so intense that he raised his bleeding head and looked at them. They retired quickly, and the soldiers and guards laughed and made game of them.

During the time of the scourging of our Lord, I saw weeping angels approach him many times; I likewise heard the prayers he constantly addressed to his Father for the pardon of our sins--prayers which never ceased during the whole time of the infliction of this cruel punishment. Whilst he lay bathed in his blood I saw an angel present to him a vase containing a bright-looking beverage which appeared to reinvigorate him in a certain degree. The archers soon returned, and after giving him some

[p. 210]

blows with their sticks, bade him rise and follow them. He raised himself with the greatest difficulty, as his trembling limbs could scarcely support the weight of his body; they did not give him sufficient time to put on his clothes, but threw his upper garment over his naked shoulders and led him from the pillar to the guard-house, where he wiped the blood which trickled down his face with a corner of his garment. When he passed before the benches on which the High Priests were seated, they cried out, 'Put him to death! Crucify him! crucify him!' and then turned away disdainfully. The executioners led him into the interior of the guard-house, which was filled with slaves, archers, hodmen, and the very dregs of the people, but there were no soldiers.

The great excitement among the populace alarmed Pilate so much, that he sent to the fortress of Antonia for a reinforcement of Roman soldiers, and posted these well-disciplined troops round the guard-house; they were permitted to talk and to deride Jesus in every possible way, but were forbidden to quit their ranks. These soldiers, whom Pilate had sent for to intimidate the mob, numbered about a thousand.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXIII.

  

Mary, during the Flagellation of our Lord.

I SAW the Blessed Virgin in a continual ecstasy during the time of the scourging of her Divine Son; she saw and suffered with inexpressible love and grief all the torments he was enduring. She groaned feebly, and her eyes were, red with weeping. A large veil covered her person, and she leant upon Mary of Heli, her eldest sister, [*1] who was

[p. 211]

old and extremely like their mother, Anne. Mary of Cleophas, the daughter of Mary of Heli, was there also. The friends of Jesus and Mary stood around the latter; they wore large veils, appeared overcome with grief and anxiety, and were weeping as if in the momentary expectation of death. The dress of Mary was blue; it was long, and partly covered by a cloak made of white wool, and her veil was of rather a yellow white. Magdalen was totally beside herself from grief, and her hair was floating loosely under her veil.

When Jesus fell down at the foot of the pillar, after the flagellation, I saw Claudia Procles, the wife of Pilate, send some large pieces of linen to the Mother of God. I know not whether she thought that Jesus would be set free, and that his Mother would then require linen to dress his wounds, or whether this compassionate lady was aware of the use which would be made of her present. At the termination of the scourging, Mary came to herself for a time, and saw her Divine Son all torn and mangled, being led away by the archers after the scourging: he wiped his eyes, which were filled with blood, that he might look at his Mother, and she stretched out her hands towards him, and continued to look at the bloody traces of his footsteps. I soon after saw Mary and Magdalen approach the pillar where Jesus had been scourged; the mob were at a distance, and they were partly concealed by the other holy women, and by a few kind-hearted persons who had joined them; they knelt down on the ground near the pillar, and wiped up the sacred blood with the linen which Claudia Procles had sent. John was not at that time with the holy women, who were about twenty in number. The sons

[p. 212]

of Simeon and of Obed, and Veronica, as also the two nephews of Joseph of Arimathea--Aram and Themni--were in the Temple, and appeared to be overwhelmed with grief. It was not more than nine o'clock A.M. when the scourging terminated.

Footnotes

^210:1 Mary of Heli is often spoken of in this relation. According to Sister Emmerich, she was the daughter of St. Joachim and St. Anne, and was born nearly twenty years before the Blessed Virgin. She was not the child of promise, and is called Mary of Heli, by which she is distinguished from the other of the same name, because [p. 211] she was the daughter of Joachim, or Heliachim. Her husband bore the name of Cleophas, and her daughter that of Mary of Cleophas. This daughter was, however, older than her aunt, the Blessed Virgin, and had been married first to Alpheus, by whom she had three sons, afterwards the Apostles Simon, James the Less and Thaddeus. She had one son by her second husband, Sabat and another called Simon, by her third husband, Jonas. Simon was afterwards Bishop of Jerusalem.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXIV.

  

Interruption of the Visions of the Passion by the Appearance of St. Joseph under the form of a Child.

DURING the whole time of the visions which we have just narrated (that is to say, from the 18th of February until the 8th of March), Sister Emmerich continued to suffer all the mental and bodily tortures which were once endured by our Lord. Being totally immersed in these meditations, and, as it were, dead to exterior objects, she wept and groaned like a person in the hands of an executioner, trembled, shuddered, and writhed on her couch.. while her face resembled that of a man about to expire under torture, and a bloody sweat often trickled over her chest and shoulders. She generally perspired so profusely that her bed and clothes were saturated. Her sufferings from thirst were likewise fearful, and she might truly be compared to a person perishing in a desert from the want of water. Generally speaking, her mouth was so parched in the morning, and her tongue so contracted and dried up, that she could not speak, but was obliged by signs and inarticulate sounds to beg for relief. Her constant state of fever was probably brought on by the great pains she endured, added to which she likewise often took upon herself the illnesses and temporal calamities merited by others. It was always necessary for her to rest for a time before relating the different scenes of the Passion, nor was it always that she could speak of what she had seen, and she was even often obliged to discontinue her narrations for the day. She was in this state of suffering on Saturday the 8th of March, and with the greatest difficulty and

[p. 213]

suffering described the scourging of our Lord which she had seen in the vision of the previous night, and which appeared to be present to her mind during the greatest part, of the following day. Towards evening, however, a change took place, and there was an interruption in the course of meditations on the Passion which had latterly followed one another so regularly. We will describe this interruption, in order, in the first place, to give our readers a more full comprehension of the interior life of this most extraordinary person; and, in the second, to enable them to pause for a time to rest their minds, as I well know that meditations on the Passion of our Lord exhaust the weak, even when they remember that it was for their salvation that he suffered and died.

The life of Sister Emmerich, both as regarded her spiritual and intellectual existence, invariably harmonised with the spirit of the Church at different seasons of the year. It harmonised even more strongly than man's natural life does with the seasons, or with the hours of the day, and this caused her to be (if we may thus express ourselves) a realisation of the existence and of the various intentions of the Church. Her union with its spirit was so complete, that no sooner did a festival day begin (that is to say, on the eve), than a perfect change took place within her, both intellectually and spiritually. As soon as the spiritual sun of these festival days of the Church was set, she directed all her thoughts towards that which would rise on the following day, and disposed all her prayers, good works, and sufferings for the attainment of the special graces attached to the feast about to commence, like a plant which absorbs the dew, and revels in the warmth and light of the first rays of the sun. These changes did not, as will readily be believed, always take place at the exact moment when the sound of the Angelus announced the commencement of a festival, and summoned the faithful to prayer; for this bell is often, either through ignorance or negligence, rung at the wrong time; but they commenced at the time when the feast really began.

If the Church commemorated a sorrowful mystery, she

[p. 214]

appeared depressed, faint, and almost powerless; but the instant the celebration of a joyful feast commenced, both body and soul revived to a new life, as if refreshed by the dew of new graces, and she continued in this calm, quiet, and happy state, quite released from every kind of suffering, until the evening. These things took place in her soul quite independently of her will; but as she had had from infancy the most ardent desire of being obedient to Jesus and to his Church, God had bestowed upon her those special graces which give a natural facility for practising obedience. Every faculty of her soul was directed towards the Church, in the same manner as a plant which, even if put into a dark cellar, naturally turns its leaves upwards, and appears to seek the light.

On Saturday, 8th of March 1823, after sunset, Sister Emmerich had, with the greatest difficulty, portrayed the different events of the scourging of our Lord, and the writer of these pages thought that her mind was occupied in the contemplation of the 'crowning with thorns,' when suddenly her countenance, which was previously pale and haggard, like that of a person on the point of death, became bright and serene, and she exclaimed in a coaxing tone, as if speaking to a child, 'O, that dear little boy! Who is he?--Stay, I will ask him. His name is Joseph. He has pushed his way through the crowd to come to me. Poor child, he is laughing; he knows nothing at all of what is going on. How light his clothing is! I fear he must be cold, the air is so sharp this morning. Wait, my child; let me put something more over you.' After saying these words in such a natural tone of voice that it was almost impossible for those present not to turn round and expect to see the child, she held up a dress which was near her, as would be done by a kind-hearted person wishing to clothe a poor frozen child. The friend who was standing by her bedside had not sufficient time to ask her to explain the words she had spoken, for a sudden change took place, both in her whole appearance and manner, when her attendant pronounced the word obedience,--one of the vows by which she had consecrated herself to our

[p. 215]

Lord. She instantly came to herself, and, like an obedient child awakening from a sound sleep and starting up at the voice of its mother, she stretched forth her hand, took the rosary and crucifix which were always at her side, arranged her dress, rubbed her eyes, and sat up. She was then carried from her bed to a chair, as she could neither stand nor walk; and it being the time for making her bed, her friend left the room in order to write out what he had heard during the day.

On Sunday, the 9th of March, the friend asked her attendant what Sister Emmerich meant the evening before when she spoke of a child called Joseph. The attendant answered, 'She spoke of him again many times yesterday evening; he is the son of a cousin of mine, and a great favourite of hers. I fear that her talking so much about him is a sign that he is going to have an illness, for she said so many times that the poor child was almost without clothing and that he must be cold.'

The friend remembered having often seen this little Joseph playing on the bed of Sister Emmerich, and he supposed that she was dreaming about him on the previous day. When the friend went to see her later in the day to endeavour to obtain a continuation of the narrations of the Passion, he found her, contrary to his expectation, more calm, and apparently better in health than on the previous day. She told him that she had seen nothing more after the scourging of our Lord; and when he questioned her concerning what she had said about little Joseph, she could not remember having spoken of the child at all. He then asked the reason of her being so calm, serene, and apparently well in health; and she answered, 'I always feel thus when Mid-Lent comes, for then the Church sings with Isaias in the introit at Mass; "Rejoice, O, Jerusalem, and come together all you that love her; rejoice with joy, you that have been in sorrow, that you may exult and be filled from the breasts of your consolation." Mid-Lent Sunday is consequently a day of rejoicing; and you may likewise remember that, in the gospel of this day, the Church relates how our Lord fed

[p. 216]

five thousand men with five loaves and two fishes, of which twelve baskets of fragments remained, consequently we ought to rejoice.'

She likewise added, that our Lord had deigned to visit her on that day in the Holy Communion, and that she always felt especial spiritual consolation when she received him on that particular day of the year. The friend cast his eyes on the calendar of the diocese of Munster, and saw that on that day they not only kept Mid-Lent Sunday, but likewise the Feast of St. Joseph, the foster-father of our Lord; he was not aware of this before, because in other places the feast of St. Joseph is kept on the 19th, and he remarked this circumstance to Sister Emmerich, and asked her whether she did not think that was the cause of her speaking about Joseph. She answered that she was perfectly aware of its being the feast of the foster-father of Jesus, but that she had not been thinking of the child of that name. However, a moment after, she suddenly remembered what her thoughts had been the day before, and explained to her friend that the moment the feast of St. Joseph began, her visions of the sorrowful mysteries of the Passion ceased, and were superseded by totally different scenes, in which St. Joseph appeared under the form of a child, and that it was to him that the words we have mentioned above were addressed.

We found that when she received these communications the vision was often in the form of a child, especially in those cases when an artist would have made use of that simile to express his ideas. If, for instance, the accomplishment of some Scripture prophecy was being shown to her, she often saw by the side of the illustration a child, who clearly designated the characteristics of such or such a prophet, by his position, his dress, and the manner in which he held in his hand and waved to and fro the prophetic roll appended to a staff.

Sometimes, when she was in extreme suffering, a beautiful child, dressed in green, with a calm and serene countenance, would approach, and seat himself in a posture of resignation at the side of her bed, allowing himself to be

[p. 217]

moved from one side to the other, or even put down on to the ground, without the smallest opposition and constantly looking at her affectionately and consoling her. If, when quite prostrate from illness and the sufferings of others which she had taken upon herself, she entered into communication with a saint, either by participation in the celebration of his feast, or from his relics being brought to her, she sometimes saw passages of the childhood of this saint, and at others the most terrible scenes of his martyrdom. In her greatest sufferings she was usually consoled, instructed, or reproved (whichever the occasion called for) by apparitions under the form of children. Sometimes, when totally overcome by trouble and distress, she would fall asleep, and be carried back in imagination to the scenes and perils of her childhood. She sometimes dreamed, as her exclamations and gestures demonstrated, that she was once more a little country girl of five years old, climbing over a hedge, caught in the briars, and weeping with fear.

These scenes of her childhood were always events which had really occurred, and the words which escaped her showed what was passing in her mind. She would exclaim (as if repeating the words of others): 'Why do you call out so?' 'I will not hold the hedge back until you are quiet and ask me gently to do so.' She had obeyed this injunction when she was a child and caught in the hedge, and she followed the same rule when grown up and suffering from the most terrible trials. She often spoke and joked about the thorn hedge, and the patience and prayer which had then been recommended to her, which admonition she, in after-life, had frequently neglected, but which had never failed her when she had recourse to it. This symbolical coincidence of the elements of her childhood with those of her riper years shows that, in the individual no less than in humanity at large, prophetic types may be found. But, to the individual as well as to mankind in general, a Divine Type has been given in the person of our Redeemer, in order that both the one and the other, by walking in his footsteps and with his assistance,

[p. 218]

may surpass human nature and attain to perfect wisdom and grace with God and man. Thus it is that the will of God is done on earth as in heaven, and that his kingdom is attained by 'men of good will.'

She then gave a short account of the visions which had, on the previous night, interrupted her visions of the Passion at the commencement of the feast of St. Joseph.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXV.

  

Description of the personal Appearance of the Blessed Virgin.

WHILE these sad events were taking place I was in Jerusalem, sometimes in one locality and sometimes in another; I was quite overcome, my sufferings were intense, and I felt as if about to expire. During the time of the scourging of my adorable Spouse, I sat in the vicinity, in a part which no Jew dared approach, for fear of defiling himself; but I did not fear defilement, I was only anxious for a drop of our Lord's blood to fall upon me, to purify me. I felt so completely heartbroken that I thought I must die as I could not relieve Jesus, and each blow which he received drew from me such sobs and moans that I felt quite astonished at not being driven away. When the executioners took Jesus into the guardhouse, to crown him with thorns, I longed to follow that I might again contemplate him in his sufferings. Then it was that the Mother of Jesus, accompanied by the holy women, approached the pillar and wiped up the blood with which it and the ground around were saturated. The door of the guard-house was open, and I heard the brutal laughter of the heartless men who were busily employed in finishing off the crown of thorns which they had prepared for our Lord. I was too much affected to weep, but I endeavoured to drag myself near to the place where our Lord was to be crowned with thorns.

I once more saw the Blessed Virgin; her countenance was wan and pale, her eves red with weeping, but the

[p. 219]

simple dignity of her demeanour cannot be described. Notwithstanding her grief and anguish, notwithstanding the fatigue which she had endured (for she had been wandering ever since the previous evening through the streets of Jerusalem, and across the Valley of Josaphat), her appearance was placid and modest, and not a fold of her dress out of place. She looked majestically around, and her veil fell gracefully over her shoulders. She moved quietly, and although her heart was a prey to the most bitter grief, her countenance was calm and resigned. Her dress was moistened by the dew which had fallen upon it during the night, and by the tears which she had shed in such abundance; otherwise it was totally unsoiled. Her beauty was great, but indescribable, for it was superhuman--a mixture of majesty, sanctity, simplicity, and purity.

The appearance of Mary Magdalen was totally different; she was taller and more robust, the expression of her countenance Showed greater determination, but its beauty was almost destroyed by the strong passions which she had so long indulged, and by the violent repentance and grief she had since felt. It was painful to look upon her; she was the very picture of despair, her long dishevelled hair was partly covered by her torn and wet veil, and her appearance was that of one completely absorbed by woe, and almost beside herself from sorrow. Many of the inhabitants of Magdalum were standing near, gazing at her with surprise and curiosity, for they had known her in former days, first in prosperity and afterwards in degradation and consequent misery. They pointed, they even cast mud upon her, but she saw nothing, knew nothing, and felt nothing, save her agonising grief.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 220]

  

CHAPTER XXVI.

  

The Crowning with Thorns.

No sooner did Sister Emmerich recommence the narrative of her visions on the Passion than she again became extremely ill, oppressed with fever, and so tormented by violent thirst that her tongue was perfectly parched and contracted; and on the Monday after Mid-Lent Sunday, she was so exhausted that it was not without great difficulty, and after many intervals of rest, that she narrated all which our Lord suffered in his crowning with thorns. She was scarcely able to speak, because she herself felt every sensation which she described in the following account:

Pilate harangued the populace many times during the time of the scourging of Jesus, but they interrupted him once, and vociferated, 'He shall be executed, even if we die for it.' When Jesus was led into the guard-house, they all cried out again, 'Crucify him, crucify him!'

After this there was silence for a time. Pilate occupied himself in giving different orders to the soldiers, and the servants of the High Priests brought them some refreshments; after which Pilate, whose superstitious tendencies made him uneasy in mind, went into the inner part of his palace in order to consult his gods, and to offer them incense.

When the Blessed Virgin and the holy women had gathered up the blood of Jesus, with which the pillar and the adjacent parts were saturated, they left the forum, and went into a neighbouring small house, the owner of which I do not know. John was not, I think, present at the scourging of Jesus.

A gallery encircled the inner court of the guard-house where our Lord was crowned with thorns, and the doors were open. The cowardly ruffians, who were eagerly waiting to gratify their cruelty by torturing and insulting our Lord, were about fifty in number, and the greatest part slaves or servants of the jailers and soldiers. The mob gathered round the building, but were soon displaced

[p. 221]

by a thousand Roman soldiers, who were drawn up in good order and stationed there. Although forbidden to leave their ranks, these soldiers nevertheless did their utmost by laughter and applause to incite the cruel executioners to redouble their insults; and as public applause gives fresh energy to a comedian, so did their words of encouragement increase tenfold the cruelty of these men.

In the middle of the court there stood the fragment of a pillar, and on it was placed a very low stool which these cruel men maliciously covered with sharp flints and bits of broken potsherds. Then they tore off the garments of Jesus, thereby reopening all his wounds; threw over his shoulders an old scarlet mantle which barely reached his knees; dragged him to the seat prepared, and pushed him roughly down upon it, having first placed the crown of thorns upon his head. The crown of thorns was made of three branches plaited together, the greatest part of the thorns being purposely turned inwards so as to pierce our Lord's head. Having first placed these twisted branches on his forehead, they tied them tightly together at the back of his head, and no sooner was this accomplished to their satisfaction than they put a large reed into his hand, doing all with derisive gravity as if they were really crowning him king. They then seized the reed, and struck his head so violently that his eyes were filled with blood; they knelt before him, derided him, spat in his face, and buffeted him, saying at the same time, 'Hail, King of the Jews!' Then they threw down his stool, pulled him up again from the ground on which he had fallen, and reseated him with the greatest possible brutality.

It is quite impossible to describe the cruel outrages which were thought of and perpetrated by these monsters under human form. The sufferings of Jesus from thirst, caused by the fever which his wounds and sufferings had brought on, were intense. [*1] He trembled all over, his

[p. 222]

flesh was torn piecemeal, his tongue contracted, and the only refreshment he received was the blood which trickled from his head on to his parched lips. This shameful scene was protracted a full half-hour, and the Roman soldiers continued during the whole time to applaud and encourage the perpetration of still greater outrages.

Footnotes

^221:1 These meditations on the sufferings of Jesus filled Sister Emmerich with such feelings of compassion that she begged of God [p. 222] to allow her to suffer as he had done. She instantly became feverish and parched with thirst, and, by morning, was speechless from the contraction of her tongue and of her lips. She was in this state when her friend came to her in the morning, and she looked like a victim which had just been sacrificed. Those around succeeded, with some difficulty, in moistening her mouth with a little water, but it was long before she could give any further details concerning her meditations on the Passion.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXVII.

  

Ecce Homo.

THE cruel executioners then reconducted our Lord to Pilate's palace, with the scarlet cloak still thrown over his shoulders, the crown of thorns on his head, and the reed in his fettered hands. He was perfectly unrecognisable, his eyes, mouth, and beard being covered with blood, his body but one wound, and his back bowed down as that of an aged man, while every limb trembled as be walked. When Pilate saw him standing at the entrance of his tribunal, even he (hard-hearted as he usually was) started, and shuddered with horror and compassion, whilst the barbarous priests and the populace, far from being moved to pity, continued their insults and mockery. When Jesus had ascended the stairs, Pilate came forward, the trumpet was sounded to announce that the governor was about to speak, and he addressed the Chief Priests and the bystanders in the following words: 'Behold, I bring him forth to you, that you may know that I find no cause in him.'

The archers then led Jesus up to Pilate, that the

[p. 223]

people might again feast their cruel eyes on him, in the state of degradation to which he was reduced. Terrible and heartrending, indeed, was the spectacle he presented, and an exclamation of horror burst from the multitude, followed by a dead silence, when he with difficulty raised his wounded head, crowned as it was with thorns, and cast his exhausted glance on the excited throng. Pilate exclaimed, as he pointed him out to the people; 'Ecce homo! Behold the man!' The hatred of the High Priests and their followers was, if possible, increased at the right of Jesus, and they cried out, 'Put him to death; crucify him.' 'Are you not content?' said Pilate. 'The punishment he has received is, beyond question, sufficient to deprive him of all desire of making himself king.' But they cried out the more, and the multitude joined in the cry, 'Crucify him, crucify him!' Pilate then sounded the trumpet to demand silence, and said: 'Take you him and crucify him, for I find no cause in him.' 'We have a law, and according to that law he ought to die,' replied the priests, 'because he made himself the Son of God.' These words, 'he made himself the Son of God,' revived the fears of Pilate; he took Jesus into another room, and asked him; 'Whence art thou?' But Jesus made no answer. 'Speakest thou not to me?' said Pilate; 'knowest thou not that I have power to crucify thee, and power to release thee?' 'Thou shouldst not have any power against me,' replied Jesus, 'unless it were given thee from above; therefore he that hath delivered me to thee hath the greater sin.'

The undecided, weak conduct of Pilate filled Claudia Procles with anxiety; she again sent him the pledge, to remind him of his promise, but he only returned a vague, superstitious answer, importing that he should leave the decision of the case to the gods. The enemies of Jesus, the High Priests and the Pharisees, having heard of the efforts which were being made by Claudia to save him, caused a report to be spread among the people, that the partisans of our Lord had seduced her, that he would be released, and then join the Romans and bring about the

[p. 224]

destruction of Jerusalem, and the extermination of Jews.

Pilate was in such a state of indecision and uncertainty as to be perfectly beside himself; he did not know what step to take next, and again addressed himself to the enemies of Jesus, declaring that 'he found no crime in him,' but they demanded his death still more clamorously. He then remembered the contradictory accusations which had been brought against Jesus, the mysterious dreams of his wife, and the unaccountable impression which the words of Jesus had made on himself, and therefore determined to question him again in order thus to obtain some information which might enlighten him as to the course he ought to pursue; he therefore returned to the Praetorium, went alone into a room, and sent for our Saviour. He glanced at the mangled and bleeding Form before him, and exclaimed inwardly: 'Is it possible that he can be God?' Then he turned to Jesus, and adjured him to tell him if he was God, if he was that king who had been promised to the Jews, where his kingdom was, and to what class of gods he belonged. I can only give the sense of the words of Jesus, but they were solemn and severe. He told him 'that his kingdom was not of this world,' and he likewise spoke strongly of the many hidden crimes with which the conscience of Pilate was defiled; warned him of the dreadful fate which would be his, if he did not repent; and finally declared that he himself, the Son of Man, would come at the last day, to pronounce a just judgment upon him.

Pilate was half frightened and half angry at the words of Jesus; he returned to the balcony, and again declared that he would release Jesus; but they cried out: 'If thou release this man, thou art not Caesar's friend. For whosoever maketh himself a king speaketh against Caesar.' Others said that they would accuse him to the Emperor of having disturbed their festival; that he must make up his mind at once, because they were obliged to be in the Temple by ten o'clock at night. The cry, 'Crucify him! crucify him!' resounded on all sides; it reechoed

[p. 225]

even from the flat roofs of the houses near the forum, where many persons were assembled. Pilate saw that all his efforts were vain, that he could make no impression on the infuriated mob; their yells and imprecations were deafening, and he began to fear an insurrection. Therefore he took water, and washed his hands before the people, saying, 'I am innocent of the blood of this just man; look you to it.' A frightful and unanimous cry then came from the dense multitude, who were assembled from all parts of Palestine, 'His blood be upon us, and upon our children.'

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXVIII.

  

Reflections on the Visions.

WHENEVER, during my meditations on the Passion of our Lord, I imagine I hear that frightful cry of the Jews, 'His blood be upon us, and upon our children,' visions of a wonderful and terrible description display before my eyes at the same moment the effect of that solemn curse. I fancy I see a gloomy sky covered with clouds, of the colour of blood, from which issue fiery swords and darts, lowering over the vociferating multitude; and this curse, which they have entailed upon themselves, appears to me to penetrate even to the very marrow of their bones, even to the unborn infants. They appear to me encompassed on all sides by darkness; the words they utter take, in my eyes, the form of black flames, which recoil upon them, penetrating the bodies of some, and only playing around others.

The last-mentioned were those who were converted after the death of Jesus, and who were in considerable numbers, for neither Jesus nor Mary ever ceased praying, in the midst of their sufferings, for the salvation of these miserable beings.

When, during visions of this kind, I turn my thoughts to the holy souls of Jesus and Mary, and to those of the enemies of Christ, all that takes place within them is

[p. 226]

shown me under various forms. I see numerous devils among the crowd, exciting and encouraging the Jews, whispering in their ears, entering their months, inciting them still more against Jesus, but nevertheless trembling at the sight of his ineffable love and heavenly patience. Innumerable angels surrounded Jesus, Mary, and the small number of saints who were there. The exterior of these angels denotes the office they fall; some represent consolation, others prayer, or some of the works of mercy.

I likewise often see consolatory, and at other times menacing voices, under the appearance of bright or coloured gleams of light, issuing from the mouths of these different apparitions; and I see the feelings of their souls, their interior sufferings, and in a word, their every thought, under the appearance of dark or bright rays. I then understand everything perfectly, but it is impossible for me to give an explanation to others; besides which, I am so ill, and so totally overcome by the grief which I feel for my own sins and for those of the world, I am so overpowered by the sight of the sufferings of our Lord, that I can hardly imagine how it is possible for me to relate events with the slightest coherency. Many of these things, but more especially the apparitions of devils and of angels, which are related by other persons who have had visions of the Passion of Jesus Christ, are fragments of symbolical interior perceptions of this species, which vary according to the state of the soul of the spectator. Hence the numerous contradictions, because many things are naturally forgotten or omitted.

Sister Emmerich sometimes spoke on these subjects, either during the time of her visions on the Passion, or before they commenced; but she more often refused to speak at all concerning them, for fear of causing confusion in the visions. It is easy to see how difficult it must have been for her, in the midst of such a variety of apparitions, to preserve any degree of connection in her narrations. Who can therefore be surprised at finding some omissions and confusion in her descriptions?

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 227]

  

CHAPTER XXIX.

  

Jesus condemned to be crucified.

PILATE, who did not desire to know the truth, but was solely anxious to get out of the difficulty without harm to himself, became more undecided than ever; his conscience whispered--'Jesus is innocent;' his wife said, 'he is holy;' his superstitious feelings made him fear that Jesus was the enemy of his gods; and his cowardice filled him with dread lest Jesus, if he was a god, should wreak his vengeance upon his judge. He was both irritated and alarmed at the last words of Jesus, and he made another attempt for his release; but the Jews instantly threatened to lay an accusation against him before the Emperor. This menace terrified him, and he determined to accede to their wishes, although firmly convinced in his own mind of the innocence of Jesus, and perfectly conscious that by pronouncing sentence of death upon him he should violate every law of justice, besides breaking the promise he had made to his wife in the morning. Thus did he sacrifice Jesus to the enmity of the Jews, and endeavour to stifle remorse by washing his hands before the people, saying, 'I am innocent of the blood of this just man; look you to it.' Vainly dost thou pronounce these words, O Pilate! for his blood is on thy head likewise; thou canst not wash his blood from thy soul, as thou dost from thy hands.

Those fearful words, 'His blood be upon us and upon our children,' had scarcely ceased to resound, when Pilate commenced his preparations for passing sentence. He called for the dress which he wore on state occasions, put a species of diadem, set in precious stones, on his head, changed his mantle, and caused a staff to be carried before him. He was surrounded with soldiers, preceded by officers belonging to the tribunal, and followed by Scribes, who carried rolls of parchments and books used for inscribing names and dates. One man walked in front, who carried the trumpet. The procession marched in this order from Pilate's palace to the forum, where an elevated seat, used

[p. 228]

on these particular occasions, was placed opposite to the pillar where Jesus was scourged. This tribunal was called Gabbatha; it was a kind of round terrace, ascended by means of staircases; on the top was a seat for Pilate, and behind this seat a bench for those in minor offices, while a number of soldiers were stationed round the terrace and upon the staircases. Many of the Pharisees had left the palace and were gone to the Temple, so that Annas, Caiphas, and twenty-eight priests alone followed the Roman governor on to the forum, and the two thieves were taken there at the time that Pilate presented our Saviour to the people, saying: 'Ecce homo!'

Our Lord was still clothed in his purple garment, his crown of thorns upon his head, and his hands manacled, when the archers brought him up to the tribunal, and placed him between the two malefactors. As soon as Pilate was seated, he again addressed the enemies of Jesus, in these words, 'Behold your King!'

But the cries of 'Crucify him! Crucify him!' resounded on all sides.

'Shall I crucify your King?' said Pilate.

'We have no King but Caesar!' responded the High Priests.

Pilate found it was utterly hopeless to say anything more, and therefore commenced his preparations for passing sentence. The two thieves had received their sentence of crucifixion some time before; but the High Priests had obtained a respite for them, in order that our Lord might suffer the additional ignominy of being executed with two criminals of the most infamous description. The crosses of the two thieves were by their sides; that intended for our Lord was not brought, because he was not as yet sentenced to death.

The Blessed Virgin, who had retired to some distance after the scourging of Jesus, again approached to hear the sentence of death pronounced upon her Son and her God. Jesus stood in the midst of the archers, at the foot of the a staircase leading up to the tribunal. The trumpet was sounded to demand silence, and then the cowardly, the

[p. 229]

base judge, in a tremulous undecided voice, pronounced the sentence of death on the Just Man. The sight of the cowardice and duplicity of this despicable being, who was nevertheless puffed up with pride at his important position, almost overcame me, and the ferocious joy of the executioners--the triumphant countenances of the High Priests, added to the deplorable condition to which our loving Saviour was reduced, and the agonising grief of his beloved Mother--still further increased my pain. I looked up again, and saw the cruel Jews almost devouring their victim with their eyes, the soldiers standing coldly by, and multitudes of horrible demons passing to and fro and mixing in the crowd. I felt that I ought to have been in the place of Jesus, my beloved Spouse, for the sentence would not then have been unjust; but I was so overcome with anguish, and my sufferings were so intense, that I cannot exactly remember all that I did see. However, I will relate all as nearly as I can.

After a long preamble, which was composed principally of the most pompous and exaggerated eulogy of the Emperor Tiberias, Pilate spoke of the accusations which had been brought against Jesus by the High Priests. He said that they had condemned him to death for having disturbed the public peace, and broken their laws by calling himself the Son of God and King of the Jews; and that the people had unanimously demanded that their decree should be carried out. Notwithstanding his oft-repeated conviction of the innocence of Jesus, this mean and worthless judge was not ashamed of saying that he likewise considered their decision a just one, and that he should therefore pronounce sentence--which he did in these words: 'I condemn Jesus of Nazareth, the King of the Jews, to be crucified;' and he ordered the executioners to bring the cross. I think I remember likewise that he took a long stick in his hands, broke it, and threw the fragments at the feet of Jesus.

On hearing these words of Pilate the Mother of Jesus became for a few moments totally unconscious, for she was now certain that her beloved Son must die the most ignominious

[p. 230]

and the most painful of all deaths. John and the holy women carried her away, to prevent the heartless beings who surrounded them from adding crime to crime by jeering at her grief; but no sooner did she revive a little than she begged to be taken again to each spot which had been sanctified by the sufferings of her Son, in order to bedew them with her tears; and thus did the Mother of our Lord, in the name of the Church, take possession of those holy places.

Pilate then wrote down the sentence, and those who stood behind him copied it out three times. The words which he wrote were quite different from those he had pronounced; I could see plainly that his mind was dreadfully agitated--an angel of wrath appeared to guide his hand. The substance of the written sentence was this: 'I have been compelled, for fear of an insurrection, to yield to the wishes of the High Priests, the Sanhedrim, and the people, who tumultuously demanded the death of Jesus of Nazareth, whom they accused of having disturbed the public peace, and also of having blasphemed and broken their laws. I have given him up to them to be crucified, although their accusations appeared to be groundless. I have done so for fear of their alleging to the Emperor that I encourage insurrections, and cause dissatisfaction among the Jews by denying them the rights of justice.'

He then wrote the inscription for the cross, while his clerks copied out the sentence several times, that these copies might be sent to distant parts of the country.

The High Priests were extremely dissatisfied at the words of the sentence, which they said were not true; and they clamorously surrounded the tribunal to endeavour to persuade him to alter the inscription, and not to put King of the Jews, but that he said, I am the King of the Jews.

Pilate was vexed, and answered impatiently, 'What I have written I have written!'

They were likewise anxious that the cross of our Lord should not be higher than those of the two thieves, but it was necessary for it to be so, because there would otherwise

[p. 231]

not have been sufficient place for Pilate's inscription; they therefore endeavoured to persuade him not to have this obnoxious inscription put up at all. But Pilate was determined, and their words made no impression upon him; the cross was therefore obliged to be lengthened by a fresh bit of wood. Consequently the form of the cross was peculiar--the two arms stood out like the branches of a tree growing from the stem, and the shape was very like that of the letter Y, with the lower part lengthened so as to rise between the arms, which had been put on separately, and were thinner than the body of the cross. A piece of wood was likewise nailed at the bottom of the cross for the feet to rest upon.

During the time that Pilate was pronouncing the iniquitous sentence, I saw his wife, Claudia Procles, send him back the pledge which he had given her, and in the evening she left his palace and joined the friends of our Lord, who concealed her in a subterraneous vault in the house of Lazarus at Jerusalem. Later in the same day, I likewise saw a friend of our Lord engrave the words, Judex injustus, and the name of Claudia Procles, on a green-looking stone, which was behind the terrace called Gabbatha--this stone is still to be found in the foundations of a church or house at Jerusalem, which stands on the spot formerly called Gabbatha. Claudia Procles became a Christian, followed St. Paul, and became his particular friend.

No sooner had Pilate pronounced sentence than Jesus was given up into the hands of the archers, and the clothes which he had taken off in the court of Caiphas were brought for him to put on again. I think some charitable persons had washed them, for they looked clean. The ruffians who surrounded Jesus untied his hands for his dress to be changed, and roughly dragged off the scarlet mantle with which they had clothed him in mockery, thereby reopening all his wounds; he put on his own linen under-garment with trembling hands, and they threw his scapular over his shoulders. As the crown of thorns was too large and prevented the seamless robe, which his

[p. 232]

[paragraph continues] Mother had made for him, from going over his head., they pulled it off violently, heedless of the pain thus inflicted upon him. His white woollen dress was next thrown over his shoulders, and then his wide belt and cloak. After this, they again tied round his waist a ring covered with sharp iron points, and to it they fastened the cords by which he was led, doing all with their usual brutal cruelty.

The two thieves were standing, one on the right and the other on the left of Jesus, with their hands tied and a chain round their necks; they were covered with black and livid marks, the effects of the scourging of the previous day. The demeanour of the one who was afterwards converted was quiet and peaceable, while that of the other, on the contrary, was rough and insolent, and he joined the archers in abusing and insulting Jesus, who looked upon his two companions with love and compassion, and offered up his sufferings for their salvation. The archers gathered together all the implements necessary for the crucifixions, and prepared everything for the terrible and painful journey to Calvary.

Annas and Caiphas at last left off disputing with Pilate, and angrily retired, taking with them the sheets of parchment on which the sentence was written; they went away in haste, fearing that they should get to the Temple too late for the Paschal sacrifice. Thus did the High Priests, unknowingly to themselves, leave the true Paschal Lamb. They went to a temple made of stone, to immolate and to sacrifice that lamb which was but a symbol, and they left the true Paschal Lamb, who was being led to the Altar of the Cross by the cruel executioners; they were most careful not to contract exterior defilement, while their souls were completely defiled by anger, hatred, and envy. They had said, 'His blood be upon us and upon our children!' And by these words they had performed the ceremony, and had placed the hand of the sacrificer upon the head of the Victim. Thus were the two paths formed--the one leading to the altar belonging to the Jewish law, the other leading to the Altar of Grace: Pilate, that proud and irresolute pagan,

[p. 233]

that slave of the world, who trembled in the presence of the true God, and yet adored his false gods, took a middle path, and returned to his palace.

The iniquitous sentence was given at about ten in the morning.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXX.

  

The Carriage of the Cross.

WHEN Pilate left the tribunal a portion of the soldiers followed him, and were drawn. up in files before the palace; a few accompanying the criminals. Eight-and- twenty armed Pharisees came to the forum on horseback, in order to accompany Jesus to the place of execution, and among these were the six enemies of Jesus, who had assisted in arresting him in the Garden of Olives. The archers led Jesus into the middle of the court, the slaves threw down the cross at his feet, and the two arras were forthwith tied on to the centre piece. Jesus knelt down by its side, encircled it with his sacred arms, and kissed it three times, addressing, at the same time, a most touching prayer of thanksgiving to his Heavenly Father for that work of redemption which he had begun. It was the custom among pagans for the priest to embrace a new altar, and Jesus in like manner embraced his cross, that august altar on which the bloody and expiatory sacrifice was about to be offered. The archers soon made him rise, and then kneel down again, and almost without any assistance, place the heavy cross on his right shoulder, supporting its great weight with his right hand. I saw angels come to his assistance, otherwise he would have been unable even to raise it from the ground. Whilst he was on his knees, and still praying, the executioners put the arms of the crosses, which were a little curved and not as yet fastened to the centre pieces, on the backs of the two thieves, and tied their hands tightly to them. The middle parts of the crosses were carried by slaves, as the transverse pieces wore not to be fastened to them until just before the time of execution.

[p. 234]

[paragraph continues] The trumpet sounded to announce the departure of Pilate's horsemen, and one of the Pharisees belonging to the escort came up to Jesus, who was still kneeling, and said, 'Rise, we have had a sufficiency of thy fine speeches; rise and set off.' They pulled him roughly up, for he was totally unable to rise without assistance, and he then fell upon his shoulders the weight of that cross which we must carry after him, according to his true and holy command to follow him. Thus began that triumphant march of the King of King, a march so ignominious on earth, and so glorious in heaven.

By means of ropes, which the executioners had fastened to the foot of the cross, two archers supported it to prevent its getting entangled in anything, and four other soldiers took hold of the ropes, which they had fastened to Jesus underneath his clothes. The sight of our dear Lord trembling beneath his burden, reminded me forcibly of Isaac, when he carried the wood destined for his own sacrifice up the mountain. The trumpet of Pilate was sounded as the signal for departure, for he himself intended to go to Calvary at the head of a detachment of soldiers, to prevent the possibility of an insurrection. He was on horseback, in armour, surrounded by officers and a body of cavalry, and followed by about three hundred of the infantry, who came from the frontiers of Italy and Switzerland. The procession was headed by a trumpeter, who sounded his trumpet at every corner and proclaimed the sentence. A number of women and children walked behind the procession with ropes, nails, wedges, and baskets filled with different articles, in their hands; others, who were stronger, carried poles, ladders, and the centre pieces of the crosses of the two thieves, and some of the Pharisees followed on horseback. A boy who had charge of the inscription which Pilate had written for the cross, likewise carried the crown of thorns (which had been taken off the head of Jesus) at the end of a long stick, but he did not appear to be wicked and hard-hearted like the rest. Next I beheld our Blessed Saviour and Redeemer--his bare feet swollen and bleeding--his back bent as though he were

[p. 235]

about to sink under the heavy weight of the cross, and his whole body covered with wounds and blood. He appeared to be half fainting from exhaustion (having had neither refreshment or sleep since the supper of the previous night), weak from loss of blood, and parched with thirst produced by fever and pain. He supported the cross on his right shoulder with his right hand, the left hung almost powerless at his side, but he endeavoured now and then to hold up his long garment to prevent his bleeding feet from getting entangled in it. The four archers who held the cords which were fastened round his waist, walked at some distance from him, the two in front pulled him on, and the two behind dragged him back, so that he could not get on at all without the greatest difficulty. His hands were cut by the cords with which they had been bound; his face bloody and disfigured; his hair and beard saturated with blood; the weight of the cross and of his chains combined to press and make the woollen dress cleave to his wounds, and reopen them: derisive and heartless words alone were addressed to him, but he continued to pray for his persecutors, and his countenance bore an expression of combined love and resignation. Many soldiers under arms walked by the side of the procession, and after Jesus came the two thieves, who were likewise led, the arms of their crosses, separate from the middle, being placed upon their backs, and their hands tied tightly to the two ends. They were clothed in large aprons, with a sort of sleeveless scapular which covered the upper part of their bodies, and they had straw caps upon their heads. The good thief was calm, but the other was, on the contrary, furious, and never ceased cursing and swearing. The rear of the procession was brought up by the remainder of the Pharisees on horseback, who rode to and fro to keep order. Pilate and his courtiers were at a certain distance behind; he was in the midst of his officers clad in armour, preceded by a squadron of cavalry, and followed by three hundred foot soldiers; he crossed the forum, and then entered one of the principal streets, for he was marching through the town in order to prevent any insurrection among the people.

[p. 236]

Jesus was conducted by a narrow back street, that the procession might not inconvenience the persons who were going to the Temple, and likewise in order that Pilate and his band might have the whole principal street entirely to themselves. The crowd had dispersed and started in different directions almost immediately after the reading of the sentence, and the greatest part of the Jews either returned to their own houses, or to the Temple, to hasten their preparations for sacrificing the Paschal Lamb; but a certain number were still hurrying on in disorder to see the melancholy procession pass; the Roman soldiers prevented all persons from joining the procession, therefore the most curious were obliged to go round by back streets, or to quicken their steps so as to reach Calvary before Jesus. The street through which they led Jesus was both narrow and dirty; he suffered much in passing through it, because the archers were close and harassed him. Persons stood on the roofs of the houses, and at the windows, and insulted him with opprobrious language; the slaves who were working in the streets threw filth and mud at him; even the children, incited by his enemies, had filled their pinafores with sharp stones, which they throw down before their doors as he passed, that he might be obliged to walk over them.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXXI.

  

The first Fall of Jesus.

THE street of which we have just spoken, after turning a little to the left, became rather steep, as also wider, a subterranean aqueduct proceeding from Mount Sion passed under it, and in its vicinity was a hollow which was often filled with water and mud after rain, and a large stone was placed in its centre to enable persons to pass over more easily. When Jesus reached this spot, his strength was perfectly exhausted; he was quite unable to move; and as the archers dragged and pushed him without showing the slightest compassion, he fell quite down against this

[p. 237]

stone, and the cross fell by his side. The cruel executioners were obliged to stop, they abused and struck him unmercifully, but the whole procession came to a standstill, which caused a degree of confusion. Vainly did he hold out his hand for some one to assist him to rise: 'Ah!' he exclaimed, 'all will soon be over;' and he prayed for his enemies. 'Lift him up,' said the Pharisees, I otherwise he will die in our hands.' There were many women and children following the procession; the former wept, and the latter were frightened. Jesus, however, received support from above, and raised his head; but these cruel men, far from endeavouring to alleviate his sufferings, put the crown of thorns again on his head before they pulled him out of the mud, and no sooner was he once more on his feet than they replaced the cross on his back. The crown of thorns which encircled his head increased his pain inexpressibly, and obliged him to bend on one side to give room for the cross, which lay heavily on his shoulders.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXXII.

  

The second Fall of Jesus.

THE afflicted Mother of Jesus had left the forum, accompanied by John and some other women, immediately after the unjust sentence was pronounced. She had employed herself in walking to many of the spots sanctified by our Lord and watering them with her tears; but when the sound of the trumpet, the rush of people, and the clang of the horsemen announced that the procession was about to start for Calvary, she could not resist her longing desire to behold her beloved Son once more, and she begged John to take her to some place through which he must pass. John conducted her to a palace, which had an entrance in that street which Jesus traversed after his first fall; it was, I believe, the residence of the high priest Caiphas, whose tribunal was in the division called Sion. John asked and obtained leave from a kind-hearted servant

[p. 238]

to stand at the entrance mentioned above, with Mary and her companions. The Mother of God was pale, her eyes were red with weeping, and she was closely wrapped in a cloak of a bluish-gray colour. The clamour and insulting speeches of the enraged multitude might be plainly heard; and a herald at that moment proclaimed in a. loud voice, that three criminals were about to be crucified. The servant opened the door; the dreadful sounds became more distinct every moment; and Mary threw herself on her knees. After praying fervently, she turned to John and said, 'Shall I remain? ought I to go a-way? shall I have strength to support such a sight?' John made answer, 'If you do not remain to see him pass, you will grieve afterwards.' They remained therefore near the door, with their eyes fixed on the procession, which was still distant, but advancing by slow degrees. When those who were carrying the instruments for the execution approached, and the Mother of Jesus saw their insolent and triumphant looks, she could not control her feelings, but joined her hands as if to implore the help of heaven; upon which one among them said to his companions: 'What woman is that who is uttering such lamentations?' Another answered: 'She is the Mother of the Galilaean.' When the cruel men heard this, far from being moved to compassion, they began to make game of the grief of this most afflicted Mother: they pointed at her, and one of them took the nails which were to be used for fastening Jesus to the cross, and presented them to her in an insulting manner; but she turned away, fixed her eyes upon Jesus, who was drawing near, and leant against the, pillar for support, lest she should again faint from grief, for her cheeks were as pale as death, and her lips almost blue. The Pharisees on horseback passed by first, followed by the boy who carried the inscription. Then came her beloved Son. He was almost sinking under the heavy weight of his cross,. and his head, still crowned with thorns, was drooping in agony on his shoulder. He cast a look of compassion and sorrow upon his Mother, staggered, and fell for the second time upon his hands and knees. Mary was perfectly agonised

[p. 239]

at this sight; she forgot all else; she saw neither soldiers nor executioners; she saw nothing but her dearly loved Son; and, springing from the doorway into the midst of the group who were insulting and abusing him, she threw herself on her knees by his side and embraced him. The only words I heard were, 'Beloved Son!' and 'Mother!' but I do not know whether these words were really uttered, or whether they were only in my own mind.

A momentary confusion ensued. John and the holy women endeavoured to raise Mary from the ground, and the archers reproached her, one of them saying, 'What hast thou to do here, woman? He would not have been in our hands if he had been better brought up.'

A few of the soldiers looked touched; and, although they obliged the Blessed Virgin to retire to the doorway, not one laid hands upon her. John and the women surrounded her as she fell half fainting against a stone, which was near the doorway, and upon which the impression of her hands remained. This stone was very hard, and was afterwards removed to the first Catholic church built in Jerusalem, near the Pool of Bethsaida, during the time that St. James the Less was Bishop of that city. The two disciples who were with the Mother of Jesus carried her into the house, and the door was shut. In the mean time the archers had raised Jesus, and obliged him to carry the cross in a different manner. Its arms being unfastened from the centre, and entangled in the ropes with which he was bound, he supported them on his arm, and by this means the weight of the body of the cross was a little taken of, as it draped more on the ground. I saw numbers of persons standing about in groups, the greatest part amusing themselves by insulting our Lord in different ways, but a tow veiled females were weeping.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 240]

  

CHAPTER XXXIII.

  

Simon of Cyrene.--Third Fall of Jesus.

THE procession had reached an arch formed in an old wall belonging to the town, opposite to a square, in which three streets terminated, when Jesus stumbled against a large stone which was placed in the middle of the archway, the cross slipped from his shoulder, he fell upon the Stone, and was totally unable to rise. Many respectable-looking persons who were on their way to the Temple stopped, and exclaimed compassionately: 'Look at that poor man, he is certainly dying!' but his enemies showed no compassion. This fall caused a fresh delay, as our Lord could not stand up again, and the Pharisees said to the soldiers: 'We shall never got him to the place of execution alive, if you do not find some one to carry his cross.' At this moment Simon of Cyrene, a pagan, happened, to pass by, accompanied by his three children. He was a gardener, just returning home after working in a garden near the eastern wall of the city, and carrying a bundle of lopped branches. The soldiers perceiving by his dress that he was a pagan, seized him, and ordered him to assist Jesus in carrying his cross. He refused at first, but was soon compelled to obey, although his children, being frightened, cried and made a great noise, upon which some women quieted and took charge of them. Simon was much annoyed, and expressed the greatest vexation at being obliged to walk with a man in so deplorable a condition of dirt and misery; but Jesus wept, and cast such a mild and heavenly look upon him that he was touched, and instead of continuing to show reluctance, helped him to rise, while the executioners fastened one arm of the cross on his shoulders, and he walked behind our Lord, thus relieving him in a great measure from its weight; and when all was arranged, the procession moved forward. Simon was a stout-looking man, apparently about forty years of age. His children were dressed in tunics made of a variegated material. the two eldest, named Rufus and

[p. 241]

[paragraph continues] Alexander, afterwards joined the disciples; the third was much younger, but a few years later went to live with St. Stephen. Simon had not carried the cross after Jesus any length of time before he felt his heart deeply touched by grace.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXXIV.

  

The Veil of Veronica.

WHILE the procession was passing through a long street, an incident took place which made a strong impression upon Simon. Numbers of respectable persons were hurrying towards the Temple, of whom many got out of the way when they saw Jesus, from a Pharisaical fear of defilement, while others, on the contrary, stopped and expressed pity for his sufferings. But when the procession had advanced about two hundred steps from the spot where Simon began to assist our Lord in carrying his cross, the door of a beautiful house on the left opened, and a woman of majestic appearance, holding a young girl by the hand, came out, and walked up to the very head of the procession. Seraphia was the name of the brave woman who thus dared to confront the enraged multitude; she was the wife of Sirach, one of the councillors belonging to the Temple, and was afterwards known by the name of Veronica, which name was given from the words vera icon (true portrait), to commemorate her brave conduct on this day.

Seraphia had prepared some excellent aromatic wine, which she piously intended to present to our Lord to refresh him on his dolorous way to Calvary. She had been standing in the street for some time, and at last went back into the house to wait. She was, when I first saw her, enveloped in a long veil, and holding a little girl of nine years of age, whom she had adopted, by the hand; a large veil was likewise hanging on her arm, and the little girl endeavoured to hide the jar of wine when the procession approached. Those who were marching at the head of the

[p. 242]

procession tried to push. her back; but she made her way through the mob, the soldiers, and the archers, reached Jesus, fell on her knees before him, and presented the veil, saying at the same time, 'Permit me to wipe the face of my Lord.' Jesus took the veil in his left hand, wiped his bleeding face, and returned it with thanks. Seraphia kissed it, and put it under her cloak. The girl then timidly offered the wine, but the brutal soldiers would not allow Jesus to drink it. The suddenness of this courageous act of Seraphia had surprised the guards, and caused a momentary although unintentional halt, of which she had taken advantage to present the veil to her Divine Master. Both the Pharisees and the guards were greatly exasperated, not only by the sudden halt, but much more by the public testimony of veneration which was thus paid to Jesus, and they revenged themselves by striking and abusing him, while Seraphia returned in haste to her house.

No sooner did she reach her room than she placed the woollen veil on a table, and fell almost senseless on her knees. A friend who entered the room a short time after, found her thus kneeling, with the child weeping by her side, and saw, to his astonishment, the bloody countenance of our Lord imprinted upon the veil, a perfect likeness, although heartrending and painful to look upon. He roused Seraphia, and pointed to the veil. She again knelt down before it, and exclaimed through her tears, 'Now I shall indeed leave all with a happy heart, for my Lord has given me a remembrance of himself.' The texture of this veil was a species of very fine wool; it was three times the length of its width, and was generally worn on the shoulders. It was customary to present these veils to persons who were in affliction, or over-fatigued, or ill, that they might wipe their faces with them, and it was done in order to express sympathy or compassion. Veronica kept this veil until her death, and hung it at the head of her bed; it was then given to the Blessed Virgin, who left It to the Apostles, and they afterwards passed it on to the Church.

Seraphia and John the Baptist were cousins, her father

[p. 243]

and Zacharias being brothers. When Joachim and Anna brought the Blessed Virgin, who was then only four years old, up to Jerusalem, to place her among the virgins in the Temple, they lodged in the house of Zacharias, which was situated near the fish-market. Seraphia was at least five years older than the Blessed Virgin, was present at her marriage with St. Joseph, and was likewise related to the aged Simeon, who prophesied when the Child Jesus was put into his arms. She was brought up with his sons, both of whom, as well as Seraphia, he imbued with his ardent desire of seeing our Lord. When Jesus was twelve years old, and remained teaching in the Temple, Seraphia, who was not then married, sent food for him every day to a little inn, a quarter of a mile from Jerusalem, where he dwelt when he was not in the Temple. Mary went there for two days, when on her way from Bethlehem to Jerusalem to offer her Child in the Temple. The two old men who kept this inn were Essenians, and well acquainted with the Holy Family; it contained a kind of foundation for the poor, and Jesus and his disciples often went there for a night's lodging.

Seraphia married rather late in life; her husband, Sirach, was descended from the chaste Susannah, and was a member of the Sanhedrim. He was at first greatly opposed to our Lord, and his wife suffered much on account of her attachment to Jesus, and to the holy women, but Joseph of Arimathea and Nicodemus brought him to a better state of feeling, and he allowed Seraphia to follow our Lord. When Jesus was unjustly accused in the court of Caiphas, the husband of Seraphia joined with Joseph and Nicodemus in attempts to obtain the liberation of our Lord, and all three resigned their seats in the Council.

Seraphia was about fifty at the time of the triumphant procession of our Lord when he entered into Jerusalem on Palm Sunday, and I then saw her take off her veil and spread it on the ground for him to walk upon. It was this same veil, which she presented to Jesus, at this his second procession, a procession which outwardly appeared

[p. 244]

to be far less glorious, but was in fact much more so. This veil obtained for her the name of Veronica, and it is still shown for the veneration of the faithful.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXXV.

  

The fourth and fifth Falls of Jesus.--The Daughters of Jerusalem.

THE procession was still at some distance from the south-west gate, which was large, and attached to the fortifications, and the street was rough and steep; it had first to pass under a vaulted arch, then over a bridge, and finally under a second arch. The wall on the left side of the gate rims first in a southerly direction, then deviates a little to the west, and finally runs to the south behind Mount Sion. When the procession was near this gate, the brutal archers shoved Jesus into a stagnant pool, which was close to it; Simon of Cyrene, in his endeavours to avoid the pool, gave the cross a twist, which caused Jesus to fall down for the fourth time in the midst of the dirty mud, and Simon had the greatest difficulty in lifting up the cross again. Jesus then exclaimed in a tone which, although clear, was moving and sad: 'Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered together thy children as the hen doth gather her chickens under her wings, and thou wouldst not?' When the Pharisees heard these words, they became still more angry, and recommencing their insults and blows endeavoured to force him to get up out of the mud. Their cruelty to Jesus so exasperated Simon of Cyrene that he at last exclaimed, 'If you continue this brutal conduct, I will throw down the cross and carry it no farther. I will do so if you kill me for it.'

A narrow and stony path was visible as soon as the gate was passed, and this path ran in a northerly direction, and led to Calvary. The high road from which it deviates divided shortly after into three branches, one to the southwest, which led to Bethlehem, through the vale of Gihon;

[p. 245]

a second to the south towards Emmaus and Joppa; a third, likewise to the south-west, wound round Calvary, and terminated at the gate which led to Bethsur. A person standing at the gate through which Jesus was led might easily see the gate of Bethlehem. The officers had fastened an inscription upon a post which stood at the commencement of the road to Calvary, to inform those who passed by that Jesus and the two thieves were condemned to death. A group of women had gathered together near this spot, and were weeping and lamenting; many carried young children in their arms; the greatest part were young maidens and women from Jerusalem, who had preceded the procession, but a few came from Bethlehem, from Hebron, and from other neighbouring places, in order to celebrate the Pasch.

Jesus was on the point of again falling, but Simon, who was behind, perceiving that he could not stand, hastened to support him; he leant upon Simon, and was thus saved from falling to the ground. When the women and children of whom we have spoken above, saw the deplorable condition to which our Lord was reduced, they uttered loud cries, wept, and, according to the Jewish custom, presented him cloths to wipe his face. Jesus turned towards them and said: 'Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not over me, but weep for yourselves and for your children. For behold the days shall come wherein they will say, Blessed are the barren, and the wombs that have not borne, and the paps that have not given suck. Then shall they begin to say to the mountains, Fall upon us, and to the hills, Cover us. For if in the green wood they do these things, what shall be done in the dry?' He then addressed a few words of consolation to them, which I do not exactly remember.

The procession made a momentary halt. The executioners, who set off first, had reached Calvary with the instruments for the execution, and were followed by a hundred of the Roman soldiers who had started with Pilate; he only accompanied the procession as far as the gateway, and returned to the town.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 246]

  

CHAPTER XXXVI

  

Jesus on Mount Golgotha.--Sixth and seventh Falls of Jesus.

THE procession again moved on; the road was very steep and rough between the walls of the town and Calvary, and Jesus had the greatest difficulty in walking with his heavy burden on his shoulders; but his cruel enemies, far from feeling the slightest compassion, or giving the least assistance, continued to urge him on by the infliction of hard blows, and the utterance of dreadful curses. At last they reached a. spot where the pathway turned suddenly to the south; here he stumbled and fell for the sixth time. The fall was a dreadful one, but the guards only struck him the harder to force him to get up, and no sooner did he reach Calvary than he sank down again for the seventh time.

Simon of Cyrene was filled with indignation and pity; notwithstanding his fatigue, he wished to remain that he might assist Jesus, but the archers first reviled, and then drove him away, and he soon after joined the body of disciples. The executioners then ordered the workmen and the boys who had carried the instruments for the execution to depart, and the Pharisees soon arrived, for they were on horseback, and had taken the smooth and easy road which ran to the east of Calvary. There was a fine view of the whole town of Jerusalem from the top of Calvary. This top was circular, and about the size of an ordinary riding-school, surrounded by a low wall, and with five separate entrances. This appeared to be the usual number in those parts, for there were five roads at the baths, at the place where they baptised, at the pool of Bethsaida, and there were likewise many towns with five gates. In this, as in many other peculiarities of the Holy Land, there was a deep prophetic signification; that number five, which so often occurred, was a type of those five sacred wounds of our Blessed Saviour, which were to open to us the gates of Heaven.

The horsemen stopped on the west side of the mount,

[p. 247]

where the declivity was not so steep; for the side up which the criminals were brought was both rough and steep. About a hundred soldiers were, stationed on different parts of the mountain, and as space was required, the thieves were not brought to the top, but ordered to halt before they reached it, and to lie on the ground with their arms fastened to their crosses. Soldiers stood around and guarded them, while crowds of persons who did not fear defiling themselves, stood near the platform or on the neighbouring heights; these were mostly of the lower classes--strangers, slaves, and pagans, and a number of them were women.

It wanted about a quarter to twelve when Jesus, loaded with his cross, sank down at the precise spot where he was to be crucified. The barbarous executioners dragged him up by the cords which they had fastened round his waist, and then untied the arms of the cross, and threw them on the ground. The sight of our Blessed Lord at this moment was, indeed, calculated to move the hardest heart to compassion; he stood or rather bent over the cross, being scarcely able to support himself; his heavenly countenance was pale and wan as that of a person on the verge of death, although wounds and blood disfigured it to a frightful degree; but the hearts of these cruel men were, alas! harder than iron itself, and far from showing the slightest commiseration, they threw him brutally down, exclaiming in a jeering tone, 'Most powerful king, we are about to prepare thy throne.' Jesus immediately placed himself upon the cross, and they measured him and marked the places for his feet and hands, whilst the Pharisees continued to insult their unresisting Victim. When the measurement was finished, they led him to a cave cut in the rock, which had been used formerly as a cellar, opened the door, and pushed him in so roughly that had it not been for the support of angels, his legs must have been broken by so hard a fall on the rough stone floor. I most distinctly heard his groans of pain, but they closed the door quickly, and placed guards before it, and the archers continued their preparations for the crucifixion. The

[p. 248]

centre of the platform mentioned above was the most elevated part of Calvary,--it was a round eminence, about two feet high, and persons were obliged to ascend two or three steps to reach its top. The executioners dug the holes for the three crosses at the top of this eminence, and placed those intended for the thieves one on the right and the other on the left of our Lord's; both were lower and more roughly made than his. They then carried the cross of our Saviour to the spot where they intended to crucify him, and placed it in such a position that it would easily fall into the hole prepared for it. They fastened the two arms strongly on to the body of the cross, nailed the board at the bottom which was to support the feet, bored the holes for the nails, and cut different hollows in the wood in the parts which would receive the head and back of our Lord, in order that his body might rest against the cross, instead of being suspended from it. Their aim in this was the prolongation of his tortures, for if the whole weight of his body was allowed to fall upon the hands the holes might be quite torn open, and death ensue more speedily than they desired. The executioners then drove into the ground the pieces of wood which were intended to keep the cross upright, and made a few other similar preparations.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXXVII.

  

The Departure of Mary and the holy Women of Calvary.

ALTHOUGH the Blessed Virgin was carried away fainting after the sad meeting with her Son loaded with his cross, yet she soon recovered consciousness; for love, and the ardent desire of seeing him once more, imparted to her a supernatural feeling of strength. Accompanied by her companions she went to the house of Lazarus, which was at the bottom of the town, and where Martha, Magdalen, and many holy women were already assembled. All were sad and depressed, but Magdalen could not restrain her tears and lamentations. They started from this

[p. 249]

house, about seventeen in number, to make the way of the cross, that is to say, to follow every step Jesus had taken in this most painful journey. Mary counted each footstep, and being interiorly enlightened, pointed out to her companions those places which had been consecrated by peculiar sufferings. Then did the sharp sword predicted by aged Simeon impress for the first time in the heart of Mary that touching devotion which has since been so constantly practised in the Church. Mary imparted it to her companions, and they in their turn left it to future generations,--a most precious gift indeed, bestowed by our Lord on his beloved Mother, and which passed from her heart to the hearts of her children through the revered voice of tradition.

When these holy women reached the house of Veronica they entered it, because Pilate and his officers were at that moment passing through the street, on their way home. They burst forth into unrestrained tears when they beheld the countenance of Jesus imprinted on the veil, and they returned thanks to God for the favour he had bestowed on his faithful servant. They took the jar of aromatic wine which the Jews had prevented Jesus from drinking, and set off together towards Golgotha. Their number was considerably increased, for many pious men and women whom the sufferings of our Lord had filled with pity had joined them, and they ascended the west side of Calvary, as the declivity there was not so great. The Mother of Jesus, accompanied by her niece, Mary (the daughter of Cleophas), John, and Salome went quite up to the round platform; but Martha, Mary of Heli, Veronica, Johanna, Chusa, Susanna, and Mary, the mother of Mark, remained below with Magdalen, who could hardly support herself. Lower down on the mountain there was a third group of holy women, and there were a few scattered individuals between the three groups, who carried messages from one to the other. The Pharisees on horseback rode to and fro among the people, and the five entrances were guarded by Roman soldiers. Mary kept her eyes fixed on the fatal spot, and stood as if entranced,--if

[p. 250]

was indeed a sight calculated to appal and rend the heart of a mother. There lay the terrible cross, the hammers, the ropes, the nails, and alongside of these frightful instruments of torture stood the brutal executioners, half drank, and almost without clothing, swearing and blaspheming, whilst making their preparations. The sufferings of the Blessed Virgin were greatly increased by her not being able to see her Son; she knew that he was still alive, and she felt the most ardent desire once more to behold him, while the thought of the torments he still had to endure made her heart ready to burst with grief.

A little hail had been falling at times during the morning, but the sun came out again after ten o'clock, and a thick red fog began to obscure it towards twelve.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXXVIII.

  

The Nailing of Jesus to the Cross.

THE preparations for the crucifixion being finished four archers went to the cave where they had confined our Lord and dragged him out with their usual brutality, while the mob looked on and made use of insulting language, and the Roman soldiers regarded all with indifference, and thought of nothing but maintaining order. When Jesus was again brought forth, the holy women gave a man some money, and begged him to pay the archers anything they might demand if they would allow Jesus to drink the wine which Veronica had prepared; but the cruel executioners, instead of giving it to Jesus, drank it themselves. They had brought two vases with them, one of which contained vinegar and gall, and the other a mixture which looked like wine mixed with myrrh and absinthe; they offered a glass of the latter to our Lord, which he tasted, but would not drink.

There were eighteen archers on the platform; the six who had scourged Jesus, the four who had conducted him to Calvary, the two who held the ropes which supported

[p. 251]

the cross, and six others who came for the purpose of crucifying him. They were strangers in the pay of either the Jews or the Romans, and were short thick-set men, with most ferocious countenances, rather resembling wild beasts than human beings, and employing themselves alternately in drinking and in making preparations for the crucifixion.

This scene was rendered the more frightful to me by the sight of demons, who were invisible to others, and I Saw large bodies of evil spirits under the forms of toads, serpents, sharp-clawed dragons, and venomous insects, urging these wicked men to still greater cruelty, and perfectly darkening the air. They crept into the mouths and into the hearts of the assistants, sat upon their shoulders, filled their minds with wicked images, and incited them to revile and insult our Lord with still greater brutality. Weeping angels, however, stood around Jesus, and the sight of their tears consoled me not a little, and they were accompanied by little angels of glory, whose heads alone I saw. There were likewise angels of pity and angels of consolation among them; the latter frequently approached the Blessed Virgin and the rest of the pious persons who were assembled there, and whispered words of comfort which enabled them to bear up with firmness.

The executioners soon pulled off our Lord's cloak, the belt to which the ropes were fastened, and his own belt, when they found it was impossible to drag the woollen garment which his Mother had woven for him over his head, on account of the crown of thorns; they tore off this most painful crown, thus reopening every wound, and seizing the garment, tore it mercilessly over his bleeding and wounded head. Our dear Lord and Saviour then stood before his cruel enemies, stripped of all save the short scapular which was on his shoulders, and the linen which girded his loins. His scapular was of wool; the wool had stuck to the wounds, and indescribable was the agony of pain he suffered when they pulled it roughly off. He Shook like the aspen as he stood before them, for he

[p. 252]

was so weakened from suffering and loss of blood that he could not support himself for more than a few moments; he was covered with open wounds, and his shoulders and back were torn to the bone by the dreadful scourging he had endured. He was about to fall when the executioners, fearing that he might die, and thus deprive them of the barbarous pleasure of crucifying him, led him to a large stone and placed him roughly down upon it, but no sooner was he seated than they aggravated his sufferings by putting the crown of thorns again upon his head. They then offered him some vinegar and gall, from which, however, he turned away in silence. The executioners did not allow him to rest long, but bade him rise and place himself on the cross that they might nail him to it. Then seizing his right arm they dragged it to the hole prepared for the nail, and having tied it tightly down with a cord, one of them knelt upon his sacred chest, a second held his hand flat, and a third taking a long thick nail, pressed it on the open palm of that adorable hand, which had ever been open to bestow blessings and favours on the ungrateful Jews, and with a great iron hammer drove it through the flesh, and far into the wood of the cross. Our Lord uttered one deep but suppressed groan, and his blood gushed forth and sprinkled the arms of the archers. I counted the blows of the hammer, but my extreme grief made me forget their number. The nails were very large, the heads about the size of a crown piece, and the thickness that of a man's thumb, while the points came through at the back of the cross. The Blessed Virgin stood motionless; from time to time you might distinguish her plaintive moans; she appeared as if almost fainting from grief, and Magdalen was quite beside herself. When the executioners had nailed the right hand of our Lord, they perceived that his left hand did not reach the hole they had bored to receive the nail, therefore they tied ropes to his left arm, and having steadied their feet against the cross, pulled the left hand violently until it reached the place prepared for it. This dreadful process caused our Lord indescribable agony, his breast heaved, and lib legs

[p. 253]

were quite contracted. They again knelt upon him, tied down his arms, and drove the second nail into his left hand; his blood flowed afresh, and his feeble groans were once more heard between the blows of the hammer, but nothing could move the hard-hearted executioners to the slightest pity. The arms of Jesus, thus unnaturally stretched out, no longer covered the arms of the cross, which were sloped; there was a wide space between them and his armpits. Each additional torture and insult inflicted on our Lord caused a fresh pang in the heart of his Blessed Mother; she became white as a corpse, but as the Pharisees endeavoured to increase her pain by insulting words and gestures, the disciples led her to a group of pious women who were standing a little farther off.

The executioners had fastened a piece of wood at the lower part of the cross under where the feet of Jesus would be nailed, that thus the weight of his body might not rest upon the wounds of his hands, as also to prevent the bones of his feet from being broken when nailed to the cross. A hole had been pierced in this wood to receive the nail when driven through his feet, and there was likewise a little hollow place for his heels. These precautions were taken lest his wounds should be torn open by the weight of his body, and death ensue before he had suffered all the tortures which they hoped to see him endure. The whole body of our Lord had been dragged upward, and contracted by the violent manner with which the executioners had stretched out his arms, and his knees were bent up; they therefore flattened and tied them down tightly with cords; but soon perceiving that his feet did not reach the bit of wood which was placed for them to rest upon, they became infuriated. Some of their number proposed making fresh holes for the nails which pierced his hands, as there would be considerable difficulty in removing the bit of wood, but the others would do nothing of the sort, and continued to vociferate, 'He will not stretch himself out, but we will help him;' they accompanied these words with the most fearful oaths and imprecations, and having fastened a rope to his right leg,

[p. 254]

dragged it violently until it reached the wood, and then tied it down as tightly as possible. The agony which Jesus suffered from this violent tension was indescribable; the words 'My God, my God,' escaped his lips, and the executioners increased his pain by tying his chest and arms to the cross, lest the hands should be torn from the nails. They then fastened his left foot on to his right foot, having first bored a hole through them with a species of piercer, because they could not be placed in such a position as to be nailed together at once. Next they took a very long nail and drove it completely through both feet into the cross below, which operation was more than usually painful, on account of his body being so unnaturally stretched out; I counted at least six and thirty blows of the hammer. During the whole time of the crucifixion our Lord never ceased praying, and repeating those passages in the Psalms which he was then accompanying, although from time to time a feeble moan caused by excess of suffering might be heard. In this manner he had prayed when carrying his cross, and thus he continued to pray until his death. I heard him repeat all these prophecies; I repeated them after him, and I have often since noted the different passages when reading the Psalms, but I now feel so exhausted with grief that I cannot at all connect them.

When the crucifixion of Jesus was finished, the commander of the Roman soldiers ordered Pilate's inscription to be nailed on the top of the cross. The Pharisees were much incensed at this, and their anger was increased by the jeers of the Roman soldiers, who pointed at their crucified king; they therefore hastened back to Jerusalem, determined to use their best endeavours to persuade the governor to allow them to substitute another inscription.

It was about a quarter past twelve when Jesus was crucified; and at the moment the cross was lifted up, the Temple resounded with the blast of trumpets, which were always blown to announce the sacrifice of the Paschal Lamb.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 255]

  

CHAPTER XXXIX.

  

Erection of the Cross.

WHEN the executioners had finished the crucifixion of our Lord, they tied ropes to the trunk of the cross, and fastened the ends of these ropes round a long beam which was fixed firmly in the ground at a little distance, and by means of these ropes they raised the cross. Some of their number supported it while others shoved its foot towards the hole prepared for its reception--the heavy cross fell into this hole with a frightful shock--Jesus uttered a faint cry, and his wounds were torn open in the most fearful manner, his blood again burst forth, and his half dislocated bones knocked one against the other. The archers pushed the cross to get it thoroughly into the hole, and caused it to vibrate still more by planting five stakes around to support it.

A terrible, but at the same time a touching sight it was to behold the cross raised up in the midst of the vast concourse of persons who were assembled all around; not only insulting soldiers, proud Pharisees, and the brutal Jewish mob were there, but likewise strangers from all parts. The air resounded with acclamations and derisive cries when they beheld it towering on high, and after vibrating for a moment in the air, fall with a heavy crash into the hole cut for it in the rock. But words of love and compassion resounded through the air at the same moment; and need we say that these words, these sounds, were emitted by the most saintly of human beings--Mary--John--the holy women, and all who were pure of heart? They bowed down and adored the 'Word made flesh,' nailed to the cross; they stretched forth their hands as if desirous of giving assistance to the Holy of Holies, whom they beheld nailed to a cross and in the power of his furious enemies. But when the solemn sound of the fall of the cross into the hole prepared for it in the rock was heard, a dead silence ensued, every heart was filled with an undefinable feeling of awe--a feeling never before experienced, and for

[p. 256]

which no one could account, even to himself; all the inmates of hell shook with terror, and vented their rage by endeavouring to stimulate the enemies of Jesus to still greater fury and brutality; the souls in Limbo were filled with joy and hope, for the sound was to them a harbinger of happiness, the prelude to the appearance of their Deliverer. Thus was the blessed cross of our Lord planted for the first time on the earth; and well might it be compared to the tree of life in Paradise, for the wounds of Jesus were as sacred fountains, from which flowed four rivers destined both to purify the world from the curse of sin, and to give it fertility, so as to produce fruit unto salvation.

The eminence on which the cross was planted was about two feet higher than the surrounding parts; the feet of Jesus were sufficiently near the ground for his friends to be able to reach to kiss them, and his face was turned to the north-west.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XL.

  

Crucifixion of the Thieves.

DURING the time of the crucifixion of Jesus, the two thieves were left lying on the ground at some distance off; their arms were fastened to the crosses on which they were to be executed, and a few soldiers stood near on guard. The accusation which had been proved against them was that of having assassinated a Jewish woman who, with her children, was travelling from Jerusalem to Joppa. They were arrested, under the disguise of rich merchants, at a castle in which Pilate resided occasionally, when employed in exercising his troops, and they had been imprisoned for a long time before being brought to trial. The thief placed on the left-hand side was much older than the other; a regular miscreant, who had corrupted the younger. They were commonly called Dismas and Gesmas, and as I forget their real names I shall distinguish them by these terms,

[p. 257]

calling the good one Dismas, and the wicked one Gesmas. Both the one and the other belonged to a band of robbers who infested the frontiers of Egypt; and it was in a cave inhabited by these robbers that the Holy Family took refuge when flying into Egypt, at the time of the massacre of the Innocents. The poor leprous child, who was instantly cleansed by being dipped in the water which had been used for washing the infant Jesus, was no other than this Dismas, and the charity of his mother, in receiving and granting hospitality to the Holy Family, had been rewarded by the cure of her child; while this outward purification was an emblem of the inward purification which was afterwards accomplished in the soul of Dismas on Mount Calvary, through that Sacred Blood which was then shed on the cross for our redemption. Dismas knew nothing at all about Jesus, but as his heart was not hardened, the sight of the extreme patience of our Lord moved him much. When the executioners had finished putting up the cross of Jesus, they ordered the thieves to rise without delay, and they loosened their fetters in order to crucify them at once, as the sky was becoming very cloudy and bore every appearance of an approaching storm. After giving them some myrrh and vinegar, they stripped off their ragged clothing, tied ropes round their arms, and by the help of small ladders dragged them up to their places on the cross. The executioners then bound the arms of the thieves to the cross, with cords made of the bark of trees, and fastened their wrists, elbows, knees, and feet in like manner, drawing the cords so tight that their joints cracked, and the blood burst out. They uttered piercing cries, and the good thief exclaimed as they were drawing him up, 'This torture is dreadful, but if they had treated us as they treated the poor Galilaean, we should have been dead long ago.'

The executioners had divided the garments of Jesus, in order to draw lots for them; his mantle, which was narrow at the top, was very wide at the bottom, and lined over the chest, thus forming a pocket between the lining and the material itself; the lining they pulled out, tore into bands, and divided. They did the same with his

[p. 258]

long white robe, belt, scapular, and under-garment, which was completely saturated with his Sacred Blood. Not being able to agree as to who was to be the possessor of the seamless robe woven by his Mother, which could not be cut up and divided, they brought out a species of chessboard marked with figures, and were about to decide the point by lots, when a messenger, sent by Nicodemus and Joseph of Arimathea, informed them that there were persons ready to purchase all the clothes of Jesus; they therefore gathered them together and sold them in a bundle. Thus did the Christians get possession of these precious relies.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XLI.

  

Jesus hanging an the Cross between two Thieves.

THE tremendous concussion caused by the fall of the cross into the hole prepared for it drove the sharp points of the crown of thorns, which was still upon the head of our dear Saviour, still deeper into his sacred flesh, and blood ran down again in streams, both from it and from his hands and feet. The archers then placed ladders against the sides of the cross, mounted them and unfastened the ropes with which they had bound our Lord to the cross, previous to lifting it up, fearing that the shock might tear open the wounds in his hands and feet, and that then the nails would no longer support his body. His blood had become, in a certain degree, stagnated by his horizontal position and the pressure of the cords, but when these wore withdrawn, it resumed its usual course, and caused such agonising sensations throughout his countless wounds, that he bowed his head, and remained as if dead for more than seven minutes. A pause ensued; the executioners were occupied with the division of his garments; the trumpets in the temple no longer resounded; and all the actors in this fearful tragedy appeared to be exhausted, some by grief, and others by the efforts they had made to compass their wicked ends, and

[p. 259]

by the joy which they felt now at having at last succeeded in bringing about the death of him whom they had so long envied. With mixed feelings of fear and compassion I cast my eyes upon Jesus,--Jesus my Redeemer,--the Redeemer of the world. I beheld him motionless, and almost lifeless. I felt as if I myself must expire; my heart was overwhelmed between grief, love, and horror; my mind was half wandering, my hands and feet burning with a feverish heat; each vein, nerve, and limb was racked with inexpressible pain; I saw nothing distinctly, excepting my beloved Spouse hanging on the cross. I contemplated his disfigured countenance, his head encircled with that terrible crown of thorns, which prevented his raising it even for a moment without the most intense suffering, his mouth parched and half open from exhaustion, and his hair and beard clotted with blood. His chest was torn with stripes and wounds, and his elbows, wrists, and shoulders so violently distended as to be almost dislocated; blood constantly trickled down from the gaping wounds in his hands, and the flesh was so torn from his ribs that you might almost count them. His legs and thighs, as also his arms, were stretched out almost to dislocation, the flesh and muscles so completely laid bare that every bone was visible, and his whole body covered with black, green, and reeking wounds. The blood which flowed from his wounds was at first red, but it became by degrees light and watery, and the whole appearance of his body was that of a corpse ready for interment. And yet, notwithstanding the horrible wounds with which he was covered, notwithstanding the state of ignominy to which he was reduced, there still remained that inexpressible look of dignity and goodness which had ever filled all beholders with awe.

The complexion of our Lord was fair, like that of Mary, and slightly tinted with red; but his exposure to the weather during the last three years had tanned him considerably. His chest was wide, but not hairy like that of St. John Baptist; his shoulders broad, and his arms and thighs sinewy; his knees were strong and

[p. 260]

hardened, as is usually the case with those who have either walked or knelt much, and his legs long, with very strong muscles; his feet were well formed, and his hands beautiful, the fingers being long and tapering, and although not delicate like those of a woman, still not resembling those of a man who had laboured hard. His neck was rather long, with a well-set and finely proportioned head; his forehead large and high; his face oval; his hair, which was far from thick, was of a golden brown colour, parted in the middle and falling over his shoulders; his beard was not any great length, but pointed and divided under the chin. When I contemplated him on the cross, his hair was almost all torn off, and what remained was matted and clotted with blood; his body was one wound, and every limb seemed as if dislocated.

The crosses of the two thieves were placed, the one to the right and the other to the left of Jesus; there was sufficient space left for a horseman to ride between them. Nothing can be imagined more distressing than the appearance of the thieves on their crosses; they suffered terribly, and the one on the left-hand side never ceased cursing and swearing. The cords with which they were tied were very tight, and caused great pain; their countenances were livid, and their eyes inflamed and ready to start from the sockets. The height of the crosses of the two thieves was much less than that of our Lord.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XLII.

  

First Word of Jesus on the Cross.

As soon as the executioners had crucified the two thieves and divided the garments of Jesus between them, they gathered up their tools, addressed a few more insulting words to our Lord, and went away. The Pharisees, likewise, rode up to Jesus, looked at him scornfully, made use of some opprobrious expressions, and then left the place. The Roman soldiers, of whom a hundred had

[p. 261]

been posted round Calvary, were marched away, and their places filled by fifty others, the command of whom was given to Abenadar, an Arab by birth, who afterwards took the name of Ctesiphon in baptism; and the second in command was Cassius, who, when he became a Christian, was known by the name of Longinus: Pilate frequently made use of him as a messenger. Twelve Pharisees, twelve Sadducees, as many Scribes, and a few Ancients, accompanied by those Jews who had been endeavouring to persuade Pilate to change the inscription on the Cross of Jesus, then came up: they were furious, as the Roman governor had given them a direct refusal. They rode round the platform, and drove away the Blessed Virgin, whom St. John led to the holy women. When they passed the Cross of Jesus, they shook their heads disdainfully at him, exclaiming at the same time, 'Vah! thou that destroyest the temple of God, and in three days buildest it up again, save thyself, coming down from the Cross. Let Christ, the King of Israel, come down now from the Cross, that we may see and believe.' The soldiers, likewise, made use of deriding language.

The countenance and whole body of Jesus became even more colourless: he appeared to be on the point of fainting, and Gesmas (the wicked thief) exclaimed, 'The demon by whom he is possessed is about to leave him.' A soldier then took a sponge, filled it with vinegar, put it on a reed, and presented it to Jesus, who appeared to drink. If thou art the King of the Jews,' said the soldier, 'save thyself, coming down from the Cross.' These things took place during the time that the first band of soldiers was being relieved by that of Abenadar. Jesus raised his head a little, and said, 'Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do.' And Gesmas cried out, 'If thou art the Christ, save thyself and us.' Dismas (the good thief) was silent, but he was deeply moved at the prayer of Jesus for his enemies. When Mary heard the voice of her Son, unable to restrain herself, she rushed forward, followed by John, Salome, and Mary of Cleophas, and approached the Cross, which the kind-hearted centurion

[p. 262]

did not prevent. The prayers of Jesus obtained for the good thief a most powerful grace; he suddenly remembered that it was Jesus and Mary who had cured him of leprosy in his childhood, and he exclaimed in a loud and clear voice, 'How can you insult him when he prays for you? He has been silent, and suffered all your outrages with patience; he is truly a Prophet--he is our King--he is the Son of God.' This unexpected reproof from the lips of a miserable malefactor who was dying on a cross caused a tremendous commotion among the spectators; they gathered up stones, and wished to throw them at him; but the centurion Abenadar would not allow it.

The Blessed Virgin was much comforted and strengthened by the prayer of Jesus, and Dismas said to Gesmas, who was still blaspheming Jesus, 'Neither dost thou fear God, seeing thou art under the same condemnation. And we indeed justly, for we receive the due reward of our deeds; but this man hath done no evil. Remember thou art now at the point of death, and repent.' He was enlightened and touched: he confessed his sins to Jesus, and said: 'Lord, if thou condemnest me it will be with justice.' And Jesus replied, 'Thou shalt experience my mercy.' Dismas, filled with the most perfect contrition, began instantly to thank God for the great graces he had received, and to reflect over the manifold sins of his past life. All these events took place between twelve and the half-hour shortly after the crucifixion; but such a surprising change ad taken place in the appearance of nature during that time as to astonish the beholders and fill their minds with awe and terror.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XLIII.

  

Eclipse of the Sun.--Second and third Word of Jesus on the Cross.

A LITTLE hail had fallen at about ten o'clock,--when Pilate was passing sentence,--and after that the weather cleared up, until towards twelve, when the thick red-looking fog began to obscure the sun. Towards the sixth

[p. 263]

hour, according to the manner of counting of the Jews, the sun was suddenly darkened. I was shown the exact cause of this wonderful phenomenon; but I have unfortunately partly forgotten it, and what I have not forgotten I cannot find words to express; but I was lifted up from the earth, and beheld the stars and the planets moving about out of their proper spheres. I saw the moon like an immense ball of fire rolling along as if flying from the earth. I was then suddenly taken back to Jerusalem, and I beheld the moon reappear behind the Mountain of Olives, looking pale and full, and advancing rapidly towards the sun, which was dim and overshrouded by a fog. I saw to the east of the sun a large dark body which had the appearance of a mountain, and which soon entirely hid the sun. The centre of this body was dark yellow, and a red circle like a ring of fire was round it. The sky grew darker and the stars appeared to cast a red and lurid light. Both men and beasts were struck with terror; the enemies of Jesus ceased reviling him, while the Pharisees endeavoured to give philosophical reasons for what was taking place, but they failed in their attempt, and were reduced to silence. Many were seized with remorse, struck their breasts, and cried out, 'May his blood fall upon his murderers!' Numbers of others, whether near the Cross or at a distance, fell on their knees and entreated forgiveness of Jesus, who turned his eyes compassionately upon them in the midst of his sufferings. However, the darkness continued to increase, and every one excepting Mary and the most faithful among the friends of Jesus left the Cross. Dismas then raised his head, and in a tone of humility and hope said to Jesus, 'Lord, remember me when thou shalt come into thy kingdom.' And Jesus made answer, 'Amen, I say to thee, This day thou shalt be with me in Paradise.' Magdalen, Mary of Cleophas, and John stood near the Cross of our Lord and looked at him, while the Blessed Virgin, filled with intense feelings of motherly love, entreated her Son to permit her to die with him; but he, casting a look of ineffable tenderness upon her, turned to John and said, 'Woman, behold thy son;' then he said to

[p. 264]

[paragraph continues] John, 'Behold thy mother.' John looked at his dying Redeemer, and saluted this beloved mother (whom he henceforth considered as his own) in the most respectful manner. The Blessed Virgin was so overcome by grief at these words of Jesus that she almost fainted, and was carried to a short distance from the Cross by the holy women.

I do not know whether Jesus really pronounced these words, but I felt interiorly that he gave Mary to John as a mother, and John to Mary as a son. In similar visions a person is often conscious of things which are not written, and words can only express a portion of them, although to the individual to whom they are shown they are so clear as not to require explanation. For this reason it did not appear to me in the least surprising that Jesus should call the Blessed Virgin 'Woman,' instead of 'Mother.' I felt that he intended to demonstrate that she was that woman spoken of in Scripture who was to crush the head of the serpent, and that then was the moment in which that promise was accomplished in the death of her Son. I knew that Jesus, by giving her as a mother to John, gave her also as a mother to all who believe in him, who become children of God, and are not born of flesh and blood, or of the will of man, but of God. Neither did it appear to me surprising that the most pure, the most humble, and the most obedient among women, who, when saluted by the angel as 'full of grace,' immediately replied, 'Behold the handmaid of the Lord, be it done to me according to thy word,' and in whose sacred womb the Word was instantly made flesh,--that she, when informed by her dying Son that she was to become the spiritual mother of another son, should repeat the same words with humble obedience, and immediately adopt as her children all the children of God, the brothers of Jesus Christ. These things are much easier to feel by the grace of God than to be expressed in words. I remember my celestial Spouse once saying to me, 'Everything is imprinted in the hearts of those children of the Church who believe, hope, and love.'

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 265]

  

CHAPTER XLIV.

  

The Fear felt by the Inhabitants of Jerusalem.--Fourth Word of Jesus on the Cross.

IT was about half-past one o'clock when I was taken into Jerusalem to see what was going on there. The inhabitants were perfectly overcome with terror and anxiety; the streets dark and gloomy, and some persons were feeling their way about, while others, seated on the ground with their heads veiled, struck their breasts, or went up to the roofs of their houses, looked at the sky, and burst forth in bitter lamentations. Even the animals uttered mournful cries, and hid themselves; the birds flew low, and fell to the ground. I saw Pilate conferring with Herod on the alarming state of things: they were both extremely agitated, and contemplated the appearance of the sky from that terrace upon which Herod was standing when he delivered up Jesus to be insulted by the infuriated rabble. 'These events are not in the common course of nature,' they both exclaimed: 'they must be caused by the anger of the gods, who are displeased at the cruelty which has been exercised towards Jesus of Nazareth.' Pilate and Herod, surrounded by guards, then directed their hasty trembling steps through the forum to Herod's palace. Pilate turned away his head when he passed Gabbatha, from whence he had condemned Jesus to be crucified. The square was almost empty; a few persons might be seen reentering their houses as quickly as possible, and a few others running about and weeping, while two or three small groups might be distinguished in the distance. Pilate sent for some of the Ancients and asked them what they thought the astounding darkness could possibly portend, and said that he himself considered it a terrific proof of the anger of their God at the crucifixion of the Galilaean, who was most certainly their prophet and their king: he added that he had nothing to reproach himself with on that head, for he had washed his hands of the whole affair, and was, therefore, quite

[p. 266]

innocent. The Ancients were as hardened as over, and replied, in a sullen tone, that there was nothing unnatural in the course of events, that they might be easily accounted for by philosophers, and that they did not repent of anything they had done. However, many persons were converted, and among others those soldiers who fell to the ground at the words of our Lord when they were sent to arrest him in the Garden of Olives.

The rabble assembled before Pilate's house, and instead of the cry of 'Crucify him, crucify him!' which had resounded in the morning, you might have heard vociferations of 'Down with the iniquitous judge!' 'May the blood of the just man fall upon his murderers!' Pilate was much alarmed; he sent for additional guards, and endeavoured to cast all the blame upon the Jews. He again declared that the crime was not his; that he was no subject of this Jesus, whom they had put to death unjustly, and who was their king, their prophet, their Holy One; that they alone were guilty, as it must be evident to all that he condemned Jesus solely from compulsion.

The Temple was thronged with Jews, who were intent on the immolation of the Paschal lamb; but when the darkness increased to such a degree that it was impossible to distinguish the countenance of one from that of the other, they were seized with fear, horror, and dread, which they expressed by mournful cries and lamentations. The High Priests endeavoured to maintain order and quiet. All the lamps were lighted; but the confusion became greater every moment, and Annas appeared perfectly paralysed with terror. I saw him endeavouring to hide first in one place, and then in another. When I left the Temple, and walked through the streets, I remarked that, although not a breath of wind was stirring, yet both the doors and windows of the houses were shaking as if in a storm, and the darkness was becoming every moment more dense.

The consternation produced by the sudden darkness at Mount Calvary was indescribable. When it first commenced,

[p. 267]

the confusion of the noise of the hammers, the vociferations of the rabble, the cries of the two thieves on being fastened to their crosses, the insulting speeches of the Pharisees, the evolutions of the soldiers, and the drunken shouts of the executioners, had so completely engrossed the attention of every one, that the change which was gradually coming over the face of nature was not remarked; but as the darkness increased, every sound ceased, each voice was hushed, and remorse and terror took possession of every heart, while the bystanders retired one by one to a distance from the Cross. Then it was that Jesus gave his Mother to St. John, and that she, overcome by grief, was carried away to a short distance. As the darkness continued to grow more and more dense, the silence became perfectly astounding; every one appeared terror-struck; some looked at the sky, while others, filled with remorse, turned towards the Cross, smote their breasts, and were converted. Although the Pharisees were in reality quite as much alarmed as other persons, yet they endeavoured at first to put a bold face on the matter, and declared that they could see nothing unaccountable in these events; but at last even they lost assurance, and were reduced to silence. The disc of the sun was of a dark-yellow tint, rather resembling a mountain when viewed by moonlight, and it was surrounded by a bright fiery ring; the stars appeared, but the light they cast was red and lurid; the birds were so terrified as to drop to the ground; the beasts trembled and moaned; the horses and the asses of the Pharisees crept as close as possible to one another, and put their heads between their legs. The thick fog penetrated everything.

Stillness reigned around the Cross. Jesus hung upon it alone; forsaken by all,--disciples, followers, friends, his Mother even was removed from his side; not one person of the thousands upon whom he had lavished benefits was near to offer him the slightest alleviation in his bitter agony,--his soul was overspread with an indescribable feeling of bitterness and grief,--all within him was dark, gloomy, and wretched. The darkness which reigned around

[p. 268]

was but symbolical of that which overspread his interior; he turned, nevertheless, to his Heavenly Father, he prayed for his enemies, he offered the chalice of his sufferings for their redemption, he continued to pray as he had done during the whole of his Passion, and repeated portions of those Psalms the prophecies of which were then receiving their accomplishment in him. I saw angels standing around. Again I looked at Jesus--my beloved Spouse on his Cross, agonising and dying, yet still in dreary solitude. He at that moment endured anguish which no mortal pen can describe,--he felt that suffering which would overwhelm a poor weak mortal if deprived at once of all consolation, both divine and human, and then compelled, without refreshment, assistance, or light, to traverse the stormy desert of tribulation upheld by faith, hope, and charity alone.

His sufferings were inexpressible; but it was by them that he merited for us the grace necessary to resist those temptations to despair which will assail us at the hour of death,--that tremendous hour when we shall feel that we are about to leave all that is dear to us here below. When our minds, weakened by disease, have lost the power of reasoning, and even our hopes of mercy and forgiveness are become, as it were, enveloped in mist and uncertainty,--then it is that we must fly to Jesus, unite our feelings of desolation with that indescribable dereliction which he endured upon the Cross, and be certain of obtaining, a glorious victory over our infernal enemies. Jesus then offered to his Eternal Father his poverty, his dereliction, his labours, and, above all, the bitter sufferings which our ingratitude had caused him to endure in expiation for our sins and weaknesses; no one, therefore, who is united to Jesus in the bosom of his Church must despair at the awful moment preceding his exit from this life, even if he be deprived of all sensible light and comfort; for he must then remember that the Christian is no longer obliged to enter this dark desert alone and unprotected,' as Jesus has cast his own interior and exterior dereliction on the Cross into this gulf of desolation, consequently he will not

[p. 269]

be left to cope alone with death, or be suffered to leave this world in desolation of spirit, deprived of heavenly consolation. All fear of loneliness and despair in death must therefore be cast away; for Jesus, who is our true light, the Way, the Truth, and the Life, has preceded us on that dreary road, has overspread it with blessings, and raised his Cross upon it, one glance at which will calm our every fear. Jesus then (if we may so express ourselves) made his last testament in the presence of his Father, and bequeathed the merits of his Death and Passion to the Church and to sinners. Not one erring soul was forgotten; he thought of each and every one; praying, likewise, even for those heretics who have endeavoured to prove that, being God, he did not suffer as a man would have suffered in his place. The cry which he allowed to pass his lips in the height of his agony was intended not only to show the excess of the sufferings he was then enduring, but likewise to encourage all afflicted souls who acknowledge God as their Father to lay their sorrows with filial confidence at his feet. It was towards three o'clock when he cried out in a loud voice, 'Eloi, Eloi, lamma sabacthani?' 'My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?' These words of our Lord interrupted the dead silence which had continued so long; the Pharisees turned towards him, and one of them said, 'Behold, he calleth Elias;' and another, 'Let us see whether Elias will come to deliver him.' When Mary heard the voice of her divine Son, she was unable to restrain herself any longer, but rushed forwards, and returned to the foot of the Cross, followed by John, Mary the daughter of Cleophas, Mary Magdalen, and Salome. A troop of about thirty horsemen from Judaea and the environs of Joppa, who were on their way to Jerusalem for the festival, passed by just at the time when all was silent round the Cross, both assistants and spectators being transfixed with terror and apprehension. When they beheld Jesus hanging on the Cross, saw the cruelty with which he had been treated, and remarked the extraordinary signs of God's wrath which overspread the face of nature, they were filled with horror,

[p. 270]

and exclaimed, 'If the Temple of God were not in Jerusalem, the city should be burned to the ground for having taken upon itself so fearful a crime.' 'These words from the lips of strangers--strangers too who bore the appearance of persons of rank--made a great impression on the bystanders, and loud murmurs and exclamations of. grief were heard on all sides; some individuals gathered together in groups, more freely to indulge their sorrow, although a certain portion of the crowd continued to blaspheme and revile all around them. The Pharisees were compelled to assume a more humble tone, for they feared an insurrection among the people, being well aware of the great existing excitement among the inhabitants of Jerusalem. They therefore held a consultation with Abenadar, the centurion, and agreed with him that the gate of the city, which was in the vicinity, should be closed, in order to prevent farther communication, and that they should send to Pilate and Herod for 500 men to guard against the chance of an insurrection, the centurion, in the mean time, doing all in his power to maintain order, and preventing the Pharisees from insulting Jesus, lest it should exasperate the people still more.

Shortly after three o'clock the light reappeared in a degree, the moon began to pass away from the disc of the sun, while the sun again shone forth, although its appearance was dim, being surrounded by a species of red mist; by degrees it became more bright, and the stars vanished, but the sky was still gloomy. The enemies of Jesus soon recovered their arrogant spirit when they saw the light returning; and it was then that they exclaimed, 'Behold, he calleth Elias.'

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XLV.

  

Fifth, sixth, and seventh Words of Jesus on the Cross.--His Death.

THE light continued to return by degrees, and the livid exhausted countenance of our Lord again became

[p. 271]

visible. His body was become much more white from the quantity of blood he had lost; and I heard him exclaim, 'I am pressed as the grape, which is trodden in the winepress. My blood shall be poured out until water cometh, but wine shall here be made no more.' I cannot be sure whether he really pronounced these words, so as to be heard by others, or whether they were only an answer given to my interior prayer. I afterwards had a vision relating to these words, and in it I saw Japhet making wine in this place.

Jesus was almost fainting; his tongue was parched., and he said: 'I thirst.' The disciples who were standing round the Cross looked at him with the deepest expression of sorrow, and he added, 'Could you not have given me a little water?' By these words he gave them to understand that no one would have prevented them from doing so during the darkness. John was filled with remorse, and replied: 'We did not think of doing so, O Lord.' Jesus pronounced a few more words, the import of which was: 'My friends and my neighbours were also to forget me, and not give me to drink, that so what was written concerning me might be fulfilled.' This omission had afflicted him very much. The disciples then offered money to the soldiers to obtain permission to give him a little water: they refused to give it, but dipped a sponge in vinegar and gall, and were about to offer it to Jesus, when the centurion Abenadar, whose heart was touched with compassion, took it from them, squeezed out the gall, poured some fresh vinegar upon it, and fastening it to a reed, put the reed at the end of a lance, and presented it for Jesus to drink. I heard our Lord say several other things, but I only remember these words: 'When my voice shall be silent, the mouths of the dead shall be opened.' Some of the bystanders cried out: 'He blasphemeth again.' But Abenadar compelled them to be silent.

The hour of our Lord was--at last come, his death-struggle had commenced; a cold sweat overspread every limb. John stood at the foot of the Cross, and wiped the feet of Jesus with his scapular. Magdalen was crouched

[p. 272]

to the ground in a Perfect' frenzy of grief behind the Cross. The Blessed Virgin stood between Jesus and the good thief, supported by Salome and Mary of Cleophas, with her eyes rivetted on the countenance of her dying Son. Jesus then said: 'It is consummated;' and, raising his head, cried out in a loud voice, 'Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit.' These words, which he uttered in a clear and thrilling tone, resounded through heaven and earth; and a moment after, he bowed down his head and gave up the ghost. I saw his soul, under the appearance of a bright meteor, penetrate the earth at the foot of the Cross. John and the holy women fell prostrate on the ground. The centurion Abenadar had kept his eyes steadfastly fixed on the disfigured countenance of our Lord, and was perfectly overwhelmed by all that had taken place. When our Lord pronounced his last words, before expiring, in a loud tone, the earth trembled, and the rock of Calvary burst asunder, forming a deep chasm between the Cross of our Lord and that of Gesmas. The voice of God--that solemn and terrible voice--had reechoed through the whole universe; it had broken the solemn silence which then pervaded all nature. All was accomplished. The soul of our Lord had left his body: his last cry had filled every breast with terror. The convulsed earth had paid homage to its Creator: the sword of grief had pierced the hearts of those who loved him. This moment was the moment of grace for Abenadar, his horse trembled under him; his heart was touched; it was rent like the hard rock; he threw his lance to a distance, struck his breast, and cried out: 'Blessed be the Most High God, the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob; indeed this Man was the Son of God!' His words convinced many among the soldiers, who followed his example, and were likewise converted.

Abenadar became from this moment a new man; he adored the true God, and would no longer serve his enemies. He gave both his horse and his lance to a subaltern of the name of Longinus, who, having addressed a few words to the soldiers, mounted his horse, and took the command upon himself. Abenadar then left Calvary,

[p. 273]

and went through the Valley of Gihon to the caves in the Valley of Hinnom, where the disciples were hidden, announced the death of our Lord to them, and then went to the town, in order to see Pilate. No sooner had Abenadar rendered public testimony of his belief in the divinity of Jesus, than a large number of soldiers followed his example, as did also some of the bystanders, and even a few Pharisees. Many struck their breasts, wept, and returned home, while others rent their garments, and cast dust on their heads, and all were filled with horror and fear. John arose; and some of the holy women who were at a short distance came up to the Blessed Virgin, and led her away from the foot of the Cross.

When Jesus, the Lord of life and death, gave up his soul into the hands of his Father, and allowed death to take possession of his body, this sacred body trembled and turned lividly white; the countless wounds which were covered with congealed blood appeared like dark marks; his cheeks became more sunken, his nose more pointed, and his eyes, which were obscured with blood, remained but half open. He raised his weary head, which was still crowned with thorns, for a moment, and then dropped it again in agony of pain; while his parched and torn lips, only partially closed, showed his bloody and swollen tongue. At the moment of death his hands, which were at one time contracted round the nails, opened and returned to their natural size, as did also his arms; his body became stiff, and the whole weight was thrown upon the feet, his knees bent, and his feet twisted a little on one side.

What words can, alas, express the deep grief of the Blessed Virgin? Her eyes closed, a death-like tint overspread her countenance; unable to stand, she fell to the ground, but was soon lifted up, and supported by John, Magdalen, and the others. She looked once more upon her beloved Son--that Son whom she had conceived by the Holy Ghost, the flesh of her flesh, the bone of her bone, the heart of her heart--hanging on a cross between two thieves; crucified, dishonoured, contemned by those

[p. 274]

whom he came on earth to save; and well might she at this moment be termed 'the queen of martyrs.'"

The sun still looked dim and suffused with mist; and during the time of the earthquake the air was close and oppressive, but by degrees it became more clear and fresh.

It was about three o'clock when Jesus expired. The Pharisees were at first much alarmed at the earthquake; but when the first shock was over they recovered themselves, began to throw stones into the chasm, and tried to measure its depth with ropes. Finding, however, that they could not fathom its bottom, they became thoughtful, listened anxiously to the groans of the penitents, who were lamenting and striking their breasts, and then left Calvary. Many among the spectators were really converted, and the greatest part returned to Jerusalem perfectly overcome with fear. Roman soldiers were placed at the gates, and in other principal parts of the city, to prevent the possibility of an insurrection. Cassius remained on Calvary with about fifty soldiers. The friends of Jesus stood round the Cross, contemplated our Lord, and wept; many among the holy women had returned to their homes, and all were silent and overcome with grief.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XLVI.

  

The Earthquake.--Apparitions of the Dead in Jerusalem.

I SAW the soul of Jesus, at the moment he expired, appear under the form of a bright orb, and accompanied by angels, among whom I distinguished the angel Gabriel penetrate the earth at the foot of the Cross. I likewise saw these angels cast a number of evil spirits into the great abyss, and I heard Jesus order several of the souls in Limbo to reenter the bodies in which they once dwelt, in order that the sight might fill sinners with a salutary terror, and that these souls might render a solemn testimony to his divinity.

The earthquake which produced the deep chasm at

[p. 275]

[paragraph continues] Calvary did much damage in different parts of Palestine, but its effects were even more fatal in Jerusalem Its inhabitants were just beginning to be a little reassured by the return of light, when their terror was reawakened with double force by the shocks of the earthquake, and the terrible noise and confusion caused by the downfall of houses and walls on all sides, which panic was still farther increased by the sudden appearance of dead persons, confronting the trembling miscreants who were flying to hide themselves, and addressing them in the most severe and reproachful language.

The High Priests had recommenced the sacrifice of the Paschal lamb (which had been stopped by the unexpected darkness), and they were triumphing at the return of light, when suddenly the ground beneath them trembled, the neighbouring buildings fell down, and the veil of the Temple was rent in two from the top to the bottom. Excess of terror at first rendered those on the outside speechless, but after a time they burst forth into cries and lamentations. The confusion in the interior of the Temple was not, however, as great as would naturally have been expected, because the strictest order and decorum were always enforced there, particularly with regard to the regulations to be followed by those who entered to make their sacrifice, and those who left after having offered it. The crowd was great, but the ceremonies were so solemnly carried out by the priests, that they totally engrossed the minds of the assistants. First came the immolation of the lamb, then the sprinkling of its blood, accompanied by the chanting of canticles and the sounding of trumpets. The priests were endeavouring to continue the sacrifices, when suddenly an unexpected and most appalling pause ensued; terror and astonishment were depicted on each countenance; all was thrown into confusion; not a sound was heard; the sacrifices ceased; there was a general rush to the gates of the Temple; every one endeavoured to fly as quickly as possible. And well might they fly, well might they fear and tremble; for in the midst of the multitude there suddenly appeared persons who had been dead.

[p. 276]

and buried for many years! These persons looked at them sternly, and reproved them most severely for the crime they had committed that day, in bringing about the death of 'the just man,' and calling down his blood upon their heads. Even in the midst of this confusion, some attempts were, however, made by the priests to preserve order; they prevented those who were in the inner part of the Temple from rushing forward, pushing their way through the crowds who were in advance of them, and descending the steps which led out of the Temple: they even continued the sacrifices in some parts, and endeavoured to calm the fears of the people.

The appearance of the Temple at this moment can only be described by comparing it to an ant-hill on which persons have thrown stones, or which has been disturbed by a stick being driven into its centre. The ants in those parts on which the stones have fallen, or which the stick has disturbed, are filled with confusion and terror; they run to and fro and do nothing; while the ants in those parts which have not been disturbed continue to labour quietly, and even begin to repair the damaged parts.

The High Priest Caiphas and his retinue did not lose their presence of mind, and by the outward tranquillity which their diabolical hardness of heart enabled them to preserve, they calmed the confusion in a great degree, and then did their utmost to prevent the people from looking upon these stupendous events as testimonies of the innocence of Jesus. The Roman garrison belonging to the fortress of Antonia likewise made great efforts to maintain order; consequently, the disturbance of the festival was not followed by an insurrection, although every heart was fixed with fear and anxiety, which anxiety the Pharisees endeavoured (and in some instances with success) to calm.

I remember a few other striking incidents: in the first place, the two columns which were placed at the entrance of their Holy of Holies, and to which a magnificent curtain was appended, were shaken to the very foundations; the column on the left side fell down in a

[p. 277]

southerly, and that on the right side in a northerly direction, thus rending the veil in two from the top to the bottom with a fearful sound, and exposing the Holy of Holies uncovered to the public gaze. A large stone was loosened and fell from the wall at the entrance of the sanctuary, near where the aged Simeon used to kneel, and the arch was broken. The ground was heaved up, and many other columns were thrown down in other parts of the Temple.

An apparition of the High Priest Zacharias, who was slain between the porch and the altar, was seen in the sanctuary. He uttered fearful menaces, spoke of the death of the second Zacharias, [*1] and of that of St. John Baptist, as also of the violent deaths of the other prophets. The two sons of the High Priest Simon, surnamed the Just (ancestors of the aged Simeon who prophesied when Jesus was presented in the Temple), made their appearance in the part usually occupied by the doctors, of the law; they also spoke in terrific terms of the deaths of the prophets, of the sacrifice of the old law which was now about to cease, and they exhorted all present to be converted, and to embrace the doctrines which had been preached by him whom they had crucified. The prophet Jeremiah likewise appeared; he stood near the altar, and proclaimed, in a menacing tone, that the ancient sacrifice was at an end, and that a new one had commenced. As these apparitions took place in parts where none but priests were allowed to enter, Caiphas and a few others were alone cognisant of them, and they endeavoured, as far as possible, either to deny their reality, or to conceal them. These prodigies were followed by others still more extraordinary. The doors of the sanctuary flew open of themselves, and a voice was heard to utter these words: 'Let us leave this place;' and I saw all the angels of the Lord instantly leave the Temple. The thirty-two Pharisees

[p. 278]

who went to Calvary a short time before our Lord expired were almost all converted at the foot of the Cross. They returned to the Temple in the midst of the confusion, and were perfectly thunderstruck at all which had taken place there. They spoke most sternly, both to Annas and to Caiphas, and left the Temple. Annas had always been the most bitter of the enemies of Jesus, and had headed every proceeding against him; but the supernatural events which had taken place had so completely unnerved him that he knew not where to hide himself. Caiphas was, in reality, excessively alarmed, and filled with anxiety, but his pride was so great that. he concealed his feelings as far as possible, and endeavoured to reassure Annas. He succeeded for a time; but the sudden appearance of a person who had been dead many years marred the effect of his words, and Annas became again a prey to the most fearful terror and remorse.

Whilst these things wore going on in the Temple, the confusion and panic were not less in Jerusalem. Dead persons were walking about, and many walls and buildings had been shaken by the earthquake, and parts of them fallen down. The superstition of Pilate rendered him even more accessible to fear; he was perfectly paralysed and speechless with terror; his palace was shaken to the very foundation, and the earth quaked beneath his feet. He ran wildly from room to room, and the dead constantly stood before him, reproaching him with the unjust sentence he had passed upon Jesus. He thought that they were the gods of the Galilaean, and took refuge in an inner room, where he offered incense, and made vows to his idols to invoke their assistance in his distress. Herod was equally alarmed; but he shut himself up in his palace, out of the sight of every one.

More than a hundred persons who had died at different epochs reentered the bodies they had occupied when on earth, made their appearance in different parts of Jerusalem, and filled the inhabitants with inexpressible consternation. Those souls which had been released by Jesus from Limbo uncovered their faces and wandered to and

[p. 279]

fro in the streets, and although their bodies were, the same as those which they had animated when on earth, yet these bodies did not appear to touch the ground as they walked. They entered the houses of their descendants, proclaimed the innocence of Jesus, and reproved those who had taken part in his death most severely. I saw them passing through the principal streets; they were generally in couples, and appeared to me to glide through the air without moving their feet. The countenances of some were pale; others of a yellow tint; their beards were long, and their voices sounded strange and sepulchral. Their grave-clothes were such as it was customary to use at the period of their decease. When they reached the place where sentence of death was proclaimed on Jesus before the procession started for Calvary they paused for a moment, and exclaimed in a loud voice: 'Glory be to Jesus for ever and ever, and destruction to his enemies!' Towards four o'clock all the dead returned to their graves. The sacrifices in the Temple had been so interrupted, and the confusion caused by the different prodigies was so great that very few persons ate the Paschal lamb on that evening.

Footnotes

^277:1 The Zacharias here referred to was the father of John the Baptist, who was tortured and afterwards put to death by Herod, because he would not betray John into the hands of the tyrant, He was buried by his friends within the precincts of the Temple.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XLVII.

  

The Request of Joseph of Arimathea to be allowed to have the Body of Jesus.

SCARCELY had the commotion which the town had been thrown into begun to subside in a degree, when the Jews belonging to the Council sent to Pilate to request that the legs of the criminals might be broken, in order to put an end to their lives before the Sabbath-day dawned. Pilate immediately dispatched executioners to Calvary to carry out their wishes.

Joseph of Arimathea then demanded an audience; he had heard of the death of Jesus, and he and Nicodemus had determined to bury him in a new sepulchre which he had made at the end of his garden, not far from Calvary.

[p. 280]

[paragraph continues] Pilate was still filled with anxiety and solicitude, and was much astonished at seeing a person holding a high position like Joseph so anxious for leave to give honourable burial to a criminal whom he had sentenced to be ignominiously crucified. He sent for the centurion Abenadar, who returned to Jerusalem after he had conferred with the disciples who were hidden in the caverns, and asked him whether the King of the Jews was really dead. Abenadar gave Pilate a full account of the death of our Lord, of his last words, and of the loud cry he uttered immediately before death, and of the earthquake which had rent the great chasm in the rock. The only thing at which Pilate expressed surprise was that the death of Jesus should have taken place so quickly, as those who were crucified usually lived much longer; but although be said so little, every word uttered by Joseph increased his dismay and remorse. He instantly gave Joseph an order, by which he was authorised to take down the body of the King of the Jews from the Cross, and to perform the rites of sepulture at once. Pilate appeared to endeavour, by his readiness in granting this request, to wish to make up, in a degree, for his previous cruel and unjust conduct, and he was likewise very glad to do what he was certain would annoy the priests extremely, as he knew their wish was to have Jesus buried ignominiously between the two thieves. He dispatched a messenger to Calvary to see his orders executed. I believe the messenger was Abenadar, for I saw him assisting in taking Jesus down from the Cross.

When Joseph of Arimathea left Pilate's palace, he instantly rejoined Nicodemus, who was waiting for him at the house of a pious woman, which stood opposite to a large street, and was not far from that alley where Jesus was so shamefully ill-treated when he first commenced carrying his Cross. The woman was a vendor of aromatic herbs, and Nicodemus had purchased many perfumes which were necessary for embalming the body of Jesus from her. She procured the more precious kinds from other places, and Joseph went away to procure a fine winding-sheet. His servants then fetched ladders, hammers, pegs, jars of

[p. 281]

water, and sponges, from a neighbouring shed, and placed them in a hand-barrow similar to that on which the disciples of John the Baptist put his body when they carried it off from the castle of Macherus.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XLVIII.

  

The Opening Of the Side of Jesus.--Death of the two Thieves.

WHILST these events were taking place in Jerusalem, silence reigned around Calvary. The crowd which had been for a time so noisy and tumultuous was dispersed; all were panic-stricken; in some that panic had produced sincere repentance, but on others it had had no beneficial effects. Mary, John, Magdalen, Mary of Cleophas, and Salome had remained, either standing or sitting before the Cross, closely veiled and weeping silently. A few soldiers were leaning over the terrace which enclosed the platform; Cassius rode up and down; the sky was lowering, and all nature wore a garb of mourning. Six archers soon after made their appearance, bringing with them ladders, spades, ropes, and large iron staves for the purpose of breaking the legs of the criminals, in order to hasten their deaths. When they approached our Lord's Cross, his friends retired a few paces back, and the Blessed Virgin was seized with fear lest they should indulge their hatred of Jesus by insulting even his dead body. Her fears were not quite unfounded, for when they first placed their ladders against the Cross they declared that he was only pretending to be dead; in a few moments, however, seeing that he was cold and stiff, they left him, and removed their ladders to the crosses on which the two thieves were still hanging alive. They took up their iron staves and broke the arms of the thieves above and below the elbow; while another archer at the same moment broke their legs, both above and below the knee. Gesmas uttered frightful cries, therefore the executioner finished him off by three heavy blows of a cudgel on his chest. Dismas gave a deep groan, and expired:

[p. 282]

be was the first among mortals who had the happiness of rejoining his Redeemer. The cords were then loosened, the two bodies fell to the ground, and the executioners dragged them to a deep morass, which was between Calvary and the walls of the town, and buried them there.

The archers still appeared doubtful whether Jesus was really dead, and the brutality they had shown in breaking the legs of the thieves made the holy. women tremble as to what outrage they might next perpetrate on the body of our Lord. But Cassius, the subaltern officer, a young man of about five-and-twenty, whose weak squinting eyes and nervous manner had often excited the derision of his companions, was suddenly illuminated by grace, and being quite overcome at the sight of the cruel conduct of the soldiers, and the deep sorrow of the holy women, determined to relieve their anxiety by proving beyond dispute that Jesus was really dead. The kindness of his heart prompted him, but unconsciously to himself he fulfilled a prophecy. He seized his lance and rode quickly up to the mound on which the Cross was planted, stopped just between the cross of the good thief and that of our Lord, and taking his lance in both hands, thrust it so completely into the right side of Jesus that the point went through the heart, and appeared on the left side. When Cassius drew his lance out of the wound a quantity of blood and water rushed from it, and flowed over his face and body. This species of washing produced effects somewhat similar to the vivifying waters of Baptism: grace and salvation at once entered his soul. He leaped from his horse, threw himself upon his knees, struck his breast, and confessed loudly before all his firm belief in the divinity of Jesus.

The Blessed Virgin and her companions were still standing near, with their eyes fixed upon the Cross, but when Cassius thrust his lance into the side of Jesus they were much startled, and rushed with one accord up to it. Mary looked as if the lance had transfixed her heart instead of that of her Divine Son, and could scarcely support herself. Cassius meantime remained kneeling and

[p. 283]

thanking God, not only for the graces he had received but likewise for the cure of the complaint in his eyes, which had caused the weakness and the squint. This cure had been effected at the same moment that the darkness with which his soul was previously filled was removed. Every heart was overcome at the sight, of the blood of our Lord, which ran into a hollow in the rock at the foot of the Cross. Mary, John, the holy women, and Cassius, gathered up the blood and water in flasks, and wiped up the remainder with pieces of linen. [*1]

Cassius, whose sight was perfectly restored at the same moment that the eyes of his soul were opened, was deeply moved, and continued his humble prayer of thanks( giving. The soldiers were struck with astonishment at the miracle which had taken place, and cast themselves on their knees by his side, at the same time striking their breasts and confessing Jesus. The water and blood continued to flow from the large wound in the side of our Lord; it ran into the hollow in the rock, and the holy women put it in vases, while Mary and Magdalen mingled their tears. The archers, who had received a message from Pilate, ordering them not to touch the body of Jesus, did not return at all.

All these events took place near the Cross, at a little before four o'clock, during the time that Joseph of Arimathea and Nicodemus were gathering together the articles necessary for the burial of Jesus. But the servants of Joseph having been sent to clean out the tomb, informed the friends of our Lord that their master intended to take the body of Jesus and place it in his new sepulchre. John

[p. 284]

immediately returned to the town with the holy women; in the first place, that Mary might recruit her strength a little, and in the second, to purchase a few things which would be required for the burial. The Blessed Virgin had a small lodging among the buildings near the Cenaculum. They did not reenter the town through the gate which was the nearest to Calvary, because it was closed, and guarded by soldiers placed there by the Pharisees; but they went through that gate which leads to Bethlehem.

Footnotes

^283:1 Sister Emmerich added: 'Cassius was baptised by the name of Longinus; and was ordained deacon, and preached the faith. He always kept some of the blood of Christ,--it dried up, but was found in his coffin in Italy. He was buried in a town at no great distance from the locality where St. Clare passed her life. There. is a lake with an island upon it near this town, and the body of Longinus must have been taken there.' Sister Emmerich appears to designate Mantua by this description, and there is a tradition preserved in that town to the same effect. I do not know which St. Clare lived in the neighbourhood.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XLIX.

  

A Description of some Parts of ancient Jerusalem.

THIS chapter will contain some descriptions of places given by Sister Emmerich on various occasions. They will be followed by a description of the tomb and garden of Joseph of Arimathea, that so we may have no need to interrupt the account of the burial of our Lord.

The first gate which stood. on the eastern side of Jerusalem, to the south of the south-east angle of the Temple, was the one leading to the suburb of Ophel. The gate of the sheep was to the north of the north-east angle of the Temple. Between these two gates there was a third, leading to some streets situated to the east of the Temple, and inhabited for the most part by stonemasons and other workmen. The houses in these streets were supported by the foundations of the Temple; and almost all belonged to Nicodemus, who had caused them to be built, and who employed nearly all the workmen living there. Nicodemus had not long before built a beautiful gate as an entrance to these streets, called the Gate of Moriah. It was but just finished, and through it Jesus had entered the town on Palm Sunday. Thus he entered by the new gate of Nicodemus, through which no one had yet passed, and was buried in the new monument of Joseph of Arimathea, in which no one had yet been laid. This gate was afterwards walled up, and there was a

[p. 285]

tradition that the Christians were once again to enter the town through it. Even in the present day, a walled-up gate, called by the Turks the Golden Gate, stands on this spot.

The road leading to the west from the gate of the sheep passed almost exactly between the north-western side of Mount Sion and Calvary. From this gate to Golgotha the distance was about two miles and a quarter; and from Pilate's palace to Golgotha about two miles. The fortress Antonia was situated to the north-west of the mountain of the Temple, on a detached rock. A person going towards the west, on leaving Pilate's palace, would have had this fortress to his left. On one of its walls there was a platform commanding the forum, and from which Pilate was accustomed to make proclamations to the people: he did this, for instance, when he promulgated new laws. When our Divine Lord was carrying his Cross, in the interior of the town, Mount Calvary was frequently on his right hand. This road, which partly ran in a south-westerly direction, led to a gate made in an inner wall of the town, towards Sion. Beyond this wall, to the left, there was a sort of suburb, containing more gardens than houses; and towards the outer wall of the city stood some magnificent sepulchres with stone entrances. On this side was a house belonging to Lazarus, with beautiful gardens, extending towards that part where the outer western wall of Jerusalem turned to the south. I believe that a little private door, made in the city wall, and through which Jesus and his disciples often passed by permission of Lazarus, led to these gardens. The gate standing at the north-western angle of the town led to Bethsur, which was situated more towards the north than Emmaus and Joppa. The western part of Jerusalem was lower than any other: the land on which it was built first sloped in the direction of the surrounding wall, and then rose again when close to it; and on this declivity there stood gardens and vineyards, behind which wound a wide road, with paths leading to the walls and towers. On the other side, without the

[p. 286]

wall, the land descended towards the valley, so that the walls surrounding the lower part of the town looked as if built on a raised terrace. There are gardens and vineyards even in the present day on the outer hill. When. Jesus arrived at the end of the Way of the Cross, he had on his left hand that part of the town where there were so many gardens; and it was from thence that Simon of Cyrene was coming when he met the procession. The gate by which Jesus left the town was not entirely facing the west, but rather the south-west. The city wall on the left-hand side, after passing through the gate, ran somewhat in a southerly direction, then turned towards the west, and then again to the south, round Mount Sion. On this side there stood a large tower, like a fortress. The gate by which Jesus left the town was at no great distance from another gate more towards the south, leading down to the valley, and where a road, turning to the left in the direction of Bethlehem, commenced. The road turned to the north towards Mount Calvary shortly after that gate by which Jesus left Jerusalem when bearing his Cross. Mount Calvary was very steep on its eastern side, facing the town, and a gradual descent on the western; and on this side, from which the road to Emmaus was to be seen, there was a field, in which I saw Luke gather several plants when he and Cleophas were going to Emmaus, and met Jesus on the way. Near the walls, to the east and south of Calvary, there were also gardens, sepulchres, and vineyards. The Cross was buried on the northeast side, at the foot of Mount Calvary.

The garden of Joseph of Arimathea [*1] was situated near

[p. 287]

the gate of Bethlehem, at about a seven minutes' walk from Calvary: it was a very fine garden, with tall trees, banks, and thickets in it, which gave much shade, and was situated. on a rising ground extending to the walls of the city. A person coming from the northern side of the valley, and entering the garden, had on his left hand a slight ascent extending as far as the city wall; and on his right, at the end of the garden, a detached rock, where the cave of the sepulchre was situated. The grotto in which it was made looked to the east; and on the southwestern and north-western sides of the same rock were two other smaller sepulchres, which were also new, and with depressed fronts. A pathway, beginning on the western side of this rock, ran all round it. The ground in front of the sepulchre was higher than that of the entrance, and a person wishing to enter the cavern had to descend several steps. The cave was sufficiently large for four men to be able to stand close up to the wall on either side without impeding the movements of the bearers of the body. Opposite the door was a cavity in the rock, in which the tomb was made; it was about two feet above the level of the ground, and fastened to the rock by one side only, like an altar: two persons could stand, one at the head and one at the foot; and there was a place also for a third in front, even if the door of the cavity was closed. This door was made of some metal, perhaps of brass, and had two folding doors. These doors could be closed by a stone being rolled against them; and the stone used for this purpose was kept outside the cavern. Immediately after our Lord was placed in the sepulchre it was rolled in front of the door. It was very large, and could not be removed without the united efforts of several men. Opposite the entrance of the cavern there stood a stone bench, and. by mounting on this a person could climb on to the rock,

[p. 288]

which was covered with grass, and from whence the city walls, the highest parts of Mount Sion, and some towers could be seen, as well as the gate of Bethlehem and the fountain of Gihon. The rock inside was of a white colour, intersected with red and blue veins.

Footnotes

^286:1 We must here remark that, in the four years during which Sister Emmerich had her visions, she described everything that had happened to the holy places from the earliest times down to our own. More than once she beheld them profaned and laid waste, but always venerated, either publicly or privately. She saw many stones and pieces of rock, which had been silent witnesses of the Passion and Resurrection of our Lord, placed by St. Helena in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre upon occasion of the foundation of that sacred building. When Sister Emmerich visited it in spirit she was accustomed to venerate the spots where the Cross had stood and the holy Sepulchre been situated. It must be observed, however, [p. 287] that she used sometimes to see a greater distance between the actual position of the Tomb and the spot where the Cross stood than there is between the chapels which bear their names in the church of Jerusalem.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER L.

  

The Descent from the Cross.

AT the time when every one had left the neighbourhood of the Cross, and a few guards alone stood around it, I saw five persons, who I think were disciples, and who had come by the valley from Bethania, draw nigh to Calvary, gaze for a few moments upon the Cross, and then steal away. Three times I met in the vicinity two men who were making examinations and anxiously consulting together. These men were Joseph of Arimathea and Nicodemus. The first time was during the Crucifixion (perhaps when they caused the clothes of Jesus to be brought back from the soldiers), and they were then at no great distance from Calvary. The second was when, after standing to look whether the crowd was dispersing, they went to the tomb to make some preparations. The third was on their return from the tomb to the Cross, when they were looking around in every direction, as if waiting for a favourable moment, and then concerted together as to the manner in which they should take the body of our Lord down from the Cross, after which they returned to the town.

Their next care was to make arrangements for carrying with them the necessary articles for embalming the body, and their servants took some tools with which to detach it from the Cross, as well as two ladders which they found in a barn close to Nicodemus's house. Each of these ladders consisted of a single pole, crossed at regular intervals by pieces of wood, which formed the steps. There were hooks which could be fastened on any part of the pole, and by means of which the ladder could be steadied

[p. 289]

or on which, perhaps, anything required for the work could also be hung.

The woman from whom they had bought their spices had packed the whole neatly together. Nicodemus had bought a hundred pounds' weight of roots, which quantity is equal to about thirty-seven pounds of our measure, as has been explained to me. They carried these spices in little barrels make of bark, which were hung round their necks, and rested on their breasts. One of these barrels contained some sort of powder. They had also some bundles of herbs in bags made of parchment or leather, and Joseph carried a box of ointment; but I do not know what this box was made of. The servants were to carry vases, leathern bottles, sponges, and tools, on a species of litter, and they likewise took fire with them in a closed lantern. They left the town before their master, and by a  gate (perhaps that of Bethania), and then turned their steps towards Mount Calvary. As they walked through the town they passed by the house where the Blessed Virgin, St. John, and the holy women had gone to seek different things required for embalming the body of Jesus, and John and the holy women followed the servants at a certain distance. The women were about five in number, and some of them carried large bundles of linen under their mantles. It was the custom for women, when they went out in the evening, or if intending to perform some work of piety secretly, to wrap their persons carefully in a long sheet at least a yard wide. They began by one arm, and then wound the linen so closely round their body that they could not walk without difficulty. I have seen them wrapped up in this manner, and the sheet not only extended to both arms, but likewise veiled the head. On the present occasion, the appearance of this dress was most striking in my eyes, for it was a real mourning garment. Joseph and Nicodemus were also in mourning attire, and wore black sleeves and wide sashes. Their cloaks, which they had drawn over their heads, were both wide and long, of a common gray colour, and served to conceal everything that they were carrying.

[p. 290]

They turned their steps in the direction of the gate leading to Mount Calvary. The streets were deserted and quiet, for terror kept every one at home. The greatest number were beginning to repent, and but few were keeping the festival. When Joseph and Nicodemus reached the gate they found it closed, and the road, streets, and every corner lined with soldiers. These were the soldiers whom the Pharisees had asked for at about two o'clock, and whom they had kept under arms and on guard, as they still feared a tumult among the people. Joseph showed an order, signed by Pilate, to let them pass freely, and the soldiers were most willing that they should do so, but explained to him that they had endeavoured several times to open the gate, without being able to move it; that apparently the gate had received a shock, and been strained in some part; and that on this account the archers sent to break the legs of the thieves had been obliged to return to the city by another gate. But when Joseph and Nicodemus seized hold of the bolt, the gate opened as if of itself, to the great astonishment of all the bystanders.

It was still dark and the sky cloudy when they reached Mount Calvary, where they found the servants who had been sent on already arrived, and the holy women sitting weeping in front of the Cross. Cassius and several soldiers who were converted remained at a certain distance, and their demeanour was respectful and reserved. Joseph and Nicodemus described to the Blessed Virgin and John all they had done to save Jesus from an ignominious death, and learned from them how they had succeeded in preventing the bones of our Lord from being broken, and how the prophecy had been fulfilled. They spoke also of the wound which Cassius had made with his lance. No sooner was the centurion Abenadar arrived than they began, with the deepest recollection of spirit, their mournful and sacred labour of taking down from the Cross and embalming the adorable body of our Lord.

The Blessed Virgin and Magdalen were seated at the foot of the Cross; while, on the right-hand side, between

[p. 291]

the cross of Dismas and that of Jesus, the other women were engaged in preparing the linen, spices, water, sponges, and vases. Cassius also came forward, and related to Abenadar the miraculous cure of his eyes. All were deeply affected, and their hearts overflowing with sorrow and love; but, at the same time, they preserved a solemn silence, and their every movement was full of gravity and reverence. Nothing broke the stillness save an occasional smothered word of lamentation, or a Stifled groan, which escaped from one or other of these holy personages, in spite of their earnest eagerness and deep attention to their pious labour. Magdalen gave way unrestrainedly to her sorrow, and neither the presence of so many different persons, nor any other consideration, appeared to distract her from it.

Nicodemus and Joseph placed the ladders behind the Cross, and mounted them, holding in their hands a large sheet, to which three long straps were fastened. They tied the body of Jesus, below the arms and knees, to the tree of the Cross, and secured the arms by pieces of linen placed underneath the hands. Then they drew out the nails, by pushing them from behind with strong pins pressed upon the points. The sacred hands of Jesus were thus not much shaken, and the nails fell easily out of the wounds; for the latter had been made wider by the weight of the body, which, being now supported by the cloths, no longer hung on the nails. The lower part of the body, which since our Lord's death had sunk down on the knees, now rested in a natural position, supported by a sheet fastened above to the arms of the Cross. Whilst Joseph was taking out the nail from the left hand, and then allowing the left arm, supported by its cloth, to fall gently down upon the body, Nicodemus was fastening the right arm of Jesus to that of the Cross, as also the sacred crowned head, which had sunk on the right shoulder. Then he took out the right nail, and having surrounded the arm with its supporting sheet, let it fall gently on to the body. At the same time, the centurion Abenadar, with great difficulty, drew out the large nail

[p. 292]

which transfixed the feet. Cassius devoutly received the nails, and laid them at the feet of the Blessed Virgin.

Then Joseph and Nicodemus, having placed ladders against the front of the Cross, in a very upright position, and close to the body, untied the upper strap, and fastened it to one of the hooks on the ladder; they did the same with the two other straps, and passing them all on from hook to hook, caused the sacred body to descend gently towards the centurion, who having mounted upon a stool received it in his arms, holding it below the knees; while Joseph and Nicodemus, supporting the upper part of the body, came gently down the ladder, stopping at every step, and taking every imaginable precaution, as would be done by men bearing the body of some beloved friend who had been grievously wounded. Thus did the bruised body of our Divine Saviour reach the ground.

It was a most touching sight. They all took the same precautions, the same care, as if they had feared to cause Jesus some suffering. They seemed to have concentrated on the sacred body all the love and veneration which they had felt for their Saviour during his life. The eyes of each were fixed upon the adorable body, and followed all its movements; and they were continually uplifting their hands towards Heaven, shedding tears, and expressing in every possible way the excess of their grief and anguish. Yet they all remained perfectly calm, and even those who were so busily occupied about the sacred body broke silence but seldom, and, when obliged to make some necessary remark, did so in a low voice. During the time that the nails were being forcibly removed by blows of the hammer, the Blessed Virgin, Magdalen, and all those who had been present at the Crucifixion, felt each blow transfix their hearts. The sound recalled to their minds all the sufferings of Jesus., and they could not control their trembling fear, lest they should again hear his piercing cry of suffering; although, at the same time, they grieved at the silence of his blessed lips, which proved, alas too surely, that he was really dead. When the body was taken down it was wrapped in linen from the knees to the waist, and then

[p. 293]

placed in the arms of the Blessed Virgin, who, overwhelmed with sorrow and love, stretched them forth to receive their precious burden.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER LI.

  

The Embalming of the Body of Jesus.

THE Blessed Virgin seated herself upon a large cloth spread on the ground, with her right knee, which was slightly raised, and her back resting against some mantles, rolled together so as to form a species of cushion. No precaution had been neglected which could in any way facilitate to her--the Mother of Sorrows--in her deep affliction of soul, the mournful but most sacred duty which she was about to fulfil in regard to the body of her beloved Son. The adorable head of Jesus rested upon Mary's knee, and his body was stretched upon a sheet. The Blessed Virgin was overwhelmed with sorrow and love. Once more, and for the last time, did she hold in her arms the body of her most beloved Son, to whom she had been unable to give any testimony of love during the long hours of his martyrdom. And she gazed upon his wounds and fondly embraced his blood-stained cheeks, whilst Magdalen pressed her face upon his feet.

The men withdrew into a little cave, situated on the south-west side of Calvary, there to prepare the different things needful for the embalming; but Cassius, with a few other soldiers who had been converted, remained at a respectful distance. All ill-disposed persons were gone back to the city, and the soldiers who were present served merely to form a guard to prevent any interruption in the last honours which were being rendered to the body of Jesus. Some of these soldiers even gave assistance when desired. The holy women held the vases, sponges, linen, unction, and spices, according as required; but when not thus employed, they remained at a respectful distance, attentively gazing upon the Blessed Virgin as she proceeded

[p. 294]

in her mournful task. Magdalen did not leave the body of Jesus; but John gave continual assistance to the Blessed Virgin, and went to and fro from the men to the women, lending aid to both parties. The women had with them some large leathern bottles and a vase filled. with water standing upon a coal fire. They gave the Blessed Virgin and Magdalen, according as they required, vases filled with clear water, and sponges, which they afterwards squeezed in the leathern bottles.

The courage and firmness of Mary remained unshaken even in the midst of her inexpressible anguish. [*1] It was absolutely impossible for her to leave the body of her Son in the awful state to which it had been reduced by his sufferings, and therefore she began with indefatigable earnestness to wash and purify it from the traces of the outrages to which it had been exposed. With the utmost care she drew off the crown of thorns, opening it behind, and then cutting off one by one the thorns which had sunk deep into the head of Jesus, in order that she might not widen the wounds. The crown was placed by the side of the nails, and then Mary drew out the thorns which had remained in the skin with a species of rounded pincers, [*2] and sorrowfully showed them to her friends. These

[p. 295]

thorns were placed with the crown, but still some of them must have been preserved separately.

The divine face of our Saviour was scarcely recognisable, so disfigured was it by the wounds with which it was covered. The beard and hair were matted together with blood. Mary washed the head and face, and passed damp sponges over the hair to remove the congealed blood. As she proceeded in her pious office, the extent of the awful cruelty which had been exercised upon Jesus became more and more apparent, and caused in her soul emotions of compassion and tenderness which increased as she passed from one wound to another. She washed the wounds of the head, the eyes filled with blood, the nostrils, and the ears, with a sponge and a small piece of linen spread over the fingers of her right hand; and then she purified, in the same manner, the half-opened mouth, the tongue, the teeth, and the lips. She divided what remained of our Lord's hair into three parts, [*1] a part falling over each temple, and the third over the back of

[p. 296]

his head; and when she had disentangled the front hair and smoothed it, she passed it behind his ears. When the head was thoroughly cleansed and purified, the Blessed Virgin covered it with a veil, after having kissed the sacred cheeks of her dear Son. She then turned her attention to the neck, shoulders, chest, back, arms, and pierced hands. All the bones of the breast and the joints were dislocated, and could not be bent. There was a frightful wound on the shoulder which had borne the weight of the Cross, and all the upper part of the body was covered with bruises and deeply marked with the blows of the scourges. On the left breast there was a small wound where the point of Cassius's lance had come out, and on the right side was the large wound made by the same lance, and which had pierced the heart through and through. Mary washed all these wounds, and Magdalen, on her knees, helped her from time to time; but without leaving the sacred feet of Jesus, which she bathed with tears and wiped with her hair.

The head, bosom, and feet of our Lord were' now washed, and the sacred body, which was covered with brown stains and red marks in those places where the skin had been torn off, and of a bluish-white colour, like flesh that has been drained of blood, was resting on the knees of Mary, who covered the parts which she had washed with a veil, and then proceeded to embalm all the wounds. The holy women knelt by her side, and in turn presented to her a box, out of which she took some precious ointment, and with it filled and covered the wounds. She also anointed the hair, and then, taking the sacred hands of Jesus in her left hand, respectfully kissed them, and filled the large wounds made by the nails with this ointment or sweet spice. She likewise filled the ears, nostrils, and wound in the side with the same precious mixture. Meanwhile Magdalen wiped and embalmed our Lord's feet, and then again washed them with her tears, and often pressed her face upon them.

The water which had been used was not thrown away, but poured into the leathern bottles in which the sponges

[p. 297]

had been squeezed. I saw Cassius or some other soldier go several times to fetch fresh water from the fountain of Gihon, which was at no great distance off. When the Blessed Virgin had filled all the wounds with ointment, she wrapped the head up in linen cloths, but she did not as yet cover the face. She closed the half-open eyes of Jesus, and kept her hand upon them for some time. She also closed the mouth, and then embraced the sacred body of her beloved Son, pressing her face fondly and reverently upon his. Joseph and Nicodemus had been waiting for some time, when John drew near to the Blessed Virgin, and besought her to permit the body of her Son to be taken from her, that the embalming might be completed, because the Sabbath was close at hand. Once more did Mary embrace the sacred body of Jesus, and utter her farewells in the most touching language, and then the men lifted it from her arms on the sheet, and carried it to some distance. The deep sorrow of Mary had been for the time assuaged by the feelings of love and reverence with which she had accomplished her sacred task; but now it once more overwhelmed her, and she fell, her head covered with her veil, into the arms of the holy women. Magdalen felt almost as though her Beloved were being forcibly carried away from her, and, hastily ran forward a few steps, with her arms stretched forth; but then, after a moment, returned to the Blessed Virgin.

The sacred body was carried to a spot beneath the level of the top of Golgotha, where the smooth surface of a rock afforded a convenient platform on which to embalm the body. I first saw a piece of open-worked linen, looking very much like lace, and which made me think of the large embroidered curtain hung between the choir and nave during Lent. [*1] It was probably worked in that open stitch for the water to run through. I also saw another large sheet unfolded. The body of our Saviour was placed on

[p. 298]

the open-worked piece of linen, and some of the other men held the other sheet spread above it. Nicodemus and Joseph then knelt down, and underneath this covering took off the linen which they had fastened round the loins of our Saviour, when they took his body down from the Cross. They then passed sponges under this sheet and washed the lower parts of the body; after which they lifted it up by the help of pieces of linen crossed beneath the loins and knees, and washed the back without turning it over. They continued washing until nothing but clear water came from the sponges when pressed. Next they poured water of myrrh over the whole body, and then, handling it with respect, stretched it out full length, for it was still in the position in which our Divine Lord had died--the loins and knees bent. They then placed beneath his hips a sheet which was a yard in width and three in length, laid upon his lap bundles of sweet-scented herbs, and shook over the whole body a powder which Nicodemus had brought. Next they wrapped up the lower part of the body, and fastened the cloth which they had placed underneath round it strongly. After this they anointed the wounds of the thighs, placed bundles of herbs between the legs, which were stretched out to their fall length, and wrapped them up entirely in these sweet spices.

Then John conducted the Blessed Virgin and the other holy women once more to the side of the body. Mary knelt down by the head of Jesus, and placed beneath it a piece of very fine linen which had been given her by Pilate's wife, and which she had worn round her neck under her cloak; next, assisted by the holy women, she placed from the shoulders to the cheeks bundles of herbs, spices, and sweet-scented powder, and then strongly bound this piece of linen round the head and shoulders. Magdalen poured besides a small bottle of balm into the wound of the side, and the holy women placed some more herbs into those of the hands and feet. Then the men put sweet spices around all the remainder of the body, crossed the sacred stiffened arms on the chest, and bound the large white sheet round the body as high as the chest, in the

[p. 299]

game manner as if they had been swaddling a child. Then, having fastened the end of a large band beneath the armpits, they rolled it round the head and the whole body. Finally, they placed our Divine Lord on the large sheet, six yards in length, which Joseph of Arimathea had bought, and wrapped him in it. He was lying diagonally upon it, and one corner of the sheet was raised from the feet to the chest, the other drawn over the head and shoulders, while the remaining two ends were doubled round the body.

The Blessed Virgin, the holy women, the men-all were kneeling round the body of Jesus to take their farewell of it, when a most touching miracle took place before them. The sacred body of Jesus, with all its wounds, appeared imprinted upon the cloth which covered it, as though he had been pleased to reward their care and their love, and leave them a portrait of himself through all the veils with which he was enwrapped. With tears they embraced the adorable body, and then reverently kissed the wonderful impression which it had left. Their astonishment increased when, on lifting up the sheet, they saw that all the bands which surrounded the body had remained white as before, and that the upper cloth alone had been marked in this wonderful manner. It was not a mark made by the bleeding wounds, since the whole body was wrapped up and covered with sweet spices, but it was a supernatural portrait, bearing testimony to the divine creative power ever abiding in the body of Jesus. I have seen many things relative to the subsequent history of this piece of linen, but I could not describe them coherently. After the resurrection it remained in the possession of the friends of Jesus, but fell twice into the hands of the Jews, and later was honoured in several different places. I have seen it in a city of Asia, in the possession of some Christians who were not Catholics. I have forgotten the name of the town, which is situated in a province near the country of the Three Kings.

Footnotes

^294:1 On Good Friday, March 30th, 1820, as Sister Emmerich was contemplating the descent from the Cross she suddenly fainted, in the presence of the writer of these lines, and appeared to be really dead. But after a time she recovered her senses and gave the following explanation, although still in a state of great suffering: 'As I was contemplating the body of Jesus lying on the knees of the Blessed Virgin I said to myself: "How great is her strength! She has not fainted even once!" My guide reproached me for this thought--in which there was more astonishment than compassion--and said to me, "Suffer then what she has suffered!" And at the same moment a sensation of the sharpest anguish transfixed me like a sword, so that I believed I must have died from it.' She had to endure this suffering for a long time, and, in consequence of it, had an illness which reduced her almost to the brink of the grave.

^294:2 Sister Emmerich said that the shape of these pincers reminded her of the scissors with which Samson's hair was out off. In her visions of the third year of the public life of Jesus she had seen our Lord keep the Sabbath-day at Misael--a town belonging [p. 295] to the Levites, of the tribe of Aser--and as a portion of the Book of Judges was read in the synagogue, Sister Emmerich beheld upon that occasion the life of Samson.

^295:1 Sister Emmerich was accustomed, when speaking of persons of historical importance, to explain how they divided their hair. 'Eve,' she said, 'divided her hair in two parts, but Mary into three.' And she appeared to attach importance to these words. No opportunity presented itself for her to give any explanation upon the subject, which probably would have shown what was done With the hair in sacrifices, funerals, consecrations, or vows, &c. She once said of Samson: 'His fair hair, which was long and thick, was gathered up on his head in seven tresses, like a helmet, and the ends of these tresses were fastened upon his forehead and temples. His hair was not in itself the source of his strength, but only as the witness to the vow which he had made to let it grow in God's honour. The powers which depended upon these seven tresses were the seven gifts of the Holy Ghost. He must have already broken his vows and lost many graces, when he allowed this sign of being a Nazarene to be out off. I did not see Dalila out off all his hair, and I think one look remained on his forehead. He retained the grace to do penance and of that repentance by which he recovered strength sufficient to destroy his enemies. The life of Samson is figurative and prophetic.'

^297:1 This refers to a custom of the Diocese of Munster. During Lent there was hung up in the churches a curtain, embroidered in open work, representing the Five Wounds, the instruments of the, Passion, &c.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 300]

  

CHAPTER LII.

  

The Body of our Lord placed in the Sepulchre.

THE men placed the sacred body on a species of leathern hand-barrow, which they covered with a brown-coloured cloth, and to which they fastened two long stakes. This forcibly reminded me of the Ark of the Covenant. Nicodemus and Joseph bore on their shoulders the front shafts, while Abenadar and John supported those behind. After them came the Blessed Virgin, Mary of Heli, her eldest sister, Magdalen and Mary of Cleophas, and then the group of women who had been sitting at some distance--Veronica, Johanna Chusa, Mary the mother of Mark, Salome the wife of Zebedee, Mary Salome, Salome of Jerusalem, Susanna, and Anne the niece of St. Joseph. Cassius and the soldiers closed the procession. The other women, such as Marone of Naim, Dina the Samaritaness, and Mara the Suphanitess, were at Bethania, with Martha and Lazarus. Two soldiers, bearing torches in their hands, walked on first, that there might be some light in the grotto of the sepulchre; and the procession continued to advance in this order for about seven minutes, the holy men and women singing psalms in sweet but melancholy tones. I saw James the Greater, the brother of John, standing upon a hill the other side of the valley, to look at them as they passed, and he returned immediately afterwards, to tell the other disciples what he had seen.

The procession stopped at the entrance of Joseph's garden, which was opened by the removal of some stakes, afterwards used as levers to roll the stone to the door of the sepulchre. When opposite the rock, they placed the Sacred Body on a long board covered with a sheet. The grotto, which had been newly excavated, had been lately cleaned by the servants of Nicodemus, so that the interior was neat and pleasing to the eye. The holy women sat down in front of the grotto, while the four men carried in the body of our Lord, partially filled the hollow couch destined for its reception with aromatic spices, and spread

[p. 301]

over them a cloth, upon which they reverently deposited the sacred body. After having once more given expression to their love by tears and fond embraces, they left the grotto. Then the Blessed Virgin entered, seated herself close to the head of her dear Son, and bent over his body with many tears. When she left the grotto, Magdalen hastily and eagerly came forward, and flung on the body some flowers and branches which she had gathered in the garden. Then she clasped her hands together, and with sobs kissed the feet of Jesus; but the men having informed her that they must close the sepulchre, she returned to the other women. They covered the sacred body with the extremities of the sheet on which it was lying, placed on the top of all the brown coverlet, and closed the folding-doors, which were made of a bronze-coloured metal, and had on their front two sticks, one straight down and the other across, so as to form a perfect cross.

The large stone with which they intended to close the sepulchre, and which was still lying in front of the grotto, was in shape very like a chest [*1] or tomb; its length was such that a man might have laid himself down upon it, and it was so heavy that it was only by means of levers that the men could roll it before the door of the sepulchre. The entrance of the grotto was closed by a gate made of branches twined together. Everything that was done within the grotto had to be accomplished by torchlight, for daylight never penetrated there.

Footnotes

^301:1 Apparently Sister Emmerich here spoke of the ancient eases in which her poor countrymen keep their clothes. The lower part of these cases is smaller than the upper, and this gives them some likeness to a tomb. She had one of these cases, which she called her chest. She often described the stone by this comparison, but her descriptions have not, nevertheless, given us a very clear idea of its shape.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 302]

  

CHAPTER LIII.

  

The Return from the Sepulchre.--Joseph of Arimathea is put in Prison.

THE Sabbath was close at hand, and Nicodemus and Joseph returned to Jerusalem by a small door not far from the garden, and which Joseph had been allowed by special favour to have made in the city wall. They told the Blessed Virgin, Magdalen, John, and some of the women, who were returning to Calvary to pray there, that this door, as well as that of the supper-room, would be opened to them whenever they knocked. The elder sister of the Blessed Virgin, Mary of Heli, returned to the town with Mary the mother of Mark, and some other women. The servants of Nicodemus and Joseph went to Calvary to fetch several things which had been left there.

The soldiers joined those who were guarding the city gate near Calvary; and Cassius went to Pilate with the lance, related all that he had seen, and promised to give him an exact account of everything that should happen, if he would put under his command the guards whom the Jews would not fail to ask to have put round the tomb. Pilate listened to his words with secret terror, but only told him in reply that his superstition amounted to madness.

Joseph and Nicodemus met Peter and the two Jameses in the town. They all shed many tears, but Peter was perfectly overwhelmed by the violence of his grief. He embraced them, reproached himself for not having been present at the death of our Saviour, and thanked them for having bestowed the rites of sepulture upon his sacred body. It was agreed that the door of the supper-room should be opened to them whenever they knocked, and then they went away to seek some other disciples who were dispersed in various directions. Later I saw the Blessed Virgin and her companions enter the supper-room; Abenadar next came and was admitted; and by

[p. 303]

degrees the greatest part of the Apostles and disciples assembled there. The holy women retired to that part of the building where the Blessed Virgin was living. They took some food, and spent a few minutes more in tears, and in relating to one another what each had seen. The men changed their dresses, and I saw them standing under the lamp, and keeping the Sabbath. They ate some lambs in the supper-room, but without observing any ceremony, for they had eaten the Paschal lamb the evening before. They were all perturbed in spirit, and filled with grief. The holy women also passed their time in praying with the Blessed Virgin under the lamp. Later, when night had quite fallen, Lazarus, the widow of Naim, Dina the Samaritan woman, and Mara of Suphan, [*1] came

[p. 304]

from Bethania, and then, once more, descriptions were given of all that had taken place, and many tears shed.

Joseph of Arimathea returned home late from the supper-room, and he was sorrowfully walking along the streets of Sion, accompanied by a few disciples and women, when all on a sudden a band of armed men, who were lying in ambuscade in the neighbourhood of Caiphas's tribunal, fell upon them, and laid hands upon Joseph, whereupon his companions fled, uttering loud cries of terror. He was confined in a tower contiguous to the city wall, not far from the tribunal. These soldiers were pagans, and had not to keep the Sabbath, therefore Caiphas had been able to secure their services on this occasion. The intention was to let Joseph die of hunger, and keep his disappearance a secret.

Here conclude the descriptions of all that occurred on the day of the Passion of our Lord; but we will add some supplementary matter concerning Holy Saturday, the Descent into Hell, and the Resurrection.

Footnotes

^303:1 According to the visions of Sister Emmerich, the three women named in the text had been living for some time at Bethania, in a sort of community established by Martha for the purpose of providing for the maintenance of the disciples when our Lord wag moving about, and for the division and distribution of the alms which were collected. The widow of Naim, whose son Martial was raised from the dead by Jesus, according to Sister Emmerich, on the 28th Marcheswan (the 18th of November), was named Maroni. She was the daughter of an uncle, on the father's side, of St. Peter. Her first husband was the son of a sister of Elizabeth, who herself was the daughter of a sister of the mother of St. Anne. Maroni's first husband having died without children, she had married Elind, a relation of St. Anne, and had left Chasaluth, near Tabor, to take up her abode at Naim, which was not far off, and where she soon lost her second husband.

Dina, the Samaritan woman, was the same who conversed with Jesus by Jacob's well. She was born near Damascus, of parents who were half Jewish and half Pagan. They died while she was yet very young, and she being brought up by a woman of bad character, the seeds of the most evil passions were early sown in her heart. She had had several husbands, who supplanted one another in turn, and the last lived at Sichar, whither she had followed him and changed her name from Dina to Salome. She had three grown-up daughters and two sons, who afterwards joined the disciples. Sister Emmerich used to say that the life of this Samaritan woman was prophetic--that Jesus had spoken to the entire sect of Samaritans in her person, and that they were attached to their errors by as many ties as she had committed adulteries.

Mara of Suphan was a Moabitess, came from the neighbourhood of Suphan, and was a descendant of Orpha, the widow of Chelion, Noemi's son. Orpha had married again in Moab. By [p. 304] Orpha, the sister-in-law of Ruth, Mara was connected with the family of David, from whom our Lord was descended. Sister Emmerich saw Jesus deliver Mara from four devils and grant her forgiveness of her sins on the 17th Elud (9th September) of the second year of his public life. She was living at Ainon, having been repudiated by her husband, a rich Jew, who had kept the children he had had by her with him. She had with her three others, the offspring of her adulteries.

'I saw,' Sister Emmerich would say,--'I saw how the stray branch of the stock of David was purified within her by the grace of Jesus, and admitted into the bosom of the Church. I cannot express how many of these roots and offshoots I see become entwined with each other, lost to view, and then once more brought to light.'

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 305]

  

CHAPTER LIV.

  

On the Name of Calvary.

WHILST meditating on the name of Golgotha, Calvary, the place of skulls, borne by the rock upon which Jesus was crucified, I became deeply absorbed in contemplation, and beheld in spirit all ages from the time of Adam to that of Christ, and in this vision the origin of the name was made known to me. I here give all that I remember on this subject.

I saw Adam, after his expulsion from Paradise, weeping in the grotto where Jesus sweated blood and water, on Mount Olivet. I saw how Seth was promised to Eve in the grotto of the manger at Bethlehem, and how she brought him forth in that same grotto. I also saw Eve living in some caverns near Hebron, where the Essenian Monastery of Maspha was afterwards established.

I then beheld the country where Jerusalem was built, as it appeared after the Deluge, and the land was all unsettled, black, stony, and very different from what it had been before. At an immense depth below the rock which constitutes Mount Calvary (which was formed in this spot by the rolling, of the waters), I saw the tomb of Adam and Eve. The head and one rib were wanting to one of the skeletons, and the remaining head was placed within the same skeleton, to which it did not belong. The bones of Adam and Eve had not all been left in this grave, for Noah had some of them with him in the ark, and they were transmitted from generation to generation by the Patriarchs. Noah, and also Abraham, were in the habit, when offering sacrifice, of always laying some of Adam's bones upon the altar, to remind the Almighty of his promise. When Jacob gave Joseph his variegated robe, he at the same time gave him some bones of Adam, to be kept as relies. Joseph always wore them on his bosom, and they were placed with his own bones in the first reliquary which the children of Israel brought out of Egypt

[p. 306]

[paragraph continues] I have seen many similar things, bat some I have for. gotten, and the others time fails me to describe.

As regards the origin of the name of Calvary, I here give all I know. I beheld the mountain which bears this name as it was in the time of the Prophet Eliseus. It was not the same then as at the time of our Lords Crucifixion, but was a hill, with many walls and caverns, resembling tombs, upon it. I saw the Prophet Eliseus descend into these caverns, I cannot say whether in reality or only in a vision, and I saw him take out a skull from a stone sepulchre in which bones were resting. Some one who was by his side--I think an angel--said to him, 'This is the skull of Adam.' The prophet was desirous to take it away, but his companion forbade him. I saw upon the skull some few hairs of a fair colour.

I learned also that the prophet having related what had happened to him, the spot received the name of Calvary. Finally, I saw that the Cross of Jesus was placed vertically over the skull of Adam. I was informed that this spot was the exact centre of the earth; and at the same time I was shown the numbers and measures proper to every country, but I have forgotten them, individually as well as in general. Yet I have seen this centre from above, and as it were from a bird's-eye view. In that way a person sees far more clearly than on a map all the different countries, mountains, deserts, seas, rivers, towns, and even the smallest places, whether distant or near at hand.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER LV.

  

The Cross and the Wine-press.

As I was meditating upon these words or thoughts of Jesus when hanging on the Cross: 'I am pressed like wine placed here under the press for the first time; my blood must continue to flow until water comes, but wine shall no more be made here an explanation was given me by means of another vision relating to Calvary.

[p. 307]

I saw this rocky country at a period anterior to the Deluge; it was then less wild and less barren than it afterwards became, and was laid out in vineyards and fields. I saw there the Patriarch Japhet, a majestic dark-complexioned old man, surrounded by immense flocks and herds and a numerous posterity: his children as well as himself had dwellings excavated in the ground, and covered with turf roofs, on which herbs and flowers were growing. There were vines all around, and a new method of making wine was being tried on Calvary, in the presence of Japhet. I saw also the ancient method of preparing wine, but I can give only the following description of it. At first men were satisfied with only eating the grapes; then they pressed them with pestles in hollow stones, and finally in large wooden trenches. Upon this occasion a new winepress, resembling the holy Cross in shape, had been devised; it consisted of the hollow trunk of a tree placed upright, with a bag of grapes suspended over it. Upon this bag there was fastened a pestle, surmounted by a weight; and on both sides of the trunk were arms joined to the bag, through openings made for the purpose, and which, when put in motion by lowering the ends, crushed the grapes. The juice flowed out of the tree by five openings, and fell into a stone vat, from whence it flowed through a channel made of bark and coated with resin, into the species of cistern excavated in the rock where Jesus was confined before his Crucifixion. At the foot of the wine-press, in the stone vat, there was a sort of sieve to stop the skins, which were put on one side. When they had made their wine-press, they filled the bag with grapes, nailed it to the top of the trunk, placed the pestle, and put in motion the side arms, in order to make the wine flow. All this very strongly reminded me of the Crucifixion, on account of the resemblance between the wine-press and the Cross. They had a long reed, at the end of which there were points, so that it looked like an enormous thistle, and they ran this through the channel and trunk of the tree when there was any obstruction. I was reminded of the lance and sponge. There were also

[p. 308]

some leathern bottles, and vases made of bark and plastered with resin. I saw several young men, with nothing but a cloth wrapped round their loins like Jesus, working at this wine-press. Japhet was very old; he wore a long beard, and a dress made of the skins of beasts; and he looked at the new wine-press with evident satisfaction. It was a festival day, and they sacrificed on a stone altar some animals which were running loose in the vineyard, young asses, goats, and sheep. It was not in this place that Abraham came to sacrifice Isaac; perhaps it was on Mount Moriah. I have forgotten many of the instructions regarding the wine, vinegar, and skins, and the different ways in which everything was to be distributed to the right and to the left; and I regret it, because the veriest trifles in these matters have a profound symbolical meaning. If it should be the will of God for me to make them known, be will show them to me again.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER LVI.

  

Apparitions on Occasion of the Death of Jesus.

AMONG the dead who rose from their graves, and who were certainly a hundred in number, at Jerusalem, there were no relations, of Jesus. I saw in various parts of the Holy Land others of the dead appear and bear testimony to the Divinity of Jesus. Thus I saw Sadoch, a most pious man, who had given all his property to the poor and to the Temple, appear to many persons in the neighbourhood of Hebron. This Sadoch had lived a century before Jesus, and was the founder of a community of Essenians: he had ardently sighed for the coming of the Messias, and had had several revelations upon the subject. I saw some others of the dead appear to the hidden disciples of our Lord, and give them different warnings.

Terror and desolation reigned even in the most distant parts of Palestine, and it was not in Jerusalem only that frightful prodigies took place. At Thirza, the towers of

[p. 309]

the prison in which the captive's delivered by Jesus had been confined fell down. In Galileo, where Jesus had travelled so much, I saw many buildings, and in particular the houses of those Pharisees who had been the foremost in persecuting our Saviour, and who were then all at the festival, shaken to the ground, crushing their wives and children. Numerous accidents happened in the neighbourhood of the Lake of Genazareth. Many buildings fell down at Capharnaum; and the wall of rocks which was in front of the beautiful garden of the centurion Zorobabel cracked across. The lake overflowed into the valley, and its waters descended as far as Capharnaum, which was a mile and a half distant. Peter's house, and the dwelling of the Blessed Virgin in front of the town, remained standing. The lake was strongly convulsed; its shores crumbled in several places, and its shape was very much altered, and became more like what it is at the present day. Great changes took place, particularly at the south-eastern extremity, near Tarichea, because in this part there was a long causeway made of stones, between the lake and a sort of marsh, which gave a constant direction to the course of the Jordan when it left the lake. The whole of this causeway was destroyed by the earthquake. Many accidents happened on the eastern side of the lake, on the spot where the swine belonging to the inhabitants of Gergesa cast themselves in, and also at Gergesa, Gerasa, and in the entire district of Chorazin. The mountain where the second multiplication of the loaves took place was shaken, and the stone upon which the miracle had been worked split in two. In Decapolis, whole towns crumbled to the earth; and in Asia, in several localities, the earthquake was severely felt, particularly to the cast and north-east of Paneas. In Upper Galilee, many Pharisees found their houses in ruins when they returned from keeping the feast. A number of them, while yet at Jerusalem, received the news of what had happened, and it was on that account that the enemies of Jesus made such very slight efforts against the Christian community at Pentecost.

[p. 310]

A part of the Temple of Garizim crumbled down. An idol stood there above a fountain, in a small temple, the roof of which fell into the fountain with the idol. Half of the synagogue of Nazareth, out of which Jesus had been driven, fell down, as well as that part of the mountain from which his enemies had endeavoured to precipitate him. The bed of the Jordan was much changed by all these shocks, and its course altered in many places. At Macherus, and at the other towns belonging to Herod, everything remained quiet, for that country was out of the sphere of repentance and of threats, like those men who did not fall to the ground in the Garden of Olives, and, consequently, did not rise again.

In many other parts where there were evil spirits, I saw the latter disappear in large bodies amid the falling mountains and buildings. The earthquakes reminded me of the convulsions of the possessed, when the enemy feels that he must take to flight. At Gergesa, a part of the mountain from which the devils had cast themselves with the swine into a marsh, fell into this same marsh; and I then saw a band of evil spirits cast themselves into the abyss, like a dark cloud.

It was at Nice, unless I am mistaken, that I saw a singular occurrence, of which I have only an imperfect remembrance. There was a port there with many vessels in it; and near this port stood a house with a high tower, in which I saw a pagan whose office was to watch these vessels. He had often to ascend this tower, and see what was going on at sea. Having heard a great noise over the vessels in the port, he hurriedly ascended the tower to discover what was taking place, and he saw several dark figures hovering over the port, and who exclaimed to him in plaintive accents: 'If thou desirest to preserve the vessels, cause them to be sailed out of this port, for we must return to the abyss: the great Pan is dead.' They told him several other things; laid injunctions upon him to make known what they were then telling him upon his return from a certain voyage which he was soon to make, and to give a good reception to the messengers who would

[p. 311]

come to announce the doctrine of him who had just died. The evil spirits were forced in this manner by the power of God to inform this good man of their defeat, and announce it to the world. He had the vessels put in safety, and then an awful storm arose: the devils cast themselves howling into the sea, and half the city fell down. His house remained standing. Soon afterwards he went on a great journey, and announced the death of the great Pan, if that is the name by which our Saviour had been called. Later he came to Rome, where much amazement was caused by what he related. His name was something like Thamus or Thramus.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER LVII.

  

Guards are placed around the Tomb of Jesus.

LATE on Friday night, I saw Caiphas and some of the chief men among the Jews holding a consultation concerning the best course to pursue with regard to the prodigies which had taken place, and the effect they had had upon the people. They continued their deliberations quite into the morning, and then hurried to Pilate's house, to tell him that, as that seducer said, while he was yet alive, 'After three days I will rise again,' it would be right to command the sepulchre to be guarded until the third day, as otherwise his disciples might come and steal him away, and say to the people, 'He is risen from the dead,' and the last error would be worse than the first. Pilate was determined to have nothing more to do with the business, and he only answered: 'You have, a guard; go, guard it as you know.' However, he appointed Cassius to keep a watch over all that took place, and give him an exact account of every circumstance. I saw these men, twelve in number, leave the town before sunrise, accompanied by some soldiers who did not wear the Roman uniform, being attached to the Temple. They carried lanterns fastened to the end of long poles, in order that they might be able to see every surrounding object, in spite of the darkness

[p. 312]

of the night, and also that they might have some light in the dark cave of the sepulchre.

No sooner had they reached the sepulchre than, having first seen with their own eyes that the body of Jesus was really there, they fastened one rope across the door of the tomb, and a second across the great stone which was placed in front, sealing the whole with a seal of half-circular shape. They then returned to the city, and the guards stationed themselves opposite the outer door. They were five or six in number, and watched three and three alternately. Cassius never left his post, and usually remained sitting or standing in front of the entrance to the cave, so as to see that side of the tomb where the feet of our Lord rested. He had received many interior graces, and been given to understand many mysteries. Being wholly unaccustomed to this state of spiritual enlightenment, he was perfectly transported out of himself, and remained nearly all the time unconscious of the presence of exterior things. He was entirely changed, had become a new man, and spent the whole day in penance, in making fervent acts of gratitude, and in humbly adoring God.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER LVIII.

  

A Glance at the Disciples of Jesus on Holy Saturday.

THE faithful disciples of our Lord assembled together in the Cenaculum, to keep the eve of the Sabbath, They were about twenty in number, clothed in long white dresses, and with their waists girded. The room was lighted up by a lamp; and after their repast they separated, and for the most part returned home. They again assembled on the following morning, and sat together reading and praying by turns; and if a friend entered the room, they arose and saluted him cordially.

In that part of the house inhabited by the Blessed Virgin there was a large room, divided into small compartments like cells, which were used by the holy women for

[p. 313]

sleeping in at night. When they returned from the sepulchre, one of their number lighted a lamp which was hanging in the middle of the room, and they all assembled around the Blessed Virgin, and commenced praying in a mournful but recollected manner. A short time afterwards, Martha, Maroni, Dina, and Mara, who were just come with Lazarus from Bethania, where they had passed the Sabbath, entered the room. The Blessed Virgin and her companions gave them a detailed account of the death and burial of our Lord, accompanying each relation with many tears. The evening was advancing, and Joseph of Arimathea came in with a few other disciples, to ask whether any of the women wished to return to their homes, as they were ready to escort them. A few accepted the proposition, and set off immediately; but before they reached the tribunal of Caiphas, some armed men stopped Joseph of Arimathea, arrested, and shut him up in an old deserted turret.

Those among the holy women who did not leave the Cenaculum retired to take their rest in the cell-like compartments spoken of above: they fastened long veils over their heads, seated themselves sorrowfully on the floor, and leaned upon the couches which were placed against the wall. After a time they stood up, spread out the bedclothes which were rolled up on the couches, took off their sandals, girdles, and a part of their clothing, and reclined for a time in order to endeavour to get a little sleep. At midnight, they arose, clothed themselves, put up their beds, and reassembled around the lamp to continue their prayer with the Blessed Virgin.

When the Mother of Jesus and her pious companions had finished their nocturnal prayer (that holy duty which has been practised by all faithful children of God and holy souls, who have either felt themselves called to it by a special grace, or who follow a rule given by God and his Church), they heard a knock at the door. which was instantly opened, and John and some of the disciples who had promised to conduct them to the Temple, entered, upon which the women wrapped their cloaks about them, and started instantly. It was then about three, in the

[p. 314]

morning, and they went straight to the Temple, it being customary among many Jews to go there before day dawned, on the day after they had eaten the Paschal lamb; and for this reason the Temple was open from midnight, as the sacrifices commenced very early. They started at about the same hour as that at which the priests had put their seal upon the sepulchre. The aspect of things in the Temple was, however, very different from what was usually the case at such times, for the sacrifices were stopped, and the place was empty and desolate, as every one had left on account of the events on the previous day which had rendered it impure. The Blessed Virgin appeared to me to visit it for the sole purpose of taking leave of the place where she had passed her youth.

The Temple was, however, open; the lamps lighted, and the people at liberty to enter the vestibule of the priests, which was the customary privilege of this day, as well as of that which followed the Paschal supper. The Temple was, as I said before, quite empty, with the exception of a chance priest or server who might be seen wandering about; and every part bore the marks of the confusion into which all was thrown on the previous day by the extraordinary and frightful events that had taken place; besides which it had been defiled by the presence of the dead, and I reflected and wondered in my own mind whether it would be possible ever to purify it again.

The sons of Simeon, and the nephews of Joseph of Arimathea, were much grieved when they heard of the arrest of their uncle, but they welcomed the Blessed Virgin and her companions, and conducted them all over the Temple, which they did without difficulty, as they held the offices of inspectors of the Temple. The holy women stood in silence and contemplated all the terrible and visible marks of the anger of God with feelings of deep awe, and then listened with interest to the many stupendous details recounted by their guides. The effects of the earthquake were still visible, as little had been done towards repairing the numerous rents and cracks in the floor, and in the walls. In that part of the Temple where

[p. 315]

the vestibule joined the sanctuary, the wall was so tremendously shaken by the shock of the earthquake, as to produce a fissure wide enough for a person to walk through, and the rest of the wall looked unsteady, as if it might fall down at any moment. The curtain which hung in the sanctuary was rent in two and hung in shreds at the sides; nothing was to be seen around but crumbled walls, crushed flagstones, and columns either partly or quite Shaken down.

The Blessed Virgin visited all those parts which Jesus had rendered sacred in her eyes; she prostrated, kissed them, and with tears in her eyes explained to the others her reasons for venerating each particular spot, whereupon they instantly followed her example. The greatest veneration was always shown by the Jews for all places which had been rendered sacred by manifestations of the Divine power, and it was customary to place the hands reverently on such places, to kiss them, and to prostrate to the very earth before them. I do not think there was anything in the least surprising in such a custom, for they both knew, saw, and felt that the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, was a living God, and that his dwelling among his people was in the Temple at Jerusalem; consequently it would have been infinitely more astonishing if they had not venerated those holy parts where his power had been particularly demonstrated, for the Temple and the holy places were to them what the Blessed Sacrament is to Christians.

Deeply penetrated with these feelings of respect, the Blessed Virgin walked through the Temple with her companions, and pointed out to them the spot where she was presented when still a child, the parts where she passed her childhood, the place where she was affianced to St. Joseph, and the spot where she stood when she presented Jesus and heard the prophecy of Simeon: the remembrance of his words made her weep bitterly, for the prophecy was indeed fulfilled, and the sword. of grief had indeed transfixed her heart; she again stopped her companions when she reached the part of the Temple where

[p. 316]

she found Jews teaching, when she lost him at the age of twelve, and she respectfully kissed the ground on which he then stood. When the holy women had looked at every place sanctified by the presence of Jesus, when they had wept and prayed over them, they returned to Sion.

The Blessed Virgin did not leave the Temple without shedding many tears, as she contemplated the state of desolation to which it was reduced, an aspect of desolation which was rendered still more depressing by the marked contrast it bore to the usual state of the Temple on the festival day. Instead of songs and hymns of jubilee, a mournful silence reigned throughout the vast edifice, and in place of groups of joyful and devout worshippers, the eye wandered over a vast and dreary solitude. Too truly, alas, did this change betoken the fearful crime which had been perpetrated by the people of God, and she remembered how Jesus had wept over the Temple, and said, 'Destroy this Temple and In three days I will build it up again.' She thought over the destruction of the Temple of the Body of Jesus which had been brought about by his enemies, and she sighed with a longing desire for the dawning of that third day when the words of eternal truth were to be accomplished.

It was about daybreak when Mary and her companions reached the Cenaculum, and they retired into the building which stood on its right-hand side, while John and some of the disciples reentered the Cenaculum, where about twenty men, assembled around a lamp, were occupied in prayer. Every now and then new-comers drew nigh to the door, came in timidity, approached the group round the lamp, and addressed them in a few mournful words, which they accompanied with tears. Every one appeared to regard John with feelings of respect; because he had remained with Jesus until he expired; but with these sentiments of respect was mingled a deep feeling of shame and confusion, when they reflected on their own cowardly conduct in abandoning their Lord and Master in the hour of need. John spoke to every one with the greatest charity and kindness; his manner was modest and

[p. 317]

unassuming as that of a child, and he seemed to fear receiving praise. I saw the assembled group take one meal during that day, but its members were, for the most part, silent; not a sound was to be heard throughout the house, and the doors were tightly closed, although, in fact, there was no likelihood of any one disturbing them, as the house belonged to Nicodemus, and he had let it to them for the time of the festival.

The holy women remained in this room until nightfall; it was lighted up by a single lamp; the doors were closed, and curtains drawn over the windows. Sometimes they gathered round the Blessed Virgin and prayed under the lamp; at other times they retired to the side of the room, covered their heads with black veils, and either sat on ashes (the sign of mourning), or prayed with their faces turned towards the wall; those whose, health was delicate took a little food, but the others fasted.

I looked at them again and again, and I saw them ever occupied in the same manner, that is to say, either in prayer or in mourning over the sufferings of their beloved Master. When my thoughts wandered from the contemplation of the Blessed Virgin to that of her Divine Son, I beheld the holy sepulchre with six or seven sentinels at the entrance--Cassius standing against the door of the cave, apparently in deep meditation, the exterior door closed, and the stone rolled close to it. Notwithstanding the thick door which intervened between the body of our Saviour and myself I could see it plainly; it was quite transparent with a divine light, and two angels were adoring at the side. But my thoughts then turned to the contemplation of the blessed soul of my Redeemer, and such an extensive and complicated picture of his descent into hell was shown to me, that I can only remember a small portion of it, which I will describe to the best of my power.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 318]

  

CHAPTER LIX

  

A detached Account of the Descent into Hell.

WHEN Jesus, after uttering a loud cry, expired, I saw his heavenly soul under the form of a bright meteor pierce the earth at the foot of the Cross, accompanied by the angel Gabriel and many other angels. His Divine nature continued united to his soul as well as to his body, which still remained hanging upon the Cross, but I cannot explain how this was, although I saw it plainly in my own mind. The place into which the soul of Jesus entered was divided into three parts, which appeared to me like three worlds; and I felt that they were round, and that each division was separated from the other by a hemisphere.

I beheld a bright and beautiful space opposite to Limbo; it was enamelled with flowers, delicious breezes wafted through it; and many souls were placed there before being admitted into Heaven after their deliverance from Purgatory. Limbo, the place where the souls were waiting for the Redemption, was divided into different compartments, and encompassed by a thick foggy atmosphere. Our Lord appeared radiant with light and surrounded by angels, who conducted him triumphantly between two of these compartments; the one on the left containing the patriarchs who lived before the time of Abraham, and that on the right those who lived between the days of Abraham and St. John Baptist. These souls did not at first recognise Jesus, but were filled nevertheless with sensations of joy and hope. There was not a spot in those narrow confines which did not, as it were, dilate with feelings of happiness. The passage of Jesus might be compared to the wafting of a breath of air, to a sudden flash of light, or to a shower of vivifying dew, but it was swift as a whirlwind. After passing through the two compartments, he reached a dark spot in which Adam and Eve were standing; he spoke to them, they prostrated and adored him in a perfect ecstasy of joy, and they immediately joined the band of angels, and accompanied our

[p. 319]

[paragraph continues] Lord to the compartment on the left, which contained the patriarchs who lived before Abraham. This compartment was a species of Purgatory, and a few evil spirits were wandering about among the souls and endeavouring to fill them with anxiety and alarm. The entrance through a species of door was closed, but the angels rapped, and I thought I heard them say, 'Open these doors.' When Jesus entered in triumph the demons dispersed, crying out at the same time, 'What is there between thee and us? What art thou come to do here? Wilt thou crucify us likewise?' The angels hunted them away, having first chained them. The poor souls confined in this place had only a slight presentiment and vague idea of the presence of Jesus; but the moment he told them that it was he himself, they burst out into acclamations of joy, and welcomed him with hymn of rapture and delight. The soul of our Lord then wended its way to the right, towards that part which really constituted Limbo; and there he met the soul of the good thief which angels were carrying to Abraham's bosom, as also that of the bad thief being dragged by demons into Hell. Our Lord addressed a few words to both, and then entered Abraham's bosom, accompanied by numerous angels and holy souls, and also by those demons who had been chained and expelled from the compartment.

This locality appeared to me more elevated than the surrounding parts; and I can only describe my sensations on entering it, by comparing them to those of a person coming suddenly into the interior of a church, after having been for some time in the burial vaults. The demons, who were strongly chained, were extremely loth to enter, and resisted to the utmost of their power, but the angels compelled them to go forward. All the just who had lived before the time of Christ were assembled there; the patriarchs, Moses, the judges, and the kings on the left-hand side; and on the right side, the prophets, and the ancestors of our Lord, as also his near relations, such as Joachim, Anna, Joseph, Zacharias, Elizabeth, and John. There were no demons in this place, and the only discomfort

[p. 320]

that had been felt by those placed there was a longing desire for the accomplishment of the promise; and when our Lord entered they saluted him with joyful hymns of gratitude and thanksgiving for its fulfilment, they prostrated and adored him, and the evil spirits who had been dragged into Abraham's bosom when our Lord entered were compelled to confess with shame that they were vanquished. Many of these holy souls were ordered by our Lord to return to the earth, reenter their own bodies, and thus render a solemn and impressive testimony to the truth. It was at this moment that so many dead persons left their tombs in Jerusalem; I regarded them less in the light of dead persons risen again than as corpses put in motion by a divine power, and which, after having fulfilled the mission intrusted to them, were laid aside in the same manner as the insignia of office are taken off by a clerk when he has executed the orders of his superiors.

I next saw our Lord, with his triumphant procession, enter into a species of Purgatory which was filled with those good pagans who, having had a faint glimmering of the truth, had longed for its fulfilment: this Purgatory was very deep, and contained a few demons, as also some of the idols of the pagans. I saw the demons compelled to confess the deception they had practised with regard to these idols, and the souls of the poor pagans cast themselves at the feet of Jesus, and adored him with inexpressible joy: here, likewise, the demons were bound with chains and dragged away. I saw our Saviour perform many other actions; but I suffered so intensely at the same time, that I cannot recount them as I should have wished.

Finally, I beheld him approach to the centre of the great abyss, that is to say, to Hell itself; and the expression of his countenance was most severe.

The exterior of Hell was appalling and frightful; it was an immense, heavy-looking building, and the granite of which it was formed, although black, was of metallic brightness; and the dark and ponderous doors were secured with such terrible bolts that no one could behold them

[p. 321]

without trembling. Deep groans and cries of despair might be plainly distinguished even while the doors were tightly closed; but, O, who can describe the dreadful yells and shrieks which burst. upon the ear when the bolts were unfastened and the doors flung open; and, O, who can depict the melancholy appearance of the inhabitants of this wretched place!

The form under which the Heavenly Jerusalem is generally represented in my visions is that of a beautiful and well-regulated city, and the different degrees of glory to which the elect are raised are demonstrated by the magnificence of their palaces., or the wonderful fruit and flowers with which the gardens are embellished. Hell is shown to me under the same form, but all within it is, on the contrary, close, confused, and crowded; every object tends to fill the mind with sensations of pain and grief; the marks of the wrath and vengeance of God are visible everywhere; despair, like a vulture, gnaws every heart, and discord and misery reign around. In the Heavenly Jerusalem all is peace and eternal harmony, the beginning, fulfilment, and end of everything being pure and perfect happiness; the city is filled with splendid buildings, decorated in such a manner as to charm every eye and enrapture every sense; the inhabitants of this delightful abode are overflowing with rapture and exultation, the gardens gay with lovely flowers, and the trees covered with delicious fruits which give eternal life. In the city of Hell nothing is to be seen but dismal dungeons, dark caverns, frightful deserts, fetid swamps filled with every imaginable species of poisonous and disgusting reptile. In Heaven you behold the happiness and peaceful union of the saints; in Hell, perpetual scenes of wretched discord, and every species of sin and corruption, either under the most horrible forms imaginable, or represented by different kinds of dreadful torments. All in this dreary abode tends to fill the mind with horror; not a word of comfort is heard or a consoling idea admitted; the one tremendous thought, that the justice of an all-powerful God inflicts or, the damned nothing but what they have fully deserved

[p. 322]

is the absorbing tremendous conviction which weighs down each heart. Vice appears in its own grim disgusting colours, being stripped of the mask under which it is hidden in this world, and the infernal viper is seen devouring those who have cherished or fostered it here below. In a word, Hell is the temple of anguish and despair, while the kingdom of God is the temple of peace and happiness. This is easy to understand when seen; but it is almost impossible to describe clearly.

The tremendous explosion of oaths, curses, cries of despair, and frightful exclamations which, like a clap of thunder, burst forth when the gates of Hell were thrown open by the angels, would be difficult even to imagine; our Lord spoke first to the soul of Judas, and the angels then compelled all the demons to acknowledge and adore Jesus. They would have infinitely preferred the most frightful torments to such a humiliation; but all were obliged to submit. Many were chained down in a circle which was placed round other circles. In the centre of Hell I saw a dark and horrible-looking abyss, and into this Lucifer was cast, after being first strongly secured with chains; thick clouds of sulphureous black smoke arose from its fearful depths, and enveloped his frightful form in the dismal folds, thus effectually concealing him from every beholder. God himself had decreed this; and I was likewise told, if I remember right, that he will be unchained for a time fifty or sixty years before the year of Christ 2000. The dates of many other events were pointed out to me which I do not now remember; but a certain number of demons are to be let loose much earlier than Lucifer, in order to tempt men, and to serve as instruments of the divine vengeance. I should think that some must be loosened even in the present day, and others will be set free in a short time.

It would be utterly impossible for me to describe all the things which were shown to me; their number was so great that I could not reduce them sufficiently to order to define and render them intelligible. Besides

[p. 323]

which my sufferings are very great, and when I speak on the subject of my visions I behold them in my mind's eye portrayed in such vivid colours, that the sight is almost sufficient to cause a weak mortal like myself to expire.

I next saw innumerable bands of redeemed souls liberated from Purgatory and from Limbo, who followed our Lord to a delightful spot situated above the celestial Jerusalem, in which place I, a very short time ago, saw the soul of a person who was very dear to me. The soul of the good thief was likewise taken there, and the promise of our Lord, 'This day thou shalt be with me in Paradise,' was fulfilled.

It is not in my power to explain the exact time that each of these events occurred, nor can I relate one-half of the things which I saw and heard; for some were incomprehensible even to myself, and others would be misunderstood if I attempted to relate them. I have seen our Lord in many different places. Even in the sea he appeared to me to sanctify and deliver everything in the creation. Evil spirits fled at his approach, and cast themselves into the dark abyss. I likewise beheld his soul in different parts of the earth, first inside the tomb of Adam, under Golgotha; and when he was there the souls of Adam and Eve came up to him, and he spoke to them for some time. He then visited the tombs of the prophets, who were buried at an immense depth below the surface; but he passed through the soil in the twinkling of an eye. Their souls immediately reentered their bodies, and he spoke to them, and explained the most wonderful mysteries. Next I saw him, accompanied by a chosen band of prophets, among whom I particularly remarked David, visit those parts of the earth which had been sanctified by his miracles and by his sufferings. He pointed out to them, with the greatest love and goodness, the different symbols in the old law expressive of the future; and he showed them how he himself had fulfilled every prophecy. The sight of the soul of our Lord, surrounded by these happy souls, and radiant with light, was inexpressibly grand as he glided

[p. 324]

triumphantly through the air, sometimes passing, with the velocity of lightning, over rivers, then penetrating through the hardest rocks to the very centre of the earth, or moving noiselessly over its surface.

I can remember nothing beyond the facts which I have just related concerning the descent of Jesus into Limbo, where he went in order to present to the souls there detained the grace of the Redemption which he had merited for them by his death and by his sufferings; and I saw all these things in a very short space of time; in fact, time passed so quickly that it seemed to me but a moment. Our Lord, however, displayed before me, at the same time, another picture, in which I beheld the immense mercies which he bestows in the present day on the poor souls in Purgatory; for on every anniversary of this great day, when his Church is celebrating the glorious mystery of his death, he casts a look of compassion on the souls in Purgatory, and frees some of those who sinned against him before his crucifixion. I this day saw Jesus deliver many souls; some I was acquainted with, and others were strangers to me, but I cannot name any of them.

Our Lord, by descending into Hell, planted (if I may thus express myself), in the spiritual garden of the Church, a mysterious tree, the fruits of which--namely, his merits--are destined for the constant relief of the poor souls in Purgatory. The Church militant must cultivate the tree, and gather its fruits, in order to present them to that suffering portion of the Church which can do nothing for itself. Thus it is with all the merits of Christ; we must labour with him if we wish to obtain our share of them; we must gain our bread by the sweat of our brow. Everything which our Lord has done for us in time must produce fruit for eternity; but we must gather these fruits in time, without which we cannot possess them in eternity. The Church is the most prudent and thoughtful of mothers; the ecclesiastical year is an immense and magnificent garden, in which all those fruits for eternity are gathered together, that we may make use of them in

[p. 325]

time. Each year contains sufficient to supply the wants of all; but woe be to that careless or dishonest gardener who allows any of the fruit committed to his care to perish; if he fails to turn to a proper account those graces which would restore health to the sick, strength to the weak, or furnish food to the hungry! When the Day of Judgment arrives, the Master of the garden will demand a strict account, not only of every tree, but also of all the fruit produced in the garden.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER LX.

  

The Eve of the Resurrection.

TOWARDS the close of the Sabbath-day, John came to see the holy women. He endeavoured to give some consolation, but could not restrain his own tears, and only remained a short time with them. They had likewise a short visit from Peter and James the Greater, after which they retired to their cells, and gave free vent to grief, sitting upon ashes, and veiling themselves even more closely.

The prayer of the Blessed Virgin was unceasing. She ever kept her eyes fixed interiorly on Jesus, and was perfectly consumed by her ardent desire of once more beholding him whom she loved with such inexpressible love. Suddenly an angel stood by her side, and bade her arise and go to the door of the dwelling of Nicodemus, for that the Lord was very near. The heart of the Blessed Virgin leaped for joy. She hastily wrapped her cloak about her, and left the holy women, without informing them where she was going. I saw her walk quickly to a small entrance which was cut in the town wall, the identical one through which she had entered when returning with her companions from the sepulchre.

It was about nine o'clock at night, and the Blessed Virgin had almost reached the entrance, when I saw her stop suddenly in a very solitary spot, and look upwards

[p. 326]

in an ecstasy of delight, for on the top of the town wall She beheld the soul of our Lord, resplendent with light without the appearance of a wound, and surrounded by patriarchs. He descended towards her, turned to his companions, and presenting her to them, said, 'Behold Mary, behold my Mother.' He appeared to me to salute her with a kiss, and he then disappeared. The Blessed Virgin knelt down, and most reverently kissed the ground on which he had stood, and the impression of her hands and knees remained imprinted upon the stones. This sight filled her with inexpressible joy, and she immediately rejoined the holy women, who were busily employed in preparing the perfumes and spices. She did not tell them what she had seen, but her firmness and strength of mind were restored. She was perfectly renovated, and therefore comforted all the rest, and endeavoured to strengthen their faith.

All the holy women were sitting by a long table, the cover of which hung down to the floor, when Mary returned; bundles of herbs were heaped around them, and these they mixed together and arranged; small flasks, containing sweet unctions and water of spikenard, were standing near, as also bunches of natural flowers, among which I remarked one in particular, which was like a streaked iris or a lily. Magdalen, Mary the daughter of Cleophas, Salome, Johanna, and Mary Salome, had bought all these things in the town during the absence of Mary. Their intention was to go to the sepulchre before sunrise on the following day, in order to strew these flowers and perfumes over the body of their beloved Master.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER LXI.

  

Joseph of Arimathea miraculously set at large.

A SHORT time after the return of the Blessed Virgin to the holy women, I was shown the interior of the prison in which the enemies of Joseph of Arimathea had confined

[p. 327]

him. He was praying fervently, when suddenly a brilliant light illuminated the whole place, and I heard a voice calling him by name, while at the same moment the roof opened, and a bright form appeared, holding out a sheet resembling that in which he had wrapped the body of Jesus. Joseph grasped it with both hands, and was drawn up to the opening, which closed again as soon as he had passed through; and the apparition disappeared the instant he was in safety at the top of the tower. I know not whether it was our Lord himself or an angel who thus set Joseph free.

He walked on the summit of the wall until be reached the neighbourhood of the Cenaculum, which was near to the South wall of Sion, and then climbed down and knocked at the door of that edifice, as the doors were fastened. The disciples assembled there had been much grieved when they first missed Joseph, who they thought had been thrown into a sink, a report to that effect having become current. Great, therefore, was their joy when they opened the door and found that it was he himself; indeed, they were almost as much delighted as when Peter was miraculously delivered from prison some years after. When Joseph had related what had taken place, they were filled with astonishment and delight; and after thanking God fervently gave him some refreshment, which he greatly needed. He left Jerusalem that same night, and fled to Arimathea, his native place, where he remained until he thought he could return safely to Jerusalem.

I likewise saw Caiphas towards the close of the Sabbath-day, at the house of Nicodemus. He was conversing with him and asking many questions with pretended kindness. Nicodemus answered firmly, and continued to affirm the innocence of Jesus. They did not remain long together.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 328]

  

CHAPTER LXII.

  

The Night of Resurrection.

I SOON after beheld the tomb of our Lord. All was calm and silent around it. There were six soldiers on guard, who were either seated or standing before the door. and Cassius was among them. His appearance was that of a person immersed in meditation and in the expectation of some great event. The sacred body of our Blessed Redeemer was wrapped in the winding-sheet, and surrounded with light, while two angels sat in an attitude of adoration, the one at the head, and the other at the feet. I had seen them in the same posture ever since he was first put into the tomb. These angels were clothed as priests. Their position, and the manner in which they crossed their arms over their breasts, reminded me of the cherubim who surrounded the Ark of the Covenant, only they were without wings; at least I did not see any. The whole of the  reminded me of the Ark of the Covenant at different periods of its history. It is possible that Cassius was sensible of the presence of the angels, and of the bright light which filled the sepulchre, for his attitude was like that of a person in deep contemplation before the Blessed Sacrament.

I next saw the soul of our Lord accompanied by those among the patriarchs whom he had liberated enter into the tomb through the rock. He showed them the wounds with which his sacred body was covered; and it seemed to me that the winding-sheet which previously enveloped it was removed, and that Jesus wished to show the souls the excess of suffering he had endured to redeem them. The body appeared to me to be quite transparent, so that the whole depth of the wounds could be seen; and this sight filled the holy souls with admiration, although deep feelings of compassion likewise drew tears from their eyes.

My next vision was so mysterious that I cannot explain or even relate it in a clear manner. It appeared to me that the soul and body of Jesus were taken together out of the sepulchre, without, however, the former being

[p. 329]

completely reunited to the latter, which still remained inanimate. I thought I saw two angels who were kneeling and adoring at the head and feet of the sacred body, raise it--keeping it in the exact position in which it was lying in the tomb--and carry it uncovered and disfigured with wounds across the rock, which trembled as they passed. It then appeared to me that Jesus presented his body, marked with the stigmas of the Passion, to his Heavenly Father, who, seated on a throne, was surrounded by innumerable choirs of angels, blissfully occupied in pouring forth hymns of adoration and jubilee. The case was probably the same when, at the death of our Lord, so many holy souls reentered their bodies, and appeared in the Temple and in different parts of Jerusalem; for it is not likely that the bodies which they animated were really alive, as in that case they would have been obliged to die a second time, whereas they returned to their original state without apparent difficulty; but it is to be supposed that their appearance in human form was similar to that of our Lord, when he (if we may thus express it) accompanied his body to the throne of his Heavenly Father.

At this moment the rock was so violently shaken, from the very summit to the base, that three of the guards fell down and became almost insensible. The other four were away at the time, being gone to the town to fetch something. The guards who were thus thrown prostrate attributed the sudden shock to an earthquake; but Cassius, who, although uncertain as to what all this might portend, yet felt an inward presentiment that it was the prelude to some stupendous event, stood transfixed in anxious expectation, waiting to see what would follow next. The soldiers who were gone to Jerusalem soon returned.

I again beheld the holy women: they had finished preparing the spices, and were resting in their private cells; not stretched out on the couches, but leaning against the bedclothes, which were rolled up. They wished to go to the sepulchre before the break of day, because they

[p. 330]

feared meeting the enemies of Jesus; but the Blessed Virgin, who was perfectly renovated and filled with fresh courage since she had seen her Son, consoled and recommended them to sleep for a time, and then go fearlessly to the tomb, as no harm would come to them; whereupon they immediately followed her advice, and endeavoured to sleep.

It was towards eleven o'clock at night when the Blessed Virgin, incited by irrepressible feelings of love, arose, wrapped a gray cloak around her, and left the house quite alone. When I saw her do this, I could not help feeling anxious, and saying to myself, 'How is it possible for this holy Mother, who is so exhausted from anguish and terror, to venture to walk all alone through the streets at such an hour?' I saw her go first to the house of Caiphas, and then to the palace of Pilate, which was at a great distance off; I watched her through the whole of her solitary journey along that part which had been trodden by her Son, loaded with his heavy Cross; she stopped at every place where our Saviour had suffered particularly, or had received any fresh outrage from his barbarous enemies. Her appearance, as she walked slowly along, was that of a person seeking something; she often bent down to the ground, touched the stones with her hands, and then inundated them with kisses, if the precious blood of her beloved Son was upon them. God granted her at this time particular lights and graces, and she was able without the slightest degree of difficulty to distinguish every place sanctified by his sufferings. I accompanied her through the whole of her pious pilgrimage, and I endeavoured to imitate her to the best of my power, as far as my weakness would permit.

Mary then went to Calvary; but when she had almost reached it, she stopped suddenly, and I saw the sacred body and soul of our Saviour standing before her. An angel walked in front; the two angels whom I had seen in the tomb were by his side, and the souls whom he had redeemed followed him by hundreds. The body of Jesus was brilliant and beautiful, but its appearance was not

[p. 331]

that of a living body, although a voice issued from it; and I heard him describe to the Blessed Virgin all he had done in Limbo, and then assure her that be should rise again with his glorified body; that he would then show himself to her, and that she must wait near the rock of Mount Calvary, and that part where she saw him fall down, until he appeared. Our Saviour then went towards Jerusalem, and the Blessed Virgin, having again wrapped her veil about her, prostrated on the spot which he had pointed out. It was then, I think, past midnight, for the pilgrimage of Mary over the Way of the Cross had taken -up at least an hour; and I next saw the holy souls who had been redeemed by our Saviour traverse in their turn the sorrowful Way of the Cross, and contemplate the different places where he had endured such fearful sufferings for their sakes. The angels who accompanied them gathered up and preserved the smallest fragments of our Lord's sacred flesh which had been torn off by the frequent blows he received, as also the blood with which the ground was sprinkled on those spots where he had fallen.

I once more saw the sacred body of our Lord stretched out as I first beheld it in the sepulchre; the angels were occupied in replacing the fragments they had gathered up of his flesh, and they received supernatural assistance in doing this. When next I contemplated him it was in his winding-sheet, surrounded with a bright light and with two adoring angels by his side. I cannot explain how all these things came to pass, for they are far beyond our human comprehension; and even if I understand them perfectly myself when I see them, they appear dark and mysterious when I endeavour to explain them to others.

As soon as a faint glimmering of dawn appeared in the east, I saw Magdalen, Mary the daughter of Cleophas, Johanna Chusa, and Salome, leave the Cenaculum, closely wrapped up in their mantles. They carried bundles of spices; and one of their number had a lighted candle in 'her hand, which she endeavoured to conceal under her cloak. I saw them direct their trembling steps towards the small door at the house of Nicodemus.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 332]

  

CHAPTER LXIII.

  

The Resurrection of our Lord.

I BEHELD the soul of our Lord between two angels, who were in the attire of warriors: it was bright, luminous, and resplendent as the sun at mid-day; it penetrated the rock, touched the sacred body, passed into it, and the two were instantaneously united, and became as one. I then saw the limbs move, and the body of our Lord, being reunited to his soul and to his divinity, rise and shake off the winding-sheet: the whole of the cave was illuminated and lightsome.

At the same moment I saw a frightful monster burst from the earth underneath the sepulchre. It had the tail of a serpent, and it raised its dragon head proudly as if desirous of attacking Jesus; and had likewise, if I remember correctly, a human head. But our Lord held in his hand a white staff, to which was appended a large banner; and he placed his foot on the head of the dragon, and struck its tail three times with his staff, after which the monster disappeared. I had had this same vision many times before the Resurrection, and I saw just such a monster, appearing to endeavour to hide itself, at the time of the conception of our Lord: it greatly resembled the serpent which tempted our first parents in Paradise, only it was more horrible. I thought that this vision had reference to the prophetic words, that 'by the seed of the woman the head of the serpent should be crushed,' and that the whole was intended to demonstrate the victory of our Lord over death, for at the same moment that I saw him crush the head of the monster, the tomb likewise vanished from my sight.

I then saw the glorified body of our Lord rise up, and it passed through the hard rock as easily as if the latter had been formed of some ductile substance. The earth shook, and an angel in the garb of a warrior descended from Heaven with the speed of lightning, entered the tomb, lifted the stone, placed it on the right side, and

[p. 333]

seated himself upon it. At this tremendous sight the soldiers fell to the ground, and remained there apparently lifeless. When Cassius saw the bright light which illuminated, the tomb, he approached the place where the sacred body had been placed, looked at and touched the linen clothes in which it had been wrapped, and left the sepulchre, intending to go and inform Pilate of all that had happened. However, he tarried a short time to watch the progress of events; for although he had felt the earthquake, seen the angel move the stone, and looked at the empty tomb, yet he had not seen Jesus.

At the very moment in which the angel entered the sepulchre and the earth quaked, I saw our Lord appear to his holy Mother on Calvary. His body was beautiful and lightsome, and its beauty was that of a celestial being. He was clothed in a large mantle, which at one moment looked dazzlingly white, as it floated through the air, waving to and fro with every breath of wind, and the next reflected a thousand brilliant colours as the sunbeams passed over it. His large open wounds shone brightly, and could be seen from a great distance: the wounds in his hands were so large that a finger might be put into them without difficulty; and rays of light proceeded from them, diverging in the direction of his fingers. The souls of the patriarchs bowed down before the Mother of our Saviour, and Jesus spoke to her concerning his Resurrection, telling her many things which I have forgotten. He showed her his wounds; and Mary prostrated to kiss his sacred feet; but he took her hand, raised her, and disappeared.

When I was at some distance from the sepulchre I saw fresh lights burning there, and I likewise beheld a large luminous spot in the sky immediately over Jerusalem.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 334]

  

CHAPTER LXIV.

  

The holy Women at the Sepulchre.

THE holy women were very near the door of Nicodemus's house at the moment of our Lord's Resurrection; but they did not see anything of the prodigies which were taking place at the sepulchre. They were not aware that guards had been placed around the tomb, for they had not visited it on the previous day, on account of its being the Sabbath. They questioned one another anxiously concerning what would have to be done about the large stone at the door, as to who would be the best person to ask about removing it, for they had been so engrossed by grief that they had not thought about it before. Their intention was to pour precious ointments upon the body of Jesus, and then to strew over it flowers of the most rare and aromatic kinds, thus rendering all the honour possible to their Divine Master in his sepulchre. Salome, who had brought more things than any one else, was a rich lady, who lived in Jerusalem, a relation of St. Joseph, but not the mother of John. The holy women came to the determination of putting down their spices on the stone which closed the door of the monument, and waiting until some one came to roll it back.

The guards were still lying on the ground, and the strong convulsions which even then shook them clearly demonstrated how great had been their terror, and the large stone was cast on one side, so that the door could be opened without difficulty. I could see the linen cloth in which the body of Jesus had been wrapped scattered about in the tomb, and the large winding-sheet lying in the same place as when they left it, but doubled together in such a manner that you saw at once that it no longer contained anything but the spices which had been placed round the body, and the bandages were on the outside of the tomb. The linen cloth in which Mary had enveloped the sacred head of her Son was still there.

I saw the holy women coming into the garden; but

[p. 335]

when they perceived the light given by the lamps of the sentinels, and the prostrate forms of the soldiers round the tomb, they for the most part became much alarmed, and retreated towards Golgotha. Mary Magdalen was, however., more courageous, and, followed by Salome, entered the garden, while the other women remained timidly on the outside.

Magdalen started, and appeared for a moment terrified when she drew near the sentinels. She retreated a few steps and rejoined Salome, but both quickly recovered their presence of mind, and walked on together through the midst of the prostrate guards, and entered into the cave which contained the sepulchre. They immediately perceived that the stone was removed, but the doors were closed, which had been clone in all probability by Cassius Magdalen opened them quickly, looked anxiously into the sepulchre, and was much surprised at seeing that the cloths in which they had enveloped our Lord were lying on one side, and that the place where they had deposited the sacred remains was empty. A celestial light filled the cave, and an angel was seated on the right side. Magdalen became almost beside herself from disappointment and alarm. I do not know whether she heard the words which the angel addressed to her, but she left the garden as quickly as possible, and ran to the town to inform the Apostles who were assembled there of what had taken place. I do not know whether the angel spoke to Mary Salome, as she did not enter the sepulchre; but I saw her leaving the garden directly after Magdalen, in order to relate all that had happened to the rest of the holy women, who were both frightened and delighted at the news, but could not make up their minds as to whether they would go to the garden or not.

In the mean time Cassius had remained near the sepulchre in hopes of seeing Jesus, as he thought he would be certain to appear to the holy women; but seeing nothing, he directed his steps towards Pilate's palace to relate to him all that had happened, stopping, however, first at the place where the rest of the holy women were assembled,

[p. 336]

to tell them what he had seen, and to exhort them to go immediately to the garden. They followed his advice, and went there at once. No sooner had they reached the door of the sepulchre than they beheld two angels clothed in sacerdotal vestments of the most dazzling white. The women were very much alarmed, covered their faces with their hands, and prostrated almost to the ground; but one of the angels addressed them, bade them not fear, and told them that they must not seek for their crucified Lord there, for that he was alive, had risen, and was no longer an inhabitant of the tomb. He pointed out to them at the same moment the empty sepulchre, and ordered them to go and relate to the disciples all that they had seen and heard. He likewise told them that Jesus would go before them into Galilee, and recalled to their minds the words which our Saviour had addressed to them on a former occasion: 'The Son of Man will be delivered into the hands of sinners, he will be crucified, and the third day rise again.' The angels then disappeared, and left the holy women filled with joy, although of course greatly agitated; they wept, looked at the empty tomb and linen clothes, and immediately started to return to the town. But they were so much overcome by the many astounding events which had taken place, that they walked very slowly, and stopped and looked back often, in hopes of seeing our Lord, or at least Magdalen.

In the mean time. Magdalen reached the Cenaculum. She was so excited as to appear like a person beside herself, and knocked hastily at the door. Some of the disciples, were still sleeping, and those who were risen were conversing together. Peter and John opened the door, but she only exclaimed, without entering the house, 'They have taken away the body of my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him,' and immediately returned to the garden. Peter and John went back into the house, and after saying a few words to the other disciples followed her as speedily as possible, but John far outstripped Peter. I then saw Magdalen reenter the garden, and direct her steps towards the sepulchre; she appeared greatly agitated,

[p. 337]

partly from grief, and partly from having walked so fast. Her garments were quite moist with dew, and her veil hanging on one side, while the luxuriant hair in which she had formerly taken so much pride fell in dishevelled masses over her shoulders, forming a species of mantle. Being alone, she was afraid of entering the cave, but stopped for a moment on the outside, and knelt down in order to see better into the tomb. She was endeavouring to push back her long hair, which fell over her face and obscured her vision, when she perceived the two angels who were seated in the tomb, and I heard one of them address her thus: 'Woman, why weepest thou?' She replied, in a voice choked with tears (for she was perfectly overwhelmed with grief at finding that the body of Jesus was really gone), 'Because they have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him.' She said no more, but seeing the empty winding-sheet, went out of the sepulchre and began to look about in other parts. She felt a secret presentiment that not only should she find Jesus, but that he was even then near to her; and the presence of the angels seemed not to disturb her in the least; she did not appear even to be aware that they were angels., every faculty was engrossed with the one thought, 'Jesus is not there! where is Jesus?' I watched her wandering about like an insane person, with her hair floating loosely in the wind: her hair appeared to annoy her much, for she again endeavoured to push it from off her face, and having divided it into two parts, threw it over her shoulders.

She then raised her head, looked around, and perceived a tall figure, clothed in white, standing at about ten paces from the sepulchre on the east side of the garden, where there was a Plight rise in the direction of the town; the figure was partly hidden from her sight by a palm-tree, but she was somewhat startled when it addressed her in these words: 'Woman, why weepest thou? Whom seekest thou?' She thought it was the gardener; and, in fact, he had a spade in his hand, and a large hat (apparently made of the bark of trees) on his head. His dress was similar to that worn by the gardener described in the parable which Jesus

[p. 338]

had related to the holy' women at Bethania a short time before his Passion. His body was not luminous, his whole appearance was rather that of a man dressed in white and seen by twilight. At the words, 'Whom seekest thou? she looked at him, and answered quickly, 'Sir, if thou hast taken him hence, tell me where thou hast laid him; and I will take him away.' And she looked anxiously Around. Jesus said to her, 'Mary.' She then instantly recognised his beloved voice, and turning quickly, replied, 'Rabboni (Master)!' She threw herself on her knees before him, and stretched out her hands to touch his feet; but he motioned her to be still, and said, 'Do not touch me, for I am not yet ascended to my Father; but go to my brethren and say to them: I ascend to my Father and to your Father, to my God and your God.' He then disappeared.

The reason of the words of Jesus, 'Do not touch me,' was afterwards explained to me, but I have only an indistinct remembrance of that explanation. I think be made use of those words because of the impetuosity of Magdalen's feelings, which made her in a certain degree forget the stupendous mystery which had been accomplished, and feel as if what she then beheld was still mortal instead of a glorified body. As for the words of Jesus, 'I am not yet ascended to my Father,' I was told that their meaning was that he had not presented himself to his Father since his Resurrection, to return him thanks for his victory over death, and for the work of the redemption which he had accomplished. He wished her to infer from these words, that the first-fruits of joy belong to God, and that she ought to reflect and return thanks to him for the accomplishment of the glorious mystery of the redemption, and for the victory which he had gained over death; and if she had kissed his feet as she used before the Passion, she would have thought of nothing but her Divine Master, and in her raptures of love have totally forgotten the wonderful events which were causing such astonishment and joy in Heaven. I saw Magdalen arise quickly, as soon as our Lord disappeared, and run to look again in the sepulchre,

[p. 339]

as if she believed herself under the influence of a dream. She saw the two angels still seated there, and they spoke to her concerning the resurrection of our Lord in the same words as they had addressed the two other women. She likewise saw the empty winding-sheet, and then, feeling certain that she was not in a state of delusion, but that the apparition of our Lord was real, she walked quickly back towards Golgotha to seek her companions, who were wandering about to and fro, anxiously looking out for her return, and indulging a kind of vague hope that they should see or hear something of Jesus.

The whole of this scene occupied a little more than two or three minutes. It was about half-past three when our Lord appeared to Magdalen, and John and Peter entered the garden just as she was leaving it. John, who was a little in advance of Peter, stopped at the entrance of the cave and looked in. He saw the linen clothes lying on one side, and waited until Peter came up, when they entered the sepulchre together, and saw the winding-sheet empty as has been before described. John instantly believed in the Resurrection, and they both understood clearly the words addressed to them by Jesus before his Passion, as well as the different passages in Scripture relating to that event, which had until then been incomprehensible to them. Peter put the linen clothes under his cloak, and they returned hastily into the town through the small entrance belonging to Nicodemus.

The appearance of the holy sepulchre was the same when the two apostles entered as when Magdalen first saw it. The two adoring angels were seated, one at the head, and the other at the extremity of the tomb, in precisely the same attitude as when his adorable body was lying there. I do not think Peter was conscious of their presence. I afterwards heard John tell the disciples of Emmaus, that when he looked into the sepulchre he saw an angel. Perhaps he was startled by this sight, and therefore drew back and let Peter enter the sepulchre first; but it is likewise very possible that the reason of his not mentioning the circumstance in his gospel was because

[p. 340]

humility made him anxious to conceal the fact of his having been more highly favoured than Peter.

The guards at this moment began to revive, and rising, gathered up their lances, and took down the lamps, which were on the door, from whence they cast a glimmering weak light on surrounding objects. I then saw them walk hastily out of the garden in evident fear and trepidation, in the direction of the town.

In the mean time Magdalen had rejoined the holy women, and given them the account of her seeing the Lord in the garden, and of the words of the angels afterwards, whereupon they immediately related what had been seen by themselves, and Magdalen wended her way quickly to Jerusalem, while the women returned to that side of the garden where they expected to find the two apostles. Just before they reached it, Jesus appeared to them. He was clothed in a long white robe, which concealed even his hands, and said to them, 'All hail.' They started with astonishment, and cast themselves at his feet; he spoke a few words, held forth his hand as if to point out something to them, and disappeared. The holy women went instantly to the Cenaculum, and told the disciples who were assembled there that they had seen the Lord; the disciples were incredulous, and would not give credence either to their account or to that of Magdalen. They treated both the one and the other as the effects of their excited imaginations; but when Peter and John entered the room and related what they likewise had seen, they knew not what to answer, and were filled with astonishment.

Peter and John soon left the Cenaculum, as the wonderful events which had taken place rendered them extremely silent and thoughtful, and before long they met James the Less and Thaddeus, who had wished to accompany them to the sepulchre. Both James and Thaddeus were greatly overcome, for the Lord had appeared to them a short time before they met Peter and John. I also saw Jesus pass quite close to Peter and John. I think the former recognised him, for he started suddenly, but I do not think the latter saw him.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 341]

  

CHAPTER LXV.

  

The Relation which was given by the Sentinels who were placed around the Sepulchre.

CASSIUS hastened to the house of Pilate about an hour after the Resurrection, in order to give him an account of the stupendous events which had taken place. He was not yet risen, but Cassius was allowed to enter his bedroom. He related all that had happened, and expressed his feelings in the most forcible language. He described how the rock had been rent, and how an angel had descended from Heaven and pushed aside the stone; he also spoke of the empty winding-sheet, and added that most certainly Jesus was the Messiah, the Son of God, and that he was truly risen. Pilate listened to this account; he trembled and quivered with terror, but concealed his agitation to the best of his power, and answered Cassius in these words: 'Thou art exceedingly superstitious; it was very foolish to go to the Galilaean's tomb; his gods took advantage of thy weakness, and displayed all these ridiculous visions to alarm thee. I recommend thee to keep silence, and not recount such silly tales to the priests, for thou wouldst got the worst of it from them.' He pretended to believe that the body of Jesus had been carried away by his disciples, and that the sentinels, who had been bribed, and had fallen asleep, or perhaps been deceived by witchcraft, had fabricated these accounts in order to justify their conduct. When Pilate had said all he could on the subject, Cassius left him, and he went to offer sacrifice to his gods.

The four soldiers who had guarded the tomb arrived shortly after at Pilate's palace, and began to tell him all that he had already heard from Cassius; but he would listen to nothing more, and sent them to Caiphas. The rest of the guards were assembled in a large court near the Temple which was filled with aged Jews, who, after

[p. 342]

some previous consultation, took the soldiers on one side, and by dint of bribes and threats endeavoured to persuade them to say that they fell asleep, and that while they were asleep the disciples came and carried away the body of our Lord. The soldiers, however, demurred, because the statement which their comrades were gone to make to Pilate would contradict any account which they could now fabricate, but the Pharisees promised to arrange everything with the governor. Whilst they were still disputing, the four guards returned from their interview with Pilate, and the Pharisees endeavoured to persuade them to conceal the truth; but this they refused to do, and declared firmly that they would not vary their first statement in the smallest degree. The miraculous deliverance of Joseph of Arimathea from prison was become public, and when the Pharisees accused the soldiers of having allowed the Apostles to carry off the body of Jesus, and threatened them with the infliction of the most severe punishment if they did not produce the body, they replied, that it would be as utterly impossible for them to produce the body of Jesus, as it was for the soldiers who had charge of Joseph of Arimathea to bring him back into his prison again. They spoke with the greatest firmness and courage promises and menaces were equally ineffectual. They declared that they would speak the truth and nothing but the truth; that the sentence of death which had been passed upon Jesus was both unjust and iniquitous; and that the crime which was perpetrated in putting him to death was the sole cause of the interruption in the Paschal solemnity. The Pharisees, being perfectly furious, caused the four soldiers to be arrested and thrown into prison, and the others, who had accepted the bribes they offered, then affirmed that the body of Jesus had been carried off by the disciples while they slept; and the Pharisees, Sadducees, and Herodians endeavoured to disseminate this lie to the utmost of their power, not only in the synagogue but also among the people; and they accompanied this false statement by the most slanderous lies concerning Jesus.

[p. 343]

All these precautions, however, availed but little, for, after the Resurrection, many persons who had been long dead arose from their graves, and appeared to those among their descendants who were not sufficiently hardened to be impervious to grace, and exhorted them to be converted. These dead persons were likewise seen by many of the disciples, who, overcome with terror, and shaken in faith, had fled into the country. They both exhorted and encouraged them to return, and restored their drooping courage. The resurrection of these dead persons did not in the slightest degree resemble the Resurrection of Jesus. He arose with a glorified body, which was no longer susceptible of either corruption or death, and ascended into heaven with this glorified body in the sight of all his disciples; but the dead bodies of which we spoke above were motionless corpses, and the souls which once inhabited them were only allowed to enter and reanimate them for a time, and after performing the mission given them, the souls again quitted these bodies, which returned to their original state in the bowels of the earth, where they will remain until the resurrection at the day of judgment. Neither could their return to life be compared to the raising of Lazarus from the dead; for he really returned to a new life, and died a second time.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER LXVI.

  

The End of the Lenten Meditations.

ON the following Sunday, [*1] if I remember right, I saw the Jews washing and purifying the Temple. They offered up expiatory sacrifices, cleared away the rubbish, and endeavoured to conceal the effects of the earthquake

[p. 344]

by placing planks and carpets over the chasms and fissures made by it in the walls and on the pavement; and they recommenced the Paschal solemnities, which had been interrupted in the midst, declared that the disturbance had been caused by the presence of impure persons, and endeavoured to explain away the apparition of the dead. They referred to a vision of Ezechiel, but how I can no longer remember. They threatened all who dared to say a syllable concerning the events which had taken place, or who presumed to murmur, with excommunication and other severe punishments. They succeeded in silencing some few hardened persons who, conscious of their own guilt, wished to banish the subject from their minds, but they made no impression on those whose hearts still retained some remains of virtue; they remained silent for a time, concealing their inward belief, but later, regaining courage, proclaimed their faith in Jesus loudly to the world. The High Priests were much disconcerted, when they perceived how rapidly the doctrines of Christ spread over the country. When Stephen was deacon, the whole of Ophel and the eastern side of Sion was too small to contain the numerous Christian communities, and a portion were obliged to take up their residence in the country between Jerusalem and Bethania.

I saw Annas in such a state of frenzy as to act like one possessed; he was at last obliged to be confined, and never again to make his appearance in public. Caiphas was outwardly less demonstrative, but he was inwardly devoured with such rage and extreme jealousy that his reason was affected.

I saw Pilate on Easter Thursday; he was instituting a search for his wife in every part of the city, but his efforts for her recovery were fruitless; she was concealed in the house of Lazarus, in Jerusalem. No one thought of looking there, as the house contained no other female; but Stephen carried food to her there, and let her know all that was going on in the city. Stephen was first-cousin to St. Paul. They were the sons of two brothers. On the day after the Sabbath, Simon of Cyrene went to

[p. 345]

the Apostles and begged to be instructed and to receive baptism.

The visions of Sister Emmerich, which had continued from the 18th of February to the 6th of April 1823, here came to a conclusion.

Footnotes

^343:1 The above relation was given later, and it is impossible to say whether it relates to the day of the Resurrection or to the following Sunday.

     
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 346] [p. 347]

  

APPENDIX.

  

Detached Account of Longinus

ON the 15th of March 1821, Sister Emmerich gave the following detached, account of parts of a vision which she had had the previous night concerning St. Longinus, whose festival happened to fall upon that very day, although she did not know it.

'Longinus, who had, I think, another name, held an office, partly civil and partly military, in the household of Pilate, who intrusted him with the duty of superintending all that passed, and making a report of it to him. He was trustworthy and ready to do a service, but previous to his conversion was greatly wanting in firmness and strength of character. He was excessively impetuous in all that he did, and anxious to be thought a person of great importance, and as he squinted and had weak eyes, he was often jeered at and made the laughing-stock of his companions. I have seen him frequently during the course of this night, and in connection with him I have at the same time seen all the Passion, I do not know in what manner; I only remember that it was in connection with him.

'Longinus was only in a subordinate position, and had to give an account to Pilate of all that he saw. On the night that Jesus was led before the tribunal of Caiphas he was in the outer court among the soldiers, and unceasingly going backwards and forwards. When Peter was alarmed at the words of the maid-servant

[p. 348]

standing near the fire, it was he who said once,. "Art thou not also one, of this man's disciples?"

'When Jesus was being led to Calvary, Longinus, by Pilate's orders, followed him closely, and our Divine Lord gave him a look which touched his heart. Afterwards I saw him on Golgotha with the soldiers. He was. on horseback, and carried a lance; I saw him at Pilate's house, after the death of our Lord, saying that the legs of Jesus ought not to be broken. He returned at once to Calvary. His lance was made of several pieces which fitted one into the other, so that by drawing them out, the lance could be made three times its original length. He had just done this when he came to the sudden determination of piercing the side of our Saviour. He was converted upon Mount Calvary, and a short time afterwards expressed to Pilate his conviction that Jesus was the Son of God. Nicodemus prevailed upon Pilate to let him have Longinus's lance, and I have seen many things concerning the subsequent history of this lance. Longinus, after his conversion, left the army, and joined the disciples. He and two other soldiers, who were converted at the foot of the Cross, were among the first baptised after Pentecost.

'I saw Longinus and these two men, clothed in long white garments, return to their native land. They lived there in the country, in a barren and marshy locality. Here it was that the forty martyrs died. Longinus was not a priest, but a deacon, and travelled here and there in that capacity, preaching the name of Christ, and giving, as an eye-witness, a history of his Passion and Resurrection. He converted a large number of persons, and cured many of the sick, by allowing them to touch a piece of the sacred lance which he carried with him. The Jews were much enraged at him and his two companions because they made known in all parts the truth of the Resurrection of Jesus, and the cruelty and deceits of his enemies. At their instigation, some Roman soldiers were dispatched to Longinus's country to take and judge him on the plea of his having left the army without leave, and

[p. 349]

being a disturber of public peace. He was engaged in cultivating his field when they arrived, and he took them to his house, and offered them hospitality. They did not know him, and when they had acquainted him with the object of their journey, he quietly called his two companions who were living in a sort of hermitage at no great distance off, and told the soldiers that they and himself were the men for whom they were seeking. The same thing happened to the holy gardener, Phocas. The soldiers were really distressed, for they had conceived a great friendship for him. I saw him led with his two companions to a small neighbouring town, where they were questioned. They were not put in prison, but permitted to go whither they pleased, as prisoners on their word, and. only made to wear a distinctive mark on the shoulder. Later, they were all three beheaded on a hill, situated between the little town and Longinus's house, and there buried. The soldiers put the head of Longinus at the end of a spear, and carried it to Jerusalem, as a proof that they had fulfilled their commission. I think I remember that this took place a very few years after the death of our Lord.

'Afterwards I had a vision of things happening at a later period. A blind countrywoman of St. Longinus went with her son on a pilgrimage to Jerusalem, in hopes of recovering her sight in the holy city where the eyes of Longinus had been cured. She was guided by her child, but he died, and she was left alone and disconsolate. Then St. Longinus appeared to her, and told her that she would recover her sight when she had drawn his head out of a sink into which the Jews had thrown it. This sink was a deep well, with the sides bricked, and all the filth and refuse of the town flowed into it through several drains. I saw some persons lead the poor woman to the spot; she descended into the well up to her neck, and draw out the sacred head, whereupon she recovered her sight. She returned to her native land, and her companions preserved the head. I remember no more upon this subject.'

    
The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by Anne Catherine Emmerich, [1862], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 350]

  

Detached Account of Abenadar.

ON the 1st of April 1823, Sister Emmerich said that that day was the Feast of St. Ctesiphon, the centurion who had assisted at the Crucifixion, and that she had seen during the night various particulars concerning his, life. But she had also suffered greatly, which, combined with exterior distractions, had caused her to forget the greatest part of what she had seen. She related what follows:

'Abenadar, afterwards called Ctesiphon, was born in a country situated between Babylon and Egypt in Arabia Felix, to the right of the spot where Job dwelt during the latter half of his life. A certain number of square houses, with flat roofs, were built there on a slight ascent. There were many small trees growing on this spot, and incense and balm were gathered there. I have been in Abenadar's house, which was large and spacious, as might be expected of a rich man's house, but it was also very low. All these houses were built in this manner, perhaps on account of the wind, because they were much exposed. Abenadar had joined the garrison of the fortress Antonia, at Jerusalem, as a volunteer. He had entered the Roman service for the purpose of enjoying more facilities in his study of the fine arts, for he was a learned man. His character was firm, his figure short and thick-set, and his complexion dark.

'Abenadar was early convinced, by the doctrine which he heard Jesus preach, and by a miracle which he saw him work, that salvation was to be found among the Jews, and he had submitted to the law of Moses. Although not yet a disciple of our Lord, he bore him no ill-will, and held his person in secret veneration. He was naturally grave and composed, and when he came to Golgotha to relieve guard, he kept order on all sides, and forced everybody to behave at least with common decency, down to the moment when truth triumphed over him, and he rendered public testimony to the Divinity of Jesus. Being a rich man, and a volunteer, he had no difficulty in resigning his post at once. He assisted at

[p. 351]

the descent from the Cross and the burial of our Lord, which put him into familiar connection with the friends of Jesus, and after the day of Pentecost he was one of the first to receive baptism in the Pool of Bethsaida, when he took the name of Ctesiphon. He had a brother living in Arabia, to whom he related the miracles he had beheld, and who was thus called to the path of salvation, came to Jerusalem, was baptised by the name of Caecilius, and was charged, together with Ctesiphon, to assist the deacons in the newly-formed Christian community.

'Ctesiphon accompanied the Apostle St. James the Greater into Spain, and also returned with him. After a time, he was again sent into Spain by the Apostles, and carried there the body of St. James, who had been martyred at Jerusalem. He was made a bishop, and resided chiefly in a sort of island or peninsula at no great distance from France, which he also visited, and where he made some disciples. The name of the place where he lived was rather like Vergui, and it was afterwards laid waste by an inundation. I do not remember that Ctesiphon was ever martyred. He wrote several books containing details concerning the Passion of Christ; but there have been some books falsely attributed to him, and others, which were really from his pen, ascribed to different writers. Rome has since rejected these books, the greatest part of which were apocryphal, but which nevertheless did contain some few things really from his pen. One of the guards of our Lord's sepulchre, who would not let himself be bribed by the Jews, was his fellow countryman and friend. His name was something like Sulei or Suleii. After being detained some time in prison, he retired into a cavern of Mount Sinai, where he lived seven years. God bestowed many special graces upon this man, and he wrote some very learned books in the style of Denis the Areopagite, Another writer made use of his works, and in this manner some extracts from them have come down to us. Everything concerning these facts was made known to me, as well as the name of the book, but I have forgotten it. This countryman of Ctesiphon afterwards followed him

[p. 352]

into Spain. Among the companions of Ctesiphon in that country were his brother Caecilius, and some other men, whose names were Intalecius, Hesicius, and Euphrasius. Another Arab, called Sulima, was converted in the very early days of the Church, and a fellow countryman of Ctesiphon, with a name like Sulensis, became a Christian later, in the time of the deacons.'

THE END.

 

    


===== BOOK: pkt.txt =====


     
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

THE PICTORIAL KEY TO THE TAROT;

 

BEING FRAGMENTS OF A SECRET TRADITION UNDER THE VEIL OF DIVINATION.

 

By Arthur Edward Waite

 

[b. 1857 d. 1942]

 

WITH 78 PLATES, ILLUSTRATING THE GREATER AND LESSER ARCANA, FROM DESIGNS

 

By Pamela Colman Smith.

 

[b. 1878 d. 1951]

 

London, W. Rider

 

[1911]

 

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, September, 2000 and June, 2003 by John Bruno Hare. This text and the accompanying illustrations are in the public domain in the United States of America because they were published prior to 1923.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

 

Preface

IT seems rather of necessity than predilection in the sense of apologia that I should put on record in the first place a plain statement of my personal position, as one who for many years of literary life has been, subject to his spiritual and other limitations, an exponent of the higher mystic schools. It will be thought that I am acting strangely in concerning myself at this day with what appears at first sight and simply a well-known method of fortune-telling. Now, the opinions of Mr. Smith, even in the literary reviews, are of no importance unless they happen to agree with our own, but in order to sanctify this doctrine we must take care that our opinions, and the subjects out of which they arise, are concerned only with the highest. Yet it is just this which may seem doubtful, in the present instance, not only to Mr. Smith, whom I respect within the proper measures of detachment, but to some of more real consequence, seeing that their dedications are mine. To these and to any I would say that after the most illuminated Frater Christian Rosy Cross had beheld the Chemical Marriage in the Secret Palace of Transmutation, his story breaks off abruptly, with an intimation that he expected next morning to be door-keeper. After the same manner, it happens more often than might seem likely that those who have seen the King of Heaven through the most clearest veils of the sacraments are those who assume thereafter the humblest offices of all about the House of God. By such simple devices also are the Adepts and Great Masters in the secret orders distinguished from the cohort of Neophytes as servi servorum mysterii. So also, or in a way which is not entirely unlike, we meet with the Tarot cards at the outermost gates--amidst the fritterings and debris of the so-called occult arts, about which no one in their senses has suffered the smallest deception; and yet these cards belong in themselves to another region, for they contain a very high symbolism, which is interpreted according to the Laws of Grace rather than by the pretexts and intuitions of that which passes for divination. The fact that the wisdom of God is foolishness with men does not create a presumption that the foolishness of this world makes in any sense for Divine Wisdom; so neither the scholars in the ordinary classes nor the pedagogues in the seats of the mighty will be quick to perceive the likelihood or even the possibility of this proposition. The subject has been in the hands of cartomancists as part of the stock-in-trade of their industry; I do not seek to persuade any one outside my own circles that this is of much or of no consequence; but on the historical and interpretative sides it has not fared better; it has been there in the hands of exponents who have brought it into utter contempt for those people who possess philosophical insight or faculties for the appreciation of evidence. It is time that it should be rescued, and this I propose to undertake once and for all, that I may have done with the side issues which distract from the term. As poetry is the most beautiful expression of the things that are of all most beautiful, so is symbolism the most catholic expression in concealment of things that are most profound in the Sanctuary and that have not been declared outside it with the same fulness by means of the spoken word. The justification of the rule of silence is no part of my present concern, but I have put on record elsewhere, and quite recently, what it is possible to say on this subject.

The little treatise which follows is divided into three parts, in the first of which I have dealt with the antiquities of the subject and a few things that arise from and connect therewith. It should be understood that it is not put forward as a contribution to the history of playing cards, about which I know and care nothing; it is a consideration dedicated and addressed to a certain school of occultism, more especially in France, as to the source and centre of all the phantasmagoria which has entered into expression during the last fifty years under the pretence of considering Tarot cards historically. In the second part, I have dealt with the symbolism according to some of its higher aspects, and this also serves to introduce the complete and rectified Tarot, which is available separately, in the form of coloured cards, the designs of which are added to the present text in black and white. They have been prepared under my supervision--in respect of the attributions and meanings--by a lady who has high claims as an artist. Regarding the divinatory part, by which my thesis is terminated, I consider it personally as a fact in the history of the Tarot--as such, I have drawn, from all published sources, a harmony of the meanings which have been attached to the various cards, and I have given prominence to one method of working that has not been published previously; having the merit of simplicity, while it is also of universal application, it may be held to replace the cumbrous and involved systems of the larger hand-books.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Contents

PREFACE

An explanation of the personal kind--An illustration from mystic literature--A subject which calls to be rescued--Limits and intention of the work.

PART I

THE VEIL AND ITS SYMBOLS

 section 1.--Introductory and General.
  section 2.--Class I. The Trumps Major, otherwise Greater Arcana.
  section 3.--Class II. The Four Suits, otherwise Lesser Arcana.
  section 4.--The Tarot in History.

PART II

THE DOCTRINE BEHIND THE VEIL

 section 1.--The Tarot and Secret Tradition.
  section 2.-The Trumps Major and their Inner Symbolism.
  section 3. Conclusion as to the Greater Keys.

PART III

THE OUTER METHOD OF THE ORACLES.

 section 1.--Distinction between the Greater and Lesser Arcana.
  section 2.--The Lesser Arcana, otherwise, the Four Suits of Tarot Cards
        The Suit of Wands.
        The Suit of Cups.
        The Suit of Swords.
        The Suit of Pentacles.
  section 3.--The Greater Arcana and their Divinatory Meanings.
  section 4.--Some additional Meanings of the Lesser Arcana.
  section 5.--The Recurrence of Cards in Dealing.
  section 6.--The Art of Tarot Divination.
  section 7.--An Ancient Celtic Method of Divination.
  section 8.--An Alternative Method of Reading the Tarot Cards.
  section 9.--The Method of Reading by Means of Thirty-five Cards.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

A CONCISE BIBLIOGRAPHY OF THE CHIEF WORKS DEALING WITH THE TAROT AND ITS CONNEXIONS

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

PART I

 

The Veil and its Symbols

 

 section 1

 

INTRODUCTORY AND GENERAL

THE pathology of the poet says that "the undevout astronomer is mad"; the pathology of the very plain man says that genius is mad; and between these extremes, which stand for ten thousand analogous excesses, the sovereign reason takes the part of a moderator and does what it can. I do not think that there is a pathology of the occult dedications, but about their extravagances no one can question, and it is not less difficult than thankless to act as a moderator regarding them. Moreover, the pathology, if it existed, would probably be an empiricism rather than a diagnosis, and would offer no criterion. Now, occultism is not like mystic faculty, and it very seldom works in harmony either with business aptitude in the things of ordinary life or with a knowledge of the canons of evidence in its own sphere. I know that for the high art of ribaldry there are few things more dull than the criticism which maintains that a thesis is untrue, and cannot understand that it is decorative. I know also that after long dealing with doubtful doctrine or with difficult research it is always refreshing, in the domain of this art, to meet with what is obviously of fraud or at least of complete unreason. But the aspects of history, as seen through the lens of occultism, are not as a rule decorative, and have few gifts of refreshment to heal the lacerations which they inflict on the logical understanding. It almost requires a Frater Sapiens dominabitur astris in the Fellowship of the Rosy Cross to have the patience which is not lost amidst clouds of folly when the consideration of the Tarot is undertaken in accordance with the higher law of symbolism. The true Tarot is symbolism; it speaks no other language and offers no other signs. Given the inward meaning of its emblems, they do become a kind of alphabet which is capable of indefinite combinations and makes true sense in all. On the highest plane it offers a key to the Mysteries, in a manner which is not arbitrary and has not been read in, But the wrong symbolical stories have been told concerning it, and the wrong history has been given in every published work which so far has dealt with the subject. It has been intimated by two or three writers that, at least in respect of the meanings, this is unavoidably the case, because few are acquainted with them, while these few hold by transmission under pledges and cannot betray their trust. The suggestion is fantastic on the surface for there seems a certain anti-climax in the proposition that a particular interpretation of fortune-telling--l'art de tirer les cartes--can be reserved for Sons of the Doctrine. The fact remains, notwithstanding, that a Secret Tradition exists regarding the Tarot, and as there is always the possibility that some minor arcana of the Mysteries may be made public with a flourish of trumpets, it will be as well to go before the event and to warn those who are curious in such matters that any revelation will contain only a third part of the earth and sea and a third part of the stars of heaven in respect of the symbolism. This is for the simple reason that neither in root-matter nor in development has more been put into writing, so that much will remain to be said after any pretended unveiling. The guardians of certain temples of initiation who keep watch over mysteries of this order have therefore no cause for alarm.

In my preface to The Tarot of the Bohemians, which, rather by an accident of things, has recently come to be re-issued after a long period, I have said what was then possible or seemed most necessary. The present work is designed more especially--as I have intimated--to introduce a rectified set of the cards themselves and to tell the unadorned truth concerning them, so far as this is possible in the outer circles. As regards the sequence of greater symbols, their ultimate and highest meaning lies deeper than the common language of picture or hieroglyph. This will be understood by those who have received some part of the Secret Tradition. As regards the verbal meanings allocated here to the more important Trump Cards, they are designed to set aside the follies and impostures of past attributions, to put those who have the gift of insight on the right track, and to take care, within the limits of my possibilities, that they are the truth so far as they go.

It is regrettable in several respects that I must confess to certain reservations, but there is a question of honour at issue. Furthermore, between the follies on the one side of those who know nothing of the tradition, yet are in their own opinion the exponents of something called occult science and philosophy, and on the other side between the make-believe of a few writers who have received part of the tradition and think that it constitutes a legal title to scatter dust in the eyes of the world without, I feel that the time has come to say what it is possible to say, so that the effect of current charlatanism and unintelligence may be reduced to a minimum.

We shall see in due course that the history of Tarot cards is largely of a negative kind, and that, when the issues are cleared by the dissipation of reveries and gratuitous speculations expressed in the terms of certitude, there is in fact no history prior to the fourteenth century. The deception and self-deception regarding their origin in Egypt, India or China put a lying spirit into the mouths of the first expositors, and the later occult writers have done little more than reproduce the first false testimony in the good faith of an intelligence unawakened to the issues of research. As it so happens, all expositions have worked within a very narrow range, and owe, comparatively speaking, little to the inventive faculty. One brilliant opportunity has at least been missed, for it has not so far occurred to any one that the Tarot might perhaps have done duty and even originated as a secret symbolical language of the Albigensian sects. I commend this suggestion to the lineal descendants in the spirit of Gabriele Rossetti and Eugene Aroux, to Mr. Harold Bayley as another New Light on the Renaissance, and as a taper at least in the darkness which, with great respect, might be serviceable to the zealous and all-searching mind of Mrs. Cooper-Oakley. Think only what the supposed testimony of watermarks on paper might gain from the Tarot card of the Pope or Hierophant, in connexion with the notion of a secret Albigensian patriarch, of which Mr. Bayley has found in these same watermarks so much material to his purpose. Think only for a moment about the card of the High Priestess as representing the Albigensian church itself; and think of the Tower struck by Lightning as typifying the desired destruction of Papal Rome, the city on the seven hills, with the pontiff and his temporal power cast down from the spiritual edifice when it is riven by the wrath of God. The possibilities are so numerous and persuasive that they almost deceive in their expression one of the elect who has invented them. But there is more even than this, though I scarcely dare to cite it. When the time came for the Tarot cards to be the subject of their first formal explanation, the archaeologist Court de Gebelin reproduced some of their most important emblems, and--if I may so term it--the codex which he used has served--by means of his engraved plates-as a basis of reference for many sets that have been issued subsequently. The figures are very primitive and differ as such from the cards of Etteilla, the Marseilles Tarot, and others still current in France. I am not a good judge in such matters, but the fact that every one of the Trumps Major might have answered for watermark purposes is shewn by the cases which I have quoted and by one most remarkable example of the Ace of Cups.

I should call it an eucharistic emblem after the manner of a ciborium, but this does not signify at the moment. The point is that Mr. Harold Bayley gives six analogous devices in his New Light on the Renaissance, being watermarks on paper of the seventeenth century, which he claims to be of Albigensian origin and to represent sacramental and Graal emblems. Had he only heard of the Tarot, had he known that these cards of

divination, cards of fortune, cards of all vagrant arts, were perhaps current at the period in the South of France, I think that his enchanting but all too fantastic hypothesis might have dilated still more largely in the atmosphere of his dream. We should no doubt have had a vision of Christian Gnosticism, Manichaeanism, and all that he understands by pure primitive Gospel, shining behind the pictures.

I do not look through such glasses, and I can only commend the subject to his attention at a later period; it is mentioned here that I may introduce with an unheard-of wonder the marvels of arbitrary speculation as to the history of the cards.

With reference to their form and number, it should scarcely be necessary to enumerate them, for they must be almost commonly familiar, but as it is precarious to assume anything, and as there are also other reasons, I will tabulate them briefly as follows:--

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

CLASS I

 

 section 2

 

TRUMPS MAJOR

 

Otherwise, Greater Arcana

1. The Magus, Magician, or juggler, the caster of the dice and mountebank, in the world of vulgar trickery. This is the colportage interpretation, and it has the same correspondence with the real symbolical meaning that the use of the Tarot in fortune-telling has with its mystic construction according to the secret science of symbolism. I should add that many independent students of the subject, following their own lights, have produced individual sequences of meaning in respect of the Trumps Major, and their lights are sometimes suggestive, but they are not the true lights. For example, Eliphas Levi says that the Magus signifies that unity which is the mother of numbers; others say that it is the Divine Unity; and one of the latest French commentators considers that in its general sense it is the will.

2. The High Priestess, the Pope Joan, or Female Pontiff; early expositors have sought to term this card the Mother, or Pope's Wife, which is opposed to the symbolism. It is sometimes held to represent the Divine Law and the Gnosis, in which case the Priestess corresponds to the idea of the Shekinah. She is the Secret Tradition and the higher sense of the instituted Mysteries.

3. The Empress, who is sometimes represented with full face, while her correspondence, the Emperor, is in profile. As there has been some tendency to ascribe a symbolical significance to this distinction, it seems desirable to say that it carries no inner meaning. The Empress has been connected with the ideas of universal fecundity and in a general sense with activity.

4. The Emperor, by imputation the spouse of the former. He is occasionally represented as wearing, in addition to his personal insignia, the stars or ribbons of some order of chivalry. I mention this to shew that the cards are a medley of old and new emblems. Those who insist upon the evidence of the one may deal, if they can, with the other. No effectual argument for the antiquity of a particular design can be drawn from the fact that it incorporates old material; but there is also none which can be based on sporadic novelties, the intervention of which may signify only the unintelligent hand of an editor or of a late draughtsman.

5. The High Priest or Hierophant, called also Spiritual Father, and more commonly and obviously the Pope. It seems even to have been named the Abbot, and then its correspondence, the High Priestess, was the Abbess or Mother of the Convent. Both are arbitrary names. The insignia of the figures are papal, and in such case the High Priestess is and can be only the Church, to whom Pope and priests are married by the spiritual rite of ordination. I think, however, that in its primitive form this card did not represent the Roman Pontiff.

6. The Lovers or Marriage. This symbol has undergone many variations, as might be expected from its subject. In the eighteenth century form, by which it first became known to the world of archaeological research, it is really a card of married life, shewing father and mother, with their child placed between them; and the pagan Cupid above, in the act of flying his shaft, is, of course, a misapplied emblem. The Cupid is of love beginning rather than of love in its fulness, guarding the fruit thereof. The card is said to have been entitled Simulacyum fidei, the symbol of conjugal faith, for which the rainbow as a sign of the covenant would have been a more appropriate concomitant. The figures are also held to have signified Truth, Honour and Love, but I suspect that this was, so to speak, the gloss of a commentator moralizing. It has these, but it has other and higher aspects.

7. The Chariot. This is represented in some extant codices as being drawn by two sphinxes, and the device is in consonance with the symbolism, but it must not be supposed that such was its original form; the variation was invented to support a particular historical hypothesis. In the eighteenth century white horses were yoked to the car. As regards its usual name, the lesser stands for the greater; it is really the King in his triumph, typifying, however, the victory which creates kingship as its natural consequence and not the vested royalty of the fourth card. M. Court de Gebelin said that it was Osiris Triumphing, the conquering sun in spring-time having vanquished the obstacles of winter. We know now that Osiris rising from the dead is not represented by such obvious symbolism. Other animals than horses have also been used to draw the currus triumphalis, as, for example, a lion and a leopard.

8. Fortitude. This is one of the cardinal virtues, of which I shall speak later. The female figure is usually represented as closing the mouth of a lion. In the earlier form which is printed by Court de Gebelin, she is obviously opening it. The first alternative is better symbolically, but either is an instance of strength in its conventional understanding, and conveys the idea of mastery. It has been said that the figure represents organic force, moral force and the principle of all force.

9. The Hermit, as he is termed in common parlance, stands next on the list; he is also the Capuchin, and in more philosophical language the Sage. He is said to be in search of that Truth which is located far off in the sequence, and of justice which has preceded him on the way. But this is a card of attainment, as we shall see later, rather than a card of quest. It is said also that his lantern contains the Light of Occult Science and that his staff is a Magic Wand. These interpretations are comparable in every respect to the divinatory and fortune-telling meanings with which I shall have to deal in their turn. The diabolism of both is that they are true after their own manner, but that they miss all the high things to which the Greater Arcana should be allocated. It is as if a man who knows in his heart that all roads lead to the heights, and that God is at the great height of all, should choose the way of perdition or the way of folly as the path of his own attainment. Eliphas Levi has allocated this card to Prudence, but in so doing he has been actuated by the wish to fill a gap which would otherwise occur in the symbolism. The four cardinal virtues are necessary to an idealogical sequence like the Trumps Major, but they must not be taken only in that first sense which exists for the use and consolation of him who in these days of halfpenny journalism is called the man in the street. In their proper understanding they are the correlatives of the counsels of perfection when these have been similarly re-expressed, and they read as follows: (a) Transcendental justice, the counter-equilibrium of the scales, when they have been overweighted so that they dip heavily on the side of God. The corresponding counsel is to use loaded dice when you play for high stakes with Diabolus. The axiom is Aut Deus, aut nihil. (b) Divine Ecstacy, as a counterpoise to something called Temperance, the sign of which is, I believe, the extinction of lights in the tavern. The corresponding counsel is to drink only of new wine in the Kingdom of the Father, because God is all in all. The axiom is that man being a reasonable being must get intoxicated with God; the imputed case in point is Spinoza. (c) The state of Royal Fortitude, which is the state of a Tower of Ivory and a House of Gold, but it is God and not the man who has become Turris fortitudinis a facie inimici, and out of that House the enemy has been cast. The corresponding counsel is that a man must not spare himself even in the presence of death, but he must be certain that his sacrifice shall be-of any open course-the best that will ensure his end. The axiom is that the strength which is raised to such a degree that a man dares lose himself shall shew him how God is found, and as to such refuge--dare therefore and learn. (d) Prudence is the economy which follows the line of least resistance, that the soul may get back whence it came. It is a doctrine of divine parsimony and conservation of energy, because of the stress, the terror and the manifest impertinences of this life. The corresponding counsel is that true prudence is concerned with the one thing needful, and the axiom is: Waste not, want not. The conclusion of the whole matter is a business proposition founded on the law of exchange: You cannot help getting what you seek in respect of the things that are Divine: it is the law of supply and demand. I have mentioned these few matters at this point for two simple reasons: (a) because in proportion to the impartiality of the mind it seems sometimes more difficult to determine whether it is vice or vulgarity which lays waste the present world more piteously; (b) because in order to remedy the imperfections of the old notions it is highly needful, on occasion, to empty terms and phrases of their accepted significance, that they may receive a new and more adequate meaning.

10. The Wheel of Fortune. There is a current Manual of Cartomancy which has obtained a considerable vogue in England, and amidst a great scattermeal of curious things to no purpose has intersected a few serious subjects. In its last and largest edition it treats in one section of the Tarot; which--if I interpret the author rightly--it regards from beginning to end as the Wheel of Fortune, this expression being understood in my own sense. I have no objection to such an inclusive though conventional description; it obtains in all the worlds, and I wonder that it has not been adopted previously as the most appropriate name on the side of common fortune-telling. It is also the title of one of the Trumps Major--that indeed of our concern at the moment, as my sub-title shews. Of recent years this has suffered many fantastic presentations and one hypothetical reconstruction which is suggestive in its symbolism. The wheel has seven radii; in the eighteenth century the ascending and descending animals were really of nondescript character, one of them having a human head. At the summit was another monster with the body of an indeterminate beast, wings on shoulders and a crown on head. It carried two wands in its claws. These are replaced in the reconstruction by a Hermanubis rising with the wheel, a Sphinx couchant at the summit and a Typhon on the descending side. Here is another instance of an invention in support of a hypothesis; but if the latter be set aside the grouping is symbolically correct and can pass as such.

11. Justice. That the Tarot, though it is of all reasonable antiquity, is not of time immemorial, is shewn by this card, which could have been presented in a much more archaic manner. Those, however, who have gifts of discernment in matters of this kind will not need to be told that age is in no sense of the essence of the consideration; the Rite of Closing the Lodge in the Third Craft Grade of Masonry may belong to the late eighteenth century, but the fact signifies nothing; it is still the summary of all the instituted and official Mysteries. The female figure of the eleventh card is said to be Astraea, who personified the same virtue and is represented by the same symbols. This goddess notwithstanding, and notwithstanding the vulgarian Cupid, the Tarot is not of Roman mythology, or of Greek either. Its presentation of justice is supposed to be one of the four cardinal virtues included in the sequence of Greater Arcana; but, as it so happens, the fourth emblem is wanting, and it became necessary for the commentators to discover it at all costs. They did what it was possible to do, and yet the laws of research have never succeeded in extricating the missing Persephone under the form of Prudence. Court de Gebelin attempted to solve the difficulty by a tour de force, and believed that he had extracted what he wanted from the symbol of the Hanged Man--wherein he deceived himself. The Tarot has, therefore, its justice, its Temperance also and its Fortitude, but--owing to a curious omission--it does not offer us any type of Prudence, though it may be admitted that, in some respects, the isolation of the Hermit, pursuing a solitary path by the light of his own lamp, gives, to those who can receive it, a certain high counsel in respect of the via prudentiae.

12. The Hanged Man. This is the symbol which is supposed to represent Prudence, and Eliphas Levi says, in his most shallow and plausible manner, that it is the adept bound by his engagements. The figure of a man is suspended head-downwards from a gibbet, to which he is attached by a rope about one of his ankles. The arms are bound behind him, and one leg is crossed over the other. According to another, and indeed the prevailing interpretation, he signifies sacrifice, but all current meanings attributed to this card are cartomancists' intuitions, apart from any real value on the symbolical side. The fortune-tellers of the eighteenth century who circulated Tarots, depict a semi-feminine youth in jerkin, poised erect on one foot and loosely attached to a short stake driven into the ground.

13. Death. The method of presentation is almost invariable, and embodies a bourgeois form of symbolism. The scene is the field of life, and amidst ordinary rank vegetation there are living arms and heads protruding from the ground. One of the heads is crowned, and a skeleton with a great scythe is in the act of mowing it. The transparent and unescapable meaning is death, but the alternatives allocated to the symbol are change and transformation. Other heads have been swept from their place previously, but it is, in its current and patent meaning, more especially a card of the death of Kings. In the exotic sense it has been said to signify the ascent of the spirit in the divine spheres, creation and destruction, perpetual movement, and so forth.

14. Temperance. The winged figure of a female--who, in opposition to all doctrine concerning the hierarchy of angels, is usually allocated to this order of ministering spirits--is pouring liquid from one pitcher to another. In his last work on the Tarot, Dr. Papus abandons the traditional form and depicts a woman wearing an Egyptian head-dress. The first thing which seems clear on the surface is that the entire symbol has no especial connexion with Temperance, and the fact that this designation has always obtained for the card offers a very obvious instance of a meaning behind meaning, which is the title in chief to consideration in respect of the Tarot as a whole.

15. The Devil. In the eighteenth century this card seems to have been rather a symbol of merely animal impudicity. Except for a fantastic head-dress, the chief figure is entirely naked; it has bat-like wings, and the hands and feet are represented by the claws of a bird. In the right hand there is a sceptre terminating in a sign which has been thought to represent fire. The figure as a whole is not particularly evil; it has no tail, and the commentators who have said that the claws are those of a harpy have spoken at random. There is no better ground for the alternative suggestion that they are eagle's claws. Attached, by a cord depending from their collars, to the pedestal on which the figure is mounted, are two small demons, presumably male and female. These are tailed, but not winged. Since 1856 the influence of Eliphas Levi and his doctrine of occultism has changed the face of this card, and it now appears as a pseudo-Baphometic figure with the head of a goat and a great torch between the horns; it is seated instead of erect, and in place of the generative organs there is the Hermetic caduceus. In Le Tarot Divinatoire of Papus the small demons are replaced by naked human beings, male and female ' who are yoked only to each other. The author may be felicitated on this improved symbolism.

16. The Tower struck by Lightning. Its alternative titles are: Castle of Plutus, God's House and the Tower of Babel. In the last case, the figures falling therefrom are held to be Nimrod and his minister. It is assuredly a card of confusion, and the design corresponds, broadly speaking, to any of the designations except Maison Dieu, unless we are to understand that the House of God has been abandoned and the veil of the temple rent. It is a little surprising that the device has not so far been allocated to the destruction Of Solomon's Temple, when the lightning would symbolize the fire and sword with which that edifice was visited by the King of the Chaldees.

17. The Star, Dog-Star, or Sirius, also called fantastically the Star of the Magi. Grouped about it are seven minor luminaries, and beneath it is a naked female figure, with her left knee upon the earth and her right foot upon the water. She is in the act of pouring fluids from two vessels. A bird is perched on a tree near her; for this a butterfly on a rose has been substituted in some later cards. So also the Star has been called that of Hope. This is one of the cards which Court de Gebelin describes as wholly Egyptian-that is to say, in his own reverie.

18. The Moon. Some eighteenth-century cards shew the luminary on its waning side; in the debased edition of Etteilla, it is the moon at night in her plenitude, set in a heaven of stars; of recent years the moon is shewn on the side of her increase. In nearly all presentations she is shining brightly and shedding the moisture of fertilizing dew in great drops. Beneath there are two towers, between which a path winds to the verge of the horizon. Two dogs, or alternatively a wolf and dog, are baying at the moon, and in the foreground there is water, through which a crayfish moves towards the land.

19. The Sun. The luminary is distinguished in older cards by chief rays that are waved and salient alternately and by secondary salient rays. It appears to shed its influence on earth not only by light and heat, but--like the moon--by drops of dew. Court de Gebelin termed these tears of gold and of pearl, just as he identified the lunar dew with the tears of Isis. Beneath the dog-star there is a wall suggesting an enclosure-as it might be, a walled garden-wherein are two children, either naked or lightly clothed, facing a water, and gambolling, or running hand in hand. Eliphas Levi says that these are sometimes replaced by a spinner unwinding destinies, and otherwise by a much better symbol-a naked child mounted on a white horse and displaying a scarlet standard.

20. The Last judgment. I have spoken of this symbol already, the form of which is essentially invariable, even in the Etteilla set. An angel sounds his trumpet per sepulchra regionum, and the dead arise. It matters little that Etteilla omits the angel, or that Dr. Papus substitutes a ridiculous figure, which is, however, in consonance with the general motive of that Tarot set which accompanies his latest work. Before rejecting the transparent interpretation of the symbolism which is conveyed by the name of the card and by the picture which it presents to the eye, we should feel very sure of our ground. On the surface, at least, it is and can be only the resurrection of that triad--father, mother, child-whom we have met with already in the eighth card. M. Bourgeat hazards the suggestion that esoterically it is the symbol of evolution--of which it carries none of the signs. Others say that it signifies renewal, which is obvious enough; that it is the triad of human life; that it is the "generative force of the earth... and eternal life." Court de Gebelin makes himself impossible as usual, and points out that if the grave-stones were removed it could be accepted as a symbol of creation.

21--which, however, in most of the arrangements is the cipher card, number nothing--The Fool, Mate, or Unwise Man. Court de Gebelin places it at the head of the whole series as the zero or negative which is presupposed by numeration, and as this is a simpler so also it is a better arrangement. It has been abandoned because in later times the cards have been attributed to the letters of the Hebrew alphabet, and there has been apparently some difficulty about allocating the zero symbol satisfactorily in a sequence of letters all of which signify numbers. In the present reference of the card to the letter Shin, which corresponds to 200, the difficulty or the unreason remains. The truth is that the real arrangement of the cards has never transpired. The Fool carries a wallet; he is looking over his shoulder and does not know that he is on the brink of a precipice; but a dog or other animal--some call it a tiger--is attacking him from behind, and he is hurried to his destruction unawares. Etteilla has given a justifiable variation of this card--as generally understood--in the form of a court jester, with cap, bells and motley garb. The other descriptions say that the wallet contains the bearer's follies and vices, which seems bourgeois and arbitrary.

22. The World, the Universe, or Time. The four living creatures of the Apocalypse and Ezekiel's vision, attributed to the evangelists in Christian symbolism, are grouped about an elliptic garland, as if it were a chain of flowers intended to symbolize all sensible things; within this garland there is the figure of a woman, whom the wind has girt about the loins with a light scarf, and this is all her vesture. She is in the act of dancing, and has a wand in either hand. It is eloquent as an image of the swirl of the sensitive life, of joy attained in the body, of the soul's intoxication in the earthly paradise, but still guarded by the Divine Watchers, as if by the powers and the graces of the Holy Name, Tetragammaton, JVHV--those four ineffable letters which are sometimes attributed to the mystical beasts. Eliphas Levi calls the garland a crown, and reports that the figure represents Truth. Dr. Papus connects it with the Absolute and the realization of the Great Work; for yet others it is a symbol of humanity and the eternal reward of a life that has been spent well. It should be noted that in the four quarters of the garland there are four flowers distinctively marked. According to P. Christian, the garland should be formed of roses, and this is the kind of chain which Eliphas Levi says is less easily broken than a chain of iron. Perhaps by antithesis, but for the same reason, the iron crown of Peter may he more lightly on the heads of sovereign pontiffs than the crown of gold on kings.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

CLASS II

 

 section 3

 

THE FOUR SUITS

 

Otherwise, Lesser Arcana

The resources of interpretation have been lavished, if not exhausted, on the twenty-two Trumps Major, the symbolism of which is unquestionable. There remain the four suits, being Wands or Sceptres--ex hypothesi, in the archaeology of the subject, the antecedents of Diamonds in modern cards: Cups, corresponding to Hearts; Swords, which answer to Clubs, as the weapon of chivalry is in relation to the peasant's quarter-staff or the Alsatian bludgeon; and, finally, Pentacles--called also Deniers and Money--which are the prototypes of Spades, In the old as in the new suits, there are ten numbered cards, but in the Tarot there are four Court Cards allocated to each suit, or a Knight in addition to King, Queen and Knave. The Knave is a page, valet, or damoiseau; most correctly, he is an esquire, presumably in the service of the Knight; but there are certain rare sets in which the page becomes a maid of honour, thus pairing the sexes in the tetrad of the court cards. There are naturally distinctive features in respect of the several pictures, by which I mean that the King of Wands is not exactly the same personage as the King of Cups, even after allowance has been made for the different emblems that they bear; but the symbolism resides in their rank and in the suit to which they belong. So also the smaller cards, which--until now--have never been issued pictorially in these our modem days, depend on the particular meaning attaching to their numbers in connexion with the particular suit. I reserve, therefore, the details of the Lesser Arcana, till I come to speak in the second part of the rectified and perfected Tarot which accompanies this work. The consensus of divinatory meanings attached both to the greater and lesser symbols belongs to the third part.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

 section 4

 

THE TAROT IN HISTORY

Our immediate next concern is to speak of the cards in their history, so that the speculations and reveries which have been perpetuated and multiplied in the schools of occult research may be disposed of once and for all, as intimated in the preface hereto.

Let it be understood at the beginning of this point that there are several sets or sequences of ancient cards which are only in part of our concern. The Tarot of the Bohemians, by Papus, which I have recently carried through the press, revising the imperfect rendering, has some useful information in this connexion, and, except for the omission of dates and other evidences of the archaeological sense, it will serve the purpose of the general reader. I do not propose to extend it in the present place in any manner that can be called considerable, but certain additions are desirable and so also is a distinct mode of presentation.

Among ancient cards which are mentioned in connexion with the Tarot, there are firstly those of Baldini, which are the celebrated set attributed by tradition to Andrea Mantegna, though this view is now generally rejected. Their date is supposed to be about 1470, and it is thought that there are not more than four collections extant in Europe. A copy or reproduction referred to 1485 is perhaps equally rare. A complete set contains fifty numbers, divided into five denaries or sequences of ten cards each. There seems to be no record that they were used for the purposes of a game, whether of chance or skill; they could scarcely have lent themselves to divination or any form of fortune-telling; while it would be more than idle to impute a profound symbolical meaning to their obvious emblematic designs. The first denary embodies Conditions of Life, as follows: (i) The Beggar, (2) the Knave, (3) the Artisan, (4) the Merchant, (5) the Noble, (6) the Knight, (7) the Doge, (8) the King, (9) the Emperor, (10) the Pope. The second contains the Muses and their Divine Leader: (11) Calliope, (12) Urania, (13) Terpsichore, (14) Erato, (15) Polyhymnia, (16) Thalia, (17) Melpomene, (18) Euterpe, (19) Clio, (20) Apollo. The third combines part of the Liberal Arts and Sciences with other departments of human learning, as follows: (21) Grammar, (22) Logic, (23) Rhetoric, (24) Geometry, (25) Arithmetic, (26) Music, (27) Poetry,(28) Philosophy, (29) Astrology, (30) Theology. The fourth denary completes the Liberal Arts and enumerates the Virtues: (31) Astronomy, (32) Chronology, (33) Cosmology, (34) Temperance, (35) Prudence, (36) Strength, (37) Justice; (38) Charity, (39) Hope, (40) Faith. The fifth and last denary presents the System of the Heavens (41) Moon, (42) Mercury, (43) Venus, (44) Sun, (45) Mars, (46) Jupiter, (47) Saturn, (48) A Eighth Sphere, (49) Primum Mobile, (50) First Cause.

We mnst set aside the fantastic attempts to extract complete Tarot sequences out of these denaries; we must forbear from saying, for example, that the Conditions of Life correspond to the Trumps Major, the Muses to Pentacles, the Arts and Sciences to Cups, the Virtues, etc., to Sceptres, and the conditions of life to Swords. This kind of thing can be done by a process of mental contortion, but it has no place in reality. At the same time, it is hardly possible that individual cards should not exhibit certain, and even striking, analogies. The Baldini King, Knight and Knave suggest the corresponding court cards of the Minor Arcana. The Emperor, Pope, Temperance, Strength, justice, Moon and Sun are common to the Mantegna and Trumps Major of any Tarot pack. Predisposition has also connected the Beggar and Fool, Venus and the Star, Mars and the Chariot, Saturn and the Hermit, even Jupiter, or alternatively the First Cause, with the Tarot card of the World.[1] But the most salient features of the Trumps Major are wanting in the Mantegna set, and I do not believe that the ordered sequence in the latter case gave birth, as it has been suggested, to the others. Romain Merlin maintained this view, and positively assigned the Baldini cards to the end of the fourteenth century.

If it be agreed that, except accidentally and

[1. The beggar is practically naked, and the analogy is constituted by the presence of two dogs, one of which seems to be flying at his legs. The Mars card depicts a sword-bearing warrior in a canopied chariot, to which, however, no horses are attached. Of course, if the Baldini cards belong to the close of the fifteenth century, there is no question at issue, as the Tarot was known in Europe long before that period.]

sporadically, the Baldini emblematic or allegorical pictures have only a shadowy and occasional connexion with Tarot cards, and, whatever their most probable date, that they can have supplied no originating motive, it follows that we are still seeking not only an origin in place and time for the symbols with which we are concerned, but a specific case of their manifestation on the continent of Europe to serve as a point of departure, whether backward or forward. Now it is well known that in the year 1393 the painter Charles Gringonneur--who for no reason that I can trace has been termed an occultist and kabalist by one indifferent English writer--designed and illuminated some kind of cards for the diversion of Charles VI of France when he was in mental ill-health, and the question arises whether anything can be ascertained of their nature. The only available answer is that at Paris, in the Bibliotheque du Roi, there are seventeen cards drawn and illuminated on paper. They are very beautiful, antique and priceless; the figures have a background of gold, and are framed in a silver border; but they are accompanied by no inscription and no number.

It is certain, however, that they include Tarot Trumps Major, the list of which is as follows: Fool, Emperor, Pope, Lovers, Wheel of Fortune, Temperance, Fortitude, justice, Moon, Sun, Chariot, Hermit, Hanged Man, Death, Tower and Last judgment. There are also four Tarot Cards at the Musee Carrer, Venice, and five others elsewhere, making nine in all. They include two pages or Knaves, three Kings and two Queens, thus illustrating the Minor Arcana. These collections have all been identified with the set produced by Gringonneur, but the ascription was disputed so far back as the year 1848, and it is not apparently put forward at the present day, even by those who are anxious to make evident the antiquity of the Tarot. It is held that they are all of Italian and some at least certainly of Venetian origin. We have in this manner our requisite point of departure in respect of place at least. It has further been stated with authority that Venetian Tarots are the old and true form, which is the parent of all others; but I infer that complete sets of the Major and Minor Arcana belong to much later periods. The pack is thought to have consisted of seventy-eight cards.

Notwithstanding, however, the preference shewn towards the Venetian Tarot, it is acknowledged that some portions of a Minchiate or Florentine set must be allocated to the period between 1413 and 1418. These were once in the possession of Countess Gonzaga, at Milan. A complete Minchiate pack contained ninety-seven cards, and in spite of these vestiges it is regarded, speaking generally, as a later development. There were forty-one Trumps Major, the additional numbers being borrowed or reflected from the Baldini emblematic set. In the court cards of the Minor Arcana, the Knights were monsters of the centaur type, while the Knaves were sometimes warriors and sometimes serving-men. Another distinction dwelt upon is the prevalence of Chrstian mediaeval ideas and the utter absence of any Oriental suggestion. The question, however, remains whether there are Eastern traces in any Tarot cards.

We come, in fine, to the Bolognese Tarot, sometimes referred to as that of Venice and having the Trumps Major complete, but numbers 20 and 21 are transposed. In the Minor Arcana the 2, 3, 4 and 5 of the small cards are omitted, with the result that there are sixty-two cards in all. The termination of the Trumps Major in the representation of the Last judgment is curious, and a little arresting as a point of symbolism; but this is all that it seems necessary to remark about the pack of Bologna, except that it is said to have been invented--or, as a Tarot, more correctly, modified--about the beginning of the fifteenth century by an exiled Prince of Pisa resident in the city. The purpose for which they were used is made tolerably evident by the fact that, in 1423, St. Bernardin of Sienna preached against playing cards and other forms of gambling. Forty years later the importation of cards into England was forbidden, the time being that of King Edward IV. This is the first certain record of the subject in our country.

It is difficult to consult perfect examples of the sets enumerated above, but it is not difficult to meet with detailed and illustrated descriptions--I should add, provided always that the writer is not an occultist, for accounts emanating from that source are usually imperfect, vague and preoccupied by considerations which cloud the critical issues. An instance in point is offered by certain views which have been expressed on the Mantegna codex--if I may continue to dignify card sequences with a title of this kind. It has been ruled--as we have seen--in occult reverie that Apollo and the Nine Muses are in correspondence with Pentacles, but the analogy does not obtain in a working state of research; and reverie must border on nightmare before we can identify Astronomy, Chronology and Cosmology with the suit of Cups. The Baldini figures which represent these subjects are emblems of their period and not symbols, like the Tarot.

In conclusion as to this part, I observe that there has been a disposition among experts to think that the Trumps Major were not originally connected with the numbered suits. I do not wish to offer a personal view; I am not an expert in the history of games of chance, and I hate the profanum vulgus of divinatory devices; but I venture, under all reserves, to intimate that if later research should justify such a leaning, then--except for the good old art of fortune-telling and its tamperings with so-called destiny--it will be so much the better for the Greater Arcana.

So far as regards what is indispensable as preliminaries to the historical aspects of Tarot cards, and I will now take up the speculative side of the subject and produce its tests of value. In my preface to The Tarot of the Bohemians I have mentioned that the first writer who made known the fact of the cards was the archaeologist Court de Gebelin, who, just prior to the French Revolution, occupied several years in the publication of his Monde Primitif, which extended to nine quarto volumes. He was a learned man of his epoch, a high-grade Mason, a member of the historical Lodge of the Philalethes, and a virtuoso with a profound and lifelong interest in the debate on universal antiquities before a science of the subject existed. Even at this day, his memorials and dissertations, collected under the title which I have quoted, are worth possessing. By an accident of things, he became acquainted with the Tarot when it was quite unknown in Paris, and at once conceived that it was the remnants of an Egyptian book. He made inquiries concerning it and ascertained that it was in circulation over a considerable part of Europe--Spain, Italy, Germany and the South of France. It was in use as a game of chance or skill, after the ordinary manner of playing-cards; and he ascertained further how the game was played. But it was in use also for the higher purpose of divination or fortune-telling, and with the help of a learned friend he discovered the significance attributed to the cards, together with the method of arrangement adopted for this purpose. In a word, he made a distinct contribution to our knowledge, and he is still a source of reference--but it is on the question of fact only, and not on the beloved hypothesis that the Tarot contains pure Egyptian doctrine. However, he set the opinion which is prevalent to this day throughout the occult schools, that in the mystery and wonder, the strange night of the gods, the unknown tongue and the undeciphered hieroglyphics which symbolized Egypt at the end of the eighteenth century, the origin of the cards was lost. So dreamed one of the characteristic literati of France, and one can almost understand and sympathize, for the country about the Delta and the Nile was beginning to loom largely in the preoccupation of learned thought, and omne ignolum pro Aegyptiaco was the way of delusion to which many minds tended. It was excusable enough then, but that the madness has continued and, within the charmed circle of the occult sciences, still passes from mouth to mouth--there is no excuse for this. Let us see, therefore, the evidence produced by M. Court de Gebelin in support of his thesis, and, that I may deal justly, it shall be summarized as far as possible in his own words.

(i) The figures and arrangement of the game are manifestly allegorical; (2) the allegories are in conformity with the civil, philosophical and religious doctrine of ancient Egypt; (3) if the cards were modern, no High Priestess would be included among the Greater Arcana; (4) the figure in question bears the horns of Isis; (5) the card which is called the Emperor has a sceptre terminating in a triple cross; (6) the card entitled the Moon, who is Isis, shews drops of rain or dew in the act of being shed by the luminary and these-as we have seen-are the tears of Isis, which swelled the waters of the Nile and fertilized the fields of Egypt; (7) the seventeenth card, or Star, is the dog-star, Sirius, which was consecrated to Isis and symbolized the opening of the year; (8) the game played with the Tarot is founded on the sacred number seven, which was of great importance in Egypt; (9) the word Tarot is pure Egyptian, in which language Tar=way or road, and Ro=king or royal--it signifies therefore the Royal Road of Life; (10) alternatively, it is derived from A=doctrine Rosh= Mercury =Thoth, and the article T; in sum, Tarosh; and therefore the Tarot is the Book of Thoth, or the Table of the Doctrine of Mercury.

Such is the testimony, it being understood that I have set aside several casual statements, for which no kind of justification is produced. These, therefore, are ten pillars which support the edifice of the thesis, and the same are pillars of sand. The Tarot is, of course, allegorical--that is to say, it is symbolism--but allegory and symbol are catholic---of all countries, nations and times they are not more Egyptian than Mexican they are of Europe and Cathay, of Tibet beyond the Himalayas and of the London gutters. As allegory and symbol, the cards correspond to many types of ideas and things; they are universal and not particular; and the fact that they do not especially and peculiarly respond to Egyptian doctrine--religious, philosophical or civil--is clear from the failure of Court de Gebelin to go further than the affirmation. The presence of a High Priestess among the Trumps Major is more easily explained as the memorial of some popular superstition--that worship of Diana, for example, the persistence of which in modern Italy has been traced with such striking results by Leland. We have also to remember the universality of horns in every cultus, not excepting that of Tibet. The triple cross is preposterous as an instance of Egyptian symbolism; it is the cross of the patriarchal see, both Greek and Latin--of Venice, of Jerusalem, for example--and it is the form of signing used to this day by the priests and laity of the Orthodox Rite. I pass over the idle allusion to the tears of Isis, because other occult writers have told us that they are Hebrew Jods; as regards the seventeenth card, it is the star Sirius or another, as predisposition pleases; the number seven was certainly important in Egypt and any treatise on numerical mysticism will shew that the same statement applies everywhere, even if we elect to ignore the seven Christian Sacraments and the Gifts of the Divine Spirit. Finally, as regards the etymology of the word Tarot, it is sufficient to observe that it was offered before the discovery of the Rosetta Stone and when there was no knowledge of the Egyptian language.

The thesis of Court de Gebelin was not suffered to repose undisturbed in the mind of the age, appealing to the learned exclusively by means of a quarto volume. It created the opportunity of Tarot cards in Paris, as the centre of France and all things French in the universe. The suggestion that divination by cards had behind it the unexpected warrants of ancient hidden science, and that the root of the whole subject was in the wonder and mystery of Egypt, reflected thereon almost a divine dignity; out of the purlieus of occult practices cartomancy emerged into fashion and assumed for the moment almost pontifical vestures. The first to undertake the role of bateleur, magician and juggler, was the illiterate but zealous adventurer, Alliette; the second, as a kind of High Priestess, full of intuitions and revelations, was Mlle. Lenormand--but she belongs to a later period; while lastly came Julia Orsini, who is referable to a Queen of Cups rather in the tatters of clairvoyance. I am not concerned with these people as tellers of fortune, when destiny itself was shuffling and cutting cards for the game of universal revolution, or for such courts and courtiers as were those of Louis XVIII, Charles IX and Louis Philippe. But under the occult designation of Etteilla, the transliteration of name, Alliette, that perruquier took himself with high seriousness and posed rather as a priest of the occult sciences than as an ordinary adept in l'art de tirer les cartes. Even at this day there are people, like Dr. Papus, who have sought to save some part of his bizarre system from oblivion.

The long and heterogeneous story of Le Monde Primitif had come to the end of its telling in 1782, and in 1783 the tracts of Etteilla had begun pouring from the press, testifying that already he had spent thirty, nay, almost forty years in the study of Egyptian magic, and that he had found the final keys. They were, in fact, the Keys of the Tarot, which was a book of philosophy and the Book of Thoth, but at the same time it was actually written by seventeen Magi in a Temple of Fire, on the borders of the Levant, some three leagues from Memphis. It contained the science of the universe, and the cartomancist proceeded to apply it to Astrology, Alchemy, and fortune-telling, without the slightest diffidence or reserve as to the fact that he was driving a trade. I have really little doubt that he considered it genuine as a metier, and that he himself was the first person whom he convinced concerning his system. But the point which we have to notice is that in this manner was the antiquity of the Tarot generally trumpeted forth. The little books of Etteilla are proof positive that he did not know even his own language; when in the course of time he produced a reformed Tarot, even those who think of him tenderly admit that he spoiled its symbolism; and in respect of antiquities he had only Court de Gebelin as his universal authority.

The cartomancists succeeded one another in the manner which I have mentioned, and of course there were rival adepts of these less than least mysteries; but the scholarship of the subject, if it can be said to have come into existence, reposed after all in the quarto of Court de Gebelin for something more than sixty years. On his authority, there is very little doubt that everyone who became acquainted, by theory or practice, by casual or special concern, with the question of Tarot cards, accepted their Egyptian character. It is said that people are taken commonly at their own valuation, and--following as it does the line of least resistance--the unsolicitous general mind assuredly accepts archaeological pretensions in the sense of their own daring and of those who put them forward. The first who appeared to reconsider the subject with some presumptive titles to a hearing was the French writer Duchesne, but I am compelled to pass him over with a mere reference, and so also some interesting researches on the general subject of playing-cards by Singer in England. The latter believed that the old Venetian game called Trappola was the earliest European form of card-playing, that it was of Arabian origin, and that the fifty-two cards used for the purpose derived from that region. I do not gather that any importance was ever attached to this view.

Duchesne and Singer were followed by another English writer, W. A. Chatto, who reviewed the available facts and the cloud of speculations which had already arisen on the subject. This was in 1848, and his work has still a kind of standard authority, but--after every allowance for a certain righteousness attributable to the independent mind--it remains an indifferent and even a poor performance. It was, however, characteristic in its way of the approaching middle night of the nineteenth century. Chatto rejected the Egyptian hypothesis, but as he was at very little pains concerning it, he would scarcely be held to displace Court de Gebelin if the latter had any firm ground beneath his hypothesis. In 1854 another French writer, Boiteau, took up the general question, maintaining the oriental origin of Tarot cards, though without attempting to prove it. I am not certain, but I think that he is the first writer who definitely identified them with the Gipsies; for him, however, the original Gipsy home was in India, and Egypt did not therefore enter into his calculation.

In 1860 there arose Eliphas Levi, a brilliant and profound illumine whom it is impossible to accept, and with whom it is even more impossible to dispense. There was never a mouth declaring such great things, of all the western voices which have proclaimed or interpreted the science called occult and the doctrine called magical. I suppose that, fundamentally speaking, he cared as much and as little as I do for the phenomenal part, but he explained the phenomena with the assurance of one who openly regarded charlatanry as a great means to an end, if used in a right cause. He came unto his own and his own received him, also at his proper valuation, as a man of great learning--which he never was--and as a revealer of all mysteries without having been received into any. I do not think that there was ever an instance of a writer with greater gifts, after their particular kind, who put them to such indifferent uses. After all, he was only Etteilla a second time in the flesh, endowed in his transmutation with a mouth of gold and a wider casual knowledge. This notwithstanding, he has written the most comprehensive, brilliant, enchanting History of Magic which has ever been drawn into writing in any language. The Tarot and the de Gebelin hypothesis he took into his heart of hearts, and all occult France and all esoteric Britain, Martinists, half-instructed Kabalists, schools of soi disant theosophy--there, here and everywhere--have accepted his judgment about it with the same confidence as his interpretations of those great classics of Kabalism which he had skimmed rather than read. The Tarot for him was not only the most perfect instrument of divination and the keystone of occult science, but it was the primitive book, the sole book of the ancient Magi, the miraculous volume which inspired all the sacred writings of antiquity. In his first work Levi was content, however, with accepting the construction of Court de Gebelin and reproducing the seventh Trump Major with a few Egyptian characteristics. The question of Tarot transmission through the Gipsies did not occupy him, till J. A. Vaillant, a bizarre writer with great knowledge of the Romany people, suggested it in his work on those wandering tribes. The two authors were almost coincident and reflected one another thereafter. It remained for Romain Merlin, in 1869, to point out what should have been obvious, namely, that cards of some kind were known in Europe prior to the arrival of the Gipsies in or about 1417. But as this was their arrival at Luneburg, and as their presence can be traced antecedently, the correction loses a considerable part of its force; it is safer, therefore, to say that the evidence for the use of the Tarot by Romany tribes was not suggested till after the year 1840; the fact that some Gipsies before this period were found using cards is quite explicable on the hypothesis not that they brought them into Europe but found them there already and added them to their stock-in-trade.

We have now seen that there is no particle of evidence for the Egyptian origin of Tarot cards. Looking in other directions, it was once advanced on native authority that cards of some kind were invented in China about the year A.D. 1120. Court de Gebelin believed in his zeal that he had traced them to a Chinese inscription of great imputed antiquity which was said to refer to the subsidence of the waters of the Deluge. The characters of this inscription were contained in seventy-seven compartments, and this constitutes the analogy. India had also its tablets, whether cards or otherwise, and these have suggested similar slender similitudes. But the existence, for example, of ten suits or styles, of twelve numbers each, and representing the avatars of Vishnu as a fish, tortoise, boar, lion, monkey, hatchet, umbrella or bow, as a goat, a boodh and as a horse, in fine, are not going to help us towards the origin of our own Trumps Major, nor do crowns and harps--nor even the presence of possible coins as a synonym of deniers and perhaps as an equivalent of pentacles--do much to elucidate the Lesser Arcana. If every tongue and people and clime and period possessed their cards--if with these also they philosophized, divined and gambled--the fact would be interesting enough, but unless they were Tarot cards, they would illustrate only the universal tendency of man to be pursuing the same things in more or less the same way.

I end, therefore, the history of this subject by repeating that it has no history prior to the fourteenth century, when the first rumours, were heard concerning cards. They may have existed for centuries, but this period would be early enough, if they were only intended for people to try their luck at gambling or their luck at seeing the future; on the other hand, if they contain the deep intimations of Secret Doctrine, then the fourteenth century is again early enough, or at least in this respect we are getting as much as we can.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

PART II

 

The Doctrine Behind the Veil

 

 section 1

 

THE TAROT AND SECRET TRADITION

THE Tarot embodies symbolical presentations of universal ideas, behind which lie all the implicits of the human mind, and it is in this sense that they contain secret doctrine, which is the realization by the few of truths imbedded in the consciousness of all, though they have not passed into express recognition by ordinary men. The theory is that this doctrine has always existed--that is to say, has been excogitated in the consciousness of an elect minority; that it has been perpetuated in secrecy from one to another and has been recorded in secret literatures, like those of Alchemy and Kabalism; that it is contained also in those Instituted Mysteries of which Rosicrucianism offers an example near to our hand in the past, and Craft Masonry a living summary, or general memorial, for those who can interpret its real meaning. Behind the Secret Doctrine it is held that there is an experience or practice by which the Doctrine is justified. It is obvious that in a handbook like the present I can do little more than state the claims, which, however, have been discussed at length in several of my other writings, while it is designed to treat two of its more important phases in books devoted to the Secret Tradition in Freemasonry and in Hermetic literature. As regards Tarot claims, it should be remembered that some considerable part of the imputed Secret Doctrine has been presented in the pictorial emblems of Alchemy, so that the imputed Book of Thoth is in no sense a solitary device of this emblematic kind. Now, Alchemy had two branches, as I have explained fully elsewhere, and the pictorial emblems which I have mentioned are common to both divisions. Its material side is represented in the strange symbolism of the Mutus Liber, printed in the great folios of Mangetus. There the process for the performance of the great work of transmutation is depicted in fourteen copper-plate engravings, which exhibit the different stages of the matter in the various chemical vessels. Above these vessels there are mythological, planetary, solar and lunar symbols, as if the powers and virtues which -according to Hermetic teaching--preside over the development and perfection of the metallic kingdom were intervening actively to assist the two operators who are toiling below. The operators--curiously enough--are male and female. The spiritual side of Alchemy is set forth in the much stranger emblems of the Book of Lambspring, and of this I have already given a preliminary interpretation, to which the reader may be referred.[1] The tract contains the mystery of what is called the mystical or arch-natural elixir, being the marriage of the soul and the spirit in the body of the adept philosopher and the transmutation of the body as the physical result of this marriage. I have never met with more curious intimations than in this one little work. It may be mentioned as a point of fact that both tracts are very much later in time than the latest date that could be assigned to the general distribution of Tarot cards in Europe by the most drastic form of criticism.

[1. See the Occult Review, vol. viii, 1908].

They belong respectively to the end of the seventeenth and sixteenth centuries. As I am not drawing here on the font of imagination to refresh that of fact and experience, I do not suggest that the Tarot set the example of expressing Secret Doctrine in pictures and that it was followed by Hermetic writers; but it is noticeable that it is perhaps the earliest example of this art. It is also the most catholic, because it is not, by attribution or otherwise, a derivative of any one school or literature of occultism; it is not of Alchemy or Kabalism or Astrology or Ceremonial Magic; but, as I have said, it is the presentation of universal ideas by means of universal types, and it is in the combination of these types--if anywhere--that it presents Secret Doctrine.

That combination may, ex hypothesi, reside in the numbered sequence of its series or in their fortuitous assemblage by shuffling, cutting and dealing, as in ordinary games of chance played with cards. Two writers have adopted the first view without prejudice to the second, and I shall do well, perhaps, to dispose at once of what they have said. Mr. MacGregor Mathers, who once published a pamphlet on the Tarot, which was in the main devoted to fortune-telling, suggested that the twenty-two Trumps Major could be constructed, following their numerical order, into what he called a "connected sentence." It was, in fact, the heads of a moral thesis on the human will, its enlightenment by science, represented by the Magician, its manifestation by action--a significance attributed to the High Priestess-its realization (the Empress) in deeds of mercy and beneficence, which qualities were allocated to the Emperor. He spoke also in the familiar conventional manner of prudence, fortitude, sacrifice, hope and ultimate happiness. But if this were the message of the cards, it is certain that there would be no excuse for publishing them at this day or taking the pains to elucidate them at some length. In his Tarot of the Bohemians, a work written with zeal and enthusiasm, sparing no pains of thought or research within its particular lines-but unfortunately without real insight--Dr. Papus has given a singularly elaborate scheme of the Trumps Major. It depends, like that of Mr. Mathers, from their numerical sequence, but exhibits their interrelation in the Divine World, the Macrocosm and Microcosm. In this manner we get, as it were, a spiritual history of man, or of the soul coming out from the Eternal, passing into the darkness of the material body, and returning to the height. I think that the author is here within a measurable distance of the right track, and his views are to this extent informing, but his method--in some respects-confuses the issues and the modes and planes of being.

The Trumps Major have also been treated in the alternative method which I have mentioned, and Grand Orient, in his Manual of Cartomancy, under the guise of a mode of transcendental divination, has really offered the result of certain illustrative readings of the cards when arranged as the result of a fortuitous combination by means of shuffling and dealing. The use of divinatory methods, with whatsoever intention and for whatever purpose, carries with it two suggestions. It may be thought that the deeper meanings are imputed rather than real, but this is disposed of by the fact of certain cards, like the Magician, the High Priestess, the Wheel of Fortune, the Hanged Man, the Tower or Maison Dieu, and several others, which do not correspond to Conditions of Life, Arts, Sciences, Virtues, or the other subjects contained in the denaries of the Baldini emblematic figures. They are also proof positive that obvious and natural moralities cannot explain the sequence. Such cards testify concerning themselves after another manner; and although the state in which I have left the Tarot in respect of its historical side is so much the more difficult as it is so much the more open, they indicate the real subject matter with which we are concerned. The methods shew also that the Trumps Major at least have been adapted to fortune-telling rather than belong thereto. The common divinatory meanings which will be given in the third part are largely arbitrary attributions, or the product of secondary and uninstructed intuition; or, at the very most, they belong to the subject on a lower plane, apart from the original intention. If the Tarot were of fortune-telling in the root-matter thereof, we should have to look in very strange places for the motive which devised it--to Witchcraft and the Black Sabbath, rather than any Secret Doctrine.

The two classes of significance which are attached to the Tarot in the superior and inferior worlds, and the fact that no occult or other writer has attempted to assign anything but a divinatory meaning to the Minor Arcana, justify in yet another manner the hypothesis that the two series do not belong to one another. It is possible that their marriage was effected first in the Tarot of Bologna by that Prince of Pisa whom I have mentioned in the first part. It is said that his device obtained for him public recognition and reward from the city of his adoption, which would scarcely have been possible, even in those fantastic days, for the production of a Tarot which only omitted a few of the small cards; but as we are dealing with a question of fact which has to be accounted for somehow, it is conceivable that a sensation might have been created by a combination of the minor and gambling cards with the philosophical set, and by the adaptation of both to a game of chance. Afterwards it would have been further adapted to that other game of chance which is called fortune-telling. It should be understood here that I am not denying the possibility of divination, but I take exception as a mystic to the dedications which bring people into these paths, as if they had any relation to the Mystic Quest.

The Tarot cards which are issued with the small edition of the present work, that is to say, with the Key to the Tarot, have been drawn and coloured by Miss Pamela Colman Smith, and will, I think, be regarded as very striking and beautiful, in their design alike and execution. They are reproduced in the present enlarged edition of the Key as a means of reference to the text. They differ in many important respects from the conventional archaisms of the past and from the wretched products of colportage which now reach us from Italy, and it remains for me to justify their variations so far as the symbolism is concerned. That for once in modern times I present a pack which is the work of an artist does not, I presume, call for apology, even to the people--if any remain among us--who used to be described and to call themselves "very occult." If any one will look at the gorgeous Tarot valet or knave who is emblazoned on one of the page plates of Chatto's Facts and Speculations concerning the History of Playing Cards, he will know that Italy in the old days produced some splendid packs. I could only wish that it had been possible to issue the restored and rectified cards in the same style and size; such a course would have done fuller justice to the designs, but the result would have proved unmanageable for those practical purposes which are connected with cards, and for which allowance must be made, whatever my views thereon. For the variations in the symbolism by which the designs have been affected, I alone am responsible. In respect of the Major Arcana, they are sure to occasion criticism among students, actual and imputed. I wish therefore to say, within the reserves of courtesy and la haute convenance belonging to the fellowship of research, that I care nothing utterly for any view that may find expression. There is a Secret Tradition concerning the Tarot, as well as a Secret Doctrine contained therein; I have followed some part of it without exceeding the limits which are drawn about matters of this kind and belong to the laws of honour. This tradition has two parts, and as one of them has passed into writing it seems to follow that it may be betrayed at any moment, which will not signify, because the second, as I have intimated, has not so passed at present and is held by very few indeed. The purveyors of spurious copy and the traffickers in stolen goods may take note of this point, if they please. I ask, moreover, to be distinguished from two or three writers in recent times who have thought fit to hint that they could say a good deal more if they liked, for we do not speak the same language; but also from any one who, now or hereafter, may say that she or he will tell all, because they have only the accidents and not the essentials necessary for such disclosure. If I have followed on my part the counsel of Robert Burns, by keeping something to myself which I "scarcely tell to any," I have still said as much as I can; it is the truth after its own manner, and as much as may be expected or required in those outer circles where the qualifications of special research cannot be expected.

In regard to the Minor Arcana, they are the first in modern but not in all times to be accompanied by pictures, in addition to what is called the "pips"--that is to say, the devices belonging to the numbers of the various suits. These pictures respond to the divinatory meanings, which have been drawn from many sources. To sum up, therefore, the present division of this key is devoted to the Trumps Major; it elucidates their symbols in respect of the higher intention and with reference to the designs in the pack. The third division will give the divinatory significance in respect of the seventy-eight Tarot cards, and with particular reference to the designs of the Minor Arcana. It will give, in fine, some modes of use for those who require them, and in the sense of the reason which I have already explained in the preface. That which hereinafter follows should be taken, for purposes of comparison, in connexion with the general description of the old Tarot Trumps in the first part. There it will be seen that the zero card of the Fool is allocated, as it always is, to the place which makes it equivalent to the number twenty-one. The arrangement is ridiculous on the surface, which does not much signify, but it is also wrong on the symbolism, nor does this fare better when it is made to replace the twenty-second point of the sequence. Etteilla recognized the difficulties of both attributions, but he only made bad worse by allocating the Fool to the place which is usually occupied by the Ace of Pentacles as the last of the whole Tarot series. This rearrangement has been followed by Papus recently in Le Tarot Divinatoire, where the confusion is of no consequence, as the findings of fortune telling depend upon fortuitous positions and not upon essential place in the general sequence of cards. I have seen yet another allocation of the zero symbol, which no doubt obtains in certain cases, but it fails on the highest planes and for our present requirements it would be idle to carry the examination further.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

 section 2

 

THE TRUMPS MAJOR AND THEIR INNER SYMBOLISM

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

I

 

The Magician

Click to enlarge

A youthful figure in the robe of a magician, having the countenance of divine Apollo, with smile of confidence and shining eyes. Above his head is the mysterious sign of the Holy Spirit, the sign of life, like an endless cord, forming the figure 8 in a horizontal position . About his waist is a serpent-cincture, the serpent appearing to devour its own tail. This is familiar to most as a conventional symbol of eternity, but here it indicates more especially the eternity of attainment in the spirit. In the Magician's right hand is a wand raised towards heaven, while the left hand is pointing to the earth. This dual sign is known in very high grades of the Instituted Mysteries; it shews the descent of grace, virtue and light, drawn from things above and derived to things below. The suggestion throughout is therefore the possession and communication of the Powers and Gifts of the Spirit. On the table in front of the Magician are the symbols of the four Tarot suits, signifying the elements of natural life, which lie like counters before the adept, and he adapts them as he wills. Beneath are roses and lilies, the flos campi and lilium convallium, changed into garden flowers, to shew the culture of aspiration. This card signifies the divine motive in man, reflecting God, the will in the liberation of its union with that which is above. It is also the unity of individual being on all planes, and in a very high sense it is thought, in the fixation thereof. With further reference to what I have called the sign of life and its connexion with the number 8, it may be remembered that Christian Gnosticism speaks of rebirth in Christ as a change "unto the Ogdoad." The mystic number is termed Jerusalem above, the Land flowing with Milk and Honey, the Holy Spirit and the Land of the Lord. According to Martinism, 8 is the number of Christ.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

II

 

The High Priestess

Click to enlarge

She has the lunar crescent at her feet, a horned diadem on her head, with a globe in the middle place, and a large solar cross on her breast. The scroll in her hands is inscribed with the word Tora, signifying the Greater Law, the Secret Law and the second sense of the Word. It is partly covered by her mantle, to shew that some things are implied and some spoken. She is seated between the white and black pillars--J. and B.--of the mystic Temple, and the veil of the Temple is behind her: it is embroidered with palms and pomegranates. The vestments are flowing and gauzy, and the mantle suggests light--a shimmering radiance. She has been called occult Science on the threshold of the Sanctuary of Isis, but she is really the Secret Church, the House which is of God and man. She represents also the Second Marriage of the Prince who is no longer of this world; she is the spiritual Bride and Mother, the daughter of the stars and the Higher Garden of Eden. She is, in fine, the Queen of the borrowed light, but this is the light of all. She is the Moon nourished by the milk of the Supernal Mother.

In a manner, she is also the Supernal Mother herself--that is to say, she is the bright reflection. It is in this sense of reflection that her truest and highest name in bolism is Shekinah--the co-habiting glory. According to Kabalism, there is a Shekinah both above and below. In the superior world it is called Binah, the Supernal Understanding which reflects to the emanations that are beneath. In the lower world it is MaIkuth--that world being, for this purpose, understood as a blessed Kingdom that with which it is made blessed being the Indwelling Glory. Mystically speaking, the Shekinah is the Spiritual Bride of the just man, and when he reads the Law she gives the Divine meaning. There are some respects in which this card is the highest and holiest of the Greater Arcana.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

III

 

The Empress

Click to enlarge

A stately figure, seated, having rich vestments and royal aspect, as of a daughter of heaven and earth. Her diadem is of twelve stars, gathered in a cluster. The symbol of Venus is on the shield which rests near her. A field of corn is ripening in front of her, and beyond there is a fall of water. The sceptre which she bears is surmounted by the globe of this world. She is the inferior Garden of Eden, the Earthly Paradise, all that is symbolized by the visible house of man. She is not Regina coeli, but she is still refugium peccatorum, the fruitful mother of thousands. There are also certain aspects in which she has been correctly described as desire and the wings thereof, as the woman clothed with the sun, as Gloria Mundi and the veil of the Sanctum Sanctorum; but she is not, I may add, the soul that has attained wings, unless all the symbolism is counted up another and unusual way. She is above all things universal fecundity and the outer sense of the Word. This is obvious, because there is no direct message which has been given to man like that which is borne by woman; but she does not herself carry its interpretation.

In another order of ideas, the card of the Empress signifies the door or gate by which an entrance is obtained into this life, as into the Garden of Venus; and then the way which leads out therefrom, into that which is beyond, is the secret known to the High Priestess: it is communicated by her to the elect. Most old attributions of this card are completely wrong on the symbolism--as, for example, its identification with the Word, Divine Nature, the Triad, and so forth.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

IV

 

The Emperor

Click to enlarge

He has a form of the Crux ansata for his sceptre and a globe in his left hand. He is a crowned monarch--commanding, stately, seated on a throne, the arms of which axe fronted by rams' heads. He is executive and realization, the power of this world, here clothed with the highest of its natural attributes. He is occasionally represented as seated on a cubic stone, which, however, confuses some of the issues. He is the virile power, to which the Empress responds, and in this sense is he who seeks to remove the Veil of Isis; yet she remains virgo intacta.

It should be understood that this card and that of the Empress do not precisely represent the condition of married life, though this state is implied. On the surface, as I have indicated, they stand for mundane royalty, uplifted on the seats of the mighty; but above this there is the suggestion of another presence. They signify also--and the male figure especially--the higher kingship, occupying the intellectual throne. Hereof is the lordship of thought rather than of the animal world. Both personalities, after their own manner, are "full of strange experience," but theirs is not consciously the wisdom which draws from a higher world. The Emperor has been described as (a) will in its embodied form, but this is only one of its applications, and (b) as an expression of virtualities contained in the Absolute Being--but this is fantasy.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

V

 

The Hierophant

Click to enlarge

He wears the triple crown and is seated between two pillars, but they are not those of the Temple which is guarded by the High Priestess. In his left hand he holds a sceptre terminating in the triple cross, and with his right hand he gives the well-known ecclesiastical sign which is called that of esotericism, distinguishing between the manifest and concealed part of doctrine. It is noticeable in this connexion that the High Priestess makes no sign. At his feet are the crossed keys, and two priestly ministers in albs kneel before him. He has been usually called the Pope, which is a particular application of the more general office that he symbolizes. He is the ruling power of external religion, as the High Priestess is the prevailing genius of the esoteric, withdrawn power. The proper meanings of this card have suffered woeful admixture from nearly all hands. Grand Orient says truly that the Hierophant is the power of the keys, exoteric orthodox doctrine, and the outer side of the life which leads to the doctrine; but he is certainly not the prince of occult doctrine, as another commentator has suggested.

He is rather the summa totius theologiae, when it has passed into the utmost rigidity of expression; but he symbolizes also all things that are righteous and sacred on the manifest side. As such, he is the channel of grace belonging to the world of institution as distinct from that of Nature, and he is the leader of salvation for the human race at large. He is the order and the head of the recognized hierarchy, which is the reflection of another and greater hierarchic order; but it may so happen that the pontiff forgets the significance of this his symbolic state and acts as if he contained within his proper measures all that his sign signifies or his symbol seeks to shew forth. He is not, as it has been thought, philosophy-except on the theological side; he is not inspiration; and he is not religion, although he is a mode of its expression.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

VI

 

The Lovers

Click to enlarge

The sun shines in the zenith, and beneath is a great winged figure with arms extended, pouring down influences. In the foreground are two human figures, male and female, unveiled before each other, as if Adam and Eve when they first occupied the paradise of the earthly body. Behind the man is the Tree of Life, bearing twelve fruits, and the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil is behind the woman; the serpent is twining round it. The figures suggest youth, virginity, innocence and love before it is contaminated by gross material desire. This is in all simplicity the card of human love, here exhibited as part of the way, the truth and the life. It replaces, by recourse to first principles, the old card of marriage, which I have described previously, and the later follies which depicted man between vice and virtue. In a very high sense, the card is a mystery of the Covenant and Sabbath.

The suggestion in respect of the woman is that she signifies that attraction towards the sensitive life which carries within it the idea of the Fall of Man, but she is rather the working of a Secret Law of Providence than a willing and conscious temptress. It is through her imputed lapse that man shall arise ultimately, and only by her can he complete himself. The card is therefore in its way another intimation concerning the great mystery of womanhood. The old meanings fall to pieces of necessity with the old pictures, but even as interpretations of the latter, some of them were of the order of commonplace and others were false in symbolism.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

VII

 

The Chariot

Click to enlarge

An erect and princely figure carrying a drawn sword and corresponding, broadly speaking, to the traditional description which I have given in the first part. On the shoulders of the victorious hero are supposed to be the Urim and Thummim. He has led captivity captive; he is conquest on all planes--in the mind, in science, in progress, in certain trials of initiation. He has thus replied to the sphinx, and it is on this account that I have accepted the variation of Eliphas Levi; two sphinxes thus draw his chariot. He is above all things triumph in the mind.

It is to be understood for this reason (a) that the question of the sphinx is concerned with a Mystery of Nature and not of the world of Grace, to which the charioteer could offer no answer; (b) that the planes of his conquest are manifest or external and not within himself; (c) that the liberation which he effects may leave himself in the bondage of the logical understanding; (d) that the tests of initiation through which he has passed in triumph are to be understood physically or rationally; and (e) that if he came to the pillars of that Temple between which the High Priestess is seated, he could not open the scroll called Tora, nor if she questioned him could he answer. He is not hereditary royalty and he is not priesthood.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

VIII

 

Strength, or Fortitude

Click to enlarge

A woman, over whose head there broods the same symbol of life which we have seen in the card of the Magician, is closing the jaws of a lion. The only point in which this design differs from the conventional presentations is that her beneficent fortitude has already subdued the lion, which is being led by a chain of flowers. For reasons which satisfy myself, this card has been interchanged with that of justice, which is usually numbered eight. As the variation carries nothing with it which will signify to the reader, there is no cause for explanation. Fortitude, in one of its most exalted aspects, is connected with the Divine Mystery of Union; the virtue, of course, operates in all planes, and hence draws on all in its symbolism. It connects also with innocentia inviolata, and with the strength which resides in contemplation.

These higher meanings are, however, matters of inference, and I do not suggest that they are transparent on the surface of the card. They are intimated in a concealed manner by the chain of flowers, which signifies, among many other things, the sweet yoke and the light burden of Divine Law, when it has been taken into the heart of hearts. The card has nothing to do with self-confidence in the ordinary sense, though this has been suggested--but it concerns the confidence of those whose strength is God, who have found their refuge in Him. There is one aspect in which the lion signifies the passions, and she who is called Strength is the higher nature in its liberation. It has walked upon the asp and the basilisk and has trodden down the lion and the dragon.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

IX

 

The Hermit

Click to enlarge

The variation from the conventional models in this card is only that the lamp is not enveloped partially in the mantle of its bearer, who blends the idea of the Ancient of Days with the Light of the World It is a star which shines in the lantern. I have said that this is a card of attainment, and to extend this conception the figure is seen holding up his beacon on an eminence. Therefore the Hermit is not, as Court de Gebelin explained, a wise man in search of truth and justice; nor is he, as a later explanation proposes, an especial example of experience. His beacon intimates that "where I am, you also may be."

It is further a card which is understood quite incorrectly when it is connected with the idea of occult isolation, as the protection of personal magnetism against admixture. This is one of the frivolous renderings which we owe to Eliphas Levi. It has been adopted by the French Order of Martinism and some of us have heard a great deal of the Silent and Unknown Philosophy enveloped by his mantle from the knowledge of the profane. In true Martinism, the significance of the term Philosophe inconnu was of another order. It did not refer to the intended concealment of the Instituted Mysteries, much less of their substitutes, but--like the card itself--to the truth that the Divine Mysteries secure their own protection from those who are unprepared.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

X

 

Wheel of Fortune

Click to enlarge

In this symbol I have again followed the reconstruction of Eliphas Levi, who has furnished several variants. It is legitimate--as I have intimated--to use Egyptian symbolism when this serves our purpose, provided that no theory of origin is implied therein. I have, however, presented Typhon in his serpent form. The symbolism is, of course, not exclusively Egyptian, as the four Living Creatures of Ezekiel occupy the angles of the card, and the wheel itself follows other indications of Levi in respect of Ezekiel's vision, as illustrative of the particular Tarot Key. With the French occultist, and in the design itself, the symbolic picture stands for the perpetual motion of a fluidic universe and for the flux of human life. The Sphinx is the equilibrium therein. The transliteration of Taro as Rota is inscribed on the wheel, counterchanged with the letters of the Divine Name--to shew that Providence is imphed through all. But this is the Divine intention within, and the similar intention without is exemplified by the four Living Creatures. Sometimes the sphinx is represented couchant on a pedestal above, which defrauds the symbolism by stultifying the essential idea of stability amidst movement.

Behind the general notion expressed in the symbol there lies the denial of chance and the fatality which is implied therein. It may be added that, from the days of Levi onward, the occult explanations of this card are--even for occultism itself--of a singularly fatuous kind. It has been said to mean principle, fecundity, virile honour, ruling authority, etc. The findings of common fortune-telling are better than this on their own plane.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

XI

 

Justice

Click to enlarge

As this card follows the traditional symbolism and carries above all its obvious meanings, there is little to say regarding it outside the few considerations collected in the first part, to which the reader is referred.

It will be seen, however, that the figure is seated between pillars, like the High Priestess, and on this account it seems desirable to indicate that the moral principle which deals unto every man according to his works--while, of course, it is in strict analogy with higher things;--differs in its essence from the spiritual justice which is involved in the idea of election. The latter belongs to a mysterious order of Providence, in virtue of which it is possible for certain men to conceive the idea of dedication to the highest things. The operation of this is like the breathing of the Spirit where it wills, and we have no canon of criticism or ground of explanation concerning it. It is analogous to the possession of the fairy gifts and the high gifts and the gracious gifts of the poet: we have them or have not, and their presence is as much a mystery as their absence. The law of Justice is not however involved by either alternative. In conclusion, the pillars of Justice open into one world and the pillars of the High Priestess into another.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

XII

 

The Hanged Man

Click to enlarge

The gallows from which he is suspended forms a Tau cross, while the figure--from the position of the legs--forms a fylfot cross. There is a nimbus about the head of the seeming martyr. It should be noted (1) that the tree of sacrifice is living wood, with leaves thereon; (2) that the face expresses deep entrancement, not suffering; (3) that the figure, as a whole, suggests life in suspension, but life and not death. It is a card of profound significance, but all the significance is veiled. One of his editors suggests that Eliphas Levi did not know the meaning, which is unquestionable nor did the editor himself. It has been called falsely a card of martyrdom, a card a of prudence, a card of the Great Work, a card of duty; but we may exhaust all published interpretations and find only vanity. I will say very simply on my own part that it expresses the relation, in one of its aspects, between the Divine and the Universe.

He who can understand that the story of his higher nature is imbedded in this symbolism will receive intimations concerning a great awakening that is possible, and will know that after the sacred Mystery of Death there is a glorious Mystery of Resurrection.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

XIII

 

Death

Click to enlarge

The veil or mask of life is perpetuated in change, transformation and passage from lower to higher, and this is more fitly represented in the rectified Tarot by one of the apocalyptic visions than by the crude notion of the reaping skeleton. Behind it lies the whole world of ascent in the spirit. The mysterious horseman moves slowly, bearing a black banner emblazoned with the Mystic Rose, which signifies life. Between two pillars on the verge of the horizon there shines the sun of immortality. The horseman carries no visible weapon, but king and child and maiden fall before him, while a prelate with clasped hands awaits his end.

There should be no need to point out that the suggestion of death which I have made in connection with the previous card is, of course, to be understood mystically, but this is not the case in the present instance. The natural transit of man to the next stage of his being either is or may be one form of his progress, but the exotic and almost unknown entrance, while still in this life, into the state of mystical death is a change in the form of consciousness and the passage into a state to which ordinary death is neither the path nor gate. The existing occult explanations of the 13th card are, on the whole, better than usual, rebirth, creation, destination, renewal, and the rest.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

XIV

 

Temperance

Click to enlarge

A winged angel, with the sign of the sun upon his forehead and on his breast the square and triangle of the septenary. I speak of him in the masculine sense, but the figure is neither male nor female. It is held to be pouring the essences of life from chalice to chalice. It has one foot upon the earth and one upon waters, thus illustrating the nature of the essences. A direct path goes up to certain heights on the verge of the horizon, and above there is a great light, through which a crown is seen vaguely. Hereof is some part of the Secret of Eternal Life, as it is possible to man in his incarnation. All the conventional emblems are renounced herein.

So also are the conventional meanings, which refer to changes in the seasons, perpetual movement of life and even the combination of ideas. It is, moreover, untrue to say that the figure symbolizes the genius of the sun, though it is the analogy of solar light, realized in the third part of our human triplicity. It is called Temperance fantastically, because, when the rule of it obtains in our consciousness, it tempers, combines and harmonises the psychic and material natures. Under that rule we know in our rational part something of whence we came and whither we are going.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

XV

 

The Devil

Click to enlarge

The design is an accommodation, mean or harmony, between several motives mentioned in the first part. The Horned Goat of Mendes, with wings like those of a bat, is standing on an altar. At the pit of the stomach there is the sign of Mercury. The right hand is upraised and extended, being the reverse of that benediction which is given by the Hierophant in the fifth card. In the left hand there is a great flaming torch, inverted towards the earth. A reversed pentagram is on the forehead. There is a ring in front of the altar, from which two chains are carried to the necks of two figures, male and female. These are analogous with those of the fifth card, as if Adam and Eve after the Fall. Hereof is the chain and fatality of the material life.

The figures are tailed, to signify the animal nature, but there is human intelligence in the faces, and he who is exalted above them is not to be their master for ever. Even now, he is also a bondsman, sustained by the evil that is in him and blind to the liberty of service. With more than his usual derision for the arts which he pretended to respect and interpret as a master therein, Eliphas Levi affirms that the Baphometic figure is occult science and magic. Another commentator says that in the Divine world it signifies predestination, but there is no correspondence in that world with the things which below are of the brute. What it does signify is the Dweller on the Threshold without the Mystical Garden when those are driven forth therefrom who have eaten the forbidden fruit.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

XVI

 

The Tower

Click to enlarge

Occult explanations attached to this card are meagre and mostly disconcerting. It is idle to indicate that it depicts min in all its aspects, because it bears this evidence on the surface. It is said further that it contains the first allusion to a material building, but I do not conceive that the Tower is more or less material than the pillars which we have met with in three previous cases. I see nothing to warrant Papus in supposing that it is literally the fall of Adam, but there is more in favour of his alternative--that it signifies the materialization of the spiritual word. The bibliographer Christian imagines that it is the downfall of the mind, seeking to penetrate the mystery of God. I agree rather with Grand Orient that it is the ruin of the House of We, when evil has prevailed therein, and above all that it is the rending of a House of Doctrine. I understand that the reference is, however, to a House of Falsehood. It illustrates also in the most comprehensive way the old truth that "except the Lord build the house, they labour in vain that build it."

There is a sense in which the catastrophe is a reflection from the previous card, but not on the side of the symbolism which I have tried to indicate therein. It is more correctly a question of analogy; one is concerned with the fall into the material and animal state, while the other signifies destruction on the intellectual side. The Tower has been spoken of as the chastisement of pride and the intellect overwhelmed in the attempt to penetrate the Mystery of God; but in neither case do these explanations account for the two persons who are the living sufferers. The one is the literal word made void and the other its false interpretation. In yet a deeper sense, it may signify also the end of a dispensation, but there is no possibility here for the consideration of this involved question.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

XVII

 

The Star

Click to enlarge

A great, radiant star of eight rays, surrounded by seven lesser stars--also of eight rays. The female figure in the foreground is entirely naked. Her left knee is on the land and her right foot upon the water. She pours Water of Life from two great ewers, irrigating sea and land. Behind her is rising ground and on the right a shrub or tree, whereon a bird alights. The figure expresses eternal youth and beauty. The star is l'etoile flamboyante, which appears in Masonic symbolism, but has been confused therein. That which the figure communicates to the living scene is the substance of the heavens and the elements. It has been said truly that the mottoes of this card are "Waters of Life freely" and "Gifts of the Spirit."

The summary of several tawdry explanations says that it is a card of hope. On other planes it has been certified as immortality and interior light. For the majority of prepared minds, the figure will appear as the type of Truth unveiled, glorious in undying beauty, pouring on the waters of the soul some part and measure of her priceless possession. But she is in reality the Great Mother in the Kabalistic Sephira Binah, which is supernal Understanding, who communicates to the Sephiroth that are below in the measure that they can receive her influx.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

XVIII

 

The Moon

Click to enlarge

The distinction between this card and some of the conventional types is that the moon is increasing on what is called the side of mercy, to the right of the observer. It has sixteen chief and sixteen secondary rays. The card represents life of the imagination apart from life of the spirit. The path between the towers is the issue into the unknown. The dog and wolf are the fears of the natural mind in the presence of that place of exit, when there is only reflected light to guide it.

The last reference is a key to another form of symbolism. The intellectual light is a reflection and beyond it is the unknown mystery which it cannot shew forth. It illuminates our animal nature, types of which are represented below--the dog, the wolf and that which comes up out of the deeps, the nameless and hideous tendency which is lower than the savage beast. It strives to attain manifestation, symbolized by crawling from the abyss of water to the land, but as a rule it sinks back whence it came. The face of the mind directs a calm gaze upon the unrest below; the dew of thought falls; the message is: Peace, be still; and it may be that there shall come a calm upon the animal nature, while the abyss beneath shall cease from giving up a form.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

XIX

 

The Sun

Click to enlarge

The naked child mounted on a white horse and displaying a red standard has been mentioned already as the better symbolism connected with this card. It is the destiny of the Supernatural East and the great and holy light which goes before the endless procession of humanity, coming out from the walled garden of the sensitive life and passing on the journey home. The card signifies, therefore, the transit from the manifest light of this world, represented by the glorious sun of earth, to the light of the world to come, which goes before aspiration and is typified by the heart of a child.

But the last allusion is again the key to a different form or aspect of the symbolism. The sun is that of consciousness in the spirit - the direct as the antithesis of the reflected light. The characteristic type of humanity has become a little child therein--a child in the sense of simplicity and innocence in the sense of wisdom. In that simplicity, he bears the seal of Nature and of Art; in that innocence, he signifies the restored world. When the self-knowing spirit has dawned in the consciousness above the natural mind, that mind in its renewal leads forth the animal nature in a state of perfect conformity.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

XX

 

The Last Judgment

Click to enlarge

I have said that this symbol is essentially invariable in all Tarot sets, or at least the variations do not alter its character. The great angel is here encompassed by clouds, but he blows his bannered trumpet, and the cross as usual is displayed on the banner. The dead are rising from their tombs--a woman on the right, a man on the left hand, and between them their child, whose back is turned. But in this card there are more than three who are restored, and it has been thought worth while to make this variation as illustrating the insufficiency of current explanations. It should be noted that all the figures are as one in the wonder, adoration and ecstacy expressed by their attitudes. It is the card which registers the accomplishment of the great work of transformation in answer to the summons of the Supernal--which summons is heard and answered from within.

Herein is the intimation of a significance which cannot well be carried further in the present place. What is that within us which does sound a trumpet and all that is lower in our nature rises in response--almost in a moment, almost in the twinkling of an eye? Let the card continue to depict, for those who can see no further, the Last judgment and the resurrection in the natural body; but let those who have inward eyes look and discover therewith. They will understand that it has been called truly in the past a card of eternal life, and for this reason it may be compared with that which passes under the name of Temperance.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

0

 

ZERO

 

The Fool

Click to enlarge

With light step, as if earth and its trammels had little power to restrain him, a young man in gorgeous vestments pauses at the brink of a precipice among the great heights of the world; he surveys the blue distance before him-its expanse of sky rather than the prospect below. His act of eager walking is still indicated, though he is stationary at the given moment; his dog is still bounding. The edge which opens on the depth has no terror; it is as if angels were waiting to uphold him, if it came about that he leaped from the height. His countenance is full of intelligence and expectant dream. He has a rose in one hand and in the other a costly wand, from which depends over his right shoulder a wallet curiously embroidered. He is a prince of the other world on his travels through this one-all amidst the morning glory, in the keen air. The sun, which shines behind him, knows whence he came, whither he is going, and how he will return by another path after many days. He is the spirit in search of experience. Many symbols of the Instituted Mysteries are summarized in this card, which reverses, under high warrants, all the confusions that have preceded it.

In his Manual of Cartomancy, Grand Orient has a curious suggestion of the office of Mystic Fool, as apart of his process in higher divination; but it might call for more than ordinary gifts to put it into operation. We shall see how the card fares according to the common arts of fortune-telling, and it will be an example, to those who can discern, of the fact, otherwise so evident, that the Trumps Major had no place originally in the arts of psychic gambling, when cards are used as the counters and pretexts. Of the circumstances under which this art arose we know, however, very little. The conventional explanations say that the Fool signifies the flesh, the sensitive life, and by a peculiar satire its subsidiary name was at one time the alchemist, as depicting folly at the most insensate stage.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

XXI

 

The World

Click to enlarge

As this final message of the Major Trumps is unchanged--and indeed unchangeable--in respect of its design, it has been partly described already regarding its deeper sense. It represents also the perfection and end of the Cosmos, the secret which is within it, the rapture of the universe when it understands itself in God. It is further the state of the soul in the consciousness of Divine Vision, reflected from the self-knowing spirit. But these meanings are without prejudice to that which I have said concerning it on the material side.

It has more than one message on the macrocosmic side and is, for example, the state of the restored world when the law of manifestation shall have been carried to the highest degree of natural perfection. But it is perhaps more especially a story of the past, referring to that day when all was declared to be good, when the morning stars sang together and all the Sons of God shouted for joy. One of the worst explanations concerning it is that the figure symbolizes the Magus when he has reached the highest degree of initiation; another account says that it represents the absolute, which is ridiculous. The figure has been said to stand for Truth, which is, however, more properly allocated to the seventeenth card. Lastly, it has been called the Crown of the Magi.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

 section 3

 

Conclusion as to the Greater Keys

There has been no attempt in the previous tabulation to present the symbolism in what is called the three worlds--that of Divinity, of the Macrocosm and the Microcosm. A large volume would be required for developments of this kind. I have taken the cards on the high plane of their more direct significance to man, who--in material life--is on the quest of eternal things. The compiler of the Manual of Cartomancy has treated them under three headings: the World of Human Prudence, which does not differ from divination on its more serious side; the World of Conformity, being the life of religious devotion; and the World of Attainment, which is that of "the soul's progress towards the term of its research." He gives also a triple process of consultation, according to these divisions, to which the reader is referred. I have no such process to offer, as I think that more may be gained by individual reflection on each of the Trumps Major. I have also not adopted the prevailing attribution of the cards to the Hebrew alphabet--firstly, because it would serve no purpose in an elementary handbook; secondly, because nearly every attribution is wrong. Finally, I have not attempted to rectify the position of the cards in their relation to one another; the Zero therefore appears after No. 20, but I have taken care not to number the World or Universe otherwise than as 21. Wherever it ought to be put, the Zero is an unnumbered card.

In conclusion as to this part, I will give these further indications regarding the Fool, which is the most speaking of all the symbols. He signifies the journey outward, the state of the first emanation, the graces and passivity of the spirit. His wallet is inscribed with dim signs, to shew that many sub-conscious memories are stored up in the soul.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

PART III

 

The Outer Method of the Oracles

 

 section 1

 

Distinction between the Greater and Lesser Arcana

IN respect of their usual presentation, the bridge between the Greater and Lesser Arcana is supplied by the court cards--King, Queen, Knight and Squire or Page; but their utter distinction from the Trumps Major is shewn by their conventional character. Let the reader compare them with symbols like the Fool, the High Priestess, the Hierophant, or--almost without exception--with any in the previous sequence, and he will discern my meaning. There is no especial idea connected on the surface with the ordinary court cards; they are a bridge of conventions, which form a transition to the simple pretexts of the counters and denaries of the numbers following. We seem to have passed away utterly from the region of higher meanings illustrated by living pictures. There in was a period, however, when the numbered cards were also pictures, but such devices were sporadic inventions of particular artists and were either conventional designs of the typical or allegorical kind, distinct from what is understood by symbolism, or they were illustrations--shall we say?--of manners, customs and periods. They were, in a word, adornments, and as such they did nothing to raise the significance of the Lesser Arcana to the plane of the Trumps Major; moreover, such variations are exceedingly few. This notwithstanding, there are vague rumours concerning a higher meaning in the minor cards, but nothing has so far transpired, even within the sphere of prudence which belongs to the most occult circles; these, it is true, have certain variants in respect of divinatory values, but I have not heard that in practice they offer better results. Efforts like those of Papus in The Tarot ol the Bohemians are strenuous and deserving after their own kind; be, in particular, recognizes the elements of the Divine Immanence in the Trumps Major, and he seeks to follow them through the long series of the lesser cards, as if these represented filtrations of the World of Grace through the World of Fortune; but he only produces -an arbitrary scheme of division which he can carry no further, and he has recourse, of necessity, in the end to a common scheme of divination as the substitute for a title to existence on the part of the Lesser Arcana. Now, I am practically in the same position; but I shall make no attempt here to save the situation by drawing on the mystical properties of numbers, as he and others have attempted, I shall recognize at once that the Trumps Major belong to the divine dealings of philosophy, but all that follows to fortune-telling, since it has never yet been translated into another language; the course thus adopted will render to divination, and at need even to gambling, the things that belong to this particular world of skill, and it will set apart for their proper business those matters that are of another order. In this free introduction to the subject in hand, it is only necessary to add that the difference between the fifty-six Lesser Arcana and ordinary playing-cards is not only essentially slight, because the substitution of Cups for Hearts, and so forth, constitutes an accidental variation, but because the presence of a Knight in each of the four suits was characteristic at one time of many ordinary packs, when this personage usually replaced the Queen. In the rectified Tarot which illustrates the present handbook, all numbered cards of the Lesser Arcana--the Aces only excepted--are furnished with figures or pictures to illustrate-but without exhausting--the divinatory meanings attached thereto.

Some who are gifted with reflective and discerning faculties in more than the ordinary sense--I am not speaking of clairvoyance may observe that in many of the Lesser Arcana there are vague intimations conveyed by the designs which seem to exceed the stated divinatory values. It is desirable to avoid misconception by specifying definitely that, except in rare instances--and then only by accident--the variations are not to be regarded as suggestions of higher and extradivinatory symbolism. I have said that these Lesser Arcana have not been translated into a language which transcends that of fortune telling. I should not indeed be disposed to regard them as belonging in their existing forms to another realm than this; but the field of divinatory possibilities is inexhaustible, by the hypothesis of the art, and the combined systems of cartomancy have indicated only the bare heads of significance attaching to the emblems in use. When the pictures in the present case go beyond the conventional meanings they should be taken as hints of possible developments along the same lines; and this is one of the reasons why the pictorial devices here attached to the four denaries will prove a great help to intuition. The mere numerical powers and bare words of the meanings are insufficient by themselves; but the pictures are like doors which open into unexpected chambers, or like a turn in the open road with a wide prospect beyond.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

 section 2. THE LESSER ARCANA

 

Otherwise, the Four Suits of Tarot Cards,

will now be described according to their respective classes by the pictures to each belonging, and a harmony of their meanings will be provided from all sources.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

THE SUIT OF WANDS

 

King

Click to enlarge

The physical and emotional nature to which this card is attributed is dark, ardent, lithe, animated, impassioned, noble. The King uplifts a flowering wand, and wears, like his three correspondences in the remaining suits, what is called a cap of maintenance beneath his crown. He connects with the symbol of the lion, which is emblazoned on the back of his throne. Divinatory Meanings: Dark man, friendly, countryman, generally married, honest and conscientious. The card always signifies honesty, and may mean news concerning an unexpected heritage to fall in before very long. Reversed: Good, but severe; austere, yet tolerant.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

WANDS

 

Queen

Click to enlarge

The Wands throughout this suit are always in leaf, as it is a suit of life and animation. Emotionally and otherwise, the Queen's personality corresponds to that of the King, but is more magnetic. Divinatory Meanings: A dark woman, countrywoman, friendly, chaste, loving, honourable. If the card beside her signifies a man, she is well disposed towards him; if a woman, she is interested in the Querent. Also, love of money, or a certain success in business. Reversed: Good, economical, obliging, serviceable. Signifies also--but in certain positions and in the neighbourhood of other cards tending in such directions--opposition, jealousy, even deceit and infidelity.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

WANDS

 

Knight

Click to enlarge

He is shewn as if upon a journey, armed with a short wand, and although mailed is not on a warlike errand. He is passing mounds or pyramids. The motion of the horse is a key to the character of its rider, and suggests the precipitate mood, or things connected therewith. Divinatory Meanings: Departure, absence, flight, emigration. A dark young man, friendly. Change of residence. Reversed: Rupture, division, interruption, discord.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

WANDS

 

Page

Click to enlarge

In a scene similar to the former, a young man stands in the act of proclamation. He is unknown but faithful, and his tidings are strange. Divinatory Meanings: Dark young man, faithful, a lover, an envoy, a postman. Beside a man, he will bear favourable testimony concerning him. A dangerous rival, if followed by the Page of Cups. Has the chief qualities of his suit. He may signify family intelligence. Reversed: Anecdotes, announcements, evil news. Also indecision and the instability which accompanies it.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

WANDS

 

Ten

Click to enlarge

A man oppressed by the weight of the ten staves which he is carrying. Divinatory Meanings: A card of many significances, and some of the readings cannot be harmonized. I set aside that which connects it with honour and good faith. The chief meaning is oppression simply, but it is also fortune, gain, any kind of success, and then it is the oppression of these things. It is also a card of false-seeming, disguise, perfidy. The place which the figure is approaching may suffer from the rods that he carries. Success is stultified if the Nine of Swords follows, and if it is a question of a lawsuit, there will be certain loss. Reversed: Contrarieties, difficulties, intrigues, and their analogies.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

WANDS

 

Nine

Click to enlarge

The figure leans upon his staff and has an expectant look, as if awaiting an enemy. Behind are eight other staves--erect, in orderly disposition, like a palisade. Divinatory Meanings: The card signifies strength in opposition. If attacked, the person will meet an onslaught boldly; and his build shews, that he may prove a formidable antagonist. With this main significance there are all its possible adjuncts--delay, suspension, adjournment. Reversed: Obstacles, adversity, calamity.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

WANDS

 

Eight

Click to enlarge

The card represents motion through the immovable-a flight of wands through an open country; but they draw to the term of their course. That which they signify is at hand; it may be even on the threshold. Divinatory Meanings: Activity in undertakings, the path of such activity, swiftness, as that of an express messenger; great haste, great hope, speed towards an end which promises assured felicity; generally, that which is on the move; also the arrows of love. Reversed: Arrows of jealousy, internal dispute, stingings of conscience, quarrels; and domestic disputes for persons who are married.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

WANDS

 

Seven

Click to enlarge

A young man on a craggy eminence brandishing a staff; six other staves are raised towards him from below. Divinatory Meanings: It is a card of valour, for, on the surface, six are attacking one, who has, however, the vantage position. On the intellectual plane, it signifies discussion, wordy strife; in business--negotiations, war of trade, barter, competition. It is further a card of success, for the combatant is on the top and his enemies may be unable to reach him. Reversed: Perplexity, embarrassments, anxiety. It is also a caution against indecision.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

WANDS

 

Six

Click to enlarge

A laurelled horseman bears one staff adorned with a laurel crown; footmen with staves are at his side. Divinatory Meanings: The card has been so designed that it can cover several significations; on the surface, it is a victor triumphing, but it is also great news, such as might be carried in state by the King's courier; it is expectation crowned with its own desire, the crown of hope, and so forth. Reversed: Apprehension, fear, as of a victorious enemy at the gate; treachery, disloyalty, as of gates being opened to the enemy; also indefinite delay.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

WANDS

 

Five

Click to enlarge

A posse of youths, who are brandishing staves, as if in sport or strife. It is mimic warfare, and hereto correspond the Divinatory Meanings: Imitation, as, for example, sham fight, but also the strenuous competition and struggle of the search after riches and fortune. In this sense it connects with the battle of life. Hence some attributions say that it is a card of gold, gain, opulence. Reversed: Litigation, disputes, trickery, contradiction.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

WANDS

 

Four

Click to enlarge

From the four great staves planted in the foreground there is a great garland suspended; two female figures uplift nosegays; at their side is a bridge over a moat, leading to an old manorial house. Divinatory Meanings: They are for once almost on the surface--country life, haven of refuge, a species of domestic harvest-home, repose, concord, harmony, prosperity, peace, and the perfected work of these. Reversed: The meaning remains unaltered; it is prosperity, increase, felicity, beauty, embellishment.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

WANDS

 

Three

Click to enlarge

A calm, stately personage, with his back turned, looking from a cliff's edge at ships passing over the sea. Three staves are planted in the ground, and he leans slightly on one of them. Divinatory Meanings: He symbolizes established strength, enterprise, effort, trade, commerce, discovery; those are his ships, bearing his merchandise, which are sailing over the sea. The card also signifies able co-operation in business, as if the successful merchant prince were looking from his side towards yours with a view to help you. Reversed: The end of troubles, suspension or cessation of adversity, toil and disappointment.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

WANDS

 

Two

Click to enlarge

A tall man looks from a battlemented roof over sea and shore; he holds a globe in his right hand, while a staff in his left rests on the battlement; another is fixed in a ring. The Rose and Cross and Lily should be noticed on the left side. Divinatory Meanings: Between the alternative readings there is no marriage possible; on the one hand, riches, fortune, magnificence; on the other, physical suffering, disease, chagrin, sadness, mortification. The design gives one suggestion; here is a lord overlooking his dominion and alternately contemplating a globe; it looks like the malady, the mortification, the sadness of Alexander amidst the grandeur of this world's wealth. Reversed: Surprise, wonder, enchantment, emotion, trouble, fear.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

WANDS

 

Ace

Click to enlarge

A hand issuing from a cloud grasps a stout wand or club. Divinatory Meanings: Creation, invention, enterprise, the powers which result in these; principle, beginning, source; birth, family, origin, and in a sense the virility which is behind them; the starting point of enterprises; according to another account, money, fortune, inheritance. Reversed: Fall, decadence, ruin, perdition, to perish also a certain clouded joy.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

THE SUIT OF CUPS

 

King

Click to enlarge

He holds a short sceptre in his left hand and a great cup in his right; his throne is set upon the sea; on one side a ship is riding and on the other a dolphin is leaping. The implicit is that the Sign of the Cup naturally refers to water, which appears in all the court cards. Divinatory Meanings: Fair man, man of business, law, or divinity; responsible, disposed to oblige the Querent; also equity, art and science, including those who profess science, law and art; creative intelligence. Reversed: Dishonest, double-dealing man; roguery, exaction, injustice, vice, scandal, pillage, considerable loss.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

CUPS

 

Queen

Click to enlarge

Beautiful, fair, dreamy--as one who sees visions in a cup. This is, however, only one of her aspects; she sees, but she also acts, and her activity feeds her dream. Divinatory Meanings: Good, fair woman; honest, devoted woman, who will do service to the Querent; loving intelligence, and hence the gift of vision; success, happiness, pleasure; also wisdom, virtue; a perfect spouse and a good mother. Reversed: The accounts vary; good woman; otherwise, distinguished woman but one not to be trusted; perverse woman; vice, dishonour, depravity.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

CUPS

 

Knight

Click to enlarge

Graceful, but not warlike; riding quietly, wearing a winged helmet, referring to those higher graces of the imagination which sometimes characterize this card. He too is a dreamer, but the images of the side of sense haunt him in his vision. Divinatory Meanings: Arrival, approach--sometimes that of a messenger; advances, proposition, demeanour, invitation, incitement. Reversed: Trickery, artifice, subtlety, swindling, duplicity, fraud.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

CUPS

 

Page

Click to enlarge

A fair, pleasing, somewhat effeminate page, of studious and intent aspect, contemplates a fish rising from a cup to look at him. It is the pictures of the mind taking form. Divinatory Meanings: Fair young man, one impelled to render service and with whom the Querent will be connected; a studious youth; news, message; application, reflection, meditation; also these things directed to business. Reversed: Taste, inclination, attachment, seduction, deception, artifice.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

CUPS

 

Ten

Click to enlarge

Appearance of Cups in a rainbow; it is contemplated in wonder and ecstacy by a man and woman below, evidently husband and wife. His right arm is about her; his left is raised upward; she raises her right arm. The two children dancing near them have not observed the prodigy but are happy after their own manner. There is a home-scene beyond. Divinatory Meanings: Contentment, repose of the entire heart; the perfection of that state; also perfection of human love and friendship; if with several picture-cards, a person who is taking charge of the Querent's interests; also the town, village or country inhabited by the Querent. Reversed: Repose of the false heart, indignation, violence.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

CUPS

 

Nine

Click to enlarge

A goodly personage has feasted to his heart's content, and abundant refreshment of wine is on the arched counter behind him, seeming to indicate that the future is also assured. The picture offers the material side only, but there are other aspects. Divinatory Meanings: Concord, contentment, physical bien-etre; also victory, success, advantage; satisfaction for the Querent or person for whom the consultation is made. Reversed: Truth, loyalty, liberty; but the readings vary and include mistakes, imperfections, etc.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

CUPS

 

Eight

Click to enlarge

A man of dejected aspect is deserting the cups of his felicity, enterprise, undertaking or previous concern. Divinatory Meanings: The card speaks for itself on the surface, but other readings are entirely antithetical--giving joy, mildness, timidity, honour, modesty. In practice, it is usually found that the card shews the decline of a matter, or that a matter which has been thought to be important is really of slight consequence--either for good or evil. Reversed: Great joy, happiness, feasting.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

CUPS

 

Seven

Click to enlarge

Strange chalices of vision, but the images are more especially those of the fantastic spirit. Divinatory Meanings: Fairy favours, images of reflection, sentiment, imagination, things seen in the glass of contemplation; some attainment in these degrees, but nothing permanent or substantial is suggested. Reversed: Desire, will, determination, project.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

CUPS

 

Six

Click to enlarge

Children in an old garden, their cups filled with flowers. Divinatory Meanings: A card of the past and of memories, looking back, as--for example--on childhood; happiness, enjoyment, but coming rather from the past; things that have vanished. Another reading reverses this, giving new relations, new knowledge, new environment, and then the children are disporting in an unfamiliar precinct. Reversed: The future, renewal, that which will come to pass presently.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

CUPS

 

Five

Click to enlarge

A dark, cloaked figure, looking sideways at three prone cups two others stand upright behind him; a bridge is in the background, leading to a small keep or holding. Divanatory Meanings: It is a card of loss, but something remains over; three have been taken, but two are left; it is a card of inheritance, patrimony, transmission, but not corresponding to expectations; with some interpreters it is a card of marriage, but not without bitterness or frustration. Reversed: News, alliances, affinity, consanguinity, ancestry, return, false projects.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

CUPS

 

Four

Click to enlarge

A young man is seated under a tree and contemplates three cups set on the grass before him; an arm issuing from a cloud offers him another cup. His expression notwithstanding is one of discontent with his environment. Divinatory Meanings: Weariness, disgust, aversion, imaginary vexations, as if the wine of this world had caused satiety only; another wine, as if a fairy gift, is now offered the wastrel, but he sees no consolation therein. This is also a card of blended pleasure. Reversed: Novelty, presage, new instruction, new relations.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

CUPS

 

Three

Click to enlarge

Maidens in a garden-ground with cups uplifted, as if pledging one another. Divinatory Meanings: The conclusion of any matter in plenty, perfection and merriment; happy issue, victory, fulfilment, solace, healing, Reversed: Expedition, dispatch, achievement, end. It signifies also the side of excess in physical enjoyment, and the pleasures of the senses.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

CUPS

 

Two

Click to enlarge

A youth and maiden are pledging one another, and above their cups rises the Caduceus of Hermes, between the great wings of which there appears a lion's head. It is a variant of a sign which is found in a few old examples of this card. Some curious emblematical meanings are attached to it, but they do not concern us in this place. Divinatory Meanings: Love, passion, friendship, affinity, union, concord, sympathy, the interrelation of the sexes, and--as a suggestion apart from all offices of divination--that desire which is not in Nature, but by which Nature is sanctified.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

CUPS

 

Ace

Click to enlarge

The waters are beneath, and thereon are water-lilies; the hand issues from the cloud, holding in its palm the cup, from which four streams are pouring; a dove, bearing in its bill a cross-marked Host, descends to place the Wafer in the Cup; the dew of water is falling on all sides. It is an intimation of that which may lie behind the Lesser Arcana. Divinatory Meanings: House of the true heart, joy, content, abode, nourishment, abundance, fertility; Holy Table, felicity hereof. Reversed: House of the false heart, mutation, instability, revolution.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

THE SUIT OF SWORDS

 

King

Click to enlarge

He sits in judgment, holding the unsheathed sign of his suit. He recalls, of course, the conventional Symbol of justice in the Trumps Major, and he may represent this virtue, but he is rather the power of life and death, in virtue of his office. Divinatory Meanings: Whatsoever arises out of the idea of judgment and all its connexions-power, command, authority, militant intelligence, law, offices of the crown, and so forth. Reversed: Cruelty, perversity, barbarity, perfidy, evil intention.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

SWORDS

 

Queen

Click to enlarge

Her right hand raises the weapon vertically and the hilt rests on an arm of her royal chair the left hand is extended, the arm raised her countenance is severe but chastened; it suggests familiarity with sorrow. It does not represent mercy, and, her sword notwithstanding, she is scarcely a symbol of power. Divinatory Meanings: Widowhood, female sadness and embarrassment, absence, sterility, mourning, privation, separation. Reversed: Malice, bigotry, artifice, prudery, bale, deceit.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

SWORDS

 

Knight

Click to enlarge

He is riding in full course, as if scattering his enemies. In the design he is really a prototypical hero of romantic chivalry. He might almost be Galahad, whose sword is swift and sure because he is clean of heart. Divinatory Meanings: Skill, bravery, capacity, defence, address, enmity, wrath, war, destruction, opposition, resistance, ruin. There is therefore a sense in which the card signifies death, but it carries this meaning only in its proximity to other cards of fatality. Reversed: Imprudence, incapacity, extravagance.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

SWORDS

 

Page

Click to enlarge

A lithe, active figure holds a sword upright in both hands, while in the act of swift walking. He is passing over rugged land, and about his way the clouds are collocated wildly. He is alert and lithe, looking this way and that, as if an expected enemy might appear at any moment. Divinatory Meanings: Authority, overseeing, secret service, vigilance, spying, examination, and the qualities thereto belonging. Reversed: More evil side of these qualities; what is unforeseen, unprepared state; sickness is also intimated.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

SWORDS

 

Ten

Click to enlarge

A prostrate figure, pierced by all the swords belonging to the card. Divinatory Meanings: Whatsoever is intimated by the design; also pain, affliction, tears, sadness, desolation. It is not especially a card of violent death. Reversed: Advantage, profit, success, favour, but none of these are permanent; also power and authority.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

SWORDS

 

Nine

Click to enlarge

One seated on her couch in lamentation, with the swords over her. She is as one who knows no sorrow which is like unto hers. It is a card of utter desolation. Divinatory Meanings: Death, failure, miscarriage, delay, deception, disappointment, despair. Reversed: Imprisonment, suspicion, doubt, reasonable fear, shame.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

SWORDS

 

Eight

Click to enlarge

A woman, bound and hoodwinked, with the swords of the card about her. Yet it is rather a card of temporary durance than of irretrievable bondage. Divinatory Meanings: Bad news, violent chagrin, crisis, censure, power in trammels, conflict, calumny; also sickness. Reversed: Disquiet, difficulty, opposition, accident, treachery; what is unforeseen; fatality.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

SWORDS

 

Seven

Click to enlarge

A man in the act of carrying away five swords rapidly; the two others of the card remain stuck in the ground. A camp is close at hand. Divinatory Meanings: Design, attempt, wish, hope, confidence; also quarrelling, a plan that may fail, annoyance. The design is uncertain in its import, because the significations are widely at variance with each other. Reversed: Good advice, counsel, instruction, slander, babbling.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

SWORDS

 

Six

Click to enlarge

A ferryman carrying passengers in his punt to the further shore. The course is smooth, and seeing that the freight is light, it may be noted that the work is not beyond his strength. Divinatory Meanings: journey by water, route, way, envoy, commissionary, expedient. Reversed: Declaration, confession, publicity; one account says that it is a proposal of love.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

SWORDS

 

Five

Click to enlarge

A disdainful man looks after two retreating and dejected figures. Their swords lie upon the ground. He carries two others on his left shoulder, and a third sword is in his right hand, point to earth. He is the master in possession of the field. Divinatory Meanings: Degradation, destruction, revocation, infamy, dishonour, loss, with the variants and analogues of these. Reversed: The same; burial and obsequies.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

SWORDS

 

Four

Click to enlarge

The effigy of a knight in the attitude of prayer, at full length upon his tomb. Divinatory Meanings: Vigilance, retreat, solitude, hermit's repose, exile, tomb and coffin. It is these last that have suggested the design. Reversed: Wise administration, circumspection, economy, avarice, precaution, testament.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

SWORDS

 

Three

Click to enlarge

Three swords piercing a heart; cloud and rain behind. Divinatory Meanings: Removal, absence, delay, division, rupture, dispersion, and all that the design signifies naturally, being too simple and obvious to call for specific enumeration. Reversed: Mental alienation, error, loss, distraction, disorder, confusion.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

SWORDS

 

Two

Click to enlarge

A hoodwinked female figure balances two swords upon her shoulders. Divinatory Meanings: Conformity and the equipoise which it suggests, courage, friendship, concord in a state of arms; another reading gives tenderness, affection, intimacy. The suggestion of harmony and other favourable readings must be considered in a qualified manner, as Swords generally are not symbolical of beneficent forces in human affairs. Reversed: Imposture, falsehood, duplicity, disloyalty.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

SWORDS

 

Ace

Click to enlarge

A hand issues from a cloud, grasping as word, the point of which is encircled by a crown. Divinatory Meanings: Triumph, the excessive degree in everything, conquest, triumph of force. It is a card of great force, in love as well as in hatred. The crown may carry a much higher significance than comes usually within the sphere of fortune-telling. Reversed: The same, but the results are disastrous; another account says--conception, childbirth, augmentation, multiplicity.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

THE SUIT OF PENTACLES

 

King

Click to enlarge

The figure calls for no special description the face is rather dark, suggesting also courage, but somewhat lethargic in tendency. The bull's head should be noted as a recurrent symbol on the throne. The sign of this suit is represented throughout as engraved or blazoned with the pentagram, typifying the correspondence of the four elements in human nature and that by which they may be governed. In many old Tarot packs this suit stood for current coin, money, deniers. I have not invented the substitution of pentacles and I have no special cause to sustain in respect of the alternative. But the consensus of divinatory meanings is on the side of some change, because the cards do not happen to deal especially with questions of money. Divinatory Meanings: Valour, realizing intelligence, business and normal intellectual aptitude, sometimes mathematical gifts and attainments of this kind; success in these paths. Reversed: Vice, weakness, ugliness, perversity, corruption, peril.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

PENTACLES

 

Queen

Click to enlarge

The face suggests that of a dark woman, whose qualities might be summed up in the idea of greatness of soul; she has also the serious cast of intelligence; she contemplates her symbol and may see worlds therein. Divinatory Meanings: Opulence, generosity, magnificence, security, liberty. Reversed: Evil, suspicion, suspense, fear, mistrust.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

PENTACLES

 

Knight

Click to enlarge

He rides a slow, enduring, heavy horse, to which his own aspect corresponds. He exhibits his symbol, but does not look therein. Divinatory Meanings: Utility, serviceableness, interest, responsibility, rectitude-all on the normal and external plane. Reversed: inertia, idleness, repose of that kind, stagnation; also placidity, discouragement, carelessness.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

PENTACLES

 

Page

Click to enlarge

A youthful figure, looking intently at the pentacle which hovers over his raised hands. He moves slowly, insensible of that which is about him. Divinatory Meanings: Application, study, scholarship, reflection another reading says news, messages and the bringer thereof; also rule, management. Reversed: Prodigality, dissipation, liberality, luxury; unfavourable news.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

PENTACLES

 

Ten

Click to enlarge

A man and woman beneath an archway which gives entrance to a house and domain. They are accompanied by a child, who looks curiously at two dogs accosting an ancient personage seated in the foreground. The child's hand is on one of them. Divinatory Meanings: Gain, riches; family matters, archives, extraction, the abode of a family. Reversed: Chance, fatality, loss, robbery, games of hazard; sometimes gift, dowry, pension.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

PENTACLES

 

Nine

Click to enlarge

A woman, with a bird upon her wrist, stands amidst a great abundance of grapevines in the garden of a manorial house. It is a wide domain, suggesting plenty in all things. Possibly it is her own possession and testifies to material well-being. Divinatory Meanings: Prudence, safety, success, accomplishment, certitude, discernment. Reversed: Roguery, deception, voided project, bad faith.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

PENTACLES

 

Eight

Click to enlarge

An artist in stone at his work, which he exhibits in the form of trophies. Divinatory Meanings: Work, employment, commission, craftsmanship, skill in craft and business, perhaps in the preparatory stage. Reversed: Voided ambition, vanity, cupidity, exaction, usury. It may also signify the possession of skill, in the sense of the ingenious mind turned to cunning and intrigue.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

PENTACLES

 

Seven

Click to enlarge

A young man, leaning on his staff, looks intently at seven pentacles attached to a clump of greenery on his right; one would say that these were his treasures and that his heart was there. Divinatory Meanings: These are exceedingly contradictory; in the main, it is a card of money, business, barter; but one reading gives altercation, quarrels--and another innocence, ingenuity, purgation. Reversed: Cause for anxiety regarding money which it may be proposed to lend.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

PENTACLES

 

Six

Click to enlarge

A person in the guise of a merchant weighs money in a pair of scales and distributes it to the needy and distressed. It is a testimony to his own success in life, as well as to his goodness of heart. Divinatory Meanings: Presents, gifts, gratification another account says attention, vigilance now is the accepted time, present prosperity, etc. Reversed: Desire, cupidity, envy, jealousy, illusion.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

PENTACLES

 

Five

Click to enlarge

Two mendicants in a snow-storm pass a lighted casement. Divinatory Meanings: The card foretells material trouble above all, whether in the form illustrated--that is, destitution--or otherwise. For some cartomancists, it is a card of love and lovers-wife, husband, friend, mistress; also concordance, affinities. These alternatives cannot be harmonized. Reversed: Disorder, chaos, ruin, discord, profligacy.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

PENTACLES

 

Four

Click to enlarge

A crowned figure, having a pentacle over his crown, clasps another with hands and arms; two pentacles are under his feet. He holds to that which he has. Divinatory Meanings: The surety of possessions, cleaving to that which one has, gift, legacy, inheritance. Reversed: Suspense, delay, opposition.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

PENTACLES

 

Three

Click to enlarge

A sculptor at his work in a monastery. Compare the design which illustrates the Eight of Pentacles. The apprentice or amateur therein has received his reward and is now at work in earnest. Divinatory Meanings: Metier, trade, skilled labour; usually, however, regarded as a card of nobility, aristocracy, renown, glory. Reversed: Mediocrity, in work and otherwise, puerility, pettiness, weakness.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

PENTACLES

 

Two

Click to enlarge

A young man, in the act of dancing, has a pentacle in either hand, and they are joined by that endless cord which is like the number 8 reversed. Divinatory Meanings: On the one hand it is represented as a card of gaiety, recreation and its connexions, which is the subject of the design; but it is read also as news and messages in writing, as obstacles, agitation, trouble, embroilment. Reversed: Enforced gaiety, simulated enjoyment, literal sense, handwriting, composition, letters of exchange.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

PENTACLES

 

Ace

Click to enlarge

A hand--issuing, as usual, from a cloud--holds up a pentacle. Divinatory Meanings: Perfect contentment, felicity, ecstasy; also speedy intelligence; gold. Reversed: The evil side of wealth, bad intelligence; also great riches. In any case it shews prosperity, comfortable material conditions, but whether these are of advantage to the possessor will depend on whether the card is reversed or not.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

 section 3 THE GREATER ARCANA AND THEIR DIVINATORY MEANINGS

Such are the intimations of the Lesser Arcana in respect of divinatory art, the veridic nature of which seems to depend on an alternative that it may be serviceable to express briefly. The records of the art are ex hypothesi the records of findings in the past based upon experience; as such, they are a guide to memory, and those who can master the elements may--still ex hypothesi--give interpretations on their basis. It is an official and automatic working. On the other hand, those who have gifts of intuition, of second sight, of clairvoyance--call it as we choose and may--will supplement the experience of the past by the findings of their own faculty, and will speak of that which they have seen in the pretexts of the oracles. It remains to give, also briefly, the divinatory significance allocated by the same art to the Trumps Major.

1. THE MAGICIAN.--Skill, diplomacy, address, subtlety; sickness, pain, loss, disaster, snares of enemies; self-confidence, will; the Querent, if male. Reversed: Physician, Magus, mental disease, disgrace, disquiet.

2. THE HIGH PRIESTESS.--Secrets, mystery, the future as yet unrevealed; the woman who interests the Querent, if male; the Querent herself, if female; silence, tenacity; mystery, wisdom, science. Reversed: Passion, moral or physical ardour, conceit, surface knowledge.

3. THE EMPRESS.--Fruitfulness, action, initiative, length of days; the unknown, clandestine; also difficulty, doubt, ignorance. Reversed: Light, truth, the unravelling of involved matters, public rejoicings; according to another reading, vacillation.

4. THE EMPEROR.--Stability, power, protection, realization; a great person; aid, reason, conviction; also authority and will. Reversed: Benevolence, compassion, credit; also confusion to enemies, obstruction, immaturity.

5. THE HIEROPHANT.--Marriage, alliance, captivity, servitude; by another account, mercy and goodness; inspiration; the man to whom the Querent has recourse. Reversed: Society, good understanding, concord, overkindness, weakness.

6. THE LOVERS.--Attraction, love, beauty, trials overcome. Reversed: Failure, foolish designs. Another account speaks of marriage frustrated and contrarieties of all kinds.

7. THE CHARIOT.--Succour, providence also war, triumph, presumption, vengeance, trouble. Reversed: Riot, quarrel, dispute, litigation, defeat.

8. FORTITUDE.--Power, energy, action, courage, magnanimity; also complete success and honours. Reversed: Despotism, abuse if power, weakness, discord, sometimes even disgrace.

9. THE HERMIT.--Prudence, circumspection; also and especially treason, dissimulation, roguery, corruption. Reversed: Concealment, disguise, policy, fear, unreasoned caution.

10. WHEEL OF FORTUNE.-Destiny, fortune, success, elevation, luck, felicity. Reversed: Increase, abundance, superfluity.

11. JUSTICE.--Equity, rightness, probity, executive; triumph of the deserving side in law. Reversed: Law in all its departments, legal complications, bigotry, bias, excessive severity.

12. THE HANGED MAN.--Wisdom, circumspection, discernment, trials, sacrifice, intuition, divination, prophecy. Reversed: Selfishness, the crowd, body politic.

13. DEATH.--End, mortality, destruction, corruption also, for a man, the loss of a benefactor for a woman, many contrarieties; for a maid, failure of marriage projects. Reversed: Inertia, sleep, lethargy, petrifaction, somnambulism; hope destroyed.

14. TEMPERANCE.--Economy, moderation, frugality, management, accommodation. Reversed: Things connected with churches, religions, sects, the priesthood, sometimes even the priest who will marry the Querent; also disunion, unfortunate combinations, competing interests.

15. THE DEVIL.--Ravage, violence, vehemence, extraordinary efforts, force, fatality; that which is predestined but is not for this reason evil. Reversed: Evil fatality, weakness, pettiness, blindness.

16. THE TOWER.--Misery, distress, indigence, adversity, calamity, disgrace, deception, ruin. It is a card in particular of unforeseen catastrophe. Reversed: According to one account, the same in a lesser degree also oppression, imprisonment, tyranny.

17. THE STAR.--Loss, theft, privation, abandonment; another reading says-hope and bright prospects, Reversed: Arrogance, haughtiness, impotence.

18. THE MOON.--Hidden enemies, danger, calumny, darkness, terror, deception, occult forces, error. Reversed: Instability, inconstancy, silence, lesser degrees of deception and error.

19. THE SUN.--Material happiness, fortunate marriage, contentment. Reversed: The same in a lesser sense.

20. THE LAST JUDGMENT.--Change of position, renewal, outcome. Another account specifies total loss though lawsuit. Reversed: Weakness, pusillanimity, simplicity; also deliberation, decision, sentence.

ZERO. THE FOOL.--Folly, mania, extravagance, intoxication, delirium, frenzy, bewrayment. Reversed: Negligence, absence, distribution, carelessness, apathy, nullity, vanity.

21. THE WORLD.--Assured success, recompense, voyage, route, emigration, flight, change of place. Reversed: Inertia, fixity, stagnation, permanence.

It will be seen that, except where there is an irresistible suggestion conveyed by the surface meaning, that which is extracted from the Trumps Major by the divinatory art is at once artificial and arbitrary, as it seems to me, in the highest degree. But of one order are the mysteries of light and of another are those of fantasy. The allocation of a fortune-telling aspect to these cards is the story of a prolonged impertinence.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

 section 4 SOME ADDITIONAL MEANINGS OF THE LESSER ARCANA

WANDS. King.--Generally favourable may signify a good marriage. Reversed: Advice that should be followed.

 Queen.--A good harvest, which may be taken in several senses. Reversed: Goodwill towards the Querent, but without the opportunity to exercise it.

 Knight.--A bad card; according to some readings, alienation. Reversed: For a woman, marriage, but probably frustrated.

 Page.--Young man of family in search of young lady. Reversed: Bad news.

 Ten.--Difficulties and contradictions, if near a good card.

 Nine.--Generally speaking, a bad card.

 Eight.--Domestic disputes for a married person.

 Seven.--A dark child.

 Six.--Servants may lose the confidence of their masters; a young lady may be betrayed by a friend. Reversed: Fulfilment of deferred hope.

 Five.--Success in financial speculation. Reversed: Quarrels may be turned to advantage.

 Four.--Unexpected good fortune. Reversed: A married woman will have beautiful children.

 Three.--A very good card; collaboration will favour enterprise.

 Two.--A young lady may expect trivial disappointments.

 Ace.--Calamities of all kinds. Reversed: A sign of birth.

Cups. King.--Beware of ill-will on the part of a man of position, and of hypocrisy pretending to help. Reversed: Loss.

 Queen.--Sometimes denotes a woman of equivocal character. Reversed: A rich marriage for a man and a distinguished one for a woman.

 Knight.--A visit from a friend, who will bring unexpected money to the Querent. Reversed: Irregularity.

 Page.--Good augury; also a young man who is unfortunate in love. Reversed: Obstacles of all kinds.

 Ten.--For a male Querent, a good marriage and one beyond his expectations. Reversed: Sorrow; also a serious quarrel.

 Nine.--Of good augury for military men. Reversed: Good business.

 Eight.--Marriage with a fair woman. Reversed: Perfect satisfaction.

 Seven.--Fair child; idea, design, resolve, movement. Reversed: Success, if accompanied by the Three of Cups.

 Six.--Pleasant memories. Reversed: Inheritance to fall in quickly.

 Five.--Generally favourable; a happy marriage; also patrimony, legacies, gifts, success in enterprise. Reversed: Return of some relative who has not been seen for long.

 Four.--Contrarieties. Reversed: Presentiment.

 Three.--Unexpected advancement for a military man. Reversed: Consolation, cure, end of the business.

 Two.--Favourable in things of pleasure and business, as well as love; also wealth and honour. Reversed: Passion.

 Ace.--Inflexible will, unalterable law. Reversed: Unexpected change of position.

SWORDS. King.--A lawyer, senator, doctor. Reversed: A bad man; also a caution to put an end to a ruinous lawsuit.

 Queen.--A widow. Reversed: A bad woman, with ill-will towards the Querent.

 Knight.--A soldier, man of arms, satellite, stipendiary; heroic action predicted for soldier. Reversed: Dispute with an imbecile person; for a woman, struggle with a rival, who will be conquered.

 Page.--An indiscreet person will pry into the Querent's secrets. Reversed: Astonishing news.

 Ten.--Followed by Ace and King, imprisonment; for girl or wife, treason on the part of friends. Reversed: Victory and consequent fortune for a soldier in war.

 Nine.--An ecclesiastic, a priest; generally, a card of bad omen. Reversed: Good ground for suspicion against a doubtful person.

 Eight.--For a woman, scandal spread in her respect. Reversed: Departure of a relative.

 Seven.--Dark girl; a good card; it promises a country life after a competence has been secured. Reversed: Good advice, probably neglected.

 Six.--The voyage will be pleasant. Reversed: Unfavourable issue of lawsuit.

 Five.--An attack on the fortune of the Querent. Reversed: A sign of sorrow and mourning.

 Four.--A bad card, but if reversed a qualified success may be expected by wise administration of affairs. Reversed: A certain success following wise administration.

 Three.--For a woman, the flight of her lover. Reversed: A meeting with one whom the Querent has compromised; also a nun.

 Two.--Gifts for a lady, influential protection for a man in search of help. Reversed: Dealings with rogues.

 Ace.--Great prosperity or great misery. Reversed: Marriage broken off, for a woman, through her own imprudence.

PENTACLES. King.--A rather dark man, a merchant, master, professor. Reversed: An old and vicious man.

 Queen.--Dark woman; presents from a rich relative; rich and happy marriage for a young man. Reversed: An illness.

 Knight.--An useful man; useful discoveries. Reversed: A brave man out of employment.

 Page.--A dark youth; a young officer or soldier; a child. Reversed: Sometimes degradation and sometimes pillage.

 Ten.--Represents house or dwelling, and derives its value from other cards. Reversed: An occasion which may be fortunate or otherwise.

 Nine.--Prompt fulfilment of what is presaged by neighbouring cards. Reversed:Vain hopes.

 Eight.--A young man in business who has relations with the Querent; a dark girl. Reversed: The Querent will be compromised in a matter of money-lending.

 Seven.--Improved position for a lady's future husband. Reversed: Impatience, apprehension, suspicion.

 Six.--The present must not be relied on. Reversed: A check on the Querent's ambition.

 Five.--Conquest of fortune by reason. Reversed: Troubles in love.

 Four.--For a bachelor, pleasant news from a lady. Reversed: Observation, hindrances.

 Three.--If for a man, celebrity for his eldest son. Reversed: Depends on neighbouring cards.

 Two.--Troubles are more imaginary than real. Reversed: Bad omen, ignorance, injustice.

 Ace.--The most favourable of all cards. Reversed: A share in the finding of treasure.

It will be observed (1) that these additamenta have little connexion with the pictorial designs of the cards to which they refer, as these correspond with the more important speculative values; (2) and further that the additional meanings are very often in disagreement with those previously given. All meanings are largely independent of one another and all are reduced, accentuated or subject to modification and sometimes almost reversal by their place in a sequence. There is scarcely any canon of criticism in matters of this kind. I suppose that in proportion as any system descends from generalities to details it becomes naturally the more precarious; and in the records of professional fortune-telling, it offers more of the dregs and lees of the subject. At the same time, divinations based on intuition and second sight are of little practical value unless they come down from the region of universals to that of particulars; but in proportion as this gift is present in a particular case, the specific meanings recorded by past cartomancists will be disregarded in favour of the personal appreciation of card values.

This has been intimated already. It seems necessary to add the following speculative readings.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

 section 5

 

THE RECURRENCE OF CARDS IN DEALING

 

In the Natural Position

4 Kings = great honour; 3 Kings = consultation; 2 Kings = minor counsel.

4 Queens = great debate; 3 Queens = deception by women; 2 Queens = sincere friends.

4 Knights = serious matters; 3 Knights = lively debate; 2 Knights = intimacy.

4 Pages = dangerous illness; 3 Pages = dispute; 2 Pages = disquiet.

4 Tens = condemnation; 3 Tens = new condition; 2 Tens = change.

4 Nines = a good friend; 3 Nines = success; 2 Nines = receipt.

4 Eights = reverse; 3 Eights = marriage 2 Eights = new knowledge.

4 Sevens = intrigue; 3 Sevens = infirmity; 2 Sevens = news.

4 Sixes = abundance; 3 Sixes = success; 2 Sixes = irritability.

4 Fives = regularity; 3 Fives = determination; 2 Fives = vigils.

4 Fours = journey near at hand; 3 Fours = a subject of reflection; 2 Fours = insomnia.

4 Threes = progress; 3 Threes = unity 2 Threes = calm.

4 Twos = contention; 3 Twos = security; 2 Twos = accord.

4 Aces = favourable chance; 3 Aces = small success; 2 Aces = trickery.

 

Reversed

4 Kings = celerity; 3 Kings = commerce 2 Kings = projects.

4 Queens = bad company; 3 Queens = gluttony; 2 Queens = work.

4 Knights = alliance 3 Knights = a duel, or personal encounter; 2 Knights = susceptibility.

4 Pages = privation 3 Pages = idleness 2 Pages = society.

4 Tens = event, happening; 3 Tens disappointment; 2 Tens = expectation justified.

4 Nines = usury; 3 Nines imprudence; 2 Nines = a small profit.

4 Eights = error; 3 Eights a spectacle; 2 Eights = misfortune.

4 Sevens = quarrellers; 3 Sevens = joy; 2 Sevens = women of no repute.

4 Sixes = care; 3 Sixes = satisfaction 2 Sixes = downfall.

4 Fives = order; 3 Fives = hesitation; 2 Fives = reverse.

4 Fours = walks abroad; 3 Fours = disquiet; 2 Fours = dispute.

4 Threes = great success; 3 Threes = serenity; 2 Threes = safety.

4 Twos = reconciliation; 3 Twos apprehension; 2 Twos = mistrust.

4 Aces = dishonour; 3 Aces debauchery; 2 Aces = enemies.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

 section 6 THE ART OF TAROT DIVINATION

We come now to the final and practical part of this division of our subject, being the way to consult and obtain oracles by means of Tarot cards. The modes of operation are rather numerous, and some of them are exceedingly involved. I set aside those last mentioned, because persons who are versed in such questions believe that the way of simplicity is the way of truth. I set aside also the operations which have been republished recently in that section of The Tarot of the Bohemians which is entitled "The Divining Tarot"; it may be recommended at its proper value to readers who wish to go further than the limits of this handbook. I offer in the first place a short process which has been used privately for many years past in England, Scotland and Ireland. I do not think that it has been published--certainly not in connexion with Tarot cards; I believe that it will serve all purposes, but I will add by way of variation-in the second place what used to be known in France as the Oracles of Julia Orsini.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

 section 7

 

AN ANCIENT CELTIC METHOD OF DIVINATION

This mode of divination is the most suitable for obtaining an answer to a definite question. The Diviner first selects a card to represent the person or, matter about which inquiry is made. This card is called the Significator. Should he wish to ascertain something in connexion with himself he takes the one which corresponds to his personal description. A Knight should be chosen as the Significator if the subject of inquiry is a man of forty years old and upward; a King should be chosen for any male who is under that age a Queen for a woman who is over forty years and a Page for any female of less age.

The four Court Cards in Wands represent very fair people, with yellow or auburn hair, fair complexion and blue eyes. The Court Cards in Cups signify people with light brown or dull fair hair and grey or blue eyes. Those in Swords stand for people having hazel or grey eyes, dark brown hair and dull complexion. Lastly, the Court Cards in Pentacles are referred to persons with very dark brown or black hair, dark eyes and sallow or swarthy complexions. These allocations are subject, however, to the following reserve, which will prevent them being taken too conventionally. You can be guided on occasion by the known temperament of a person; one who is exceedingly dark may be very energetic, and would be better represented by a Sword card than a Pentacle. On the other hand, a very fair subject who is indolent and lethargic should be referred to Cups rather than to Wands.

If it is more convenient for the purpose of a divination to take as the Significator the matter about which inquiry is to be made, that Trump or small card should be selected which has a meaning corresponding to the matter. Let it be supposed that the question is: Will a lawsuit be necessary? In this case, take the Trump No. 11, or justice, as the Significator. This has reference to legal affairs. But if the question is: Shall I be successful in my lawsuit? one of the Court Cards must be chosen as the Significator. Subsequently, consecutive divinations may be performed to ascertain the course of the process itself and its result to each of the parties concerned.

Having selected the Significator, place it on the table, face upwards. Then shuffle and cut the rest of the pack three times, keeping the faces of the cards downwards.

Turn up the top or FIRST CARD of the pack; cover the Significator with it, and say: This covers him. This card gives the influence which is affecting the person or matter of inquiry generally, the atmosphere of it in which the other currents work.

Turn up the SECOND CARD and lay it across the FIRST, saying: This crosses him. It shews the nature of the obstacles in the matter. If it is a favourable card, the opposing forces will not be serious, or it may indicate that something good in itself will not be productive of good in the particular connexion.

Turn up the THIRD CARD; place it above the Significator, and say: This crowns him. It represents (a) the Querent's aim or ideal in the matter; (b) the best that can be achieved under the circumstances, but that which has not yet been made actual.

Turn up the FOURTH CARD; place it below the Significator, and say: This is beneath him. It shews the foundation or basis of the matter, that which has already passed into actuality and which the Significator has made his own.

Turn up the FIFTH CARD; place it on the side of the Significator from which he is looking, and say: This is behind him. It gives the influence that is just passed, or is now passing away.

 N.B.--If the Significator is a Trump or any small card that cannot be said to face either way, the Diviner must decide before beginning the operation which side he will take it as facing.

Turn up the SIXTH CARD; place it on the side that the Significator is facing, and say: This is before him. It shews the influence that is coming into action and will operate in the near future.

The cards are now disposed in the form of a cross, the Significator--covered by the First Card--being in the centre.

The next four cards are turned up in succession and placed one above the other in a line, on the right hand side of the cross.

The first of these, or the SEVENTH CARD of the operation, signifies himself--that is, the Significator--whether person or thing-and shews its position or attitude in the circumstances.

The EIGHTH CARD signifies his house, that is, his environment and the tendencies at work therein which have an effect on the matter--for instance, his position in life, the influence of immediate friends, and so forth.

The NINTH CARD gives his hopes or fears in the matter.

The TENTH is what will come, the final result, the culmination which is brought about by the influences shewn by the other cards that have been turned up in the divination.

It is on this card that the Diviner should especially concentrate his intuitive faculties and his memory in respect of the official divinatory meanings attached thereto. It should embody whatsoever you may have divined from the other cards on the table, including the Significator itself and concerning him or it, not excepting such lights upon higher significance as might fall like sparks from heaven if the card which serves for the oracle, the card for reading, should happen to be a Trump Major.

The operation is now completed; but should it happen that the last card is of a dubious nature, from which no final decision can be drawn, or which does not appear to indicate the ultimate conclusion of the affair, it may be well to repeat the operation, taking in this case the Tenth Card as the Significator, instead of the one previously used. The pack must be again shuffled and cut three times and the first ten cards laid out as before. By this a more detailed account of "What will come" may be obtained.

If in any divination the Tenth Card should be a Court Card, it shews that the subject of the divination falls ultimately into the hands of a person represented by that card, and its end depends mainly on him. In this event also it is useful to take the Court Card in question as the Significator in a fresh operation, and discover what is the nature of his influence in the matter and to what issue he will bring it.

Great facility may be obtained by this method in a comparatively short time, allowance being always made for the gifts of the operator-that is to say, his faculty of insight, latent or developed-and it has the special advantage of being free from all complications.

I here append a diagram of the cards as laid out in this mode of divination. The Significator is here facing to the left.

The Significator.

1. That covers him

2. What crosses him.

3. What crowns him.

4. What is beneath him.

5. What is behind him.

6. What is before him.

7. Himself.

8. His house.

9. His hopes or fears.

10. What will come.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

 section 8

 

AN ALTERNATIVE METHOD OF READING THE TAROT CARDS

Shuffle the entire pack and turn some of the cards round, so as to invert their tops.

Let them be cut by the Querent with his left hand.

Deal out the first forty-two cards in six packets of seven cards each, face upwards, so that the first seven cards form the first packet, the following seven the second, and so on-as in the following diagram:--

Take up the first packet; lay out the cards on the table in a row, from right to left; place the cards of the second packet upon them and then the packets which remain. You will thus have seven new packets of six cards each, arranged as follows--

Take the top card of each packet, shuffle them and lay out from right to left, making a line of seven cards.

Then take up the two next cards from each packet, shuffle and lay them out in two lines under the first line.

Take up the remaining twenty-one cards of the packets, shuffle and lay them out in three lines below the others.

You will thus have six horizontal lines of seven cards each, arranged after the following manner.

 

In this method, the Querent--if of the male sex--is represented by the Magician, and if female by the High Priestess; but the card, in either case, is not taken from the pack until the forty-two cards have been laid out, as above directed. If the required card is not found among those placed upon the table, it must be sought among the remaining thirty-six cards, which have not been dealt, and should be placed a little distance to the right of the first horizontal line. On the other hand, if it is among them, it is also taken out, placed as stated, and a card is drawn haphazard from the thirty-six cards undealt to fill the vacant position, so that there are still forty-two cards laid out on the table.

The cards are then read in succession, from right to left throughout, beginning at card No. 1 of the top line, the last to be read being that on the extreme left, or No. 7, of the bottom line.

This method is recommended when no definite question is asked-that is, when the Querent wishes to learn generally concerning the course of his life and destiny. If he wishes to know what may befall within a certain time, this time should be clearly specified before the cards are shuffled.

With further reference to the reading, it should be remembered that the cards must be interpreted relatively to the subject, which means that all official and conventional meanings of the cards may and should be adapted to harmonize with the conditions of this particular case in question--the position, time of life and sex of the Querent, or person for whom the consultation is made.

Thus, the Fool may indicate the whole range of mental phases between mere excitement and madness, but the particular phase in each divination must be judged by considering the general trend of the cards, and in this naturally the intuitive faculty plays an important part.

It is well, at the beginning of a reading, to run through the cards quickly, so that the mind may receive a general impression of the subject-the trend of the destiny--and afterwards to start again--reading them one by one and interpreting in detail.

It should be remembered that the Trumps represent more powerful and compelling forces--by the Tarot hypothesis--than are referable to the small cards.

The value of intuitive and clairvoyant faculties is of course assumed in divination. Where these are naturally present or have been developed by the Diviner, the fortuitous arrangement of cards forms a link between his mind and the atmosphere of the subject of divination, and then the rest is simple. Where intuition fails, or is absent, concentration, intellectual observation and deduction must be used to the fullest extent to obtain a satisfactory result. But intuition, even if apparently dormant, may be cultivated by practice in these divinatory processes. If in doubt as to the exact meaning of a card in a particular connexion, the Diviner is recommended, by those who are versed in the matter, to place his hand on it, try to refrain from thinking of what it ought to be, and note the impressions that arise in his mind. At the beginning this will probably resolve itself into mere guessing and may prove incorrect, but it becomes possible with practice to distinguish between a guess of the conscious mind and an impression arising from the mind which is sub-conscious.

It is not within my province to offer either theoretical or practical suggestions on this subject, in which I have no part, but the following additamenta have been contributed by one who has more titles to speak than all the cartomancists of Europe, if they could shuffle with a single pair of hands and divine with one tongue.

 

NOTES ON THE PRACTICE OF DIVINATION

1. Before beginning the operation, formulate your question definitely, and repeat it aloud.

2. Make your mind as blank as possible while shuffling the cards.

3. Put out of the mind personal bias and preconceived ideas as far as possible, or your judgment will be tinctured thereby.

4. On this account it is more easy to divine correctly for a stranger than for yourself or a friend.

      
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

 section 9

 

THE METHOD OF READING BY MEANS OF THIRTY-FIVE CARDS

When the reading is over, according to the scheme set forth in the last method, it may happen-as in the previous case-that something remains doubtful, or it may be desired to carry the question further, which is done as follows:--

Take up the undealt cards which remain over, not having been used in the first operation with 42 cards. The latter are set aside in a heap, with the Querent, face upwards, on the top. The thirty-five cards, being shuffled and cut as before, are divided by dealing into six packets thus:--

 Packet I consists of the first SEVEN CARDS

 Packet II consists of the SIX CARDS next following in order; Packet III consists of the FIVE CARDS following; Packet IV contains the next FOUR CARDS; Packet V contains Two CARDS; and Packet VI contains the last ELEVEN CARDS. The arrangement will then be as follows:--

Take up these packets successively; deal out the cards which they contain in six lines, which will be necessarily of unequal length.

THE FIRST LINE stands for the house, the environment and so forth.

THE SECOND LINE stands for the person or subject of the divination.

THE THIRD LINE stands for what is passing outside, events, persons, etc.

THE FOURTH LINE stands for a surprise, the unexpected, etc.

THE FIFTH LINE stands for consolation, and may moderate all that is unfavourable in the preceding lines.

THE SIXTH LINE is that which must be consulted to elucidate the enigmatic oracles of the others; apart from them it has no importance.

These cards should all be read from left to right, beginning with the uppermost line.

It should be stated in conclusion as to this divinatory part that there is no method of interpreting Tarot cards which is not applicable to ordinary playing-cards, but the additional court cards, and above all the Trumps Major, are held to increase the elements and values of the oracles.

And now in conclusion as to the whole matter, I have left for these last words--as if by way of epilogue--one further and final point. It is the sense in which I regard the Trumps Major as containing Secret Doctrine. I do not here mean that I am acquainted with orders and fraternities in which such doctrine reposes and is there found to be part of higher Tarot knowledge. I do not mean that such doctrine, being so preserved and transmitted, can be constructed as imbedded independently in the Trumps Major. I do not mean that it is something apart from the Tarot. Associations exist which have special knowledge of both kinds; some of it is deduced from the Tarot and some of it is apart therefrom; in either case, it is the same in the root-matter. But there are also things in reserve which are not in orders or societies, but are transmitted after another manner. Apart from all inheritance of this kind, let any one who is a mystic consider separately and in combination the Magician, the Fool, the High Priestess, the Hierophant, the Empress, the Emperor, the Hanged Man and the Tower. Let him then consider the card called the Last Judgment. They contain the legend of the soul. The other Trumps Major are the details and--as one might say--the accidents. Perhaps such a person will begin to understand what lies far behind these symbols, by whomsoever first invented and however preserved. If he does, he will see also why I have concerned myself with the subject, even at the risk of writing about divination by cards.

     
The Pictorial Key to the Tarot, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman Smith [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

Bibliography

 

A CONCISE BIBLIOGRAPHY OF THE CHIEF WORKS DEALING WITH THE TAROT AND ITS CONNEXIONS

As in spite of its modest pretensions, this monograph is, so far as I am aware, the first attempt to provide in English a complete synoptic account of the Tarot, with its archaeological position defined, its available symbolism developed, and--as a matter of curiosity in occultism--with its divinatory meanings and modes of operation sufficiently exhibited, it is my wish, from the literate standpoint, to enumerate those text-books of the subject, and the most important incidental references thereto, which have come under my notice. The bibliographical particulars that follow lay no claim to completeness, as I have cited nothing that I have not seen with my own eyes; but I can understand that most of my readers will be surprised at the extent of the literature--if I may so term it conventionally--which has grown up in the course of the last 120 years. Those who desire to pursue their inquiries further will find ample materials herein, though it is not a course which I am seeking to commend especially, as I deem that enough has been said upon the Tarot in this place to stand for all that has preceded it. The bibliography itself is representative after a similar manner. I should add that there is a considerable catalogue of cards and works on card-playing in the British Museum, but I have not had occasion to consult it to any extent for the purposes of the present list.

 

I

 Monde Primitf, analyse et compare avec le Monde Moderne. Par M. Court de Gebelin. Vol. 8, 40, Paris, 1781.

The articles on the Jeu des Tarots will be found at pp. 365 to 410. The plates at the end shew the Trumps Major and the Aces of each suit. These are valuable, as indications of the cards at the close of the eighteenth century. They were presumably then in circulation in the South of France, as it is said that at the period in question they were practically unknown at Paris. I have dealt with the claims of the papers in the body of the present work. Their speculations were tolerable enough for their mazy period; but that they are suffered still, and accepted indeed without question, by French occult writers is the most convincing testimony that one can need to the qualifications of the latter for dealing with any question of historical research.

 

II

The Works of Etteilla. Les Septs Nuances de I'oeuvre philosophique Hermitique; Maniere de se recreer avec le Jeu de Cartes, nommees Tarots; Fragments sur les Hautes Sciences; Philosophie des Hautes Sciences; Jeu des Tarots, ou le Livre de Thoth; Lecons Theoriques et Pratiques du Livre de Thoth--all published between 1783 and 1787.

These are exceedingly rare and were frankly among the works of colportage of their particular period. They contain the most curious fragments on matters within and without the main issue, lucubrations on genii, magic, astrology, talismans, dreams, etc. I have spoken sufficiently in the text of the author's views on the Tarot and his place in its modern history. He regarded it as a work of speaking hieroglyphics, but to translate it was not easy. He, however, accomplished the task that is to say, in his own opinion.

 

III

 An Inquiry into the Antient Greek Game, supposed to have been invented by Palamedes. [By James Christie.] London: 40, 1801.

I mention this collection of curious dissertations because it has been cited by writers on the Tarot. It seeks to establish a close connexion between early games of antiquity and modern chess. It is suggested that the invention attributed to Palamedes, prior to the Siege of Troy, was known in China from a more remote period of antiquity. The work has no reference to cards of any kind whatsoever.

 

IV

 Researches into the History of Playing Cards. By Samuel Weller Singer. 40, London, 1816.

The Tarot is probably of Eastern origin and high antiquity, but the rest of Court de Gebelin's theory is vague and unfounded. Cards were known in Europe prior to the appearance of the Egyptians. The work has a good deal of curious information and the appendices are valuable, but the Tarot occupies comparatively little of the text and the period is too early for a tangible criticism of its claims. There are excellent reproductions of early specimen designs. Those of Court de Gebelin are also given in extenso.

 

V

 Facts and Speculations on Playing Cards. By W. A. Chatto. 8vo, London, 1848.

The author suggested that the Trumps Major and the numeral cards were once separate, but were afterwards combined. The oldest specimens of Tarot cards are not later than 1440. But the claims and value of the volume have been sufficiently described in the text.

 

VI

 Les Cartes a Jouer el la Cartomancie. Par D. R. P. Boiteau d'Ambly. 40, Paris, 1854.

There are some interesting illustrations of early Tarot cards, Which are said to be of Oriental origin; but they are not referred to Egypt. The early gipsy connexion is affirmed, but there is no evidence produced. The cards came with the gipsies from India, where they were designed to shew forth the intentions of "the unknown divinity" rather than to be the servants of profane amusement.

 

VII

 Dogme el Rituel de la Haute Magie. Par Eliphas Levi, 2 vols., demy 8vo, Paris, 1854.

This is the first publication of Alphonse Louis Constant on occult philosophy, and it is also his magnum opus. It is constructed in both volumes on the major Keys of the Tarot and has been therefore understood as a kind of development of their implicits, in the way that these were presented to the mind of the author. To supplement what has been said of this work in the text of the present monograph, I need only add that the section on transmutations in the second volume contains what is termed the Key of Thoth. The inner circle depicts a triple Tau, with a hexagram where the bases join, and beneath is the Ace of Cups. Within the external circle are the letters TARO, and about this figure as a whole are grouped the symbols of the Four Living Creatures, the Ace of Wands, Ace of Swords, the letter Shin, and a magician's candle, which is identical, according to Levi, with the lights used in the Goetic Circle of Black Evocations and Pacts. The triple Tau may be taken to represent the Ace of Pentacles. The only Tarot card given in the volumes is the Chariot, which is drawn by two sphinxes; the fashion thus set has been followed in later days. Those who interpret the work as a kind of commentary on the Trumps Major are the conventional occult students and those who follow them will have only the pains of fools.

 

VIII

 Les Romes. Par J. A. Vaillant. Demy 8vo, Paris, 1857.

The author tells us how he met with the cards, but the account is in a chapter of anecdotes. The Tarot is the sidereal book of Enoch, modelled on the astral wheel of Athor. There is a description of the Trumps Major, which are evidently regarded as an heirloom, brought by the gipsies from Indo-Tartary. The publication of Levi's Dogme et Rituel must, I think, have impressed Vaillant very much, and although in this, which was the writer's most important work, the anecdote that I have mentioned is practically his only Tarot reference, he seems to have gone much further in a later publication--Clef Magique de la Fiction et du Fait, but I have not been able to see it, nor do I think, from the reports concerning it, that I have sustained a loss.

 

IX

 Histoire de la Magie. Par Eliphas Levi. 8vo, Paris, 1860.

The references to the Tarot are few in this brilliant work, which will be available shortly in English. It gives the 21st Trump Major, commonly called the Universe, or World, under the title of Yinx Pantomorph--a seated figure wearing the crown of Isis. This has been reproduced by Papus in Le Tarot Divinataire. The author explains that the extant Tarot has come down to us through the Jews, but it passed somehow into the hands of the gipsies, who brought it with them when they first entered France in the early part of the fifteenth century. The authority here is Vaillant.

 

X

 La Clef des Grands Mysteres. Par Eliphas Levi. 8vo, Paris, 1861.

The frontispiece to this work represents the absolute Key of the occult sciences, given by William Postel and completed by the writer. It is reproduced in The Tarot of the Bohemians, and in the preface which I have prefixed thereto, as indeed elsewhere, I have explained that Postel never constructed a hieroglyphical key. Eliphas Levi identifies the Tarot as that sacred alphabet which has been variously referred to Enoch, Thoth, Cadmus and Palamedes. It consists of absolute ideas attached to signs and numbers. In respect of the latter, there is an extended commentary on these as far as the number ig, the series being interpreted as the Keys of Occult Theology. The remaining three numerals which complete the Hebrew alphabet are called the Keys of Nature. The Tarot is said to be the original of chess, as it is also of the Royal Game of Goose. This volume contains the author's hypothetical reconstruction of the tenth Trump Major, shewing Egyptian figures on the Wheel of Fortune.

 

XI

 L'Homme Rouge des Tuileyies. Par P. Christian. Fcap. 8vo, Paris, 1863.

The work is exceedingly rare, is much sought and was once highly prized in France; but Dr. Papus has awakened to the fact that it is really of slender value, and the statement might be extended. It is interesting, however, as containing the writer's first reveries on the Tarot. He was a follower and imitator of Levi. In the present work, he provides a commentary on the Trumps Major and thereafter the designs and meanings of all the Minor Arcana. There are many and curious astrological attributions. The work does not seem to mention the Tarot by name. A later Histoire de la Magie does little more than reproduce and extend the account of the Trumps Major given herein.

 

XII

 The History of Playing Cards. By E. S. Taylor. Cr. 8vo, London, 1865.

This was published posthumously and is practically a translation of Boiteau. It therefore calls for little remark on my part. The opinion is that cards were imported by the gipsies from India. There are also references to the so-called Chinese Tarot, which was mentioned by Court de Gebelin.

 

XIII

 Origine des Caries a Jouer. Par Romain Merlin. 40, Paris, 1869.

There is no basis for the Egyptian origin of the Tarot, except in the imagination of Court de Gebelin. I have mentioned otherwise that the writer disposes, to his personal satisfaction, of the gipsy hypothesis, and he does the same in respect of the imputed connexion with India; he says that cards were known in Europe before communication was opened generally with that world about 1494. But if the gipsies were a Pariah tribe already dwelling in the West, and if the cards were a part of their baggage, there is nothing in this contention. The whole question is essentially one of speculation.

 

XIV

 The Platonist. Vol. II, pp. 126-8. Published at St. Louis, Mo., U.S.A., 1884-5. Royal 4to. This periodical, the suspension of which must have been regretted by many admirers of an unselfish and laborious effort, contained one anonymous article on the Tarot by a writer with theosophical tendencies, and considerable pretensions to knowledge. It has, however, by its own evidence, strong titles to negligence, and is indeed a ridiculous performance. The word Tarot is the Latin Rota = wheel, transposed. The system was invented at a remote period in India, presumably--for the writer is vague--about B.C. 300. The Fool represents primordial chaos. The Tarot is now used by Rosicrucian adepts, but in spite of the inference that it may have come down to them from their German progenitors in the early seventeenth century, and notwithstanding the source in India, the twenty-two keys were pictured on the walls of Egyptian temples dedicated to the mysteries of initiation. Some of this rubbish is derived from P. Christian, but the following statement is peculiar, I think, to the writer: "It is known to adepts that there should be twenty-two esoteric keys, which would make the total number up to 100." Persons who reach a certain stage of lucidity have only to provide blank pasteboards of the required number and the missing designs will be furnished by superior intelligences. Meanwhile, America is still awaiting the fulfilment of the concluding forecast, that some few will ere long have so far developed in that country "as to be able to read perfectly... in that perfect and divine sybilline work, the Taro." Perhaps the cards which accompany the present volume will give the opportunity and the impulse!

 

XV

 Lo Joch de Naips. Per Joseph Brunet y Bellet. Cr. 8vo, Barcelona, 1886.

With reference to the dream of Egyptian origin, the author quotes E. Garth Wilkison's Manners and Customs of the Egyptians as negative evidence at least that cards were unknown in the old cities of the Delta. The history of the subject is sketched, following the chief authorities, but without reference to exponents of the occult schools. The mainstay throughout is Chatto. There are some interesting particulars about the prohibition of cards in Spain, and the appendices include a few valuable documents, by one of which it appears, as already mentioned, that St. Bernardin of Sienna preached against games in general, and cards in particular, so far back as 1423. There are illustrations of rude Tarots, including a curious example of an Ace of Cups, with a phoenix rising therefrom, and a Queen of Cups, from whose vessel issues a flower.

 

XVI

 The Tarot: Its Occult Signification, Use in FortuneTelling, and Method of Play. By S. L. MacGregor Mathers. Sq. 16mo, London, 1888.

This booklet was designed to accompany a set of Tarot cards, and the current packs of the period were imported from abroad for the purpose. There is no pretence of original research, and the only personal opinion expressed by the writer or calling for notice here states that the Trumps Major are hieroglyphic symbols corresponding to the occult meanings of the Hebrew alphabet. Here the authority is Levi, from whom is also derived the brief symbolism allocated to the twenty-two Keys. The divinatory meanings follow, and then the modes of operation. It is a mere sketch written in a pretentious manner and is negligible in all respects.

 

XVII

 Traite Methodique de Science Occulte. Par Papus. 8vo, Paris, 1891.

The rectified Tarot published by Oswald Wirth after the indications of Eliphas Levi is reproduced in this work, which--it may be mentioned--extends to nearly 1,100 pages. There is a section on the gipsies, considered as the importers of esoteric tradition into Europe by means of the cards. The Tarot is a combination of numbers and ideas, whence its correspondence with the Hebrew alphabet. Unfortunately, the Hebrew citations are rendered almost unintelligible by innumerable typographical errors.

 

XVIII

 Eliphas Levi: Le Livre des Splendeurs. Demy 8vo, Paris, 1894.

A section on the Elements of the Kabalah affirms (a) That the Tarot contains in the several cards of the four suits a fourfold explanation of the numbers 1 to 10; (b) that the symbols which we now have only in the form of cards were at first medals and then afterwards became talismans; (c) that the Tarot is the hieroglyphical book of the Thirty-two Paths of Kabalistic theosophy, and that its summary explanation is in the Sepher Yelzirah; (d) that it is the inspiration of all religious theories and symbols; (e) that its emblems are found on the ancient monuments of Egypt. With the historical value of these pretensions I have dealt in the text.

 

XIX

 Clefs Magiques et Clavicules de Salomon Par Eliphas Levi. Sq. 12mo, Paris, 1895.

The Keys in question are said to have been restored in 1860, in their primitive purity, by means of hieroglyphical signs and numbers, without any admixture of Samaritan or Egyptian images. There are rude designs of the Hebrew letters attributed to the Trumps Major, with meanings--most of which are to be found in other works by the same writer. There are also combinations of the letters which enter into the Divine Name; these combinations are attributed to the court cards of the Lesser Arcana. Certain talismans of spirits are in fine furnished with Tarot attributions; the Ace of Clubs corresponds to the Deus Absconditus, the First Principle. The little book was issued at a high price and as something that should be reserved to adepts, or those on the path of adeptship, but it is really without value--symbolical or otherwise.

 

XX

 Les xxii Lames Hermetiques du Tarot Divinatoire. Par R. Falconnier. Demy 8vo, Paris, 1896.

The word Tarot comes from the Sanskrit and means "fixed star," which in its turn signifies immutable tradition, theosophical synthesis, symbolism of primitive dogma, etc. Graven on golden plates, the designs were used by Hermes Trismegistus and their mysteries were only revealed to the highest grades of the priesthood of Isis. It is unnecessary therefore to say that the Tarot is of Egyptian origin and the work of M. Falconnier has been to reconstruct its primitive form, which he does by reference to the monuments--that is to say, after the fashion of Eliphas Levi, he draws the designs of the Trumps Major in imitation of Egyptian art. This production has been hailed by French occultists as presenting the Tarot in its perfection, but the same has been said of the designs of Oswald Wirth, which are quite unlike and not Egyptian at all. To be frank, these kinds of foolery may be as much as can be expected from the Sanctuary of the Comedie-Francaise, to which the author belongs, and it should be reserved thereto.

 

XXI

 The Magical Ritual of the Sanctum Regnum, interpreted by the Tarot Trumps. Translated from the MSS. of Eliphas Levi and edited by W. Wynn Westcott, M.B. Fcap. 8vo, London, 1896.

It is necessary to say that the interest of this memorial rests rather in the fact of its existence than in its intrinsic importance. There is a kind of informal commentary on the Trumps Major, or rather there are considerations which presumably had arisen therefrom in the mind of the French author. For example, the card called Fortitude is an opportunity for expatiation on will as the secret of strength. The Hanged Man is said to represent the completion of the Great Work. Death suggests a diatribe against Necromancy and Goetia; but such phantoms have no existence in "the Sanctum Regnum" of life. Temperance produces only a few vapid commonplaces, and the Devil, which is blind force, is the occasion for repetition of much that has been said already in the earlier works of Levi. The Tower represents the betrayal of the Great Arcanum, and this it was which caused the sword of Samael to be stretched over the Garden of Delight. Amongst the plates there is a monogram of the Gnosis, which is also that of the Tarot. The editor has thoughtfully appended some information on the Trump Cards taken from the early works of Levi and from the commentaries of P. Christian.

 

XXII

 Comment on devient Alchimiste. Par F. Jolivet de Castellot. Sq. 8vo, Paris, 1897.

Herein is a summary of the Alchemical Tarot, which-with all my respect for innovations and inventions-seems to be high fantasy; but Etteilla had reveries of this kind, and if it should ever be warrantable to produce a Key Major in place of the present Key Minor, it might be worth while to tabulate the analogies of these strange dreams. At the moment it will be sufficient to say that there is given a schedule of the alchemical correspondences to the Trumps Major, by which it appears that the juggler or Magician symbolizes attractive force; the High Priestess is inert matter, than which nothing is more false; the Pope is the Quintessence, which--if he were only acquainted with Shakespeare--might tempt the present successor of St. Peter to repeat that "there are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio." The Devil, on the other hand, is the matter of philosophy at the black stage; the Last judgment is the red stage of the Stone; the Fool is its fermentation; and, in fine, the last card, or the World, is the Alchemical Absolute-the Stone itself. If this should encourage my readers, they may note further that the particulars of various chemical combinations can be developed by means of the Lesser Arcana, if these are laid out for the purpose. Specifically, the King of Wands = Gold the Pages or Knaves represent animal substances the King of Cups = Silver; and so forth.

 

XXIII

 Le Grand Arcane, ou l'occultisme devoile. Par Eliphas Levi. Demy 8vo, Paris, 1898.

After many years and the long experience of all his concerns in occultism, the author at length reduces his message to one formula in this work. I speak, of course, only in respect of the Tarot: he says that the cards of Etteilla produce a kind of hypnotism in the seer or seeress who divines thereby. The folly of the psychic reads in the folly of the querent. Did he counsel honesty, it is suggested that he would lose his clients. I have written severe criticisms on occult arts and sciences, but this is astonishing from one of their past professors and, moreover, I think that the psychic occasionally is a psychic and sees in a manner as such.

 

XXIV

 Le Serpent de la Genese--Livre II; La Clef de la Magie Noire. Par Stanislas de Guaita. 8vo, Paris, 1902.

It is a vast commentary on the second septenary of the Trumps Major. Justice signifies equilibrium and its agent; the Hermit typifies the mysteries of solitude; the Wheel of Fortune is the circulus of becoming or attaining; Fortitude signifies the power resident in will; the Hanged Man is magical bondage, which speaks volumes for the clouded and inverted insight of this fantasiast in occultism: Death is, of course, that which its name signifies, but with reversion to the second death; Temperance means the magic of transformations, and therefore suggests excess rather than abstinence. There is more of the same kind of thing--I believe--in the first book, but this will serve as a specimen. The demise of Stanislas de Guaita put an end to his scheme of interpreting the Tarot Trumps, but it should be understood that the connexion is shadowy and that actual references could be reduced to a very few pages.

 

XXV

 Le Tarot: Apercu historique. Par. J. J. Bourgeat. Sq. 12MO, Paris, 1906.

The author has illustrated his work by purely fantastic designs of certain Trumps Major, as, for example, the Wheel of Fortune, Death and the Devil. They have no connexion with symbolism. The Tarot is said to have originated in India, whence it passed to Egypt. Eliphas Levi, P. Christian, and J. A. Vaillant are cited in support of statements and points of view. The mode of divination adopted is fully and carefully set out.

 

XXVI

 L'Art de tirer les Caries. Par Antonio Magus. Cr. 8vo, Paris, n.d. (about 1908).

This is not a work of any especial pretension, nor has it any title to consideration on account of its modesty. Frankly, it is little--if any--better than a bookseller's experiment. There is a summary account of the chief methods of divination, derived from familiar sources; there is a history of cartomancy in France; and there are indifferent reproductions of Etteilla Tarot cards, with his meanings and the well-known mode of operation. Finally, there is a section on common fortune-telling by a piquet set of ordinary cards: this seems to lack the only merit that it might have Possessed, namely, perspicuity; but I speak with reserve, as I am not perhaps a judge possessing ideal qualifications in matters of this kind. In any case, the question signifies nothing. It is just to add that the concealed author maintains what he terms the Egyptian tradition of the Tarot, which is the Great Book of Thoth. But there is a light accent throughout his thesis, and it does not follow that he took the claim seriously.

 

XXVII

 Le Tarot Divinatoire: Clef du tirage des Caries et des sorts. Par le Dr. Papus. Demy 8vo, Paris, 1909.

The text is accompanied by what is termed a complete reconstitution of all the symbols, which means that in this manner we have yet another Tarot. The Trumps Major follow the traditional lines, with various explanations and attributions on the margins, and this Plan obtains throughout the series. From the draughtsman's point of view, it must be said that the designs are indifferently done, and the reproductions seem worse than the designs. This is probably of no especial importance to the class of readers addressed. Dr. Papus also presents, by way of curious memorials, the evidential value of which he seems to accept implicitly, certain unpublished designs of EIiphas Levi; they are certainly interesting as examples of the manner in which the great occultist manufactured the archaeology of the Tarot to bear out his personal views. We have (a) Trump Major, No. 5, being Horus as the Grand Hierophant, drawn after the monuments; (b) Trump Major, No. 2, being the High Priestess as Isis, also after the monuments; and (c) five imaginary specimens of an Indian Tarot. This is how la haute science in France contributes to the illustration of that work which Dr. Papus terms livre de la science eternelle; it would be called by rougher names in English criticism. The editor himself takes his usual pains and believes that he has discovered the time attributed to each card by ancient Egypt. He applies it to the purpose of divination, so that the skilful fortune-teller can now predict the hour and the day when the dark young man will meet with the fair widow, and so forth.

 

XXVIII

 Le Tarot des Bohemiens. Par Papus. 8vo, Paris, 1889. English Translation, second edition, 1910.

An exceedingly complex work, which claims to present an absolute key to occult science. It was translated into English by Mr. A. P. Morton in 1896, and this version has been re-issued recently under my own supervision. The preface which I have prefixed thereto contains all that it is necessary to say regarding its claims, and it should be certainly consulted by readers of the present Pictorial Key to the Tarot. The fact that Papus regards the great sheaf of hieroglyphics as "the most ancient book in the world," as "the Bible of Bibles," and therefore as "the primitive revelation," does not detract from the claim of his general study, which--it should be added--is accompanied by numerous valuable plates, exhibiting Tarot codices, old and new, and diagrams summarizing the personal theses of the writer and of some others who preceded him. The Tarot of the Bohemians is published at 6s. by William Rider & Son, Ltd.

 

XXIX

 Manuel Synthetique et Pratique du Tarot. Par Eudes Picard. 8vo, Paris, 1909.

Here is yet one more handbook of the subject, presenting in a series of rough plates a complete sequence of the cards. The Trumps Major are those of Court de Gebelin and for the Lesser Arcana the writer has had recourse to his imagination; it can be said that some of them are curious, a very few thinly suggestive and the rest bad. The explanations embody neither research nor thought at first hand; they are bald summaries of the occult authorities in France, followed by a brief general sense drawn out as a harmony of the whole. The method of use is confined to four pages and recommends that divination should be performed in a fasting state. On the history of the Tarot, M. Picard says (a) that it is confused; (b) that we do not know precisely whence it comes; (c) that, this notwithstanding, its introduction is due to the Gipsies. He says finally that its interpretation is an art.




===== BOOK: pnm.txt =====


    
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE PHILOSOPHY OF NATURAL MAGIC

  

By

  

HENRY CORNELIUS AGRIPPA

  

VON NETTESHEIM

  

COUNSELOR TO CHARLES THE FIFTH, EMPEROR OF GERMANY, AND JUDGE OF THE PREROGATIVE COURT

  

OFFICIAL EDITION

  

A COMPLETE WORK ON

  

Natural Magic, White Magic, Black Magic, Divination, Occult Binding, Sorceries, And Their Power. Unctions, Love Medicines And Their Virtues. The Occult Virtue Of Things Which Are In Them Only In Their Life Time, And Such As Remain In Them Even After Their Death. The Occult Or Magical Virtue Of All Things, etc.

  

Chicago, Ill., de Laurence, Scott & Co.

  

[1913]

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com by John Bruno Hare, June 2008. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

Click to enlarge
Dedication

THIS WORK
 OF OCCULT
 PHILOSOPHY,
 OR NATURAL
 MAGIC, BY
 THAT PURE MYSTIC, THINKER AND TEACHER, SCHOLAR,
 STATESMAN, PHILOSOPHER AND AUTHOR,
 HENRY CORNELIUS AGRIPPA
 WAS BROUGHT FORTH BY HIM THOUGH
 SLANDER, EDICT, AND ENEMIES OPPOSED.
 HE LIVED,
 TOILED AND
 TRIUMPHED IN
 THIS CAUSE.
 TO THOSE
 WHO HAVE
 A LOVE FOR
 TRUTH AND
 MYSTIC ART
 THIS NEW
 EDITION IS
 DEDICATED.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 6]

  

AGRIPPA.

Mr. Henry Morley, an eminent English scholar, in his Life of Cornelius Agrippa, makes these tributary statements:

He secured the best honors attainable in art and arms; was acquainted with eight languages, being the master of six. His natural bent had been from early youth to a consideration of Divine Mysteries. To learn these and teach them to others had been at all times his chief ambition. He is distinguished among the learned for his cultivation of Occult Philosophy, upon which he has written a complete work.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 7]

  

TABLE OF CONTENTS.

          INTRODUCTORY.

        

     
      EDITOR'S PREFACE

       <page 15>

     
      EARLY LIFE OF AGRIPPA

       <page 17>

     
      CORNELIUS AGRIPPA TO THE READER

       <page 27>

     
      AGRIPPA TO TRITHEMIUS

       <page 30>

     
      TRITHEMIUS TO AGRIPPA

       <page 33>

     
       

        

     
      THE PHILOSOPHY OF NATURAL MAGIC

        

     
      CHAPTER I. How Magicians Collect Virtues from the Three-fold   World, is Declared in these Three Books

       <page 37>

     
      CHAPTER II. What Magic Is, What are the Parts thereof, and How the   Professors thereof must be Qualified

       <page 38>

     
      CHAPTER III. Of the Four Elements, their Qualities, and Mutual   Mixtions

       <page 42>

     
      CHAPTER IV. Of a Three-fold Consideration of the Elements

       <page 44>

     
      CHAPTER V. Of the Wonderful Natures of Fire and Earth

       <page 45>

     
      CHAPTER VI. Of the Wonderful Natures of Water, Air and Winds

       <page 48>

     
      CHAPTER VII. Of the Kinds of Compounds, what Relation they stand in   to the Elements, and what Relation there is betwixt the Elements themselves   and the Soul, Senses and Dispositions of Men

       <page 56>

     
      [p. 8]

        

     
      CHAPTER VIII. How the Elements are in the Heavens, in Stars, in Devils,   in Angels, and, lastly, in God himself

       <page 58>

     
      CHAPTER IX. Of the Virtues of things Natural, depending   immediately upon Elements

       <page 61>

     
      CHAPTER X. Of the Occult Virtues of Things

       <page 62>

     
      CHAPTER XI. How Occult Virtues are Infused into the several kinds   of Things by Ideas, through the Help of the Soul of the World, and Rays of   the Stars; and what Things abound most with this Virtue

       <page 65>

     
      CHAPTER XII. How it is that Particular Virtues are Infused into   Particular Individuals, even of the same Species

       <page 67>

     
      CHAPTER XIII. Whence the Occult Virtues of Things Proceed

       <page 68>

     
      CHAPTER XIV. Of the Spirit of the World, What It Is and how by way   of medium It Unites occult Virtues to their Subjects

       <page 72>

     
      CHAPTER XV. How we must Find Out and Examine the Virtues of Things   by way of Similitude

       <page 74>

     
      CHAPTER XVI. How the Operations of several Virtues Pass from one   thing into another, and are Communicated one to the other

       <page 77>

     
      CHAPTER XVII. How by Enmity and Friendship the Virtues of things   are to be Tried and Found Out

       <page 78>

     
      CHAPTER XVIII. Of the Inclinations of Enmities

       <page 81>

     
      CHAPTER XIX. How the Virtues of Things are to be Tried and Found   Out, which are in them Specifically, or in any one Individual by way of   Special Gift

       <page 85>

     
      CHAPTER XX. The Natural Virtues are in borne Things throughout their   Whole Substance, and in other Things in Certain Parts and Members

       <page 86>

     
      [p. 9]

        

     
      CHAPTER XXI. Of the Virtues of Things which are in them only in   their Life Time, and Such as Remain in them even After their Death

       <page 88>

     
      CHAPTER XXII. How Inferior Things are Subjected to Superior   Bodies, and how the Bodies, Actions, and Dispositions of Men are Ascribed to   Stars and Signs

       <page 91>

     
      CHAPTER XXIII. How we shall Know what Stars Natural Things are   Under, and what Things are Under the Sun, which are called Solary

       <page 95>

     
      CHAPTER XXIV. What Things are Lunary, or Under the Power of the   Moon

       <page 99>

     
      CHAPTER XXV. What Things are Saturnine, or Under the Power of   Saturn

       <page 101>

     
      CHAPTER XXVI. What Things are Under the Power of Jupiter, and are   called Jovial

       <page 104>

     
      CHAPTER XXVII. What Things are Under the Power of Mars, and are   called Martial

       <page 105>

     
      CHAPTER XXVIII. What Things are Under the Power of Venus, and are called   Venereal

       <page 106>

     
      CHAPTER XXIX. What Things are Under the Power of Mercury, and are   called Mercurial

       <page 107>

     
      CHAPTER XXX. That the Whole Sublunary World, and those Things   which are in It, are Distributed to Planets

       <page 108>

     
      CHAPTER XXXI. How Provinces and Kingdoms are Distributed to   Planets

       <page 109>

     
      CHAPTER XXXII. What Things are Under the Signs, the Fixed Stars,   and their Images

       <page 111>

     
      CHAPTER XXXIII. The Seals and Characters of Natural Things

       <page 114>

     
      [p. 10]

        

     
      CHAPTER XXXIV. How, by Natural Things and their Virtues, we may   Draw Forth and Attract the Influences and Virtues of Celestial Bodies

       <page 118>

     
      CHAPTER XXXV. Of the Mixtions of Natural Things, one with another,   and their Benefit

       <page 119>

     
      CHAPTER XXXVI. Of the Union of Mixed Things, and the Introduction   of a More Noble Form, and the Senses of Life

       <page 121>

     
      CHAPTER XXXVII. How, by some certain Natural and Artificial Preparations,   We May Attract certain Celestial and Vital Gifts

       <page 123>

     
      CHAPTER XXXVIII. How We May Draw not only Celestial and Vital but   also certain Intellectual and Divine Gifts from Above

       <page 125>

     
      CHAPTER XXXIX. That We May, by some certain Matters of the World,   Stir Up the Gods of the World and their Ministering Spirits

       <page 127>

     
      CHAPTER XL. Of Bindings; what Sort they are of, and in what Ways   they are wont to be Done

       <page 128>

     
      CHAPTER XLI. Of Sorceries, and their Power

       <page 129>

     
      CHAPTER XLII. Of the Wonderful Virtues of some Kinds of Sorceries

       <page 131>

     
      CHAPTER XLIII. Of Perfumes or Suffumigations; their Manner and   Power

       <page 136>

     
      CHAPTER XLIV. The Composition of some Fumes appropriated to the   Planets

       <page 139>

     
      CHAPTER XLV. Of Collyries, Unctions, Love-Medicines, and their   Virtues

       <page 141>

     
      CHAPTER XLVI. Of Natural Alligations and Suspensions

       <page 144>

     
      CHAPTER XLVII. Of Magical Rings and their Compositions

       <page 146>

     
      [p. 11]

        

     
      CHAPTER XLVIII. Of the Virtue of Places, and what Places are   Suitable to every Star

       <page 148>

     
      CHAPTER XLIX. Of Light, Colors, Candles and Lamps, and to what Stars,   Houses and Elements several Colors are Ascribed

       <page 151>

     
      CHAPTER L. Of Fascination, and the Art thereof

       <page 154>

     
      CHAPTER LI. Of certain Observations, Producing wonderful Virtues

       <page 156>

     
      CHAPTER LII. Of the Countenance and Gesture, the Habit and the   Figure of the Body, and to what Stars any of these do Answer; whence   Physiognomy, and Metoposcopy, and Chiromancy, Arts of Divination, have their   Grounds

       <page 159>

     
      CHAPTER LIII. Of Divination, and the Kinds thereof

       <page 162>

     
      CHAPTER LIV. Of divers certain Animals, and other things, which   have a Signification in Auguries

       <page 165>

     
      CHAPTER LV. How Auspicias are Verified by the Light of Natural   Instinct, and of some Rules of Finding of It Out

       <page 173>

     
      CHAPTER LVI. Of the Soothsayings of Flashes and Lightnings, and   how Monstrous and Prodigious Things are to be Interpreted

       <page 178>

     
      CHAPTER LVII. Of Geomancy, Hydromancy, Aeromancy, and Pyromancy, Four   Divinations of Elements

       <page 181>

     
      CHAPTER LVIII. Of the Reviving of the Dead, and of Sleeping or   Hibernating (wanting victuals) Many Years together

       <page 183>

     
      CHAPTER LIX. Of Divination by Dreams

       <page 188>

     
      CHAPTER LX. Of Madness, and Divinations which are made when men   are awake, and of the Power of a Melancholy Humor, by which Spirits are   sometimes induced into Men's Bodies

       <page 189>

     
      [p. 12]

        

     
      CHAPTER LXI. Of the Forming of Men, of the External Senses, also   those Inward, and the Mind; and of the Three-fold Appetite of the Soul, and   Passions of the Will

       <page 193>

     
      CHAPTER LXII. Of the Passions of the Mind, their Original Source, Differences,   and Kinds

       <page 197>

     
      CHAPTER LXIII. How the Passions of the Mind change the proper Body   by changing its Accidents and moving the Spirit

       <page 199>

     
      CHAPTER LXIV. How the Passions of the Mind change the Body by way of   Imitation from some Resemblance; of the Transforming and Translating of Men,   and what Force the Imaginative Power hath, not only over the Body but the   Soul

       <page 201>

     
      CHAPTER LXV. How the Passions of the Mind can Work of themselves   upon Another's Body

       <page 204>

     
      CHAPTER LXVI. That the Passions of the Mind are Helped by a   Celestial Season, and how Necessary the Constancy of the Mind is in every   Work

       <page 206>

     
      CHAPTER LXVII. How the Mind of Man may be Joined with the Mind of the   Stars, and Intelligences of the Celestials, and, together with them, Impress   certain wonderful Virtues upon inferior Things

       <page 208>

     
      CHAPTER LXVIII. How our Mind can Change and Bind inferior Things   to the Ends which we Desire

       <page 209>

     
      CHAPTER LXIX. Of Speech, and the Occult Virtue of Words

       <page 210>

     
      CHAPTER LXX. Of the Virtue of Proper Names

       <page 212>

     
      CHAPTER LXXI. Of many Words joined together, as in Sentences and   Verses; and of the Virtues and Astrictions of Charms

       <page 214>

     
      CHAPTER LXXII. Of the wonderful Power of Enchantments

       <page 216>

     
      [p. 13]

        

     
      CHAPTER LXXIII. Of the Virtue of Writing, and of Making   Imprecations, and Inscriptions

       <page 218>

     
      CHAPTER LXXIV. Of the Proportion, Correspondency, and Reduction of   Letters to the Celestial Signs and Planets, According to various Tongues, and   a Table thereof

       <page 219>

     
       

        

     
      BY HENRY MORLEY.

        

     
      Criticism on Agrippa's Natural Magic

       <page 224>

     
      Agrippa and the Rosicrucians

       <page 226>

     
      Exposition of the Cabala

       <page 234>

     
      The Mirific Word

       <page 245>

     
      New Table of the Cabala and Tarot (specially compiled)

       <page 246>

     
      Reuchlin the Mystic

       <page 250>

     
      Agrippa Expounds Reuchlin

       <page 258>

     
      The Nobility of Woman

       <page 261>

     
      Order of the Empyrean Heaven

       <page 275>

     
      Symbols of the Alchemists

       <page 282>

     
       

        

     
      BY DR. L. W. DE LAURENCE.

        

     
      The Eternal Principle

       <page 286>

     
      A Message To Mystics, The Magic Mirror

       <page 288>

     
    

  

ILLUSTRATIONS AND ETCHINGS.

          Title Page of 1651 Edition

       <page 36>

     
      Grand Solar Man

       <page 90>

     
      Calamus

       <page 98>

     
      Characters of Nature

       <page 116>

     
      Divine Letters

       <page 117>

     
      Cabalistical Table of Co-ordinate Characters

       <page 223>

     
      Tree of the Cabala (three full-page etchings)

       <page 239>, <page 241>, <page 243>

     
      The Empyrean Heaven

       <page 274>

     
      Rosicrucian Symbol of the Spirit of Nature

       <page 277>

     
      Symbols of the Alchemists

       <page 283>

     
   
     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 14]

  

SUBLIME OCCULT PHILOSOPHY.

JUDICIOUS READER: This is true and sublime Occult Philosophy. To understand the mysterious influences of the intellectual world upon the celestial, and of both upon the terrestrial; and to know how to dispose and fit ourselves so as to be capable of receiving the superior operations of these worlds, whereby we may be enabled to operate wonderful things by a natural power--to discover the secret counsels of men, to increase riches, to overcome enemies, to procure the favor of men, to expel diseases, to preserve health, to prolong life, to renew youth, to foretell future events, to see and know things done many miles off, and such like as these. These things may seem incredible, yet read but the ensuing treatise and thou shalt see the possibility confirmed both by reason and example.

--J. F., the translator of the English edition of 1651.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 15]

  

PREFACE.

In the last half of 1509 and the first months of 1510, Cornelius Agrippa, known in his day as a Magician, gathered together all the Mystic lore he had obtained by the energy and ardor of youth and compiled it into the elaborate system of Magic, in three books, known as Occult Philosophy, the first book of which--Natural Magic--constitutes the present volume. Agrippa published his Occult Philosophy, with additional chapters, in 1533. The only English translation appeared in London in 1651. It is a thoroughly edited and revised edition of this latter work that we produce. Some translating has been done and missing parts supplied. The reader is assured that while we have modified some of the very broad English of the seventeenth century, that he has a thoroughly valid work. Due care has been taken to preserve all the quaintness of the English text as far as consistent with plain reading. We have endeavored to do full justice to our author, the demands of those purely mystical, and the natural conservatism of the antiquary and collector. In this we believe we have fully succeeded.

The life of Agrippa, up to the time of writing his Occult Philosophy, is also given, drawn mostly from Henry Morley's excellent life of Cornelius Agrippa.

That part of the volume credited to Mr. Morley maybe designated as an honest skeptic's contribution to Mysticism, and his chapters are produced entire, as justice to both him and Agrippa cannot be done otherwise, and they are an especially valuable part of Mystic literature.

[p. 16]

The table of the Cabala, newly compiled for this volume, will be found to possess superior features over all others.

Following the above we give a chapter on the Empyrean Heaven, which will explain much that our author has written. It is derived mainly from an old occult work on "Physic."

The Symbols of the Alchemists will be found both useful and instructive. The chapter on the Magic Mirror, which ends the work, is believed to be the best contribution on the subject extant.

All the original illustrations and some new and selected ones will be found, as also various etchings of characters. That one on the Empyrean Heaven contains, we have cause to believe, some of the very hidden knowledge relating to the Lost Word. It is a much older plate than the work it was taken from.

Some parts of the volume will interest those who love to work out hidden things.

The editor conveys his warmest thanks to those friends who have encouraged him in the work--on the Cabala table, the illustration of the Grand Solar Man and the translating--outside of which he has not asked or received any help. This being the case our friends will please excuse any particular thing that may not sound pleasantly to the ear.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 17]

  

EARLY LIFE OF CORNELIUS AGRIPPA.

AT Cologne, on the 14th of September, 1486, there was born into the noble house of Nettesheim a son, whom his parents called in baptism Henry Cornelius Agrippa. Some might, at first thought, suppose that the last of the three was a Christian name likely to find especial favor with the people of Cologne, the site of whose town, in days of Roman sovereignty, Marcus Agrippa's camp suggested and the colony of Agrippina fixed. But the existence of any such predilection is disproved by some volumes filed with the names of former natives of Cologne. There were as few Agrippas there as elsewhere, the use of the name being everywhere confined to a few individuals taken from a class that was itself not numerous. A child who came into the world feet-foremost was called an Agrippa by the Romans, and the word itself, so Aulus Gellius explains it, was invented to express the idea, being compounded of the trouble of the woman and the feet of the child. The Agrippas of the sixteenth century were usually sons of scholars, or of persons in the upper ranks, who had been mindful of a classic precedent; and there can be little doubt that a peculiarity attendant on the very first incident in the life here to be told was expressed by the word used as appendix to an already sufficient Christian name.

The son thus christened became a scholar and a subject of discussion among scholars, talking only Latin to the world. His family name, Von Nettesheim, he never latinised, inasmuch as the best taste suggested that--if a Latin designation was most proper of a scholar--he could do, or others could do

[p. 18]

for him, nothing simpler than to set apart for literary purposes that half of his real style which was already completely Roman. Henry Cornelius Agrippa von Nettesheim became therefore to the world what he is also called in this narrative--Cornelius Agrippa.

He is the only member of the family of Nettesheim concerning whom any records have been left for the instruction of posterity. Nettesheim itself is a place of little note, distant about twenty-five miles to the southwest of Cologne. It lies in a valley, through which flows the stream from one of the small sources of the Roer. The home of the Von Nettesheims, when they were not personally attached to the service of the emperor, was at Cologne. The ancestors of Cornelius Agrippa had been for generations in the service of the royal house of Austria; his father had in this respect walked in the steps of his forefathers, and from a child Cornelius looked for nothing better than to do the same.

It is proper to mention that among the scholars of Germany one, who before the time of Agrippa was known as the most famous of magicians, belonged to the same city of Cologne; for there, in the thirteenth century, Albertus Magnus taught, and it is there that he is buried.

Born in Cologne did not mean in 1486 what it has meant for many generations almost until now--born into the darkness of a mouldering receptacle of relics. Then the town was not priest-ridden, but rode its priests. For nearly a thousand years priestcraft and handicraft have battled for predominance within its walls. Priestcraft expelled the Jews, banished the weavers, and gained thoroughly the mastery at last. But in the time of Cornelius Agrippa handicraft was uppermost, and in sacred Cologne every trader and mechanic did his part in keeping watch on the archbishop. Europe contained then but few cities that were larger, busier, and richer, for the Rhine was a

[p. 19]

main highway of commerce, and she was enriched, not only by her manufacturers and merchants, but, at the same time also, by a large receipt of toll. Commerce is the most powerful antagonist to despotism, and in whatever place both are brought together one of them must die.

Passing by the earlier times to about the year 1350 there arose a devilish persecution of the Jews in many parts of Europe, and the Jews of Cologne, alarmed by the sufferings to which others of their race had been exposed, withdrew into their houses, with their wives and children, and burnt themselves in the midst of their possessions. The few who had flinched from this self-immolation were banished, and their houses and lands, together with all the land that had belonged to Cologne Jews, remained as spoils in the hands of the Cologne Christians. All having been converted into cash, the gains of the transactions were divided equally between the town and the archbishop. The Jews, twenty years later, were again allowed to reside in the place on payment of a tax for the protection granted them.

In 1369 the city was again in turmoil, caused by a dispute concerning privileges between the authorities of the church and the town council. The weavers, as a democratic body, expressed their views very strong and there was fighting in the streets. The weavers were subdued; they fled to the churches, and were slain at the altars. Eighteen hundred of them, all who survived, were banished, suffering, of course, confiscation of their property, and Cologne being cleared of all its weavers--who had carried on no inconsiderable branch of manufacture--their guild was demolished. This event occurred twenty years after the town had lost, in the Jews, another important part of its industrial population, and the proud city thus was passing into the first stage of its decay.

[p. 20]

In 1388 an university was established at Cologne, upon the model of the University of Paris. Theology and scholastic philosophy were the chief studies cultivated in it, and they were taught in such a way as to win many scholars from abroad. Eight years afterwards, churchmen, nobles, and traders were again contesting their respective claims, and blood was again shed in the streets. The nobles, assembled by night at a secret meeting, were surprised, and the final conquest of the trading class was in that way assured. A new constitution was then devised, continuing in force during the lifetime of Cornelius Agrippa.

The Von Nettesheims were likely to be on better terms with the archbishop than with the party who opposed him, and they were in the emperor's service. This must have influenced the early years of Agrippa. In these early years he displayed a rare aptitude for study, and, as Cologne was an university town and printing, discovered shortly before his birth, was carried on there in the production of Latin classics, the writings of ascetics, scholastics, and mystics like Thomas Aquinas and Albertus Magnus, it was only natural he should avail his eager desire for knowledge at these sources. He was remarkably successful in the study of European languages also, becoming proficient in several. Thus his years of home training were passed until he arrived at the age when princes are considered fit to be produced at court. He then left Cologne and became an attendant on the Emperor of Germany, Maximilian the First, whom he served first as secretary, afterwards for seven years as a soldier. At the age of twenty he was employed on secret service by the German court. At this time Spain was in a chaotic political condition. Ferdinand, the widower of Isabella, was excluded from the crown after his wife's death, that inheritance having passed with his daughter Joanna, as a dower, to her husband Philip, who was the son of Maximilian. In September,

[p. 21]

[paragraph continues] 1506, Philip died, shortly before having declared war against France. Thus it was that Cornelius went to Paris, ostensibly to attend the university there, but in reality to keep Maximilian advised of the important news regarding the French. In the capacity of secret service, in which he was engaged more than once, he showed himself abundantly able to preserve diplomatic secrets, though concerning his own affairs he was open, frank, and free. Thus he is silent in regard to official duties at this time. In attending the university Agrippa came in contact with several other minds who had a love for the occult--mystics who found in him a natural leader to guide them into the realms of the unknown. With these he organized a secret band of Theosophists, or possibly Rosicrucians. Among these mystics was one more prominent as the friend of Agrippa, who might be regarded as second in leadership, an Italian by the name of Blasius Caesar Landulphus, who afterwards became noted in medicine, and also a professor in the University of Pavia. Among them were MM. Germain, advocate, and author of a history of Charles V., etc.; Gaigny, theologian, linguist, Latin poet, and successively procurator, rector, and chancellor of the Paris University; Charles Foucard, M. de Molinflor, Charles de Bouelles, canon, professor of theology, and author of works on metaphysics and geometry, among which he treated of the quadrature of the circle and the cubication of the sphere, and other unusual matters; Germain de Brie, canon, linguist, and writer of Greek verse; MM. Fasch, Wigand, and Clairchamps; and Juanetin Bascara de Gerona, a young Catalonian nobleman, temporarily at Paris while on his way to the court of Maximilian.

Disturbances in Spain had spread to Aragon and Catalonia, and in the district of Tarragon the Catalonians had chased one of their local masters, the Senor de Gerona, the last named of the secret band above.

[p. 22]

[paragraph continues] Agrippa and his friends devised a plan whereby Gerona could be restored to his estates. The capture of a fortification known as the Black Fort was necessary to the enterprise, and to effect this a daring stratagem was decided upon. As the whole province of Tarragon could thus be held against the rebellious peasantry it was believed the emperor, Maximilian, would sanction the enterprise in behalf of his kin, and Gerona went to the German court for this purpose. Agrippa also returned to Cologne for a season early in 1507.

It was over a year afterwards when the plans of the conspirators were carried out. The Black Fort was captured, as planned, by a stratagem. After remaining there for a time, Agrippa was sent with some others to garrison the place of Gerona at Villarodona. Landulph had, meanwhile, gone to Barcelona, and it was deemed prudent that Gerona, the peasants of the whole country being now in arms, should join him there. Gerona was, however, captured by the infuriated rustics, who immediately organized themselves in great force to storm his castle and exterminate the garrison there, who-, in Gerona's absence, were under the charge of Agrippa. Timely warning of the attack was conveyed to the garrison. To escape by breaking through the watches of the peasantry was madness, to remain was equally futile. But one way of escape presented itself--an old, half-ruined tower three miles distant, situated in one of the mountain wildernesses which characterize the district of Valls. The tower stood in a craggy, cavernous valley, where the broken mountains make way for a gulf containing stagnant waters, and jagged, inaccessible rocks hem it in. At the gorge by which this place is entered stood the tower, on a hill which was itself surrounded by deep bogs and pools, while it also was within a ring of lofty crags. There was but one way to this tower, except when the ground was frozen, and these

[p. 23]

events happened in the midsummer of 1508. The way among the pools was by a narrow path of stone, with turf walls as hedges. The site of the tower made it inexpugnable in summer time. It was owned by an abbot, who gave them permission to occupy and fortify it. This they accordingly done, having a poor bailiff, in charge of the place, for company.

The retreat to the tower was safely accomplished under cover of night. Gerona's place was sacked the next day by the peasants, who sought fiercely for the German, as they termed Agrippa. The hiding place of the conspirators becoming known, the flood of wrath poured down towards the tower, but the strength of the position was then felt. With a barricade of overthrown wagons the sole path to the besieged was closed, and behind this barrier they posted themselves with their arquebuses, of which one only sufficed to daunt a crowd of men accustomed to no weapons except slings or bows and arrows. The peasantry, discovering that the tower was not to be stormed, settled down to lay strict siege to the place and thereby starve its little garrison into surrender.

Perilous weeks were passed by the adventurers, but more formidable than actual conflict was the famine consequent on their blockade. Perrot, the keeper, taking counsel with himself as how to help his guests and rid himself of them at the same time, explored every cranny of the wall of rock by which they were surrounded. Clambering among the wastes, with feet accustomed to the difficulties of the mountain, he discovered at last a devious and rugged way, by which the obstacles of crag and chasm were avoided and the mountain top reached. Looking down from there he saw how, on the other side, the mountain rose out of a lake, known as the Black Lake, having an expanse of about four miles, upon the farther shore of which his master's abbey stood. He found a way to the lake through a rocky gorge,

[p. 24]

but from there to the abbey was a long way, and, to men without a boat, the lake was a more impassable barrier than the mountain. He returned to the tower, where the little garrison heard the result of his explorations. It was seen that a boat was necessary to effect an escape, and to procure that a letter would have to be sent through the ranks of the vigilant besiegers, whose sentries were posted at all points, and who allowed no one to approach the tower; not even the good abbot himself, who had vainly tried to turn the peasants from their purpose.

Under these circumstances the ingenuity of Agrippa was severely tested, and he justified the credit he had won for subtle wit. The keeper had a son, a shepherd-boy, and Agrippa disfigured him with stains of milk-thistle and the juice of other herbs, befouled his skin and painted it with shocking spots to imitate the marks of leprosy, fixed his hair into a filthy bunch, dressed him like a beggar, and gave him a crooked branch for a stick, within which there was scooped a hollow for the letter. Upon the boy so disguised--a fearful picture of the outcast leper--the leper's bell was hung, his father seated him on an ox, and led him by night across the marshes by the ford, where he left him. Stammering, as he went, petitions for alms, the boy walked without difficulty by a very broad road made for him among the peasantry, who regarded his approach with terror and fled from his path. The letter was safely delivered, the boy returning the next day with the desired answer, ringing his bell at the border of the marsh at dark for his father to bring him in. Agrippa and his companions spent the night in preparations for departure. Towards dawn they covered their retreat by a demonstration of their usual state of watchfulness, fired their guns, and gave other indications of their presence. This done, they set forth, in dead silence, carrying their baggage, and were

[p. 25]

guided by Perrot, the keeper, to the summit. There they lay gladly down among the stones to rest, while their guide descended on the other side and spread a preconcerted signal, a white cloth, upon a rock. When he returned they ate the breakfast they had brought with them, all sitting with their eyes towards the lake. At about nine o'clock two fishermen's barks were discerned, which hoisted a red flag, the good abbot's signal. Rejoicing at the sight of this, the escaped men fired off their guns in triumph from the mountain-top, a hint to the besieging peasantry of their departure, and, at the same time, a signal to the rescuers. Still following Perrot, they next descended, along ways by him discovered, through the rocky gorge, to the meadows that bordered the lake. Entering the boats, before evening they found themselves safe under the abbot's roof. The day of this escape was the 14th of August, 1508. They had been suffering siege, therefore, during almost two months in the mountain fastness.

Cornelius Agrippa being safe could quit the scene, and done so without waiting to see how the difficulty would be solved between the Catalonian peasants and their master. It perplexed him much that he had no tidings of Landulph, his closest friend. The abbot advised him to go to court again, but Agrippa replied that he had no mind to risk being again sent upon hazardous missions. After remaining several days in the abbey he set out, with an old man and his servant Stephen, for Barcelona. Antonius Xanthus, the companion of Agrippa, had seen much of the rough side of the world, was useful as a traveling companion, and became a member of Agrippa's secret league.

Not finding Landulph at Barcelona they traveled to Valentia. From there they sailed for Italy, and by way of the Balearic Islands and Sardinia they went to Naples, where, disheartened by not finding Landulph,

[p. 26]

they shipped for Leghorn, and then traveled to Avignon. There they learned, from a traveling merchant, that Landulph was at Lyons. The friends now corresponded, Cornelius writing December 17th--nearly four months after he had left the abbey in search of his friend, the 24th of August. We may imagine many of the things these friends wrote each other. It was the suggestion of Agrippa that all the members of their league be called together that they might be absolved of their oaths regarding the Spanish conspiracy and to resume, once more, their former pleasant relations. He also hoped that Landulph might be able to visit him at Avignon and talk their secrets over, as he was unable to leave for Lyons, his funds being exhausted, until after the lapse of a little time.

_________

The foregoing account, which has been condensed from Mr. Henry Morley's excellent Life of Cornelius Agrippa, is continued in that part of this volume that starts with the heading of "Agrippa and the Rosicrucians." Agrippa's life now becomes so interwoven with mysticism that we give Morley's account in full. The next chapters in his life are replete with the fruition of his mystic nature, its full-blown flower being The Occult Philosophy, or Three Books of Magic, the writing of which completes his early life.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 27]

  

CORNELIUS AGRIPPA TO THE READER.

I do not doubt but the title of our book of Occult Philosophy, or of Magic, may by the rarity of it allure many to read it, amongst which, some of a disordered judgment and some that are perverse will come to hear what I can say, who, by their rash ignorance, may take the name of Magic in the worse sense and, though scarce having seen the title, cry out that I teach forbidden Arts, sow the seed of heresies, offend the pious, and scandalize excellent wits; that I am a sorcerer, and superstitious and devilish, who indeed am a Magician: to whom I answer, that a Magician doth not, amongst learned men, signify a sorcerer or one that is superstitious or devilish; but a wise man, a priest, a prophet; and that the Sybils were Magicianesses, and therefore prophesied most clearly of Christ; and that Magicians, as wise men, by the wonderful secrets of the world, knew Christ, the author of the world, to be born, and came first of all to worship him; and that the name of Magic was received by philosophers, commended by divines, and is not unacceptable to the Gospel. I believe that the supercilious censors will object against the Sybils, holy Magicians and the Gospel itself sooner than receive the name of Magic into favor. So conscientious are they that neither Apollo nor all the Muses, nor an angel from heaven can redeem me from their curse. Whom therefore I advise that they read not our writings, nor understand them, nor remember them. For they are pernicious and full of poison; the gate of Acheron is in this book; it speaks stones--let them take heed

[p. 28]

that it beat not out their brains. But you that come without prejudice to read it, if you have so much discretion of prudence as bees have in gathering honey, read securely, and believe that you shall receive no little profit, and much pleasure; but if you shall find any things that may not please you, let them alone and make no use of them, for I do not approve of them, but declare them to you. But do not refuse other things, for they that look into the books of physicians do, together with antidotes and medicines, read also of poisons. I confess that Magic teacheth many superfluous things, and curious prodigies for ostentation; leave them as empty things, yet be not ignorant of their causes. But those things which are for the profit of men--for the turning away of evil events, for the destroying of sorceries, for the curing of diseases, for the exterminating of phantasms, for the preserving of life, honor, or fortune--may be done without offense to God or injury to religion, because they are, as profitable, so necessary. But I have admonished you that I have writ many things rather narratively than affirmatively; for so it seemed needful that we should pass over fewer things, following the judgments of Platonists and other Gentile Philosophers when they did suggest an argument of writing to our purpose. Therefore if any error have been committed, or anything hath been spoken more freely, pardon my youth, for I wrote this being scarce a young man, that I may excuse myself, and say, whilst I was a child I spake as a child, and I understood as a child, but being become a man, I retracted those things which I did being a boy, and in my book of the vanity and uncertainty of Sciences I did, for the most part, retract this book. But here, haply, you may blame me again, saying, "Behold, thou, being a youth, didst write, and now, being old, hast retracted it; what, therefore, hast thou set forth?" I confess, whilst I was

[p. 29]

very young, I set upon the writing of these books, but, hoping that I should set them forth with corrections, and enlargements--and for that cause I gave them to Trithemius, a Neapolitanian Abbot, formerly a Spanhemensian, a man very industrious after secret things. But it happened afterwards that, the work being intercepted, before I finished it, it was carried about imperfect and impolished, and did fly aboard in Italy, in France, in Germany, through many men's hands; and some men, whether more impatiently or imprudently I know not, would have put it thus imperfect to the press, with which mischief, I, being affected, determined to set it forth myself, thinking that there might be less danger if these books came out of my hands with some amendments than to come forth, torn and in fragments, out of other men's hands. Moreover, I thought it no crime if I should not suffer the testimony of my youth to perish. Also, we have added some chapters and inserted many things which did seem unfit to pass by, which the curious reader shall be able to understand by the inequality of the very phrase, for we were unwilling to begin the work anew and to unravel all that we had done, but to correct it and put some flourish upon it. Wherefore, I pray thee, courteous reader, weigh not these things according to the present time of setting them forth, but pardon my curious youth if thou find any thing in them that may displease thee.

___________

When Agrippa first wrote his Occult Philosophy he sent it to his friend Trithemius, an Abbot of Wurtzburg, with the ensuing letter. Trithemius detained the messenger until he had read the manuscript and then answered Agrippa's letter with such sound advice as mystics would do well to follow for all time to come. Trithemius is known as a mystic author and scholar.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 30]

  

AGRIPPA TO TRITHEMIUS.

TO R. P. D. JOHN TRITHEMIUS, AN ABBOT OF SAINT JAMES, IN THE SUBURBS OF HERBIPOLIS, HENRY CORNELIUS AGRIPPA OF NETTESHEIM SENDETH GREETING:

WHEN I was of late, most reverend father, for a while conversant with you in your Monastery of Herbipolis, we conferred together of divers things concerning Chemistry, Magic, and Cabala, and of other things, which as yet lie hid in Secret Sciences and Arts; and then there was one great question amongst the rest--Why Magic, whereas it was accounted by all ancient philosophers to be the chiefest science, and by the ancient wise men and priests was always held in great veneration, came at last, after the beginning of the Catholic Church, to be always odious to and suspected by the holy Fathers, and then exploded by Divines, and condemned by sacred Canons, and, moreover, by all laws and ordinances forbidden? Now, the cause, as I conceive, is no other than this, viz.: Because, by a certain fatal depravation of times and men, many false philosophers crept in, and these, under the name of Magicians, heaping together, through various sorts of errors and factions of false religions, many cursed superstitions and dangerous rites, and many wicked sacrileges, even to the perfection of Nature; and the same set forth in many wicked and unlawful books, to which they have by stealth prefixed the most honest name and title of Magic; hoping, by this sacred title, to gain credit to their cursed and detestable fooleries. Hence it is that this name of Magic, formerly so honorable, is now become most odious to good and honest men, and accounted a

[p. 31]

capital crime if any one dare profess himself to be a Magician, either in doctrine or works, unless haply some certain old doting woman, dwelling in the country, would be believed to be skillful and have a divine power, that she (as saith Apuleis the satirist) "can throw down the heaven, lift up the earth, harden fountains, wash away mountains, raise up ghosts, cast down the Gods, extinguish the stars, illuminate hell," or, as Virgil sings:

She'll promise by her charms to cast great cares,
 Or ease the minds of men, and make the Stars
 For to go back, and rivers to stand still,
 And raise the nightly ghosts even at her will;
 To make the earth to groan, and trees to fall
 From the mountains--

Hence those things which Lucan relates of Thessala the Magicianess, and Homer of the omnipotency of Circe. Whereof many others, I confess, are as well of a fallacious opinion as a superstitious diligence and pernicious labor; for when they cannot come under a wicked art yet they presume they may be able to cloak themselves under that venerable title of Magic.

These things being so, I wondered much and was not less indignant that, as yet, there had been no man who had either vindicated this sublime and sacred discipline from the charge of impiety or had delivered it purely and sincerely to us. What I have seen of our modern writers--Roger Bacon, Robert of York, an Englishman, Peter Apponus, Albertus [Magnus] the Teutonich, Arnoldas de villa Nova, Anselme the Parmensian. Picatrix the Spaniard, Cicclus Asculus of Florence, and many other writers of an obscure name--when they promise to treat of Magic do nothing but relate irrational tales and superstitions unworthy of honest men. Hence my spirit was moved, and, by reason partly of admiration, and partly of indignation, I was willing to play

[p. 32]

the philosopher, supposing that I should do no discommendable work--seeing I have been always from my youth a curious and undaunted searcher for wonderful effects and operations full of mysteries--if I should recover that ancient Magic (the discipline of all wise men) from the errors of impiety, purify and adorn it with its proper lustre, and vindicate it from the injuries of calumniators; which thing, though I long deliberated of it in my mind, I never durst undertake; but after some conference betwixt us of these things, at Herbipolis, your transcending knowledge and learning, and your ardent adhortation, put courage and boldness into me. There selecting the opinions of philosophers of known credit, and purging the introduction of the wicked (who, dissemblingly, and with a counterfeited knowledge, did teach that traditions of Magicians must be learned from very reprobate books of darkness or from institutions of wonderful operations), and, removing all darkness, I have at last composed three compendious books of Magic, and titled them Of Occult Philosophy, being a title less offensive, which books I submit (you excelling in the knowledge of these things) to your correction and censure, that if I have wrote anything which may tend either to the contumely of Nature, offending God, or injury of religion, you may condemn the error; but if the scandal of impiety be dissolved and purged, you may defend the Tradition of Truth; and that you would do so with these books, and Magic itself, that nothing may be concealed which may be profitable, and nothing approved of which cannot but do hurt; by which means these three books, having passed your examination with approbation, may at length be thought worthy to come forth with good success in public, and may not be afraid to come under the censure of posterity.

Farewell, and pardon these my bold undertakings.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 33]

  

TRITHEMIUS TO AGRIPPA.

JOHN TRITHEMIUS, ABBOT OF SAINT JAMES OF HERBIPOLIS, FORMERLY OF SPANHEMIA, TO HIS HENRY CORNELIUS AGRIPPA OF NETTESHEIM, HEALTH AND LOVE:

YOUR work, most renowned Agrippa, entitled Of Occult Philosophy, which you have sent by this bearer to me, has been examined. With how much pleasure I received it no mortal tongue can express nor the pen of any write. I wondered at your more than vulgar learning--that you, being so young, should penetrate into such secrets as have been hid from most learned men; and not only clearly and truly but also properly and elegantly set them forth. Whence first I give you thanks for your good will to me, and, if I shall ever be able, I shall return you thanks to the utmost of my power. Your work, which no learned man can sufficiently commend, I approve of. Now that you may proceed toward higher things, as you have begun, and not suffer such excellent parts of wit to be idle, I do, with as much earnestness as I can, advise, intreat and beseech you that you would exercise yourself in laboring after better things, and demonstrate the light of true wisdom to the ignorant, according as you yourself are divinely enlightened. Neither let the consideration of idle, vain fellows withdraw you from your purpose; I say of them, of whom it is said, "The wearied ox treads hard," whereas no man, to the judgment of the wise, can be truly learned who is sworn to the rudiments of one only faculty. But you have been by God gifted with a large and sublime wit, and it is not that you should imitate oxen but rather birds; neither think it sufficient that you study about particulars, but

[p. 34]

bend your mind confidently to universals; for by so much the more learned any one is thought, by how much fewer things he is ignorant of. Moreover, your wit is fully apt to all things, and to be rationally employed, not in a few or low things, but many and sublimer. Yet this one rule I advise you to observe--that you communicate vulgar secrets to vulgar friends, but higher and secret to higher and secret friends only: Give hay to an ox, sugar to a parrot only. Understand my meaning, lest you be trod under the oxen's feet, as oftentimes it falls out. Farewell, my happy friend, and if it lie in my power to serve you, command me, and according to your pleasure it shall without delay be done; also, let our friendship increase daily; write often to me, and send me some of your labors I earnestly pray you. Again farewell.

From our Monastery of Peapolis, the 8th day of April, A. D. MDX.

_____

In January, 1531, Agrippa wrote from Mechlin to Hermann of Wied, Archbishop of Cologne, to whom he dedicated his Occult Philosophy. In this letter he says: "Behold! amongst such things as were closely laid up--the books Of Occult Philosophy, or of Magic," "a new work of most ancient and abstruse learning;" "a doctrine of antiquity, by none, I dare say, hitherto attempted to be restored." "I shall be devotedly yours if these studies of my youth shall by the authority of your greatness come into knowledge," "seeing many things in them seemed to me, being older, as most profitable, so most necessary to be known. You have therefore the work, not only of my youth but of my present age," "having added many things."

The etching inserted at this place is made from the title page of the only complete English edition of the Occult Philosophy of Magic heretofore published.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 35] [p. 36]

Click to enlarge
Title Page of 1651

[p. 37]

  

THE PHILOSOPHY OF NATURAL MAGIC

  

BY

  

HENRY CORNELIUS AGRIPPA

  

KNIGHT AND DOCTOR OF BOTH LAWS, COUNSELLOR TO CAeSAR'S SACRED MAJESTY, AND JUDGE OF THE PREROGATIVE COURT.

_______

  

CHAPTER I.

  

HOW MAGICIANS COLLECT VIRTUES FROM THE THREE-FOLD WORLD IS DECLARED IN THESE THREE BOOKS.

SEEING there is a Three-fold World--Elementary, Celestial and Intellectual--and every inferior is governed by its superior, and receiveth the influence of the virtues thereof, so that the very Original and Chief Worker of all doth by angels, the heavens, stars, elements, animals, plants, metals and stones convey from Himself the virtues of His Omnipotency upon us, for whose service He made and created all these things: Wise men conceive it no way irrational that it should be possible for us to ascend by the same degrees through each World, to the same very original World itself, the Maker of all things and

[p. 38]

[paragraph continues] First cause, from whence all things are and proceed; and also to enjoy not only these virtues, which are already in the more excellent kind of things, but also besides these, to draw new virtues from above. Hence it is that they seek after the virtues of the Elementary World, through the help of physic, and natural philosophy in the various mixtions of natural things; then of the Celestial World in the rays, and influences thereof, according to the rules of Astrologers, and the doctrines of mathematicians, joining the Celestial virtues to the former. Moreover, they ratify and confirm all these with the powers of divers Intelligence, through the sacred ceremonies of religions. The order and process of all these I shall endeavor to deliver in these three books: Whereof the first contains Natural Magic, the second Celestial, and the third Ceremonial. But I know not whether it be an unpardonable presumption in me, that I, a man of so little judgment and learning, should in my very youth- so confidently set upon a business so difficult, so hard and intricate as this is. Wherefore, whatsoever things have here already, and shall afterward be said by me, I would not have anyone assent to them, nor shall I myself, any further than they shall be approved of by the universal church and the congregation of the faithful.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER II.

  

WHAT MAGIC IS, WHAT ARE THE PARTS THEREOF, AND HOW THE PROFESSORS THEREOF MUST BE QUALIFIED.

MAGIC is a faculty of wonderful virtue, full of most high mysteries, containing the most profound contemplation of most secret things, together with the nature, power, quality, substance and virtues thereof, as also the knowledge of whole Nature, and it doth

[p. 39]

instruct us concerning the differing and agreement of things amongst themselves, whence it produceth its wonderful effects, by uniting the virtues of things through the application of them one to the other, and to their inferior suitable subjects, joining and knitting them together thoroughly by the powers and virtues of the superior Bodies. This is the most perfect and chief Science, that sacred and sublimer kind of Philosophy, and lastly the most absolute perfection of all most excellent Philosophy. For seeing that all regulative Philosophy is divided into Natural, Mathematical and Theological: (Natural Philosophy teacheth the nature of those things which are in the world, searching and inquiring into their causes, effects, times, places, fashions, events, their whole and parts, also

The Number and the Nature of those things,
 Called Elements--what Fire, Earth, Aire forth brings;
 From whence the Heavens their beginnings had;
 Whence Tide, whence Rainbow, in gay colors clad.
 What makes the Clouds that gathered are, and black,
 To send forth Lightnings, and a Thund'ring crack;
 What doth the Nightly Flames, and Comets make;
 What makes the Earth to swell, and then to quake;
 What is the Seed of Metals, and of Gold;
 What Virtues, Wealth, Both Nature's Coffer hold.

All these things doth Natural Philosophy, the viewer of Nature, contain, teaching us, according to Virgil's Muse:

                                   Whence all things flow--
 Whence Mankind, Beast; whence Fire, whence Rain and Snow;
 Whence Earthquakes are; why the whole Ocean beats
 Over its banks and then again retreats;
 Whence strength of Herbs, whence Courage, rage of Brutes
 All kinds of Stone, of creeping Things, and Fruits.

But Mathematical Philosophy teacheth us to know the quantity of natural bodies, as extended into three dimensions, as also to conceive of the motion and course of celestial bodies.

[p. 40]

                             As in great haste,
 What makes the golden Stars to march so fast?
 What makes the Moon sometimes to mask her face,
 The Sun also, as if in some disgrace?

And, as Virgil sings:

How th' Sun doth rule with twelve Zodiac Signs,
 The Orb that's measur'd round about with Lines--
 It doth the Heavens' Starry Way make known,
 And strange Eclipses of the Sun and Moon;
  also, and the Stars of Rain,
 The Seven Stars likewise, and Charles, his wain;
 Why Winter Suns make tow'rds the West so fast;
 What makes the Nights so long ere they be past?

All which are understood by Mathematical Philosophy.

Hence, by the Heavens we may foreknow
 The Seasons all; times for to reap and sow,
 And when 'tis fit to launch into the deep,
 And when to war, and when in peace to sleep;
 And when to dig up trees, and them again
 To set, that they may bring forth amain.

Now Theological Philosophy, or Divinity, teacheth what God is, what the Mind, what an Intelligence, what an Angel, what a Devil, what the Soul, what Religion, what sacred Institutions, Rites, Temples, Observations, and sacred Mysteries are. It instructs us also concerning Faith, Miracles, the virtues of Words and Figures, the secret operations and mysteries of Seals; and, as Apuleius saith, it teacheth us rightly to understand and to be skilled in the Ceremonial Laws, the equity of Holy things and rule of Religions. But to recollect myself.)

These three principal faculties [**] Magic comprehends, unites and actuates; deservedly, therefore, was it by the Ancients esteemed as the highest and most sacred Philosophy. It was, as we find, brought to light by most sage authors and most famous

[p. 41]

writers, [**] amongst which principally Zamolxis and Zoroaster were so famous that many believed they were the inventors of this Science. Their track Abbaris the Hyperborean, Charmondas, Danigeron, Eudoxus, Hermippus followed. There were also other eminent, choice men, as Mercurius Tresmegistus, Porphyrius, Iamblicus, Plotinus, Proclus, Dardanus, Orpheus the Thracian, Gog the Grecian, Germa the Babylonian, Apollonius of Tyana. Osthanes also wrote excellently of this Art, whose books being as it were lost, Democritus of Abdera recovered, and set them forth with his own Commentaries. Besides, Pythagoras, Empedocles, Democritus, Plato, and many other renowned Philosophers travelled far by sea to learn this Art; and being returned, published it with wonderful devoutness, esteeming of it as a great secret. Also it is well known that Pythagoras and Plato went to the Prophets of Memphis to learn it, and travelled through almost all Syria, Egypt, Judea, and the Schools of the Chaldeans that they might not be ignorant of the most sacred Memorials and Records of Magic, as also that they might be furnished with Divine things. Whosoever, therefore, is desirous to study in this Faculty, if he be not skilled in Natural Philosophy, wherein are discovered the qualities of things, and in which are found the occult properties of every Being, and if he be not skillful in the Mathematics, and in the Aspects, and Figures of the Stars, upon which depend the sublime virtue and property of everything; and if he be not learned in Theology, wherein are manifested those immaterial substances, which dispense and minister all things, he cannot be possibly able to understand the rationality

[p. 42]

of Magic. For there is no work that is done by mere Magic, nor any work that is merely Magical, that doth not comprehend these three Faculties.

Footnotes

^40:* Natural, Mathematical and Theological (Spiritual) Philosophy.

^41:* The author here gives a valuable list of mystic writers and teachers up to A. D. 1509. At this date Agrippa was a "teacher of theology" at Dole, France, where he "attracted great attention by his lectures; but having by his bitter satires on the monks drawn upon himself the hatred of that body, he was accused of heresy, and obliged to leave," going to Cologne.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER III.

  

OF THE FOUR ELEMENTS, THEIR QUALITIES, AND MUTUAL MIXTIONS.

THERE are four Elements, and original grounds of all corporeal things--Fire, Earth, Water, Air--of which all elemented inferior bodies are compounded; not by way of heaping them up together; but by transmutation and union; and when they are destroyed they are resolved into Elements. For there is none of the sensible Elements that is pure, but they are more or less mixed, and apt to be changed one into the other: Even as Earth becoming dirty, and being dissolved, becomes Water, and the same being made thick and hard, becometh Earth again; but being evaporated through heat, passeth into Air, and that being kindled, passeth into Fire; and this being extinguished, returns back again into Air; but being cooled again after its burning, becomes Earth, or Stone, or Sulphur, and this is manifested by Lightning. Plato also was of that opinion, that Earth was wholly changeable, and that the rest of the Elements are changed, as into this, so into one another successively. But it is the opinion of the subtler sort of Philosophers, that Earth is not changed, but relented and mixed with other Elements, which do dissolve it, and that it returns back into itself again. [**] Now, every one of the Elements hath two specifical qualities--the former whereof it

[p. 43]

retains as proper to itself; in the other, as a mean, it agrees with that which comes next after it. For Fire is hot and dry, the Earth dry and cold, the Water cold and moist, the Air moist and hot. [**] And so after this manner the Elements, according to two contrary qualities, are contrary one to the other, as Fire to Water, and Earth to Air. Moreover, the Elements are upon another account opposite one to the other: For some are heavy, as Earth and Water, and others are light, as Air and Fire. Wherefore the Stoics called the former passives, but the latter actives. And yet once again, Plato distinguisheth them after another manner, and assigns to every one of them three qualities, viz., to the Fire brightness, thinness and motion, but to the Earth darkness, thickness and quietness. And according to these qualities the Elements of Fire and Earth are contrary. But the other Elements borrow their qualities from these, so that the Air receives two qualities of the Fire, thinness and motion, and one of the Earth, viz., darkness. In like manner Water receives two qualities of the Earth, darkness and thickness, and one of Fire, viz., motion. But Fire is twice more thin than Air, thrice more movable, and four times more bright; and the Air is twice more bright, thrice more thin, and four times more movable than Water. Wherefore Water is twice more bright than Earth, thrice more thin, and four times more movable. [*+] As therefore the Fire is to the Air,

[p. 44]

so Air is to the Water, and Water to the Earth; and again, as the Earth is to the Water, so is the Water to the Air, and the Air to the Fire. And this is the root and foundation of all bodies, natures, virtues and wonderful works; and he which shall know these qualities of the Elements, and their mixtions, shall easily bring to pass such things that are wonderful, and astonishing, and shall be perfect in Magic.

Footnotes

^42:* Agrippa teaches here and in the chapter following that matter, or substance, however much its elementary forms may change, is ETERNAL, thus denying the dogma that God "created" all things "out of nothing."

^43:* Tabularly stated:

           

       PROPER
   QUALITY.

        

       MEAN
   QUALITY.

     
      Fire is

       ... hot

       and

       dry.

     
      Earth is

       ... dry

       and

       cold.

     
      Water is

       ... cold

       and

       moist.

     
      Air is

       ... moist

       and

       hot.

     
   As to these qualities--Fire is contrary to Water, and Earth to Air. This exposition of the "qualities" astrologers should note, for while the books give the same matter the "proper" and "mean" qualities are not given.

^43:+ The unity of the contrasts between the four elements is here shown.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER IV.

  

OF A THREE-FOLD CONSIDERATION OF THE ELEMENTS.

THERE are, then, as we have said, four Elements, without the perfect knowledge whereof we can effect nothing in Magic. Now each of them is three-fold, that so the number of four may make up the number of twelve; and by passing by the number of seven into the number of ten, there may be a progress to the supreme Unity, upon which all virtue and wonderful operation depends. Of the first Order are the pure Elements, which are neither compounded nor changed, nor admit of mixtion, but are incorruptible, and not of which, but through which the virtues of all natural things are brought forth into act. No man is able to declare their virtues, because they can do all things upon all things. He which is ignorant of these, shall never be able to bring to pass any wonderful matter. Of the second Order are Elements that are compounded, changeable and inpure, yet such as may by art be reduced to their pure simplicity, whose virtue, when they are thus reduced to their simplicity, doth above all things perfect all occult and common operations of Nature; and these are the foundation of the whole Natural Magic. Of the third Order are those Elements, which originally and of themselves are not Elements, but are twice

[p. 45]

compounded, various and changeable one into the other. [**] They are the infallible Mediums, and therefore are called the middle nature, or Soul of the middle nature. Very few there are that understand the deep mysteries thereof. In them is, by means of certain numbers, degrees and orders, the perfection of every effect in anything soever, whether Natural, Celestial or Supercelestial; they are full of wonders and mysteries, and are operative, as in Magic Natural, so in Divine: For from these, through them, proceed the bindings, loosings and transmutations of all things, the knowing and foretelling of all things to come, also the driving forth of evil and the gaining of good spirits. Let no man, therefore, without these three sorts of Elements, and the knowledge thereof, be confident that he is able to work any thing in the occult Sciences of Magic and Nature. But whosoever shall know how to reduce those of one Order into those of another, impure into pure, compounded into simple, and shall know how to understand distinctly the nature, virtue and power of them in number, degrees and order, without dividing the substance, he shall easily attain to the knowledge and perfect operation of all Natural things and Celestial secrets.

Footnotes

^45:* Such as heat, light and electricity; astral magnetism, attraction and vibration; form, number and color; occult principles of natural law; the immutable attributes of time, space and substance.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER V.

  

OF THE WONDERFUL NATURES OF FIRE AND EARTH.

THERE are two things, saith Hermes, viz., Fire and Earth, which are sufficient for the operation of all wonderful things: the former is active, the latter passive. Fire, as saith Dionysius, in all things, and through all things, comes and goes away bright; it is

[p. 46]

in all things bright, and at the same time occult and unknown. When it is by itself (no other matter coming to it, in which it should manifest its proper action) it is boundless and invisible, of itself sufficient for every action that is proper to it, movable, yielding itself after a manner to all things that come next to it, renewing, guarding Nature, enlightening, not comprehended by lights that are veiled over, clear, parted, leaping back, bending upwards, quick in motion, high, always raising motions, comprehending another, not comprehended itself, not standing in need of another, secretly increasing of itself, and manifesting its greatness to things that receive it; Active, Powerful, Invisibly present in all things at once; it will not be affronted or opposed, but as it were in a way of revenge, it will reduce, on a sudden, things into obedience to itself; incomprehensible, impalpable, not lessened, most rich in all dispensations of itself. Fire, as saith Pliny, is the boundless and mischievous part of the nature of things, it being a question whether it destroys or produceth most things. Fire itself is one, and penetrates through all things, as say the Pythagoreans, also spread abroad in the Heavens, and shining: but in the infernal place straitened, dark and tormenting; in the mid way it partakes of both. Fire, therefore, in itself is one, but in that which receives it, manifold; and in differing subjects it is distributed in a different manner, as Cleanthes witnesseth in Cicero. That fire, then, which we use is fetched out of other things. It is in stones, and is fetched out by the stroke of the steel; it is in Earth, and makes that, after digging up, to smoke; it is in Water, and heats springs and wells; it is in the depth of the Sea, and makes that, being tossed with winds, warm; it is in the Air, and makes it (as we oftentimes see) to burn. And all animals and living things whatsoever, as also all vegetables, are preserved by heat; and everything

[p. 47]

that lives, lives by reason of the inclosed heat. The properties of the Fire that is above, are heat, making all things fruitful, and light, giving life to all things. The properties of the infernal Fire are a parching heat, consuming all things, and darkness, making all things barren. The Celestial and bright Fire drives away spirits of darkness; also this, our Fire made with wood, drives away the same in as much as it hath an analogy with and is the vehiculum of that Superior light; as also of him who saith, "I am the Light of the World," which is true Fire, the Father of Lights, from whom every good thing, that is given, comes; sending forth the light of His Fire, and communicating it first to the Sun and the rest of the Celestial bodies, and by these, as by mediating instruments, conveying that light into our Fire. As, therefore, the spirits of darkness are stronger in the dark, so good spirits, which are Angels of Light, are augmented, not only by that light, which is Divine, of the Sun, and Celestial, but also by the light of our common Fire. Hence it was that the first and most wise institutors of religions and ceremonies ordained that prayers, singings and all manner of divine worships whatsoever should not be performed without lighted candles or torches (hence, also, was that significant saying of Pythagoras, "Do not speak of God without a Light"), and they commanded that for the driving away of wicked spirits, Lights and Fires should be kindled by the corpses of the dead, and that they should not be removed until the expiations were after a holy manner performed and they buried. And the great Jehovah himself in the old law commanded that all his sacrifices should be offered with Fire, and that Fire should always be burning upon the altar, which custom the priests of the altar did always observe and keep amongst the Romans.

Now the basis and foundation of all the Elements is the Earth, for that is the object, subject, and receptacle

[p. 48]

of all Celestial rays and influences; in it are contained the seeds and seminal virtues of all things; and therefore it is said to be Animal, Vegetable and Mineral. It being made fruitful by the other Elements and the Heavens, it brings forth all things of itself. It receives the abundance of all things and is, as it were, the first fountain from whence all things spring. It is the center, foundation and mother of all things. Take as much of it as you please, separated, washed, depurated, subtilized, if you let it lie in the open air a little while, it will, being full and abounding with heavenly virtues, of itself bring forth plants, worms and other living things, also stones, and bright sparks of metals. In it are great secrets, if at any time it shall be purified by the help of Fire, and reduced unto its simplicity by a convenient washing. It is the first matter of our creation, and the truest medicine that can restore and preserve us.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER VI.

  

OF THE WONDERFUL NATURES OF WATER, AIR AND WINDS.

THE other two Elements, viz., Water and Air, are not less efficacious than the former; neither is Nature wanting to work wonderful things in them. There is so great a necessity of Water, that without it no living thing can live. No herb nor plant whatsoever, without the moistening of Water can branch forth. In it is the seminary virtue of all things, especially of animals. The seeds also of trees and plants, although they are earthy, must notwithstanding of necessity be rotted in Water before they can be fruitful; whether they be imbibed with the moisture of the Earth, or with dew or rain or any other Water that is on purpose put to them. For Moses writes, that only Earth

[p. 49]

and Water bring forth a living soul. But he ascribes a twofold production of things to Water, viz., of things swimming in the Waters, and of things flying in the Air above the Earth. And that those productions that are made in and upon the Earth are partly attributes to the very Water, the same Scripture testifies, where it saith that the plants and the herbs did not grow, because God had not caused it to rain upon the Earth. Such is the efficacy of this Element of Water that spiritual regeneration cannot be done without it, as Christ himself testified to Nicodemus. Very great, also, is the virtue of it in the religious worship of God, in expiations and purifications; yea, the necessity of it is no less than that of Fire. Infinite are the benefits, and divers are the uses thereof, as being that by virtue of which all things subsist, are generated, nourished and increased. Thence it was that Thales, of Miletus, and Hesiod concluded that Water was the beginning of all things, and said it was the first of all the Elements, and the most potent, and that because it hath the mastery over all the rest. For, as Pliny saith, Waters swallow up the Earth, extinguish flames, ascend on high, and by the stretching forth of the clouds, challenge the Heaven for their own; the same falling become the cause of all things that grow in the Earth. Very many are the wonders that are done by Waters, according to the writings of Pliny, Solinus, and many other historians of the wonderful virtue whereof. Ovid also makes mention in these verses:

Horn'd Hammon's Waters at high noon
 Are cold; hot at Sun-rise and setting Sun.
 Wood, put in bub'ling Athemas is Fir'd,
 The Moon then farthest from the Sun retir'd;
 Ciconian streams congeal his guts to Stone
 That thereof drinks, and what therein is thrown
 Crathis and Sybaris (from the Mountains rol'd)
 Color the hair like Amber or pure Gold.
 Some fountains, of a more prodigious kinde,
 Not only change the body but the minde. [p. 50]
 Who hath not heard of obscene Salmacis?
 Of th' Aethiopian lake? for, who of this
 But only taste, their wits no longer keep,
 Or forthwith fall into a deadly sleep.
 Who at Clitorius fountain thirst remove
 Loath Wine and, abstinent, meer Water love.
 With streams oppos'd to these Lincestus flowes--
 They reel, as drunk, who drink too much of those.
 A Lake in fair Arcadia stands, of old
 Call'd Pheneus, suspected as twofold--
 Fear and forbear to drink thereof by night--
 By night unwholesome, wholesome by day-light.

Josephus also makes relation of the wonderful nature of a certain river betwixt Arcea and Raphanea, cities of Syria, which runs with a full channel all the Sabbath day and then on a sudden ceaseth, as if the springs were stopped, and all the six days you may pass over it dry shod; but again, on the seventh day (no man knowing the reason of it), the Waters return again in abundance as before. Wherefore the inhabitants thereabout called it the Sabbath-day river, because of the Seventh day, which was holy to the Jews. The Gospel also testifies to a sheep-pool, into which whosoever stepped first, after the Water was troubled by the Angel, was made whole of whatsoever disease he had. The same virtue and efficacy we read was in a spring of the Jonian Nymphs, which was in the territories belonging to the town of Elis, at a village called Heraclea, near the river Citheron which whosoever stepped into, being diseased, came forth whole and cured of all his diseases. Pausanias also reports that in Lyceus, a mountain of Arcadia, there was a spring called Agria, to which, as often as the dryness of the region threatened the destruction of fruits, Jupiter's priest of Lyceus went, and after the offering of sacrifices, devoutly praying to the Waters of the Spring, holding a Bough of an Oak in his hand, put it down to the bottom of the hallowed Spring. Then the Waters, being troubled, Vapor ascending from thence into the Air was blown into

[p. 51]

clouds with which, being joined together, the whole Heaven was overspread; which being a little after dissolved into rain, watered all the country most wholesomely. Moreover, Ruffus, a physician of Ephesus, besides many other authors, wrote strange things concerning the wonders of Waters, which for ought I know, are found in no other author.

It remains that I speak of the Air. This is a vital spirit, passing through all beings, giving life and subsistence to all things, binding, moving and filling all things. Hence it is that the Hebrew doctors reckon it not amongst the Elements, but count it as a Medium or glue, joining things together, and as the resounding spirit of the World's instrument. It immediately receives into itself the influences of all celestial bodies and then communicates them to the other Elements, as also to all mixed bodies. Also it receives into itself, as it were a divine looking-glass, the species of all things, as well natural as artificial, as also of all manner of speeches, and retains them; and carrying them with it, and entering into the bodies of men, and other animals, through their pores, makes an impression upon them, as well when they sleep as when they be awake, and affords matter for divers strange Dreams and Divinations. Hence they say it is, that a man passing by a place where a man was slain, or the carcass newly hid, is moved with fear and dread; because the Air in that place, being full of the dreadful species of manslaughter, doth being breathed in, move and trouble the spirit of the man with the like species, whence it is that he comes to be afraid. For everything that makes a sudden impression, astonisheth nature. Whence it is, that many philosophers were of opinion that Air is the cause of dreams, and of many other impressions of the mind, through the prolonging of Images, or similitudes, or species (which are fallen from things and speeches, multiplied in the very Air) until they

[p. 52]

come to the senses, and then to the phantasy, and soul of him that receives them, which being freed from cares and no way hindered, expecting to meet such kind of species, is informed by them. For the species of things, although of their own proper nature they are carried to the senses of men, and other animals in general, may notwithstanding get some impression from the Heaven whilst they be in the Air, by reason of which, together with the aptness and disposition of him that receives them, they may be carried to the sense of one rather than of another. And hence it is possible naturally, and far from all manner of superstition, no other spirit coming between, that a man should be able in a very little time to signify his mind unto another man abiding at a very long and unknown distance from him; although he cannot precisely give an estimate of the time when it is, yet of necessity it must be within twenty-four hours; and I myself know how to do it, and have often done it. [**] The same also in time past did the Abbot Trithemius both know and do. Also, when certain appearances, not only spiritual but also natural, do flow forth from

[p. 53]

things (that is to say, by a certain kind of flowing forth of bodies from bodies [*+] and do gather strength in the Air), they offer and show themselves to us as well through light as motion, as well to the sight as to other senses, and sometimes work wonderful things upon us, as Plotinus proves and teacheth. And we see how by the south wind the Air is condensed into thin clouds, in which, as in a looking-glass, are reflected representations at a great distance of castles, mountains, horses and men and other things which, when the clouds are gone, presently vanish. And Aristotle, in his Meteors, shows that a rainbow is conceived in a cloud of the Air, as in a looking-glass. And Albertus saith that the effigies of bodies may, by the strength of nature, in a moist Air be easily represented, in the same manner as the representations of things are in things. And Aristotle tells of a man to whom it happened, by reason of the weakness of his sight, that the Air that was near to him became, as it were, a looking-glass to him, and the optic beam did reflect back upon himself, and could not penetrate the Air, so that whithersoever he went he thought he saw his own image, with his face towards him, go before him. In like manner, by the artificialness of some certain looking-glasses, may be produced at a distance in the Air, beside the looking-glasses, what images

[p. 54]

we please; which when ignorant men see, they think they see the appearances of spirits, or souls; when, indeed, they are nothing else but semblances kin to themselves, and without life. And it is well known, if in a dark place where there is no light but by the coming in of a beam of the sun somewhere through a little hole, a white paper or plain looking-glass be set up against that light, that there may be seen upon them whatsoever things are done without, being shined upon by the sun. And there is another sleight or trick yet more wonderful: If any one shall take images artificially painted, or written letters, and in a clear night set them against the beams of the full moon, whose resemblances, being multiplied in the Air, and caught upward, and reflected back together with the beams of the moon, any other man that is privy to the thing, at a long distance sees, reads and knows them in the very compass and circle of the moon; which Art of declaring secrets is indeed very profitable for towns and cities that are besieged, being a thing which Pythagoras long since did often do, and which is not unknown to some in these days; I will not except myself. And all these and many more, and greater than these, are grounded in the very nature of the Air, and have their reasons and causes declared in mathematics and optics. And as these resemblances are reflected back to the sight, so also sometimes to the hearing, as is manifest in the Echo. But there are more secret arts than these, and such whereby any one may at a very remote distance hear and understand what another speaks or whispers softly.

There are also, from the airy element, Winds; for they are nothing else but Air moved and stirred up. Of these there are four that are principal, blowing from the four corners of the Heaven, viz.: Notus from the South, Boreas from the North, Zephyrus 

[p. 55]

from the West, Eurus from the East, [**] which Pontanus comprehending in these verses, saith:

Cold Boreas from the top of 'lympus blows,
 And from the bottom cloudy Notus flows.
 From setting Phoebus fruitful Zeph'rus flies,
 And barren Eurus from the Sun's up-rise.

Notus is the Southern Wind, cloudy, moist, warm and sickly, which Hieronymus calls the butler of the rains. Ovid describes it thus:

Out flies South-wind with dropping wings, who shrowds
 His fearful aspect in the pitchie clouds,
 His white Haire streams, his Beard big-swol'n with showers;
 Mists binde his Brows, rain from his Bosome powres.

But Boreas is contrary to Notus, and is the Northern Wind, fierce and roaring, and discussing clouds; makes the Air serene, and binds the Water with frost. Him doth Ovid thus bring in speaking of himself:

Force me befits: with this thick clouds I drive;
 Toss the blew Billows, knotty Okes up-rive;
 Congeal soft snow, and beat the Earth with hallo:
 When I my brethren in the Aire assaile,
 (For that's our Field) we meet with such a shock,
 That thundering Skies with our encounters rock
 And cloud-struck lightning flashes from on high,
 When through the Crannies of the Earth I flie
 And force her in her hollow Caves; I make
 The Ghosts to tremble, and the ground to quake.

And Zephyrus, which is the Western Wind, is most soft, blowing from the West with a pleasant

[p. 56]

gale; it is cold and moist, removing the effects of Winter, bringing forth branches and flowers. To this Eurus is contrary, which is the Eastern Wind, and is called Apeliotes; it is waterish, cloudy and ravenous. Of these two Ovid sings thus:

To Persis and Sabea, Eurus flies;
 Whose gums perfume the blushing Morne's up-rise:
 Next to the Evening, and the Coast that glows
 With setting Phoebus, flow'ry Zeph'rus blows;
 In Scythia horrid Boreas holds his rain,
 Beneath Boites, and the frozen Wain;
 The land to this oppos'd doth Auster steep
 With fruitful showres and clouds which ever weep.

Footnotes

^52:* This is conclusive evidence that telepathy or mind transference has been known and practiced for hundreds of years. The method of mind transference is frequently carried out unawares, and may be performed in various ways. When two persons are in natural sympathy with each other it is a comparatively easy matter if they are of a nervous or sensitive temperament. Writing a letter, and then burning it, the while fixing the mind firmly upon the person addressed and willing that the letter be answered is one method. Mentally addressing a crystal vessel of water with the palms of the bands extended over the glass, the while picturing the absent person clearly in the mind's eye, and then pouring the water into a stream or the ocean, will carry a message to one at sea. Burying a stone, slate or piece of metal in the earth, at the time of the new moon, on which a message is inscribed, will influence those who labor in the earth or work in like metals, especially if Saturn or Uranus be in strong aspect to the earth through the sun. The AIR method is the best of all, and was that undoubtedly used by Agrippa as he makes mention of the matter in this place: Go out into the open air, or to an open window, and face the quarter wherein the person is; or, if the quarter be unknown, face in turn each of the four cardinal points, and audibly call the name of the person with whom communication is desired, the same as though the party was in an adjoining room, three times, earnestly, and [p. 53] each time with added force. While doing this extend the arms and hands, as in appeal, the while clearly picturing the person's features in the mind, and will, determinedly and persistently, that your call and message be heard. Then speak, as though the person stood before you, shortly, firmly and decidedly. Having done this listen for a reply, which will come as though one were speaking to the mind without the aid of the ear. Do not imagine a reply as that will not help but rather hinder communication. Of course, in most cases, it is necessary that there should exist a sympathetic bond or tie of some kind between the parties. This art may be developed by practice, by lovers especially, to an astonishing degree. It will be found very helpful to set certain times for such development. With practice, after mind communication has been accomplished, spoken messages and other noted conditions may be dispensed with, and it will be merely necessary to WILL and THINK--projecting the message astrally.

^53:+ The astral body from the material body.

^55:* Marcus Manilius, of Rome, time of Augustus, and author of the poem entitled "Astronomica," thus writes of the Cardinal Winds (Five Books of Manilius, London, 1697):

East, West, and North, and South, on either side,
 These Quarters lie oppos'd, the World divide:
 As many Winds from these four Quarters file,
 And fight and rattle, thro' the empty Sky;
 Rough Boreas from the North, bears Frost and Snows,
 And from the East, the gentle Eurus blows,
 Wet Auster from the torrid South is thrown,
 And pleasing Zephyrus cools the setting Sun.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER VII.

  

OF THE KINDS OF COMPOUNDS, WHAT RELATION THEY STAND IN TO THE ELEMENTS, AND WHAT RELATION THERE IS BETWIXT THE ELEMENTS THEMSELVES AND THE SOUL, SENSES AND DISPOSITIONS OF MEN.

NEXT after the four simple Elements follow the four kinds of perfect Bodies compounded of them, and they are Stones, Metals, Plants and Animals: and although unto the generation of each of these all the Elements meet together in the composition, yet every one of them follows, and resembles one of the Elements, which is most predominant. For all Stones are earthy for they are naturally heavy and descend, and so hardened with dryness that they cannot be melted. But Metals are waterish and may be melted, which naturalists confess, and chemists find to be true, viz., that they are generated of a viscous Water or waterish argent vive. Plants have such an affinity with the Air, that unless they be abroad in the open air, they do neither bud nor increase. So also all Animals

Have in their Natures a most fiery force,
 And also spring from a Celestial source.

[p. 57]

[paragraph continues] And Fire is so natural to them, that that being extinguished they presently die. And, again, every one of those kinds is distinguished within itself by reason of degrees of the Elements. For amongst the Stones they especially are called earthy that are dark and more heavy; and those waterish which are transparent and are compacted of water, as crystal, beryl and pearls in the shells of fishes; and they are called airy which swim upon the water, and are spongeous, as the stones of a sponge, the pumice stone and the stone sophus; [**] and they are called fiery out of which fire is extracted, or which are produced of fire, as thunder-bolts, fire-stones and the stone asbestos. Also amongst Metals, lead and silver are earthy; quicksilver is waterish; copper and tin are airy; and gold and iron are fiery. In Plants also, the roots resemble the earth by reason of their thickness; and the leaves water, because of their juice; flowers the air, because of their subtility, and the seeds the fire, by reason of their multiplying spirit. Besides, they are called some hot, some cold, some moist, some dry, borrowing their names from the qualities of the Elements. Amongst Animals also, some are in comparison of others earthy, and dwell in the bowels of the earth, as worms and moles, and many other small creeping vermin; others are watery, as fishes; others airy, which cannot live out of the air; [*+] others also are fiery, living in the fire, as salamanders, and crickets, such as are of a fiery heat, as pigeons, ostriches, lions, and such as the wise men call beasts breathing fire. Besides, in animals the bones resemble the earth, flesh the air, the vital spirit the fire, and the humors the water. And these humors also partake of the Elements, for yellow choler is instead of fire, blood instead of air, phlegm instead of water, and black choler, or melancholy,

[p. 58]

instead of earth. And lastly, in the Soul itself, according to Austin, the understanding resembles fire, reason the air, imagination the water, and the senses the earth. And these senses also are divided amongst themselves by reason of the Elements, for the sight is fiery, neither can it perceive without fire and light; the hearing is airy, for a sound is made by the striking of the air; the smell and taste resemble the water, without the moisture of which there is neither smell nor taste; and lastly, the feeling is wholly earthy, and taketh gross bodies for its object. The actions, also, and the operations of man are governed by the Elements. The earth signifies a slow and firm motion; the water signifies fearfulness and sluggishness, and remissness in working; air signifies cheerfulness and an amiable disposition; but fire a fierce, quick and angry disposition. The Elements, therefore, are the first of all things, and all things, are of and according to them, and they are in all things, and diffuse their virtues through all things.

Footnotes

^57:* Probably meerschaum (sea-froth), or sepiolite, one of the bisilicates.

^57:+ Birds in general are undoubtedly here meant.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER VIII.

  

HOW THE ELEMENTS ARE IN THE HEAVENS, IN STARS, IN DEVILS, IN ANGELS, AND LASTLY IN GOD HIMSELF.

IT IS the unanimous consent of all Platonists, that as in the original and exemplary World, all things are in all; so also in this corporeal world, all things are in all; so also the Elements are not only in these inferior bodies, but also in the Heavens, in Stars in Devils, in Angels, and lastly in God, the maker and original example of all things. Now in these inferior bodies the Elements are accompanied with much gross matter; but in the Heavens the Elements are with their natures and virtues, viz., after a celestial

[p. 59]

and more excellent manner than in sublunary things. For the firmness of the Celestial Earth is there without the grossness of water; and the agility of the Air without running over its bounds; the heat of Fire without burning, only shining and giving life to all things by its heat. Amongst the Stars, also, some are fiery, as Mars and Sol; airy, as Jupiter and Venus; watery, as Saturn and Mercury; and earthy, such as inhabit the eighth Orb [**] and the Moon (which, notwithstanding, by many is accounted watery), seeing, as if it were Earth, it attracts to itself the celestial waters, with which, being imbibed, it doth, by reason of its nearness to us, pour out and communicate to us. There are, also, amongst the Signs, [*+] some fiery, some earthy, some airy, some watery; the Elements rule them also in the Heavens, distributing to them these four threefold considerations of every Element, viz., the beginning, middle and end: So Aires possesseth the beginning of fire, Leo the progress and increase, and Sagittarius the end. Taurus the beginning of the earth, Virgo the progress, Capricorn the end. Gemini the beginning of the air, Libra the progress, Aquarius the end. Cancer the beginning of water, Scorpius the middle, and Pisces the end. Of the mixtions, therefore, of these Planets and Signs, together with the Elements, are all bodies made. Moreover, Devils also are upon this account distinguished the one from the other, so that some are called fiery, some earthy, some airy, and some watery. Hence, also, those four Infernal Rivers--fiery Phlegethon, airy Cocytus, watery Styx, earthy Acheron. Also in the Gospel we read of hell fire, and eternal fire, into which the cursed shall be commanded to go; and in the Revelation we read of a lake of fire, and Isaiah speaks of the damned that

[p. 60]

the Lord will smite them with corrupt air. And in Job, they shall skip from the waters of the snow to extremity of heat; and in the same we read, that the Earth is dark, and covered with the darkness of death and miserable darkness. Moreover, also, these Elements are placed in the Angels in Heaven and the blessed Intelligences. There is in them a stability of their essence, which is an earthly virtue, in which is the steadfast seat of God; also their mercy and piety is a watery cleansing virtue. Hence by the Psalmist they are called Waters, where he, speaking of the Heavens, saith, Who rulest the Waters that are higher than the Heavens. [**] Also in them their subtile breath is Air, and their love is shining Fire. Hence they are called in Scripture the Wings of the Wind; and in another place the Psalmist speaks of them, Who makest Angels thy Spirits and thy Ministers a flaming fire. Also according to orders of Angels, some are fiery, as Seraphim, and Authorities and Powers; earthy, as Cherubim; watery, as Thrones and Archangels; airy, as Dominions and Principalities. Do we not also read of the original maker of all things, that the earth shall be opened and bring forth a Savior? It is not spoken of the same that he shall be a fountain of living Water, cleansing and regenerating? Is not the same Spirit breathing the breath of life; and the same, according to Moses' and Paul's testimony, a consuming Fire? That Elements, therefore, are to be found everywhere, and in all things after their manner, no man can deny: First in these inferior bodies seculent and gross, and in celestials more pure and clear; but in supercelestials living, and in all respects blessed. Elements, therefore, in the exemplary world are Ideas of things to be produced, in Intelligences are distributed powers,

[p. 61]

in Heavens are virtues, and in inferior bodies gross forms.

Footnotes

^59:* A supposedly transparent envelope or azure sphere inclosing the earth and other like spheres, within which were carried the planetary bodies.

^59:+ The twelve "houses" or divisional parts of the Zodiac.

^60:* See Psalm cxlviii., 4: "Waters that be above the Heavens." Gen., i., 6-9, is also noteworthy. The Watery Triplicity of the Zodiac may properly be termed as "Waters above the Heavens," or Celestial Waters.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER IX.

  

OF THE VIRTUES OF THINGS NATURAL, DEPENDING IMMEDIATELY UPON ELEMENTS.

OF the natural virtues of things, some are Elementary, as to heat, to cool, to moisten, to dry; and they are called operations, or first qualities; and the second act: for these qualities only do wholly change the whole substance, which none of the other qualities can do. And some are in things compounded of Elements, and these are more than first qualities, and such are those that are maturating, digesting, resolving, mollifying, hardening, restringing, absterging, corroding, burning, opening, evaporating, strengthening, mitigating, conglutinating, obstructing, expelling, retaining, attracting, repercussing, stupefying, bestowing, lubrifying and many more. Elementary qualities do many things in a mixed body which they cannot do in the Elements themselves. And these operations are called secondary qualities, because they follow the nature and proportion of the mixtion of the first virtues, as largely it is treated of in physic books. As maturation, which is the operation of natural heat, according to a certain proportion in the substance of the matter, so induration is the operation of cold; so also is congelation, and so of the rest. And these operations sometimes act upon a certain member, as such which provoke water, milk, the flow, and they are called third qualities, which follow the second, as the second do the first. According, therefore, to these first, second, and third qualities many diseases are both cured and caused. Many things also there are artificially made, which men much wonder at; as is Fire which burns Water,

[p. 62]

which they call the Greek Fire, of which Aristotle teacheth many compositions in his particular treatise of this subject. In like manner there is made a Fire that is extinguished with oil, and is kindled with cold water, when it is sprinkled upon it; and a Fire which is kindled either with Rain, Wind or the Sun; and there is made a Fire which is called burning Water, the confection whereof is well known, and it consumes nothing but itself. And also there are made Fires that cannot be quenched, and incombustible Oils and perpetual Lamps, which can be extinguished neither with wind, nor water, nor any other way; which seems utterly incredible, but that there had been such a most famous Lamp, which once did shine in the Temple of Venus, in which the stone Asbestos did burn, which being once fired can never be extinguished. Also, on the contrary, Wood, or any other combustible matter may be so ordered, that it can receive no harm from the Fire; and there are made certain confections, with which the hands being anointed, we may carry red-hot iron in them, or put them into melted metal; or go with our whole bodies, being first anointed therewith, into the Fire without any manner of harm; and such like things as these may be done. There is also a kind of flax, which Pliny calls Asbestum, the Greeks call Asbeson, which is not consumed by Fire, of which Anaxilaus saith, that a tree compassed about with it may be cut down with insensible blows, that cannot be heard.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER X.

  

OF THE OCCULT VIRTUES OF THINGS.

THERE are also other virtues in things, which are not from any Element, as to expel poison, to drive away the noxious vapors of minerals, to attract iron

[p. 63]

or anything else; and these virtues are a sequel of the species and form of this or that thing; whence also they being a little in quantity, are of great efficacy; which is not granted to any Elementary quality. For these virtues, having much form and little matter, can do very much; but an Elementary virtue, because it hath more materiality, requires much matter for its acting. And they are called Occult Qualities, because their causes lie hid, and man's intellect cannot in any way reach and find them out. Wherefore philosophers have attained to the greatest part of them by long experience, rather than by the search of reason: for as in the stomach the meat is digested by heat, which we know, so it is changed by a certain hidden virtue which we know not: for truly it is not changed by heat, because then it should rather be changed by the fire-side than in the stomach. So there are in things, besides the Elementary qualities which we know, other certain imbred virtues created by Nature, which we admire and are amazed at, being such as we know not, and indeed seldom or never have seen. As we read in Ovid of the Phoenix, one only bird, which renews herself:

All Birds from others do derive their birth,
 But yet one Fowle there is in all the Earth,
 Call'd by th' Assyrians Phoenix, who the wain
 Of age repairs, and sows her self again.

And in another place--

Aegyptus came to see this wondrous sight;
 And this rare Bird is welcom'd with delight.

Long since Matreas brought a very great wonderment upon the Greeks and Romans concerning himself. He said that he nourished and bred a beast that did devour itself. Hence many to this day are solicitous what this beast of Matreas should be. Who would not wonder that fishes should be digged out of the Earth, of which Aristotle, Theophrastus, and

[p. 64]

[paragraph continues] Polybius the historian, makes mention? And those things which Pausanius wrote concerning the Singing Stones? All these are effects of Occult Virtues. So the ostrich concocts cold and most hard iron, and digests it into nourishment for his body; whose stomach, they also report, cannot be hurt with red-hot iron. So that little fish, call echeneis, doth so curb the violence of the winds, and appease the rage of the sea, that, let the tempests be never so imperious and raging, the sails also bearing a full gale, it doth notwithstanding by its mere touch stay the ships and makes them stand still, that by no means they can be moved. So salamanders and crickets live in the fire; although they seem sometimes to burn, yet they are not hurt. The like is said of a kind of bitumen, with which the weapons of the Amazons were said to be smeared over, by which means they could be spoiled neither with sword nor fire; with which also the gates of Caspia, made of brass, are reported to be smeared over by Alexander the Great. We read also that Noah's Ark -vas joined together with this bitumen, and that it endured some thousands of years upon the Mountains of Armenia. There are many such kind of wonderful things, scarce credible, which notwithstanding are known by experience. Amongst which Antiquity makes mention of Satyrs, which were animals, in shape half men and half brutes, yet capable of speech and reason; one whereof St. Hierome reporteth, spake once unto holy Antonius the Hermit, and condemned the error of the Gentiles in worshiping such poor creatures as they were, and desired him that he would pray unto the true God for him; also he affirms that there was one of these Satyrs shewed openly alive, and afterwards sent to Constantine the Emperor.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 65]

  

CHAPTER XI.

  

HOW OCCULT VIRTUES ARE INFUSED INTO THE SEVERAL KINDS OF THINGS BY IDEAS THROUGH THE HELP OF THE SOUL OF THE WORLD, AND RAYS OF THE STARS; AND WHAT THINGS ABOUND MOST WITH THIS VIRTUE.

PLATONISTS say that all inferior bodies are exemplified by the superior Ideas. Now they define an Idea to be a form, above bodies, souls, minds, and to be one, simple, pure, immutable, indivisible, incorporeal and eternal; and that the nature of all Ideas in the first place is in very Goodness itself (i. e.), God, by way of cause; and that they are distinguished amongst themselves by some relative considerations only, lest whatsoever is in the world should be but one thing without any variety, and that they agree in essence, lest God should be a compound substance. In the second place, they place them in the very Intelligible Itself (i. e.), in the Soul of the World, differing the one from the other by absolute forms, so that all the Ideas in God indeed are but one form, but in the Soul of the World they are many. They are placed in the minds of all other things, whether they be joined to the body or separated from the body, by a certain participation, and now by degrees are distinguished more and more. They place them in Nature, as certain small Seed of Forms infused by the Ideas, and lastly they place them in matter, as Shadows. Hereunto may be added, that in the Soul of the World there be as many Seminal Forms of things as Ideas in the mind of God, by which forms she did in the Heavens above the Stars frame to herself shapes also, and stamped upon all these some properties. On these Stars therefore, shapes and properties, all virtues of inferior species, as also their properties do depend; so that every species hath its Celestial Shape, or figure that is suitable to

[p. 66]

it, from which also proceeds a wonderful power of operating, which proper gift it receives from its own Idea, through the Seminal Forms of the Soul of the World. For Ideas are not only essential causes of every species, but are also the causes of every virtue, which is in the species; and this is that which many philosophers say, that the properties which are in the nature of things (which virtues, indeed, are the operations of the Ideas) are moved by certain virtues, viz., such as have a certain and sure foundation; not fortuitous, nor casual, but efficacious, powerful and sufficient--doing nothing in vain. Now these Virtues do not err in their actings, but by accident, viz., by reason of the impurity or inequality of the matter: For upon this account there are found things of the same species more or less powerful, according to the purity or indisposition of the matter; for all Celestial Influences may be hindered by the indisposition and insufficiency of the matter. Whence it was a proverb amongst the Platonists, that Celestial Virtues were infused according to the desert or merit of the matter: Which also Virgil makes mention of when he sings:

Their natures fiery are, and from above,
 And from gross bodies freed, divinely move.

Wherefore those things in which there is less of the Idea of the matter (i. e.), such things which have a greater resemblance of things separated, have more powerful virtues in operation, being like to the operation of a separated Idea. We see then that the situation and figure of Celestials is the cause of all those excellent Virtues that are in inferior species. [**]

Footnotes

^66:* An Idea of a pure Element, whether the element be of time, space or matter, is an idea that pertains exclusively to such element, correlating with it as perfectly as the idea is perfect. As such idea must be evolved in an intelligent use of such element, so ideas are essential to occult experiment.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 67]

  

CHAPTER XII.

  

HOW IT IS THAT PARTICULAR VIRTUES ARE INFUSED INTO PARTICULAR INDIVIDUALS, EVEN OF THE SAME SPECIES.

THERE are also in many individuals, or particular things, peculiar gifts, as wonderful as in the species and these also are from the figure and situation of Celestial Stars. For every Individual, when it begins to be under a determined Horoscope, and Celestial Constellation, contracts together with its essence a certain wonderful virtue both of doing and suffering something that is remarkable, even besides that which it receives from its species; and this it doth partly by the influence of the Heaven and partly through that obedientialness, of the matter of things to be generated, to the Soul of the World, which obedientialness indeed is such as that of our bodies to our souls. For we perceive that there is this in us, that according to our conceptions of things our bodies are moved, and that cheerfully, as when we are afraid of or fly from any thing. So, many times when the celestial souls conceive several things, then the matter is moved obediently to it. Also in Nature there appear divers prodigies, by reason of the imagination of superior motions. So also they conceive and imagine divers virtues, not only things natural but also sometimes things artificial, and this especially if the Soul of the operator be inclined towards the same. Whence Avicen saith, that whatsoever things are done here, must have been before in the motions and conceptions of the Stars and Orbs. So in things various effects, inclinations and dispositions are occasioned not only from the matter variously disposed, as many suppose, but from a various influence and diverse form; not truly with a specifical difference, but peculiar and proper.

[p. 68]

[paragraph continues] And the degrees of these are variously distributed by the first cause of all things. God himself, who being unchangeable, distributes to every one as he pleaseth, with whom, notwithstanding, second causes, Angelical and Celestial, co-operate, disposing of the corporeal matter and other things that are committed to them. All virtues, therefore, are infused by God, through the Soul of the World, yet by a particular power of resemblances and intelligences over-ruling them, and concourse of the rays, and aspects of the Stars in a certain peculiar harmonious consent.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XIII.

  

WHENCE THE OCCULT VIRTUES OF THINGS PROCEED.

IT is well known to all that there is a certain virtue in the Loadstone by which it attracts iron, and that the Diamond doth by its presence take away that virtue of the Loadstone. So also, Amber and Jet, rubbed and warmed, draw a straw to them; and the stone Asbestos, being once fired, is never or scarce extinguished. A Carbuncle shines in the dark; the stone Aetites put above the young fruit of women or plants strengthens them, but being put under, weakeneth. The Jasper stauncheth blood; the little fish Echeneis stops the ships; Rhubarb expels choler; the liver of the Chameleon, burnt, raiseth showers and thunders. The stone Heliotrope dazzles the sight, and makes him that wears it to be invisible; the stone Lyucurius takes away delusions from before the eyes, the perfume of the stone Lypparis calls forth all the beasts, the stone Synochitis brings up infernal ghosts, the stone Anachitis makes the images of the Gods appear. The Ennectis, put under them that dream, causeth oracles. There is an herb in Aethiopia with which, they report, ponds and

[p. 69]

lakes are dried up, and all things that are shut to be opened; and we read of an herb, called Latace, which the Persian kings give to their embassadors, that whithersoever they shall come they shall abound with plenty of all things. There is also a Scythian herb with which, being tasted or at least held in the mouth, they report the Scythians will endure twelve days' hunger and thirst; and Apuleius saith that he was taught by an Oracle that there were many kinds of herbs and stones with which men might prolong their lives forever, but that it was not lawful for men to understand the knowledge of those things because, whereas they have but a short time to live, they study mischief with all their might and attempt all manner of wickedness; if they should be sure of a very long time, they would not spare the Gods themselves. But from whence these virtues are none of all these have shewed who have set forth huge volumes of the properties of things, not Hermes, not Bochus, not Aaron, not Orpheus, not Theophrastus, not Thebith, not Zenothemis, not Zoroaster, not Evax, not Dioscorides, not Isaaick the Jew, not Zacharias the Babylonian, not Albertus, not Arnoldus; and yet all these have confessed the same, that Zacharias writes to Mithridites, the great power and human destinies are couched in the virtues of Stones and Herbs. But to know from whence these come, a higher speculation is required. Alexander the peripatetic, not going any further than his senses and qualities, is of the opinion that these proceed from Elements, and their qualities, which haply might be supposed to be true, if those were of the same species; but many of the operations of the Stones agree neither in genere nor specie. Therefore Plato and his scholars attribute these virtues to Ideas, the formers of things. But Avicen reduceth these kinds of operations to Intelligence, Hermes to the Stars, Albertus to the specifical forms of things. And although these

[p. 70]

authors seem to thwart one the other, yet none of them, if they be rightly understood, goes beside the truth; since all their sayings are the same in effect in most things. For God, in the first place, is the end and beginning of all Virtues; he gives the seal of the Ideas to his servants, the Intelligences; who, as faithful officers, sign all things intrusted to them with an Ideal Virtue; the Heavens and Stars, as instruments, disposing the matter in the mean while for the receiving of those forms which reside in Divine Majesty (as saith Plato in Timeus) and to be conveyed by Stars; and the Giver of Forms distributes them by the Ministry of his Intelligences, which he hath set as Rulers and Controllers over his Works, to whom such a power is intrusted in things committed to them that so all Virtues of Stones, Herbs, Metals, and all other things may come from the Intelligences, the Governors. The Form, therefore, and Virtue of things comes first from the Ideas, then from the ruling and governing Intelligences, then from the aspects of the Heavens disposing, and lastly from the tempers of the Elements disposed, answering the influences of the Heavens, by which the Elements themselves are ordered, or disposed. These kinds of operations, therefore, are performed in these inferior things by express forms, and in the Heavens by disposing virtues, in Intelligences by mediating rules, in the Original Cause by Ideas and exemplary forms, all of which must of necessity agree in the execution of the effect and virtue of everything.

There is, therefore, a wonderful virtue and operation in every Herb and Stone, but greater in a Star, beyond which, even from the governing Intelligences every thing receiveth and obtains many things for itself, especially from the Supreme Cause, with whom all things do mutually and exactly correspond, agreeing in an harmonious consent, as it were in hymns, always praising the highest Maker of all things, as

[p. 71]

by the three children in the fiery furnace were all things called upon to praise God with singings. Bless ye the Lord all things that grow upon the Earth, and all things which move in the Waters, all fowls of the Heavens, beasts and cattle, together with the sons of men. There is, therefore, no other cause of the necessity of effects than the connection of all things with the First Cause, and their correspondency with those Divine patterns and eternal Ideas whence every thing hath its determinate and particular place in the exemplary world, from whence it lives and receives its original being: And every virtue of herbs, stones, metals, animals, words and speeches and all things that are of God, is placed there. Now the First Cause, which is God, although he doth by Intelligences and the Heavens work upon these inferior things, Both sometimes (these mediums being laid aside, or their officiating being suspended) works those things immediately by himself, which works then are called Miracles. But whereas secondary causes, which Plato and others call handmaids, do by the command and appointment of the First Cause, necessarily act, and are necessitated to produce their effects, if God shall notwithstanding, according to his pleasure, so discharge and suspend them, that they shall wholly desist from the necessity of that command and appointment; then they are called the greatest Miracles of God. So the fire in the Chaldeans' furnace did not burn the Children. So also the Sun at the command of Joshua went back from its course the space of a whole day; so also at the prayer of Hezekiah it went back ten degrees or hours. So when Christ was crucified the Sun was darkened, though at full Moon. And the reason of these operations can be by no rational discourse, no Magic, or occult or profound Science whatsoever be found out or understood, but are to be learned and inquired into by Divine Oracles only.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 72]

  

CHAPTER XIV.

  

OF THE SPIRIT OF THE WORLD, WHAT IT IS, AND HOW BY WAY OF MEDIUM IT UNITES OCCULT VIRTUES TO THEIR SUBJECTS.

DEMOCRITUS and Orpheus, and many Pythagoreans, having most diligently searched into the virtues of celestial things and natures of inferior things, said: That all things are full of God and not without cause. For there is nothing of such transcending virtues, which being destitute of Divine assistance, is content with the nature of itself. Also they called those Divine Powers which are diffused in things, Gods; which Zoroaster called Divine Allurements; Synesius, Symbolical Inticements; others called them Lives, and some also Souls, saying that the virtues of things did depend upon these because it is the property of the Soul to be from one matter extended into divers things about which it operates: So is a man who extends his intellect unto intelligible things, and his imagination unto imaginable things; and this is that which they understood when they said, viz.: That the Soul of one thing went out and went into another thing, altering it, and hindering the operations of it: as the diamond hinders the operation of the loadstone, that it cannot attract iron. Now seeing the Soul is the first thing that is movable and, as they say, is moved of itself; but the body, or the matter, is of itself unable and unfit for motion, and doth much degenerate from the Soul, therefore they say there is need of a more excellent medium, viz., such a one that may be, as it were, no body, but, as it were, a Soul; or, as it were, no Soul, but, as it were, a body, viz., by which the soul may be joined to the body. Now they conceive such a medium to be the Spirit of the World, viz., that which we call the quintessence, because it is not from the four Elements, but

[p. 73]

a certain first thing, having its being above and besides them. There is, therefore, such a kind of spirit required to be, as it were the medium, whereby Celestial Souls are joined to gross bodies, and bestow upon them wonderful gifts. This Spirit is after the same manner in the body of the world, as ours is in the body of man. For as the powers of our soul are communicated to the members of the body by the spirit, so also the Virtue of the Soul of the World is diffused through all things by the quintessence: For there is nothing found in the whole world that hath not a spark of the virtue thereof. Yet it is more, nay, most of all, infused into those things which have received or taken in most of this Spirit. Now this Spirit is received or taken in by the rays of the Stars, so far forth as things render themselves conformable to them. By this Spirit, therefore, every occult property is conveyed into herbs, stones, metals, and animals through the Sun, Moon, Planets, and through Stars higher than the Planets.

Now this Spirit may be more advantageous to us if any one knew how to separate it from the Elements; or at least to use those things chiefly which do most abound with this Spirit. For these things, in which this Spirit is less drowned in a body and less checked by matter, do more powerfully and perfectly act, and also more readily generate their like; for in it are all generative and seminary virtues. For which cause the Alchemists endeavored to separate this Spirit from Gold and Silver; which being rightly separated and extracted, if thou shalt afterward project it upon any matter of the same kind (i. e.), any metal, presently will turn it into Gold or Silver. And we know how to do that, and have seen it done; but we could make no more Gold than the weight of that was out of which we extracted the Spirit; for seeing that [gold] is an extense form, and not intense, it cannot beyond its own bounds change an imperfect body

[p. 74]

into a perfect; which I deny not, but may be done by another way.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XV.

  

HOW WE MUST FIND OUT AND EXAMINE THE VIRTUES OF THINGS BY WAY OF SIMILITUDE.

IT is now manifest that the occult properties in things are not from the nature of the Elements, but infused from above, hid from our senses, and scarce at last known by our reason, which indeed come from the Life and the Spirit of the World, through the rays of the Stars; and can no otherwise but by experience and conjecture be inquired into by us. Wherefore, he that desires to enter upon this study must consider that every thing moves and turns itself to its like, and inclines that to itself with all its might, as well in property, viz., Occult Virtue, as in quality, viz., Elementary Virtue. Sometimes also in substance itself, as we see in salt, for whatsoever hath long stood with salt becomes salt; for every agent, when it hath begun to act, doth not attempt to make a thing inferior to itself, but, as much as may be, like and suitable to itself. Which also we manifestly see in sensible animals, in which the nutritive virtue doth not change the meat into an herb or a plant, but turns it into sensible flesh. In what things, therefore, there is an excess of any quality or property, as heat, cold, boldness, fear, sadness, anger, love, hatred, or any other passion or virtue (whether it be in them by nature or, sometimes also, by art or chance, as boldness in a wanton), these things do very much move and provoke to such a quality, passion or virtue. So fire moves to fire, and water moves to water, and he that is bold moves to boldness. And it is well known

[p. 75]

amongst physicians that brain helps the brain, and lungs the lungs. So also it is said that the right eye of a frog helps the soreness of a man's right eye, and the left eye thereof helps the soreness of his left eye, if they be hanged about his neck in a cloth of its natural color. The like is reported of the eyes of a crab. So the feet of a tortoise helps them that have the gout in their being applied thus--as foot to foot, hand to hand, right to right, left to left.

After this manner they say that any animal that is barren causeth another to be barren, and of the animal especially the generative parts. So they report that a female shall be barren if, betimes, drink be made of a certain sterile animal, or anything steeped therewith. If, however, we would obtain any property or virtue, let us seek such animals, or such other things whatsoever, in which such a property is in a more eminent manner than in any other thing, and in these let us take that part in which such a property or virtue is most vigorous; as if at any time we would promote love, let us seek some animal which is most loving, of which kind are pigeons, turtles, sparrows, swallows, wagtails, and in these take those members or parts in which the vital virtue is most vigorous, such as the heart, breast, and also like parts. And it must be done at that time when these animals have this affection most intense, for then they do provoke and draw love. In like manner, to increase boldness, let us look for a lion, or a cock, and of these let us take the heart, eyes or forehead. And so we must understand that which Psellus the Platonist saith, viz., that dogs, crows, and cocks conduce much to watchfulness, also the nightingale and bat and horned owl, and in these the heart, head and eyes especially. Therefore, it is said, if any shall carry the heart of a crow or a bat about him, he shall not sleep till he cast it away from him. The same doth the head of a bat, dried and bound to the right arm of him that is

[p. 76]

awake, for if it be put upon him when he is asleep, it is said that he shall not be awaked till it be taken off from him. After the same manner doth a frog and an owl make one talkative, and of these specially the tongue and heart. So the tongue also of a water-frog, laid under the head, makes a man speak in his sleep; and the heart of a screech-owl, laid upon the left breast of a woman that is asleep, is said to make her utter all her secrets. The same also the heart of the horned owl is said to do, also the suet of a hare, laid upon the breast of one that is asleep. Upon the same account do animals that are long lived conduce to long life; and whatsoever things have a power in themselves to renew themselves conduce to the renovation of our body and restoring of youth, which physicians have often professed they know to be true; as is manifest of the viper and snake. And it is known that harts renew their old age by the eating of snakes. After the same manner the phoenix is renewed by a fire which she makes for herself; and the like virtue there is in a pelican, whose right foot being put under warm dung, after three months there is of that generated a pelican. Therefore some physicians by some certain confections made of vipers, and hellebore, and the flesh of some such kind of animals, do restore youth, and indeed do sometimes restore it so, as Medea restored old Pileas. It is also believed that the blood of a bear, if it be sucked out of her wound, doth increase strength of body, because that animal is the strongest creature.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 77]

  

CHAPTER XVI.

  

HOW THE OPERATIONS OF SEVERAL VIRTUES PASS FROM ONE THING INTO ANOTHER, AND ARE COMMUNICATED ONE TO THE OTHER.

THOU must know that so great is the power of natural things that they not only work upon all things that are near them, by their virtue, but also besides this, they infuse into them a like power, through which, by the same virtue, they also work upon other things, as we see in the loadstone, which stone indeed doth not only draw iron rings, but infuseth a virtue into the rings themselves, whereby they can do the same, which Austin and Albertus say they saw. After this manner it is, as they say, that a wanton, grounded in boldness and impudence, is like to infect all that are near her, by this property, whereby they are made like herself. So Paul saith to the Corinthians, Evil communications doth corrupt good manners. Therefore they say if any one shall put on the inward garment of a wanton, or shall have about him that looking-glass which she daily looks into, he shall thereby become bold, confident, impudent and wanton. In like manner, they say, that a cloth that was about a corpse hath received from thence the property of sadness and melancholy; and that the halter wherewith a man was hanged hath certain wonderful properties. The like story tells Pliny: If any shall put a green lizard, made blind, together with iron or gold rings, into a glass vessel, putting under them some earth, and then shutting the vessel, and when it appears that the lizard hath received his sight, shall put him out of the glass, that those rings shall help sore eyes. The same may be done with rings and a weasel, whose eyes after they are, with any kind of prick, put out, it is certain are restored to sight again. Upon the same account

[p. 78]

rings are put for a certain time in the nest of sparrows or swallows, which afterwards are used to procure love and favor.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XVII.

  

HOW BY ENMITY AND FRIENDSHIP THE VIRTUES OF THINGS ARE TO BE TRIED AND FOUND OUT.

IN the next place it is requisite that we consider that all things have a friendliness and enmity amongst themselves, and every thing hath something that it fears and dreads, that is an enemy and destructive to it; and, on the contrary, something that it rejoiceth and delighteth in and is strengthened by. So in the Elements, Fire is an enemy to Water, and Air to Earth, but yet they agree amongst themselves. And, again, in Celestial bodies, Mercury, Jupiter, the Sun and Moon are friends to Saturn; Mars and Venus enemies to him. All the planets besides Mars are friends to Jupiter, also all besides Venus hate Mars; Jupiter and Venus love the Sun, Mars, Mercury and the Moon are enemies to him. All besides Saturn love Venus. Jupiter, Venus and Saturn are friends to Mercury; the Sun, Moon and Mars his enemies. Jupiter, Venus and Saturn are friends to the Moon; Mars and Mercury her enemies. There is another kind of enmity amongst the stars, viz., when they have opposite houses, as Saturn to the Sun and Moon, Jupiter to Mercury, and Mars to Venus. And their enmity is stronger whose exaltations are opposite, as of Saturn and the Sun, of Jupiter and Mars, and of Venus and Mercury. But their friendship is the strongest who agree in nature, quality, substance and power, as Mars with the Sun, as Venus with the Moon, and as Jupiter with Venus; as also their friendship whose exaltation is in the

[p. 79]

house of another, as that of Saturn with Venus, of Jupiter with the Moon, of Mars with Saturn, of the Sun with Mars, of Venus with Jupiter, and of the Moon with Venus. And of what sort the friendships and enmities of the superiors be, such are the inclinations of things subjected to them in those inferior. These dispositions, therefore, of friendship and enmity are nothing else but certain inclinations of things of the one to another, desiring such-and-such a thing if it be absent, and to move towards it unless it be hindered; and to acquiesce in it when it is obtained, shunning the contrary and dreading the approach of it, and not resting in or being contented with it. Heraclitus, [**] therefore, being guided by this opinion, professed that all things were made by enmity and friendship.

Now the inclinations of Friendship are such in all Vegetables and Minerals, as is that attractive virtue or inclination which the loadstone hath upon iron, and the emerald upon riches and favor, the jasper upon the birth of any thing, and the stone achates upon eloquence. In like manner there is a kind of bituminous clay that draws fire, and leaps into it, wheresoever it sees it. Even so doth the root of the herb aproxis draw fire from afar off. Also the same inclination there is betwixt the male palm-tree and female; whereof, when the bough of one shall touch the bough of the other, they fold themselves into mutual embraces; neither doth the female palm-tree bring forth fruit without the male. And the almond tree, when she is alone is less fruitful. The vines

[p. 80]

love the elm, and the olive-tree and myrtle love one the other; also the olive-tree and fig-tree.

Now, in Birds and Animals, there is amity betwixt the blackbird and thrush, betwixt the crow and heron, betwixt peacocks and pigeons, turtles and parrots. When Sappho writes to Phaon:

To Birds unlike oftimes joyned are white Doves;
 Also the Bird that's green, black Turtle loves.

Again, the whale and the little fish, his guide, are friendly. Neither is this amity in Animals amongst themselves, but also with other things, as with Metals, Stones and Vegetables: So the cat delights in the herb catnip and rubbeth herself upon it, and there be mares in Cappadocia that expose themselves to the blast of the wind. So frog, toads, snakes, and all manner of creeping poisonous things, delight in the plant called pas-flower, of whom, as the physicians say, if any one eat he shall die with laughing. The tortoise, also, when he is hunted by the adder, eats origanum, and is thereby strengthened; and the stork, when he hath eat snakes, seeks for a remedy in origanum; and the weasel, when he goes to fight with the basilisk, eats rue--whence we come to know that origanum and rue are effectual against poison. So in some Animals there is an imbred skill and medicinal art; for when the toad is wounded with a bite or poison of another animal, he is wont to go to rue or sage and rub the place wounded, and so escape the danger of the poison. So men have learned many excellent remedies of diseases and virtues of things, from brutes; so swallows have shewed us that sallendine is very medicinable for the sight, with which they cure the eyes of their young; and the pyet, when she is sick puts a bay-leaf into her nest, and is recovered. In like manner, cranes, jackdaws, partridges, and black-birds purge their nauseous stomachs with the same, with which also crows allay the

[p. 81]

poison of the chameleon; and the lion, if he be feverish, is recovered by eating of an ape. The lapwing, being surfeited with eating of grapes, cures himself with southernwood; so the harts have taught us that the herb ditany is very good to draw out darts; for they, being wounded with an arrow, cast it out by eating of this herb; the same do goats in Candy. So hinds, a little before they bring forth, purge themselves with a certain herb called mountain osier. Also they that are hurt with spiders seek a remedy by eating of crabs. Swine also being hurt by snakes cure themselves by eating of them; and cows, when they perceive they are poisoned with a kind of French poison, seek for cure in the oak. Elephants, when they have swallowed a chameleon, help themselves with the wild olive. Bears, being hurt with mandrakes, escape the danger by eating of ants. Geese, ducks, and such like watery fowls, cure themselves with the herb called wall-sage. Pigeons, turtles, and hens, with the herb called pellitory of the wall. Cranes, with bulrushes. Leopards cure themselves, being hurt, with the herb called wolf's-bane; boars, with ivy; hinds, with the herb called cinnara.

Footnotes

^79:* Sometimes given as Heracleitus, a Greek philosopher who lived about 500 B. C. He was known as the "weeping philosopher," so impressed was he by the weaknesses of mankind. Only fragments of his philosophical work, "Peri Physeos" (On Nature) remain. These fragments go to show that Heraclitus held "fire to be the first principle of all phenomena, and the original substance out of which they have all been evolved." Agrippa, In the above, throws further light on his philosophy. The fragments of the teachings of Heraclitus were collected, at Berlin, in 1805, while Agrippa wrote some three hundred years earlier.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XVIII.

  

OF THE INCLINATIONS OF ENMITIES.

ON the contrary, there are Inclinations of Enmities, and they are, as it were, the odium, and anger, indignation, and a certain kind of obstinate contrariety of nature, so that any thing shuns its contrary and drives it away out of its presence. Such kinds of inclinations hath rhubarb against choler, treacle against poison, the sapphire stone against hot boils and feverish heats and diseases of the eyes; the amethyst against drunkenness, the jasper against

[p. 82]

flux of blood and offensive imaginations, the emerald and angus castus against lust, achates against poison, piony against the falling sickness, coral against the ebullition of black choler and pains in the stomach. The topaz against spiritual heats, such as are covetousness, lust, and all manner of excesses of love. The like inclinations is there also of ants against the herb origanum; and the wing of a bat and the heart of a lapwing, from the presence of which they fly. Also origanum is contrary to a certain poisonous fly, which cannot endure the Sun, and resists salamanders, and loathes cabbage with such a deadly hatred that they destroy one the other. So cucumbers hate oil, and will run themselves into a ring lest they should touch it. And it is said that the gall of a crow makes men afraid and drives them away from where it is, as also certain other things. So a diamond doth disagree with the loadstone, that being set by it, it will not suffer iron to be drawn to it; and sheep fly from frog-parsley as from some deadly thing, and that, which is more wonderful, Nature hath pictured the sign of this death in the livers of sheep, in which the very figure of frog-parsley, being described, doth naturally appear. So goats do so hate garden basil as if there were nothing more pernicious. And again, amongst animals, mice and weasels do disagree; whence it is said that mice will not touch cheese if the brains of a weasel be put in the rennet, and besides that the cheese will not be corrupt with age. So a lizard is so contrary to scorpions that it makes them afraid with its very sight, as also it puts them into a cold sweat; therefore they are killed with the oil of lizards, which oil also cures the wounds made by scorpions. There is also an enmity betwixt scorpions and mice; wherefore if a mouse be applied to a prick or wound made by a scorpion, it cures it, as it is reported. There is also an enmity betwixt scorpions and stalabors,

[p. 83]

asps and wasps. It is reported, also that no thing is so much an enemy to snakes as crabs, and that if swine be hurt therewith they eat them and are cured. The sun, also being in Cancer, serpents are tormented. Also scorpion and crocodile kill one the other; and if the bird ibis doth but touch a crocodile with one of his feathers, he makes him immovable. The bird called bustard flies away at the sight of a horse, and a hart runs away at the sight of a ram, as also a viper. An elephant trembles at the hearing of the grunting of a hog, so doth a lion at the sight of a cock; and panthers will not touch them that are anointed all over with the broth of a hen, especially if garlic hath been boiled in it. There is also enmity betwixt foxes and swans, bulls and jackdaws. Amongst birds, also, some are at perpetual strife one with another, as also with other animals, as jackdaws and owls, the kite and crows, the turtle and ring-tail, egepis and eagles, harts and dragons. Also amongst water animals there is enmity, as betwixt dolphins and whirlpools, mullets and pikes, lampreys and congers. Also the fish called pourcontrel makes the lobster so much afraid that the lobster seeing the other but near him, is struck dead. The lobster and conger tear one the other. The civet cat is said to stand so in awe of the panther that he hath no power to resist him or touch his skin; and they say that if the skins of both of them be hanged up one against the other, the hairs of the panther's skin fall off. And Orus Apollo saith in his hieroglyphics, if any one be girt about with the skin of the civet cat that he may pass safely through the middle of his enemies and not at all be afraid. Also the lamb is very much afraid of the wolf and flies from him. And they say that if the tail or skin or head of a wolf be hanged upon the sheep-coate the sheep are much troubled and cannot eat their meat for fear. And Pliny makes mention of a bird, called marlin, that

[p. 84]

breaks crows' eggs, whose young are so annoyed by the fox that she also will pinch and pull the fox's whelps, and the fox herself also; which when the crows see, they help the fox against her, as against a common enemy. The little bird called a linnet, living in thistles, hates asses, because they eat the flowers of thistles. Also there is such a bitter enmity betwixt the little bird called easlon and the ass that their blood will not mix together, and that at the braying of the ass both the eggs and young of the easlon perish. There is also such a disagreement betwixt the olive-tree and a wanton, that if she plant it, it will either be always unfruitful or altogether wither. [**] A lion fears nothing so much as fired torches, and will be tamed by nothing so much as by these; and the wolf fears neither sword nor spear, but a stone--by the throwing of which, a wound being made, worms breed in the wolf. A horse fears a camel so that he cannot endure to see so much as his picture. An elephant, when he rageth, is quieted by seeing a cock. A snake is afraid of a man that is naked, but pursues a man that is clothed. A mad bull is tamed by being tied to a fig-tree. Amber draws all things to it besides garden basil and those things which are smeared with oil, betwixt which there is a kind of a natural antipathy.

Footnotes

^84:* This illustration of a natural antipathy said to exist between a wanton and an olive-tree, as well as other illustrations herein of the occult virtues of things, may be regarded as somewhat fanciful, but the reader will be able to bring to mind plenty of natural phenomena that fully prove the leading truths that Agrippa here seeks to convey. For instance, the writer knows one person of whom it may be justly claimed that every plant grows that he touches, while his mother, rendering the same care, finds it impossible to raise a plant. All women know, who have had the experience, that at certain times each month they cannot make pickles that will not spoil. The explanation of these things are found in the occult virtues of Nature; the inherent sympathy, amity or antipathy IN all things TO all other things, which Agrippa so admirably sets forth.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 85]

  

CHAPTER XIX.

  

HOW THE VIRTUES OF THINGS ARE TO BE TRIED AND FOUND OUT, WHICH ARE IN THEM SPECIALLY, OR IN ANY ONE INDIVIDUAL BY WAY OF SPECIAL GIFT.

MOREOVER, thou must consider that the Virtues of things are in some things according to the Species, as boldness and courage in a lion and cock, fearfulness in a hare or lamb, ravenousness in a wolf, treachery and deceitfulness in a fox, flattery in a dog, covetousness in a crow and jackdaw, pride in a horse, anger in a tiger and boar, sadness and melancholy in a cat, lust in a sparrow, and so of the rest. For the greatest part of Natural Virtues doth follow the Species. Yet some are in things Individually; as there be some men which do so wonderfully abhor the sight of a cat that they cannot look upon her without quaking; which fear, it is manifest, is not in them, as they are men. And Avicen tells of a man that lived in his time, whom all poisonous things did shun, all of them dying which did by chance bite him, he himself not being hurt; and Albertus reports that in a city of the Ubians he saw a wench who would catch spiders to eat them, and being much pleased with such a kind of meat, was wonderfully nourished therewith. So is boldness in a wanton, and fearfulness in a thief. And upon this account it is that philosophers say that any particular thing that never was sick is good against any manner of sickness; therefore they say that a bone of a dead man, who never had a fever, being laid upon the patient, frees him of his quartan. There are also many singular virtues infused into particular things by Celestial bodies, as we have shewed before.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 86]

  

CHAPTER XX.

  

THE NATURAL VIRTUES ARE IN SOME THINGS THROUGHOUT THEIR WHOLE SUBSTANCE, AND IN OTHER THINGS IN CERTAIN PARTS AND MEMBERS.

AGAIN thou must consider that the Virtues of things are in some things in the whole (i. e.), the whole substance of them, or in all their parts, as that little fish echeneis, [**] which is said to stop a ship by its mere touch; this it doth not do according to any particular part, but according to the whole substance. So the civet cat hath this in its whole substance, that dogs, by the very touch of his shadow, hold their peace. So salendine is good for the sight, not according to any one but all its parts; not more in the root than in the leaves and seeds, and so of the rest. But some Virtues are in things according to some parts of it, viz., only in the tongue, or eyes, or some other members and parts; so in the eyes of a basilisk is a most violent power to kill men as soon as they see them. The like power is there in the eyes of the

[p. 87]

civet cat, which makes any animal that it hath looked upon to stand still, to be amazed, and not able to move itself. The like virtue is there in the eyes of some wolves, who, if they see a man first, make him amazed and so hoarse, that if he would cry out, he hath not the use of his voice. Of this Virgil makes mention when he sings:

Moeris is dumb, hath lost his voice, and why?
 The Wolf on Moeris first hath cast his eye.

So also there were some certain women in Scythia, and amongst the Illyrians and Triballians, who as often as they looked angrily upon any man, were said to slay him. Also we read of a certain people of Rhodes, called Telchines, who corrupted all things with their sight, wherefore Jupiter drowned them. Therefore witches, when they would after this manner work by witchcraft, use the eyes of such kind of animals in their waters for the eyes, for the like effects. In like manner do ants fly from the heart of a lapwing and not from the head, foot or eyes. So the gall of lizards, being bruised in water, is said to gather weasels together; not the tail or the head of it. The gall of goats, put into the earth in a brazen vessel, gathers frogs together; and a goat's liver is an enemy to butterflies and all maggots. Dogs shun them that have the heart of a dog about them; and foxes will not touch those poultry that have eaten the liver of a fox. So divers things have divers virtues dispersed variously through several parts, as they are from above infused into them according to the diversity of things to be received; as in a man's body the bones receive nothing but life, the eyes sight, and the ears hearing. And there is in man's body a certain little bone, which the Hebrews call LVZ, of the bigness of a pulse that is husked, which is subject to no corruption, neither is it overcome with fire, but is always preserved unhurt,

[p. 88]

out of which, as they say, as a plant out of the seed, our animal bodies shall in the resurrection of the dead spring up. And these Virtues are not cleared by reason, but by experience.

Footnotes

^86:* The belief that the Echeneis, a fish of the Remora or Sucker family, has the power of stopping ships was formerly quite prevalent. In Goodwin's translation of Plutarch's Morals, volume three, we find the following story: "Chaeremomanus, the Trallian, when we were at a very noble fish-dinner, pointing to a little, long, sharp-headed fish, said the echeneis (ship-stopper) was like that, for he had often seen it as he sailed in the Sicilian sea, and wondered at its strange force, for it stopped the ship when under full sail, until one of the seamen perceived it sticking to the outside of the ship, and took it off." Oppian says, describing its occult virtue:

"But through the canvas bellies with the blast,
  And boistrous winds bend down the cracking mast,
  The bark stands firmly rooted on the sea
  And all unmov'd, as tower, or towering tree."

Pliny says: "Why should our fleets and armadas at sea make such turrets on the walls and forecastles, when one little fish is able to arrest and stay, per force, our goodly and tall ships."--Nat. Hist., Vol. XI., p. 41. Ovid writes, "there, too, is the little sucking fish, wondrous to behold, a vast obstruction to ships," and Lucan says the echeneis stops ships on the ocean.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXI.

  

OF THE VIRTUES OF THINGS WHICH ARE IN THEM ONLY IN THEIR LIFE TIME, AND SUCH AS REMAIN IN THEM EVEN AFTER THEIR DEATH.

MOREOVER, we must know that there are some properties in things only whilst they live, and some that remain after their death. So the little fish echeneis stops the ships, and the basilisk and catablepa kill with their sight when they are alive; but when they are dead do no such thing. So they say that in the colic, if a live duck be applied to the abdomen it takes away the pain and herself dies. Like to this is that which Archytas says: If you take a heart, newly taken out of an animal, and, whilst it is yet warm, hang it upon one that hath a quartan fever, it drives it away. So if any one swallow the heart of a lapwing, or a swallow, or a weasel, or a mole, whilst it is yet warm with natural heat it shall be helpful to him for remembering, understanding, and for foretelling. Hence is this general rule, viz.: That whatsoever things are taken out of animals, whether they be any member, the hair, nails, or such like, they must be taken from those animals whilst they be yet living; and, if it be possible, that so they may be alive afterwards. Whence they say, when you take the tongue of a frog, you must put the frog into the water again; and if you take the tooth of a wolf, you must not kill the wolf; and so of the rest. So writes Democritus, if any one take out the tongue of a water-frog, yet living, no other part of the body

[p. 89]

sticking to it, and she be let go into the water again, and lay it upon the place where the heart beats of a woman, she shall answer truly whatsoever you ask her. Also they say, that if the eyes of a frog be before sunrising bound to the sick party, and the frog be let go again, blind, into the water, they will drive away tertian ague; as also that they will, being bound with the flesh of a nightingale in the skin of a hart, keep one always watchful without sleep. Also the ray of the fork-fish, being bound to the navel, is said to make a woman have an easy travail, if the ray be taken from the fish alive and it put into the sea again. So they say the right eye of a serpent, being applied, doth help the watering of the eyes if the serpent be let go alive. And there is a certain fish or great serpent, called Myrus, whose eye, if it be pulled out, and bound to the forehead of the patient, is said to cure the inflammation of the eyes; and that the eye of the fish grows again; and that he is taken blind who will not let the fish go. Also the teeth of all serpents, being taken out whilst they are alive, and hanged about the patient, are said to cure the quartan. So doth the tooth of a mole, taken out whilst she is alive, being afterwards let go, cure the toothache; and dogs will not bark at those that have the tail of a weasel that is escaped. And Democritus relates that the tongue of a chameleon, if it be taken from her alive, doth conduce to a good success in trials, and is profitable for women that are in travail, if it be about the outside of the house, for you must take heed that it be not brought into the house, because that would be most dangerous.

Moreover, there be some properties that remain after death, and of these the Platonists say, that they are things in which the Idea of the matter is less swallowed up. In these, even after death, that which is immortal in them doth not cease to work wonderful things. So in the herbs and plants, pulled asunder

[p. 90]

Click to enlarge
GRAND SOLAR MAN.

and dried, that Virtue is quick and operative which was infused at first into them by the Idea. Thence it is that as the eagle all her life time doth overcome

[p. 91]

all other birds, so also her feathers, after her death, destroy and consume the feathers of all other birds. Upon the same account doth a lion's skin destroy all other skins; and the skin of the civet cat destroys the skin of the panther; and the skin of a wolf corrodes the skin of a lamb. And some of these do not do it by way of a corporeal contact, but also sometimes by their very sound. So a drum made of the skin of a wolf makes a drum made of a lamb-skin not so sound. Also a drum made of the skin of the fish called rochet drives away all creeping things, at what distance soever the sound of it is heard; and the strings of an instrument made of the intestines of a wolf, and being strung upon a harp or lute with strings made of the intestines of a sheep, will make no harmony.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXII.

  

HOW INFERIOR THINGS ARE SUBJECTED TO SUPERIOR BODIES, AND HOW THE BODIES, THE ACTIONS, AND DISPOSITIONS OF MEN ARE ASCRIBED TO STARS AND SIGNS.

IT IS manifest that all things inferior are subject to the superior, and after a manner (as saith Proclus) they are one in the other, viz., in inferiors are superior and in superiors are inferior: So in the Heaven are things terrestrial, but as in their cause, and in a celestial manner; and in the Earth are things celestial, but after a terrestrial manner, as in an effect. So we say that there be here certain things which are Solary and certain which are Lunary, in which the Sun and Moon make a strong impression of their virtues. Whence it is that these kind of things receive more operations and properties, like to those of the Stars and Signs which they are under. So we know that Solary things respect the heart and

[p. 92]

head by reason that Leo is the house of the Sun, and Aries the exaltation of the Sun. So things under Mars are good for the head and secrets by reason of Aries and Scorpio. Hence they whose senses fail and heads ache by reason of drunkenness, find cold water and vinegar good to bathe the head and secrets. But in reference to these it is necessary to know how man's body is distributed to Planets and Signs. Know, therefore, that according to the doctrine of the Arabians, the Sun rules over the brain, heart, the thigh, the marrow, the right eye, and the spirit; also the tongue, the mouth, and the rest of the organs of the senses, as well internal as external; also the hands, feet, legs, nerves, and the power of imagination. That Mercury rules over the spleen, stomach, bladder, womb, and right ear, as also the faculty of the common sense. That Saturn rules over the liver and fleshy part of the stomach. That Jupiter rules over the abdomen and navel, whence it is written by the Ancients, that the effigy of a navel was laid up in the temple of Jupiter Hammon. Also some attribute to him the ribs, breasts, bowels, blood, arms, and the right hand and left ear, and the powers natural. And some set Mars over the blood, the veins, the kidneys, the bag of the gall, the buttocks, the back, motion of the sperm, and the irascible power. Again they set Venus over the kidneys, the secrets, the womb, the seed, and concupiscible power; as also the flesh, fat, belly, breast, navel, and the venereal parts and such as serve thereto; as also the os sacrum, the back-bone, and loins; as also the head, and the mouth, with which they give a kiss as a token of love. Now the Moon, although she may challenge the whole body, and every member thereof according to the variety of the Signs, yet more particularly they ascribe to her the brain, lungs, marrow of the backbone, the stomach, the menstrual and excretory parts, and the left eye, as also the power of increasing. But

[p. 93]

[paragraph continues] Hermes saith: That there are seven holes in the head of an animal, distributed to the seven Planets, viz.: The right ear to Saturn, the left to Jupiter, the right nostril to Mars, the left to Venus, the right eye to the Sun, the left to the Moon, and the mouth to Mercury.

The several Signs, also, of the Zodiac take care of their members: So Aries governs the head and face; Taurus, the neck; Gemini, the arms and shoulders; Cancer, the breast, lungs, stomach and arms; Leo, the heart, stomach, liver and back; Virgo, the bowels and bottom of the stomach; Libra, the kidneys, thighs and buttocks; Scorpius, the secrets; Sagittarius, the thighs and groins; Capricornus, the knees; Aquarius, the legs and shins; Pisces, the feet. [**] And as the triplicities of these Signs answer one the other, and agree in celestials, so also they agree in the members; which is sufficiently manifest by experience, because with the coldness of the feet the belly and breast are affected, which members answer the same triplicity; whence it is, if a medicine be applied to the one it helps the other, as by the warming of the feet the pain of the belly ceaseth. Remember, therefore, this order, and know that things which are under any one of the Planets have a certain particular aspect or inclination to those members that are attributed to that planet, and especially to the Houses and exaltation's thereof. For the rest of the dignities, as those triplicities and marks and face, are of little account in this. Upon this account, therefore, peony, balm, clove-gilly-flowers, citron-peel, sweet-marjoram, cinnamon, saffron, lignum aloes, frankincense, amber, musk, and myrrh help the head and heart, by reason of the Sun and Aries and Leo. So

[p. 94]

doth ribwort, the herb of Mars, help the head and secrets by reason of Aries and Scorpio; and so of the rest. [**] Also all things under Saturn conduce to sadness and melancholy; those under Jupiter to mirth and honor; those under Mars to boldness, contention and anger; those under the Sun to glory, victory and courage; those under Venus to love, lust and concupiscence; those under Mercury to eloquence; those under the Moon to a common life. Also all the actions and dispositions of men are distributed according to the Planets; for Saturn governs old men, monks, melancholy men, and hidden treasures and those things which are obtained with long journeys and difficulty; but Jupiter governs those that are religious, prelates, kings and dukes, and such kind of gains that are got lawfully; Mars rules over barbers, chirurgeons, physicians, sergeants, butchers executioners,

[p. 95]

all that make fires, bakers, and soldiers, who are every where called martial men. Also do the other Stars signify their office, as they are described in the books of Astrologers.

Footnotes

^93:* The several parts of the physical body, it will be seen, run in order from the head to the feet in their correspondence with the twelve Signs or Houses of the Zodiac, from Aries, the first house, to Pisces, the twelfth and last. The Zodiac, as a whole, in symbolizing all parts of a complete man, typifies a perfect celestial being known as the Grand Solar Man.

^94:* NOTE ON PUNCTUATION: We find all semicolons used in this sentence in the English edition of 1651. Mr. Henry Morley, in his "Life of Cornelius Agrippa" (London, 1856), Vol. I., page 140, in a note referring to a quotation be makes there from the Latin edition of Agrippa of 1531, says: "I have preserved the punctuation in this passage to show the use of the colon before semicolons were invented." The passage Mr. Morley quotes from the Latin edition of 1531 ("De Occulta Philosophia Libri Tres," Antwerp, Belgium, one book only of which was published of the three) contains six colons, whereas the English edition of 1651 (see etching for title page), also used by Mr. Morley, and published complete one hundred and twenty years later, contains none. This indicates, apparently, the general period when semicolons were invented and came into use. The characters of punctuation are supposed to have been generally invented and introduced near the close of the fifteenth century by Aldus Manutus, a noted printer and publisher of Venice. The semicolon, as above, originated later on, between 1531 and 1651. Further, the m-dash, "--," as now used, is of comparatively modern introduction. I fail to find a single m-dash in the English edition of Agrippa of 1651, though 3-m-dashes, "----," were occasionally used before quotations from the poets. Eight years later, in 1659, I find the 2-m-dash used, in the second edition of Lilly's "Christian Astrology," page 60, thus: "His least----30." As this was an ordinary paragraph, of itself, it shows that they did not at that time use the m-dash but were evolving towards it. The truth regarding punctuation is that it has slowly and steadily evolved, especially since the art of printing, to its present status. The object of punctuation, primarily, is to present a writer's thought clearly, concisely, and correctly, by pointing out his salient words, using the "marks" like all artist does his "hues," to give prominence and pith thereto.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXIII.

  

HOW WE SHALL KNOW WHAT STARS NATURAL THINGS ARE UNDER, AND WHAT THINGS ARE UNDER THE SUN, WHICH ARE CALLED SOLARY.

NOW it is very hard to know what Star or Sign every thing is under; yet it is known through the imitation of their rays, or motion, or figure of the superiors. Also some of them are known by their colors and odors; also some by the effects of their operations, answering to some Stars. So, then, Solary things, or things under the power of the Sun, are amongst Elements, the lucid flame; in the humors, the purer blood and spirit of life; amongst tastes, that which is quick, mixed with sweetness; amongst metals, gold, by reason of its splendor, and its receiving that from the Sun which makes it cordial; and amongst stones, they which resemble the rays of the Sun by their golden sparklings, as doth the glittering stone aetites, which hath power against the falling sickness and poisons. So also the stone which is called the Eye of the Sun, being of a figure like to the apple of the eye, from the middle whereof shines forth a ray; it comforts the brain and strengthens the sight. So the carbuncle, which shines by night, hath a virtue against all airy and vaporous poison. So the chrysolite stone, which is of a light green color, in which, when it is held against the Sun, there shines forth a golden star; and this comforts those parts that serve for breathing, and helps those that be asthmatical; and if it be bored through,

[p. 96]

and the hole filled with the mane of an ass, and bound to the left arm, it drives away idle imaginations and melancholy fears, and puts away foolishness. So the stone called iris, which is like crystal in color, being often found with six corners; when, under some roof, part of it is held against the rays of the Sun and the other part is held in the shadow, it gathers the rays of the Sun into itself, which, whilst it sends them forth, by way of reflection, makes a rainbow appear on the opposite wall. Also the stone heliotrope, green like the jasper or emerald, beset with red specks, makes a man constant, renowned and famous; also it conduceth to long life; and the virtue of it, indeed, is most wonderful upon the beams of the Sun, which it is said to turn into blood (i. e.), to appear of the color of blood, as if the Sun were eclipsed, viz., when it is joined to the juice of a herb of the same name, and be put into a vessel of water. There is also another virtue of it more wonderful, and that is upon the eyes of men, whose sight it doth so dim and dazzle that it doth not suffer him that carries it to see it, and this it doth not do without the help of the herb of the same name, which also is called heliotrope (i. e.), following the Sun. These virtues doth Albertus Magnus and William of Paris confirm in their writings. The stone hyacinth also hath a virtue from the Sun against poisons and pestiferous vapors; it makes him that carries it to be safe and acceptable; it conduceth also to riches and wit; it strengthens the heart; being held in the mouth it doth wonderfully cheer up the mind. Also there is the stone pyrophylus, of a red mixture, which Albertus Magnus saith Aesculapius makes mention of in one of his Epistles unto Octavius Augustus, saying that there is a certain poison so wonderfully cold, which preserves the heart of man (being taken out) from burning, so that if for any time it be put into the fire it is turned into a stone, and this is that

[p. 97]

stone which is called pyrophylus, from the fire. It hath a wonderful virtue against poison, and it makes him that carries it to be renowned and dreadful to his enemies. But, above all, that stone is most Solary which Apollonius is reported to have found, and which is called pantaura, which draws other stones to it, as the loadstone doth iron, and is most powerful against all poisons. It is called by some pantherus, because it is spotted like the beast called the panther. It is therefore also called pantochras, because it contains all colors, and Aaron calls it evanthum. There are also other Solary stones, as the topazius, chrysopassus, the rubine, and balagius. So also is auripigmentum, and things of a golden color and very lucid.

Amongst plants, also, and trees, those are Solary which turn towards the Sun, as the marigold, and those which fold in their leaves when the Sun is near upon setting, but when it riseth unfold their leaves by little and little. The lote-tree also is Solary, as is manifest by the figure of the fruit and leaves. So is peony, sallendine, balm, ginger, gentian, and dittany; and vervain, which is of use in prophesying and expiations, as also driving away evil-spirits. The bay-tree also is consecrated to Phoebus, so is the cedar, the palm-tree, the ash, the ivy and vine, and whatsoever repel poisons and lightnings, and those things which never fear for the extremities of the winter. Solary also are mint, mastic, zedoary, saffron, balsam, amber, musk, yellow honey, lignum aloes, cloves, cinnamon, calamus, aromaticus, pepper, frankincense, sweet-marjoram, also libanotis, which Orpheus calls the sweet perfume of the Sun.

Also amongst animals those are called Solary which are magnanimous, courageous, ambitious of victory and renown--as the lion, king of beasts; the crocodile, the spotted wolf, the ram, the boar; the bull, king of the herd, which was by the Egyptians

[p. 98]

at Heliopolis dedicated to the Sun, which they called Verites; and an ox was consecrated to Apis in Memphis, and in Herminthus a bull by the name of Pathis. The wolf, also, was consecrated to Apollo and Latona. Also the beast called baboon is Solary, which twelve times in a day (viz., every hour) barks and in time of Aequinoctium micturateth twelve times every hour; the same also it doth in the night, whence the Egyptians did engrave him upon their fountains. [**]

Also, amongst birds, these are Solary: The phoenix, being but one of that kind; and the eagle, the queen of birds; also the vulture, the swan, and those which sing at the rising Sun and, as it were, call upon it to rise, as the cock and crow; also the hawk, which because it, in the divinity of the Egyptians, is an emblem of the spirit and light, is by Porphyrius reckoned amongst the Solary birds. Moreover, all such things as have some resemblance of the works of the Sun, as worms shining in the night, and the beetle. Also, according to Appious' interpretation, such things whose eyes are changed according to the course

[p. 99]

of the Sun are accounted Solary; and things which come of them.

And amongst fish, the sea-calf is chiefly Solary, who doth resist lightning; also shell-fish and the fish called Pulmo, both of which shine in the night; and the fish called stella, [**] for his parching heat; and the fish called strombi [*+] that follow their king; and margari, [*++] which also have a king, and, being dried, are hardened into a stone of a golden color.

Footnotes

^98:* Mr. Morley notes here in reference to the baboon that "Hermes Trismegistus, or a writer in his name, taught that the common division of time was suggested to man by the habits of this sacred animal." Life of Henry Cornelius Agrippa, Volume I, page 132.

^99:* Stella--a star--star-fish; the Asterias or sea-star. One peculiarity of this radiate animal is that so long as it has any one of its usual five points remaining, it will restore any others that may have been destroyed.

^99:+ Strombi--Strombite. A , of the genus Strombus, possessing a spiral shell with a broad, wing-like lip. Ordinarily known as sea-snail.

^99:++ Margari--Margarite--Margaritaceae. Pearl-fish; the pearl oyster.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXIV.

  

WHAT THINGS ARE LUNARY, OR UNDER THE POWER OF THE MOON.

THESE things are Lunary, amongst the Elements, viz.: The earth, then the water, as well that of the sea as of the rivers; and all moist things, as the moisture of trees and animals, especially they which are white, as the whites of , fat, sweat, phlegm, and the superfluities of bodies. Amongst tastes, salt and insipid; amongst metals, silver; amongst stones, crystal, the silver marcasite, and all those stones that are white and green. Also the stone selenite (i. e., the Moon, Lunary), shining from a white body, with a yellow brightness; imitating the motion of the Moon, by having in it the figure of the Moon, which daily increaseth or decreaseth as doth the Moon. Also pearls, which are generated in shells of fishes, and stalactites, formed from the droppings

[p. 100]

of water; also the beryl, or aqua-marine, greenish and six-sided.

Amongst plants and trees, these are Lunary, as the selenotropion, which turns towards the Moon as doth the heliotropion towards the Sun; and the palm-tree, which sends forth a bough at every rising of the new Moon. Hyssop, also, and rosemary, agnus castus, and the olive-tree, are Lunary. Also the herb chinosta, which increaseth and decreaseth with the Moon, viz., in substance and number of leaves, not only in sap but in virtue--which, indeed, is in some sort common to all plants, except onions, which last are under the influence of Mars, and have contrary properties.

As amongst flying things the Saturnine bird called a quail is a great enemy of the Moon and Sun, Lu-nary animals are such as delight to be in man's company, and such as do naturally excel in love or hatred, as all kinds of dogs. The chameleon also is Lunary, which always assumes a color according to the variety of the color of the object--as the Moon changeth her nature according to the variety of the Sign which it is found in. Lunary also are swine, hinds, goats, and all those animals, whatsoever, that observe and imitate the motion of the Moon, as the baboon, and the panther, which is said to have a spot upon her shoulder like the Moon, increasing into a roundness and having horns that bend inwards. Cats also are Lunary, whose eyes become greater or less according to the course of the Moon; and those things (which are of like nature, as catamenial blood, of which are made wonderful and strange things by magicians. The civet cat, also, changing her sex with the Moon, being obnoxious to divers sorceries; and all animals that live in water as well as on land, as otters, and such as prey upon fish. Also all monstrous beasts, such as without any manifest seed are equivocally generated, as mice, which sometimes

[p. 101]

seem to be generated of the putrefaction of the earth. Amongst fowl, geese, ducks, didappers, and all kinds of watery fowl as prey upon fish, as the heron, and those that are equivocally produced, as wasps of the carcasses of horses, bees of the putrefaction of cows, small flies of putrefied wine, and beetles of the flesh of asses. But most Lunary of all is the two-horned beetle, horned after the manner of a bull, which digs under cow-dung and there remains for the space of twenty-eight days (in which time the Moon measures the whole Zodiac), and in the twenty-ninth day, when it thinks there will be a conjunction of their brightness, it opens the dung and casts it into water, from whence then come beetles.

Amongst fish, these are Lunary: Aelurus, whose eyes are changed according to the course of the Moon, and whatsoever observes the motion of the Moon, as the tortoise, the echeneis, crabs, oysters, cockles and frogs.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXV.

  

WHAT THINGS ARE SATURNINE, OR UNDER THE POWER OF SATURN.

SATURNINE things, amongst Elements, are earth and also water; amongst humors, black choler that is moist, as well natural as adventitious (adust choler excepted). Amongst tastes, sour, tart, and dead-like. Amongst metals, lead, and gold, by reason of its weight, and the golden marcasite. Amongst stones, the onyx, the ziazza, the camonious, the sapphire, the brown jasper, the chalcedon, the loadstone, and all dark, weighty, earthy things. Amongst plants and trees, the daffodil, dragon's-wort, rue, cummin, hellebore, the tree from whence benzoin comes, mandrake, opium, and those things which are never sown,

[p. 102]

and never bear fruit, and those which bring forth berries of a dark color and black fruit, as the black fig-tree, the pine-tree, the cypress-tree, and a certain tree used at burials, which never springs afresh with berries, rough, of a bitter taste, of a strong smell, of a black shadow, yielding a most sharp pitch, bearing a most unprofitable fruit, never dies with age, deadly, and dedicated to Pluto. As is the herb pas-flower, [**] with which they were wont, anciently, to

[p. 103]

strow the graves before they put the dead bodies into them; wherefore it was lawful to make their garlands at feasts with all herbs and flowers besides pas-flowers, because it was mournful and not conducing to mirth. Also all creeping animals, living apart, and solitary, nightly, sad, contemplative, dull, covetous, fearful, melancholy, that take much pains, slow, that feed grossly, and such as eat their young. Of these kinds, therefore, are the mole, the wolf, the ass, the toad, the cat, the hog, the bear, the camel, the basilisk, the hare, the ape, the dragon, the mule, all serpents and creeping things, scorpions, ants, and such things as proceed from putrefaction in the earth, in water, or in the ruins of houses, as mice and many sorts of vermin. 'Amongst birds, those are Saturnine which have long necks and harsh voices, as

[p. 104]

cranes, ostriches, and peacocks, which are dedicated to Saturn and Juno. Also the screech-owl, the horned-owl, the bat, the lapwing, the crow, the quail, which is the most envious bird of all. Amongst fishes, the eel, living apart from all other fish; the lamprey, the dog-fish, which devours her young; also the tortoise, oysters, cockles, to which may be added sea-sponges and all such things as come of them.

Footnotes

^102:* Pas, from the Latin word "passus," meaning step, pace, or "right of going foremost; precedence." Thus the pas-flower means a plant blooming ahead of other flowers. A co-ordinate word is "pascha," meaning to "pass over," giving the name "Passover," or the feast of Easter. "Pasch" comes from and means the same as "pascha," and we read of the "pasch" egg, stained and given to children at Easter, as also of the "pasch" flower of Easter. The Easter flower was also known as the Pash-flower, Paschal-flower, and Pasque-flower--"pash" and "pasque" meaning Easter, and "paschal" pertaining thereto. This indicates that the pas-flower in the above text is identical with the pasque-flower, of the genus Anemone, having large purple flowers, which usually bloom about Easter, stepping foremost in their- order of blooming as regarding other flowers. Agrippa also makes mention here of the pas-flower as being an emblem of mourning as the ancients used it to "strow the graves before they put the dead bodies into them." While the ancients may have held the pas-flower as sacred to the rites of burial, the sense of its use as the Easter flower would indicate that it was also used as an emblem of great joy, and signified a new life for the departed through a new birth or resurrection. A true understanding of the meaning of the feast of the Passover or Easter will show this: Easter-day is always the first Sunday after the fourteenth day of the calendar moon which comes upon or next after the 21st of March; so that if the fourteenth day comes on a Sunday, Easter-day will be the Sunday after. Easter corresponds to the Passover of the Jews, and "most nations still give it this name under the various forms of pascha, pasque, paque, or pask." The feast of the Passover was instituted by the Jews "to commemorate the providential escape of the Hebrews, in Egypt, when God, smiting the first-born of the Egyptians, PASSED OVER the houses of the Israelites, which were marked with the blood of the PASCHAL LAMB." With the Christian church it is observed to commemorate the "RESURRECTION of Christ." The Old High Germans celebrated the day in honor of Ostara, the goddess of LIGHT or SPRING, whence they called April (the month of or following Easter) Ostarmanoth. The Anglo-Saxons called the same month, Eastermonadh, from Eastre, their name for the same goddess, and their paschal feast, Eastran or Easter. March was named from Mars, the god of war, and was originally the first month of the year as it was in March that the Sun came to Aries, the first House of the Zodiac, emblemized by the LAMB, as the ram was the first animal to forage for food and procreate; and the Sun entering [p. 103] the first House was the vernal equinox, or the first day of spring, the first season of the fruitful year, and therefore March, being the advent month of light and fecundity, was esteemed as the first month of the year. The first full month of light and spring, when every fetter of winter was riven and spring was opened wide and fixed, was April, from aperio, to open; and also from the Greek word, aphros--foam--from which Venus was said to have sprung, and hence this month was sacred to her; no doubt Ostara and Eastre were identical with her. As Easter-day falls the first Sunday after the fourteenth day of the calendar moon which comes upon or next after the 21st of March, Easter-day usually comes in April and dates its arrival from the aspect of the Moon to the arbitrary date of March 21. This is a very significant fact and is fully confirmed as such when we find that the 21st of March is the usually precise date when the Earth, in its annual movement around the Sun, enters Libra, causing the Sun to apparently enter the opposite House or Sign of Aries, ending winter and ushering in spring, for the first day of spring always comes when the Sun enters Aries. Aries is the House of the LAMB, and with the birth of spring the lamb is resurrected or brought to life anew, while winter is dead, the Sun having PASSED OVER the meridian line between winter and spring. Further, the word Easter corresponds with Aries, for it springs from the word East, and Aries is the Eastern part of the Zodiac. Therefore, March 21st is the true Eastern-day, but the celebration of the return of spring is fitly deferred until the first Sun-day after about a lunar cycle, so as to partake of the first fruits of the spring season. In view of the foregoing, therefore, the ancients used the pas-flower at the grave as an emblem of the passing over of the winter of old age and the resurrection of the spirit to eternal light and immortal youth. lased as such the pas-flower or pasque-flower typified joy and hope.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXVI.

  

WHAT THINGS ARE UNDER THE POWER OF JUPITER, AND ARE CALLED JOVIAL.

THINGS under Jupiter, amongst Elements, are the air; amongst humors, blood and the Spirit of Life; also all things which respect the increase, nourishment, and vegetation of the life. Amongst tastes, such as are sweet and pleasant. Amongst metals, tin, silver and gold, by reason of their temperateness. Amongst stones, the hyacinth, beryl, sapphire, emerald, green jasper, and those of airy colors. Amongst plants and trees, sea-green, garden basil, bugloss, mace, spike, mint, mastic, elecampane, the violet, darnel, henbane, the poplar-tree, and those which are called lucky trees, as the oak, the aesculus, or horse-chestnut, which is like an oak but much larger; the holm or holly-tree, the beech-tree, the hazel-tree, the service-tree, the white fig-tree, the pear-tree, the apple-tree, the vine, the plum-tree, the ash, the dogwood tree, and the olive-tree, and also oil-tree. Also all manner of corn, as barley and wheat; also raisins, licorice, sugar, and all such things whose sweetness is manifest and subtile, partaking somewhat of an astringent and sharp taste, as are nuts, almonds, pine-apples, filberts, pistachio-nuts, roots of peony, myrobalan, rhubarb, and manna; Orpheus adds

[p. 105]

storax. Amongst animals, such as have some stateliness and wisdom in them, and those which are mild, well trained up, and of good dispositions, as the hart and elephant; and those which are gentle, as sheep and lambs. Amongst birds, those that are of a temperate complexion, as hens, together with the yolk of their eggs. Also the partridge, the pheasant, the swallow, the cuckoo, and the stork and pelican, birds given to a kind of devotion, which are emblems of gratitude. The eagle is dedicated to Jupiter--she is the ensign of emperors, and an emblem of Justice and Clemency. Amongst fish, the dolphin, the fish, called anchia or anchovy; and the sheath or sheat-fish, by reason of his devoutness.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXVII.

  

WHAT THINGS ARE UNDER THE POWER OF MARS, AND ARE CALLED MARTIAL.

THESE things are Martial: Amongst Elements, fire, together with all adust and sharp things. Amongst humors, choler; also bitter tastes, tart and burning the tongue, and causing tears. Amongst metals, iron and red brass; and all fiery, red, and sulphureous things. Amongst stones, the diamond, loadstone, the bloodstone, the jasper, the stone that consists of divers kinds, and the amethyst. Amongst plants and trees, hellebore, garlic, euphorbium, castanea, ammoniac, radish, the laurel or sweet-bay, wolf's-bane, scammony; and all such as are poisonous, by reason of too much heat, and those which are beset, round about with prickles, or, by touching the skin, burn it, prick it, or make it swell, as cardis, the nettle, crow-foot and such as, being eaten, cause tears, as onions, ascolonia, leeks, mustard-seed, and all thorny trees; and the dogwood-tree,

[p. 106]

which is dedicated to Mars. And all such animals as are warlike, ravenous, bold, and of clear fancy, as the horse, mule, goat, kid, wolf, leopard, and wild ass. Serpents, also, and dragons, full of displeasure and poison. Also all such as are offensive to men, as gnats, flies, and the baboon, by reason of his anger. All birds that are ravenous, devour flesh, and break bones, as the eagle, the falcon, the hawk, and the vulture; and those which are called the fatal birds, as the horn-owl, the screech-owl, castrels, and kites; and such as are hungry and ravenous, and such as make a noise in their swallowing, as crows, daws, and the pie, which, above all the rest, is dedicated to Mars. And amongst fishes, the pike, the barbel, the fork-fish, the fish that hath horns like a ram, the sturgeon, and the glacus, all which are great devourers and ravenous.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXVIII.

  

WHAT THINGS ARE UNDER THE POWER OF VENUS, AND ARE CALLED VENEREAL.

THESE things are under Venus: Amongst Elements, air and water. Amongst humors, phlegm, with blood, spirit, and seed. Amongst tastes, those which are sweet, unctuous, and delectable. Amongst metals, silver, and brass, both yellow and red. Amongst stones, the beryl, chrysolite, emerald, sapphire, green jasper, carnelian, the stone aetites, the lazuli stone, coral, and all of a fair, various, white, and green color. Amongst plants and trees, the vervain, violet, maiden-hair; valerian, which by the Arabians is called phu! and tithymal, for its fragrant and sweet smell; also thyme, the gum ladanum, amber-gris, sanders or red sandal-wood, coriander, and all sweet perfumes; and delightful and sweet fruits,

[p. 107]

as sweet pears, figs, pomegranates, which, the poets say, were, in Cyprus, first sown by Venus. Also the Rose of Lucifer was dedicated to her; also the Myrtle-tree of Hesperus. Moreover, all luxurious, delicious animals, and of a strong love, as dogs, conies, odorous sheep and goats, both female and male, which generate sooner than any other animal; also the bull, for his disdain, and the calf, for his wantonness. Amongst birds, the swan, the wagtail, the swallow, the pelican, the bergander, which are very loving to their young. Also the crow, and the pigeon, which is dedicated to Venus; and the turtle-dove, one whereof was commanded to be offered at the purification, after bringing forth. The sparrow also was dedicated to Venus, which was commanded in the law to be used in the purification, after the leprosy, a martial disease, than which nothing was of more force to resist it. Also, the Egyptians called the Eagle by the name of Venus, because she never fails to answer the call of her mate. Amongst fishes, these are venereal: The lustful pilchard, the lecherous gilt-head, the whiting, for her love to her young, and the crab, fighting for his mate.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXIX.

  

WHAT THINGS ARE UNDER THE POWER OF MERCURY, AND ARE CALLED MERCURIAL.

THINGS under Mercury are these: Amongst Elements, water, though it moves all things indistinctly. Amongst humors, those especially which are mixed, as also the animal spirit. Amongst tastes, those that are various, strange, and mixed. Amongst metals, quick-silver, tin, and the silver marcasite. Amongst stones, the emerald, achate or agate, red marble, and topaz, and those which are of divers colors and various

[p. 108]

figures naturally; and those that are artificial, as glass; and those which have a color mixed with green and yellow. Amongst plants and trees, the hazel, five-leaved grass, the herb mercury, fumitory, pimpernel, marjoram, parsley, and such as have shorter and less leaves, being compounded of mixed natures and divers colors. Animals, also, that are of quick sense, ingenious, strong, inconstant, and swift; and such as become easily acquainted with men, as dogs, weasels, apes, foxes, the hart and mule; and all animals that are of both sexes, and those which can change their sex, as the hare, civet cat, and such like. Amongst birds, those which are naturally witty, melodious and inconstant, as the linnet, nightingale, blackbird, lark, thrush, the gnat-snapper, the bird calandra, the parrot, the pie, the bird ibis, the bird porphyrio, the black beetle with one horn, and the sea-bird trochilus, which goes into the crocodile's mouth for its food. Amongst fishes, the fish called pour-contrel, for deceitfulness and changeableness; the fork-fish for its industry, and the mullet, also, that shakes off the bait on the hook with his tail.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXX.

  

THAT THE WHOLE SUBLUNARY WORLD, AND THOSE THINGS WHICH ARE IN IT, ARE DISTRIBUTED TO PLANETS.

MOREOVER, whatsoever is found in the whole world is made according to the governments of the Planets, and accordingly receives its virtue. So in fire, the enlivening light thereof is under the government of the Sun; the heat of it under Mars, in the Earth; the various superficies thereof under the Moon and Mercury, and the starry heaven; the whole mass of it under Saturn. But in the middle Elements, air is

[p. 109]

under Jupiter, and water under the Moon; but being mixed, are under Mercury and Venus. In like manner natural active causes observe the Sun, the matter the Moon, the fruitfulness of active causes, Jupiter; the fruitfulness of the matter, Venus; the sudden effecting of any thing, Mars; and Mercury, that for his vehemency, this for his dexterity and manifold virtue. But the permanent continuation of all things is ascribed to Saturn. Also, amongst vegetables, every thing that bears fruit is from Jupiter, and every thing that bears flowers is from Venus; all seed and bark is from Mercury, and all roots from Saturn, and all wood from Mars, and leaves from the Moon. Wherefore, all that bring forth fruit, and not flowers, are of Saturn and Jupiter; but they that bring forth flowers and seed, and not fruit, are of Venus and Mercury; those which are brought forth of their own accord, without seed, are of the Moon and Saturn. All beauty is from Venus, all strength from Mars, and every planet rules and disposeth that which is like to it. Also in stones, their weight, clamminess and slipticness is of Saturn, their use and temperament of Jupiter, their hardness from Mars, their life from the Sun, their beauty and fairness from Venus, their occult virtue from Mercury, and their common use from the Moon.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXXI.

  

HOW PROVINCES AND KINGDOMS ARE DISTRIBUTED TO PLANETS.

MOREOVER, the whole orb of the earth is distributed by kingdoms and provinces to the Planets and Signs: For Macedonia, Thracia, Illyria, Arriana, Gordiana, India, many of which countries are in the lesser Asia, are under Saturn with Capricornus; but with Aquarius

[p. 110]

under him are the Sauromatian Country, Oxiana, Sogdiana, Arabia, Phazania, Media and , which countries, for the most part, belong to the more inward Asia. Under Jupiter, with Sagittarius, are Tuscana, Celtica, Spaine, and happy Arabia; and under him, with Pisces, are Lycia, Lydia, Cilicia, Pamphylia, Paphlagonia, Nasamonia, and Lybia. Mars, with Aries, governs Britany, France, Germany, Bastarnia, the lower parts of Syria, Idumea, and Judea; with Scorpio, he rules Syria, Comagena, Cappadocia, Metagonium, Mauritania, and Getulia. The Sun, with Leo, governs Italy, Apulia, Sicilia, Phenicia, Chaldea, and the Orchenians. Venus, with Taurus, governs the Isles Cyclades, the seas of little Asia, Cyprus, Parthia, Media, Persia; but, with Libra, she commands the people of the Island Bractia, of Caspia, of Seres, of Thebais, of Oasis, and of Troglodys. Mercury, with Gemini, rules Hircania, Armenia, Mantiana, Cyrenaica, Marmarica, and the lower Egypt; but, with Virgo, he rules Greece, Achaia, Creta, Babylon, Mesopotamia, Assyria, and Ela, whence they of that place are in Scripture called Elamites. The Moon, with Cancer, governs Bithivia, Phrygia, Colchica, Numidia, Africa, Carthage, and all Carchedonia.

These we have, in this manner, gathered from Ptolemy's opinion, to which, according to the writings of other astrologers, many more may be added. But he who knows how to compare these divisions of provinces according to the Divisions of the Stars, with the Ministry of the Ruling Intelligences, and Blessings of the Tribes of Israel, the Lots of the Apostles, and Typical Seals of the Sacred Scripture, shall be able to obtain great and prophetical oracles, concerning every region, of things to come.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 111]

  

CHAPTER XXXII.

  

WHAT THINGS ARE UNDER THE SIGNS, THE FIXED STARS, AND THEIR IMAGES.

THE like consideration is to be had in all things concerning the Figures of the Fixed Stars: Therefore they will have the terrestrial ram to be under the rule of the celestial Aries, and the terrestrial bull and ox to be under the celestial Taurus. So also that Cancer should rule over crabs, and Leo over lions; Virgo over virgins, and Scorpio over scorpions; Capricornus over goats, Sagittarius over horses, and Pisces over fishes. Also the celestial Ursa over bears, the Hydra over serpents, and the Dog Star over dogs, and so of the rest. Now, Apuleius distributes certain and peculiar herbs to the Signs and Planets, viz: To Aries, the herb sage; to Taurus, the vervain that grows straight; to Gemini, the vervain that grows bending; to Cancer, comfrey; to Leo, sow-bread; to Virgo, calamint; to Libra, mug-wort; to Scorpio, scorpion-grass; to Sagittarius, pimpernel; to Capricornus, the dock; to Aquarius, dragon's wort; to Pisces, hart-wort. And to the Planets these, viz.: To Saturn, sengreen; to Jupiter, agrimony; to Mars, sulphur-wort; to the Sun, mari-gold; to Venus, wound-wort; to Mercury, mullein; to the Moon, peony. But Hermes, whom Albertus follows, distributes to the Planets these, viz.: To Saturn, the daffodil; to Jupiter, henbane; to Mars, rib-wort; to the Sun, knot-grass; to Venus, vervain; to Mercury, cinque-foil; to the Moon, goose-foot. We also know by experience that asparagus is under Aries, and garden basil under Scorpio; for of the shavings of ram's-horn, sowed, comes forth asparagus; and garden basil, rubbed betwixt two stones, produceth scorpions. Moreover, I will, according to the doctrine of Hermes, and of Thebit,

[p. 112]

reckon up some of the more eminent Stars, whereof the first is called the Head of Algol, and, amongst stones, rules over the diamond; amongst plants, black hellebore and mug-wort. The second are the Pleiades, or Seven Stars, which, amongst stones, rule over crystal and the stone diodocus; amongst plants, the herb diacedon, and frankincense and fennel; and amongst metals, quicksilver. The third is the star Aldeboran, which hath under it, amongst stones, the carbuncle and ruby; amongst plants, the milky thistle and matry-silva. The fourth is called the Goat Star, which rules, amongst stones, the sapphire; amongst plants, horehound, mint, mug-wort and mandrake. The fifth is called the great Dog Star, which, amongst stones, rules over the beryl; amongst plants, savin, mug-wort and dragon's-wort; and, amongst animals, the forked tongue of a snake. The sixth is called the lesser Dog Star, and, amongst stones, rules over achate or agate; amongst plants, the flowers of marigold and pennyroyal. The seventh is called the Heart of the Lyon, which, amongst stones, rules over the granate or garnet; amongst plants, sallendine, mug-wort and mastic. The eighth is the Taile of the lesser Bear, which, amongst stones, rules over the loadstone; amongst herbs, over succory or chicory, whose leaves and flowers turn towards the north; also mug-wort and the flowers of periwinkle; and, amongst animals, the tooth of a wolf. The ninth is called the Wing of the Crow, under which, amongst stones, are such stones as are of the color of the black onyx stone; amongst plants, the bur, quadraginus, henbane and comfrey; and, amongst animals, the tongue of a frog. The tenth is called Spica, which hath under it, amongst stones, the emerald; amongst plants, sage, trifoil, periwinkle, mug-wort and mandrake. The eleventh is called Alchamech, which, amongst stones, rules over the jasper; amongst plants, the

[p. 113]

plantain. The twelfth is called Elpheia; under this, amongst stones, is the topaz; amongst plants, rosemary, trifoil and ivy. The thirteenth is called the Heart of the Scorpion, under which, amongst stones, is the sardonius and amethyst; amongst plants, long aristolochy and saffron. The fourteenth is the Falling Vultur, under which, amongst stones, is the chrysolite; amongst plants, succory and fumitory. The fifteenth is the Taile of Capricorn, under which, amongst stones, is chalcedony; amongst plants, marjoram, mug-wort, and catnip, and the root of mandrake.

Moreover, this we must know, that every stone or plant or animal, or any other thing, is not governed by one star alone, but many of them receive influence, not separated, but conjoined, from many stars. So amongst stones, the chalcedon is under Saturn and Mercury, together with the Taile of Scorpion, and Capricorn. The sapphire, under Jupiter, Saturn and the star Alhajoth; tutia is under Jupiter and the Sun and Moon; the emerald, under Jupiter, Venus and Mercury and the star Spica. The amethyst, as saith Hermes, is under Mars, Jupiter and the Heart of the Scorpion. The jasper, which is of divers kinds, is under Mars, Jupiter and the star Alchamech. The chrysolite is under the Sun, Venus and Mercury, as also under the star which is called the Falling Vultur. The topaz, under the Sun and the star Elpheia; the diamond, under Mars and the Head of Algol. In like manner, amongst vegetables, the herb dragon is under Saturn and the celestial Dragon; mastic and mint are under Jupiter and the Sun, but mastic is also under the Heart of the Lyon, and mint, under the Goat Star. Hellebore is dedicated to Mars and the Head of Algol; moss and sanders to the Sun and Venus; coriander to Venus and Saturn. Amongst animals, the sea calf is under the Sun and Jupiter; the fox

[p. 114]

and ape, under Saturn and Mercury; and domestical dogs under Mercury and the Moon. And thus we have shewed more things in these inferiors by their superiors. [**]

Footnotes

^114:* Agrippa's historian, Mr. Henry Morley, says: "Here ends the detail of the theory of Nature, upon which were based, so far as concerned natural things, the arts of sorcery and divination. From theory to practice, therefore, the young student passes."--"Life of Cornelius Agrippa," Vol. I., p. 136.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXXIII.

  

OF THE SEALS AND CHARACTERS OF NATURAL THINGS.

ALL Stars have their peculiar natures, properties, and conditions, the Seals and Characters whereof they produce, through their rays, even in these inferior things, viz., in elements, in stones, in plants, in animals, and their members; whence every natural thing receives, from a harmonious disposition and from its star shining upon it, some particular Seal, or character, stamped upon it; which Seal of character is the significator of that star, or harmonious disposition, containing in it a peculiar Virtue, differing from other virtues of the same matter, both generically, specifically, and numerically. Every thing, therefore, hath its character pressed upon it by its star for some particular effect, especially by that star which doth principally govern it. And these Characters contain and retain in them the peculiar Natures, Virtues, and Roots of their Stars, and produce the like operations upon other things, on which they are reflected, and stir up and help the influences of their Stars, whether they be Planets, or fixed Stars, or Figures, or celestial Signs, [*+] viz.,

[p. 115]

as oft as they shall be made in a fit matter, and in their due and accustomed times. Which ancient Wise Men considering--such as labored much in the finding out of the occult properties of things--did set down in writing the Images of the Stars, their Figures, Seals, Marks, Characters, such as Nature herself did describe, by the rays of the Stars, in these inferior bodies--some in stones, some in plants, and joints and knots of boughs, and some in divers members of animals. For the bay-tree, the lote-tree, and the marigold are Solary Plants, and in their roots and knots, being cut off, shew the Characters of the Sun. So also in the bones and shoulder-blades in animals; whence there arose a spatulary kind of divining (i. e.) by the shoulder-blades; and in the stones and stony things the Characters and Images of celestial things are often found. But seeing that in so great a diversity of things there is not a traditional knowledge, only in a few things, which human understanding is able to reach: Therefore, leaving those things which are to be found out in plants and stones, and other things, as also in the members of divers animals, we shall limit ourselves to man's nature only, which, seeing it is the most complete Image of the whole Universe, containing in itself the whole heavenly harmony, will, without all doubt, abundantly afford us the Seals and Characters of all the Stars and Celestial Influences, and those, as the more efficacious, which are less differing from the celestial nature. But as the number. of the Stars is known to God alone, so also their effects and Seals upon these inferior things, wherefore no human intellect is able to attain to the knowledge of them. Whence

[p. 116]

very few of those things became known to us which the ancient philosophers and chiromancers attained to, partly by reason and partly by experience; and there be many things yet lying hid in the treasury of Nature. We shall here, in this place, note some few Seals and Characters of the Planets, such as the ancient chiromancers knew of, in the hands of men. These doth Julian call Sacred and Divine Letters, seeing that by them, according to the holy Scripture, is the life of men writ in their hands. And there are in all nations of all languages always the same and like to them, and permanent; to which were added and found out afterwards many more; as by the ancient, so by latter chiromancers. And they that would know them must have recourse to their volumes. It is sufficient here to shew from

[p. 117]

HERE FOLLOW THE FIGURES OF DIVINE LETTERS:

The Letters or Characters of Saturn.

The Letters or Characters of Jupiter.

The Letters or Characters of Mars.

The Letters or Characters of the Sun.

The Letters or Characters of Venus.

The Letters or Characters of Mercury.

The Letters or Characters of the Moon.

[p. 118]

whence the Characters of Nature have their original source, and in what things they are to be enquired after. [**]

Footnotes

^114:+ The Heavens in general are mapped out into clusters and combinations of stars, known as "constellations," and to each constellation the ancients gave a certain "figure," the name of which also named the constellation, [p. 115] as Capricornus (from "caper," goat, and "cornu," horn) is given the figure of a goat (one horn starry); and this constellation, by being one of the twelve constellations of the Zodiac, is further known as one of the TWELVE "Signs."

^118:* "Mr. Morley, on page 138 of his work, gives "successively, line under line, the divine letters of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, Mercury, the Sun, and the Moon," which may be compared with the figures made from the 1651 edition:

Click to enlarge

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXXIV.

  

HOW, BY NATURAL THINGS AND THEIR VIRTUES, WE MAY DRAW FORTH AND ATTRACT THE INFLUENCES AND VIRTUES OF CELESTIAL BODIES.

NOW, if thou desirest to receive virtue from any part of the World, or from any Star, thou shalt (those things being used which belong to this Star) come under its peculiar influence, as wood is fit to receive flame by reason of sulphur, pitch and oil. Nevertheless, when thou dost do any one species of things, or individual, rightly apply many things (which are things of the same subject, scattered, amongst themselves, conformable to the same Idea and Star), presently, by this matter so opportunely fitted, a singular gift is infused by the Idea, by means of the Soul of the World. I say "opportunely fitted," viz., under a harmony, like to the harmony which did infuse a certain virtue into the matter. For although things have some virtues, such as we speak of, yet those virtues do so lie hid that there is seldom any effect produced by them. But, as in a grain of mustard-seed, bruised, the sharpness which lay hid is stirred up; and as the heat of the fire doth make letters apparent to the sight which before could not be read, being writ with the juice of an onion, or with milk; and as letters wrote upon a stone with the fat of a goat, and altogether unperceived, when the stone is put into

[p. 119]

vinegar appear and shew themselves; and as a blow with a stick stirs up the madness of a dog which before lay asleep--so doth the Celestial Harmony disclose virtues lying in the water; stirs them up, strengtheneth them, and makes them manifest; and as I may so say, produceth that into Act which before was only in Power, when things are rightly exposed to it in a Celestial Season. As for example: If thou dost desire to attract virtue from the Sun, and to seek those things that are Solary, amongst vegetables, plants, metals, stones, and animals, those things are to be used and taken chiefly which in a Solary order are higher. For these are more available. So thou shalt draw a singular gift from the Sun, through the beams thereof, being seasonably received together, and through the Spirit of the World.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXXV.

  

OF THE MIXTIONS OF NATURAL THINGS, ONE WITH ANOTHER, AND THEIR BENEFIT.

IT is most evident that in the inferior nature all the powers of superior bodies are not found comprehended in any one thing, but are dispersed through many kinds of things amongst us; as there are many Solary things, whereof every one doth not contain all the virtues of the Sun; but some have some properties from the Sun, and others other-some. Wherefore, it is sometimes necessary that there be mixtions in operations, that if a hundred or a thousand virtues of the Sun were dispersed through so many plants, animals, and the like, we may gather all these together, and bring them into one form, in which we shall see all the said virtues, being united, contained. Now, there is a twofold virtue in commixtion; one, viz., which was first

[p. 120]

planted in its parts, and is celestial; the other is obtained by a certain and artificial mixtion of things, mixt amongst themselves, and of the mixtions of them according to certain proportions, such as agree with the heaven, under a certain constellation. And this virtue descends by a certain likeness and aptness that is in things, amongst themselves, towards their superiors, and just as much as the following things do by degrees correspond with them that go before, where the patient is fitly applied to its superior agent. So from a certain composition of herbs, vapors, and such like, made according to the principles of natural philosophy and astronomy, there results a certain common form, endowed with many gifts of the Stars, as, in the honey of bees, that which is gathered out of the juice of innumerable flowers and brought into one form, contains the virtue of all, by a kind of divine and admirable art of the bees. Yet this is not to be less wondered at, which Eudoxus Giudius reports, of an artificial kind of honey which a certain Nation of Giants in Lybia knew how to make out of flowers, and that very good and not far inferior to that of the bees. For every mixtion, which consists of many several things, is then most perfect when it is so firmly compacted in all parts that it becomes one, is every where firm to itself, and can hardly be dissipated--as we sometimes see stones and divers bodies to be, by a certain natural power, so conglutinated and united that they seem to be wholly one thing; as we see two trees, by grafting, to become one; also oysters with stones, by a certain occult virtue of Nature; and there have been seen some animals which have been turned into stones, and so united with the substance of the stone that they seem to make one body, and that also homogeneous; so the tree ebony is one while wood and another while stone. When, therefore, any one makes a mixtion of many matters

[p. 121]

under the celestial influences, then the variety of celestial actions on the one hand, and of natural powers on the other hand, being joined together, doth indeed cause wonderful things--by ointments, by collyries, by fumes, and such like--which are read of in the books of Chiramis, Archyta, Democritus, and Hermes, who is named Alchorat, and many others.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXXVI.

  

OF THE UNION OF MIXED THINGS, AND THE INTRODUCTION OF A MORE NOBLE FORM AND THE SENSES OF LIFE.

MOREOVER, we must know, that by how much the more noble the form of anything is, by so much the more prone and apt it is to receive, and powerful to act. Then the virtues of things do then become wonderful, viz., when they are put to matters that are mixed, and prepared in fit seasons, to make them alive, by procuring life for them from the Stars, as also a sensible Soul as a more noble form. For there is so great a power in prepared matters, which, we see, do then receive life when a perfect mixtion of qualities seems to break the former contrariety. For so much the more perfect life things receive, shews by how much their temper is more remote from contrariety.

Now, the Heaven, as a prevalent cause, doth (from the beginning of every thing to be generated by the due concoction and perfect digestion of the matter), together with life, bestow celestial influences and wonderful gifts, according to the Capacity that is in that Life and sensible Soul to receive more noble and sublime virtues. For the Celestial Virtue doth otherwise lie asleep, as sulphur kept from the flame,

[p. 122]

but in Living Bodies it doth always burn, as kindled sulphur; and then by its vapor, like the lighted sulphur, it fills all the places that are next to it.

So certain wonderful works are wrought, such as are read of in the book of Nemith, which is titled a Book of the Laws of Pluto, because such kind of monstrous generations are not produced according to the Laws of Nature. For we know that of worms are generated gnats; of a horse, wasps; of a calf or ox, bees; of a crab, his legs being taken off and he buried in the ground, a scorpion; of a duck, dried into powder and put into hot water, are generated frogs; but if the duck be baked in a pie, and cut into pieces, and then put into a moist place under the ground, toads are generated of it. Of the herb garden basil, bruised betwixt two stones, are generated scorpions; and of the hairs of a catameniel person, buried under compost, are bred serpents; and the hair of a horse's tail, put into water, receiveth life and is turned into a pernicious worm. And there is an art wherewith, by a hen sitting upon eggs, may be generated a form like to a man (which I have seen and know how to make), which magicians say hath in it wonderful virtues; and this they call the true mandrake. You must, therefore, know which and what kind of matters are either of Nature or Art, begun or perfected, or compounded of more things, and what celestial influences they are able to receive. For a congruity of natural things is sufficient for the receiving of influence from those celestial; because when nothing doth hinder the Celestials to send forth their lights upon Inferiors, they suffer no matter to be destitute of their virtue. Wherefore, as much matter as is perfect and pure, is not unfit to receive the celestial influence. For that is the binding and continuity of the matter to the Soul of the World, which doth so daily flow in upon things natural, and all things which Nature

[p. 123]

hath prepared, that it is impossible that a prepared matter should not receive life, or a more noble form.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXXVII.

  

HOW, BY SOME CERTAIN NATURAL AND ARTIFICIAL PREPARATIONS, WE MAY ATTRACT CERTAIN CELESTIAL AND VITAL GIFTS.

PLATONISTS, together with Hermes, say, and Jarchus Brachmanus and the Mecubals of the Hebrews confess, that all sublunary things are subject to generation and corruption, and that also there are the same things in the Celestial World, but after a celestial manner, as also in the Intellectual World, but in a far more perfect and better fashion and manner, and in the most perfect manner of all in the Exemplary. And, after this course, that every inferior thing should, in its kind, answer its superior thing, and through this the Supreme Itself, and receive from heaven that celestial power they call the quintessence, or the Spirit of the World, or the Middle Nature; and from the Intellectual World a spiritual and enlivening virtue, transcending all qualities whatsoever; and, lastly, from the Exemplary, or original, World, through the mediation of the other, according to their degree receive the original power of the whole perfection. Hence, every thing may be aptly reduced from these Inferiors to the Stars, from the Stars to their Intelligences, and from thence to the First Cause itself--from the series and order whereof all Magic and all Occult Philosophy flows: For every day some natural thing is drawn by art, and some divine thing is drawn by Nature, which, the Egyptians, seeing, called Nature a Magicianess (i. e.), the very Magical

[p. 124]

power itself, in the attracting of like by like, and of suitable things by suitable.

Now, such kind of attraction, by the mutual correspondency of things amongst themselves, of superiors with inferiors, the Grecians called sympathies. So the earth agrees with cold water, the water with moist air, the air with fire, the fire with the heaven in water; neither is fire mixed with water, but by air; nor the air with the earth, but by water. So neither is the soul united to the body, but by the spirit; nor the understanding to the spirit, but by the soul. So we see that when Nature hath framed the body of an infant, by this very preparative she presently fetcheth its spirit from the Universe. This spirit is its instrument to obtain of God its understanding and mind in its soul and body, as in wood the dryness is fitted to receive oil, and the oil, being imbibed, is food for the fire, the fire is the vehicle of light. By these examples you see how by some certain natural and artificial preparations we are in a capacity to receive certain celestial gifts from above. For stones and metals have a correspondency with herbs, herbs with animals, animals with the heavens, the heavens with Intelligences, and they with divine properties and attributes and with God himself, after whose image and likeness all things are created.

Now, the first image of God is the world; of the world, man; of man, beasts; of beasts, the zeophyton or zoophyte (i. e.), half animal and half plant; of the zeophyton, plants; of plants, metals; and of metals, stones. And, again, in things spiritual, the plant agrees with a brute in vegetation, a brute with a man in sense, man with an angel in understanding, and an angel with God in immortality. Divinity is annexed to the mind, the mind to the intellect, the intellect to the intention, the intention to the imagination, the imagination to the senses, and the senses,

[p. 125]

at last, to things. For this is the band and continuity of Nature, that all superior virtue doth flow through every inferior with a long and continued series, dispersing its rays even to the very last things; and inferiors, through their superiors, come to the very Supreme of all. For so inferiors are successively joined to their superiors, that there proceeds an influence from their head, the First Cause, as a certain string stretched out to the lowermost things of all; of which string, if one end be touched the whole doth presently shake, and such a touch doth sound to the other end; and at the motion of an inferior the superior also is moved, to which the other doth answer, as strings in a lute well tuned.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXXVIII.

  

HOW WE MAY DRAW NOT ONLY CELESTIAL AND VITAL, BUT ALSO CERTAIN INTELLECTUAL AND DIVINE GIFTS FROM ABOVE.

MAGICIANS teach that celestial gifts may, through inferiors being conformable to superiors, be drawn down by opportune influences of the heaven; and so, also, by these celestial gifts, the celestial angels (as they are servants of the stars) may be procured and conveyed to us. Iamblichus, Proclus and Synesius, with the whole school of Platonists, confirm that not only celestial and vital but also certain intellectual, angelical and divine gifts may, be received from above by some certain matters having a natural power of divinity (i. e.), which have a natural correspondency with the superiors, being rightly received and opportunely gathered together according to the rules of natural philosophy and astronomy. And Mercurius Trismegistus writes, that an Image, rightly made of certain proper things, appropriated

[p. 126]

to any one certain angel will presently be animated by that angel. Of the same, also, Austin (St. Augustine) makes mention in his eighth book, De Civitate Dei (the City of God). For this is the harmony of the world, that things supercelestial be drawn down by the celestial, and the supernatural by those natural, because there is One Operative Virtue that is diffused through all kinds of things; by which virtue, indeed, as manifest things are produced out of occult causes, so a magician doth make use of things manifest to draw forth things that are occult, viz., through the rays of the Stars, through fumes, lights, sounds, and natural things which are agreeable to those celestial, in which, aside from their corporeal qualities, there is, also, a kind of reason, sense and harmony, and incorporeal and divine measures and orders.

So we read that the ancients were wont often to receive some divine and wonderful thing by certain natural things: So the stone that is bred in the apple of the eye of a civet eat, held under the tongue of a man, is said to make him to divine or prophesy; the same is selenite, the moon-stone, reported to do. So they say that the Images of Gods may be called up by the stone called anchitis; [**] and that the ghosts of the dead may be, being called up, kept up by the stone synochitis. The like doth the herb aglauphotis do, which is also called marmorites, growing upon the marbles of Arabia, as saith Pliny, and the which magicians use. Also there is an herb called rheangelida with which magicians drinking of can prophesy. Moreover, there are some herbs by which the dead are raised to life; whence Xanthus the historian tells that with a certain herb called balus, a young dragon being killed, was made alive again;

[p. 127]

also, that by the same herb a certain man of Tillum, whom a dragon killed, was restored to life; and Juba reports, that in Arabia a certain man was by a certain herb restored to life. But whether or no any such things can be done, indeed, upon man by the virtue of herbs or any other natural thing, we shall discourse in the following chapter. Now, it is certain and manifest, that such things can be done upon other animals. So if flies, that are drowned, be put into warm ashes they revive. And bees, being drowned, do in like matter recover life in the juice of the herb catnip; and eels, being dead for want of water, if with their whole bodies they be put under mud in vinegar and the blood of a vulture being put to them, will all of them, in a few days, recover life. They say that if the fish echeneis be cut into pieces and cast into the sea, the parts will within a little time come together and live. Also we know that the pelican doth restore her young to life, being killed, with her own blood.

Footnotes

^126:* This was, in all probability, some mineral that resembled Dr. Dee's celebrated stone, which was cannel-coal, a black mineral coal sufficiently hard to be cut and polished and used by him as a Magic Mirror.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXXIX.

  

THAT WE MAY, BY SOME CERTAIN MATTERS OF THE WORLD, STIR UP THE GODS OF THE WORLD AND THEIR MINISTERING SPIRITS.

NO MAN is ignorant that evil spirits, by evil and profane arts, may be raised up as Psellus saith sorcerers are wont to do, whom most detestable and abominable filthiness did follow and accompany, such as were in times past in the sacrifices of Priapus, and in the worship of the idol which was called Panor, to whom they did sacrifice with shameful nakedness. Neither to these is that unlike (if it be true and not a fable) which is read concerning the detestable heresy of old churchmen, and like to these

[p. 128]

are manifest in witches and mischievous women, which wickednesses the foolish dotage of women is subject to fall into. By these, and such as these, evil spirits are raised. As a wicked spirit spake once to John of one Cynops, a sorcerer: "All the power," saith he, "of Satan dwells there; and he is entered into a confederacy with all the principalities together, and likewise we with him; and Cynops obeys us and we, again, obey him." Again, on the contrary side, no man is ignorant that super-celestial angels or spirits may be gained by us through good works, a pure mind, secret prayers, devout humiliation, and the like. Let no man, therefore, doubt that in like manner by some certain matters of the world, the gods of the world may be raised by us, or, at least, the ministering spirits, or servants of these gods, and, as Mercurius saith, the airy spirits (not supercelestial, but less higher). So we read that the ancient priests made statues and images, -foretelling things to come, and infused into them the Spirits of the Stars, which were not kept there by constraint in some certain matters, but rejoiced in them, viz., as acknowledging such kinds of matter to be suitable to them, they do always and willingly abide in them, and speak and do wonderful things by them; no otherwise than evil spirits are wont to do when they possess men's bodies.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XL.

  

OF BINDINGS; WHAT SORT THEY ARE OF, AND IN WHAT WAYS THEY ARE WONT TO BE DONE.

WE have spoken concerning the virtues and wonderful efficacy of natural things. It remains now that we understand a thing of great wonderment--and it is a binding of men into love or hatred, sickness

[p. 129]

or health, or such like. Also the binding of thieves and robbers, that they cannot steal in any place; the binding of merchants, that they cannot buy or sell in any place; the binding of an army, that they cannot pass over any bound; the binding of ships, that no winds, though never so strong, shall be able to carry them out of the haven. Also the binding of a mill, that it can by no force whatsoever be turned round; the binding of a cistern or fountain, that the water cannot be drawn up out of them; the binding of the ground, that it cannot bring forth fruit; the binding of any place, that nothing can be built upon it; the binding of fire, that though it be never so strong, can burn no combustible thing that is put to it. Also the bindings of lightnings and tempests, that they shall do no hurt; the binding of dogs, that they cannot bark; the binding of birds and wild beasts, that they shall not be able to fly or run away. And such like as these, which are scarce credible, yet often known by experience. Now, there are such kind of bindings as these made by sorceries, collyries, unguents, and love potions; by binding to or hanging up of things; by rings, by charms, by strong imaginations and passions, by images and characters, by enchantments and imprecations, by lights, by numbers, by, sounds, by words, and names, invocations, and sacrifices; by swearing, conjuring, consecrations, devotions, and by divers superstitions, and observations, and such like.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XLI.

  

OF SORCERIES, AND THEIR POWER.

THE force of sorceries is reported to be so great that they are believed to be able to subvert, consume and change all inferior things, according to Virgil's muse:

[p. 130]

Moeris for me these herbs in Pontus chose,
 And curious drugs, for there great plenty grows;
 I, many times, with these have Moeris
 spied Chang'd to a wolfe, and in the woods to hide;
 From Sepulchres would souls departed charm,
 And Corn bear standing from another's Farm.

Also, in another place, concerning the companions of Ulysses, whom

The cruel Goddess, Circe, there invests
 With fierce aspects, and chang'd to savage beasts.

And, a little after,

When love from Picus, Cerce could not gaine,
 Him, with her charming-wand, and hellish bane,
 Chang'd to a bird, and spots his speckled wings
 With sundry colors----

Now, there are some kinds of these sorceries mentioned by Lucan concerning that sorceress, Thessala, calling up ghosts, where he saith:

Here all Nature's products unfortunate:
 Foam of mad Dogs, which waters fear and hate;
 Guts of the Lynx; Hyena's, knot imbred;
 The marrow of a Hart with Serpents fed
 Were not wanting; no, nor the sea Lamprey,
 Which stops the ships; nor yet the Dragon's eye.

And such as Apuleius tells of concerning Pamphila, that sorceress, endeavoring to procure love; to whom Fotis, a certain maid, brought the hairs of a goat (cut off from a bag or bottle made with the skin thereof) instead of Baeotius' (a young man) hair. Now she, saith Apuleius, being out of her wits for the young man, goeth up to the tiled roof and, in the upper part thereof, makes a great hole open to all the oriental and other aspects, and most fit for these her arts, and there privately worships; having before furnished her mournful house with suitable furniture, with all kinds of spices, with plates of iron with strange words engraven upon them, with parts of sterns of ships that were cast

[p. 131]

away and much lamented, and with divers members of buried carcasses cast abroad--here noses and fingers, there the fleshy nails of those that were hanged, and, in another place, the blood of them that were murdered, and their skulls, mangled with the teeth of wild beasts. Then she offers sacrifices (their enchanted entrails lying panting), and sprinkles them with divers kinds of liquors; sometimes with fountain water, sometimes with cow's milk, sometimes with mountain honey, and mead. Then she ties those hairs into knots, and lays them on the fire, with divers odors, to be burnt. Then presently, with an irresistible power of magic, and blind force of the gods, the bodies of those whose hairs did smoke, and crash, did assume the spirit of a man, and feel, and hear, and walk, and come whither the stink of their hair led them, and, instead of Baeotius, the young man, come skipping and leaping with joy and love into the house. Austin also reports that he heard of some women sorceresses, that were so well versed in these kind of arts, that, by giving cheese to men, they would presently turn them into working cattle and, the work being done, restored them into men again.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XLII.

  

OF THE WONDERFUL VIRTUES OF SOME KINDS OF SORCERIES.

NOW I will shew you what some of the Sorceries are, that by the example of these there may be a way opened for the consideration of the whole subject of them. Of these, therefore, the first is the catamenia, which, how much power it hath in sorcery, we will now consider; for, as they say, if it comes over new wine it makes it sour, and if it doth but touch

[p. 132]

the vine, it spoils it forever; and, by its very touch, it makes all plants and trees barren, and they that be newly set to die; it burns up all the herbs in the garden and makes fruit fall off from the trees; it darkens the brightness of a looking-glass, dulls the edges of knives and razors, and dims the beauty of ivory. It makes iron presently rusty; it makes brass rust and smell very strong; it makes dogs mad if they do but taste of it, and if they, being thus mad, shall bite any one, that wound is incurable. It kills whole hives of bees, and drives them from the hives that are but touched with it. It makes linen black that is boiled with it; it makes mares cast their foal if they do but touch it, and makes asses barren as long as they eat of the corn that hath been touched with it. The ashes of catamenious clothes, if they be cast upon purple garments that are to be washed, change the color of them, and takes away colors from flowers. They say that it drives away tertian and quartan agues if it be put into the wool of a black ram, and tied up in a silver bracelet; as, also, if the soles of the patient's feet be anointed therewith, and especially if it be done by the woman herself, the patient not knowing of it. Moreover, it cures the fits of the falling sickness; but most especially it cures them that are afraid of water, or drink after they are bitten with a mad dog, if only a catamenious cloth be put under the cup. Besides, they report, that if catamenious persons shall walk, being nude, about the standing corn, they make all cankers, worms, beetles, flies, and all hurtful things, to fall off from the corn; but they must take heed that they do it before sun-rising, or else they will make the corn to wither. Also, they say, they are able to expel hail, tempests, and lightnings, more of which Pliny makes mention of. Know this, that they are a greater poison if they happen in the decrease of the Moon, and yet much greater if

[p. 133]

they happen betwixt the decrease and change of the Moon; but if they happen in the eclipse of the Moon or the Sun, they are an incurable poison. But they are of the greatest force of all when they happen in the first early years, even in the years of virginity, for if they do but touch the posts of the house there can no mischief take effect in it. Also, they say, that the threads of any garment touched therewith cannot be burnt, and if they be cast into the fire it will spread no further. Also, it is said, that the root of peony, being given with castor oil smeared over, using the catamenious cloth, cureth the falling sickness. Moreover, if the stomach of a hart be burnt or roasted, and to it be put a perfuming made with a catamenious cloth, it will make cross-bows useless for the killing of any game. The hairs of a catamenious person, put under compost, breed serpents; and, if they be burnt, will drive away serpents with their smell. So great a poisonous force is in them that they are poison to poisonous creatures.

There is, also, hippomanes, which amongst sorceries is not the least taken notice of, and it is a little venemous piece of flesh as big as a fig, and black, which is in the forehead of a colt newly foaled, which unless the mare herself presently eat, she will never after love her foal or let it suckle. And for this cause, they say, there is a most wonderful power in it to procure love, if it be powdered and drank in a cup with the blood of him that is in love. There is another sorcery of the same name, hippo-manes, a venemous humor of the mare in her mating season, of which Virgil makes mention when he sings:

Hence comes that poison which the Shepherds call
 Hippomanes, and from the Mares doth fall,
 The woeful bane which cruel stepdames use,
 And with a charme 'mongst pow'rful drugs infuse.

[p. 134]

Of this doth Juvenal, the satirist, make mention:

Hippomanes, poysons that boyled are, and charmes
 Are given to Sons in law, with such like harmes.

Apollonius, also, in his Argonautica, makes mention of the herb of Prometheus, which he saith groweth from corrupt blood dropping upon the earth, whilst the vulture was gnawing upon the liver of Prometheus upon the hill Caucasus. The flower of this herb, he saith, is like saffron, having a double stalk hanging out, one further than the other the length of a cubit; the root under the earth, as flesh newly cut, sends forth a blackish juice as it were of a beech, with which, saith he, if any one shall, after he hath performed his devotion to Proserpina, smear over his body, he cannot be hurt either with sword or fire. Also Saxo Gramaticus writes, that there was a certain man, called Froton, who had a garment which, when he had put on, was such he could not be hurt with the point or edge of any weapon. The civet cat also abounds with sorceries, for, as Pliny reports, the posts of a door being touched with her blood, the arts of jugglers and sorcerers are so invalid that the gods cannot be called up, and will by no means be persuaded to talk with them. Also, that they are anointed with the ashes of the ankle-bone of her left foot, being decocted with the blood of a weasel, shall become odious to all. The same, also, is done with the eye, being, decocted. Also, it is said, that the straight-gut is administered against the injustice and corruption of princes and great men in power, and for success of petitions, and to conduce to the ending of suits and controversies, if any one hath never so little of it about him; and that if it be bound unto the left arm, it is such a perfect charm that if any man do but look upon a woman, it will make her follow him presently; and that the skin of the civet cat's

[p. 135]

forehead doth withstand bewitchings. They say, also, that the blood of a basilisk, which they call the blood of Saturn, hath such great force in sorcery that it procures for him that carries it about him good success of his petitions from great men in power, and of his prayers from God, and also remedies of diseases, and grant of any privilege. They say, also, that a tyke, if it be pulled out of the left ear of a dog, and if be it is altogether black, hath great virtue in the prognosticating of life, for if the sick party shall answer him that brought it in, and who, standing at his feet, shall ask of him concerning his disease, there is certain hope of life; and that he shall die if he make no answer.

They say, also, that a stone that is bit with a mad dog hath power to cause discord, if it be put in drink, and that lie shall not be barked at by dogs that puts the tongue of a dog in his shoe under his great toe, especially if the herb of the same name, viz., hound's-tongue, be joined with it. And that a membrane of the secondines of a dog doth the same; and that dogs will shun him that hath a dog's heart. And Pliny reports that there is a red toad that lives in briers and brambles, and is full of sorceries and doth wonderful things, for the little bone which is in his left side, being cast into cold water, makes it presently very hot; by which also the rage of dogs is restrained, and their love is procured if it be put in their drink; and, if it be bound to any one, it stirreth up desire. On the contrary, the little bone which is on the right side makes hot water cold, and that it can never be hot again unless that be taken out; also it is said to cure quartans if it be bound to the sick in a snake's skin, as also all other fevers, and to restrain love and desire. And that the spleen and heart is an effectual remedy against the poisons of the said toad. Thus much Pliny writes. Also, it is said, that the sword with which

[p. 136]

a man is slain hath wonderful power in sorceries. For if the snaffle of the bridle, or spurs, be made of it, they say that with these any horse, though never so wild, may be tamed and gentled; and that if a horse should be shod with shoes made of it, he would be most swift and fleet, and never, though never so hard rode, tire. But yet they will that some certain characters and names should be written upon it. They say, also, if any man shall dip a sword, wherewith men were beheaded, in wine, and the sick drink thereof, he shall be cured of his quartan. They say, also, that a cup of liquor being made with the brains of a bear, and drank out of the skull, shall make him that drinks it be as fierce and as raging as a bear, and think himself to be changed into a bear, and judge all things he sees to be bears, and so to continue in that madness until the force of that draught shall be dissolved, no other distemper being all this while perceived in him.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XLIII.

  

OF PERFUMES OR SUFFUMIGATIONS; THEIR MANNER AND POWER.

SOME suffumigations, also, or perfumings, that are proper to the Stars, are of great force for the opportune receiving of celestial gifts under the rays of the Stars, in as much as they do strongly work upon the air and breath. For our breath is very much changed by such kind of vapors, if both vapors be of another like. The air, also, being through the said vapors easily moved, or affected with the qualities of inferiors or those celestial, daily; and, quickly penetrating our breast and vitals, doth wonderfully reduce us to the like qualities. Wherefore, suffumigations are wont to be used by them that

[p. 137]

are about to soothsay or predict for to affect their fancy or conception; which suffumigations, indeed, being duly appropriated to any certain deities, do fit us to receive divine inspiration. So they say that fumes made with linseed, flea-bane seed, roots of violets, and parsley, doth make one to foresee things to come and doth conduce to prophesying. Let no man wonder how great things suffumigations can do in the air, especially when he shall with Porphyrius consider that by certain vapors, exhaling from proper suffumigations, airy spirits are presently raised, as also thunderings and lightnings, and such like things. As the liver of a chameleon, being burnt on top of the house, doth, as is manifest, raise showers and lightnings. In like manner the head and throat of the chameleon, if they be burnt with oaken wood, cause storms and lightnings. There are also suffumigations under opportune influences of the Stars that make the images of spirits forthwith appear in the air or elsewhere. So, they say, that if of coriander, smallage, henbane, and hemlock, be made a fume, that spirits will presently come together; hence they are called spirit's herbs. Also, it is said, that fume made of the root of the reedy herb sagapen, with the juice of hemlock and henbane, and the herb tapsus barbatus, red sanders, and black poppy, makes spirits and strange shapes appear; and if smallage be added to them, the fume chaseth away spirits from any place and destroys their visions. In like manner, a fume made of calamint, peony, mints, and palma christi, drives away all evil spirits and vain imaginations.

Moreover, it is said, that by certain fumes certain animals are gathered together and also put to flight, as Pliny mentions concerning the stone liparis, that with the fume thereof all beasts are called out. So the bones in the upper part of the throat of a hart, being burnt, gather all the serpents together; but

[p. 138]

the horn of the hart, being burnt, doth with its fume chase them all away. The same doth a fume of the feathers of peacocks. Also, the lungs of an ass, being burnt, puts all poisonous things to flight; the fume of the burnt hoof of a horse drives away mice; the same doth the hoof of a mule; with which, also, if it be the hoof of the left foot, flies are driven away. And, they say, if a house or any place be smoked with the gall of a cuttle-fish, made into a confection with red storax, roses, and lignum-aloes, or lignaloes, and if then there be some sea-water, or blood, cast into that place, the whole house will seem to be full of water or blood; and if some earth of plowed ground be cast there, the earth will seem to quake. Now, such kinds of vapors, we must conceive, do infect any body and infuse virtue into it, which Both continue long, even as any contagious or poisonous vapor of the pestilence, being kept for two years in the wall of a house infects the inhabitants, and as the contagion of pestilence, or leprosy, lying hid in a garment, doth long after infect him that wears it. Therefore, were certain suffumigations used to affect images, rings, and such like instruments of magic and hidden treasures, and, as Porphyrius saith, very effectually. So, they say, if any one shall hide gold or silver, or any other precious thing, the Moon being in conjunction with the Sun, and shall fume the hiding place with coriander, saffron, henbane, smallage, and black poppy, of each alike quantity, bruised together, and tempered with the juice of hemlock, that which is so hid shall never be found or taken away; and that spirits shall continually keep it, and if any one shall endeavor to take it away he shall be hurt by them and shall fall into a frenzy.

And Hermes saith that there is nothing like the fume of spermaceti for the raising of spirits. Wherefore, if a fume be made of that and lignum-aloes,

[p. 139]

red storax, pepper-wort, musk, and saffron, all tempered together, with the blood of a lapwing, it will quickly gather airy spirits together, and if it be used about the graves of the dead, it gathers together spirits and the ghosts of the dead.

So, as often as we direct any work to the Sun, we must make suffumigations with Solary things, and if to the Moon, with Lunary things, and so of the rest. And we must know that as there is a contrariety and enmity in stars and spirits, so also in suffumigations unto the same. So there is also a contrariety betwixt lignum aloes and sulphur, frankincense, and quicksilver; therefore, spirits that are raised by the fume of lignum aloes are allayed by the burning of sulphur. As Proclus gives an example of a spirit, which was wont to appear in the form of a lion, but, by the setting of a cock before it, vanished away because there is a contrariety betwixt a cock and a lion, and so the like consideration and practice is to be observed concerning such like things.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XLIV.

  

THE COMPOSITION OF SOME FUMES APPROPRIATED TO THE PLANETS.

WE make a suffumigation for the Sun in this manner, viz., of saffron, ambergris, musk, lignum aloes, lignum balsam, the fruit of the laurel, cloves, myrrh, and frankincense; all which being bruised and mixt in such a proportion as may make a sweet odor, must be incorporated with the brain of an eagle, or the blood of a white cock, after the manner of pills or troches.

For the Moon we make a suffumigation of the head of a dried frog, the eyes of a bull, the seed of white

[p. 140]

poppy, frankincense, and camphor; which must be incorporated with catamenia, or the blood of a goose.

For Saturn, take black poppy seed, henbane, root of mandrake, the loadstone, and myrrh, and make them up with the brain of a cat or the blood of a bat.

For Jupiter, take the seed of ash, lignum aloes, storax, the gum benjamin or benzoin, the lazuli stone, and the tops of the feathers of a peacock; and incorporate them with the blood of a stork, or a swallow, or the brain of a hart.

For Mars, take euphorbium, bedellium, gum ammoniac, the roots of both hellebores, the loadstones, and a little sulphur; and incorporate them all with the brain of a hart, the blood of a man and the blood of a black cat.

For Venus, take musk, ambergris, lignum aloes, red roses and red coral, and make them up with the brain of sparrows and the blood of pigeons.

For Mercury, take mastic, frankincense, cloves, and the herb cinque-foil, and the stone achate, and incorporate them all with the brain of a fox or weasel, and the blood of a magpie.

Besides, to Saturn are appropriated for fumes all odoriferous roots, as pepper-wort root, etc., and the frankincense tree; to Jupiter, odoriferous fruits, as nutmegs and cloves; to Mars, all odoriferous wood, as sanders, cypress, lignum balsam and lignum aloes; to the Sun, all gums, frankincense, mastic, benjamin, storax, ladanum, ambergris and musk; to Venus, sweet flowers, as roses, violets, saffron, and such like; to Mercury, all the peels of wood and fruit, as cinnamon, lignum cassia, mace, citron or lemon peel, and bayberries, and whatsoever seeds are odoriferous; to the Moon, the leaves of all vegetables, as the leaf indum, and the leaves of the myrtle and bay-tree.

Know, also, that according to the opinion of the magicians, in every good matter, as love, good will,

[p. 141]

and the like, there must be a good fume, odoriferous and precious; and in every evil matter, as hatred, anger, misery, and the like, there must be a stinking fume, that is of no worth.

The twelve Signs, also, of the Zodiac have their proper fumes, as Aries hath myrrh; Taurus, pepper-wort; Gemini, mastic; Cancer, camphor; Leo, frankincense; Virgo, sanders; Libra, galbanum; Scorpio, opopanax; Sagittarius, lignum aloes; Capricornus, benjamin; Aquarius, euphorium; Pisces, red storax. But Hermes describes the most powerful fume to be that which is compounded of the Seven Aromatics, according to the powers of the Seven Planets--for it receives from Saturn, pepper-wort; from Jupiter, nutmeg; from Mars, lignum aloes; from the Sun, mastic; from Venus, saffron; from Mercury, cinnamon; and from the Moon, the myrtle.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XLV.

  

OF COLLYRIES, UNCTIONS, LOVE-MEDICINES, AND THEIR VIRTUES.

MOREOVER, collyries and unguents, conveying the virtues of things natural and celestial to our spirit, can multiply, transmute, transfigure, and transform it accordingly, as also transpose those virtues which are in them into it; that so, it cannot act only upon its own body, but also upon that which is near it, and affect that by visible rays, charms, and by touching it with some like quality. For because our spirit is the subtile, pure, lucid, airy, and unctuous vapor of the blood, it is therefore fit to make collyries of the like vapors, which are more suitable to our spirit in substance, for then, by reason of their likeness, they do the more stir up, attract, and transform the spirit. The like virtues have certain ointments and other

[p. 142]

confections. Hence by the touch sometimes sickness, poisonings, and love is induced; some things, as the hands or garments, being anointed. Also by kisses, some things being held in the mouth, love is induced; as in Virgil we read that Venus prays Cupid

That when glad Dido hugs him in her lap
 At royal feasts, crown'd with the cheering grape,
 When she, embracing, shall sweet kisses give,
 Inspire hid flame, with deadly bane deceive,
 He would----

Now the sight, because it perceives more purely and clearly than the other senses, and fastening in us the marks of things more acutely and deeply, doth most of all and before others, agree with the phantastic spirit, as is apparent in dreams, when things seen do more often present themselves to us than things heard, or any thing coming under the other senses. Therefore, when collyries or eye-waters transform visual spirits, that spirit doth easily affect the imagination, which indeed being affected with divers species and forms, transmits the same by the spirit unto the outward sense of sight; by which occasion there is caused in it a perception of such species and forms in that manner, as if it were moved by external objects, that there seem to be seen terrible images and spirits and such like. So there are made collyries, making us forthwith to see the images of spirits in the air or elsewhere; as I know how to make of the gall of a man, and the eyes of a black cat, and of some other things. The like is made also of the blood of a lapwing, of a bat, and a goat; and, they say, if a smooth, shining piece of steel be smeared over with the juice of mug-wort, and made to fume, it will make invoked spirits to be seen in it. So, also, there are some suffumigations, or unctions, which make men speak in their sleep, to walk, and to do those things which are done by men that are awake; and sometimes to do those things

[p. 143]

which men that are awake cannot or dare not do. Some there are that make us to hear horrid or delectable sounds, and such like. And this is the cause why maniacal and melancholy men believe they see and hear those things without which their imagination doth only fancy within; hence they fear things not to be feared, and fall into wonderful and most false suspicions, and fly when none pursueth them; are also angry and contend, nobody being present, and fear where no fear is. Such like passions also can magical confections induce, by suffumigations, by collyries, by unguents, by potions, by poisons, by lamps and lights, by looking-glasses, by images, enchantments, charms, sounds and music. Also by divers rites, observations, ceremonies, religions and superstitions; all which shall be handled in their places. And not only by these kind of arts are passions, apparitions and images induced, but also things themselves, which are really changed and transfigured into divers forms, as the poet relates of Proteus, Periclimenus, Acheloas, and Merra, the daughter of Erisichthon. So, also, Circe changed the companions of Ulysses; and of old, in the sacrifices of Jupiter Lycaeus, the men that tasted of the inwards of the sacrifices were turned into wolves which, Pliny saith, befell a certain man called Demarchus. The same opinion was Austin of, for, he saith, whilst he was in Italy, he heard of some women that by giving sorceries in cheese to travelers, turned them into working cattle, and when they had done such work as they would have them, turned them into men again; and that this befell a certain priest called Prestantius. The Scriptures themselves testify that Pharao's sorceries turned their rods into serpents and water into blood, and did other such like things.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 144]

  

CHAPTER XLVI.

  

OF NATURAL ALLIGATIONS AND SUSPENSIONS.

WHEN the Soul of the World by its virtue doth make all things that are naturally generated or artificially made to be fruitful, by infusing into them celestial properties for the working of some wonderful effects, then things themselves--not only when applied by suffumigations, or collyries, or ointments, or potions, or any other such like way, but also when they, being conveniently wrapped up, are bound to or hanged about the neck, or in any other way applied, although by never so easy a contact--do impress their virtue upon us. By these alligations, therefore, suspensions, wrappings up, applications, and contacts, the accidents of the body and mind are changed into sickness, health, boldness, fear, sadness, and joy, and the like. They render them that carry them gracious or terrible, acceptable or rejected, honored and beloved or hateful and abominable. Now these kind of passions are conceived to be by the above said to be infused, and not otherwise, like what is manifest in the grafting of trees, where the vital virtue is sent and communicated from the trunk to the twig grafted into it by way of contact and alligation. So in the female palm-tree, when she comes near to the male her boughs bend to the male, and are bowed, which, the gardeners seeing, bind ropes from the male to the female, which becomes straight again, as if she had by this connection of the rope received the virtue of the male. In like manner we see that the cramp-fish, or torpedo, being touched afar off with a long pole, doth presently stupefy the hand of him that toucheth it. And if any shall touch the sea-hare with his hand or stick will presently run out of his wits. Also, if the fish called stella, or star-fish, as they say, being fastened with the blood of a fox

[p. 145]

and a brass nail to a gate, evil medicines can do no hurt to any in such house. Also, it is said, that if a woman take a needle and beray it with dung, and then wrap it up in earth in which the carcass of a man was buried, and shall carry it about her in a cloth which was used at the funeral, that she shall be able to possess herself so long as she hath it about her.

Now, by these examples, we see how, by certain alligations of certain things, as also suspensions, or by a simple contact, or the connection or continuation of any thread, we may be able to receive some virtues thereby. It is necessary that we know the certain rule of Alligation and Suspension, and the manner which the Art requires, viz., that they be done under a certain and suitable Constellation, and that they be done with wire, or silken threads, with hair, or sinews of certain animals. And things that are to be wrapped up must be done in the leaves of herbs, or the skins of animals, or fine cloths, and the like, according to the suitableness of things--as, if you would procure the Solary virtue of any thing, this being wrapped up in bay leaves, or the skin of a lion, hang it about thy neck with a golden thread, or a silken thread of a yellow color, whilst the Sun rules in the heaven--so thou shalt be endued with the Solary virtue of that thing. But if thou dost desire the virtue of any Saturnine thing, thou shalt in like manner take that thing whilst Saturn rules, and wrap it in the skin of an ass, or in a cloth used at a funeral (especially if you desire it for sadness), and with a black thread hang it about thy neck. In like manner we must conceive of the rest.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 146]

  

CHAPTER XLVII.

  

OF MAGICAL RINGS AND THEIR COMPOSITIONS.

RINGS, also, which were always much esteemed of by the ancients, when they are opportunely made, do in like manner impress their virtue upon us, in as much as they do affect the spirit of him that carries them with gladness or sadness, and render him courteous or terrible, bold or fearful, amiable or hateful; in as much as they do fortify us against sickness, poisons, enemies, evil spirits, and all manner of hurtful things, or, at least, will not suffer us to be kept under them. Now, the manner of making these kinds of Magical Rings is this, viz.; When any Star ascends fortunately, with the fortunate aspect or conjunction of the Moon, we must take a stone and herb that is under that Star, and make a ring of the metal that is suitable to this Star, and in it fasten the stone, putting the herb or root under it--not omitting the inscriptions of images, names and characters, as also the proper suffumigations; but we shall speak more of these in another place, where we shall treat of Images and Characters.

So we read in Philostratus Jarchus that a wise prince of the Indies bestowed seven rings made after this manner (marked with the virtues and names of the seven planets) to Apollonius; of which he wore every day of the week one thereof, distinguishing them in their order according to the name of the days, as is set forth by astrologers, viz., Sunday, the ring marked with the virtues and inscribed with the name and seal of the Sun, that planet which ruleth over Sunday and from which the day taketh its name; Monday, the ring of the virtues, seal and name of the Moon; Tuesday, that inscribed unto Mars; Wednesday, that unto Mercury; Thursday, that inscribed unto Jupiter; Friday, that unto Venus,

[p. 147]

and Saturday, that unto the planet Saturn, seeing as Saturday is the last day of the week and hath correspondence with the last end of life, and is ruled by Saturn which carries the sickle of death; and, it is said, that Apollonius, by the benefit of these seven magical rings, lived above one hundred and thirty years, as also that he always retained the beauty and vigor of his youth. In like manner Moses, the lawgiver and ruler of the Hebrews, being skilled in the Magic of the Egyptians, is said by Josephus to have made rings of love and oblivion. There was also, as saith Aristotle, amongst the Cireneans, a ring of Battus which could procure love and honor. We read also that Eudamus, a certain philosopher, made rings against the bites of serpents, bewitchings, and evil spirits. The same doth Josephus relate of Solomon. Also we read in Plato that Gygus, the king of Lydia, had a ring of wonderful and strange virtues, the seal of which, when he turned it toward the palm of his hand, rendered him invisible; nobody could see him, but he could see all things; and, by the opportunity of which ring, he deceived the queen and slew the king, his master, and killed whomsoever he thought stood in his way; and in these villainies no one could see him; and, at length, by the benefit of this ring he became king of Lydia himself. [**]

Footnotes

^147:* Notwithstanding the many exaggerated accounts like this one of King Gygus, the editor desires to give his unqualified assent as to the occult properties of specially prepared Magical Rings. When a boy he got a copy of an old book entitled "The History and Poetry of Finger Rings," which contains much curious information on the subject, and from that time to this he has by personal experiment, and much study in connection with other occult arts that bear upon the matter, become confident that rings may be made that will insure many good things to their possessors--warding off and curing diseases, guarding against evil transits and other dangerous influences, and those which will favorably influence one's station in life, and procure other ardently desired things and ends. The Masonic ring will gradually take on occult power if its owner yields intelligent assistance on every call, methodically performing his regular society duty, thereby infusing his ring with Masonic virtues. Of course, a properly prepared ring may seemingly fail of its specified object, but [p. 148] we are inclined to believe that they are helpful, however little their effect may be noticed, in every case. We warn our readers against the numerous charlatans who sell so-called Magical Rings. Magical Rings are never sold as such. Whatever virtue may exist in a ring the owner alone CONFIRMS and BINDS. All that any other person can do is to properly instruct how such a ring should he made and worn. Any so-called "prophet" or "oracle" that now disgraces and perverts true occult art will most probably lay claim to this knowledge, as will those astrologers and "gifted" pretenders in America who hide their crude acquirements and practices behind high-sounding names. I say "in America," because in England even eminent practitioners are prohibited by British law from doing work for the public and are forced, for self-protection, to serve under assumed names. Such a condition not prevailing in this country it is safe to regard those who assume titles as either charlatans or who act from a very superficial knowledge. There may, possibly, be honorable exceptions to this rule, but we doubt it. Consult YOURSELF, therefore, regarding a personal occult ring, selecting the metal, stone and design that you are most pleased with. Then you have made a proper start, and, in a great many cases, need go no further; thus every plain gold marriage ring becomes a magical ring. As the courtship is exalted so will be the potency of the ring. The wife may often owe her security to the marriage ring and should always wear it. To lose the marriage ring portends evil, and another one, heavier and engraven with the first names of the couple--like "Jack" and "Mary"--and the marriage date, should be procured as soon as circumstances will permit. Every ring, being a circle, contains occult force and symbolizes the eternal.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 148]

  

CHAPTER XLVIII.

  

OF THE VIRTUE OF PLACES, AND WHAT PLACES ARE SUITABLE TO EVERY STAR.

THERE be wonderful virtues of places accompanying them, either from things there placed, or by the influences of the Stars, or in any other way. For, as Pliny relates of a cuckoo, in what place any one doth first hear him, if his right foot-print be marked about and that place dug up, there will no fleas be bred in that place where it is scattered. So they say that the dust of the track of a snake, being gathered up and scattered amongst bees, makes them return to their hives. So, also, that the dust in which a mule hath rolled himself, being cast upon the body, doth mitigate the heat of passion; and that the dust wherein a hawk hath rolled herself, if it be bound

[p. 149]

to the body in a bright red cloth, cures the quartan. So doth the stone taken out of the nest of a swallow, as they say, presently relieve those that have the falling sickness, and being bound to the party, continually preserves them, especially if it be rolled in the blood or heart of a swallow. And it is reported that if any one shall cut a vein, being fasting, and shall go over a place where any one lately fell with the fit of a falling sickness, that he shall fall into the same disease. And Pliny reports that to fasten an iron nail in that place where he that fell with a fit of the falling sickness first did pitch his head, will free him from his disease. So they say that an herb, growing upon the head of any image, being gathered, and bound up in some part of one's garment with a red thread, shall presently allay the headache; and that any herb gathered out of the brooks or rivers before Sunrising, and no body seeing him that gathers it, shall cure the tertian if it be bound to the left arm, the sick party not knowing what is done.

Amongst places that are appropriated to the Stars, all stinking places, and dark, underground, religious, and mournful places, as church-yards, tombs, and houses not inhabited by men; and old, tottering, obscure, dreadful houses; and solitary dens, caves, and pits; also fish-ponds, standing pools, sewers, and such like, are appropriated to Saturn. Unto Jupiter are ascribed all privileged places, consistories of noblemen, tribunals, chairs, places for exercise, schools, and all beautiful and clean places, and those sprinkled with divers odors. To Mars, fiery and bloody places, furnaces, bakehouses, shambles, places of execution, and places where there have been great battles fought and slaughters made, and the like. To the Sun, light places, the serene air, kings' palaces and princes' courts, pulpits, theaters, thrones, and all kingly and magnificent places. To Venus, pleasant fountains, green meadows, flourishing gardens, garnished beds,

[p. 150]

stews, and, according to Orpheus, the sea, the seashore, baths, dancing places, and all places belonging to women. To Mercury, shops, schools, warehouses, exchanges for merchants, and the like. To the Moon, wildernesses, woods, rocks, hills, mountains, forests, fountains, waters, rivers, seas, seashores, ships, highways, groves, granaries for corn, and such like. On this account they that endeavor to procure love are wont to bury for a certain time the instruments of their art, whether they be rings, images, looking-glasses, or any other, or hide them in a stew house, so that they will contract some virtue under Venus, the same as those things that stand in stinking places become stinking, and those in an aromatical place become aromatic and of a sweet savor.

The four corners of the earth also pertain to this matter. Hence they that are to gather a Saturnine, Martial, or Jovial herb must look towards the East or South, partly because they desire to be oriental from the Sun, and partly because of their principal houses, viz.: Aquarius, Scorpio and Sagittarius are Southern Signs, so also are Capricornus and Pisces. But they that will gather a Venereal, Mercury or Lunary herb must look towards the West because they delight to be western, or else they must look towards the North because their principal houses--viz., Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Virgo--are Northern Signs. So in any Solary work we must look not only towards the East and South whilst plucking it, but also towards the Solary body and light.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 151]

  

CHAPTER XLIX.

  

OF LIGHT, COLORS, CANDLES AND LAMPS, AND TO WHAT STARS, HOUSES AND ELEMENTS SEVERAL COLORS ARE ASCRIBED.

LIGHT also is a quality that partakes much of form, and is a simple act, and also a representation of the understanding. It is first diffused from the Mind of God into all things; but in God the Father, the Father of Light, it is the first true light; then in the Son a beautiful, overflowing brightness, and in the Holy Ghost a burning brightness, exceeding all Intelligences; yea, as Dyonisius saith of Seraphims, in angels it is a shining intelligence diffused, an abundant joy beyond all bounds of reason, yet received in divers degrees, according to the nature of the Intelligence that receives it. Then it descends into the celestial bodies, where it becomes a store of life and an effectual propagation; even a visible splendor. In the fire it is a certain natural liveliness, infused into it by the heavens. And, lastly, in men, it is a clear course of reason, an innate knowledge of divine things, and the whole rational faculty; but this is manifold, either by reason of the disposition of the body or by reason of him who bestows it, who gives it to every one as he pleaseth. From thence it passeth to the fancy, yet above the senses, but only imaginable; and thence to the senses, especially to the sense of the eyes. In them light is a visible clearness; and is extended to other perspicuous bodies, in which it becomes a color and a shining beauty; but in dark bodies it is a certain beneficial and generative virtue, and penetrates to the very center where its beams, being collected into a small place, become a dark heat, tormenting and scorching, so that all things perceive the vigor of the light according to their capacity--and all light, joining to itself an enlivening

[p. 152]

heat, and, passing through all things, doth convey its qualities and virtues to all things. Great is the power of light to mar or make enchantments. So a sick man, uncovered against the Sun or the Moon, their rays become charged with the noxious qualities of the sickness and, penetrating, convey them into the body of another, and affect that with a quality of the same kind. So that from the sick should be covered deep from the light, lest its occult quality doth infect the well. This is the reason why Enchanters have a care to cover their enchantments with their shadow. So the civet cat makes all dogs dumb with the very touch of her shadow.

Also, there are made, artificially, some Lights, by lamps, torches, candles, and such like, of some certain thing and fluids, opportunely chosen, according to the rule of the Stars, and composed amongst themselves according to their congruity, which, when they be lighted, and shine alone, are wont to produce some wonderful and celestial effects, which men many times wonder at. So Pliny reports, out of Anaxilaus, of a poison of mares which, being lighted in torches, doth monstrously represent a sight of horses' heads. The like may be done with flies, which being duly tempered with wax, and lighted, make a strange sight of flies; and the skin of a serpent, lighted in a proper lamp, maketh serpents appear. They say that when grapes are in their flower, if any one shall bind a vial full of oil to them, and shall let it alone until they be ripe, and then the oil be put in a lamp and lighted, it makes grapes to be seen; and so with other fruits. If centaury be mixed with honey, and the blood of a lapwing, and be put in a lamp, they that stand about will look much larger than they are wont; and if it be lit in a clear night the Stars will seem to scatter one from another. Such force, also, is in the ink of the cuttle-fish that it, being put into a lamp, makes blackamoors appear. It is also reported that a candle,

[p. 153]

made of some Saturnine things, being lighted, if it be extinguished in the mouth of a man newly dead, will afterwards, as oft as it shines alone, bring a feeling of sadness and great fear upon them that stand about it. Of such like torches and lamps doth Hermes speak more of, also Plato and Chyrannides, and of the latter writers, Albertus, in a certain treatise of this particular thing.

Colors, also, are a class of lights, which, being duly mixed with things, are wont to expose such things to the influence of those Stars to which the colors are agreeable. And we shall afterwards speak of some colors which are the Lights of the Planets, by which even the natures of Fixed Stars themselves are understood, which also may be applied to the flames of lamps and candles. But in this place we shall relate how the colors of inferior mixed things are distributed to divers planets. All colors as black, lucid, earthy, leaden, or brown, have relation to Saturn. Sapphire and airy colors, and those which are always green, clear, purple, darkish, golden, or mixed with silver, belong to Jupiter. Red colors, and burning, fiery, flaming, violet, purple, bloody, and iron colors, resemble Mars. Golden, saffron, purple, and bright colors, resemble the Sun. But all white, fair, curious, green, ruddy, betwixt saffron and purple, resemble Venus, Mercury and the Moon. Moreover, amongst the Signs of the Zodiac, known as the Houses of the Heaven, the first and seventh hath the color white; the second and twelfth, green; the third and eleventh, saffron; the fourth and the tenth, red; the fifth and ninth, a honey color; and the sixth and eighth, black.

The Elements, also, have their colors, by which natural philosophers judge of the complexion and property of their nature. For an earthy color, caused of coldness and dryness, is brown, and black, and manifests black choler and a Saturnine nature. Blue, tending towards whiteness, doth denote phlegm.

[p. 154]

[paragraph continues] For cold makes white; moisture and dryness makes black. Reddish color shews blood; but fiery, flaming, burning hot, shews choler, which, by reason of its subtilty and aptness to mix with others, doth cause divers colors more; for if it be mixed with blood, and blood be most predominant, it makes a florid red; if choler predominate, it makes a reddish color: if there be an equal mixtion, it makes a sad red. But if adust choler be mixed with blood it makes a hempen color; and red, if blood predominate; and somewhat red if choler prevail; but if it be mixed with a melancholy humor it makes a black color; but with melancholy and phlegm together, in an equal proportion, it makes a hempen color. If phlegm abound, a mud color; if melancholy, a bluish; but if it be mixed with phlegm alone, in an equal proportion, it makes a citron color; if unequally, a pale or palish. Now, all colors are more prevalent when they be in silk, or in metals, or in perspicuous substances, or in precious stones, and in those things which resemble celestial bodies in color, especially in living things.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER L.

  

OF FASCINATION, AND THE ART THEREOF.

FASCINATION is a binding, which comes from the spirit of the witch, through the eyes of him that is so bewitched, and entering to his heart. Now the instrument of fascination is the spirit, viz., a certain pure, lucid, subtile vapor, generated of the purer blood by the heat of the heart. This doth always send forth, through the eyes, rays like to itself. Those rays, being sent forth, do carry with them a spiritual vapor, and that vapor a blood (as it appears in swollen and red eyes), whose rays, being sent forth to the eyes of him that looks upon them, carry the vapor of the corrupt blood together with itself;

[p. 155]

by the contagion of which it doth infect the eyes of the beholder with the like disease. So the eye, being opened and intent upon any one with a strong imagination, doth dart its beams (which are the vehiculum of the spirit) into the eyes of him that is opposite to him; which tender spirit strikes the eyes of him that is bewitched, being stirred up from the heart of him that strikes, and possesseth the breast of him that is stricken, wounds his heart and infects his spirit. Whence Apuleius saith, "Thy eyes, sliding down through my eyes into mine inward breast, stir up a most vehement burning in my marrow." Know, then, that men are most bewitched when, with often beholding, they direct the edge of their sight to the edge of the sight of those that bewitch them; and when their eyes are reciprocally intent one upon the other, and when rays are joined to rays and lights to lights, the spirit of the one is joined to the spirit of the other and fixeth its sparks. So are strong ligations made, and so most vehement loves are inflamed with only the rays of the eyes; even with a certain sudden looking on, as if it were with a dart or stroke, penetrating the whole body, whence then the spirit and amorous blood, being thus wounded, are carried forth upon the lover and enchanter, no otherwise than the blood and spirit of the vengeance of him that is slain are upon him that slays him. Whence Lucretius sang concerning those amorous bewitchings

The body smitten is, but yet the mind
 Is wounded with the darts of Cupid blind.
 All parts do Sympathize i' th' wound, but know
 The blood appears in that which had the blow. [**]

[p. 156]

So, great is the power of fascination, especially when the vapors of the eyes are subservient to the affection. Therefore witches use collyries, ointments, alligations, and such like, to affect and corroborate the spirit in this or that manner. To procure love they use venereal collyries, as hippomanes, the blood of doves, or sparrows, and such like. To induce fear, they use martial collyries, as of the eyes of wolves, the civet cat, and the like. To procure misery or sickness, they use Saturnine things, and so of the rest.

Footnotes

^155:* Again, in speaking of the power of Venus, the goddess of peace, over Mars, the god of war, he says:

                      On thy soft bosom he--
 The warlike field who sways--almighty Mars,
 Struck by triumphant Love's eternal wound,
 Reclines full frequent. With uplifted gaze
 On thee he feeds his longing, lingering eyes,
 And all his soul hangs quivering from thy lips.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER LI.

  

OF CERTAIN OBSERVATIONS, PRODUCING WONDERFUL VIRTUES.

THEY say that certain acts and observations have a certain power of natural things; that they believe diseases may be expelled, or brought thus and thus. So they say that quartanes may be driven away if the parings of the nails of the sick be bound to the neck of a live eel, in a linen cloth, and she be let go into the water. And Pliny saith that the parings of a sick man's nails of his feet and hands being mixed with wax, cure the quartan, tertian, and quotidian ague; and if they be before Sunrising fastened to another man's gate, will cure such like diseases. In like manner, let all the parings of the nails be put into the caves of ants, and the first ant that begins to draw at the parings must be taken and bound to the neck of the sick, and by this means will the disease be cured. They say that by wood, stricken with lightning, and cast behind the back with one's hands, any disease may be removed; and, in quartanes, a piece of a nail from a gibbet, wrapped up in wool, and hung about the neck, cures them; also, a rope doth the like that is taken from a gallows and hid under

[p. 157]

ground so that the Sun cannot reach it. The throat of him that hath a hard swelling, or imposthume, being touched with the hand of him that died by an immature death, will be cured thereby. They say, also, that a woman is presently eased of her hard labor if any one shall put into her bed a stone or dart with which a boar or a bear or man hath been killed with one blow. The same doth a spear that is pulled out of the body of a man, if it shall not first touch the ground; also, they say, that arrows, pulled out of the body of a man, if they have not touched the earth, taken and stealthily placed under any one lying down, will procure love. The falling sickness is cured by meat made of the flesh of a wild beast, slain in the same manner as a man is slain. A man's eyes that are washed three times with the water wherein he hath washed his feet shall never be sore or blear. It is said that some do cure diseases of the groin with thread taken out of a weaver's loom and tying into it seven or nine knots, the name of some widow being named at every knot. The spleen of cattle, extended upon painful spleens, cures them if he that applies it saith that he is applying a medicine to the spleen to cure and ease it. After this, they say, the patient must be shut into a sleeping room, the door being sealed up with a ring, and some verse be repeated over nineteen times. The water of a green lizard cures the same disease if it be hanged up in a vessel before the patient's bed-chamber so that he may, as he passes in and out, touch it with his hand. And a little frog climbing up a tree, if any one shall spit in his mouth, and then let him escape, is said to cure the cough. It is a wonderful thing, but easy to experience, that Pliny speaks of, that if any one shall be sorry for any blow that he hath given another, afar off or nigh at hand, if he shall presently spit into the middle of that hand with which he gave the blow, the party

[p. 158]

that was smitten shall presently be freed from pain. This hath been approved of in a four-footed beast that hath been sorely hurt. Some there are that aggravate the blow before they give it. In like manner, spittle carried in the hand, or to spit in the shoe of the right foot before it be put on, is good when any one passeth through a dangerous place. They say that wolves will not come to a field if one of them be taken and his blood let by little and little out of his legs, being unbroken, with a knife, and sprinkled about the outside of the field, and he himself be buried in that place from whence he was first drawn. The Methanenses, citizens of Trezenium, accounted it as a present remedy for preserving of vines from the wrong of the southern wind, having always found it by most certain experience, if, whilst the wind blows, a white cock should be pulled to pieces in the middle by two men, both of whom, each keeping his part, must walk each way around the vineyard, until both meet in the place from whence they began their circuit, and must in that place bury the pieces of the cock. Also, if any one shall hold a viper over a vapor with a staff, he shall prophesy, and that the staff wherewith a snake was beaten is good against female diseases. These things Pliny recites. It is said that in gathering roots and herbs we must draw three circles round about them first, with a sword, and then dig them up, meanwhile taking heed of any contrary wind. Also they say, that if any one shall measure a dead man with a rope, first from the elbow to the biggest finger, then from the shoulder to the same finger, and afterwards from the head to the feet, making thrice those mensurations; if any one afterwards shall be measured with the same rope, in the same manner, he shall not prosper, but be unfortunate and fall into misery and sadness. Albertus of Chyrannis saith, that if any woman hath enchanted thee to love her, take the gown she sleepeth

[p. 159]

in out of doors and spit through the right sleeve thereof, when the enchantment will be quitted. And Pliny saith, that to sit by women far with child, or when a medicine is given to any one of them, the fingers being joined together like the teeth of a comb, is a charm; so much the more if the hands be joined about one or both knees. Also, to sit cross legged is sorcery; therefore it was forbidden to be done in the counsels of princes and rulers, as a thing which hindered all acts. And, it is said, if any one shall stand before a man's chamber door, and call to him by name and the man answer, if then he fasten a knife or needle on the door, the edge or point being downward, and break it, he that be in the room shall be unable of his intention so long as those things shall be there.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER LII.

  

OF THE COUNTENANCE AND GESTURE, THE HABIT AND THE FIGURE OF THE BODY, AND TO WHAT STARS ANY OF THESE DO ANSWER--WHENCE PHYSIOGNOMY, AND METOPOSCOPY, AND CHIROMANCY, ARTS OF DIVINATION, HAVE THEIR GROUNDS.

THE countenance, gesture, motion, setting and figure of the body, being accidental to us, conduce to the receiving of celestial gifts and expose us to the superior bodies, which produce certain effects in us, like unto the effects following the methods of gathering hellebore, which, if thou pullest the leaf upward when gathering it, draws the humors upward and causeth vomiting; if downward, it causeth purging, drawing the humor downward. How much also the countenance and gesture of one person doth affect the sight, imagination and spirit of another no man is ignorant. So they that are parents discover those impressions in their children of their previous conditions, and

[p. 160]

that which they did then do, form and imagine. So a mild and cheerful countenance of a prince in the city makes the people joyful; but if it be fierce or sad doth terrify them. So the gesture and countenance of any one lamenting, doth easily move to pity. So the shape of an amiable person doth easily excite to friendship. Thou must know that such like gestures and figures as harmonies of the body, do expose it no otherwise to the celestials, than odors, and the spirit of a medicine, and internal passions, also, do the soul. For as medicines and passions of the mind are by certain dispositions of the heaven increased, so also the gesture and motions of the body do get an efficacy by certain influences of the heavens. For there are gestures resembling Saturn which are melancholy and sad, as are beating of the breast or striking of the head; also such as are religious, as the bowing of the knee, and a fixed look downwards, as of one praying; also weeping, and such like, as are used by the austere and Saturnine man; such an one as a satirist describes:

With hang'd down head, with eyes fixed to the ground,
 His raging words bites in, and muttering sound
 He doth express with pouting lips.

A cheerful and honest countenance, a worshipful or noble gesture or bearing, clapping of the hands as of one rejoicing and praising, and the bending of the knee with the head lifted up, as of one that is worshiping, are ascribed to Jupiter.

A sour, fierce, cruel, angry, rough countenance and gesture are ascribed to Mars.

Solary are honorable and courageous gestures and countenances; also, walking abroad, a bending of the knee, as of one honoring a king with one knee bent.

Those under Venus are dances, embraces, laughters, and those of an amiable and cheerful countenance.

[p. 161]

Those Mercurial are inconstant, quick, variable and such like gestures and countenances.

Those Lunary, or under the Moon, are such as are movable, poisonous, and childish and the like.

As we have spoken above of gestures so, also, are the shapes of men distinct, as follows:

Saturn bespeaks a man to be of a black and yellowish color, lean, crooked, of a rough skin, great veins, the body covered with hair, little eyes, of a frowning forehead, a thin beard, great lips, eyes intent upon the ground, of a heavy gait, striking his feet together as he walks, crafty, witty, a seducer and murderous.

Jupiter signifies a man to be of a pale color, darkish red, a handsome body, good stature, bold, of great eyes (not black altogether) with large pupils, short nostrils not equal, great teeth before, curled hair, of good disposition and manners.

Mars makes a man red, with red hair, a round face, yellowish eyes, of a terrible and sharp look, jocund, bold, proud and crafty.

The Sun makes a man of a tawny color, betwixt yellow and black dashed with red, of a short stature yet of a handsome body, without much hair and curly, of yellow eyes, wise, faithful and desirous of praise.

Venus signifies a man to be tending towards blackness, but more white, with a mixture of red, a handsome body, a fair and round face, fair hair, fair eyes, the blackness whereof is more intense, of good manners and honest love; also kind, patient and jocund.

Mercury signifies a man not much white, or black, of a long face, high forehead, fair eyes, not black, to have a straight and long nose, thin beard, long fingers, to be ingenious, a subtile inquisitor, a turncoat, and subject to many fortunes.

The Moon signifies a man to be in color white, mixed with a little red; of a fair stature, a round

[p. 162]

face, with some marks in it; eyes not fully black, frowning forehead, and kind, gentle and sociable.

The Signs, also, and the faces of Signs, have their figures and shapes which, he that would know, must seek them out in books of Astrology. Lastly, upon these figures and gestures, both Physiognomy and Metoposcopy, arts of divination, do depend; also Chiromancy, foretelling future events, not as causes but as signs, through like effects, caused by the same cause. And although these divers kinds of divinations may seem to be done by inferior and weak signs, yet the judgments of them are not to be slighted or condemned when prognostication is made by them, not out of superstition but by reason of the harmonical correspondency of all the parts of the body. Whosoever, therefore, doth the more exactly imitate the celestial bodies, either in nature, study, action, motion, gesture, countenance, passions of the mind, and opportunity of the season, is so much the more like to the heavenly bodies and can receive larger gifts from them.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER LIII.

  

OF DIVINATIONS, AND THE KINDS THEREOF.

THERE are some other kinds of divinations, depending upon natural causes, which are known to every one in his art and experience to be in divers things, by which physicians, husbandmen, shepherds, mariners, and others, do prognosticate out of the probable signs of every kind of divination. Many of these kinds of divination Aristotle made mention of in his book of Times, amongst which Auguria and Auspicia are the chiefest, which were in former time in such esteem amongst the Romans that they would do nothing that did belong to private or public business

[p. 163]

without the counsel of the Augures. Cicero in his Book of Divinations largely declares that the people of Tuscia would do nothing without this art. Now, there are divers kinds of Auspicias, for some are called Pedestria (i. e.), which are taken from four-footed beasts; some are called Auguria, which are taken from birds; some are Celestial, which are taken from thunderings and lightnings; some are called Caduca (i. e.), when any fell in the temple, or elsewhere; some were sacred, which were taken from sacrifices; some of these were called Piacula, and sad Auspicia, as when a sacrifice escaped from the altar, or, being smitten, made a bellowing, or fell upon another part of his body than he should. To these is added Exauguration, viz., when the rod fell out of the hand of the Augure with which it was the custom to view and take notice of the Auspicium.

Michael Scotus makes mention of twelve kinds of Auguries, viz., six on the right hand, the names of which, he saith, are Fernova, Fervetus, Confert, Emponenthem, Sonnasarnova, and Sonnasarvetus; and six on the left hand, the names of which are Confernova, Confervetus, Viaram, Herrenam, Scassarnova, and Scassarvetus. Expounding their names, he saith:

Fernova is an augury when thou goest out of thy house to do any business, and in going thou see a man or a bird going or flying, so that either of them set himself before thee upon thy left hand, that is a good signification in reference to thy business.

Fervetus is an augury when thou shalt go out of thy house to do any business, and in going thou find or see a bird or a man resting himself before thee on the left side of thee, that is an ill sign concerning thy business.

Viaram is an augury when a man or a bird in his journey, or flying, pass before thee, coming from the right side of thee, and, bending toward the left, go

[p. 164]

out of thy sight, that is a good sign concerning thy business.

Confernova is an augury when thou dost first find a man or a bird going or flying, and then rest himself before thee on thy right side, thou seeing of it, that is a good sign concerning thy business.

Confervetus is an augury when first thou find or see a man or a bird bending from thy right side, it is an ill sign concerning thy business.

Scimasarnova or Sonnasarnova is when a man or a bird comes behind thee and outgoeth thee, but before he comes at thee he rests, thou seeing of him on thy right side, it is to thee a good sign.

Scimasarvetus or Sonnasarvetus is when thou see a man or bird behind thee, but before he comes to thee he rests in that place, thou seeing of it, is a good sign.

Confert is an augury when a man or bird in journeying or flying shall pass behind thee, coming from the left side of thee, and, bending toward thy right, pass out of thy sight, and is an evil sign concerning thy business.

Scassarvetus is when thou see a man or a bird pass by thee, and resting in a place on thy left side, is an evil sign to thee.

Scassarnova is when thou see a man or a bird pass by thee, and resting in a place on thy right side, is an augury of good to thee.

Emponenthem is when a man or a bird, coming from thy left side, and passing to thy right, goeth out of thy sight without resting, and is a good sign.

Hartena or Herrenam is an augury that, if a man or a bird coming from thy right hand, shall pass behind thy back to thy left, and thou shall see him resting anywhere, this is in evil sign.

The ancients did also prognosticate from sneezings, of which Homer in the seventeenth book of his poem of the Odyssey makes mention, because they,

[p. 165]

thought that they proceeded from a sacred place, viz., the head, in which the intellect is vigorous and operative. Whence, also, whatsoever speech came into the breast or mind of a man rising in the morning, unawares, is said to be some presage and an augury.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER LIV.

  

OF DIVERS CERTAIN ANIMALS, AND OTHER THINGS, WHICH HAVE A SIGNIFICATION IN AUGURIES.

ALL the Auspicia, or auspices, which first happen in the beginning of any enterprise are to be taken notice of. As, if in the beginning of thy work thou shalt perceive that rats have gnawn thy garments, desist from thy undertakings. If going forth thou shalt stumble at the threshhold, or if in the way thou shalt dash thy foot against any thing, forbear thy journey. If any ill omen happen in the beginning of thy business, put off thy undertakings, lest thy intentions be wholly frustrated, or accomplished to no purpose, but expect and wait for a fortunate hour for the dispatching of thy affairs with a better omen. We see that many animals are, by a natural power im-bred in them, prophetical. Doth not the cock by his crowing diligently tell you the hours of the night and morning, and, with his wings spread forth, chase away the lion? Many birds, with their singing and chattering, and flies, by their sharp pricking, foretell rain; and dolphins, by their often leaping above the water, warn of tempests. It would be too long to relate all the passages which the Phrygians, Cilicians, Arabians, Umbrians, Tuscians, and other peoples, which follow the auguries, have learned by birds. These they have proved by many experiments and examples. For in all things the Oracles of things to come are hid, but those are the chiefest which

[p. 166]

omenal birds shall foretell. These are those which the poets relate were turned from men into birds. Therefore, what the daw declares, hearken unto and mark, observing her setting as she sits; and her manner of flying, whether on the right hand or left; whether clamorous or silent; whether she goes before or follows after; whether she waits for the approach of him that passeth by, or flies from him, and which way she goes. All these things must be diligently observed. Arus Apollo saith in his Hieroglyphics that daws that are twins signify marriage, because this bird brings forth two eggs, out of which male and female must be brought forth; but if, which seldom happens, two males be generated, or two females, the males will not go with any other females, nor females with any other males, but will always live without a mate, and solitary. Therefore they that meet a single daw, divine thereby that they shall live a single life. The same also doth a black hen pigeon betoken, for after the death of her mate, she always lives single. Thou shall, also, as carefully observe crows, which are as significant as daws, yea, and in greater matters. It was Epictetus the Stoics' philosopher's judgment, who was a sage author, that if a crow did croak over against any one, it did betoken some evil, either to his body, fortune, honor, wife, or children. Then thou shall take heed to swans, who foreknow the secrets of the waters, for their cheerfulness doth presage happy events not only to mariners, but all other travelers, unless they be overcome by the coming over of a stronger bird, as of an eagle, who, by the most potent majesty of her sovereignty, makes null the predictions of all other birds if she speaks to the contrary; for she flies higher than all other birds, and is of more acute sight, and is never excluded from the secrets of Jupiter; she portends advancement and victory, but by blood, because she drinks no water but blood. An

[p. 167]

eagle flying over the Locresians, fighting against the Crotoniensians, gave them victory; an eagle setting herself unawares upon the target of Hiero, going forth to the first war, betokened that he should be king. Two eagles sitting all day upon the house at the birth of Alexander, of Macedonia, did portend to him an omen of two kingdoms, viz., Asia and Europe. An eagle, also, taking off the hat of Lucias Tarquinius Priscus, son to Demarathus the Corinthian (and, by reason of some discord, being come into Hetraria and going to Rome) and then flying high with it, and afterwards putting it upon his head again, did portend to him the kingdom of the Romans. Vultures signify difficulty, hardness, and ravenousness, which was verified in the beginning of the building of cities. Also they fortell the places of slaughter, coming seven days beforehand; and because they have most respect to that place where the greatest slaughter shall be, as if they gaped after the greatest number of the slain, therefore the ancient kings were wont to send out spies to take notice what place the vultures had most respect to. The phoenix promiseth singular good success, which being seen anew, Rome was built very auspiciously. The pelican because she hazards herself for her young, signifies that a man should, out of the zeal of his love, undergo much hardship. The painted bird gave the name to the city of Pictavia, and foreshowed the lenity of that people by its color and voice. The heron is an augury of hard things. The stork also is a bird of concord and makes concord. Cranes gives us notice of the treachery of enemies. The bird cacupha betokens gratitude, for she alone doth express love to her dam, being spent with old age. On the contrary, the hippopotamus, that kills his dam, doth betoken ingratitude for good turns, also injustice. The bird origis is most envious, and betokens envy.

[p. 168]

Amongst the smaller birds, the pie is talkative and foretells guests. The bird albanellus flying by anyone, it from the left to the right, betokens cheerfulness of entertainment; if contrariwise, betokens the contrary. The screech owl is always unlucky, so also is the horn owl, who, because she goes to her young by night, unawares, as death comes unawares, is therefore said to foretell death; yet, sometimes, because she is not blind in the dark of the night, doth betoken diligence and watchfulness, which she made good when she sat upon the spear of Hiero. And Dido, when she saw the unlucky owl, pitied Aeneas, whence the poet sang:

The Owl, sitting on top of the house alone,
 Sends forth her sad complaints with mournful tone.

And in another place,

The slothful Owl by mortals is esteemed
 A fatal omen--

The same bird sang in the capitol when the Roman affairs were low at Numantia and when Fregelia was pulled down for a conspiracy made against the Romans. Almadel says that owls and night-ravens, when they turn aside to strange countries, or houses, betoken the death of the men of that country and those houses, for those birds are delighted with dead carcasses and perceive them beforehand. For men that are dying have a near affinity with dead carcasses. The hawk is also a foreteller of contention, as Naso sings:

We hate the Hawk, because that arms amongst
 She always lives--

Lelius, the embassador of Pompey, was slain in Spain, amongst the purveyors, which misfortune, a hawk flying over the head, is said to foretell. And Almadel saith that these kinds of birds fighting

[p. 169]

amongst themselves, signify the change of a kingdom; but if birds of another kind shall fight with them and are never seen to come together again, it portends a new condition and state of that country. Also, little birds, by their coming to or departing from, foreshew that a family shall be increased or lessened; and their flight, by how much the more serene it is, by so much the more laudable shall the change be. Whence did Melampus, the Augure, conjecture at the slaughter of the Greeks by the flight of little birds, when he saith: "Thou see now that no bird takes his flight in fair weather." Swallows, because when they are dying they provide a place of safety for their young, do portend a great patrimony or legacy after the death of friends. A bat, meeting any one running away, signifies an evasion; for, although she have no wings, yet she flies. A sparrow is a bad omen to one that runs away, for she flies from the hawk and makes haste to the owl, where she is in as great danger; yet in love she is fortunate, for being stirred up with affection she seeks her consort hourly. Bees are a good omen to kings, for they signify an obsequious people. Flies signify importunity and impudence because being oftentimes driven away they do continually return. Also domestic birds are not without some auguries, for cocks, by their crowing, promote hope, and the journey of him that is undertaking it. Moreover, Livia, the mother of Tiberius, when she was great with him, took a hen's egg and hatched it in her bosom, and at length came forth a cock chick with a great comb, which the auguries interpreted that the child that should be born of her should be a king. And Cicero writes that at Thebais, cocks, by their crowing all night, did presage that the Baeotians would obtain victory against the Lacedaemonians, and the reason is according to the augury's interpretations because that bird when he is beaten is silent, but when he himself hath

[p. 170]

overcome, crows. In like manner, also, omens of events are taken from beasts. For the meeting of a weasel is ominous; also, the meeting of a hare is an ill omen to a traveler, unless she be taken. A mule also is bad because barren. A hog is pernicious, for such is his nature, and therefore signifies pernicious men. A horse betokens quarrelings and fightings, whence Anchises, seeing of white horses, cries out in Virgil:

With war are Horses arm'd, yea, threaten war.

But when they are joined together in a chariot, because they draw with an equal yoke, they signify that peace is to be hoped for. An ass is an unprofitable creature, yet did Marius good, who, when he was pronounced an enemy to his country, saw an ass disdaining provender that was offered to him, and running to the water, by which augury he, supposing he saw a way of safety showed to him, entreated the aid of his friends that they would convey him to the sea, which being granted, he was set into a little ship, and so escaped the threats of Silla the conqueror. If the foal of an ass meet any one going to an augury, he signifies labor, patience and hinderances. A wolf meeting any one is a good sign, the effect whereof was seen in Hiero of Sicilia, from whom a wolf, snatching away a book whilst he was at school, confirmed to him the success of the kingdom, but yet the wolf makes him speechless whom he sees first. A wolf rent in pieces a watchman of P. Africanus and C. Fulvius at Minturn, when the Roman army was overcome by the fugitives in Sicilia. He signifies perfidious men, such as you can give no credit to, which was known in the progeny of Romans. For the faith which they long since sucked from their mother, the wolf, and kept to themselves from the beginning, as by a certain law of nature, passed over to their posterity. To meet a lion, seeing he is amongst animals the strongest and striking terror

[p. 171]

into all the rest, is good. But for a woman to meet a lioness is bad, because she hinders conception, for a lioness brings forth but once. To meet sheep and goats is good. It is read in the Ostentarian of the Tuscians, if this animal shall wear any unusual color, it portends to the emperor plenty of all things, together with much happiness. Whence Virgil to Pollio sings thus:

But, in the meadows, Rams shall scarlet bear,
 And changing, sometimes golden fleeces wear.

It is good also to meet oxen treading out corn, but better to meet them plowing, which although breaking the way, hinder thy journey, yet by the favor of their Auspicium will recompense thee again. A dog in a journey is fortunate, because Cyrus, being cast into the woods, was nourished by a dog until he came to the kingdom; which, also, the angel, companion of Tobit, did not scorn as a companion. The castor, because he biteth himself sorely, so as to be seen by hunters, is an ill omen and portends that a man will injure himself. Also, amongst small animals, mice signify danger, for the same day that they did gnaw gold in the capitol, both the consuls were intercepted by Hannibal by way of ambush, near Tarentum. The locust making a stand in any place, or burning the place, hinders one from their wishes and is an ill omen; and on the contrary the grasshopper promotes a journey and foretells a good event of things. The spider weaving a line downwards, is said to signify hope of money to come. Also the ants, because they know how to provide for themselves, and to prepare safe nests for themselves, portend security and riches, and a great army. Hence, when the ants had devoured a tame dragon of Tiberius Caesar, it was advised that he should take heed of the tumult of a multitude. If a snake meet thee, take heed of an ill-tongued enemy; for this creature hath no power

[p. 172]

but in his mouth. A snake creeping into the palace of Tiberius, portended his fall. Two snakes were found in the bed of Sempronius Gracchus, wherefore a soothsayer told him, if he would let the male or the female escape, either he or his wife would shortly die; and he, preferring the life of his wife, killed the male and let the female go, and within a few days he died. So a viper signifies lewd women and wicked children; and an eel signifies a man displeased with everybody, for she lives apart from all other fishes, nor is ever found in the company of any. But, amongst all Auguries and Omens, there is none more effectual and potent than man himself, and none that doth signify the truth more clearly. Thou shalt, therefore, diligently note and observe the condition of the man that meeteth thee, his age, profession, station, stature, gesture, motion, exercise, complexion, habit, name, words, speech, and all such like things. For seeing there are in all other animals so many discoveries of presages, without all question these are more efficacious and clear which are infused into man's soul; which Tully himself testifies, saying, that there is a certain Auspicium naturally in men's souls of their eternity, for the knowing of the courses and causes of things. In the foundation of the city of Rome the head of a man was found with his whole face, which did presage the greatness of the empire, and gave the name to the Mountain of the Capitol. The Brutian soldiers fighting against Octavius and Antonius, found an Aethiopian in the gate of their castle, and though they slew him as a presage of ill success, yet they were unfortunate in battle, and both their generals, Brutus and Cassius, were slain.

The meeting of monks is commonly accounted an ill omen, and so much the rather if it be early in the morning, because these kind of men live for the most by the sudden death of men, as vultures do by slaughters.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 173]

  

CHAPTER LV.

  

HOW AUSPICIAS ARE VERIFIED BY THE LIGHT OF NATURAL INSTINCT, AND OF SOME RULES OF FINDING IT OUT.

 and Auguria, which foretell things to come by animals and birds, Orpheus, the divine, himself, as we read, did teach and show first of all, which afterwards were had in great esteem with all nations. Now they are verified by the light of natural instinct, as if from this some lights of divination may descend upon four-footed beasts, those winged, and other creatures, by which they are able to presage to us of the events of things; which Virgil seems to be sensible of when he sings:

Nor think I Heaven on them such knowledge states,
 Nor that their prudence is above the Fates.

Now, this Instinct of Nature, as saith William of Paris, is more sublime than all human apprehension, and very near, and most like to prophecy. By this instinct there is a certain wonderful light of divination in some animals naturally, as is manifested in some dogs, who know thieves by this instinct and men that are hid, unknown both to themselves and men, and find them out and apprehend them, falling upon them with a full mouth. By the like instinct vultures foresee future slaughters in battles, and gather together into places where they shall be, as if they foresaw the flesh of dead carcasses. By the same instinct partridges know their dam, whom they never saw, and leave the partridge which stole away her dam's eggs and sate upon them. By the same instinct, also, certain hurtful and terrible things are perceived, the soul being ignorant of them, whence terror and horror ceaseth when men think nothing of these things. So a thief, lying hid in a house, al-

[p. 174]

though no one knows or thinks of his being there, strikes fear and terror and a troublesomeness of mind into the inhabitants of that house, although, haply, not of all, because the brightness of this instinct is not common to all men, yet possessed of some of them. So an evil person, being hid in some large building, is sometimes perceived to be there by some one that is altogether ignorant of their being there. It is mentioned in history that Heraiscus, a certain Egyptian, a man of a divine nature, could discern evil persons, not only by his eyes but also by their voice, he hearing them afar off, and thereupon did fall into a most grievous headache. William of Paris also makes mention of a certain woman in his time that, by the same instinct, perceived a man whom she loved coming two miles off. He relates, also, that in his time a certain stork was convicted of unchastity by the smell of the male, who, being judged guilty by a multitude of storks whom the male gathered together, discovering to them the fault of his mate, was, her feathers being pulled off, torn in pieces by them. The same doth Varro, Aristotle and Pliny relate concerning horses. And Pliny makes mention of a certain serpent, called the asp, that did such a like thing, for she, coming to a certain man's table in Egypt, was there daily fed, and she, having brought forth some young, by one of which a son of her host was killed, after she knew of it, killed that young one, and would never return to that house any more. Now, by these examples, you see how the lights of presage may descend upon some animals, as signs, or marks of things, and are set in their gesture, motion, voice, flying, going, meat, color, and such like. For, according to the doctrine of the Platonists, there is a certain power put into inferior things by which, for the most part, they agree with the superiors; whence also the tacit consents of animals seem to agree with divine bodies, and their bodies and

[p. 175]

affections to be affected with their powers, by the name of which they are ascribed to the deities. We must consider, therefore, what animals are Saturnine, what are Jovial and what Marital, and so of the rest; and, according to their properties, to draw forth their presages; so those birds which resemble Saturn and Mars, are all of them called terrible and deadly, as the screech owl, the hawlet, and others which we have mentioned before; also the horn owl, because she is a Saturnine, solitary bird, also nightly, and is reputed to be most unfortunately ominous, of which the poet saith:

The ugly Owl, which no bird well resents,
 Foretells misfortunes and most sad events.

But the swan is a delicious bird, under Venus, and dedicated to Phoebus, and is said to be most happy in her presages, especially in the auspices of mariners, for she is never drowned in water, whence Ovid Sings:

Most happy is the cheerful, singing Swan In her presages----

There are also some birds that presage with their mouth and singing, as the crow, pie, and daw, whence Virgil:

             --This did foreshow
 Oft from the hollow holm that ominous Crow.

Now, the birds that portend future things by their flying are, viz., buzzards, the bone-breakers, vultures, eagles, cranes, swans, and the like, for they are to be considered in their flying, whether they fly slowly or swiftly; whether to the right hand or to the left; how many fly together. Upon this account, if cranes fly apace, they signify a tempest; and, when slowly, fair weather. When two eagles fly together, they are said to portend evil, because two is a number of confusion. In like manner thou shalt enquire into the reason of the rest, as this is shown by number. Moreover, it

[p. 176]

belongs to an artist to observe a similitude in these conjectures, as in Virgil, Venus, dissembling, teacheth her son, Aeneas, in these verses:

        --All this is not for naught,
 Else me in vain my parents Augury taught;
 Lo! twice six Swans in a glad company
 Jove's bird pursued through the etherial Sky
 In Heaven's broad tracks; now earth in a long train
 They seem to take, or taken, to disdain;
 As they return with sounding wings they sport,
 And Heaven surrounding in a long consort.
 Just so, I say, thy friends and fleet have gained
 The port, or with full sails the Bay obtained.

Most wonderful is that kind of auguring of theirs, who hear and understand the speeches of animals, in which, as amongst the ancients, Melampus, , Thales, and Apollonius, the Tyanean, who, as we read, excelled, and whom, they report, had excellent skill in the language of birds; of whom Philostratus and Porphyrius speak, saying, that of old, when Apollonius sat in company amongst his friends, seeing sparrows sitting upon a tree, and one sparrow coming from elsewhere unto him, making a great chattering and noise, and then flying away, all the rest following him, he said to his companions that that sparrow told the rest that an ass, being burdened with wheat, fell down in a hole near the city and that the wheat was scattered upon the ground. Many, being much moved with these words, went to see, and so it was, as Apollonius said, at which they much wondered. Phorphyrius, the Platonist, in his third book of sacrifices, saith that there is certainly a swallow language, because every voice of every animal is significative of some passion of its soul, as joy, sadness, or anger, or the like, which voices, it is not so wonderful a thing, could be understood by men conversant about them. But Democritus himself declared this art, as saith Pliny, by naming the birds, of whose blood mixed together was produced a serpent, of which whosoever did eat should understand the voices of birds. And

[p. 177]

[paragraph continues] Hermes saith that if any one shall go forth to catch birds on a certain day of the Kalends of November, and shall boil the first bird that he catcheth with the heart of a fox, that all that shall eat of this bird shall understand the voices of birds and all other animals. Also, the Arabians say that they can understand the meaning of brutes who shall eat the heart and liver of a dragon. Proclus, also, the Platonist, believed and wrote that the heart of a mole conduceth to presages. There were also divinations and auspices which were taken from the inwards of sacrifices, the inventor whereof was Tages, of whom Lucan sang:

And if the Inwards have no credit gained,
 And if this Art by Tages was but feigned.

The Roman religion thought that the liver was the head of the inwards. Hence the soothsayers enquiring after future things in the inwards, did first look into the liver, in which were two heads, whereof the one was called the head for the city, the other for the enemy; and the heads of this, or another part, being compared together, they then gave judgment and pronounced for victory; as we read, in Lucan, that the inwards did signify the slaughter of Pompey's men and the victory of Caesar's, according to these verses:

In the inwards all defects are ominous
 One part and branch of the entrails doth increase,
 Another part is weak, and flagging lies,
 Beats, and moves with quick pulse the arteries.

Then, the bowels being finished, they search the heart. Now, if there were a sacrifice found without a heart, or a head was wanting in the liver, these were deadly presages, and were called piacularia. Also, if a sacrifice fled from the altar, or, being smitten, made a lowing, or fell upon any part of his body than he ought to do, it was the like ominous. We read that when Julius Caesar on a day went forth to procession with his purple robe, and sitting in a golden chair

[p. 178]

and sacrificing, there was twice a heart wanting. When C. Marius Utica was sacrificing, there was wanting a liver. Also when Caius, the prince, and M. Marcellus, C. Claudius and L. Petellius Coss, were offering sacrifices, that the liver was consumed suddenly away and, not long after, one of them died of a disease, another was slain by men of Lyguria, the entrails foretelling so much; which was thought to be done by the power of the Gods, or help of the devil. Hence it was accounted a thing of great concernment amongst the ancients as oft as any thing unusual was found in the inwards, as when Sylla was sacrificing at Laurentum, the figure of a crown appeared in the head of the liver, which Posthumius, the soothsayer, interpreted to portend a victory with a kingdom, and therefore advised that Sylla should eat those entrails himself. The color, also, of the inwards is to be considered. Of these Lucan made mention:

Struck at the color Prophets were with fear,
 For with foul spots pale entrals tinged were.
 Both black and blue, with specks of sprinkled blood
 They were--

There was in times past such a venerable esteem of these arts that the most potent and wise men sought after them; yea, the senate and kings did nothing without the counsel of the Augures. But all these in these days are abolished, partly by the negligence of men and partly by the authority of the fathers.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER LVI.

  

OF THE SOOTHSAYINGS OF FLASHES AND LIGHTNINGS, AND HOW MONSTROUS AND PRODIGIOUS THINGS ARE TO BE INTERPRETED.

Now, the soothsayings of flashes and lightnings, and of wonders, and how monstrous and prodigious

[p. 179]

things are to be interpreted, the prophets and priests of Hetruscus have taught the art. For they have ordained sixteen regions of the heavens and have ascribed Gods to every one of them, besides eleven kinds of lightning, and nine gods which should dart them forth, by showing rules for understanding the signification of them. But as often as monstrous, prodigious and wondrous things happen, they do presage, as is most certain, some great matter. Now, their interpreter must be some excellent conjector of similitudes, as also some curious searcher, and of them who at that time are employed about the affairs of princes and provinces. For the celestials take such care only for princes, peoples and provinces that before the rest they might be prefigured and admonished by stars, by constellations and by prodigies. Now, if the same thing, or the like, hath been seen in former ages, we must consider that very thing and what happened after that, and according to these, to foretell the same, or the like, because the same signs are for the same things, and the like for like. So prodigies have come before the birth and death of many eminent men and kings, as Cicero makes mention of Midas, a boy, into whose mouth whilst he was sleeping, the ant put corns of wheat, which was an omen of great riches. So bees sat upon the mouth of Plato when he was sleeping in the cradle, by which was foretold the sweetness of his speech. Hecuba, when she was bringing forth Paris, saw a burning torch, which should set on fire Troy and all Asia. There appeared unto the mother of Phalaris the image of Mercury pouring forth blood upon the earth, with which the whole house was overflowed. The mother of Dionysius dreamed she brought forth a satyr, which prodigious dream the event that followed made good. The wife of Tarquinius Priscus, seeing a flame lick the head of Servius Tullius, foretold that he should have the kingdom.

[p. 180]

[paragraph continues] In like manner, after Troy was taken, Aeneas disputing with Anchises, his father, concerning a fight, there appeared a flame licking the head of the crown of Ascanius and doing him no hurt. Which thing, seeing it did portend the kingdom to Ascanius, persuaded him to depart, for monstrous prodigies did forerun great and eminent destruction. So we read in Pliny that M. Attilius and C. Portius, being consuls, it rained milk and blood, which did presage that a very great pestilence should the next year overspread Rome. In Lucania it rained spongeous iron, and in the year before Marcus Crassus was slain in Parthia, with which, also, all the soldiers of Lucania, being a very numerous army, were slain. L. Paulus and C. Marcellus, being consuls, it rained wool about the castle of Corisanum, near which place, a year after, T. Annius was slain by Milus. And in the wars of Denmark, the noise of arms and the sound of a trumpet was heard in the air. And Livy, concerning the Macedonian wars, saith, in the year when Annibal died it rained blood for two days. Concerning the second Punic war, he saith that water mixed with blood came down from heaven like rain at the time when Annibal did spoil Italy. A little before the destruction of Leuctra, the Lacedemonians heard a noise of arms in the temple of Hercules, and at the same time in the temple of Hercules the doors that were shut with bars opened themselves, and the arms that were hanged on the wall were found on the ground. The like events may be prognosticated of other like things, as oftentimes in times past something hath been foretold of them. But concerning these, also, the judgments of the celestial influences must not be neglected, concerning which we shall more largely treat in the following chapters.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 181]

  

CHAPTER LVII.

  

OF GEOMANCY, HYDROMANCY, AEROMANCY, AND PYROMANCY, FOUR DIVINATIONS OF ELEMENTS.

MOREOVER, the Elements themselves teach us fatal events; whence those four famous kinds of divinations, Geomancy, Hydromancy, Aeromancy, and Pyromancy, have got their names, of which the sorceress in Lucan seems to boast herself when she saith:

The Earth, the Aire, the Chaos, and the Skie,
 The Seas, the Fields, the Rocks, and Mountains high
 Foretell the truth----

The first, therefore, is Geomancy, which foreshows future things by the motions of the earth, as also the noise, the swelling, the trembling, the chops, the pits, and exhalation, and other impressions thereof, the art of which Almadel, the Arabian, sets forth. But there is another kind of Geomancy which divines by points written upon the earth by a certain power in the fall of it, which is not of present speculation, but of that we shall speak hereafter.

Now Hydromancy doth perform its presages by the impressions of waters, their ebbing and flowing, their increases, and depressions, their tempests, colors and the like; to which, also, are added visions which are made in the waters. A kind of divination found by the Persians, as Varro reports, was that of a boy who saw in the water the effigies of Mercury, which foretold, in a hundred and fifty verses, all the events of the war of Mithridates. We read, also, that Numa Pompilius practiced Hydromancy, for in the water he called up the gods and learned of them things to come. Which art also Pythagoras, a long time after Numa, practiced. There was of old a kind of Hydromancy had in great esteem amongst the Assyrians,

[p. 182]

and it was called Lecanomancy, from a skin full of water, upon which they put plates of gold and silver and precious stones written upon with certain images, names and characters. To this may be referred that art by which lead and wax, being melted and cast into the water, do express manifest marks of images of those things we desire to know. There were also in former years fountains that did foretell things to come, as the fathers' fountain at Achaia, and that which was called the water of Juno, in Epidaurus; but of these more in the following chapter, where we shall speak of Oracles.

Hither also may be referred the divination of fishes, of which kind there was use made by the Lycians in a certain place which was called Dina, near the sea; in a wood dedicated to Apollo, was a hollow in the dry sand, into which he that went to consult of future things let down roasted meat, and presently that place was filled with water and a great multitude of fish and strange shapes, unknown to men, did appear; by the forms of which the prophet foretold what should come to pass. These things doth Atheneus more at large relate in the history of the Lycians.

After the same manner, also, doth Aeromancy divine by airy impressions, by the blowing of the winds, by rainbows, by circles round about the moon and stars, by mists and clouds, and by imagination in clouds and visions in the air.

So also Pyromancy divines by fiery impressions, and by stars with long tails, by fiery colors, by visions and imaginations in the fire. So the wife of Cicero foretold that he would be consul the next year because, when a certain man, after the sacrifice was ended, would look in the ashes, there suddenly broke forth a flame. Of this kind are those that Pliny speaks of--that terrene, pale and buzzing fires presage tempests, circles about the snuffs of candles betoken

[p. 183]

rain, and if the flame fly, turning and winding, it portends wind. Also torches, when they strike the fire before them and are not kindled. Also when a coal sticks to a pot taken off from the fire, and when the fire casts off the ashes and sparkles; or when ashes are hard grown together on the hearth, and when a coal is very bright.

To these is also added Capnomancy, so called from smoke, because it searcheth into the flame and smoke; and thin colors, sounds and motions when they are carried upright, or on one side, or round, which we read of in these verses in Statius.

Let Piety be bound, and on the Altar laid,
 Let us implore the Gods for divine aid.
 She makes acute, red, towering flames, and bright,
 Increas'd by th' aire, the middle being white;
 And then she makes the flames without all bound
 For to wind in and out, and to run round
 Like a Serpent----

Also in the Aethnean Caves and Fields of the Nymphs in Apollonia, auguries were taken from fires and flames--joyful, if they did receive what was cast into them, and sad, if they did reject them. But of these things we shall speak of in the following chapters, amongst the answers of the Oracles.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER LVIII.

  

OF THE REVIVING OF THE DEAD, AND OF SLEEPING OR HIBERNATING (WANTING VICTUALS) MANY YEARS TOGETHER.

THE Arabian philosophers agree that some men may elevate themselves above the powers of their body and above their sensitive powers; and, those being surmounted, they receive into themselves--by the perfection of the Heavens and the Celestial intelligences--A Divine Vigor. Seeing, therefore, that

[p. 184]

all the Souls of men are perpetual, and, also, that all the Spirits obey the perfect Souls, Magicians think that perfect men may, by the powers of their soul, repair their dying bodies (with other inferior souls, newly separated) and inspire them again: As a weasel, that is killed, is made alive again by the breath and cry of his dam; and as lions make alive their dead whelps by breathing upon them. And because, as they say, all like things, being applied to their like, are made of the same natures; and, also, every patient, subject, and thing that receives into itself the act of any agent is endowed with the nature of that agent and made conatural with it. Hence they think that to this vivification, or making alive, certain herbs, and Magical confections (such as, they say, are made of the ashes of the Phoenix and the cast skin of a Snake) do much conduce; which, indeed, to many may seem fabulous, and to some impossible, unless it could be accounted approved by an historical faith. For we read of some that have been drowned in water, others cast into the fire or put upon the fire, others slain in war, and others otherwise tried, and all these, after a few days were alive again, as Pliny testifies of Aviola, a man pertaining to the consul, of L. Lamia, Caelinus, Tubero, Corfidius, Gabienus, and many others. We read that Aesop, the tale-maker, Tindoreus, Hercules and Palicy, the sons of Jupiter, and Thalia, being dead, were raised to life again; also that many were, by physicians and magicians, raised from death again, as the historians relate of Aesculapius; and we have above mentioned, out of Juba, and Xanthus and Philostratus, concerning Tillo, and a certain Arabian, and Apollonius the Tyanean. Also we read that Glaucus, a certain man that was dead, the herb dragon-wort restored to life. Some say that he revived by the putting into his body a medicine made of honey, whence the proverb, Glaucus was raised

[p. 185]

from death by taking honey into his body. Apuleius, also, relating the manner of these kinds of restoring to life, saith of Zachla, the Egyptian prophet, that the prophet, being favorable, laid a certain herb upon the mouth of the body of a young man, being dead, and another upon his breast; then, turning toward the East, or rising of the propitious Sun, he prayed silently (a great assembly of people striving to see it), when, in the first place, the breast of the dead man did heave, then a beating in his veins, then his body filled with breath, after which the body rose and the young man spoke. If these accounts are true, the dying souls must, sometimes lying hid in their bodies, be oppressed with vehement extasies and be freed from all bodily action; so that the life, sense, and motion forsake the body, and also that the man is not yet truly dead, but lies astonied, and dead, as it were, for a certain time. And this is often found, that in times of pestilence many that are carried for dead to the graves to be buried, revive again. The same also hath often befell women by reason of fits of the mother. And Rabbit Moises, out of the book of Galen, which Patriarcha translated, makes mention of a man who was suffocated for six days, and did neither eat nor drink, and his arteries became hard. And it is said, in the same book, that a certain man, being filled with water, lost the pulse of his whole body, so that the heart was not perceived to move, and he lay like a dead man. It is also said that a man, by reason of a fall from a high place, or great noise, or long staying under the water, may fall into a swoon, which may continue forty-eight hours, and so may lay as if he were dead, his face being very green. And in the same place there is mention made of a man that buried a man, who seemed to be dead, seventy-two hours after his seeming decease, and so killed him because he buried him alive; and there are given signs whereby it may

[p. 186]

be known who are alive, although they seem to be dead, and, indeed, will die, unless there be some means to recover them, as phlebotomy, or some other cure. And these are such as very seldom happen. This is the manner by which we understand magicians and physicians do raise dead men to life, as they that were tried by the stinging of serpents, were, by the nation of the Marsi and the Psilli, restored to life. We may conceive that such kind of extasies may continue a long time, although a man be not truly dead, as it is in dormice and crocodiles and many other serpents, which sleep all winter, and are in such a dead sleep that they can scarce be awakened with fire. And I have often seen a dormouse dissected and continue immovable, as if she were dead, until she was boiled, and when put into boiling water the dissected members did show life. And, although it be hard to be believed, we read in some approved historians, that some men have slept for many years together; and, in the time of sleep until they awaked, there was no alteration in them so as to make them seem older. The same doth Pliny testify of a certain boy, whom, he saith, being wearied with heat and his journey, slept fifty-seven years in a cave. We read, also, that Epimenides Gnosius slept fifty-seven years in a cave. Hence the proverb arose--to outsleep Epimenides. M. Damascenus tells that in his time a certain countryman in Germany, being wearied, slept for the space of a whole autumn and the winter following, under a heap of hay, until the summer, when the hay began to be eaten up; then he was found awakened as a man half dead and out of his wits. Ecclesiastical histories confirm this opinion concerning the seven sleepers, whom they say slept 196 years. There was in Norvegia a cave in a high sea shore, where, as Paulus Diaconus and Methodius, the martyr, write, seven men lay sleeping a long time without corruption, and

[p. 187]

the people that went in to disturb them were contracted or drawn together, so that after a while, being forewarned by that punishment, they dared not disturb them. Xenocrates, a man of no mean repute amongst philosophers, was of the opinion that this long sleeping was appointed by God as a punishment for some certain sins. But Marcus Damascenus proves it, by many reasons, to be possible and natural, neither doth he think it irrational that some should, without meat and drink, avoiding excitements, and without consuming or corruption, sleep many months. And this may befall a man by reason of some poisonous potion, or sleepy disease, or such like causes, for certain days, months or years, according to the intention or remission of the power of the medicine, or of the passions of their mind. Physicians say that there are some antidotes, of which they that take too great a potion shall be able to endure hunger a long time; as Elias, in former time, being fed with a certain food by an angel, walked and fasted in the strength of that meat forty days. And John Bocatius makes mention of a man in his time, in Venice, who would every year fast four days without any meat; also, a greater wonder, that there was a woman in lower Germany, at the same time, who took no food till the thirteenth year of her age, which, to us, may seem incredible, but that he confirmed it. He also tells of a miracle of our age, that his brother, Nicolaus Stone, an Helvetian by nation, who lived over twenty years in the wilderness without meat till he died. That also is wonderful which Theoprastus mentions concerning a certain man, called Philinus, who used no meat or drink besides milk. And there are also grave authors who describe a certain herb of Sparta, with which, they say, the Scythians can endure twelve days' hunger, without meat or drink, if they do but taste it, or hold it in their mouth.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 188]

  

CHAPTER LIX.

  

OF DIVINATION BY DREAMS.

THERE is also a certain kind of divination by dreams which is confirmed by the traditions of philosophers, the authorities of divines, the examples of histories and by daily experience. By dreams I do not mean vain and idle imaginations, for they are useless and have no divination in them, but arise from the remains of watchings, and disturbance of the body. For, as the mind is taken up about and wearied with cares, it suggests itself to him that is asleep. I call that a true dream which is caused by the celestial influences in the phantastic spirit, mind or body, being all well disposed. The rule of interpreting these is found amongst astrologers, in that part which is wrote concerning questions: but yet that is not sufficient, because these kinds of dreams come by use to divers men after divers manners, and according to the divers qualities and dispositions of the phantastic spirit. Wherefore, there cannot be given one common rule to all for the interpretation of dreams. But, according to the doctrine of Synesius, seeing there are the same accidents to things, and like befalls like, so he which hath often fallen upon the same visible thing, hath assigned to himself the same opinion, passion, fortune, action, and event. As Aristotle saith, the memory is confirmed by sense, and by keeping in memory the same thing, knowledge is obtained; as also, by the knowledge of many experiences, by little and little, arts and sciences are thus obtained. After the same account you must conceive of dreams. Whence Synesius commands that every one should observe his dreams and their events, and such like rules, viz., to commit to memory all things that are seen, and accidents that befall, as well in sleep as in watching, and with a diligent observation

[p. 189]

consider with himself the rules by which these are to be examined; for by this means shall a diviner be able, by little and little, to interpret his dreams, if so be nothing slip out of his memory. Now, dreams are more efficacious when the Moon overruns that Sign which was in the ninth number [**] of the nativity, or revolution of that year, [*+] or in the ninth Sign from the Sign of Perfection. [*++] For it is a most true and certain divination, neither doth it proceed from nature or human arts, but from purified minds, by divine inspiration. We shall now discuss and examine Prophesying and Oracles.

Footnotes

^189:* "Ninth Number."--The Ninth House of the Horoscope, known as the House of Science and Religion.

^189:+ "Revolution."--When the Sun has attained, as to the Earth, its original position, or the place it occupied at the moment of birth.

^189:++ "Sign of Perfection."--This is the First House of the Horoscope: that House of the "Heaven," or Zodiac, "rising" at birth; the eastern horizon.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER LX.

  

OF MADNESS, AND DIVINATIONS WHICH ARE MADE WHEN MEN ARE AWAKE, AND OF THE POWER OF A MELANCHOLY HUMOR, BY WHICH SPIRITS ARE SOMETIMES INDUCED INTO MEN'S BODIES.

IT happens also, sometimes, that not only they that are asleep, but also they that are watchful, do, with a kind of instigation of mind, divine; which divination Aristotle calls ravishment, or a kind of madness, and teacheth that it proceeds from a melancholy humor, saying in his treaties of divination: Melancholy men, by reason of their earnestness, do far better conjecture, and quickly conceive a habit, and most easily receive an impression of the celestials. And he, in his Problems, saith that the Sibyls, and the Bacchides, and Niceratus the Syracusan, and Ammon, were, by their natural melancholy complexion,

[p. 190]

prophets and poets. The cause, therefore, of this madness, if it be anything within the body, is a melancholy humor; not that which they call black choler, which is so obstinate and terrible a thing, that the violence of it is said, by physicians and natural philosophers (besides madness, which it doth induce), to draw or entice evil spirits to seize upon men's bodies. Therefore, we understand a melancholy humor here, to be a natural and white choler. For this, when it is stirred up, burns, and stirs up a madness conducing to knowledge and divination, especially if it be helped by any celestial influx, especially of Saturn, who (seeing he is cold and dry, as is a melancholy humor, hath his influence upon it) increaseth and preserveth it. Besides, seeing he is the author of secret contemplation, and estranged from all public affairs, and the highest of all the planets, he doth, as he withcalls his mind from outward business, so also make it ascend higher, and bestows upon men the knowledge and presages of future things. And this is Aristotle's meaning, in his book of Problems. By melancholy, saith he, some men are made, as it were, divine, foretelling things to come; and some men are made poets. He saith, also, that all men that were excellent in any science, were, for the most part, melancholy. Democritus and Plato attest the same, saying that there were some melancholy men that had such excellent wits that they were thought and seemed to be more divine than human. So also there have been many melancholy men at first rude, ignorant and untractable, as they say Tynnichus, Hesiod, Ion, Calcinenses, Homer, and Lucretius were, who on a sudden were taken with a madness and became poets, and prophesied wonderful and divine things, which they themselves scarce understood. Whence Plato, in Ion, saith that many prophets, after the violence of their madness was abated, do not well understand what they

[p. 191]

wrote, yet treated accurately of each art in their madness; as all artists, by reading of them, judge. So great also, they say, the power of melancholy is of, that, by its force, celestial spirits also are sometimes drawn into men's bodies, by whose presence and instinct, antiquity testifies, men have been made drunk and spake most wonderful things. And this thing, they think, happens under a three-fold difference, according to a three-fold apprehension of the soul, viz., imaginative, rational, and mental; they say, therefore, that when the mind is forced with a melancholy humor, nothing moderating the power of the body, and, passing beyond the bounds of the members, is wholly carried into imagination, it doth suddenly become a seat for inferior spirits, by which the mind oftentimes receives wonderful ways and forms of manual arts. So we see that any most ignorant man doth presently become an excellent painter, or contriver of building, and to become a master in any such art. But when these kinds of spirits portend to us future things they show those things which belong to the disturbing of the Elements and changes of times, as rain, tempests, inundations, earthquakes, slaughter, great mortality, famine, and the like. As we read in Aulus Gelius that his priest, Cornelius Patrarus, did, at the time when Caesar and Pompey were to fight in Thessalia, being taken with a madness, foretell the time, order and issue of the battle. But when the mind is turned wholly into reason it becomes a receptacle for middle world spirits. Hence it obtains the knowledge and understanding of natural and human things. So we see that a man sometimes doth on a sudden become a philosopher, physician, or an orator, and foretells mutations of kingdoms, and restitutions of ages, and such things as belong to them, as did the Sibyl to the Romans. But when the mind is wholly elevated into the understanding, then it becomes a receptacle of sublime

[p. 192]

spirits and learns of them the secrets of divine things, such as the Law of God, and the Orders of Angels, and such things as belong to the knowledge of things eternal and the ascent of souls. It foresees things which are appointed by predestination, such as future prodigies or miracles, the prophet to come, and the changing of the law. So the Sibyls prophesied of Christ a long time before his coming. So Virgil, understanding that Christ was at hand and remembering what the Sibyl, Cumaea, had said, sang thus to Pollio:

Last times are come, Cumaea's prophesie--
 Now from high heaven springs a new progenie,
 And times Great Order now again is born,
 The Maid returns, Saturnian Realms return.

And, a little after, intimating that original sin shall be of no effect, he saith:

If any prints of our old vice remain'd
 By thee they're void, and fear shall leave the Land;
 He a God's life shall take, with Gods shall see
 Mixt Heroes, and himself their object be;
 Rule with paternal power th' appeased Earth
 He shall----

Then he adds, that thence the fall of the Serpent, and the poison of the tree of death, or of the knowledge of good and evil, shall be nulled, saying:

----The Serpent shall
 And the deceitful Herb of Venom fall.

Yet he intimates that some sparks of original sin shall remain, when he saith:

Some steps of ancient fraud shall yet be found.

And at last with a most great hyperbole cries out to his child, as the offspring of God, adoring him in these words:

[p. 193]

Dear race of Gods, great stock of Jupiter,
 Behold! the World shakes on its ponderous axe,
 See earth, and heavens immense, and Ocean tracts,
 How all things at th' approaching Age rejoice!
 O, that my life would last so long, and voice,
 As would suffice thy actions to rehearse.

There are also some prognostics which are in the middle, betwixt natural and supernatural divination, as in those who are near to death, and, being weakened with old age, do sometimes foresee things to come, because, as saith Plato, by how much the more men are less hindered by their sense, so much the more accurately they understand, and because they are nearer to the place whither they must go (and their bonds being, as it were, a little loosed, seeing they are no more subject to the body) easily perceive the light of divine revelation.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER LXI.

  

OF THE FORMING OF MAN, OF THE EXTERNAL SENSES, ALSO THOSE INWARD, AND THE MIND; AND OF THE THREE-FOLD APPETITE OF THE SOUL, AND PASSIONS OF THE WILL.

IT IS the opinion of some divines that God did not immediately create the body of man, but by the assistance of the heavenly spirits compounded and framed him; which opinion Alcinous and Plato favor, thinking that God is the chief creator of the whole world, and of spirits, both good and bad, and therefore, immortalized them; but that all kinds of mortal animals were made only at the command of God; for, if he should have created them, they must have been immortal. The spirits, therefore, mixing Earth, Fire, Air, and Water together, made of them all, put together, one body, which they subjected to the service of the soul, assigning in it several provinces to each power thereof; to the meaner of them, mean and low

[p. 194]

places: as to anger, the midriff; to desire, the womb; but to the more noble senses, the head--as the tower of the whole body--and then the manifold organs of speech. They divide the senses into the external and internal. The external are divided into five, known to every one, to which there are allotted five organs, or subjects, as it were foundations; being so ordered that they which are placed in the more eminent part of the body, have a greater degree of purity. For the eyes, placed in the uppermost place, are the most pure, and have an affinity with the nature of Fire and Light; then the ears have the second order of place and purity, and are compared to the Air; the nostrils have the third order, and have a middle nature betwixt the Air and the Water. Then the organ of tasting, which is grosser, and most like to the nature of Water. Last of all the touching is diffused through the whole body, and is compared to the grossness of Earth. The more pure senses are those which perceive their objects farthest off, as seeing and hearing; then the smelling, then the taste, which doth not perceive but that which is nigh. But the touch perceives both ways, for it perceives bodies nigh; and as sight discerns by the medium of the Air, so the touch perceives, by the medium of a stick or pole, bodies hard, soft and moist. Now the touch only is common to all animals. And it is most certain that man hath this sense, and, in this and taste, he excels all other animals; but in the other three, he is excelled by some animals, as by a dog, who hears, sees and smells more acutely than man; and the lynx and eagles see more acutely than all other animals and man. Now the interior senses are, according to Averrois, divided into four, whereof the first is called common sense, because it doth first collect and perfect all the representations which are drawn in by the outward senses. The second is the imaginative power, whose office is, seeing it represents nothing, to retain

[p. 195]

those representations which are received by the former senses, and to present them to the third faculty of inward sense, which is the phantasy, or power of judging, whose work is also to perceive and judge by the representations received, what, or what kind of thing that is of which the representations are; and to commit those things which are thus discerned and adjudged, to the memory to be kept. For the virtues thereof in general, are discourse, dispositions, persecutions, and fights, and stirrings up to action, but in particular, the understanding of intellectuals, virtues, the manner of discipline, counsel, and election. This is that which shows us future things by dreams, whence the fancy is sometimes named the phantastical intellect. For it is the last impression of the understanding, which, as saith Iamblicus, is that belonging to all the powers of the mind, and forms all figures, resemblances of species, and operations, and things seen, and sends forth the impressions of other powers unto others. And those things which appear by sense, it stirs up into an opinion; but those things which appear by the intellect, in the second place, it offers to opinion; but of itself it receives images from all, and by its property, doth properly assign them, according to their assimilation; it forms all the actions of the soul, and accommodates the external to the internal and impresses the body with its impression. Now these senses have their organs in the head, for the common sense and imagination take up the two forward cells of the brain, although Aristotle placeth the organ of the common sense in the heart; but the cogitative power possesseth the highest and middle part of the head; and, lastly, the memory the hindmost part thereof. Moreover, the organs of voice and speech are many, as the inward muscles of the breast betwixt the ribs, the breasts, the lungs, the arteries, the windpipe, the bowing of the tongue, and all those

[p. 196]

parts and muscles that serve for breathing. But the proper organ of speech is the mouth, in which are framed words and speeches, the tongue, the teeth, the lips, the palate and the like. Above the sensible soul, which expresseth its powers by the organs of the body, the incorporeal mind possesseth the highest place, and it hath a double nature--the one, which inquireth into the causes, properties, and progress of those things which are contained in the Order of Nature, and is content in the contemplation of the truth, which is, therefore called the contemplative intellect. The other is a power of the mind which, discerning by consulting what things are to be done and what is to be shunned, is wholly taken up in consultation and action, and is therefore called the active intellect. This order of powers, therefore, Nature ordained in man, that by the external senses we might know corporeal things, and by those internal the representations of bodies, as also things abstracted by the mind and intellect, which are neither bodies nor any thing like them. And, according to this three-fold order of the powers of the soul, there are three Appetites in the soul: The first is natural, and is an inclination of nature unto its end, as of a stone downward, which is in all stones; another is animal, which the sense follows, and it is divided into that irascible and that concupiscible; the third is intellectual, and is called the will, differing from the sensitive faculty in that the sensitive is, of itself, of those things which may be presented to the senses, desiring nothing unless in some manner comprehended. But the will, although it be of itself of all things that are possible, yet, because it is free by its essence, it may be also of things that are impossible, as it was in the devil (desiring himself to be equal with God) and, therefore, is altered and depraved with pleasure and with continual anguish, whilst it assents to the inferior powers. Whence,

[p. 197]

from its depraved appetite, there arise four passions in it, with which, in like manner, the body is affected sometimes. Whereof the first is called oblectation, which is a certain quietness or assentation of the mind or will, because it obeys, and not willingly consents to that pleasantness which the senses hold forth; which is, therefore, defined to be an inclination of the mind to an effeminate pleasure. The second is called effusion, which is a remission of, or dissolution of the power, viz., when beyond the oblectation, the whole power of the mind and intention of the present good is melted, and diffuseth itself to enjoy it. The third is vaunting and loftiness, thinking itself to have attained to some great good, in the enjoyment of which it prides itself and glorieth. The fourth and the last is envy, or a certain kind of pleasure or delight at another man's harm, without any advantage to itself. It is said to be without any advantage to itself, because, if any one should, for his own profit, rejoice at another man's harm, this would be rather out of love to himself than out of ill will to another. And all these four passions, arising from a depraved appetite for pleasure, the grief or perplexity itself doth also beget very many contrary passions, as horror, sadness, fear, and sorrow at another's good without his own hurt, which we call envy, or sadness at another's prosperity, just as pity is a certain kind of sadness at another's misery.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER LXII.

  

OF THE PASSIONS OF THE MIND, THEIR ORIGINAL SOURCE, DIFFERENCES, AND KINDS.

THE passions of the human mind are nothing else but certain motions or inclinations proceeding from the apprehension of any thing, as of good or evil, convenient or inconvenient. Now these kind of apprehensions

[p. 198]

are of three sorts, viz., Sensual, Rational, and Intellectual. According to these three are three sorts of passions in the soul; for when they follow the sensitive apprehension then they respect a temporary good or evil, under the notion of profitable or unprofitable, or delightful or offensive, and are called natural or animal passions. When they follow the rational apprehension, and so respect good or bad, under the notions of virtue or vice, praise or disgrace, profitable or unprofitable, or honest or dishonest, they are called rational or voluntary passions. When they follow the intellectual apprehension, and respect good or bad, under the notion of just or unjust, or true or false, they are called intellectual passions, or syncrisis, the faculty of choosing from comparison. Now, the subject of the passions of the soul is the concupitive power of the soul, and is divided into that concupiscible and that irascible, and both respect good and bad, but under a different notion. For when the concupiscible power respects good and evil absolutely, love or lust, or, on the contrary, hatred is caused. When it respects good, though absent, so desire is caused; or evil, though absent or at hand, and so is caused horror, flying from, or loathing; or, if it respects good, though present, then there is caused delight, mirth or pleasure; but if evil, though present, then sadness, anxiety, or grief; but the irascible power respects good or bad, under the notion of some difficulty, to obtain the one, or to avoid the other, and this sometimes with confidence. And so there is caused hope or boldness; but when with diffidency, then despair and fear. But when that irascible power riseth into revenge, and this be only about some evil past, as it were, of injury or hurt offered, there is caused anger. And so we find eleven passions in the mind, which are: love, hatred, desire, horror, joy, grief, hope, despair, boldness, fear, and anger.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 199]

  

CHAPTER LXIII.

  

HOW THE PASSIONS OF THE MIND CHANGE THE PROPER BODY BY CHANGING ITS ACCIDENTS AND MOVING THE SPIRIT.

THE phantasy, or imaginative power, hath a ruling power over the passions of the soul when they follow the sensual apprehension. For this doth, of its own power, according to the diversity of the passions, first of all, change the proper body with a sensible transmutation, by changing the accidents in the body, and by moving the spirit upward or downward, inward or outward, and by producing divers qualities in the members. So in joy, the spirits are driven outward; in fear, drawn back; in bashfulness, are moved to the brain. So in joy, the heart is dilated outward, by little and little; in sadness, is constrained, by little and little, inward. After the same manner in anger or fear, but suddenly. Again anger, or desire of revenge, produceth heat, redness, a bitter taste and a looseness. Fear induceth cold, trembling of the heart, speechlessness and paleness. Sadness causeth sweat and a bluish whiteness. Pity, which is a kind of sadness, doth often ill affect the body of him that takes pity, though it seems to be the body of another man so affected. Also, it is manifest that amongst some lovers there is such a strong tie of love that what the one suffers the other suffers. Anxiety induceth dryness and blackness. And how great heats love stirs up in the liver and pulse, physicians know, divining by that kind of judgment the name of the one that is so beloved in an heroic passion. So Naustratus knew that Antiochus was taken with the love of Stratonica. It is also manifest that such like passions, when they are most vehement, may cause death. And this is manifest to all men, that with too much joy, sadness,

[p. 200]

love, hatred, men many times die, and are sometimes freed from a disease. And so we read that Sophocles, and Dionysius, the Sicilian tyrant, did both suddenly die at the news of a tragical victory. So a certain woman, also, seeing her son returning from the Canensian battle, died suddenly. Now, what sadness can do is known to all. We know that dogs oftentimes die with sadness because of the death of their masters. Sometimes, also, by reason of these like passions, long diseases follow, and are sometimes cured. So, also, some men looking from a high place, by reason of great fear, tremble, are dim-sighted and weakened, and sometimes lose their senses. So fears and falling-sickness sometimes follow sobbing. Sometimes wonderful effects are produced, as in the son of Croesus, whom his mother brought forth dumb, yet a vehement fear and ardent affection made him speak, which naturally he could never do. So with a sudden fall, oftentimes life, sense, or motion, on a sudden, leave the members, and presently again, are sometimes returned. And how much vehement anger, joined with great audacity, can do, Alexander the Great shows, who, being circumvented with a battle in India, was seen to send forth from himself lightning and fire; the father of Theodoricus is said to have sent forth out of his body sparks of fire, so that sparkling flames did leap out with a noise. And such like things sometimes appear in beasts, as in the horse of Tiberius, which was said to send forth a flame out of his mouth.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 201]

  

CHAPTER LXIV.

  

HOW THE PASSIONS OF THE MIND CHANGE THE BODY BY WAY OF IMITATION FROM SOME RESEMBLANCE; OF THE TRANSFORMING AND TRANSLATING OF MEN, AND WHAT FORCE THE IMAGINATIVE POWER HATH, NOT ONLY OVER THE BODY BUT THE SOUL.

THE foresaid passions sometimes alter the body by reason of the virtue which the likeness of the thing hath to change it, which power the vehement imagination moves, as in setting the teeth on edge at the sight or hearing of something, or because we see, or imagine, another to eat sharp or sour things. So he, which sees another gape, gapes also; and some, when they hear any one name sour things, their tongues waxeth tart. Also, the seeing of any filthy thing causeth nauseousness. Many, at the sight of a man's blood, fall into a swoon. Some, when they see bitter meat given to any, perceive a bitter spittle in their mouth. And William of Paris saith that he saw a man, that at the sight of a medicine, was affected as much as he pleased; when, as neither the substance of the medicine, nor the odor, nor the taste of it came to him, but only a kind of resemblance was apprehended by him. Upon this account, some that are in a dream think they burn and are in a fire, and are fearfully tormented, as if they did truly burn, when, as the substance of the fire is not near them, but only a resemblance apprehended by their imagination. And sometimes men's bodies are transformed, and transfigured, and also transported; and this oft times when they are in a dream, and sometimes when they are awake. So Cyprus, after he was chosen king of Italy, did very much wonder at and meditate upon the fight and victory of bulls, and in the thought thereof did sleep a whole night, and in the morning

[p. 202]

he was found horned, no otherwise than by the vegetative power, being stirred up by a vehement imagination, elevating cornific humors into his head and producing horns. For a vehement cogitation, whilst it vehemently moves the species, pictures out the figure of the thing thought on, which they represent in their blood, and the blood impresseth the figure on the members that are nourished by it; as upon those of the same body, so upon those of anothers. So the imagination of a woman with child impresseth the mark of the thing longed for upon her infant, and the imagination of a man, bit with a mad dog, impresseth upon his body the image of dogs. So men may grow gray on a sudden. And some, by the dream of one night, have grown up from boys into perfect men. Hereto, also, may be referred those many scars of King Dagobertus, and marks of Franciscus, which they received--the one, whilst he was afraid of correction, and the other, whilst he did wonderfully meditate upon the wounds of Christ. So, many are transported from place to place, passing over rivers, fires and unpassable places, viz., when the species of any vehement desire, or fear, or boldness, are impresed upon their spirits, and, being mixed with vapors, do move the organ of the touch in their original, together with phantasy, which is the original of local motion. Whence they stir up the members and organs of motion to motion, and are moved, without any mistake, unto the imagined place, not out of sight, but from the interior phantasy. So great a power is there of the soul upon the body, that whichever way the soul imagines and dreams that it goes, thither doth it lead the body. We read many other examples by which the power of the soul upon .the body is wonderfully explained, as like that which Avicen describes of a certain man, who, when he pleased, could affect his body with the palsy. They report of Gallus Vibius that he did fall into madness,

[p. 203]

not casually, but on purpose, for, whilst he did imitate madmen, he assimilated their madness to himself and became mad indeed. And Austin makes mention of some men who could move their ears at their pleasure, and some that could move the crown of their head to their forehead and could draw it back again when they pleased, and of another that could sweat at his pleasure. And it is well known that some can weep -at their pleasure, and pour forth abundance of tears; and there are some that can bring up what they have swallowed, when they please, as out of a bag, by degrees. And we see that in these days there are many who can so imitate and express the voices of birds, cattle, dogs, and some men, that they can scarce at all be discerned. Also Pliny relates, by divers examples, that women have been turned into men. Pontanus testifieth that in his time, a certain woman called Caietava, and another one called Aemilia, who, many years after they were married, were changed into men. Now, how much imagination can affect the soul no man is ignorant, for it is nearer to the substance of the soul than the sense is, and therefore acts more upon the soul than the sense doth. So women, by certain strong imaginations, dreams, and suggestions, brought in by certain magical arts, do often bind themselves into a strong affection for any one. So they say that Medea, by a dream, was filled with love for Jason. So the soul sometimes is, by a vehement imagination or speculation, altogether abstracted from the body, as Celsus relates of a certain presbyter, who, as often as he pleased, could make himself senseless and lay like a dead man, so that when any one pricked or burnt him he felt no pain, but lay without any motion or breathing; yet he could, as he said, hear men's voices, as it were, afar off, if they cried out aloud.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 204]

  

CHAPTER LXV.

  

HOW THE PASSIONS OF THE MIND CAN WORK OF THEMSELVES UPON ANOTHER'S BODY.

THE passions of the soul which follow the phantasy when they are most vehement, cannot only change their own body, but also can transcend so as to work upon another body; so that some wonderful impressions are thence produced in elements and extrinsical things, and they can thus take away or bring some disease of the mind or body. For the passions of the soul are the chiefest cause of the temperament of its proper body. So the soul, being strongly elevated, and inflamed with a strong imagination, sends forth health or sickness, not only in its proper body, but also in other bodies. So Avicen is of the opinion that a camel may fall by the imagination of any one. So he who is bitten with a mad dog presently falls into a madness, and there appear in his body the shapes of dogs. So the longing of a woman with child doth act upon another's body when it signs the infant in the womb with the mark of the thing she longs for. So many monstrous generations proceed from monstrous imaginations of women with child, as Marcus Damascenus reports that at Petra Saneta, a town situated upon the territories of Pisa, there was a wench presented to Charles, king of Bohemia, who was rough and hairy all over her body, like a wild beast, whom her mother, affected with a religious kind of horror by the picture of John the Baptist (which was in the chamber she occupied), afterwards brought her forth after this fashion. And this, we see, is not only in men, but also is done among brute creatures. So we read that Jacob, the patriarch, with his speckled rods set in the watering places, did discolor the sheep of Laban.

[p. 205]

[paragraph continues] So the imaginative powers of peacocks, and other birds, whilst they be mating, impress a color upon their wings. Whence we produce white peacocks, by hanging white clothes round the places where they mate. Now, by the above examples, it appears how the affection of the phantasy, when it vehemently intends itself, doth not only affect its own proper body, but also anothers. So also the desire of witches to hurt doth bewitch men most perniciously with steadfast looks. To these things Avicen, Aristotle, Algazel, and Gallen assent. For it is manifest that a body may most easily be affected with the vapor of another's diseased body, which we plainly see in the plague and leprosy. Again, in the vapor of the eyes there is so great a power that they can bewitch and infect any that are near them, as the cockatrice or basilisk which kill men with their looks. And certain women in Scythia, amongst the Illyrians and Triballi, killed whomsoever they looked angry upon. Therefore, let no man wonder that the body and soul of one may, in like manner, be affected with the mind of another, seeing the mind is far more powerful, strong, fervent, and more prevalent in its motion than the vapors exhaling out of bodies; neither are there wanting mediums by which it should work, neither is another's body less subject to another's mind than to another's body. Upon this account, they say that a man, by his affection and habit only, may act upon another. Therefore, philosophers advise that the society of evil and mischievous men must be shunned, for their soul, being full of noxious rays, infects them that are near with a hurtful contagion. On the contrary, they advise that the society of good and fortunate men be endeavored after, because by their nearness they do us much good. For as the smell of musk doth penetrate, so something of either bad or good is derived from anything bad or good by those that are nigh to them; which may

[p. 206]

continue a long time. Now, if the foresaid passions have so great a power in the phantasy, they have certainly a greater power in the reason, in as much as the reason is more excellent than the phantasy; and, lastly, they have much greater power in the mind; for this, when it is fixed upon God for any good with its whole intention, doth oftentimes affect another's body, as well as its own, with some divine gift. By this means we read that many miracles were done by Apollonius, Pythagoras, Empedocles, Philolaus, and many prophets and holy men of our religion, which things we shall now consider.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER LXVI.

  

THAT THE PASSIONS OF THE MIND ARE HELPED BY A CELESTIAL SEASON, AND HOW NECESSARY THE CONSTANCY OF THE MIND IS IN EVERY WORK.

THE passions of the mind are much helped, and are helpful, and become most powerful by virtue of the Heavens, as they agree with the Heaven, either by any natural agreement or by voluntary election. For, as saith Ptolemy, he which chooseth that which is the better seems to differ nothing from him who hath this by nature. It conduceth, therefore, very much for the receiving of the benefit of the Heavens, in any work, if we shall, by the Heaven, make ourselves suitable to it in our thoughts, affections, imaginations, deliberations, elections, contemplations, and the like. For such like passions do vehemently stir up our spirit to the likeness of the Heavens and expose us and ours straightway to the Superior Significators of such like passions; and, also, by reason of their dignity and nearness to the Superiors do much more partake of the Celestials than any other material things. For our mind can, through imagination or by reason of a kind of imitation, be so conformed

[p. 207]

to any Star as suddenly to be filled with the virtues of that Star, as if it were a proper receptacle of the influence thereof. Now, the contemplating mind, as it withdraws itself from all sense, imagination, nature, and deliberation, and calls itself back to things separated, unless it exposeth itself to Saturn, is not of present consideration or enquiry. For our mind Both effect divers things by faith (which is a firm adhesion, a fixed intention, and a vehement application of the worker, or receiver) to him that cooperates in any thing, and gives power to the work which we intend to do. So that there is made, as it were, in us, the image of the virtue to be received, and the thing to be done in us, or by us. We must, therefore, in every work and application of things, affect vehemently, imagine, hope, and believe strongly, for that will be a great help. And it is verified amongst physicians, that a strong belief, and an undoubted hope and love towards the physician and medicine, conduce much to health; yea, more, sometimes, than the medicine itself. For the same that the efficacy and virtue of the medicine works, the same doth the strong imagination of the physician work, being able to change the qualities in the body of the sick, especially when the patient placeth much confidence in the physician, by that means disposing himself for the receiving of the virtue of the physician and physic. Therefore, he that works in Magic must be of a constant belief, be credulous, and not at all doubtful of obtaining the effect. For, as a firm and strong belief doth work wonderful things, although it be in false works, so distrust and doubting doth dissipate and break the virtue of the mind of the worker, which is the medium between both extremes; whence it happens that he is frustrated of the desired influence of the superiors, which could not be joined and united to our labors without a firm and solid virtue of our mind.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 208]

  

CHAPTER LXVII.

  

HOW THE MIND OF MAN MAY BE JOINED WITH THE MIND OF THE STARS, AND INTELLIGENCES OF THE CELESTIALS, AND, TOGETHER WITH THEM, IMPRESS CERTAIN WONDERFUL VIRTUES UPON INFERIOR THINGS.

THE philosophers, especially the Arabians, say that man's mind, when it is most intent upon any work, through its passion and effects, is joined with the mind of the stars and intelligences; and, being so joined, is the cause of some wonderful virtue being infused into our works and things; and this, because there is in the mind an apprehension and power of all things, so all things have a natural obedience to it, and of necessity an efficacy; and more to that which desires them with a strong desire. And according to this is verified the art of characters, images, enchantments, and some speeches, and many other wonderful experiments as to everything which the mind affects. By this means, whatsoever the mind of him that is in vehement love, affects, hath an efficacy to cause love; and whatsoever the mind of him that strongly hates, dictates, hath an efficacy to hurt and destroy. The like is in other things, which the mind affects with a strong desire. For all those things which the mind acts and dictates by characters, figures, words, speeches, gestures, and the like, help the appetite of the soul and acquire certain wonderful virtues; as from the soul of the operator, in that hour when such a like appetite doth invade it, so from the opportunity and celestial influence, moving the mind in that manner. For our mind, when it is carried upon the great excess of any passion or virtue, oftentimes presently takes of itself a strong, better and more convenient hour or opportunity, which Thomas Aquinas, in his third

[p. 209]

book against the Gentiles, confesseth. So many wonderful virtues both cause and follow certain admirable operations by great affections in those things which the soul doth dictate in that hour to them. But know that such things confer nothing, or very little, to the author of them, and to him which is inclined to them, as if he were the author of them. And this is the manner by which their efficacy is found out. And it is a general rule in them, that every mind that is more excellent in its love and affection makes such like things more fit for itself, becoming efficacious to that which it desires. Every one, therefore, that is willing to work in Magic must know the virtue, measure, order, and degree of his own soul, in relation to the Power of the Universe.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER LXVIII.

  

HOW OUR MIND CAN CHANGE AND BIND INFERIOR THINGS TO THE ENDS WHICH WE DESIRE.

THERE is also a certain virtue in the minds of men of changing, attracting, hindering, and binding to that which they desire; and all things obey them when they are carried into a great excess of any passion or virtue, so as to exceed those things which they bind. For the superior binds that which is inferior, and converts it to itself; and the inferior is, by the same reason, converted to the superior, or is otherwise affected, and wrought upon. By this reason, things that receive a superior degree of any star, bind, or attract, or hinder things which have an inferior, according as they agree or disagree amongst themselves. Whence a lion is afraid of a cock, because the presence of the Solary virtue is more agreeable to a cock than to a lion. So a loadstone draws iron, because, in its order, it hath a superior degree of the Celestial Bear.

[p. 210]

So the diamond hinders the loadstone, because, in the order of Mars, it is superior to it. In like manner any man, when he is opportunely exposed to the celestial influences (as by the affections of his mind and due applications of natural things), if he become stronger in a Solary virtue, he binds and draws the inferior into admiration and obedience--in the order of the Moon, to servitude or infirmities; in a Saturnine order, to quietness or sadness; in the order of Jupiter, to worship; in the order of Mars, to fear and discord; in a Venus order, to love and joy; in a Mercurial order, to persuasion and obsequiousness, and the like. The ground of such a kind of binding is the very vehement and boundless affection of the soul with the concourse of the celestial order. But the dissolutions or hinderances of such a like binding are made by a contrary effect, and that more excellent or strong; for as the greater excess of the mind binds, so, also, it looseth and hindereth. And, lastly, when the mind feareth Venus, it opposes Saturn; when Saturn or Mars, it opposes Venus or Jupiter; for astrologers say that these are most at enmity, and contrary the one to the other (i. e.), causing contrary effects in these inferior bodies. For in the Heavens, where there is nothing wanting, and where all things are governed with love, there can in no wise be hatred or enmity.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER LXIX.

  

OF SPEECH, AND THE OCCULT VIRTUE OF WORDS.

IT being shown that there is a great power in the affections of the soul, you must know, moreover, that there is no less virtue in words and the names of things, and greatest of all in speeches and motions; by which we chiefly differ from the brutes, and are called rational; not from reason, which is taken for

[p. 211]

that part of the soul which contains the affections (which Galen saith is also common to brutes, although in a less degree), but we are called rational from that reason which is, according to the voice, understood in words and speech, which is called Declarative Reason; by which part we do chiefly excel all other animals. For logos, in Greek, signifies reason, speech, and a word. Now, a word is twofold, viz., internal and uttered. An internal word is a conception of the mind and motion of the soul, which is made without a voice; as in dreams we seem to speak and dispute with ourselves, and whilst we are awake, we run over a whole speech silently. But an uttered word hath a certain act in the voice, and properties of locution, and is brought forth with the breath of a man, with opening of his mouth and with the speech of his tongue; in which nature hath coupled the corporeal voice and speech to the mind and understanding, making that a declarer and interpreter of the conception of our intellect to the hearers; and of this we now speak. Words, therefore, are the fittest medium betwixt the speaker and the hearer, carrying with them not only the conception of the mind, but also the virtue of the speaker, with a certain efficacy, unto the hearers; and this oftentimes with so great a power, that often they change not only the hearers but also other bodies and things that have no life. Now those words are of greater efficacy than others which represent greater things--as intellectual, celestial, and supernatural; as more expressly, so more mysteriously. Also those that come from a more worthy tongue, or from any of a more holy order; for these (as it were certain signs and representations) receive a power of celestial and supercelestial things, as from the virtue of things explained, of which they are the vehicle, and from a power put into them by the virtue of the speaker.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 212]

  

CHAPTER LXX.

  

OF THE VIRTUE OF PROPER NAMES.

THAT the proper names of things are very necessary in Magical Operations, almost all men testify. For the natural power of things proceeds, first, from the objects to the senses, and then from these to the imagination, and from this to the mind, in which it is first conceived, and then is expressed by voices and words. The Platonists, therefore, say that in this very voice, or word, or name framed, with its articles, that the power of the thing, as it were some kind of life, lies under the form of the signification. First conceived in the mind, as it were through certain seeds of things, then by voices or words, as a birth brought forth; and lastly, kept in writings. Hence magicians say, that the proper names of things are certain rays of things, everywhere present at all times, keeping the power of things, as the essence of the thing signified, rules, and is discerned in them and know the things by them, as by proper and living images. For, as the great operator doth provide divers species and particular things by the influence of the Heavens, and by the elements, together with the virtues of planets, so, according to the properties of the influences, proper names result to things and are put upon them by him who numbers the multitude of the stars, calling them all by their names; of which names Christ in another place speaks, saying, "Your names are written in Heaven." Adam, therefore, that gave the first names to things, knowing the influences of the Heavens and properties of all things, gave them all names according to their natures, as it is written in Genesis, where God brought all things that he had created before Adam, that he should name them; and as he named any thing, so the name of it was; which names,

[p. 213]

indeed, contain in them wonderful powers of the things signified. Every voice, therefore, that is significative, first of all signifies by the influence of the celestial harmony; secondly, by the imposition of man, although oftentimes otherwise by this than by that. But when both significations meet in any voice or name, which are put upon them by the said harmony, or men, then that name is with a double virtue, viz., natural and arbitrary, made most efficacious to act as often as it shall be uttered in due place and time, and seriously, with an intention exercised upon the matter rightly disposed, and that can naturally be acted upon by it. So we read in Philostratus, that when a maid at Rome died the same day she was married, and was presented to Apollonius, he accurately inquired into her name, which being known, he pronounced some occult thing, by which she revived. It was an observation amongst the Romans, in their holy rites, that when they did besiege any city, they did diligently enquire into the proper and true name of it, and the name of that God under whose protection it was; which being known, they did then with some verse call forth the Gods that were the protectors of that city, and did curse the inhabitants of that city, so at length, their Gods being absent, did overcome them, as Virgil sings:

    --That kept this Realm, our Gods
 Their Altars have forsook, and blest abodes.

Now the verse with which the Gods were called out and the enemies were cursed, when the city was assaulted round about, let him that would know find it out in Livy and Marcrobius; but also many of these Serenus Samonicus, in his book of secret things, makes mention of.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 214]

  

CHAPTER LXXI.

  

OF MANY WORDS JOINED TOGETHER, AS IN SENTENCES AND VERSES; AND OF THE VIRTUES AND ASTRICTIONS OF CHARMS.

BESIDES the virtues of words and names, there is also a greater virtue found in sentences, from the truth contained in them, which hath a very great power of impressing, changing, binding, and establishing, so that being used it doth shine the more, and being resisted is more confirmed and consolidated; which virtue is not in simple words, but in sentences, by which anything is affirmed or denied; of which sort are verses, enchantments, imprecations, deprecations, orations, invocations, obtestations, adjurations, conjurations, and such like. Therefore, in composing verses and orations for attracting the virtue of any star or deity, you must diligently consider what virtue any star contains, as, also, what effects and operations, and to infer them in verses, by praising, extolling, amplifying, and setting forth those things which such a kind of star is wont to cause by way of its influence, and by vilifying and dispraising those things which it is wont to destroy and hinder, and by supplicating and begging for that which we desire to get, and by condemning and detesting that which we would have destroyed and hindered; and after the same manner to make an elegant oration, and duly distinct, by articles, with competent numbers and proportions. Moreover, magicians command that we call upon and pray by the names of the same star, or name to them to whom such a verse belongs, by their wonderful things, or miracles, by their courses and ways in their sphere, by their light, by the dignity of their kingdom, by the beauty and brightness that is in it, by their strong and powerful virtues, and by such like things as these. As

[p. 215]

[paragraph continues] Psyche, in Apuleius, prays to Ceres, saying, "I beseech thee by thy fruitful right hand, I intreat thee by the joyful ceremonies of harvests, by the quiet silence of thy chests, by the winged chariots of dragons, thy servants, by the furrows of the Sicilian earth, the devouring wagon, the clammy earth, by the place of going down into cellars at the light nuptials of Proserpina, and returns at the light inventions of her daughter, and other things which are concealed in her temple in the city of Eleusis, in Attica." Besides, with the divers sorts of the names of the stars, they command us to call upon them by the names of the Intelligences ruling over the stars themselves, of which we shall speak more at large in their proper place. They that desire further examples of these, let them search into the hymns of Orpheus, than which nothing is more efficacious in Natural Magic, if they, together with their circumstances, which wise men know, be used according to a due harmony with all attention. But to return to our purpose. Such like verses, being aptly and duly made, according to the Rule of the Stars, and being full of signification and meaning, and opportunely pronounced with vehement affection (as according to the number and the proportion of their articles, so according to the form resulting from the articles) and, by the violence of imagination, do confer a very great power in the enchanter, and sometimes transfers it upon the thing enchanted, to bind and direct it to the same purpose for which the affections and speeches of the enchanter are intended. Now, the instrument of enchanters is a most pure, harmonical spirit--warm, breathing, living, bringing with it motion, affection, and signification; composed of its parts, endued with sense, and conceived by reason. By the quality, therefore, of this spirit, and by the celestial similitude, thereof (besides those things which have already been spoken

[p. 216]

of) verses, also, from the opportunity of time, receive from above most excellent virtues; and, indeed, are more sublime and efficacious than spirits, and. vapors exhaling out of the vegetable life, such as herbs, roots, gums, aromatical things, and fumes and such like. And, therefore, magicians enchanting things, are wont to blow and breathe upon them the words of the verse, or to breathe in the virtue with the spirit, that so the whole virtue of the soul be directed to the thing enchanted, being disposed for the receiving of said virtue. And here it is to be noted that every oration, writing and words, as they induce accustomed motions by their accustomed numbers, proportions, and form, so (besides their usual order) being pronounced, or wrote backwards, move unto unusual effects.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER LXXII.

  

OF THE WONDERFUL POWER OF ENCHANTMENTS.

THEY say that the power of enchantments and verses is, so great, that it is believed they are able to subvert almost all Nature. Apuleius saith that with a magical whispering, swift rivers are turned back, the slow sea is bound, the winds are breathed out with one accord, the Sun is stopped, the Moon is clarified, the Stars are pulled out, the day is kept back, the night is prolonged; and of these things Lucan writes:

The courses of all things did cease, the night
 Prolonged was, 'twas long before 'twas light;
 Astonied was the headlong World--all this
 Was by the hearing of a verse.

And a little before:

Thessalian verse did into his heart so flow,
 That it did make a greater heat of love.

[p. 217]

And elsewhere:

No dregs of poison being by him drunk;
 His wits decay'd enchanted----

Also Virgil, in Damon,

Charms can command the Moon down from the Skie;
 Circe's Charms chang'd Ulysses' company.
 A cold snake, being charm'd, burst----

And Ovid, in his untitled book, saith:

With charms doth with 'ring Ceres dye,
   Dried are the fountains all,
 Acorns from Okes, enchanted Grapes,
   And apples from trees fall.

If these things were not true, there would not be such strict penal statutes made against them that should enchant fruit. And Tibullus saith of a certain enchantress:

Her with Charms drawing Stars from Heaven, I,
 And turning the course of rivers, did espy;
 She parts the earth, and Ghosts from Sepulchres
 Draws up, and fetcheth bones away from th' fires,
 And at her pleasure scatters clouds i' th' Air,
 And makes it Snow in Summer hot and fair.

Of all which that enchantress seems to boast herself in Ovid, when she saith:

At will, I make swift streams retire
 To their fountains, whilst their Banks admire;
 Sea toss and smooth; clear Clouds with Clouds deform.
 With Spells and Charms I break the Viper's jaw,
 Cleave solid Rocks, Oakes from their seizures draw,
 Whole Woods remove, the lofty Mountains shake,
 Earth for to groan, and Ghosts from graves awake,
 And thee, O Moon, I draw----

Moreover, all poets sing, and philosophers do not deny, that by verses many wonderful things may be done, as corn to be removed, lightnings to be commanded, diseases to be cured, and the like. For Cato,

[p. 218]

himself, in country affairs, used some enchantments against the diseases of beasts, which as yet are extant in his writings. Also Josephus testifies that Solomon was skilled in those kinds of enchantments. Also Celsus Africanus reports, according to the Egyptian doctrine, that man's body, according to the number of the faces of the Zodiac Signs, was taken care of by so many, viz., thirty-six spirits, whereof each undertake and defend their proper part, whose names they call with a peculiar voice, which, being called upon, restore to health with their enchantments, the diseased parts of the body.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER LXXIII.

  

OF THE VIRTUE OF WRITING, AND OF MAKING IMPRECATIONS, AND INSCRIPTIONS.

THE use of words and speech is to express the inwards of the mind, and from thence to draw forth the secrets of the thoughts, and do declare the will of the speaker. Now, writing is the last expression of the mind, and is the number of speech and voice, as, also, the collection, state, end, continuing, and iteration, making a habit, which is not perfected with the act of one's voice. And whatsoever is in the mind, in voice, in word, in operation, and in speech, the whole and all of this is in writing also. And as nothing which is conceived in the mind is not expressed by voice, so nothing which is expressed is not also written. And, therefore, magicians command that in every work there be imprecations and inscriptions made, by which the operator may, express his affection; that if he gather an herb, or a stone, he declare for what use he doth it; if he make a picture, he say and write to what end he maketh it, with imprecations and inscriptions. Albertus, also, in his book, called the Speculum, doth not disallow this, without

[p. 219]

which all our works would never be brought into effect, seeing a disposition does not cause an effect, but the act of the disposition. We find, also, that the same kind of precepts was in use amongst the ancients, as Virgil testifies when he sings:

      I walk around
 First with these Threads--in number which three are--
 'Bout th' Altars, thrice I shall thy Image bear.

And a little after:

Knots, Amaryllis, tie! of Colors three,
 Then say, "These bonds I knit for Venus be."

And in the same place:

As with one fire this clay doth harder prove,
 The wax more soft; so, Daphnis, with our love.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER LXXIV.

  

OF THE PROPORTION, CORRESPONDENCY, AND REDUCTION OF LETTERS TO THE CELESTIAL SIGNS AND PLANETS, ACCORDING TO VARIOUS TONGUES, AND A TABLE THEREOF.

GOD gave to man a mind and speech, which (as saith Mercurius Trismegistus) are thought to be a gift of the same virtue, power, and immortality. The omnipotent God hath by his providence divided the speech of men into divers languages, which languages have, according to their diversity, received divers and proper characters of writing, consisting in their certain order, number, and figure, not so disposed and formed by hap or chance, nor by the weak judgment of man, but from above, whereby they agree with the celestial and divine bodies and virtues. But before all notes of languages, the writing of the Hebrews is, of all, the most sacred in the figures of characters, points of vowels, and tops of accents; or consisting in matter, form, and spirit.

[p. 220]

The position of the Stars being first made in the seat of God, which is Heaven, after the figure of them (as the masters of the Hebrews testify) are most fully formed the letters of the Celestial Mysteries, as by their figure, form, and signification, so by the numbers signified by them, and also by the various harmonies of their conjunction. Whence the more curious Mecubals of the Hebrews do undertake--by the figure of their letters, the forms of characters, and their signature, simpleness or composition, separation, crookedness or directness, defect, abounding, greatness or littleness, crowning, opening or shutting, order, transmutation, joining together, revolution of letters, and of points, and tops, by the supputation of numbers, and by the letters of things signified--to explain all things; how they proceed from the first cause, and are again to be reduced into the same. Moreover, they divide the letters of the Hebrew alphabet, viz., into twelve simple, seven double, and three mothers, which, they say, signify as characters of things--the Twelve Signs, Seven Planets, and Three Elements, viz., Fire, Water, and Earth; for they account Air no element, but as the glue and spirit of the elements. To these, also, they appoint points and tops. As, therefore, by the aspects of planets and signs, together with the Elements (the working spirit and truth), all things have been and are brought forth. So, by these characters of letters and points, signifying those things that are brought forth, the names of all things are appointed, as certain Signs and vehicles of things explained, carrying with them everywhere their essence and virtues. The profound meanings and Signs are inherent in those characters, and figures of them, as also numbers, place, order, and revolution; so that Origenes, therefore, thought that those names, when translated into another idiom, do not retain their proper virtue. For only the original

[p. 221]

names, which are rightly imposed, because they signify naturally and have a natural activity. It is not so with them which signify at pleasure, which have no activity as they are signifying, as they are but certain natural things in themselves. Now, if there be any language whose words have a natural signification, it is manifest that this is the Hebrew; the order of which he that shall profoundly and radically observe, and shall know to resolve proportionably the letters thereof, shall have a rule exactly to find out any idiom. There are, therefore, two and twenty letters, which are the foundation of the world, and of creatures that are, and are named in it, and every saying and every creature are of them, and by their revolutions receive their name, being, and virtue.

He, therefore, that will find them out, must by each joining together of the letters so long examine them, until the voice of God is manifest, and the framing of the most sacred letters be opened and discovered; for hence voices and words have efficacy in magical works, because that in which Nature first exerciseth magical efficacy is the voice of God. But these are of more deep speculation than to be handled in this book. To return to the division of the letters: of these, amongst the Hebrews, are three mothers, viz., y, w, '; seven double, viz., th, r, p, k, d, n, b. The other twelve, viz., sh, q, tz, `, s, g, m, l, t, ch, z, h, are simple. The rule is the same amongst the Chaldeans, and, by the imitation of those above, also the letters of other tongues are distributed to the Signs, Planets, and Elements, after their order. For the vowels in the Greek tongue answer to the Seven Planets, and the others are attributed to the Twelve Signs of the Zodiac, the Four Elements, and the Spirit of the World. Amongst the Latins there is the same signification of them. For the five vowels A, E, I, O, U, and J and V, consonants, are ascribed

[p. 222]

to the Seven Planets, and the consonants, B, C, D, F, G, L, M, N, P, R, S, T, are answerable to the Twelve Signs. The rest, viz., K, Q, X, Z, make the Elements. H the aspiration, represents the Spirit of the World. Y, because it is a Greek, and not a Latin character, and serving only to Greek words, follows the nature of its idiom.

But this you must not be ignorant of, that it is observed by all wise men, that the Hebrew letters are the most efficacious of all, because they have the greatest similitude with celestials and the world, and that the letters of the other tongues have not so great an efficacy because they are more distant from them. Now the disposition of these the following table will explain. Also all the letters have double numbers of their order, viz., extended, which simply express of what number the letters are, according to their order; and collected, which re-collect with themselves the numbers of all the preceding letters. Also they have integral numbers, which result from the names of letters, according to their various manners of numbering. The virtues of which numbers, he that shall know, shall be able in every tongue to draw forth wonderful mysteries by their letters, as also to tell what things have been past, and foretell things to come. There are also other mysterious joinings of letters with numbers, but we shall abundantly discourse of all these in the following books. Wherefore we will now put an end to this first book.

_______

The table above referred to, on the following page, is from the English edition of 1651. The reader will also find a table of the Cabala elsewhere in this volume. At this place we insert Mr. Henry Morley's appropriate criticism on Agrippa's book of Natural Magic.

[p. 223]

Click to enlarge

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 224]

  

HENRY MORLEY'S CRITICISM.

LITTLE disguised by Hebrew admixture, and little  by the speculations of the Platonists of Alexandria, Philo the Jew, Plotinus, and Iamblichus, whom the young student quotes most frequently, we have again the Attic Moses, Plato, speaking through a young and strong heart to the world. Very great was the influence of Plato in this period of wakening to thought. Nothing was known by experience of Nature, for little had been learnt since the time when Plato, theorising upon Nature, owned it to be impossible to arrive at any certain result in our speculations upon the creation of the visible universe and its authors; "wherefore," he said, "even if we should only advance reasons not less probable than those of others, you should still be content." In this spirit alone Cornelius Agrippa taught his age: "There are these marvels well accredited; there is this cumbrous and disjointed mass of earthly, sensible experience, which there is no way of explaining left to me but one. I accept the marvels, foolish as they seem; they are as well accredited as things more obviously true. With God all things are possible. In God all things consist. I will adopt Plato's belief, that the world is animated by a moving soul, and from the soul of the world I will look up to its Creator. I cannot rest content with a confused mass of evidence; I will animate with my own soul, and a faith in its divine origin, the world about me. I will adopt the glorious belief of Plato, that we sit here as in a cavern with our faces held from looking to the cavern's mouth, down which a light is streaming and pours in a flood over our heads, broken

[p. 225]

by shadows of things moving in the world above. We see the shadows on the wall, hear echoes, and believe in all as the one known truth of substance and of voice, although these are but the images of the superiors. I also will endeavor to climb up out of the cave into the land flooded with sunlight. I connect all that we see here with Plato's doctrine of superior ideas, I subdue matter to spirit, I will see true knowledge in apparent foolishness, and connect the meanest clod with its divine Creator. I will seek to draw down influences, and to fill my soul with a new strength imparted by the virtue of ideas streaming from above. The superior manifest in the inferior is the law of Nature manifested in the thing created. My soul is not sufficient for itself; beyond it and above it lie eternal laws, subtle, not having substance or form, yet the cause of form and substance. I cannot hope to know them otherwise than as ideas; to unborn generations they will be revealed, perhaps; to me they are ideas, celestial influences, working intelligences. I believe in them, and I desire to lay open my soul to their more perfect apprehension. They are not God, though God created them; they are not man, though they have by divine ordainment formed him. The more I dwell upon their qualities, the more I long for the divine, the more shall I be blessed by the reception of their rays. The more intensely I yearn heavenward, the more shall I bring down heaven to dwell in my soul."

So we may hear, if we will, the spirit of the young inquirer pleading to us from across the centuries, and if our own minds ever yearned for an escape from the delusions of the grosser sense and the restriction set by crowds on free inquiry, there is no true heart that will not say: "You labored well, my brother."

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 226]

  

AGRIPPA AND THE ROSICRUCIANS.

THE secrets to be talked over between Cornelius and his friend related to that study of the mysteries of knowledge in which the Theosophists assisted one another. Secret societies, chiefly composed of curious and learned youths, had by this time become numerous, and numerous especially among the Germans. Not only the search after the philosopher's stone, which was then worthy to be prosecuted by enlightened persons, but also the new realms of thought laid open by the first glance at Greek literature, and by the still more recent introduction of a study of the Hebrew language, occupied the minds of these associated scholars. Such studies often carried those who followed them within the borders of forbidden ground, and therefore secrecy was a condition necessary to their freedom of inquiry. Towards the close of the sixteenth century such associations (the foundation of which had been a desire to keep thought out fetters) were developed into the form of brotherhoods of Rosicrucians: Physician, Theosophist, Chemist, and now, by the mercy of God, Rosicrucian, became then the style in which a brother gloried. The brotherhoods of Rosicrucians are still commonly remembered, but in the social history of Europe they are less to be considered than those first confederations of Theosophists, which nursed indeed mystical errors gathered from the Greeks and Jews, but out of whose theories there was developed much of a pure spiritualism that entered into strife with what was outwardly corrupt and sensual in the body of the Roman Church, and thus prepared the way for the more vital attacks of the Reformers.

[p. 227]

[paragraph continues] When first Greek studies were revived, the monks commonly regarded them as essentially adverse to Roman interests, and the very language seemed to them infected with the plague of heresy. In the Netherlands it became almost a proverb with them that to be known for a grammarian was to be reputed heretic. Not seldom, indeed, in later times, has John Reuchlin, who, for his Greek and Hebrew scholarship was called, after the manner of his day, the Phoenix of Germans, and who was the object of an ardent hero worship to men like Cornelius Agrippa, been called also the Father of the Reformation. Certainly Luther, Erasmus, and Melancthon had instruction from him; by him it was that Schwartzerd had been taught to call himself Melancthon; and many will remember how, after his death, Erasmus, in a pleasant dialogue, raised his old friend to the rank of saint, and prayed to him, "Oh, holy soul, be favorable to the languages; be favorable to those that love honorers of the languages; be propitious to the sacred tongues." But Reuchlin--for the taste of smoke in it, Reuchlin quasi Reeki, his name was turned into the Greek form, Capnio,--Reuchlin, or Capnio, never passed as a reformer beyond detestation of the vices of the priesthood. Like Cornelius, who begun his life before the public as a scholar by an act of homage to his genius, Reuchlin loved liberty and independence, cherished the idol of free conscience, but never fairly trusted himself to its guidance. To the last an instinct of obedience to the church governed his actions, and the spiritual gold he could extract from Plato, Aristotle, or the wonderful Cabala of the Jews, was in but small proportion to the dross fetched up with it from the same ancient mines.

A contemporary notion of the Reformation, not without some rude significance in this respect, is said to have been obtruded upon Charles V. by a

[p. 228]

small body of unknown actors, who appeared before him in 1530, when he was in Germany. He had been dining with his brother Ferdinand, and did not refuse their offer to produce a comedy in dumb show. One dressed as a scholar, labelled Capnio, brought before the emperor a bundle of sticks--some crooked and some straight--laid them down in the highway, and departed. Then entered another, who professed to represent Erasmus, looked at the sticks, shook his head, made various attempts to straighten the crooked ones, and finding that he could not do so, shook his head over them again, put them down where he had found them, and departed. Then came an actor, labelled Luther, with a torch, who set all that was crooked in the bundle blazing. When he was gone entered one dressed as an emperor, who tried in vain to put the fire out with his sword. Last came Pope Leo X., to whom, grieving dismally over the spectacle before him, there were two pails brought; one contained oil, the other water. His holiness, to quell the fire, poured over it the bucketful of oil, and while the flame attracted all eyes by the power, beyond mastery, with which it shot up towards heaven, the actors made their escape undetected.

Now, it was over the crooked sticks of Capnio, and many other matters difficult of comprehension, that Cornelius and his confederates were bent in curious and anxious study. "The bearer of the letters," said Landulph, in excusing himself on the plea of illness, from a winter journey to a friend at Avignon--"the bearer of these letters is a German, native of Nuremberg, but dwelling at Lyons; and he is a curious inquirer after hidden mysteries, a free man restrained by no fetters, who, impelled by I know not what rumor concerning you, desires to sound your depths." That the man himself might be sounded, as one likely to have knowledge of some important

[p. 229]

things, and that if it seemed fit, he should be made a member of their brotherhood, was the rest of the recommendation of this person by Landulph to his friend Agrippa.

At Lyons were assembled many members of his league, awaiting the arrival of the young soldier-philosopher. His early taste for an inquiry into mysteries had caused him to take all possible advantage, as a scholar, of each change of place and each extension of acquaintance among learned men who were possessors of rare books. He had searched every accessible volume that might help him in the prosecution of the studies that had then a fascination, not for him only, but for not a few of the acutest minds in Christendom. At that time there was, in the modern sense, no natural science; the naturalists of ancient Greece and Rome being the sole authorities in whom the learned could put trust. Of the miraculous properties of plants and animals, and parts of animals, even at the close of the sixteenth century, careful and sober men placed as accepted knowledge many extravagant ideas on record. At the beginning of the century, when a belief in the influences of the stars, in the interferences of demons, and in the most wonderful properties of bodies, was the rule among learned and unlearned--Luther himself not excluded from the number--an attempt to collect and group, if it might be, according to some system, the most recondite secrets of what passed for the divine ordering of Nature, was in no man's opinion foolish, though in the opinion of the greater number criminal. Belief in the mysteries of magic, not want of belief, caused men to regard with enmity and dread researches into secrets that might give to those by whom they were discovered subtle and superhuman power, through possessing which they would acquire an influence, horrible to suspect, over their fellow-creatures. Detaching their search into the mysteries

[p. 230]

of the universe from all fear of this kind, the members of such secret societies as that to which Cornelius belonged gathered whatever fruit they could from the forbidden tree, and obtained mutual benefit by frank exchange of information. Cornelius had already, by incessant search, collected notes for a complete treatise upon magic, and of these not a few were obtained from Reuchlin's Hebrew-Christian way of using the Cabala.

From Avignon, after a short stay, Cornelius Agrippa went to Lyons, and remaining there some weeks, compared progress with his friends, and no doubt also formally divested himself of any further responsibility connected with the Spanish enterprise. Towards the end of this year, a friend at Cologne, Theodoric, Bishop of Cyrene, wrote, expressing admiration of him, as of one among so many thousand Germans who at sundry times and places had displayed in equal degree power to labor vigorously as a man at arms as well as man of letters. Who does not know, the bishop asks, how few of many thousands have done that' He envies those who can thus earn the wreath of Mars without losing the favor of Minerva, and calls the youth "in arms a man, in scholarship a teacher." To escape the soldier's life of bondage seems to be now the ambition of the scholar. With the world before him, in the twenty-third year of his age, well born, distinguished among all who knew him for the rare extent of his attainments, Cornelius, attended by his servant, Stephen, quitted his friends at Lyons, and rode to Authun, where he was received in the abbey of a liberal and hospitable man, physician, theologian, and knight by turns, M. Champier, who, having been born at Saint Saphorin-le-Chateau, near Lyons, was called Symphorianus Champier, or Campegius, and who, not content with his own noble ancestry, assigned himself, by right of the Campegius, to the

[p. 231]

family of the Campegi of Bologna, and assumed its arms. He studied at Paris Litera humaniora, at Montpellier medicine, and practiced at Lyons. He lived to obtain great fame, deserving title, and losing after his death all. It was not until five years after this visit from Cornelius Agrippa that Symphorianus, acting as body physician to the Duke of Lorraine, was knighted on the battle-field of Marignano. Among his writings, those which most testify his sympathy with the inquiries of Cornelius, are a book on the Miracles. of Scripture, a Life of Arnold of Villeneuve, and a French version of Sibylline oracles. This Champier then sympathized with the enthusiasm of the young theosophist, and under his roof the first venture of Cornelius before the world of letters seems to have been planned. In the last week of May, we find that he has sent Stephen to fetch DeBrie from Dole, has summoned Antonius Xanthus from Niverne, and wishes, in association with Symphorianus, to arrange a meeting with Landulph, at any convenient place and time. He has something in hand concerning which he wishes to take counsel with his comrades. A few days afterwards he and Landulph are at Dole together; and while Cornelius has left Dole for a short time to go to Chalon (sur Saone), his friend sends word to him that he has engaged on his behalf the interest of the Archbishop of Besancon (Antony I., probably not an old man, since he was alive thirty years afterwards), who desires greatly to see him, and boasts that he can give information of some things unknown perhaps even to him. The archbishop is impatient to see the person who has stored up from rare books, even those written in Greek and Hebrew, so great a number of the secrets of the universe. Landulph, to content him, antedates the time appointed for his friend's return, and while reporting this, adds that there are many at Dole loud in the

[p. 232]

praise of Cornelius, and none louder than himself. The influence of his associates is evidently at work on his behalf among the magnates of the town and university of Dole, and learned men in the adjoining towns of Burgundy, for it is at Dole that he has resolved to make his first public appearance as a scholar, by expounding in a series of orations Reuchlin's book on the Mirific Word. At Chalon, however, Cornelius fell sick of a summer pestilence, from which he was recovering on the eighth of July. As soon as health permitted he returned to Dole, where there was prepared for him a cordial reception.

Dole is a pretty little town, and at that time possessed the university which was removed in after years to Besancon. Its canton was called, for its beauty and fertility, the Val d'Amour; and when Besancon was independent of the lords of Burgundy, Dole was their capital. A pleasant miniature capitol, with not four thousand inhabitants, a parliament, a university, a church of Notre Dame whereof the tower could be seen from distant fields, a princely residence--Dole la Joyeuse they called it until thirty years before Cornelius Agrippa declaimed his orations there; but after it had been, in 1479, captured and despoiled by a French army, it was called Dole la Dolente.

Mistress of Dole and Burgundy was Maximilian's daughter, Margaret of Austria, who, in this year of Agrippa's life, was twenty-nine years old. She was already twice a widow. When affianced twice--once vainly to France, a second time to Spain, and likely to perish in a tempest before reaching her appointed husband--she had wit to write a clever epitaph upon herself. Her Spanish husband died almost after the first embrace, and she had since, after four years of wedded happiness, lost her true husband, Philibert of Savoy. She was twenty-four years old when that happened, and resolved to make an end of marrying.

[p. 233]

[paragraph continues] In 1506, after the death of Archduke Philip, her father Maximilian being guardian of his grandson Charles the Fifth, made Margaret his governor over the Netherlands, and appointed her to rule also over Burgundy and the Charolois. Thus she came to be, in the year 1509, mistress at Dole. A clever, lively woman, opposed strongly to France, and always mindful of the interests of that house of Austria, to which the family of young Agrippa was attached, Margaret was well known for her patronage of letters and her bounty towards learned men. It would be, therefore, a pleasant transfer of his loyalty, Agrippa, thought, from Maximilian to Margaret, if he could thereby get rid of what he regarded as camp slavery under the one, and earn the favor of the other in the academic grove. To earn Margaret's goodwill and help upon the royal road to fortune was one main object of Cornelius when he announced at Dole that he proposed to expound Reuchlin's book, on the Mirific Word, in orations, to which, inasmuch as they were to be delivered in honor of the most serene Princess Margaret, the whole public would have gratuitous admission.

Poor youth! he could not possibly have made a more genuine and honest effort, or one less proper to be used by evil men for the damnation of his character. Margaret was the princess to whom of all others he was able to pay unaffected homage, and Reuchlin, then the boast of Germans, was the scholar of whom before every other, he, a German youth, might choose to hold discourse to the Burgundians. Of Reuchlin, Aegidius, chief of the Austin Friars, wrote, that he "had blessed him and all mortals by his works." Philip Beroaldus, the younger, wrote to him: "Pope Leo X. has read your Pythagorean book, as he reads all good books, greedily; then it was read by the Cardinal de' Medici, and I am expecting next to have my turn." This book, which had been read by the

[p. 234]

[paragraph continues] Pope himself with eager pleasure, was a wonder of the day, and was in the most perfect unison with the whole tone of Agrippa's mind; he really understood it deeply, it was most dear to him as a theosophist, and he was not to be blamed if he felt, also that of all books in the world there was none of which the exposition would so fully serve his purpose of displaying the extent and depth of his own store of knowledge.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

EXPOSITION OF THE CABALA.

MAINLY upon what was said and written by Cornelius Agrippa in this twenty-third year of his age has been founded the defamation by which, when he lived, his spirit was tormented and the hope of his existence miserably frustrated--by which, now that he is dead, his character comes down to us defiled. This victim, at least, has not escaped the vengeance of the monks, and his crime was that he studied vigorously in his salad days those curiosities of learning into which, at the same time, popes, bishops, and philosophers, mature of years, inquired with equal faith and almost equal relish, but less energy or courage. For a clear understanding of the ground, and of the perils of the ground, now taken by Cornelius Agrippa, little more is necessary than a clear notion of what was signified by Reuchlin's book on the Mirific Word; but what has to be said of Reuchlin and his book, as well as of other matters that will hereafter concern the fortunes of Cornelius, requires some previous attention to a subject pretty well forgotten in these days by a people rich in other knowledge; we must recall, in fact, some of the main points of the Cabala.

This account of the Cabala is derived from German sources, among which the chief are Brucker's

[p. 235]

[paragraph continues] Historia Philosophae and the Kabbala Denudata, a collection of old cabalistical writings arranged and explained by Christian Knorr von Rosenroth. The traditions, or Cabala, of the Jews, are contained in sundry books, written by Hebrew Rabbis, and consist of a strange mixture of fable and philosophy varying on a good many points, but all adhering with sufficient accuracy to one scheme of doctrine. They claim high and remote origin. Some say that the first Cabala were received by Adam from the angel Raziel, who gave him, either while he yet remained in Paradise, or else at the time of his expulsion, to console and help him, a book full of divine wisdom. In this book were the secrets of Nature, and by knowledge of them Adam entered into conversation with the Sun and Moon, knew how to summon good and evil spirits, to interpret dreams, foretell events, to heal, and to destroy. This book, handed down from father to son, came into Solomon's possession, and by its aid Solomon became master of many potent secrets. A cabalistic volume, called the Book of Raziel, was, in the middle ages, sometimes to be seen among the Jews.

Another account said that the first cabalistical book was the Sepher Jezirah, written by Abraham; but the most prevalent opinion was, that when the written law was given on Mount Sinai to Moses, the Cabala, or mysterious interpretation of it, was taught to him also. Then Moses, it was said, when he descended from the mountain, entered Aaron's tent, and taught him also the secret powers of the written word; and Aaron, having been instructed, placed himself at the right hand of Moses, and stood by while his sons, Eleazar and Ithamar, who had been called into the tent, received the same instruction. On the right and left of Moses and Aaron then sat Ithamar and Eleazar, when the seventy elders of the Sanhedrim were called in and taught the hidden

[p. 236]

knowledge. The elders finally were seated, that they might be present when all those among the common people who desired to learn came to be told those mysteries; thus the elect of the common people heard but once what the Sanhedrim heard twice, the sons of Aaron three times, and Aaron four times repeated of the secrets that had been made known to Moses by the voice of the Most High.

Of this mystical interpretation of the Scripture no person set down any account in writing, unless it was Esdras; but some Jews doubt whether he did. Israelites kept the knowledge of the doctrine by a pure tradition; but about fifty years after the destruction of Jerusalem, Akiba, a great rabbi, wrote the chief part of it in that book, Sepher-Jezireh, or the Book of the Creation, which was foolishly ascribed by a few to Abraham. A disciple of the Rabbi Akiba was Rabbi Simeon ben Jochai, who wrote more of the tradition in a book called Zoar.

The truth probably is, that the literature of cabalism, which is full of suggestion derived from the Neoplatonics of Alexandria, began with the Jews of Alexandria under the first Ptolemys. In the book of Simeon ben Schetach it went to Palestine, where it at first was little heeded; but after the destruction of Jerusalem it gained importance, and then Rabbis Akiba and Simeon ben Jochai extended it. It is indisputable that Aristotle had been studied by the writer of the Sepher-Jezireh, the oldest known book of the Cabalists. The Cabala went afterwards with other learning to Spain, and that part of it at least which deals with Hebrew anagrams cannot be traced to a time earlier than the eleventh century. Many rabbis--Abraham ben David, Saudia, Moses Botril, Moses bar Nachman, Eliezer of Garmiza, and others--have written Hebrew books for the purpose of interpreting the system of the Cabala; but it was, perhaps,

[p. 237]

not before the eighth century that it had come to receive very general attention from the Jews.

The Cabala consisted of two portions, the symbolical and the real; the symbolical Cabala being the means by which the doctrines of the real Cabala were elicited.

In the Hebrew text of the Scriptures, it was said, there is not only an evident, but there is also a latent meaning; and in its latent meaning are contained the mysteries of God and of the universe. It need scarcely be said that a belief in secret wisdom has for ages been inherent in the Oriental mind, and in the Scriptures, it was reasoned by the later Jews, all wisdom must be, of necessity, contained. Of divine authorship, they cannot be like ordinary works of men. But if they were taken only in the natural sense, might it not be said that many human works contain marvels not less surprising and morality as pure. No, it was said, as we have entertained angels, and regarded them as men, so we may entertain the words of the Most High, if we regard only their apparent sense and not their spiritual mystery. And so it was that through a blind excess of reverence the inspired writings were put to superstitious use.

The modes of examining their letters, words, and sentences, for hidden meaning, in which wholly consisted the symbolical Cabala, were three, and these were called Gemantria, Notaricon, Themura.

Gemantria was arithmetical when it consisted in applying to the Hebrew letters of a word the sense they bore as numbers, letters being used also for figures in the Hebrew as in the Greek. Then the letters in a word being taken as numbers and added up, it was considered that another word, of which the letters added up came to an equal sum, might fairly be substituted by the arithmetical gemantria. Figurative gemantria deduced mysterious interpretations

[p. 238]

from the shapes of letters used in sacred writing. Thus, in Numbers x., 35, Beth means the reversal of enemies. This kind of interpretation was known also by the name of Zurah. Architectonic gemantria constructed words from the numbers given by Scripture when describing the measurements of buildings, as the ark, or temple.

By Notaricon more words were developed from the letters of a word, as if it had consisted of so many abbreviations, or else first and last letters of words, or the first letters of successive words, were detached from their places and put side by side. By Themura, any word might be made to yield a mystery out of its anagram; these sacred anagrams were known as Zeruph. By the same branch of the symbolical Cabala three systems were furnished, in accordance with which words might be transformed by the substitution of one letter for another. The first of the systems, Albam, arranged the letters of the alphabet in two rows, one below another; the second, Athbath, gave another couple of rows; the third, Athbach, arranged them by pairs in three rows--all the pairs in the first row being the numerical value ten, in the second row a hundred, in the third a thousand; any one of these forms might be consulted, and any letter in a word exchanged for another standing either in Albam, Athbath, or Athbach, immediately above it or below it, or on the right hand of it or the left.

This was the symbolical Cabala, and the business of it was to extract, by any of the means allowed, the hidden meaning of the Scriptures. The real Cabala was the doctrine in this way elicited. It was theoretical, explaining divine qualities, the ten sephiroth, the fourfold cabalistical worlds, the thirty-two footprints of wisdom, the fifty doors to prudence, Adam Kadmon, &c.; or it was practical, explaining how to use such knowledge for the calling of spirits,

[p. 239]

the extinguishing of fires, the banishing of disease, and so forth.

The theoretical Cabala contained, it was said by

Click to enlarge
FIRST TO FOURTH SEPHIROTH.

[paragraph continues] Christian students, many references to the Messiah. Its main points were: 1--The Tree; 2--The Chariot of Ezekiel; 3--The Work of Creation; 4--The Ancient

[p. 240]

of Days mentioned in Daniel. It concerns us most to understand the Tree. The Chariot of Ezekiel, or Maasseh Mercabah, was a description of prefigurements concerning ceremonial and judicial law. The doctrine of Creation, in the book Levischith, was a dissertation upon physics. The Ancient of Days treated of God and the Messiah in a way so mystical that cabalists generally declined to ascribe any meaning at all to the direct sense of the words employed. Of these things we need say no more, but of the Cabalistical Tree it will be requisite to speak in more detail.

It was an arrangement of the ten sephiroth. The word Sephiroth is derived by some rabbis from a word meaning to count, because they are a counting of the divine excellence. Otherwise it is considered an adaptation of the Greek word Sphere, because it represents the spheres of the universe which are successive emanations from the Deity.

In the beginning was Or Haensoph, the eternal light, from whose brightness there descended a ray through the first-born of God, Adam Kadmon, and presently, departing from its straight course, ran in a circle, and so formed the first of the sephiroth, which was called Kethei, or the crown, because superior to all the rest. Having formed this circle, the ray resumed its straight course till it again ran in a circle to produce the second of the ten sephiroth, Chochma, wisdom, because wisdom is the source of all. The same ray of divine light passed on, losing gradually, as it became more distant from its holy source, some of its power, and formed presently, in like manner, the third of the sephiroth, called Binah, or understanding, because understanding is the channel through which wisdom flows to things below--the origin of human knowledge. The fourth of the sephiroth is called Gedolah or Chesed, greatness or goodness, because God, as being great and good,

[p. 241]

Click to enlarge
FOURTH TO NINTH SEPHIROTH.

[p. 242]

created all things. The fifth is Geburah, strength, because it is by strength that He maintains them, and because strength is the only source of justice in the world. The sixth of the sephiroth, Thpereth, beauty or grace, unites the qualities of the preceding. The four last of the sephiroth are successively named Nezach, victory; Hod, honor; Jesod, or Schalom, the foundation or peace; and finally, Malcuth, the kingdom. Each of the ten has also a divine name, and their divine names, written in the same order, are Ejeh, Jah, Jehovah (pronounced Elohim), Eloah, Elohim, Jehovah (pronounced as usual), Lord Sabaoth, Jehovah Zebaoth, Elchai (the living God), Adonai (the Lord). By these circles our world is surrounded, and, weakened in its passage through them, but able to bring down with it powers that are the character of each, divine light reaches us. These sephiroth, arranged in a peculiar manner, form the Tree of the Cabalists; they are also sometimes arranged in the form of a man, Adam Kadmon, according to the idea of the Neoplatonics that the figure of the world was that of a man's body. In accordance with another view derived from the same school, things in this world were supposed to be gross images of things above. Matter was said by the cabalists to have been formed by the withdrawal of the divine ray, by the emanation of which from the first source it was produced. Everything created was created by an emanation from the source of all, and that which being most distant contains least of the divine essence is capable of gradual purification; so that even the evil spirits will in course of time become holy and pure, and be assimilated to the brightest of the emanations from Or Haensoph. God, it was said, is all in all; everything is part of the divine essence, with a growing, or perceptive, or reflective power, one or all, and by that which has one all may be acquired. A stone may become a plant; a plant, a

[p. 243]

Click to enlarge
NINTH AND TENTH SEPHIROTH.

beast; a beast, a man; a man, an angel; an angel, a creator.

This kind of belief, which was derived also from

[p. 244]

the Alexandrian Platonists led to that spiritual cabalism by which such Christians as Reuchlin and Agrippa profited. It connected them by a strong link with the divine essence, and they, feeling perhaps more distinctly than their neighbors that they were partakers of the divine nature, and might, by a striving after purity of soul and body win their way to a state of spiritual happiness and power, cut themselves off from all communion with the sensuality that had become the scandal of the Church of Rome, and keenly perceived, as they expressed strongly, their sense of the degraded habits of the priests. It was in this way that the Christian Cabalists assisted in the labors of the Reformation.

Little more has to be said about their theory, and that relates to the four Cabalistical Worlds. These were placed in the four spaces between the upper sephiroth. Between the first and second was placed Aziluth, the outflowing, which contained the purest beings, the producers of the rest. Between the second and third sephiroth was the world Briah, or the thrones, containing spirits less pure, but still not material. They were classed into wheels, lightnings, lions, burning spirits, angels, children of God, cherubim. Their prince was called Metatron. The world in the next interspace, called Jezireh, angels, approached more nearly to a material form; and the fourth, Asiah, was made wholly material. From this point density increases till our world is reached. Asiah is the abode of the Klippoth, or material spirits striving against God. They travel through the air, their bodies are of dense air, incorruptible, and they have power to work in the material world. With Catoriel, Adam Belial, Esau, Aganiel, Usiel, Ogiel, Thomiel, Theumiel, for captains, they fight in two armies under their chiefs Zamiel and Lilith. Their enemies are the angels, who contend against

[p. 245]

them with two armies, led by Metatron and Sandalphon. Lilith is the begetter of the powers striving against light.

The nature of man's soul, said Cabalists, is threefold--vegetative, perceptive, intellectual--each embracing each. It emanates from the upper sephiroth, is composed of the pure elements--for the four elements, either in their pure and spiritual or their gross form, enter into all things--is expansive, separates after death, so that the parts return each to its own place, but reunite to praise God on the Sabbaths and new moons. With each soul are sent into the world a guardian and an accusing angel. [**]

Footnotes

^245:* NOTE: Mr. Morley's excellent summary of the Kabbala Denudate may be regarded as fully authentic although he writes from the standpoint of an unbeliever. The Tree of the Cabala (divided into three plates to facilitate comparison), by Dr. Pancoast, gives the more modern rendition of the Cabala. We introduce, on the two following pages, a newly arranged table of the Cabala (Hebrew letters) renderings in English letters, symbols, tarot emblems, etc. This table is the plainest in its terms of all others. Following the table the Cabala is continued under the title of "The Mirific Word."

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE MIRIFIC WORD.

NOW, as the creative light runs round each upper world before coming to ours, it comes to us charged with supernal influence, and such an idea lies at the foundation of cabalistical magic. By what secret to have power over this line of communication with superior worlds it is for practical cabalism to discover.

The secret consisted chiefly in the use of names. God, it was said, gave to all things their names; He could have given no name that was not mystically fit; every such name, therefore, is a word containing divine power, and especially affecting that thing, person,

[p. 246] [p. 247]

  

A NEWLY ARRANGED TABLE OF THE TAROT AND CABALA.

          NUMERICAL
   ORDER.

       HEBREW
   FORM.

       LETTERS
   NAME.

       CORRESPONDING
   ENGLISH.

       NUMERICAL
   VALUE.

       SYMBOLS.

       TAROT
   MEANINGS.

       CLASSES.

     
      1

       '

       Aleph

       A

       1

       Bull

       The Magician

       Mother

     
      2

       b

       Beth

       B, BH, BY

       2

       House High

       Priestess

       Double

     
      3

       g

       Gimel

       G, GH

       3

       Erect Serpent

       The Empress

       Double

     
      4

       d

       Daleth

       D, DH

       4

       Door or Hinge

       The Emperor

       Double

     
      5

       h

       He

       H

       5

       Window, Virginity

       The Hierophant

       Single

     
      6

       w

       Vau

       V, W

       6

       Nail, Hook

       The Lovers

       Single

     
      7

       z

       Zayin

       Z

       7

       Weapon

       The War Chariot

       Single

     
      8

       ch

       Cheth

       CH, KH, HH, H

       8

       Fence

       Justice

       Single

     
      9

       t

       Teth

       T

       9

       Scrotum

       The Hermit

       Single

     
      10

       y

       Yodh

       Y, I, J

       10

       Male Organs

       Wheel of Fate

       Single

     
      11

       k

       Caph

       C, CH, K, KH

       20

       Hollow of Hand, Cube

       Strength

       Double

     
      12

       l

       Lamed

       L

       80

       Ox-goad, Whip

       The Suspended Man

       Single

     
      13

       m

       Mem

       M

       40

       Water

       Death

       Mother

     
      14

       n

       Nun

       N

       50

       Fish

       Temperance

       Single

     
      15

       s

       Samech

       S

       60

       Pillar, Egg

       The Demon

       Single

     
      16

       `

       Ayin

       O, GHH

       70

       Eye

       Lightning-struck tower

       Single

     
      17

       p

       Phe

       P, PH

       80

       Mouth

       The Star

       Double

     
      18

       tz

       Tsadhe

       TS, TZ

       90

       Fish-hook, Dart

       The Moon

       Single

     
      19

       q

       Koph

       K, Q

       100

       Back Scull

       The Sun

       Single

     
      20

       r

       Resh

       R, RH

       200

       Head, Sphere, Circle

       Judgment

       Double

     
      0

       sh

       Shin

       S, SH

       300

       Tooth

       The Zany

       Mother

     
      21

       t

       Tau

       T, TH

       400

       Cross

       The Universe

       Double

     
    

--> Five Hebrew Letters, Caph, Mem, Nun, Phe, and Tsadhe, denote 500, 600, 700, 800, and 900, when final.

[p. 248]

or spirit to which it belongs. The Scripture tells us that there are names written in heaven; why, it was said, should they be written there, if they be useless. Through the knowledge of such divine names, it is affirmed, Moses overcame the sorcerers of Egypt, Elias brought fire from heaven, Daniel closed the mouths of lions. But of all names by which wonders can be wrought, the Mirific Word of Words (here we come to the main thought of Reuchlin's book, and to the central topic of the oratory of Cornelius) was the concealed name of God--the Schem-hammaphoraseh. Whoever knows the true pronunciation of the name Jehovah--the name from which all other divine names in the world spring as the branches from a tree, the name that binds together the sephiroth--whoever has that in his mouth has the world in his mouth. When it is spoken angels are stirred by the wave of sound. It rules all creatures, works all miracles, it commands all the inferior names of deity which are borne by the several angels that in heaven govern the respective nations of the earth. The Jews had a tradition that when David was on the point of fighting with Goliath, Jaschbi, the giant's brother, tossed him up into the air, and held a spear below, that he might fall upon it. But Abishai, when he saw that, pronounced the holy name, and David remained in the air till Jaschbi's spear no longer threatened him. They said, also, that the Mirific name was among the secrets contained in the Holy of Holies, and that when any person having entered that shrine of the temple learnt the word of power, he was roared at as he came out by two brazen lions, or bayed by brazen dogs, until through terror he lost recollection of it. Some Jews accounted also by a fable of this nature for our Savior's miracles. They said that, having been admitted within the Holy of Holies, and having learnt the sacred mystery, he wrote it down upon a

[p. 249]

tablet, cut open his thigh, and having put the tablet in the wound, closed the flesh over it by uttering the name of wonder. As he passed out the roaring lions caused the secret to pass from his mind, but afterwards he had only to cut out the tablet from his thigh, and, as the beginning of miracles, heal instantly the wound in his own flesh by pronouncing the Mirific Word. Such Jewish details were, of course, rejected by the Christians, who accepted the essential principles of the Cabala.

As the name of all power was the hidden name of God, so there were also names of power great, though limited, belonging to the angels and the evil spirits. To discover the names of the spirits, by applying to the Hebrew text of Scripture the symbolical Cabala, was to acquire some of the power they possessed. Thus, it being said of the Sodomites that they were struck with blindness, the Hebrew word for blindness was translated into Chaldee, and the Chaldee word by one of the symbolical processes was made to yield the name of a bad angel, Schabriri, which, being written down, was employed as a charm to cure ophthalmia. A common mode of conjuration with these names of power was by the use of amulets, pieces of paper or parchment on which, for certain purposes, certain names were written. At his first entrance into the world such an amulet, with the names "Senoi Sansenoi, Semongeloph," upon it was slipped round the neck of the new-born child, so that the infant scarcely saw the light before it was collared by the genius of superstition.

Another mode of conjuration consisted in the use, not of names, but of the Psalms of David. Whole volumes were written upon this use of the Psalms. The first of them, written on doeskin, was supposed to help the birth of children; others could, it was thought, be so written as to make those who carried them invisible; others secured favors from princes;

[p. 250]

others extinguished fires. The transcription of a psalm for any such purpose was no trifling work, because, apart from the necessary care in the formation of letters, some having a mystical reason for being larger than others, it was necessary for the copyist, as soon as he had written down one line, to plunge into a bath. Moreover, that the charm might be the work of a pure man, before beginning every new line of his manuscript, it was thought necessary that he should repeat the plunge.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

REUCHLIN THE MYSTIC.

SUCH were the mysteries of the Hebrew Cabala, strangely blending a not unrefined philosophy with basest superstition. It remains for us to form some just opinion of the charm they had for many Christian scholars in the first years of the sixteenth century. Reuchlin, or Capnio, was of such scholars the leader and the type; as such, indeed, he was accepted by the young Cornelius Agrippa. He was the greatest Hebrew scholar of his day, and had become so by his own natural bent. Born at Pfortzheim, of the poorest parents, two and thirty years before Agrippa came into the world, taught Latin at the town school, and winning in his youth a ducal patron by his tunable voice as chorister in the court chapel at Baden, by his quick wit, and his serene, lively, amiable temper, he never afterwards lacked powerful assistance.

The life of Reuchlin is the story of the origin of Greek and Hebrew studies among learned Europeans. He was sent with the Margrave's son, afterwards Bishop of Utrecht, to Paris. The fall of Constantinople, in 1453, had caused fugitive Greeks to betake themselves to many European cities, where

[p. 251]

they sometimes gave instruction in their language. Reuchlin, at Paris, learned Greek from a Spartan, who gave him instruction also in caligraphy and made him so clever a workman with his pen, that he could eke out his means and buy books with money earned as a Greek copyist. He studied Aristotle with the Spartan. Old John Wessel, of Groningen, a disciple of Thomas a Kempis, taught him Hebrew, and invited him to a direct study of the Bible. At the age of twenty he was engaged by publishers to write a Latin dictionary, which he called Breviloquus. At the age of twenty he taught Greek publicly, laying his main stress on a study of the grammar; the good sense he spoke emptied the benches of the sophisters around him, and produced complaints from old-fashioned professors. It was then urged that all the views disclosed in Greek books were essentially opposed to the spirit and belief of Rome. The monks had no commerce with the language; and when they came to a Greek quotation in a book that they were copying, were used to inscribe the formula "Graeca sunt, non leguntur." Reuchlin maintained his ground, at twenty-five wrote a Greek grammar, lectured at Poictiers, and was made licentiate of civil law. His notion of law studies was expressed in a formula that has been applied in other terms to other things: In his first year the young lawyer knows how to decide all causes, in the second begins to be uncertain, in the third acknowledges that he knows nothing, and then first begins to learn. In the last of these stages of progress the licentiate of Poictiers repaired to Tubingen, and practiced as an advocate with such success that he made money and married. At Tubingen, Reuchlin won the confidence of Eberhard of the Beard, became his private secretary and one of his privy-councillors, and went with him to Rome in 1482, his age then being eight and twenty. At Rome he distinguished himself as an orator before the

[p. 252]

[paragraph continues] Pope, and was considered to speak Latin wonderfully well for a German. After his return to Germany, John Reuchlin remained with Eberhard in Stuttgard, became assessor of the Supreme Court at the age of thirty, and a year afterwards was elected proctor for the body of the Dominicans throughout all Germany, which unpaid office he held for nearly thirty years. At the age of thirty-one he received at Tubingen his doctorate, and in the year following, that is to say, in the year of Cornelius Agrippa's birth, he was sent with two others to Frankfort, Cologne, and Aix-la-Chapelle, on the occasion of the coronation of Maximilian as Roman emperor. Then it was that Maximilian first became acquainted with him. Reuchlin had then a house at Stuttgard, and was known as a great cultivator of the learned languages, while he was also high in the favor of his own prince, and in constant request as a practitioner of law. In 1490 he was sent to Rome on another mission, and on his way through Florence enjoyed personal intercourse with Giovanni Pico di Mirandola, the scholar who, although a determined antagonist to the astrologers, was a great friend to cabalism and the introducer of the cabalistic mysteries into the favor of Italian scholars. By him Reuchlin was further stimulated to the love of Hebrew lore. When, two years afterwards, Reuchlin was at Linz on state business with the Emperor Frederic III., it was something, indeed, that the base-born scholar was raised to the dignity of court palatine, but it was more to Reuchlin that the court physician was a learned Jew, Jehiel Loans, who perfected his intimacy with the Hebrew. His aim then was, above all things, first to study the original text of the Old Testament, and secondly to read the writings of the Cabalists. The emperor, whose life was then about to close (he died while Reuchlin was at Linz), saw here another way of gratifying the agreeable and

[p. 253]

kindly scholar, for he not only made Reuchlin a count palatine (his arms were a golden altar, from which smoke arose, with the inscription "Ara Capnionis"), but he also presented to him a very ancient Hebrew Bible, written carefully on parchment, a treasure then worth three hundred gold crowns, which is to be seen still in the library of the Grand Duke of Carlsruhe, where it is regarded as the oldest of its kind in Europe. With the knowledge imparted by Jehiel Loans, and the actual text in which all mysteries lay hidden, Reuchlin went home enriched as much as he had been ennobled. Hebrew writing was at that time very rare, and was to be met with chiefly in the hands of Jews. At Hebrew Reuchlin labored, collecting Hebrew books and works expounding the Cabala, whenever possible; and eventually he gave life in Germany, as Giovanni Pico di Mirandola was giving life in Italy, to the cabalistical philosophy, the great impulse to this German revival being the publication of the book on the Mirific Word. It first appeared at Basle, in the year 1495, the author's age then being forty-one. It was not published at Tubingen till 1514. The book was regarded as a miracle of heavenly wisdom. Philip Beroaldus told of the Pope's enjoyment, and wrote word also to its author that he had caused not only men of letters, but even statesmen and warriors, to betake themselves to studying the mysteries of the Cabala.

The death of Reuchlin's patron, Eberhard the elder, soon after his elevation to the rank of duke in 1495, was followed by a period of misrule in the little state. One of the first acts of Eberhard the younger was to release his favorite, a dissolute priest, named Holzinger, from the prison in which he had been kept by the good counsel of Reuchlin; and for the further discomfiture of the scholar this man was appointed chancellor over the university of

[p. 254]

[paragraph continues] Tubingen. Reuchlin of course resigned. He had been long wanted at Heidelberg, and went there to be cherished by a new patron in the Elector Palatine. He showed, as usual, his lively energy by the establishment of a Greek chair, which the monks pronounced upon the spot to be a heresy; and by venting his wrath against Holzinger in a Latin comedy, denouncing dissolute priests, which he called Sergius, or the Head of the Head. It was written to be acted by the students. A Latin comedy was then a rare thing in the land; and the news that John Reuchlin had written one was noised abroad. Prudent friends counseled him to beware of such unscrupulous and powerful enemies as he would make if he attacked abuses of the priesthood; he submitted to advice, and as he was notoriously answerable for a comedy, and gossip must be satisfied, he suddenly composed a substitute for that first written. When, therefore, the day of the performance came, it was found that the Greek professor had composed a comedy against abuses in his own profession; it was a castigation of dishonest advocates. Scenica Progymnastica the piece was called.

After two years of misrule Eberhard the younger took its consequences; he was then deposed, and Holzinger, the monk, sent back to prison. "When the bricks are doubled, Moses comes," said Reuchlin, and returned to his old post at Tubingen. Hitherto his life of study had not been unprofitable, nor, much benefit as he received through patronage, was it a life wanting independence. "Whatever," he says, "I spent in learning, I acquired by teaching."

An anecdote of this good-humored scholar may be here interpolated, which displays his character in half a dozen points of view. He was detained once in an inn when it was raining very heavily, and of course had his book with him. The rain had driven into the common room a large number of country

[p. 255]

people, who were making a great noise. To quiet them Reuchlin called for a piece of chalk, and drew with it a circle on the table before which he sat. Within the circle he then drew a cross, and also within it, on the right side of the cross, he placed with great solemnity a cup of water, on the left he stuck a knife upright. Then placing a book--doubtless a Hebrew one--within the mysterious circle, he began to read, and the rustics who had gathered round him, with their mouths agape, patiently waited for the consequence of all this conjuration. The result was that Reuchlin finished comfortably the chapter he was reading without being distressed even by a whisper of disturbance.

In the year 1502 Reuchlin was elected to the post of general judge of alliance under the terms of the Suabian league. His office was to adjudicate in all matters of dispute among confederates and vassals, concerning the interests of the emperor as Archduke of Austria, the electors and princes. There was a second judge for prelates, counts, and nobles, a third for imperial cities. This post he held during eleven years; he was holding it, therefore, at the time when the young Cornelius Agrippa undertook to comment publicly at Dole upon his book concerning the Mirific Word, Reuchlin then being fifty-five years old, and at the summit of his fame, high, also, in the good esteem of Maximilian. Three years before this date, notwithstanding the great mass of legal business entailed on him by his judicial office, Reuchlin had, to the great help of all students, published a volume of the Rudiments of Hebrew, which included both a grammar and a dictionary. This book, he wrote, "cost me the greatest trouble, and a large part of my fortune." Cornelius no doubt had learnt his Hebrew by the help of it, and was already deep in studies which a few years afterwards brought the monks of Cologne into array against Reuchlin himself, their

[p. 256]

hostility somewhat embittered by an inkling of the Latin comedy that was not to be quite suppressed. Cornelius, however, was the first to feel the power of such enemies. By the Epistolae Obscurorum Virorum the monks were destined to come off much worsted from their battle against Reuchlin and the scholars who defended his fair name. Of their fortune in the battle fought against Cornelius Agrippa it is one part of this history to tell.

Reuchlin wrote at a later period (1517) a book upon the cabalistic art. If it is written God created heaven and earth, he interpreted that to mean spirit and matter, the spirit consisting of the angels and ministers by whom the ways of man are influenced. Magic, he said, dealt with evil spirits, but the true Cabala only with the good. He believed in astrology; and so, indeed, did Luther and Melancthon; Giovanni Pico di Mirandola at Florence, while adopting the Cabala, was very singular in his hostility to a belief in influences of the stars. His own faith in cabalism Reuchlin enforced thus: God, out of love to his people, has revealed the hidden mysteries to some of them, and these could find in the dead letters the living spirit. For Scripture consists of single letters, visible signs, which stand in a certain connection with the angels, as celestial and spiritual emanations from God. By the pronunciation of the one, the others also are affected; but with a true Cabalist, who penetrates the whole connection of the earthly with the heavenly, these signs, rightly placed in connection with each other, are a way of putting him into immediate union with the spirits, who through that are bound to satisfy his wishes.

In his book called Capnio, or the Mirific Word, expounded at Dole by Cornelius Agrippa, Reuchlin placed the Christian system in the center of old heathen philosophies, considering many of the doctrines of Pythagoras and Plato as having been taken

[p. 257]

from, not introduced into, the wisdom of the Cabalists. The argument is stated in the form of dialogue, which is immediately preceded by a summary of its intention that may very well suffice here for a summary of its contents: "Receive, then, in this book the argument on the Mirific Word of three philosophers, whom I have feigned to be holding such dispute among themselves as the controversies proper to their sects would occasion, as to the best elucidation of the hidden properties of sacred names. Out of which, great as they are in number and importance, occasion will at last be the more easily afforded for selecting one name that is above all names supremely mirific and beatific. And this you may know the whole matter in brief. Sidonius, at first ascribed to the school of Epicurus, but found afterwards, nullius jurare in verba magistri, an unfettered philosopher, travels about to satisfy his thirst for knowledge, and after many experiences enters Suabia, where he meets in the town of Pfortzheim" (Reuchlin's birthplace) "two philosophers--Baruch, a Jew, and Capnio" (Reuchlin himself), "a Christian, with whom he disserts upon many systems, and presently upon the knowledge itself of divine and human things, upon opinion, faith, miracles, the powers of words and figures, secret operations, and the mysteries of seals. In this way question arises concerning the sacred names and consecrated characters of all nations which have anything excellent in their philosophy, or not unworthy in their ceremonies; an enumeration of symbols is made by each speaker zealously on behalf of the rites cherished in his sect, until at last Capnio, in the third book, collects out of all that is holy one name, Jehosua, in which is gathered up the virtue and power of all sacred things, and which is eternally, supremely blessed."

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 258]

  

AGRIPPA EXPOUNDS REUCHLIN.

HERE was a vast theme for the oratory of a youth of twenty-three, and it was one also that enabled him to display the whole range of his learning. The newly recovered treasures of Greek literature; the study of Plato, that had lately been revived by Marsilius Ficinus in Italy; the study of Aristotle, urged and helped in France by Faber Stapulensis (d'Etapies), appeared to bring the fullest confirmation of the principles of the Cabala to men ignorant, as all were then, of the Greek source of more than half the later mysticism of the Hebrews, which attributed to itself an origin so ancient. That he had acquired so early in his life Hebrew and Greek lore, that he was deeply read in studies which were admired from afar only by so many scholars of his day, and, thus prepared, that he discussed mysteries about which men in all ages feel instinctive curiosity, and men in that age reasoned eagerly, would alone account sufficiently for the attention paid to the young German by the university of Dole. Moreover, while fulfilling his own private purpose, he appeared also to the loyalty of the Burgundians, by delivering his orations to all corners , for the honor of the Princess Margaret, their ruler, and opening them with her panegyric. The young orator being also remarkable for an effective manner of delivery, the grave and learned men who came to his prelections honored him by diligent attendance. The exposition was made from the pulpit of the gymnasium, before the parliament and magistracy of Dole, the professors and the readers of the university. Simon Vernet, vice-chancellor of the university, dean of the church, and doctor in each faculty, was not once absent. The worthy vice-chancellor, or dean, appears,

[p. 259]

indeed, to have taken an especial interest in the fame of their visitor. He had himself a taste for public declamation, and to a friend who was urging on Cornelius that he should seek durable fame rather by written than by spoken words, expressed a contrary desire on his behalf. He preferred orator to author. When Cornelius had complied with the request of another friend, who wished to translate into the vernacular his panegyric upon Margaret, praising his oratory for the perfect fitness of each word employed in it, and its complete freedom from verbiage, and desiring that through a translation the illustrious princess might be informed how famously Cornelius had spoken in her honor, and so be the more disposed to reward him with her favor, the translation came back with a note, saying that the vice-chancellor had been its censor and corrector. Vernet was diligent, in fact, on the young scholar's behalf, and his interests were seconded by the Archbishop of Besancon. Not a syllable was whispered about heresy. The friend who urged Cornelius, in spite of the dean's contrary counsel, to become an author, gave a familiar example from his own experience of the vanity of spoken words. He had declaimed publicly from memory, and without one hitch, upwards of two thousand two hundred verses of his own composition, yet, because they were not printed, earned only a temporary local fame. Of the value of the written word evidence very soon afterwards was enclosed to Cornelius by that other friend who had translated his oration. Zealous to do good service, he had caused a copy of the panegyric to proceed, by way of Lyons, on the road to royal notice, and delighted the aspirant after patronage by enclosing to him flatteries from John Perreal, a royal chamberlain, probably the same learned Frenchman who became known twenty or

[p. 260]

more years later as Johannis Perellus, translated into Latin Gaza on the Attic Months, and wrote a book about the Epacts of the Moon.

To the youth flushed with triumph as a scholar there came also reminders of the military life he was so ready to forsake. A correspondent sent him news of a defeat of the Venetians by the French, near Agnadello, the first fruits of the discreditable league of Cambray. The French, it will be remembered, won this victory while Maximilian, their new ally, was still perplexed by the dissatisfaction of his subjects evidenced during the late diet at Worms. Agrippa's friend wished to have in return for his news any knowledge that his relation to the emperor might give him of intentions that might be disclosed at an approaching diet. His real intentions were to break a pledge by marching against the Venetians; his fate, to retire ere long, defeated, from before the walls of Padua. He was renewing with his enemy, the King of France, the treaty of Cambray, and sending a messenger to Spire to burn the book in which he had recorded all the injuries and insults suffered by his family, or empire, at the hands of France. Cornelius cared little for France or Padua; his hopes as a scholar were with Margaret at Ghent, though she, too, being another member of the league, could have employed him as a soldier. Other hopes, as a man, he was directing towards a younger and a fairer mistress. He desired not only to prosper but to marry.

The little university of Dole favored the young man heartily. His prelections had excited great attention, and procured for him the admiration of the neighborhood. From the university they won for him at once the degree of doctor of divinity, together with a stipend.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 261]

  

THE NOBILITY OF WOMAN.

ANGLING for private patronage was in the sixteenth century correlative to the habit not very uncommon in these days of using baits to catch the public favor. Men who once lived by the help of princes now owe their support to the whole people, and the pains bestowed upon the cultivation of the good-will of the people in these days are neither less nor more to be reprehended than the pains taken by scholars of past time to procure a safe means of subsistence through the good-will of a prince. It may be said, with a fair approximation to the truth, that as much as a man may do now, with the intention of deserving popularity, and not discredit himself in his own eyes or those of the great number of his neighbors, he might have done with as little discredit in the sixteenth century with the design of earning favor from the great. We have seen how, in the case of Reuchlin, a poor chorister was fostered at first by small princes of Germany, afterwards even by the emperor, and enabled to develop into a great Hebrew scholar, when one patron died having another ready to befriend him, and enjoying dignity and wealth with a complete sense of independence. That age was, in fact, as far removed as this is from the transition period, during which the patronage of letters by the great, extinct as a necessity, survived as a tradition, and the system that had once been vigorous and noble became imbecile and base.

Nobody at Dole was ignorant that the design of Cornelius Agrippa was to earn the patronage of Margaret, a liberal encourager of learning. Nobody considered it dishonorable to seek this by showing that it was deserved. The prevalent feeling was so far removed from any such impression, that from many quarters the young man was urged to magnify his claim on Margaret's attention by devoting not only

[p. 262]

the orations, but also some piece of writing to her honor. Even the cordial vice-chancellor, desirous to advance the interests of the young orator, set aside his predilection for the spoken word, and was among the foremost in admonishing Cornelius to write. Not slow to profit by advice that ran the same course with his inclinations, the new doctor of divinity set himself to display his powers as a theologian in the true manner of the day, and with theological acuteness to combine a courtier's tact, by dedicating to the most conspicuous example of his argument a treatise on the Nobility and Pre-excellence of the Female Sex. As I have hinted, too, there was a private example of it known to his own heart.

Angling for patronage shown from another point of view!--mean arts used by mean spirits to compel the favor of the rich and base. But to secure the favor of the rich and noble the arts used were not to be accounted mean.

Now let us trace in a brief summary the argument for the Nobility of the Female Sex and the Superiority of Woman over Man, written at Dole, in the year 1509, by a doctor of divinity, aged twenty-three. He sets out with the declaration that when man was created male and female, difference was made in the flesh, not in the soul. He quotes Scripture to show that after the corruption of our bodies difference of sex will disappear, and that we shall all be like angels in the resurrection. As to the soul, then, man and woman are alike; but as to everything else the woman is the better part of the creation.

In the first place, woman being made better than man, received the better name. Man was called Adam, which means Earth; woman Eva, which is by interpretation Life. By as much as life excels earth woman therefore excels man. And this, it is urged, must not be thought trivial reasoning, because the

[p. 263]

maker of those creatures knew what they were before he named them, and was One who could not err in properly describing each. We know, and the Roman laws testify, that ancient names were always consonant with the things they represented, and names have been held always to be of great moment by theologians and jurisconsults. It is written thus of Nabal: "As his name is, so is he; Nabal is his name, and folly is with him." (1 Samuel, xxv., 25.) Saint Paul, also, in his Epistle to the Hebrews, speaks of his Lord and Master, as "made so much better than the angels, as he hath obtained a more excellent name than they." (Heb., i., 4.) The reader's memory will at once supply the next passage of Scripture quoted, I do not like to cite it. Agrippa then dilates, as well he may, on the immense importance of words, according to the practice of all jurists, he tells how Cyprian argued against the Jews that Adam's name was derived from the initials of the Greek words meaning east, west, north, and south, because his flesh was made out of the earth, though that derivation was at variance with Moses, who put only three letters in the Hebrew name. For this, however, adds Agrippa, Cyprian was not to blame, since, like many saints and expounders of the sacred text, he had not learnt the Hebrew language.

Upon the word Eva it is further maintained that it suggests comparison with the mystic symbols of the Cabalists, the name of the woman having affinity with the ineffable Tetragrammaton, the most sacred name of the Divinity; while that of the man differed entirely from it. All these considerations, however, Agrippa consents to pass over, as matters read by few and understood by fewer. The pre-eminence of the woman can be proved out of her constitution, her gifts, and her merits.

The nature of woman is discussed, however, from the theologian's point of view. Things were created

[p. 264]

in the order of their rank. First, indeed, incorruptible soul, then incorruptible matter, but afterwards, out of that matter, more or less corruptible things, beginning with the meanest. First minerals, then herbs, and shrubs, and trees, then zoophytes, then brutes in their order, reptiles first, afterwards fishes, birds, quadrupeds. Lastly, two human beings, but of these first the male, and finally the female, in which the heavens and the earth and their whole adornment were perfected. The divine rest followed, because the work was consummated, nothing greater was conceived; the woman was thus left the most perfect and the noblest of the creatures upon earth, as a queen placed in the court that had been previously prepared for her. Rightly, therefore, do all beings round about her pay to this queen homage of reverence and love.

The difference between the woman and the man is yet more strongly marked, says the deeply read theologian, because the man was made like the brutes in open land outside the gates of paradise, and made wholly of clay, but the woman was made afterwards in paradise itself; she was the one  creation. Presently there follow Scripture arguments to show that the place of their birth was a sign to men of honor or dishonor. The woman, too, was not made of clay, but from an influx of celestial matter; since there went into her composition nothing terrestrial except only one of Adam's ribs, and that was not gross clay, but clay that had been already purified and kindled with the breath of life.

The theological demonstrations Cornelius next confirms by the evidence of some natural facts equally cogent and trustworthy, which were held in that day by many wise men to be equally true. It is because she is made of purer matter that a woman, from whatever height she may look down, never turns .giddy, and her eyes never have mist before

[p. 265]

them like the eyes of men. Moreover, if a woman and man tumble together into water, far away from all external help, the woman floats long upon the surface, but the man soon sinks to the bottom. Is there not also the divine light shining through the body of the woman, by which she is made often to seem a miracle of beauty Then follows a clever inventory of all a woman's charms of person, written with due reserve, which might be here translated, if the English language had the terseness of the Latin. In short, woman is the sum of all earth's beauty, and it proved that her beauty has sometimes inspired even angels and demons with a desperate and fatal love. Then follows a chain of Scripture texts honoring female beauty, which all lead up to the twenty thousand virgins, solemnly celebrated by the church, and the admiration of the beauty of the Virgin Mary by the Sun and Moon.

Texts follow that must be omitted, and then the argument takes anatomical grounds of the most ingenious character, and shows how every difference of structure between the man and the woman gives to woman the advantage due to her superior delicacy. Even after death nature respects her inherent modesty, for a drowned woman floats on her face, and a drowned man upon his back. The noblest part of a human being is the head; but the man's head is liable to baldness, woman is never seen bald. The man's face is often made so filthy by a most odious beard, and so covered with sordid hairs, that it is scarcely to be distinguished from the face of a wild beast; in woman, on the other hand, the face always remains pure and decent. For this reason women were, by the laws of the twelve tables, forbidden to rub their cheeks lest hair should grow and obscure their blushing modesty. But the most evident proof of the innate purity of the female sex is, that a woman having once washed is clean, and if she wash in

[p. 266]

second water will not soil it; but that a man is never clean, though he should wash in ten successive waters, he will cloud and infect them all.

Some other marvellous peculiarities I must omit, and pass to Agrippa's appreciation of the woman's predominance in the possession of the gift of speech, the most excellent of human faculties, which Hermes Trismegistus thought equal to immortality in value, and Hesiod pronounced the best of human treasures. Man, too, receives this gift from woman, from his mother or his nurse; and it is a gift bestowed upon woman herself with such liberality that the world has scarcely seen a woman who was mute. Is it not fit that women should excel men in that faculty, wherein men themselves chiefly excel the brutes?

The argument again becomes an edifice of Scripture text, and it is well to show the nature of it. though we may shrink from the misuse of sacred words, because it is well thoroughly to understand how Scripture was habitually used by professed theologians in the sixteenth century, and from this light example to derive a grave lesson, perhaps, that may be, even to the people of the nineteenth century, not wholly useless.

Solomon's texts on the surpassing excellence of a good woman of course are cited, and a cabalistic hint is given of the efficacy of the letter H, which Abram took away from his wife Sarah, and put into the middle of his own name, after he had been blessed through her. Benediction has come always by woman, law by man. We have all sinned in Adam, not in Eve; original sin we inherit only from the father of our race. The fruit of the tree of knowledge was forbidden to man only, before woman was made; woman received no injunction, she was created free. She was not blamed, therefore, for eating, but for causing sin in her husband by giving him to eat; and she did that not of her own will, but because the

[p. 267]

devil tempted her. He chose her as the object of temptation, as St. Bernard says, because he saw with envy that she was the most perfect of creatures. She erred in ignorance because she was deceived; the man sinned knowingly. Therefore our Lord made atonement in the figure of the sex that had sinned, and also for more complete humiliation came in the form of a man, not that of a woman, which is nobler and sublimer. He humbled himself as man, but overcame as a descendant of the woman; for the seed of the woman, it was said, not the seed of man, should bruise the serpent's head. He would not, therefore, be born of a man; woman alone was judged worthy to be the earthly parent of the Deity. Risen again, he appeared first to woman. Men forsook him, women never. No persecution, heresy, or error in the Church ever began with the female sex. They were men who betrayed, sold, bought, accused, condemned, mocked, crucified the Lord. Peter denied him, his disciples left him. Women were at the foot of the cross, women were at the sepulchre. Even Pilate's wife, who was a heathen, made more effort to save Jesus than any man among believers. Finally, do not almost all theologians assert that the Church is maintained by the Virgin Mary?

Aristotle may say that of all animals the males are stronger and wiser than the females, but St. Paul writes that weak things have been chosen to confound the strong. Adam was sublimely endowed, but woman humbled him; Samson was strong, but woman made him captive; Lot was chaste, but woman seduced him; David was religious, but woman disturbed his piety; Solomon was wise, but woman deceived him; Job was patient, and was robbed by the devil of fortune and family; ulcerated, grieved, oppressed, nothing provoked him to anger till a woman did it, therein proving herself stronger than the devil. Peter was fervent in faith, but woman forced

[p. 268]

him to deny his lord. Somebody may remark that all these illustrations tend to woman's shame; not to her glory. Woman, however, may reply to man as Innocent III. wrote to some cardinal, "If one of us is to be confounded, I prefer that it be you." Civil law allows a woman to consult her own gain to an-other's hurt; and does not Scripture itself often extol and bless the evil deeds of the woman more than the good deeds of the man? Is not Rachel praised who deceived her fathers Rebecca, because she obtained fraudulently Jacob's benediction? Is not the deceit of Rahab imputed to her as justice? Was not Jael blessed among women for a treacherous and cruel deed? What could be more iniquitous than the counsel of Judith? what more cruel than her wiles? what worse than her perfidy? Yet for this she is blessed, lauded, and extolled in Scripture, and the woman's iniquity is reputed better than the goodness of the man. Was not Cain's a good work when he offered his best fruits in sacrifice and was reproved for it? Did not Esau well when he hunted to get venison for his old father, and in the meantime was defrauded of his birthright, and incurred the divine hate? Other examples are adduced, and robust scholars, ingenious theologians, are defied to find an equal amount of evidence in support of the contrary thesis, that the iniquity of the man is better than the goodness of the woman. Such a thesis, says Agrippa, could not be defended.

From this point to the end Agrippa's treatise consists of a mass of illustrations from profane and Scripture history, classified roughly. Some are from natural history. The queen of all birds, he says, is the eagle, always of the female sex, for no male eagles have been found. The phoenix is a female always. On the other hand, the most pestilent of serpents, called the basilisk, exists only as a male; it is impossible for it to hatch a female.

[p. 269]

All evil things began with men, and few or none with woman. We die in the seed of Adam and live in the seed of Eve. The beginning of envy, the first homicide, the first parricide, the first despair of divine mercy was with man; Lamech was the first bigamist, Noah was the first drunkard, Nimrod the first tyrant, and so forth. Men were the first to league themselves with demons and discover profane hearts. Men have been incontinent, and had, in innumerable instances, to each man many wives at once; but women have been continent, each content with a single husband, except only Bathsheba. Many women are then cited as illustrations of their sex in this respect, or for their filial piety, including Abigail, Lucretia, Cato's wife, and the mother of the Gracchi, the vestal Claudia, Iphigenia. If any one opposes to such women the wives of Zoilus, Samson, Jason, Deiphobus, and Agamemnon, it may be answered that these have been unjustly accused, that no good man ever had a bad wife. Only bad husbands get bad wives, or if they get a good one, are sometimes able to corrupt her excellence. If women made the laws, and wrote the histories and tragedies, could they not justly crowd them with testimony to the wickedness of men? Our prisons are full of men, and slain men cumber the earth everywhere, but women are the beginners of all liberal arts, of virtue and beneficence. Therefore the arts and virtues commonly have feminine names. Even the corners of the world receive their names from women--the nymph Asia; Europe, the daughter of Agenior; Lybia, the daughter of Epaphus, who is called also Aphrica.

Illustrations follow of the pre-eminence of woman in good gifts, and it is urged that Abraham, who by his faith was accounted just, was placed in subjection to Sarah his wife, and was told, "In all that Sarah hath said unto thee, harken unto her voice." (Gen., xxi., 12.)

[p. 270]

There follows a host of other illustrations of the excellence of women, drawn from all sources; among others, illustrations of her eminence in learning. "And," adds Agrippa, "were not women now forbidden to be literary, we should at this day have most celebrated women, whose wit would surpass that of men. What is to be said upon this head, what even by nature women seem to be born easily superior to practiced students in all faculties? Do not the grammarians entitle themselves masters of right speaking? Yet we learn this far better from our nurses and our mothers than from the grammarians. For that reason Plato and Quintilian so solicitously urged a careful choice of children's nurses, that the children's language might be formed on the best model. Are not the poets in the invention of their whims and fables, the dialecticians in their contentious garrulity, surpassed by women? Was ever orator so good or so successful, that a courtesan could not excel his powers of persuasion? What arithmetician by false calculation would know how to cheat a woman in the payment of a debt? What musician equals her in song and in amenity of voice 3 Are not philosophers, mathematicians, and astrologers often inferior to country women in their divinations and predictions, and does not the old nurse very often beat the doctor?" Socrates himself, the wisest of men, did not disdain to receive knowledge from Aspasia, nor did Apollo the theologian despise the teaching of Priscilla.

Then follows a fresh string of illustrations by which we are brought to a contemplation of the necessity of women for the perpetuation of any state, and the cessation of the human race that may be consequent on her withdrawal. Through more examples we are brought then to consider the honor and precedence accorded by law and usage to the female sex. Man makes way for woman on the public road, and

[p. 271]

yields to her in society the highest places. Purple and fine linen, gold and jewels are conceded as the fit adornments of her noble person, and from the sumptuary laws of the later emperors women were excepted. Illustrations follow of the dignity and privileges of the wife, and of the immunities accorded to her by the law. Reference is made to ancient writers, who tell how, among the Getulians, the Bactrians, and others, men were the softer sex, and sat at home while women labored in the fields, built houses, transacted business, rode abroad, and went out to do battle. Among the Cantabrians men brought dowries to their wives, brothers were given in marriage by their sisters, and the daughters of a household were the heirs. Among the Scythians, Thracians, and Gauls, women possessed their rights, but among us, said Agrippa, "the tyranny of men prevailing over divine right and the laws of nature, slays by law the liberty of woman, abolishes it by use and custom, extinguishes it by education. For the woman, as soon as she is born, is from her earliest years detained at home in idleness, and as if destitute of capacity for higher occupations, is permitted to conceive of nothing beyond needle and thread. Then when she has attained years of puberty she is delivered over to the jealous empire of a man, or shut up for ever in a shop of vestals. The law also forbids her to fill public offices. No prudence entitles her to plead in open court." A list follows of the chief disabilities of women, "who are treated by the men as conquered by the conquerors, not by any divine necessity, for any reason, but according to custom, education, fortune, and the tyrant's opportunity."

A few leading objections are then answered. Eve was indeed made subject to man after the fall, but that curse was removed when man was saved. Paul says that "wives are to be subject to their husbands,

[p. 272]

and women to be silent in the church," but he spoke of temporal church discipline, and did not utter a divine law, since "in Christ there is neither male nor female, but a new creature." We are again reminded of the text subjecting Abraham to Sarah, and the treatise closes then with a short recapitulation of its heads. "We have shown," Agrippa says, "the pre-eminence of the female sex by its name, its order and place of creation, the material of which it was created, and the dignity that was given to woman over man by God, then by religion, by nature, by human laws, by various authority, by reason, and have demonstrated all this by promiscuous examples. Yet we have not said so many things but that we have left more still to be said, because I came to the writings of this not moved by ambition, or for the sake of bringing myself praise, but for the sake of duty and truth, lest, like a sacrilegious person, I might seem, if I were silent, by an impious taciturnity (and as it were a burying of my talent) to refuse the praises due to so devout a sex. So that if any one more curious than I am should discover any argument which he thinks requisite to be added to this work, let him expect to have his position not contested by me, but attested, in as far as he is able to carry on this good work of mine with his own genius and learning. And that this work itself may not become too large a volume, here let it end."

Such was the treatise written by Cornelius at Dole for the more perfect propitiation of the Princess Margaret. Many years  before it was printed and presented to the princess; doubtless, however, the youth read the manuscript to his betrothed very soon after it was written. Towards the close of the year a friend in Cologne wrote to Agrippa of the impatience of his parents for their son's return, but at the close of November another friend in Cologne, Theodoric, Bishop of Cyrene, asking as an especial

[p. 273]

favor for his views upon judicial astrology so hotly opposed by Pico di Mirandola, says that his expression on the subject had appeared to him ambiguous when they conversed together. Probably he had then been offering to the embrace of his parents not a son only, but a son and daughter, for it is said to have been in the year 1509, when all was honor for him in the present, all hope in the future, that Cornelius von Nettesheim married Jane Louisa Tyssie, of Geneva, a maiden equal to him in rank, remarkable for beauty, and yet more remarkable for her aspirations and her worth. She entered with her whole soul into the spirit of her husband's life, rejoiced in his ambition, and knew how to hold high converse with his friends. The marriage was in every respect a happy one; there was a world of gentleness and loving kindness in Agrippa's heart. We shall have revelation of it as the narrative proceeds. The tenderness of his nature mingles strangely, sadly, with his restlessness, his self-reliance, and his pride,

So, full of hope and happiness, at the age of twenty-three, he took to wife a maiden who could love him for his kindliness, and reverence him for his power. He was no needy adventurer, but the son of a noble house, who was beginning, as it seemed, the achievement of the highest honors. He was surrounded by admirers, already a doctor of divinity, hereafter to attain he knew not what. Fostered by Maximilian's daughter, what might not his intellect achieve?

Poor youth, even in that year of hope the blight was already settling on his life! While he was writing praise of womanhood at Dole to win the smiles of Margaret, Catilinet, a Franciscan friar, who had been at the adjacent town of Gray when Reuchlin was expounded, mediated cruel vengeance on the down-chinned scholar. At Ghent, as preacher before the Regent of the Netherlands and all her court,

[p. 274]

Click to enlarge
System of the Interior or Empyrean Heaven showing the fall of Lucifer

[paragraph continues] Catilinet was to deliver in the Easter following the Quadragesimal Discourses. Against the impious Cabalist he was preparing to arouse the wrath of

[p. 275]

[paragraph continues] Margaret during those same days which were spent by the young student in pleasant effort to deserve her kindness.

Now it was that Agrippa wrote his book on Magic.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

ORDER OF THE EMPYREAN HEAVEN.

THERE is a God, all-powerful, all-intelligent and supremely perfect; eternal and infinite; omnipotent and omniscient; who endures from eternity to eternity, and is present from infinity to infinity.

But though, from the nature and perfections of the Deity, he is invisibly present in all places and nothing happens without his knowledge and permission; yet it is expressly revealed in Scripture, and admitted by all wise and intelligent authors, that he is visibly present with the angels and spirits, and blessed souls of the departed, in those mansions of bliss called Heaven. There he is pleased to afford a nearer and more immediate view of himself, and a more sensible manifestation of his glory, and a more adequate perception of his attributes, than can be seen or felt in any other parts of the universe; which place, for the sake of pre-eminent distinction, and as being the seat and center, from whence all things flow and have their beginning, life, light, power, and motion, is called the interior or Empyrean Heaven.

The position and order of this interior heaven, or center of the Divinity, has been variously described, and its locality somewhat disputed among the learned; but all agree as to the certainty of its existence. Hermes Trismegistus defines heaven to be an intellectual sphere, whose center is everywhere, and circumference nowhere, but by this he meant no

[p. 276]

more than to affirm, what we have done above, that God is everywhere, and at all times, from infinity to infinity, that is to say, without limitation, bounds, or circumference. Plato speaks of this internal heaven in terms which bear so strict a resemblance with the books of Revelation, and in so elevated and magnificent a style, that it is apparent the heathen philosophers, notwithstanding their worshiping demi or false gods, possessed an unshaken confidence in one omnipotent, supreme, overruling power, whose throne was the center of all things, and the abode of angels and blessed spirits.

To describe this interior heaven, in terms adequate to its magnificence and glory, is utterly impossible. The utmost we can do is to collect, from inspired writers, and from the words of Revelation, assisted by occult philosophy, and a due knowledge of the celestial spheres, that order and position of it, which reason and the divine lights we have, bring nearest to the truth. That God must be strictly and literally the center from whence all ideas of the Divine Mind flow, as rays in every direction, through all spheres and through all bodies, cannot admit of a doubt. That the inner circumference of this center is surrounded, filled or formed, by arrangements of the three hierarchies of angels, is also consonant to reason and Scripture, and forms what may be termed the entrance or inner gate of the empyrean heaven, through which no spirit can pass without their knowledge and permission, and within which we must suppose the vast expanse or mansions of the Godhead, and glory of the Trinity, to be. This is strictly conformable to the idea of all the prophets and evangelical writers. From this primary circle, or gate of heaven, Lucifer, the grand Apostate, as Milton finely describes it, was hurled into the bottomless abyss; whose office, as one of the highest orders of angels, having placed him near the eternal throne, he became

[p. 277]

competitor for dominion and power with God himself.

The circles next surrounding the hierarchies, are

Click to enlarge
Symbol of the Universal Spirit of Nature

composed of the ministering angels and spirits and messengers of the Deity. In positions answering to the ideas of the holy Trinity, and intersecting all

[p. 278]

orders of angels, are seated, in fullness of glory and splendor, those superior angels, or intelligent spirits, who answer to the divine attributes of God, and are the pure essences or stream through which the will or fiat of the Godhead is communicated to the angels and spirits, and instantaneously conducted to the Anima Mundi. Round the whole, as an atmosphere round a planet, the Anima Mundi, or universal Spirit of Nature, is placed; which, receiving the impressions or ideas of the Divine Mind, conducts them onward, to the remotest parts of the universe; to infinity itself; to, and upon, and through, all bodies, and to all God's works. This Anima Mundi is therefore what we understand of Nature, of Providence, of the presence of God, and the fountain or seat of all second causes, being, as it were, the Eye of God, or medium between God and all created things. Next to the Anima Mundi, is that vast region or expanse, called the ethereal heaven, or firmament, wherein the fixed stars, planets, and comets, are disposed; and wherein the celestial bodies, and the comets, move freely in all directions, and towards all parts of the heavens.

To illustrate what has been stated above a plate is here inserted of the Interior Heaven, with the different orders of the Spirits and Essences of the Divine Mind, distinguished by their proper names and characters, in the original Hebrew and Iberian text, as pointed out in the manuscripts of ancient and learned philosophers. This plate shows in what manner the rays or beams of Divine Providence pass from the center or seat of the Godhead, through all the different orders of angels and spirits, to the Anima Mundi, and from thence to all the celestial bodies planets, and stars; to our earth, and to the remotest parts of infinite space, constituting what is termed celestial influx, or that faculty in nature by

[p. 279]

which the quality and temperature of one body is communicated to another.

Theologists have divided angels into different ranks or classes, which they term Hierarchies, a word signifying to rule in holy things. Ancient authors give nine orders of these celestial spirits--Cherubim, Seraphim, Thrones, Dominions, Principalities, Powers, Virtues, Angels, and Archangels--and these they class into Three Hierarchies, appointing them their respective offices in the performance of the word and will of God.

The rabbis and cabalistical writers have defined one rank of angels--or the Intelligences--as superior to all the foregoing nine orders of spirits, and which answer to and are contained in the ten distinguishing names of God, and are the pure essences of the Supreme Spirit, or the Divine Diffusion through which the mirific Word and Will are communicated to the angels and blessed spirits, and through which providence extends to the care and protection of Nature.

The first of these divine essences is Jehovah, and is peculiarly attributed to God the Father, being the pure and simple essence of the Supreme Divinity, flowing through Hajoth Hakados, to the angel Metratton, and to the ministering spirit Reschith Hagalalim, who guides the Primum Mobile, and bestows the gift of being upon all things. To this spirit is allotted the office of bringing the souls of the faithful departed into heaven; and by him God spake to Moses.

The second is Jah, and is attributed to the Person of the Messiah, whose power and influence descend through the angel Masleh into the sphere of the celestial Zodiac. This is the Spirit of Nature, the Soul of the World, or the Omnific Word which actuated the chaos and divided the unwrought matters into three

[p. 280]

portions: Of the first and most essential part was the Spiritual World composed; of the second was made the visible heavens or the Celestial World; and of the third part was formed the Terrestrial World, out of which was drawn the elemental quintessence, or first matter of all things, which produced the four elements of Fire, Water, Air, and Earth, and all the creatures which inhabit them, by the agency of a particular spirit called Raziel, who was the ruler of Adam.

The third is Ehjeh, and is attributed to the Holy Spirit, whose divine light is received by the angel Sabbathi, and communicated from him through the sphere of Saturn. This is the principium generationis, the beginning of the ways of God, or the manifestations of the Father and the Son's light in the supernatural generation. And from hence flow down all living souls, entering the inanimate body, and giving form to unsettled matter.

The fourth is El, through the light of whom flows grace, goodness, mercy, piety, and munificence, to the angel Zadkiel, and, thence, passing through the. sphere of Jupiter, fashioneth the images of all bodies, bestowing clemency, benevolence, and justice on all.

The fifth is Elohi, the upholder of the sword, and left hand of God, whose influence penetrates the angel Geburah, and thence descends through the sphere of Mars, giving fortitude in war and affliction.

The sixth is Tsebaoth, who bestoweth his mighty power through the angel Raphael into the sphere of the Sun, giving motion, heat, and brightness to it, and thence producing metals.

The seventh is Elion, who rules the angel Michael, and descends through the sphere of Mercury, giving benignity, motion, intelligence, and eloquence.

The eighth is Adonai, whose influence is received by the angel Haniel, and communicated through the

[p. 281]

sphere of Venus, giving zeal, fervency, and righteousness of heart, and producing vegetables.

The ninth is Shaddai, whose influence is conveyed by cherubim to the angel Gabriel, and falls into the sphere of the Moon, causing increase and decrease of all things, like unto the tides of the sea, and governing the genii and natural protectors of man.

The tenth is Elohim, who extends his beneficence to the angel Jesodoth, into the sphere of the Earth, and dispenseth knowledge, understanding, and wisdom.

The three first of these ten names--Jehovah, Jah, and Ehjeh--express the essence of God, and are proper names; but the other seven are only expressive of his attributes. The only true name of God, according to the cabala, is the name of four letters--the Tetragrammaton--Yod-he-vau-he.

In the exterior circle of the celestial heaven, occupied by the fixed stars, the Anima Mundi hath her particular forms, answering to the ideas of the Divine Mind; and this situation approaching nearest to the Empyrean Heaven, the seat of God, receives the spiritual powers and influences which immediately proceed from him. Hence they are diffused through the spheres of the planets and heavenly bodies, and communicated to the inmost center of the Earth by means of natural law, or the Spirit of the World, that rules the terrestrial world.

While many ancient authors have contended on the definition and meaning of the word Nature, yet they all in reality mean one and the same thing, only giving different explanations of the same ideas; and if their arguments are closely pursued and compared with each other, they will all tend to show that the Anima Mundi and the Soul of the Universe is what they mean by Nature.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 282]

  

SYMBOLS OF THE ALCHEMISTS.

THIS volume would be incomplete without the symbols of the Alchemists, as they naturally pertain to Natural Magic, and occasionally prove of great value. The London Pharmaceutical Journal, an excellent authority, gives the symbols we here introduce.

Nowadays chemists write their formulas and work out their processes by means of symbols, and the alchemists used also signs and hieroglyphics to represent the then known elements, metals, and other substances in common use.

The so-called elements--Fire, Water, Air, Earth--were represented by special symbols, here represented. The metals were supposed to be influenced by the planets to a certain degree, and were represented by the corresponding signs of the Zodiac. Various other articles also had their symbols, which served as a means of shorthand at a period when caligraphy was little known or employed. Gold, for instance, was associated with the Sun because of its brightness and perfection, for it was always held to be the noblest of metals. The symbol applied to it embodies these qualities. Silver resembles the Moon in lustre, and the origin of the crescent needs no explanation. Iron was dedicated to Mars, being the metal from which implements of war were made, Mars being the god of war, probably owing to the blood-red color of the planet. Saturn was the slowest of the planets, and lead, being the dullest and most despised of metals, was therefore accorded to Saturn. Quicksilver was, of course, most appropriate to Mercury, the messenger of the gods.

Dr. Pereira derives all these symbols from gold and the Greek cross, taken to represent acrimony the supposititious substance, which, combined with gold, produced other metals. Copper, for instance, has the

[p. 283]

sign of gold on top, and that of acrimony underneath. Quicksilver derived its symbol from that of silver on the top, because of its color, that of acrimony beneath, and gold between, because gold was supposed to lurk in all metals. Iron was supposed to contain acrimony of a different nature from that of the other metals, being represented in this symbol by the barbed spearhead. Fire and Water being antagonistic are represented by the same symbol, one being inverted. Air, which was supposed to be a modification of fire, has a modified fire symbol, whilst the fourth hypothetical element has for its symbol that of air inverted. These are based on Aristotle's doctrine, which taught that the four elements had each two qualities, one of which was common to some other elements.

Click to enlarge
SYMBOLS OF THE ALCHEMISTS AND THEIR SIGNIFICATIONS.

[p. 284]

Click to enlarge
SYMBOLS OF THE ALCHEMISTS, CONTINUED

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 285]

  

A MESSAGE FROM THE STARS.

          I stood at eventime. The never-ending plain
   All empty looked and void. Yet, as I gazed again
   An army bivouacked. Unnumbered points of light
   Bespoke a force Supreme--invincible for Right.

     
   
     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 286]

  

THE ETERNAL PRINCIPLE.

  

BY DR. L. W. DE LAURENCE.

The struggle between light and darkness, between good and evil, is as old as the world, and yet there is no principle of evil;  whatever degrades is evil, whatever elevates is good.

Evil or so-called sin is simply undeveloped good. Good and evil are the light and shadow of the one eternal principle of life, and each is necessary for the existence of the other.

The struggle between light and shadow is life, and there can be no life without a struggle.

Matter transmits force, but does not originate force. It is for a time the receptacle of power, but not the power. All essence of power belongs to Spirit. All pure force is invisible.

Matter and Spirit may be one to the Absolute and Infinite Being, but that one is Spirit. In human speech, matter is only the name of an effect whose cause is wrapped in mystery.

It remains for the human to penetrate the veil and solve the mystery. And the solution of this problem of mind and matter discovers man unto himself,

[p. 287]

and binds him in loving union forever with the Infinite "I am," the Spirit of all.

Absence of feeling and of suffering only shows that the process of death has begun, or that the animal has taken full possession. Pain is not an element to be most dreaded; for, as gold is refined by fire, the Soul is refined by pain, and only through the death of suffering does the human Soul rise into eternal life.

If selfishness and the animal instinct have full sway, the Soul shrivels toward decay, while all its noble powers are congealed, its sensibilities benumbed, its vision blinded, its intellect dimmed, and from the once clear mirror the reflection of a noble Soul shines no more where the innermost temple might have been radiant with truth and virtue.

DEATH--Is death more to be feared because it is an enigma the mysteries of which western dull minds, because obscured by theology, cannot fathom, or their weak fancy cannot comprehend?

The human Soul is the anchorage or place of ideas. The Astral body or star magno is the mirror that reflects and records them, human thoughts being simply the clothing of these ideas. The spirit is the self-acting energy that produces the Idea.

     
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 288]

  

A MESSAGE TO ALL MYSTICS.

  

THE HINDU MAGIC MIRROR.

  

BY DR. L. W. DE LAURENCE.

Copyright, 1910, by de Laurence, Scott & Co., Publishing Department.

A sincere and true message to all faithful Brother Mystics and those who may wish to join this Occult Organization which exists here and in the Astral or unseen world.

Given under and by the direction of the great Occult Organization and Brotherhood of Magic for the never ending advancement of human souls through Dr. L. W. de Laurence, whose supreme desire is to educate capable and sincere brothers and sisters to act in concert with our Brotherhood of unseen Mystics and teach them the work that they must do preparatory thereto.

I, Dr. L. W. de Laurence, do hereby state, truly, and positively, that I know that the existence of a powerful Occult Organization and Brotherhood of Mystics, both here and in the great unseen world, to be an incontestable truth; and, furthermore, that I KNOW that the Science and Art of Magic as operated by these Mystics is worthy of faithful investigation.

Furthermore, be it known to all the world, and especially so unto him or her into whose hands this message may come, not by reason of their own solicitation, or by advertisement, but by their own Astral influence and Occult magnetism, that the hereinafter simple message to Brother Mystics and those who desire to rid themselves of the bonds and shackles of gross ignorance, theology, superstition and materialism, regarding the famous "Magic Mirror," that wonderful Astral Instrument so long used by leading Mystics, Adepts, and Occult workers for communication and preparatory development for communication between the two worlds, will help all who heed.

This message hereinafter written I have given verbatim as it has come to me, under the direction of the great Brotherhood of Mystics from the unseen Astral world.

[p. 289]

Every soul will rest at some mile-post in life
 Those never ending, unnumbered, unknown points
 All void, vacant, and dark.
 Yet, be still, for as it looks once more

A multitude assembled;
 Unnumberable Astral souls reveal a force Supreme,
 Invincible for human advancement,
 The annulment of man-made law;

The concert uplifting and educating of humanity.
 Listen, Oh ye capable brothers, for out of darkness
 Comes this Mystic Message.

  

THE MESSAGE.

  

Part One.

TO THOSE MYSTICS STILL IN EARTH LIFE, THE ASTRAL BROTHERHOOD OF MAGIC, AN OCCULT ORGANIZATION, SENDS GOOD WILL, LIGHT AND GREETINGS.

UNTIL YOU, BROTHER AND SISTER "KNOW THYSELF" AND THE POSSIBILITIES OF "THYSELF," BY AND THROUGH THE UNDERSTANDING OF "SELF," AND ARE ABLE TO kindle the Astral fire within, there is labor for us to perform in assisting you in your preparatory work thereto.

The shackles and chains of centuries, of cycles of ages, of antiquity, are riven at length by their own corroding and heart-eating rust (materialism).

*     *     *     *     *     *     *     *

Let ye, oh brother and sister listen most attentively, for no shackle or bond that comes of theology, darkness or superstition, or gross ignorance, can ever endure the full light of inner truth nor the full dawn of the day.

To carry this work onward to its and your own full success we must have true, faithful, sincere and capable brothers on the Earth Plane who have common sense (sense that is not common), and who will act in full concert with us for the uplifting and Occult Education of humanity.

No city code, or man-made law, can overthrow, annul or set aside the laws of God (SELF, NATURE).

The progressive Mystic who has received his or her Occult Education will always act unselfishly, for they have by their education become Nature's (GOD'S) own legitimate and true instrument in human advancement.

They have steadfastly met and overthrown error, superstition, theology, ignorance, and arrogance in high and so-called holy places, and have thus denied the so-called Divine right of Kings, Ministers and Priests, and those who would scoff at spiritism.

They have without hesitation uprooted and overthrown the rule

[p. 290]

of despot and tyrant, have led true brothers and sisters with the potent weapon of mental thought and Astral force, to triumph over superstition and ignorance, and will finally be the means of ending the reign of the beasts of materialism and selfishness who can exist only for a time, and times, and half time.

Before the truths of our Brotherhood and Occult Organization the bonds and shackles of fettered humanity are destined to melt as snow beneath the Sun of Aries.

Do not be so foolish as to ask whether you are a Mystic or whether you can develop sufficiently to become identified with this great Occult Organization and ultimately communicate directly and personally with the unseen Brotherhood.

Each and every sensible and true soul possesses within itself these possibilities which are simply the attributes of Divine Soul Powers. Of course you may suppress and crucify them, or permit them to lie dormant, but only to your own loss and sorrow; or you can allow them to thrive and bloom, like the lotus blossoms on the river Nile, to a beauty and power that will allow you to outstep those who have devoted themselves to more inferior studies and pursuits.

Are you superstitious? Are you orthodox? Are you stingy? Are you selfish? Are you a doubting Tom? Ask yourself these questions.

These are the deep, treacherous, underlying false conditions you must combat and overcome. Can you lay aside these selfish or superstitious instincts and work for the good and uplifting of all worthy Brothers and Sisters instead of the aggrandizement of self? If you can, then you are welcome to our Astral Organization and great Occult Brotherhood.

If such you are, then we stretch out to you a helping hand over the infinite spaces, from the dim, forgotten centuries, and recognize you as a true brother or sister and comrade. You may rest assured, and the future will prove the truth of this statement, that the reign of truth and absolute justice and absolute unselfishness ultimately will come to every planet. To such culmination the progress of earth life is marked with every vicissitude that change and man-made laws may imply.

When such a condition has been brought about the planetary forces that previously indicated so much sorrow and suffering are discovered to be essential to perfect social organization.

'Tis thus the condition of adversity is turned into the force of perpetuity; the disappointments of failures and obstruction and slow decay are turned into a condition of sure, safe advancement.

Infinite force and infinite intelligence are infinitely good. If what you read here stirs the soul and smoldering forces within you it is the responding cry of your true spiritual self--your true Ego--the Astral self, recognizing and responding to the desires and vibrations of the eternal SELF.

It rests entirely with you whether this warning and recognition bears fruit or not.

[p. 291]

If you decide to act, ponder and consider well our advice. "BE SILENT." "Be ye wise as serpents but harmless as doves." A seed before it sprouts lies concealed, secret and silent in the dark earth.

It is in this condition that it finds its real and only opportunity for growth and development.

Antagonistic elements can only sweep over it while it lies concealed; its work, growth and development goes silently on. Such must be your self-development. So must your Astral and Soul Forces develop while silently hid in yourself.

Neither money nor position will buy true knowledge, nor can they destroy true knowledge.

Astral Powers, and Soul Forces, cannot be measured with money. Your Magical powers and great Astral possibilities must spring to life within yourself. Jesus, the greatest Master that ever lived, said: "Seek ye the Kingdom of God within you." We admonish you likewise.

See well to it that you heed. You may be so orthodox as to think that you should not heed and investigate, believing that the esoteric should not be investigated, or that your development should not be accelerated.

There is no subject, be it esoteric or exoteric, that is too sacred for true investigation, and it is the peculiar province of the True Mystic to desire to reason on all bidden and Astral forces with the utmost care.

The health of body, the energy and confidence that an ardor for truth and power inspires, mark his progress. No doubters, no laggard, no dotard, charlatan, no miser, no selfish one may ever hope to succeed, or ever overtake the fleeting feet of true Occultism and esoteric truths.

The true Master, Adept or Mystic must possess a will and intelligence that develops and brightens with attrition.

No scoffer, no obstacle, should daunt him, no condition should bar him, nothing should hinder or discourage him in his Astral development and search after truth.

He must acquire secret Knowledge and Mystic powers as a miser does his wealth to hold--his soul his strong-box; but, unlike the miser, he can give of his store and yet retain his all.

Steadfastness and purity of purpose and self are a necessary requisite while traveling the rugged path of Occultism and Mystic development.

*     *     *     *     *     *     *     *

We cannot enter into diseased or sensual conditions.

We may and desire to set those Astral forces in operation that will assuage deep-seated sorrow and physical suffering, but we cannot be expected to bring sweet music out of inharmonious notes.

To attempt to do so would of course be foolish and result in deep injury to ourselves. So we say, BE PURE, save your vital forces and preserve them long into old age.

The true Mystic and real Master never dissipates his physical or sex forces. The dissolute, sensual man does. The unspent

[p. 292]

and preserved sex and germinal forces surrounds you with a beautiful purple aura, which envelops you always greatly to your honor as well as being conducive to your development.

This beautiful aura and strength-giving element is dissipated and destroyed by sensual acts and animal instincts. When this purple Astral Aura is preserved and its supply constantly increased from day to day by pure acts and thoughts you will possess the means necessary for your development and the practice of true Occultism and Magic.

Heed thee, then, that your Aura remains purple, unimpaired and preserved. For this reason children are many times clairvoyant and possess Spirit and Astral Sight when their parents do not.

  

CONDITION ESSENTIAL FOR SPIRIT CO-ORDINATION AND COMMUNICATION.

It now becomes our province to direct and indicate the way and manner best suited for communication with the unseen world.

Try and fulfill all the requirements that we have indicated in the fore part of this communication and those which hereinafter follow, especially those relating to the preparation and use of the MAGIC MIRROR.

However, should you fail, do not be discouraged or cast down.--BE FAITHFUL. Faithfulness and application are all that will ever accelerate your development.

Persevere. To "him or her who is faithful much help and assistance will be given. At some future time, should you decide to become a brother or sister of this Occult Organization, you will know our meaning of the above; for we assure you we know full well how to handle this problem that has vexed so many who insist in developing in their own foolish way.

However, after you start, should no apparent results be obtained, keep on, be faithful, persevere, if necessary, for many years, yea, a lifetime.

Results and your capacity for work and perseverance will indicate the degree of your development and advancement as a true brother and faithful Mystic, while the cardinal principles of true Co-ordination will promote and signify the progress of your development and communication.

Of course, if you really wish to identify yourself with our Occult Organization and enter into such a relationship with us that you can communicate, you must place yourself, of your own free will and accord, in harmony and accord with those vibratory Astral forces which Co-ordinate with our own.

To obtain this class of vibratory forces you should read, then carefully re-read, this message many times until you thoroughly understand its real esoteric meaning.

Next most carefully decide and fix in your mind just the kind of an ideal life you think a true Mystic should live. Examine yourself as you would a peck of wheat, seeking both the inferior and superior grains or qualities.

[p. 293]

Take heed of each inferior quality and virtue you possess. Then, like a true man or woman, decide to live what you believe to be the true ideal Mystical life.

After you do this see to it that you live the ideal life and you will bless the day and hour that this message came unsolicited by you.

Until you so live the ideal life, do not expect to co-ordinate with us. Should you decide upon an ideal Mystical life many questions will come to you.

Anticipating this there follows here the answer to all important ones. First--Good, pure, unselfish thoughts are absolutely essential and demanded. Remember, you seek to identify yourself with the greatest and really only true Occult Organization in the world.

A pure mind keeps away all vain fancies and mental delusions. Seek and you will find.

Aspire and you will be inspired. Perform any good deed you can; do not defer a good deed nor a laudable ambition.

The proper time to do anything is when ambition inspires you to do it. Then your energy is sustained by a free and natural ardor and desire, and you are assisted by a clear conception, unclouded by procrastination, which acts most effectively for success.

By living a pure mental and physical condition, and rounding out your existence by constantly keeping before you the ideal life of the advanced Mystic, you should rapidly advance to a degree of spiritual light and Astral coordination where we may be able to establish intelligent communication with you.

But remember, it all depends upon your faithfulness and capacity to persevere until you have advanced to a point where you can place yourself in a sphere of vibratory Astral forces that will admit of perfect coordination.

  

WHEN TO USE A MAGIC MIRROR.

Now if you have begun to live the ideal life and have arisen to a degree where we can cooperate with you through your Aura, you are now in a state where you can seek coordination, communication and relationship with us through a Magic Mirror.

Every wise Mystic constructs his own Opaque Magic Mirror, not because it could not be made for him, but because, if he constructs it himself, it will be more certain to serve the occult purpose for which it was made.

It will also more fully co-equal with his own cloisteral and monastic personality.

A Magic Mirror made under these circumstances, with an intense desire in the Disciple to succeed, will not be a means of preventing sodality and exclusive association between himself and the Astral world, as would one constructed by another, impregnated and perverted with their selfish corporeal magnetism and depressed lustreless Aura, which always serves as a bar to your complete coalesce and association with those in spirit life.

If you wish to succeed, disassociate yourself with any individual

[p. 294]

whose sole object and pursuit is financial gain, or who is of a mercenary nature.

If you make it a rule in life to disassociate yourself with any person who has a parsimonious, stingy nature and who is always curmudgeonly in his dealings, you will be better off.

Stay entirely away from those of a churlish, penurious disposition, as they will surround you with a muddy, mottled Aura or magnetism which will hold you back like a heavy fog or dismal vapor.

For this reason, unless you are careful, it is best to always live a sequestered and monastic life as far as your business and earthly pursuits will allow.

Far better that you remain untrammeled than to have to do with the close-handed and niggardly. Never get intimate or confidential with them or their kind.--Have no dealings with them, as they are surrounded with an Aura that means death to your hopes.

Shun them as you would an abominable, odious, damnable thing, for if you could see them in their true light, as the Mystic can, you would shrink and recoil from them as you would from something that was loathsome and nauseating--accursed.

Now, should you be interested enough to follow further, and it is purely your own affair whether you do or not, you are going to be told that if you were in a position to see clearly, that is to say, if your spiritual or Astral sight was developed, you would be able to observe many things which are low and unbecoming in those around you.

  

SPIRIT SIGHT AT WILL.

If you doubt this, it's because it is concealed from you owing to the fact that you only possess the physical sight. These things can only be observed by those who have Spirit Sight at will.

Does not your so-called Christian Bible, the toy and the mystery which the material minister and priest exhort over like a clod-pate of a jack-a-dandy, tell you to "develop the inner or spiritual sight"?

Common sense should indicate that it is your plain duty to possess Astral or Spirit Sight, which the ancients called the inner or spiritual sight.

If you wish to own a real, genuine Opaque Magic Mirror and be able to make it exactly as it was made by famous ancient Mystics so that it will possess Occult Virtue and become infused with Astral Auras, then proceed as hereinafter instructed, in this message, by this prerogative court and Brotherhood of Mystics.

Foremost, procure unto thyself the following materials from Messrs. de Laurence, Scott & Co., with which to make your own Opaque Magic Mirror.

One Convexo-Concave superior transparent glass[**] which has a perfect and complete sphericity of form on the properly indicated side; manufactured by a certain secret process and formed by infusing silicious matter with fixed alkalies; but so constructed

[p. 295]

that it possesses none of the qualities of the lens, so that rays of Astral light passing through it are not made to change their direction or to magnify or diminish objects at a certain distance, as does the crystalline humour of the human eye.

In other words, this exclusive Convexo-Concave superior transparent glass must be so made by a special process that it has no mitigating, assuasive or lenitive qualities whatsoever.

Its exact size must be 5 9/16 * 7 10/16 inches.

Next obtain a sufficient amount of a secret bituminiferous substance like that used by the ancient mystics and old philosophers for this very purpose.

Also one small brush; very fine. The entire cost of the above materials, securely packed and sent in a special mailing case to any postoffice address in the world, should not exceed the amount of $3.00.

The materials referred to above were positively, previous to this communication, not obtainable anywhere in the world arranged ready for instant use.

Next obtain a box with a lid on to hold your mirror. Next procure one yard of new cloth. These are special materials from which you can make a genuine superior Opaque Magic Mirror.

The material for making a Superior Magic Mirror, that is, the Convexo-Concave transparent non-magnifying superior glass, 5 9/16 * 7 10/16 inches, and the secret bituminiferous substance to be used for coating your Magic Mirror, and the fine brush also to be used to apply the coating, you must obtain as told above, of Messrs. de Laurence, Scott & Co.

The box for holding the Magic Mirror, the yard of cloth and the pint of turpentine which you will also need, you of course can easily obtain yourself at a nominal cost from the stores where you reside.

These Convexo-Concave superior glasses for making the Magic Mirrors are prepared especially for this purpose and are only sold by Messrs. de Laurence, Scott & Co., who are the biggest and only official dealers in these materials as well as standard Occult, Spiritual and Magical books and Temple Incense in the world.

They are also official and direct importers, maintaining permanent offices and connections in India and the Orient for the importing of such materials as Temple Incense and costly essences which are used by the Priests and Mystics in the Orient and Hindu Occult Chambers.

*     *     *     *     *     *     *     *

[n295]* These particular superior transparent glasses, from which a Magic Mirror can be made, can not be obtained of anyone in the world outside of Messrs. de Laurence, Scott & Co., notwithstanding that after the publication and circulation of this Message others may offer them for sale.

So, unless you know that your dealer obtains them from this firm direct, you have no assurance they are genuine. Unless they are genuine and made after the special process as above, they will fail to serve the purpose for which you have obtained them.

[p. 296]

To prevent this, obtain materials direct from this firm, or tell your dealer to do so. To prevent the sale of spurious materials for the making of genuine Opaque Magic Mirrors by unscrupulous dealers who will be anxious to supply you after the publication and circulation of this message, you should write Messrs. de Laurence, Scott & Co., direct and they will advise you by return mail whether your dealer is obtaining his materials from them or not, or whether he is imposing upon you.

They also sell, at a small cost, an excellent sphere or Crystal, which no Mystic or Adept ever thinks of being without. See pages <page 306>-309.

A Mystic or real Adept would be in no better shape to carry on Occult or Mystical work without his Rock Crystal or "Hindu Beryl," or an imported "Astral Sphere," than would a man who tried to write with no ink in his pen. Messrs. de Laurence, Scott & Co. have on exhibition in their offices a genuine Rock Crystal or Hindu Beryl--imported Astral Sphere--value of which is $150.00, the same being the personal property of Dr. L. W. de Laurence, who has repeatedly refused $500 cash for it.

Students and Mystics as well as others owe much to this progressive firm, whose business has increased so rapidly that they have been compelled to move in larger quarters, and there is a possibility that they may be compelled to erect their own building as their business is increasing daily.

This firm imports from the Orient and Europe and in turn exports books and other goods to every country in the world. Dr. L. W. de Laurence's name is as well known in South Africa, Gold Coast Africa, India and British West Indies as it is in Europe and the United States. After a careful canvass and checking up of sales it was found that there was not a city nor town in the United States but what sheltered one or more  who had purchased and studied this famous man's books.

Another thing students have this firm to thank for is their bold manner of stopping dealers in charging exorbitant prices for official books and materials necessary to carry on Occult work.

A case in point is their recent publication of a fine edition of that famous book sold in London entitled, "The Mysteries of Magic," by Eliphas Levi. Importers and London dealers sold this book at $3.75, prepaid, cheaply gotten up; de Laurence, Scott & Co obtained a copy, set their typesetters, their platemakers, their printers and binders to work, and published a modern edition of this excellent work on Occultism and Magic, bound it in red silk and stamped it in pure gold and sold it all over the world for $2.00, prepaid, thereby saving sincere students $1.75 on this one book.

Still another case: "India's Hood Unveiled," "Spirit Sight At Will," written by a native of South India, was being sold from India at a high price, published in paper covers.

Today de Laurence, Scott & Co. have their own exclusive edition of this work on the market for $2.00, prepaid, finely bound.

Dr. L. W. de Laurence has given to the world, with the sole

object of forming "The Congress of the Ancient Divine Mental 

[p. 297]

[paragraph continues] & Christian Masters," to date, five grand "Text Books," namely: First, "The Imminence of God"--"Know Thyself"; Second, "God the Bible Truth and Christian Theology"; Third, "Zoroaster, the Great Persian"; Fourth, "A Question of Miracles"; Fifth, "Superstition in All Ages."

These works are having an unprecedented sale and edition after edition is rolling from the presses.

When these works get well into circulation they will be the foundation and credentials for the greatest Congress and Brotherhood ever known.

However, not wishing to digress too far from the subject matter in our message to you, we will return, but then it's well for you to know these things, which are true, for no man in the world today can produce the results that Dr. de Laurence has. He has written and published and put into circulation a larger number of standard Occult works than any man who has ever lived before in the world, and it is unlikely that any one man ever will equal this great master in this respect.

"The Great Book of Magical Art," Hindu Magic and East India Occultism, a large volume weighing six pounds, was issued ten years ago by him. All admit that this work is the only reliable and standard work on this subject in print. The first edition, owing to the great cost of publishing, were sold for $12.00 per copy. Dealers in rare books bought this work through their puppets and resold it for $25.00, $50.00 and $150.00 a copy.

Dr. de Laurence immediately stopped its publication for three years, being greatly displeased at this.

Messrs. de Laurence, Scott & Co. now sell this celebrated volume, bound in full cloth, for $6.75, prepaid.

This of course killed the rare-book dealers' little game. It is needless to say that any work which has sold day in and day out for ten years and is still enjoying a large sale is a Standard work.

  

HOW TO CONSTRUCT AND USE A MAGIC MIRROR.

  

Part Two.

MESSAGE PART TWO: The turpentine, which you are to obtain where you live, you are to use to thoroughly clean your brush and convexo concave glass with. The bituminiferous substance, with which you are to coat the Magic Mirror so as to make it opaque, you will receive from Messrs. de Laurence, Scott & Co., ready mixed, and will not need diluting unless it should be too thick; in this event, mix a little turpentine into it.

The brush MUST be new, as must be all the materials used in the construction of your opaque Magic Mirror.

The box, which you are to obtain where you reside, may be of wood, but new. The cloth, which you are to obtain where you reside, should be of purple or blue, and of goods very agreeable to your touch and sight. If you cannot obtain blue or purple,

[p. 298]

get green or white, but under no circumstances use red. Wrap your Magic Mirror in the cloth when not in use and keep it in the box.

With all materials ready you are to pass into a room by yourself when all conditions are agreeable, and proceed as hereinafter instructed. With a piece of new cloth (a small piece will do) clean the concave glass of dust after dipping the cloth in turpentine. This will cause the bituminiferous substance to adhere to the glass when you apply it. Dip your brush also into the turpentine, wipe it off, then proceed to paint or coat the convex side of the glass with the bituminiferous substance.

The outside of the glass is the convex side and is the side to coat. Don't coat the concave or inside. Start coating at one end of glass and proceed slowly until you reach the other end. Apply the bituminiferous substance smoothly and as evenly as possibly, not resting for any other purpose until you have entirely finished your work. You must not go back over the glass, as any imperfection or streak in the coating can be remedied by the next coat you are to apply on another day. You are to apply three coats, as above, which will be necessary to make this specially prepared convexo-concave superior transparent glass Opaque, on three different days.

  

HOW TO MAGNETIZE A MAGIC MIRROR.

After you have prepared the convexo-concave glass as above, allow it to dry while you are washing your hands, etc. Next proceed to infuse into it the particular individual virtues of your own aura and magnetism. This is accomplished as follows: Pass the right hand, palm down, in a circular motion over the Mirror after each coating--your hand being about two inches above it. Repeat with the left hand. Then operate as above, with both hands at once. You should, however, make any kind of a motion over the glass that you feel impressed to make. Do all this with confidence, as it certainly pertains to your own individuality. You should make no fancy motions for effect, but should keep your mind solemnly on your task. Let your movements be deliberate and regular. See to it that the palms pass close to both sides of the glass. At times allow the hands to stop near both ends of the glass. It is not the movements of your hands, of course, that infuses and magnetizes the bituminiferous substance. It is your aura, which you have projected and transmitted into it. This bituminiferous substance is of such a nature that it readily absorbs your vital Aura and magnetism. It is the only substance known that will do this so well, and the secret of its preparation is known only to Dr. L. W. de Laurence, who has received it direct from the unseen Mystics. Some may scoff at this, however--be that as it may--it is true, nevertheless, and you should not be influenced by any sort of sophistry.

Be sure that you give this bituminiferous substance ample time to take on and absorb your Astral Aura so that it becomes thoroughly infused and well impregnated with it while you are in a

[p. 299]

perfectly quiet mental state of deep meditation, all the while keeping before you the ideal Mystic life you have decided upon living.

After you feel that you have about exhausted your Aura and that it has been absorbed by the substance on the Mirror you should stop. Before and during the process of making your Magic Mirror let yourself be prompted only by high aspirations and pure desires. Drive out all worry and thought of self and earthly desires by meditating on your work and the purpose for which you have made your Mirror. Read and re-read this message before you begin this work. After you have prepared the Magic Mirror then lay it upon a piece of heavy paper or cardboard, the coated side up; place it in the box to dry, some place where it will not be disturbed and the atmosphere is of an even temperature, or nearly so.

Allow the cardboard to remain under the glass until you have on three different days recoated and re-infused or magnetized it. You now have a Magic Mirror whose opaqueness will be perfect, and it will be ready for use three days after you apply the last coat. These are the only complete instructions ever given out to the world in print for this work, and it is given without thought or desire for pay--it being our desire and request that it be given free to all who are far enough advanced to appreciate their great value.

The entire cost of printing and mailing this information to you will be paid personally by Dr. L. W. de Laurence. The amount is not a small one, as you know when you consider that we have directed it to be mailed to 25,000 people, and as you are one of these, we trust that you will realize that our only object is to show you that we have recognized you as a brother-sister and comrade.

After you have finished the first, second and last coating, clean your brush with turpentine and put it aside for future use. Also cork up your bituminiferous substance tightly, as it is a rare and very expensive preparation.

*     *     *     *     *     *     *     *

Once started, keep steadily on living your ideal Mystical life, as near as your conditions and family, if you be married, affairs will allow. Examine yourself at the end of each day and resolve to do better the next. Try and avoid lapses. Live a life that each hour, each week, each month and each year makes you better morally and stronger physically. Help those who are worthy and need assistance.

This kind of a life will surely bring you health, peace of soul, and the inspiration to do good will become stronger, as will your desire for truth and goodness. If you do this you will really feel yourself getting stronger and better. You will feel your Astral and spiritual self unfolding. As you perfect yourself and succeed in Astral attainments so will you attract to yourself by your Aura higher and purer forces and aspirations. With these there will come to you, and be added unto you, Astral and Mystical powers that will well repay you for your efforts--the power that will

[p. 300]

make you a power and a Mystic. Remember, Brother and Sister, that each should give  to his or her ability and will receive according to his or her capacity.

This development, this inspiration, this Astral unfoldment, this progress, these powers--all these--and more--must come from within--for, remember, "The Kingdom of God Is Within You." Without this unfoldment of your Astral self all the spirits and Astral Powers in the Universe might be ready to help you and obey your invocation, but no results would follow their ministrations. You must unfold. Astral Powers, Astral Sight, and, Spirit Sight Must unfold from within you.

You can blindly follow the childish instructions and methods of the so-called professors and mediums and surface writers and so-called authors until you are sore tired, heartbroken and discouraged, and you will never even be able to receive intelligently an Astral or mental impression from the unseen World, let alone being able to co-ordinate and enter into intelligent communication.

With a heart destitute of selfishness, with your soul on fire for humanity, and a mind desiring and aspiring for help and truth, always desiring to engage in good Occult works--all these the fruits of a good life--you will need and shall have our help and companionship.

Once your Magic Mirror has been constructed strictly according to our direction in this message it will be necessary of course for you to give us an opportunity to materialize and also communicate with you.

This can only be accomplished by your conforming to certain conditions as hereinafter indicated.

The first essential is regular sittings or periods of meditation, when you must get mentally and physically quiet, so as to completely bring about a condition of receptivity to external psychic and astral forces. You should go into silent and secret meditation at certain specified times and observe that you attend well this duty, always endeavoring to bring about a state of introspection.

You will observe we have advised that these sittings be secret. This of course is for your own welfare and protection. Keep it from the curious and we do here admonish you in this beginning to be secret, and neither teach nor manifest to anyone this work, or place, or time, nor your desire, or will, except it be to a true companion, brother Mystic or Master of this work, who likewise should be faithful, discreet, silent, and dignified by nature, education and conduct.

Never are you to expose or reveal them to unworthy or unscrupulous persons; but reveal them only to faithful, discreet and chosen friends, for your association with a prating companion, whose misbelief, doubting, questioning, and, lastly, unworthiness, hinders and disturbs the effect and result of every Magical and Occult operation, consequently, and, in consideration of what has been said in the forepart of this message, about the undesirable astral Auras some people carry around with them, you should not seek the companionship of those who are unworthy.

[p. 301]

Set a given time for your meditation period and development in the use of your Magic Mirror. Arrange these sittings at a convenient hour, then allow nothing to interfere except sickness or something beyond your power to prevent.

You should also procure unto yourself an Incense Burner of good ventilation and some Imported TEMPLE INCENSE and burn the same as directed on pages 310, 311, 312, 313.

Burn a small amount of this compound at every sitting with a Magic Mirror or a Crystal. One imported package will do for fifty or more sittings. This "Soul-Vision" and "Astral-Light," inducing subtle, fragrant compound, should always be burned in a special Incense Burner procurable of Messrs. de Laurence, Scott & Co.

Once you begin these sittings, be regular; do not disappoint us unless you wish to disappoint yourself.

Four times a week is often enough. Once a week will do if you cannot sit oftener. Sit from forty-five minutes to an hour, or an hour and a half, always commencing at the same time of day or night.

Have a quiet, neat room, where you can be alone. Be composed, be patient, and, above all, be faithful--believe there is more in life than the demoralized material world around you on the earth plane.

Have the room dark so you will not be able to see the Magic Mirror, though you are all the time gazing into it. Sit quiet and hold the Magic Mirror in both hands by placing them against the ends.

Just as soon as you start this you will be visited by members of our Occult Organization and Brotherhood from spirit life, and all necessary data regarding your desires and personality secured.

Your condition, capacity, ability, surroundings, vibratory forces, Astral Auras, time of sitting, and all necessary information carefully noted.

A report is then made and all data about you will be recorded. To successfully establish intelligent communication with you we must then proceed to find some brother or sister in the spirit world whose vibration, forces and Astral Aura will coordinate with you, and who will volunteer to be a companion to you so as to establish communication with you at given intervals.

Of course it may at times seem long before we succeed in securing the right companion for you.

However, if you are faithful, patient and regular you may rest assured the Brotherhood is interested in you and will not see you sit in vain.

Many, many, times you will be visited by those of us who would like to talk with you but cannot owing to some peculiar Astral or physical condition. Of course, we note these adverse conditions and set about overcoming them and to help bring you, into direct communication with us.

Once a brother is found whose vibratory forces coordinate with your own and he volunteers to become your companion results

[p. 302]

come quickly, and will be instantly noted on your OPAQUE CONVEXO-CONCAVE MAGIC MIRROR.

First, you will see all around the room bright lights like little stars snapping into life; while across the Black Opaque face of your Magic Mirror will pass an emulsive luminous film, which will be phosphorescent--without heat--of a white, cloudy appearance. This is the usual manifestation of the presence of Astral forces.

After the luminous film has passed away a little star may be seen to pass across the firmament of the MAGIC MIRROR. This is the first indication of real advancement and success upon your part.

However, you should keep quiet at this your initial phenomena, eliminating all quixotic thoughts from your mind.

Do not be too anxious for results or the advancement of your development. If you heed this advice you will act as have all ci-devant Mystics, and all others who are wise, quo ad hoc.

Once Astral phenomena and psychic results come you may be assured that we are around you; that we have a true gauge on you; and if you persevere, your ideas will undergo a complete transfiguration as far as Mysticism and true pneumatology is concerned.

In short, the veil of Osiris, if your efforts are not mediocre, will be raised before your admiring gaze.

Once you have learned from us, by this message, how to make a real, genuine Opaque Convexo-Concave Magic Mirror and other details which we have given here regarding Astral Vision and Magnetic Aura, it is our request that you interest any worthy brother or sister in this work and make them a Magic Mirror should they desire you to do so.

As the subject is of vital and universal interest to humanity, it may be hoped you will avoid all selfishness, as hereinbefore mentioned, and obtain as many brothers and sisters as you can.

They can either have you make them a Magic Mirror or send for materials to make one and thereby become a member of our Brotherhood of Mystics.

It  your plain duty to do this, especially should they be influenced or inclined to apply to you by their Astral influence and not as the direct result of printed matter or advertisement.

In constructing an Opaque Convexo-Concave Magic Mirror for another who wishes to become a Mystic, take just as much care with it as if it were your own and deliver it to him or her, as the case may be, no matter if you have become greatly attached to it yourself. Your charge should not exceed $5.00, or less if you feel disposed.

Admonish the one who receives it never to let anyone else handle it. Try to become a trained psychic, seer and Mystic by studying and using the Opaque Magic Mirror and studying official and standard works that treat on this subject.

An excellent book for assisting you in the use of a Mirror and Crystal is The Mystic Test Book of "The Hindu Occult Chambers," Hindu and Egyptian Crystal Gazing, together with the Wonders of the Magic Mirror. This work teaches the original and

[p. 303]

true science of Hindu Seership and "Spirit-and-Astral-Sight-at-Will," as it was taught by the old Masters and mystics. See Order No. 12; Catalogue Page No. 36. If you would then know the initiations and disciples of the Mystic Brotherhood and understand the inner psychic and Astral nature of yourself and the spiritual basis of human Auras we beckon you, true brother and sister, to join our Mystic Brotherhood and no longer remain in ignorance regarding your Astral or Sidereal self.

You will then understand every system of Astral personality and be able to determine the primary fund and nature of Astral and psychic forces, and their nature, and their results, and their aptitudes in dominating industrial life and personal destiny.

It is not our purpose to here consider elaborately the nature and substance which compose, and the laws which govern, the Astral personality of humanity, or why the nature and destiny of a person is, and can be specifically influenced in one direction more than another by them.

This may seem strange. However, if you will consider for a moment the great contention of Occult and Astral Forces that are struggling for supremacy in the psychic or Astral regions around and in you, and into which you were born, and which wero born into you, and the fact that, even from a physical viewpoint, the volume, direction and effect of these Astral forces and Auras are forever varying; surging; overcoming; and again equalizing each other with your every change of thought and varying mental attitude and divers physical conditions, it should be easily understood and realized that they may and really do influence mentality destiny and results.

It would certainly cause a sensation in all social, domestic and commercial life, and would undoubtedly change a tentative art as medicine into an exact science, if the nature and laws that underlie Astral and Occult forces were universally understood.

It does not disprove our claims, as contained herein, nor place them subject to ridicule, because many are not initiated into their use or nature; else must many arts and sciences suffer the same results.

All Sages, Seers, and Mystics, and members of all Standard and proficient Occult organizations know by experience that Astral and psychic Auras and forces do influence and control the psychical and physical nature of men, women and children, and, in short, all active life.

The Astral and psychic sight and the intuitions of all Ancient and Modern Mystics is perfect.

Results are as a rule more regular in Occultism than those said to be obtained from the unmeasured phases of religion; ethics; morality and some other branches of so-called human knowledge and physical or material sciences.

People are fast giving up orthodoxy and religion and the more advanced of mankind are working out the solutions regarding the Astral or inner self.

Indisputable facts manifesting the Astral and mental forces are

[p. 304]

attested to by great and fearless Mystics and men of research all over the world.

The near future will be devoted to the solution of man's inner or Astral self. People are beginning to greatly desire Astral vision and to understand the silent, ever-pulsating forces of the unseen world.

Interesting, valuable and wonderful revelations are being secured by many today.

Dr. L. W. de Laurence, who we have honored as being the medium and instrument through which this message is given to humanity, is well trained for Astral sight and Psychic vision, and to this great and fearless Mystic and Seer and his wonderful publications we desire to call your special attention in this message.

He has written, published, and even given to his fellow brothers and sisters and his disciples the very information they needed to become a Mystic and Seer.

A supplemental and full record of the life of this great man and Mystic is now being written daily in the unseen world by an eyewitness, and will be given to the world after his death through the mediumship of a certain brother Mystic who has no personal knowledge of Dr. de Laurence, his early manhood, his travels in Oriental countries, his steadfastness, his trials, his initiations while a chela (disciple) into the greatest Occult organization existing today.

Dr. de Laurence has a mission to perform in Europe, America, West Indies, Africa, etc.; his mission is teaching "THE IMMANENCE OF GOD". in contest with Orthodoxy and the so-called Christian church, as well as true Occultism and Magic.

Dr. de Laurence is a man well advanced in life, although strong and capable as a man of twenty-five.

His intention is to live one hundred and fifty years, so as to give to the world such information and help as it may need regarding man's Astral, Mental and Psychic forces.

Many Mystics and advanced students have developed Astral and Spiritual consciousness by studying his works.

The alchemy of life, Telepathy and Intuition, Dream and Trance states, wider states of mental plane and consciousness of Astral Vision, Inherent Vibrant Astral force, higher Auras, Stages of Clairvoyance, Psychic Vibrations, which control the emotional and mental nature of men and women and children, and interpenetrate the physical body for health or disease, are fully and most intelligently treated by him. The very fact that his books have been simultaneously accepted as Standard and official by all the leading Spiritualists and Occult students has convinced us, as well as his record as a successful Mystic and Seer, that he was the proper one for us to select as our Medium to give this message to you. Again, he has more correspondents than any other teacher, besides being in the best position to circulate it properly.

Regarding the personal character and ability of Dr. de Laurence as an author, compiler and publisher, we, as well as his thousands of students and all who know him personally, have the utmost respect. However, there are some who will seek to belittle

[p. 305]

him, for they belong to a class of mental deformities who are attempting to build up their own interests by speaking ill of others. Dr. de Laurence is known to be a man who will not utter an ill word about any one, and those who have made themselves conspicuous in complaining about bis radical methods of cutting book prices and other business methods simply have shown that they possess a low grade of mentality, desiring to rise by pulling down a good man.

  

THE IMMANENCE OF GOD, KNOW THYSELF.

The publication of "The Immanence of God, Know Thyself," "God, the Bible, Truth and Christian Theology" and "Zoroaster, the Great Persian" have come like a boom among church officials, ministers and priests. These works have shocked Theology and Orthodoxy to its very foundation. Books that will follow in time will do even more. So mental underlings, and the "pocket edition" kind of an individual can sneer because that is their breed, and they must do it or their soul will corrode--the ministers and priests may shrug their shoulders and show their sneering natures by ignoring, but they cannot gainsay the truth of these books.

Our work and teaching will go out to the intelligent world in spite of all the critics and underlings. We care not for creed, color or clime, and this message will be read in Africa, India and America, as well as in Judea and Galilee, Japan and China.

We have sincere brothers and sisters in all climes. All are WELCOME to test their psychic qualities, or investigate the dynamic and psychic world, so that they may thereby obtain a better, fuller and clearer conception of the possibilities, faculties, nature and qualities of their inner or Astral self and the world of vibratory forces around them.

You need not ask if whether or no you are a Mystic. Every soul contains within itself the attributes of divinity. They may be repressed and crucified to the loss of the soul, or they may be made to bloom, like the lotus, to a beauty and power that may set the more inferior limitations of existence at any length.

Are you selfish? This is the question you should ask yourself. This is the deep, underlying condition we must combat. Can you lay this selfish instinct aside to work for the good of all in place of the aggrandizement of self I If so, then we welcome you to our Brotherhood. We reach out to you a hand over the

N infinite spaces, from the dim, forgotten centuries, and recognize you as brother and comrade.

Before the truth of our Brotherhood the bonds and shackles of mankind are destined to melt as snow beneath the Sun of Aries.

    
The Philosophy of Natural Magic, by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, L. W. de Laurence ed. [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 306]

This advertisement appeared at the end of the original 1913 edition of this book. It is included for completeness.--JBH.

  

THE HINDU MAGIC MIRROR.

  

ORDER NO. 135. CATALOGUE PAGE NO. 140.

For many ages people have sought some medium, instrument, or means by which they might penetrate through, or lift the veil which hangs between the world we inhabit and that vast spiritual realm where causes reside and principles exist. To that end, recourse has been had to various so-called marvelous methods; taught by fake spiritualists, would-be mediums, and silk hat professors, all of which in the end have proved unsatisfactory. No person can reach the interior sight, develop or read in the Astral Light by such methods.

To all who have failed so far there is a surer, better and safer way, and that is self-development, by means entirely within the reach of every one, and which are within their will and control; and which require but the elements of Time, Patience and constant practice to ensure very good results; if not complete success in soul-sight.

The best way is for the student to use some form of the spirit-glass or Magic Mirror.

Full particulars regarding the construction, magnetizing and use of the Magic Mirror is contained in "A Message to All Mystics," also read article concerning Soul Sight and Magic Mirrors, which will be found in our Great Catalogue. All those desiring special instructions on various points regarding the making, use and care of the Magic Mirror should read the above articles by Dr. de Laurence very closely, then there will be no need for further inquiry.

  

HOW TO OBTAIN THE MATERIAL FOR MAKING A MAGIC MIRROR.

If you wish to own a real, genuine Opaque Magic Mirror and be able to make it exactly as it was made by famous ancient

`307

[paragraph continues] Mystics so that it will possess Occult Virtue and become infused with Astral Auras, then proceed as hereinafter instructed.

Foremost, procure unto thyself the following materials from de Laurence, Scott & Co., with which to make your own Opaque Magic Mirror:

One Convexo-Concave superior transparent glass which has a perfect and complete sphericity of form on the properly indicated side; manufactured by a certain secret process and formed by infusing silicious matter with fixed alkalies; but so constructed that it possesses none of the qualities of the lens, so that rays of Astral Light passing through it are not made to change their direction or to magnify or diminish objects at a certain distance, as does the crystalline humour of the human eye.

In other words, this exclusive Convexo-Concave superior transparent glass must be made by a special process that it has no mitigating, assuasive or lenitive qualities whatsoever.

Its exact size must be 5 12-16 * 7 12-16 inches.

Next obtain a sufficient amount of a secret bituminiferous substance like that used by the ancient mystics and old philosophers for this very purpose.

Also one small brush; very fine.

Messrs. de Laurence, Scott & Co. will, upon order, supply the materials hereinbefore mentioned, consisting of one specially made Convexo-Concave superior transparent glass, 5 12-16x7 12-16 inches, a sufficient amount of a secret bituminiferous substance to give the glass three coats and make it Opaque; also a brush to apply the substance on the glass.

Order No. 135--The above materials will be sent in a mailing case, securely packed, together with "THE FAMOUS MESSAGES TO ALL MYSTICS," which gives full directions for making a Magic Mirror. Price, $2.50. Foreign, 12s, 10d.

  

"MAGIC MIRROR," SPECIAL HEAVY XX.

  

ORDER NO. 136. CATALOGUE PAGE 140.

Same material as described above, except that the superior transparent glass is XX heavy, and the more desirable, especially for professional business.

Order No. 136--Price with one fine Sable Brush and a sufficient amount of bituminiferous substance to make same perfectly opaque, $3.50, prepaid. Foreign, 16s 5d.

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: poe.txt =====


     
The Poetic Edda, by Henry Adams Bellows, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE POETIC EDDA

 

TRANSLATED FROM THE ICELANDIC WITH AN INTRODUCTION AND NOTES

 

BY

 

HENRY ADAMS BELLOWS

 

TWO VOLUMES IN ONE

 

1936

 

PRINCETON UNIVERSITY PRESS: PRINCETON

 

AMERICAN SCANDINAVIAN FOUNDATION

 

NEW YORK

 

Scanned, Proofed and Formatted by John Bruno Hare at sacred-texts.com, April-July 2001. This text is in the public domain in the US because its copyright was not renewed in a timely fashion.

 Note: I have indicated the 'caesura' (the break in the middle of the line) throughout this text by the vertical bar character '|'--jbh

 
      
The Poetic Edda, by Henry Adams Bellows, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

  

CONTENTS[*]

  General Introduction  <page xi> 
  Lays of the Gods    
      Voluspo  <page 1> 
      Hovamol  <page 28> 
      Vafthruthnismol  <page 68> 
      Grimnismol  <page 84> 
      Skirnismol  <page 107> 
      Harbarthsljoth  <page 121> 
      Hymiskvitha  <page 138> 
      Lokasenna  <page 151> 
      Thrymskvitha  <page 174> 
      Alvissmol  <page 183> 
      Baldrs Draumar  <page 195> 
      Rigsthula  <page 201> 
      Hyndluljoth  <page 217> 
      Svipdagsmol  <page 234> 
  Lays of the Heroes    
      Volundarkvitha  <page 252> 
      Helgakvitha Hjorvarthssonar  <page 269> 
      Helgakvitha Hundingsbana I  <page 290> 
      Helgakvitha Hundingsbana II  <page 309> 
      Fra Dautha Sinfjotla  <page 332> 
      Gripisspo  <page 337> 
      Reginsmol  <page 356> 
  

  [* For the phonetic spellings of the proper names see the Pronouncing
 Index.]

 CONTENTS--Continued

  Fafnismol  <page 370> 
  Sigrdrifumol  <page 386> 
  Brot af Sigurtharkvithu  <page 402> 
  Guthrunarkvitha I  <page 411> 
  Sigurtharkvitha en Skamma  <page 420> 
  Helreith Brynhildar  <page 442> 
  Drap Niflunga  <page 447> 
  Guthrunarkvitha II, en Forna  <page 450> 
  Guthrunarkvitha III  <page 465> 
  Oddrunargratr  <page 469> 
  Atlakvitha en Gronlenzka  <page 480> 
  Atlamol en Gronlenzku  <page 499> 
  Guthrunarhvot  <page 536> 
  Hamthesmol  <page 545> 
  

 

 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

The General Introduction mentions many of the scholars to whose work this translation owes a special debt. Particular reference, however, should here be made to the late William Henry Schofield, Professor of Comparative Literature in Harvard University and President of The American-Scandinavian Foundation, under whose guidance this translation was begun; to Henry Goddard Leach, for many years Secretary of The American-Scandinavian Foundation, and to William Witherle Lawrence, Professor of English in Columbia University and Chairman of the Foundation's Committee on Publications, for their assistance with the manuscript and the proofs; and to Hanna Astrup Larsen, the Foundation's literary secretary, for her efficient management of the complex details of publication.

      
The Poetic Edda, by Henry Adams Bellows, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xi]

 

GENERAL INTRODUCTION

THERE is scarcely any literary work of great importance which has been less readily available for the general reader, or even for the serious student of literature, than the Poetic Edda. Translations have been far from numerous, and only in Germany has the complete work of translation been done in the full light of recent scholarship. In English the only versions were long the conspicuously inadequate one made by Thorpe, and published about half a century ago, and the unsatisfactory prose translations in Vigfusson and Powell's Corpus Poeticum Boreale, reprinted in the Norroena collection. An excellent translation of the poems dealing with the gods, in verse and with critical and explanatory notes, made by Olive Bray, was, however, published by the Viking Club of London in 1908. In French there exist only partial translations, chief among them being those made by Bergmann many years ago. Among the seven or eight German versions, those by the Brothers Grimm and by Karl Simrock, which had considerable historical importance because of their influence on nineteenth century German literature and art, and particularly on the work of Richard Wagner, have been largely superseded by Hugo Gering's admirable translation, published in 1892, and by the recent two volume rendering by Genzmer, with excellent notes by Andreas Heusler, 194-1920. There are competent translations in both Norwegian and Swedish. The lack of any complete and adequately annotated English rendering in metrical form, based on a critical text, and profiting by the cumulative labors of such scholars as Mogk, Vigfusson,

[p. xii]

Finnur Jonsson, Grundtvig, Bugge, Gislason, Hildebrand, Luning, Sweet, Niedner, Ettmuller, Mullenhoff, Edzardi, B. M. Olsen, Sievers, Sijmons, Detter, Heinzel, Falk, Neckel, Heusler, and Gering, has kept this extraordinary work practically out of the reach of those who have had neither time nor inclination to master the intricacies of the original Old Norse.

On the importance of the material contained in the Poetic Edda it is here needless to dwell at any length. We have inherited the Germanic traditions in our very speech, and the Poetic Edda is the original storehouse of Germanic mythology. It is, indeed, in many ways the greatest literary monument preserved to us out of the antiquity of the kindred races which we call Germanic. Moreover, it has a literary value altogether apart from its historical significance. The mythological poems include, in the Voluspo, one of the vastest conceptions of the creation and ultimate destruction of the world ever crystallized in literary form; in parts of the Hovamol, a collection of wise counsels that can bear comparison with most of the Biblical Book of Proverbs; in the Lokasenna, a comedy none the less full of vivid characterization because its humor is often broad; and in the Thrymskvitha, one of the finest ballads in the world. The hero poems give us, in its oldest and most vivid extant form, the story of Sigurth, Brynhild, and Atli, the Norse parallel to the German Nibelungenlied. The Poetic Edda is not only of great interest to the student of antiquity; it is a collection including some of the most remark able poems which have been preserved to us from the period before the pen and the printing-press. replaced the poet-singer and oral tradition. It is above all else the desire

[p. xiii]

to make better known the dramatic force, the vivid and often tremendous imagery, and the superb conceptions embodied in these poems which has called forth the present translation.

WHAT IS THE POETIC EDDA?

Even if the poems of the so-called Edda were not so significant and intrinsically so valuable, the long series of scholarly struggles which have been going on over them for the better part of three centuries would in itself give them a peculiar interest. Their history is strangely mysterious. We do not know who composed them, or when or where they were composed; we are by no means sure who collected them or when he did so; finally, we are not absolutely certain as to what an "Edda" is, and the best guess at the meaning of the word renders its application to this collection of poems more or less misleading.

A brief review of the chief facts in the history of the Poetic Edda will explain why this uncertainty has persisted. Preserved in various manuscripts of the thirteenth and early fourteenth centuries is a prose work consisting of a very extensive collection of mythological stories, an explanation of the important figures and tropes of Norse poetic diction,--the poetry of the Icelandic and Norwegian skalds was appallingly complex in this respect,--and a treatise on metrics. This work, clearly a handbook for poets, was commonly known as the "Edda" of Snorri Sturluson, for at the head of the copy of it in the Uppsalabok, a manuscript written presumably some fifty or sixty years after Snorri's death, which was in 1241, we find: "This book is called Edda, which Snorri Sturluson composed." This work, well known as the Prose Edda, Snorri's Edda or the

[p. xiv]

 Younger Edda, has recently been made available to readers of English in the admirable translation by Arthur G. Brodeur, published by the American-Scandinavian Foundation in 1916.

Icelandic tradition, however, persisted in ascribing either this Edda or one resembling it to Snorri's much earlier compatriot, Saemund the Wise (1056-1133). When, early in the seventeenth century, the learned Arngrimur Jonsson proved to everyone's satisfaction that Snorri and nobody else must have been responsible for the work in question, the next thing to determine was what, if anything, Saemund had done of the same kind. The nature of Snorri's book gave a clue. In the mythological stories related a number of poems were quoted, and as these and other poems were to all appearances Snorri's chief sources of information, it was assumed that Saemund must have written or compiled a verse Edda--whatever an "Edda" might be--on which Snorri's work was largely based.

So matters stood when, in 1643, Brynjolfur Sveinsson, Bishop of Skalholt, discovered a manuscript, clearly written as early as 1300, containing twenty-nine poems, complete or fragmentary, and some of them with the very lines and stanzas used by Snorri. Great was the joy of the scholars, for here, of course, must be at least a part of the long-sought Edda of Saemund the Wise. Thus the good bishop promptly labeled his find, and as Saemund's Edda, the Elder Edda or the Poetic Edda it has been known to this day.

This precious manuscript, now in the Royal Library in Copenhagen, and known as the Codex Regius (R2365), has been the basis for all published editions of the Eddic poems. A few poems of similar character found elsewhere

[p. xv]

have subsequently been added to the collection, until now most editions include, as in this translation, a total of thirty-four. A shorter manuscript now in the Arnamagnaean collection in Copenhagen (AM748), contains fragmentary or complete versions of six of the poems in the Codex Regius, and one other, Baldrs Draumar, not found in that collection. Four other poems (Rigsthula, Hyndluljoth, Grougaldr and Fjolsvinnsmol, the last two here combined under the title of Svipdagsmol), from various manuscripts, so closely resemble in subject-matter and style the poems in the Codex Regius that they have been included by most editors in the collection. Finally, Snorri's Edda contains one complete poem, the Grottasongr, which many editors have added to the poetic collection; it is, however, not included in this translation, as an admirable English version of it is available in Mr. Brodeur's rendering of Snorri's work.

From all this it is evident that the Poetic Edda, as we now know it, is no definite and plainly limited work, but rather a more or less haphazard collection of separate poems, dealing either with Norse mythology or with hero-cycles unrelated to the traditional history of greater Scandinavia or Iceland. How many other similar poems, now lost, may have existed in such collections as were current in Iceland in the later twelfth and thirteenth centuries we cannot know, though it is evident that some poems of this type are missing. We can say only that thirty-four poems have been preserved, twenty-nine of them in a single manuscript collection, which differ considerably in subject-matter and style from all the rest of extant Old Norse poetry, and these we group together as the Poetic Edda.

[p. xvi]

But what does the word "Edda" mean? Various guesses have been made. An early assumption was that the word somehow meant "Poetics," which fitted Snorri's treatise to a nicety, but which, in addition to the lack of philological evidence to support this interpretation, could by no stretch of scholarly subtlety be made appropriate to the collection of poems. Jacob Grimm ingeniously identified the word with the word "edda" used in one of the poems, the Rigsthula, where, rather conjecturally, it means "great-grand mother." The word exists in this sense no where else in Norse literature, and Grimm's suggestion of "Tales of a Grandmother," though at one time it found wide acceptance, was grotesquely. inappropriate to either the prose or the verse work.

At last Eirikr Magnusson hit on what appears the likeliest solution of the puzzle: that "Edda" is simply the genitive form of the proper name "Oddi." Oddi was a settlement in the southwest of Iceland, certainly the home of Snorri Sturluson for many years, and, traditionally at least, also the home of Saemund the Wise. That Snorri's work should have been called "The Book of Oddi" is altogether reasonable, for such a method of naming books was common--witness the "Book of the Flat Island" and other early manuscripts. That Saemund may also have written or compiled another "Oddi-Book" is perfectly possible, and that tradition should have said he did so is entirely natural.

It is, however, an open question whether or not Saemund had anything to do with making the collection, or any part of it, now known as the Poetic Edda, for of course the seventeenth-century assignment of the work to him is negligible. [p. xvii] We can say only that he may have made some such compilation, for he was a diligent student of Icelandic tradition and history, and was famed throughout the North for his learning. But otherwise no trace of his works survives, and as he was educated in Paris, it is probable that he wrote rather in Latin than in the vernacular.

All that is reasonably certain is that by the middle or last of the twelfth century there existed in Iceland one or more written collections of Old Norse mythological and heroic poems, that the Codex Regius, a copy made a hundred years or so later, represents at least a considerable part of one of these, and that the collection of thirty-four poems which we now know as the Poetic or Elder Edda is practically all that has come down to us of Old Norse poetry of this type. Anything more is largely guesswork, and both the name of the compiler and the meaning of the title "Edda" are conjectural.

THE ORIGIN OF THE EDDIC POEMS

There is even less agreement about the birthplace, authorship and date of the Eddic poems themselves than about the nature of the existing collection. Clearly the poems were the work of many different men, living in different periods; clearly, too, most of them existed in oral tradition for generations before they were committed to writing. In general, the mythological poems seem strongly marked by pagan sincerity, although efforts have been made to prove them the results of deliberate archaizing; and as Christianity became generally accepted throughout the Norse world early in the eleventh century, it seems altogether likely that most of the poems dealing

[p. xviii]

with the gods definitely antedate the year 1000. The earlier terminus is still a matter of dispute. The general weight of critical opinion, based chiefly on the linguistic evidence presented by Hoffory, Finnur Jonsson and others, has indicated that the poems did not assume anything closely analogous to their present forms prior to the ninth century. On the other hand, Magnus Olsen's interpretation of the inscriptions on the Eggjum Stone, which he places as early as the seventh century, have led so competent a scholar as Birger Nerman to say that "we may be warranted in concluding that some of the Eddic poems may have originated, wholly or partially, in the second part of the seventh century." As for the poems belonging to the hero cycles, one or two of them appear to be as late as 1100, but most of them probably date back at least to the century and a half following 900. It is a reasonable guess that the years between 850 and 1050 saw the majority of the Eddic poems worked into definite shape, but it must be remembered that many changes took place during the long subsequent period of oral transmission, and also that many of the legends, both mythological and heroic, on which the poems were based certainly existed in the Norse regions, and quite possibly in verse form, long before the year 900.

As to the origin of the legends on which the poems are based, the whole question, at least so far as the stories of the gods are concerned, is much too complex for discussion here. How much of the actual narrative material of the mythological lays is properly to be called Scandinavian is a matter for students of comparative mythology to

[p. xix]

guess at. The tales underlying the heroic lays are clearly of foreign origin: the Helgi story comes from Denmark, and that of Volund from Germany, as also the great mass of traditions centering around Sigurth (Siegfried), Brynhild, the sons of Gjuki, Atli (Attila), and Jormunrek (Ermanarich). The introductory notes to the various poems deal with the more important of these questions of origin. of the men who composed these poems,--'wrote" is obviously the wrong word--we know absolutely nothing, save that some of them must have been literary artists with a high degree of conscious skill. The Eddic poems are "folk-poetry,"--whatever that may be,--only in the sense that some of them strongly reflect racial feelings and beliefs; they are anything but crude or primitive in workmanship, and they show that not only the poets themselves, but also many of their hearers, must have made a careful study of the art of poetry.

Where the poems were shaped is equally uncertain. Any date prior to 875 would normally imply an origin on the mainland, but the necessarily fluid state of oral tradition made it possible for a poem to be "composed" many times over, and in various and far-separated places, without altogether losing its identity. Thus, even if a poem first assumed something approximating its present form in Iceland in the tenth century, it may none the less embody language characteristic of Norway two centuries earlier. Oral poetry has always had an amazing preservative power over language, and in considering the origins of such poems as these, we must cease thinking in terms of the printing-press, or even in those of the scribe. The

[p. xx]

claims of Norway as the birthplace of most of the Eddic poems have been extensively advanced, but the great literary activity of Iceland after the settlement of the island by Norwegian emigrants late in the ninth century makes the theory of an Icelandic home for many of the poems appear plausible. The two Atli lays, with what authority we do not know, bear in the Codex Regius the superscription "the Greenland poem," and internal evidence suggests that this statement may be correct. Certainly in one poem, the Rigsthula, and probably in several others, there are marks of Celtic influence. During a considerable part of the ninth and tenth centuries, Scandinavians were active in Ireland and in most of the western islands inhabited by branches of the Celtic race. Some scholars have, indeed, claimed nearly all the Eddic poems for these "Western Isles." However, as Iceland early came to be the true cultural center of this Scandinavian island world, it may be said that the preponderant evidence concerning the development of the Eddic poems in anything like their present form points in that direction, and certainly it was in Iceland that they were chiefly preserved.

THE EDDA AND OLD NORSE LITERATURE

Within the proper limits of an introduction it would be impossible to give any adequate summary of the history and literature with which the Eddic poems are indissolubly connected, but a mere mention of a few of the salient facts may be of some service to those who are unfamiliar with the subject. Old Norse literature covers approximately the period between 850 and 1300. During the first part of

[p. xxi]

that period occurred the great wanderings of the Scandinavian peoples, and particularly the Norwegians. A convenient date to remember is that of the sea-fight of Hafrsfjord, 872, when Harald the Fair-Haired broke the power of the independent Norwegian nobles, and made himself overlord of nearly all the country. Many of the defeated nobles fled overseas, where inviting refuges had been found for them by earlier wanderers and plunder-seeking raiders. This was the time of the inroads of the dreaded Northmen in France, and in 885 Hrolf Gangr (Rollo) laid siege to Paris itself. Many Norwegians went to Ireland, where their compatriots had already built Dublin, and where they remained in control of most of the island till Brian Boru shattered their power at the battle of Clontarf in 1014.

Of all the migrations, however, the most important were those to Iceland. Here grew up an active civilization, fostered by absolute independence and by remoteness from the wars which wracked Norway, yet kept from degenerating into provincialism by the roving life of the people, which brought them constantly in contact with the culture of the South. Christianity, introduced throughout the Norse world about the year 1000, brought with it the stability of learning, and the Icelanders became not only the makers but also the students and recorders of history. The years between 875 and 1100 were the great spontaneous period of oral literature. Most of the military and political leaders were also poets, and they composed a mass of lyric poetry concerning the authorship of which we know a good deal, and much of which has been preserved. Narrative

[p. xxii]

prose also flourished, for the Icelander had a passion for story-telling and story-hearing. After 1100 came the day of the writers. These sagamen collected the material that for generations had passed from mouth to mouth, and gave it permanent form in writing. The greatest bulk of what we now have of Old Norse literature,--and the published part of it makes a formidable library,--originated thus in the earlier period before the introduction of writing, and was put into final shape by the scholars, most of them Icelanders, of the hundred years following 1150.

After 1250 came a rapid and tragic decline. Iceland lost its independence, becoming a Norwegian province. Later Norway too fell under alien rule, a Swede ascending the Norwegian throne in 1320. Pestilence and famine laid waste the whole North; volcanic disturbances worked havoc in Iceland. Literature did not quite die, but it fell upon evil days; for the vigorous native narratives and heroic poems of the older period were substituted translations of French romances. The poets wrote mostly doggerel; the prose writers were devoid of national or racial inspiration.

The mass of literature thus collected and written down largely between 1150 and 1250 maybe roughly divided into four groups. The greatest in volume is made up of the sagas: narratives mainly in prose, ranging all the way from authentic history of the Norwegian kings and the early Icelandic settlements to fairy-tales. Embodied in the sagas is found the material composing the second group: the skaldic poetry, a vast collection of songs of praise, triumph, love, lamentation, and so on, almost uniformly characterized

[p. xxiii]

by an appalling complexity of figurative language. There is no absolute line to be drawn between the poetry of the skalds and the poems of the Edda, which we may call the third group; but in addition to the remarkable artificiality of style which marks the skaldic poetry, and which is seldom found in the poems of the Edda, the skalds dealt almost exclusively with their own emotions, whereas the Eddic poems are quite impersonal. Finally, there is the fourth group, made up of didactic works, religious and legal treatises, and so on, studies which originated chiefly in the later period of learned activity.

PRESERVATION OF THE EDDIC POEMS

Most of the poems of the Poetic Edda have unquestionably reached us in rather bad shape. During the long period of oral transmission they suffered all sorts of interpolations, omissions and changes, and some of them, as they now stand, are a bewildering hodge-podge of little related fragments. To some extent the diligent twelfth century compiler to whom we owe the Codex Regius--Saemund or another--was himself doubtless responsible for the patchwork process, often supplemented by narrative prose notes of his own; but in the days before written records existed, it was easy to lose stanzas and longer passages from their context, and equally easy to interpolate them where they did not by any means belong. Some few of the poems, however, appear to be virtually complete and unified as we now have them.

Under such circumstances it is clear that the establishment of a satisfactory text is a matter of the utmost difficulty. As the basis for this translation I have used the text

[p. xxiv]

prepared by Karl Hildebrand (1876) and revised by Hugo Gering (1904). Textual emendation has, however, been so extensive in every edition of the Edda, and has depended so much on the theories of the editor, that I have also made extensive use of many other editions, notably those by Finnur Jonsson, Neckel, Sijmons, and Detter and Heinzel, together with numerous commentaries. The condition of the text in both the principal codices is such that no great reliance can be placed on the accuracy of the copyists, and frequently two editions will differ fundamentally as to their readings of a given passage or even of an entire-poem. For this reason, and because guesswork necessarily plays so large a part in any edition or translation of the Eddic poems, I have risked overloading the pages with textual notes in order to show, as nearly as possible, the exact state of the original together with all the more significant emendations. I have done this particularly in the case of transpositions, many of which appear absolutely necessary, and in the indication of passages which appear to be interpolations.

THE VERSE-FORMS OF THE EDDIC POEMS

The many problems connected with the verse-forms found in the Eddic poems have been analyzed in great detail by Sievers, Neckel, and others. The three verse-forms exemplified in the poems need only a brief comment here, however, in order to make clear the method used in this translation. All of these forms group the lines normally in four-line stanzas. In the so-called Fornyrthislag ("Old Verse"), for convenience sometimes referred to in the notes as four-four measure, these lines have all the same

[p. xxv]

structure, each line being sharply divided by a caesural pause into two half-lines, and each half-line having two accented syllables and two (sometimes three) unaccented ones. The two half-lines forming a complete line are bound together by the alliteration, or more properly initial-rhyme, of three (or two) of the accented syllables. The following is an example of the Fornyrthislag stanza, the accented syllables being in italics:

  VreiThr vas VingThorr, | es vaknaThi
 ok sins hamars | of saknaThi;
 skegg nam hrista, | skor nam dyja,
 reTh JarThar burr | umb at Threifask.

In the second form, the Ljothahattr ("Song Measure"), the first and third line of each stanza are as just described, but the second and fourth are shorter, have no caesural pause, have three accented syllables, and regularly two initial-rhymed accented syllables, for which reason I have occasionally referred to Ljothahattr as four-three measure. The following is an example:

  Ar skal risa | sas annars vill
       fe eTha fior hafa;
 liggjandi ulfr | sjaldan laer of getr
       ne sofandi maThr sigr.

In the third and least commonly used form, the Malahattr ("Speech Measure"), a younger verse-form than either of the other two, each line of the four-line stanza is divided into two half-lines by a caesural pause, each half line having two accented syllables and three (sometimes

[p. xxvi]

four) unaccented ones; the initial rhyme is as in the Fornyrthislag. The following is an example:

  Horsk vas husfreyja, | hugThi at mannviti,
 lag heyrThi orTha, | hvat a laun maeltu;
 Tha vas vant vitri, | vildi Theim hjalTha:
 skyldu of sae sigla, | en sjolf ne kvamskat.

A poem in Fornyrthislag is normally entitled -kvitha (Thrymskvitha, Guthrunarkvitha, etc.), which for convenience I have rendered as "lay," while a poem in Ljothahattr is entitled -mol (Grimnismol, Skirnismol, etc.), which I have rendered as "ballad." It is difficult to find any distinction other than metrical between the two terms, although it is clear that one originally existed.

Variations frequently appear in all three kinds of verse, and these I have attempted to indicate through the rhythm of the translation. In order to preserve so far as possible the effect of the Eddic verse, I have adhered, in making the English version, to certain of the fundamental rules governing the Norse line and stanza formations. The number of lines to each stanza conforms to what seems the best guess as to the original, and I have consistently retained the number of accented syllables. in translating from a highly inflected language into one depending largely on the use of subsidiary words, it has, however, been necessary to employ considerable freedom as to the number of unaccented syllables in a line. The initial-rhyme is generally confined to two accented syllables in each line. As in the original, all initial vowels are allowed to rhyme interchangeably, but I have disregarded the rule which lets certain groups of consonants rhyme only with themselves

[p. xxvii]

(e.g., I have allowed initial s or st to rhyme with sk or sl). In general, I have sought to preserve the effect of the original form whenever possible without an undue sacrifice of accuracy. For purposes of comparison, the translations of the three stanzas just given are here included:

Fornyrthislag:

  Wild was Vingthor | when he awoke,
 And when his mighty | hammer he missed;
 He shook his beard, | his hair was bristling,
 To groping set | the son of Jorth.

Ljothahattr:

He must early go forth | who fain the blood
 Or the goods of another would get;
 The wolf that lies idle | shall win little meat,
 Or the sleeping man success.

Malahattr:

  Wise was the woman, | she fain would use wisdom,
 She saw well what meant | all they said in secret; . .
 From her heart it was hid | how help she might render,
 The sea they should sail, | while herself she should go not.

PROPER NAMES

The forms in which the proper names appear in this translation will undoubtedly perplex and annoy those who have become accustomed to one or another of the current methods of anglicising Old Norse names. The nominative ending -r it has seemed best to, omit after consonants, although it has been retained after vowels; in Baldr the final -r is a part of the stem and is of course retained. I

[p. xxviii]

have rendered the Norse Th by "th" throughout, instead of spasmodically by "d," as in many texts: e.g., Othin in stead of Odin. For the Norse o I have used its equivalent, "o," e.g., Volund; for the o  I have used "o" and not "a," e.g., Voluspo, not Valuspa or Voluspa. To avoid confusion with accents the long vowel marks of the Icelandic are consistently omitted, as likewise in modern Icelandic proper names. The index at the end of the book indicates the pronunciation in each case.

CONCLUSION

That this translation may be of some value to those who can read the poems of the Edda in the original language I earnestly hope. Still more do I wish that it may lead a few who hitherto have given little thought to the Old Norse language and literature to master the tongue for themselves. But far above either of these I place the hope that this English version may give to some, who have known little of the ancient traditions of what is after all their own race, a clearer insight into the glories of that extraordinary past, and that I may through this medium be able to bring to others a small part of the delight which I myself have found in the poems of the Poetic Edda.

      
The Poetic Edda, by Henry Adams Bellows, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xxix]

 

THE POETIC EDDA

 

VOLUME I

 

LAYS OF THE GODS

[p. xxx] [p. 1]

 

VOLUSPO

 The Wise-Woman's Prophecy

 INTRODUCTORY NOTE

At the beginning of the collection in the Codex Regius stands the Voluspo, the most famous and important, as it is likewise the most debated, of all the Eddic poems. Another version of it is found in a huge miscellaneous compilation of about the year 1300, the Hauksbok, and many stanzas are included in the Prose Edda of Snorri Sturluson. The order of the stanzas in the Hauksbok version differs materially from that in the Codex Regius, and in the published editions many experiments have been attempted in further rearrangements. On the whole, how ever, and allowing for certain interpolations, the order of the stanzas in the Codex Regius seems more logical than any of the wholesale "improvements" which have been undertaken.

The general plan of the Voluspo is fairly clear. Othin, chief of the gods, always conscious of impending disaster and eager for knowledge, calls on a certain "Volva," or wise-woman, presumably bidding her rise from the grave. She first tells him of the past, of the creation of the world, the beginning of years, the origin of the dwarfs (at this point there is a clearly interpolated catalogue of dwarfs' names, stanzas 10-16), of the first man and woman, of the world-ash Yggdrasil, and of the first war, between the gods and the Vanir, or, in Anglicized form, the Wanes. Then, in stanzas 27-29, as a further proof of her wisdom, she discloses some of Othin's own secrets and the details of his search for knowledge. Rewarded by Othin for what she has thus far told (stanza 30), she then turns to the real prophesy, the disclosure of the final destruction of the gods. This final battle, in which fire and flood overwhelm heaven and earth as the gods fight with their enemies, is the great fact in Norse mythology; the phrase describing it, ragna rok, "the fate of the gods," has become familiar, by confusion with the word rokkr, "twilight," in the German Goterdammerung. The wise-woman tells of the Valkyries who bring the slain warriors to support Othin and the other gods in the battle, of the slaying of Baldr, best and fairest of the gods, through the wiles of Loki, of the enemies of the gods, of the summons to battle on both sides, and of the mighty struggle, till Othin is slain, and "fire leaps high

[p. 2]

about heaven itself" (stanzas 31-58). But this is not all. A new and beautiful world is to rise on the ruins of the old; Baldr comes back, and "fields unsowed bear ripened fruit" (stanzas 59-66).

This final passage, in particular, has caused wide differences of opinion as to the date and character of the poem. That the poet was heathen and not Christian seems almost beyond dispute; there is an intensity and vividness in almost every stanza which no archaizing Christian could possibly have achieved. On the other hand, the evidences of Christian influence are sufficiently striking to outweigh the arguments of Finnur Jonsson, Mullenhoff and others who maintain that the Voluspo is purely a product of heathendom. The roving Norsemen of the tenth century, very few of whom had as yet accepted Christianity, were nevertheless in close contact with Celtic races which had already been converted, and in many ways the Celtic influence was strongly felt. It seems likely, then, that the Voluspo was the work of a poet living chiefly in Iceland, though possibly in the "Western Isles," in the middle of the tenth century, a vigorous believer in the old gods, and yet with an imagination active enough to be touched by the vague tales of a different religion emanating from his neighbor Celts.

How much the poem was altered during the two hundred years between its composition and its first being committed to writing is largely a matter of guesswork, but, allowing for such an obvious interpolation as the catalogue of dwarfs, and for occasional lesser errors, it seems quite needless to assume such great changes as many editors do. The poem was certainly not composed to tell a story with which its early hearers were quite familiar; the lack of continuity which baffles modern readers presumably did not trouble them in the least. It is, in effect, a series of gigantic pictures, put into words with a directness and sureness which bespeak the poet of genius. It is only after the reader, with the help of the many notes, has--familiarized him self with the names and incidents involved that he can begin to understand the effect which this magnificent poem must have produced on those who not only understood but believed it.

[p. 3]

1. Hearing I ask | from the holy races,
 From Heimdall's sons, | both high and low;
 Thou wilt, Valfather, | that well I relate
 Old tales I remember | of men long ago.

2. I remember yet | the giants of yore,
 Who gave me bread | in the days gone by;
 Nine worlds I knew, | the nine in the tree
 With mighty roots | beneath the mold.

 [1. A few editors, following Bugge, in an effort to clarify the poem, place stanzas 22, 28 and 30 before stanzas 1-20, but the arrangement in both manuscripts, followed here, seems logical. In stanza I the Volva, or wise-woman, called upon by Othin, answers him and demands a hearing. Evidently she be longs to the race of the giants (cf. stanza 2), and thus speaks to Othin unwillingly, being compelled to do so by his magic power. Holy: omitted in Regius; the phrase "holy races" probably means little more than mankind in general. Heimdall: the watchman of the gods; cf. stanza 46 and note. Why mankind should be referred to as Heimdall's sons is uncertain, and the phrase has caused much perplexity. Heimdall seems to have had various at tributes, and in the Rigsthula, wherein a certain Rig appears as the ancestor of the three great classes of men, a fourteenth century annotator identifies Rig with Heimdall, on what authority we do not know, for the Rig of the poem seems much more like Othin (cf. Rigsthula, introductory prose and note). Valfather ("Father of the Slain"): Othin, chief of the gods, so called because the slain warriors were brought to him at Valhall ("Hall of the Slain") by the Valkyries ("Choosers of the Slain").

2. Nine worlds: the worlds of the gods (Asgarth), of the Wanes (Vanaheim, cf. stanza 21 and note), of the elves (Alfheim), of men (Mithgarth), of the giants (Jotunheim), of fire (Muspellsheim, cf. stanza 47 and note), of the dark elves (Svartalfaheim), of the dead (Niflheim), and presumably of the dwarfs (perhaps Nithavellir, cf. stanza 37 and note, but the ninth world is uncertain). The tree: the world-ash Yggdrasil, [fp. 4] symbolizing the universe; cf. Grimnismol, 29-35 and notes, wherein Yggdrasil is described at length.]

 [p. 4]

3. Of old was the age | when Ymir lived;
 Sea nor cool waves | nor sand there were;
 Earth had not been, | nor heaven above,
 But a yawning gap, | and grass nowhere.

4. Then Bur's sons lifted | the level land,
 Mithgarth the mighty | there they made;
 The sun from the south | warmed the stones of earth,
 And green was the ground | with growing leeks.

5. The sun, the sister | of the moon, from the south
 Her right hand cast | over heaven's rim;
 No knowledge she had | where her home should be,
 The moon knew not | what might was his,
 The stars knew not | where their stations were.

 [3. Ymir: the giant out of whose body the gods made the world; cf. Vafthruthnismol, 21. in this stanza as quoted in Snorri's Edda the first line runs: "Of old was the age ere aught there was." Yawning gap: this phrase, "Ginnunga-gap," is sometimes used as a proper name.

4. Bur's sons: Othin, Vili, and Ve. Of Bur we know only that his wife was Bestla, daughter of Bolthorn; cf. Hovamol, 141. Vili and Ve are mentioned by name in the Eddic poems only in Lokasenna, 26. Mithgarth ("Middle Dwelling"): the world of men. Leeks: the leek was often used as the symbol of fine growth (cf. Guthrunarkvitha I, 17), and it was also supposed to have magic power (cf. Sigrdrifumol, 7).

5. Various editors have regarded this stanza as interpolated; Hoffory thinks it describes the northern summer night in which the sun does not set. Lines 3-5 are quoted by Snorri. In the manuscripts line 4 follows line 5. Regarding the sun and moon [fp. 5] as daughter and son of Mundilferi, cf. Vafthruthnismol, 23 and note, and Grimnismol, 37 and note.]

 [p. 5]

6. Then sought the gods | their assembly-seats,
 The holy ones, | and council held;
 Names then gave they | to noon and twilight,
 Morning they named, | and the waning moon,
 Night and evening, | the years to number.

7. At Ithavoll met | the mighty gods,
 Shrines and temples | they timbered high;
 Forges they set, and | they smithied ore,
 Tongs they wrought, | and tools they fashioned.

8. In their dwellings at peace | they played at tables,
 Of gold no lack | did the gods then know,--
 Till thither came | up giant-maids three,
 Huge of might, | out of Jotunheim.

 [6. Possibly an interpolation, but there seems no strong reason for assuming this. Lines 1-2 are identical with lines 1-2 of stanza 9, and line 2 may have been inserted here from that later stanza.

7. Ithavoll ("Field of Deeds"?): mentioned only here and in stanza 60 as the meeting-place of the gods; it appears in no other connection.

8. Tables: the exact nature of this game, and whether it more closely resembled chess or checkers, has been made the subject of a 400-page treatise, Willard Fiske's "Chess in Iceland." Giant-maids: perhaps the three great Norns, corresponding to the three fates; cf. stanza 20, and note. Possibly, however, something has been lost after this stanza, and the missing passage, replaced by the catalogue of the dwarfs (stanzas 9-16), may have explained the "giant-maids" otherwise than as Norns. In Vafthruthnismol, 49, the Norms (this time "three throngs" in stead of simply "three") are spoken of as giant-maidens; [fp. 6] Fafnismol, 13, indicates the existence of many lesser Norns, belonging to various races. Jotunheim: the world of the giants.]

 [p. 6]

9. Then sought the gods | their assembly-seats,
 The holy ones, | and council held,
 To find who should raise | the race of dwarfs
 Out of Brimir's blood | and the legs of Blain.

10. There was Motsognir | the mightiest made
 Of all the dwarfs, | and Durin next;
 Many a likeness | of men they made,
 The dwarfs in the earth, | as Durin said.

11. Nyi and Nithi, | Northri and Suthri,
 Austri and Vestri, | Althjof, Dvalin,
 Nar and Nain, | Niping, Dain,
 Bifur, Bofur, | Bombur, Nori,
 An and Onar, | Ai, Mjothvitnir.

 [9. Here apparently begins the interpolated catalogue of the dwarfs, running through stanza 16; possibly, however, the interpolated section does not begin before stanza 11. Snorri quotes practically the entire section, the names appearing in a some what changed order. Brimir and Blain: nothing is known of these two giants, and it has been suggested that both are names for Ymir (cf. stanza 3). Brimir, however, appears in stanza 37 in connection with the home of the dwarfs. Some editors treat the words as common rather than proper nouns, Brimir meaning "the bloody moisture" and Blain being of uncertain significance.

10. Very few of the dwarfs named in this and the following stanzas are mentioned elsewhere. It is not clear why Durin should have been singled out as authority for the list. The occasional repetitions suggest that not all the stanzas of the catalogue came from the same source. Most of the names presumably had some definite significance, as Northri, Suthri, Austri, and Vestri ("North," "South", "East," and "West"), [fp. 7] Althjof ("Mighty Thief'), Mjothvitnir ("Mead-Wolf"), Gandalf ("Magic Elf'), Vindalf ("Wind Elf'), Rathwith ("Swift in Counsel"), Eikinskjaldi ("Oak Shield"), etc., but in many cases the interpretations are sheer guesswork.]

 [p. 7]

12. Vigg and Gandalf) | Vindalf, Thrain,
 Thekk and Thorin, | Thror, Vit and Lit,
 Nyr and Nyrath,-- | now have I told--
 Regin and Rathsvith-- | the list aright.

13. Fili, Kili, | Fundin, Nali,
 Heptifili, | Hannar, Sviur,
 Frar, Hornbori, | Fraeg and Loni,
 Aurvang, Jari, | Eikinskjaldi.

14. The race of the dwarfs | in Dvalin's throng
 Down to Lofar | the list must I tell;
 The rocks they left, | and through wet lands
 They sought a home | in the fields of sand.

15. There were Draupnir | and Dolgthrasir,
 Hor, Haugspori, | Hlevang, Gloin,

 [12. The order of the lines in this and the succeeding four stanzas varies greatly in the manuscripts and editions, and the names likewise appear in many forms. Regin: probably not identical with Regin the son of Hreithmar, who plays an important part in the Reginsmol and Fafnismol, but cf. note on Reginsmol, introductory prose.

14. Dvalin: in Hovamol, 144, Dvalin seems to have given magic runes to the dwarfs, probably accounting for their skill in craftsmanship, while in Fafnismol, 13, he is mentioned as the father of some of the lesser Norns. The story that some of the dwarfs left the rocks and mountains to find a new home on the sands is mentioned, but unexplained, in Snorri's Edda; of Lofar we know only that he was descended from these wanderers.]

 [p. 8]

Dori, Ori, | Duf, Andvari,
 Skirfir, Virfir, | Skafith, Ai.

16. Alf and Yngvi, | Eikinskjaldi,
 Fjalar and Frosti, | Fith and Ginnar;
 So for all time | shall the tale be known,
 The list of all | the forbears of Lofar.

17. Then from the throng | did three come forth,
 From the home of the gods, | the mighty and gracious;
 Two without fate | on the land they found,
 Ask and Embla, | empty of might.

18. Soul they had not, | sense they had not,
 Heat nor motion, | nor goodly hue;
 Soul gave Othin, | sense gave Honir,
 Heat gave Lothur | and goodly hue.

 [15. Andvari: this dwarf appears prominently in the Reginsmol, which tells how the god Loki treacherously robbed him of his wealth; the curse which he laid on his treasure brought about the deaths of Sigurth, Gunnar, Atli, and many others.

17. Here the poem resumes its course after the interpolated section. Probably, however, something has been lost, for there is no apparent connection between the three giant-maids of stanza 8 and the three gods, Othin, Honir and Lothur, who in stanza 17 go forth to create man and woman. The word "three" in stanzas 9 and 17 very likely confused some early reciter, or perhaps the compiler himself. Ask and Embla: ash and elm; Snorri gives them simply as the names of the first man and woman, but says that the gods made this pair out of trees.

18. Honir: little is known of this god, save that he occasion ally appears in the poems in company with Othin and Loki, and [fp. 9] that he survives the destruction, assuming in the new age the gift of prophesy (cf. stanza 63). He was given by the gods as a hostage to the Wanes after their war, in exchange for Njorth (cf. stanza 21 and note). Lothur: apparently an older name for Loki, the treacherous but ingenious son of Laufey, whose divinity Snorri regards as somewhat doubtful. He was adopted by Othin, who subsequently had good reason to regret it. Loki probably represents the blending of two originally distinct figures, one of them an old fire-god, hence his gift of heat to the newly created pair.]

 [p. 9]

19. An ash I know, | Yggdrasil its name,
 With water white | is the great tree wet;
 Thence come the dews | that fall in the dales,
 Green by Urth's well | does it ever grow.

20. Thence come the maidens | mighty in wisdom,
 Three from the dwelling | down 'neath the tree;
 Urth is one named, | Verthandi the next,--
 On the wood they scored,-- | and Skuld the third.
 Laws they made there, and life allotted
 To the sons of men, and set their fates.

 [19. Yggdrasil: cf. stanza 2 and note, and Grimnismol, 29-35 and notes. Urth ("The Past"): one of the three great Norns. The world-ash is kept green by being sprinkled with the marvelous healing water from her well.

20. The maidens: the three Norns; possibly this stanza should follow stanza 8. Dwelling: Regius has "sae" (sea) instead of "sal" (hall, home), and many editors have followed this reading, although Snorri's prose paraphrase indicates "sal." Urth, Verthandi and Skuld: "Past," "Present" and "Future." Wood, etc.: the magic signs (runes) controlling the destinies of men were cut on pieces of wood. Lines 3-4 are probably interpolations from some other account of the Norns.]

 [p. 10]

21. The war I remember, | the first in the world,
 When the gods with spears | had smitten Gollveig,
 And in the hall | of Hor had burned her,
 Three times burned, | and three times born,
 Oft and again, | yet ever she lives.

22. Heith they named her | who sought their home,
 The wide-seeing witch, | in magic wise;
 Minds she bewitched | that were moved by her magic,
 To evil women | a joy she was.

 [21. This follows stanza 20 in Regius; in the Hauksbok version stanzas 25, 26, 27, 40, and 41 come between stanzas 20 and 21. Editors have attempted all sorts of rearrangements. The war: the first war was that between the gods and the Wanes. The cult of the Wanes (Vanir) seems to have originated among the seafaring folk of the Baltic and the southern shores of the North Sea, and to have spread thence into Norway in opposition to the worship of the older gods; hence the "war." Finally the two types of divinities were worshipped in common; hence the treaty which ended the war with the exchange of hostages. Chief among the Wanes were Njorth and his children, Freyr and Freyja, all of whom became conspicuous among the gods. Beyond this we know little of the Wanes, who seem originally to have been water-deities. I remember: the manuscripts have "she remembers," but the Volva is apparently still speaking of her own memories, as in stanza 2. Gollveig ("Gold-Might"): apparently the first of the Wanes to come among the gods, her ill treatment being the immediate cause of the war. Mullenhoff maintains that Gollveig is another name for Freyja. Lines 5-6, one or both of them probably interpolated, seem to symbolize the refining of gold by fire. Hor ("The High One"): Othin.

22. Heith ("Shining One"?): a name often applied to wise women and prophetesses. The application of this stanza to Gollveig is far from clear, though the reference may be to the [fp. 11] magic and destructive power of gold. It is also possible that the stanza is an interpolation. Bugge maintains that it applies to the Volva who is reciting the poem, and makes it the opening stanza, following it with stanzas 28 and 30, and then going on with stanzas I ff. The text of line 2 is obscure, and has been variously emended.]

 [p. 11]

23. On the host his spear | did Othin hurl,
 Then in the world | did war first come;
 The wall that girdled | the gods was broken,
 And the field by the warlike | Wanes was trodden.

24. Then sought the gods | their assembly-seats,
 The holy ones, | and council held,
 Whether the gods | should tribute give,
 Or to all alike | should worship belong.

25. Then sought the gods | their assembly-seats,
 The holy ones, | and council held,
 To find who with venom | the air had filled,
 Or had given Oth's bride | to the giants' brood.

 [23. This stanza and stanza 24 have been transposed from the order in the manuscripts, for the former describes the battle and the victory of the Wanes, after which the gods took council, debating whether to pay tribute to the victors, or to admit them, as was finally done, to equal rights of worship.

25. Possibly, as Finn Magnusen long ago suggested, there is something lost after stanza 24, but it was not the custom of the Eddic poets to supply transitions which their hearers could generally be counted on to understand. The story referred to in stanzas 25-26 (both quoted by Snorri) is that of the rebuilding of Asgarth after its destruction by the Wanes. The gods employed a giant as builder, who demanded as his reward the sun and moon, and the goddess Freyja for his wife. The gods, terrified by the rapid progress of the work, forced Loki, who had advised the bargain, to delay the giant by a trick, so that the [fp. 12] work was not finished in the stipulated time (cf. Grimnismol, 44, note). The enraged giant then threatened the gods, whereupon Thor slew him. Oth's bride: Freyja; of Oth little is known beyond the fact that Snorri refers to him as a man who "went away on long journeys."]

 [p. 12]

26. In swelling rage | then rose up Thor,--
 Seldom he sits | when he such things hears,--
 And the oaths were broken, | the words and bonds,
 The mighty pledges | between them made.

27. I know of the horn | of Heimdall, hidden
 Under the high-reaching | holy tree;
 On it there pours | from Valfather's pledge
 A mighty stream: | would you know yet more?

 [26. Thor: the thunder-god, son of Othin and Jorth (Earth) cf. particularly Harbarthsljoth and Thrymskvitha, passim. Oaths, etc.: the gods, by violating their oaths to the giant who rebuilt Asgarth, aroused the undying hatred of the giants' race, and thus the giants were among their enemies in the final battle.

27. Here the Volva turns from her memories of the past to a statement of some of Othin's own secrets in his eternal search for knowledge (stanzas 27-29). Bugge puts this stanza after stanza 29. The horn of Heimdall: the Gjallarhorn ("Shrieking Horn"), with which Heimdall, watchman of the gods, will summon them to the last battle. Till that time the horn is buried under Yggdrasil. Valfather's pledge: Othin's eye (the sun?), which he gave to the water-spirit Mimir (or Mim) in exchange for the latter's wisdom. It appears here and in stanza 29 as a drinking-vessel, from which Mimir drinks the magic mead, and from which he pours water on the ash Yggdrasil. Othin's sacrifice of his eye in order to gain knowledge of his final doom is one of the series of disasters leading up to the destruction of the gods. There were several differing versions of the story of Othin's relations with Mimir; another one, quite incompatible with this, appears in stanza 47. In the manuscripts I know and I see appear as "she knows" and "she sees" (cf. note on 21).]

 [p. 13]

28. Alone I sat | when the Old One sought me,
 The terror of gods, | and gazed in mine eyes:
 "What hast thou to ask? | why comest thou hither?
 Othin, I know | where thine eye is hidden."

29. I know where Othin's | eye is hidden,
 Deep in the wide-famed | well of Mimir;
 Mead from the pledge | of Othin each mom
 Does Mimir drink: | would you know yet more?

30. Necklaces had I | and rings from Heerfather,
 Wise was my speech | and my magic wisdom;
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 Widely I saw | over all the worlds.

 [28. The Hauksbok version omits all of stanzas 28-34, stanza 27 being there followed by stanzas 40 and 41. Regius indicates stanzas 28 and 29 as a single stanza. Bugge puts stanza 28 after stanza 22, as the second stanza of his reconstructed poem. The Volva here addresses Othin directly, intimating that, although he has not told her, she knows why he has come to her, and what he has already suffered in his search for knowledge regarding his doom. Her reiterated "would you know yet more?" seems to mean: "I have proved my wisdom by telling of the past and of your own secrets; is it your will that I tell likewise of the fate in store for you?" The Old One: Othin.

29. The first line, not in either manuscript, is a conjectural emendation based on Snorri's paraphrase. Bugge puts this stanza after stanza 20.

30. This is apparently the transitional stanza, in which the Volva, rewarded by Othin for her knowledge of the past (stanzas 1-29), is induced to proceed with her real prophecy (stanzas 31-66). Some editors turn the stanza into the third person, making it a narrative link. Bugge, on the other hand, puts it [fp. 14] after stanza 28 as the third stanza of the poem. No lacuna is indicated in the manuscripts, and editors have attempted various emendations. Heerfather ("Father of the Host"): Othin.]

 [p. 14]

31. On all sides saw I | Valkyries assemble,
 Ready to ride | to the ranks of the gods;
 Skuld bore the shield, | and Skogul rode next,
 Guth, Hild, Gondul, | and Geirskogul.
 Of Herjan's maidens | the list have ye heard,
 Valkyries ready | to ride o'er the earth.

32. I saw for Baldr, | the bleeding god,
 The son of Othin, | his destiny set:

 [31. Valkyries: these "Choosers of the Slain" (cf. stanza I, note) bring the bravest warriors killed in battle to Valhall, in order to re-enforce the gods for their final struggle. They are also called "Wish-Maidens," as the fulfillers of Othin's wishes. The conception of the supernatural warrior-maiden was presumably brought to Scandinavia in very early times from the South-Germanic races, and later it was interwoven with the likewise South-Germanic tradition of the swan-maiden. A third complication developed when the originally quite human women of the hero-legends were endowed with the qualities of both Valkyries and swan-maidens, as in the cases of Brynhild (cf. Gripisspo, introductory note), Svava (cf. Helgakvitha Hjorvarthssonar, prose after stanza 5 and note) and Sigrun (cf. Helgakvitha Hundingsbana I, 17 and note). The list of names here given may be an interpolation; a quite different list is given in Grimnismol, 36. Ranks of the gods: some editors regard the word thus translated as a specific place name. Herjan ("Leader of Hosts"): Othin. It is worth noting that the name Hild ("Warrior") is the basis of Bryn-hild ("Warrior in Mail Coat").

32. Baldr: The death of Baldr, the son of Othin and Frigg, was the first of the great disasters to the gods. The story is fully told by Snorri. Frigg had demanded of all created things, saving only the mistletoe, which she thought too weak to be worth troubling [fp. 15] about, an oath that they would not harm Baldr. Thus it came to he a sport for the gods to hurl weapons at Baldr, who, of course, was totally unharmed thereby. Loki, the trouble-maker, brought the mistletoe to Baldr's blind brother, Hoth, and guided his hand in hurling the twig. Baldr was slain, and grief came upon all the gods. Cf. Baldrs Draumar.]

 [p. 15]

Famous and fair | in the lofty fields,
 Full grown in strength | the mistletoe stood.

33. From the branch which seemed | so slender and fair
 Came a harmful shaft | that Hoth should hurl;
 But the brother of Baldr | was born ere long,
 And one night old | fought Othin's son.
 34. His hands he washed not, | his hair he combed not,
 Till he bore to the bale-blaze | Baldr's foe.
 But in Fensalir | did Frigg weep sore
 For Valhall's need: | would you know yet more?

35. One did I see | in the wet woods bound,
 A lover of ill, | and to Loki like;

 [33. The lines in this and the following stanza have been combined in various ways by editors, lacunae having been freely conjectured, but the manuscript version seems clear enough. The brother of Baldr: Vali, whom Othin begot expressly to avenge Baldr's death. The day after his birth he fought and slew Hoth.

34. Frigg: Othin's wife. Some scholars have regarded her as a solar myth, calling her the sun-goddess, and pointing out that her home in Fensalir ("the sea-halls") symbolizes the daily setting of the sun beneath the ocean horizon.

35. The translation here follows the Regius version. The Hauksbok has the same final two lines, but in place of the first [fp. 16] pair has, "I know that Vali | his brother gnawed, / With his bowels then | was Loki bound." Many editors have followed this version of the whole stanza or have included these two lines, often marking them as doubtful, with the four from Regius. After the murder of Baldr, the gods took Loki and bound him to a rock with the bowels of his son Narfi, who had just been torn to pieces by Loki's other son, Vali. A serpent was fastened above Loki's head, and the venom fell upon his face. Loki's wife, Sigyn, sat by him with a basin to catch the venom, but whenever the basin was full, and she went away to empty it, then the venom fell on Loki again, till the earth shook with his struggles. "And there he lies bound till the end." Cf. Lokasenna, concluding prose.]

 [p. 16]

By his side does Sigyn | sit, nor is glad
 To see her mate: | would you know yet more?

36. From the east there pours | through poisoned vales
 With swords and daggers | the river Slith.
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .

37. Northward a hall | in Nithavellir
 Of gold there rose | for Sindri's race;
 And in Okolnir | another stood,
 Where the giant Brimir | his beer-hall had.

 [36. Stanzas 36-39 describe the homes of the enemies of the gods: the giants (36), the dwarfs (37), and the dead in the land of the goddess Hel (38-39). The Hauksbok version omits stanzas 36 and 37. Regius unites 36 with 37, but most editors have assumed a lacuna. Slith ("the Fearful"): a river in the giants' home. The "swords and daggers" may represent the icy cold.

37. Nithavellir ("the Dark Fields"): a home of the dwarfs. Perhaps the word should be "Nithafjoll" ("the Dark Crags"). Sindri: the great worker in gold among the dwarfs. Okolnir [fp. 17] ("the Not Cold"): possibly a volcano. Brimir: the giant (possibly Ymir) out of whose blood, according to stanza 9, the dwarfs were made; the name here appears to mean simply the leader of the dwarfs.]

 [p. 17]

38. A hall I saw, | far from the sun,
 On Nastrond it stands, | and the doors face north,
 Venom drops | through the smoke-vent down,
 For around the walls | do serpents wind.

39. I saw there wading | through rivers wild
 Treacherous men | and murderers too,
 And workers of ill | with the wives of men;
 There Nithhogg sucked | the blood of the slain,
 And the wolf tore men; | would you know yet more?

 [38. Stanzas 38 and 39 follow stanza 43 in the Hauksbok version. Snorri quotes stanzas 39, 39, 40 and 41, though not consecutively. Nastrond ("Corpse-Strand"): the land of the dead, ruled by the goddess Hel. Here the wicked undergo tortures. Smoke vent: the phrase gives a picture of the Icelandic house, with its opening in the roof serving instead of a chimney.

39. The stanza is almost certainly in corrupt form. The third line is presumably an interpolation, and is lacking in most of the late, paper manuscripts. Some editors, however, have called lines 1-3 the remains of a full. stanza, with the fourth line lacking, and lines 4-5 the remains of another. The stanza depicts the torments of the two worst classes of criminals known to Old Norse morality--oath-breakers and murderers. Nithhogg ("the Dread Biter"): the dragon that lies beneath the ash Yggdrasil and gnaws at its roots, thus symbolizing the destructive elements in the universe; cf. Grimnismol, 32, 35. The wolf: presumably the wolf Fenrir, one of the children of Loki and the giantess Angrbotha (the others being Mithgarthsorm and the goddess Hel), who was chained by the gods with the marvelous chain Gleipnir, fashioned by a dwarf "out of six things: the [fp. 18] noise of a cat's step, the beards of women, the roots of mountains, the nerves of bears, the breath of fishes, and the spittle of birds." The chaining of Fenrir cost the god Tyr his right hand; cf. stanza 44.]

 [p. 18]

40. The giantess old | in Ironwood sat,
 In the east, and bore | the brood of Fenrir;
 Among these one | in monster's guise
 Was soon to steal | the sun from the sky.

41. There feeds he full | on the flesh of the dead,
 And the home of the gods | he reddens with gore;
 Dark grows the sun, | and in summer soon
 Come mighty storms: | would you know yet more?

42. On a hill there sat, | and smote on his harp,
 Eggther the joyous, | the giants' warder;
 Above him the cock | in the bird-wood crowed,
 Fair and red | did Fjalar stand.

 [40. The Hauksbok version inserts after stanza 39 the refrain stanza (44), and puts stanzas 40 and 41 between 27 and 21. With this stanza begins the account of the final struggle itself. The giantess: her name is nowhere stated, and the only other reference to Ironwood is in Grimnismol, 39, in this same connection. The children of this giantess and the wolf Fenrir are the wolves Skoll and Hati, the first of whom steals the sun, the second the moon. Some scholars naturally see here an eclipse myth.

41. In the third line many editors omit the comma after "sun," and put one after "soon," making the two lines run: "Dark grows the sun | in summer soon, / Mighty storms--" etc. Either phenomenon in summer would be sufficiently striking.

42. In the Hauksbok version stanzas 42 and 43 stand between stanzas 44 and 38. Eggther: this giant, who seems to be the watchman of the giants, as Heimdall is that of the gods and Surt of the dwellers in the fire-world, is not mentioned elsewhere in [fp. 19] the poems. Fjalar, the cock whose crowing wakes the giants for the final struggle.]

 [p. 19]

43. Then to the gods | crowed Gollinkambi,
 He wakes the heroes | in Othin's hall;
 And beneath the earth | does another crow,
 The rust-red bird | at the bars of Hel.

44. Now Garm howls loud | before Gnipahellir,
 The fetters will burst, | and the wolf run free;
 Much do I know, | and more can see
 Of the fate of the gods, | the mighty in fight.

45. Brothers shall fight | and fell each other,
 And sisters' sons | shall kinship stain;

 [43. Gollinkambi ("Gold-Comb"): the cock who wakes the gods and heroes, as Fjalar does the giants. The rust-red bird: the name of this bird, who wakes the people of Hel's domain, is nowhere stated.

44. This is a refrain-stanza. In Regius it appears in full only at this point, but is repeated in abbreviated form before stanzas 50 and 59. In the Hauksbok version the full stanza comes first between stanzas 35 and 42, then, in abbreviated form, it occurs four times: before stanzas 45, 50, 55, and 59. In the Hauksbok line 3 runs: "Farther I see and more can say." Garm: the dog who guards the gates of Hel's kingdom; cf. Baldrs Draumar, 2 ff., and Grimnismol, 44. Gniparhellir ("the Cliff-Cave"): the entrance to the world of the dead. The wolf: Fenrir; cf. stanza 39 and note.

45. From this point on through stanza 57 the poem is quoted by Snorri, stanza 49 alone being omitted. There has been much discussion as to the status of stanza 45. Lines 4 and 5 look like an interpolation. After line 5 the Hauksbok has a line running: "The world resounds, the witch is flying." Editors have arranged these seven lines in various ways, with lacunae freely indicated. Sisters' sons: in all Germanic countries the relations between uncle and nephew were felt to be particularly close.]

 [p. 20]

Hard is it on earth, | with mighty whoredom;
 Axe-time, sword-time, | shields are sundered,
 Wind-time, wolf-time, | ere the world falls;
 Nor ever shall men | each other spare.

46. Fast move the sons | of Mim, and fate
 Is heard in the note | of the Gjallarhorn;
 Loud blows Heimdall, | the horn is aloft,
 In fear quake all | who on Hel-roads are.

47. Yggdrasil shakes, | and shiver on high
 The ancient limbs, | and the giant is loose;
 To the head of Mim | does Othin give heed,
 But the kinsman of Surt | shall slay him soon.

 [46. Regius combines the first three lines of this stanza with lines 3, 2, and I of stanza 47 as a single stanza. Line 4, not found in Regius, is introduced from the Hauksbok version, where it follows line 2 of stanza 47. The sons of Mim: the spirits of the water. On Mini (or Mimir) cf. stanza 27 and note. Gjallarhorn: the "Shrieking Horn" with which Heimdall, the watchman of the gods, calls them to the last battle.

47. In Regius lines 3, 2, and I, in that order, follow stanza 46 without separation. Line 4 is not found in Regius, but is introduced from the Hauksbok version. Yggdrasil: cf. stanza 19 and note, and Grimnismol, 29-35. The giant: Fenrir. The head of Mim: various myths were current about Mimir. This stanza refers to the story that he was sent by the gods with Honir as a hostage to the Wanes after their war (cf. stanza 21 and note), and that the Wanes cut off his head and returned it to the gods. Othin embalmed the head, and by magic gave it the power of speech, thus making Mimir's noted wisdom always available. of course this story does not fit with that underlying the references to Mimir in stanzas 27 and 29. The kinsman of Surt: the wolf [fp. 21] Fenrir, who slays Othin in the final struggle; cf. stanza 53. Surt is the giant who rules the fire-world, Muspellsheim; cf. stanza 52.]

 [p. 21]

48. How fare the gods? | how fare the elves?
 All Jotunheim groans, | the gods are at council;
 Loud roar the dwarfs | by the doors of stone,
 The masters of the rocks: | would you know yet more?

49. Now Garm howls loud | before Gnipahellir,
 The fetters will burst, | and the wolf run free
 Much do I know, | and more can see
 Of the fate of the gods, | the mighty in fight.

50. From the east comes Hrym | with shield held high;
 In giant-wrath | does the serpent writhe;
 O'er the waves he twists, | and the tawny eagle
 Gnaws corpses screaming; | Naglfar is loose.

 [48. This stanza in Regius follows stanza 51; in the Hauksbok it stands, as here, after 47. Jotunheim: the land of the giants.

49. Identical with stanza 44. In the manuscripts it is here abbreviated.

50. Hrym: the leader of the giants, who comes as the helmsman of the ship Naglfar (line 4). The serpent: Mithgarthsorm, one of the children of Loki and Angrbotha (cf. stanza 39, note). The serpent was cast into the sea, where he completely encircles the land; cf. especially Hymiskvitha, passim. The eagle: the giant Hraesvelg, who sits at the edge of heaven in the form of an eagle, and makes the winds with his wings; cf. Vafthruthnismol, 37, and Skirnismol, 27. Naglfar: the ship which was made out of dead men's nails to carry the giants to battle.]

 [p. 22]

51. O'er the sea from the north | there sails a ship
 With the people of Hel, | at the helm stands Loki;
 After the wolf | do wild men follow,
 And with them the brother | of Byleist goes.

52. Surt fares from the south | with the scourge of branches,
 The sun of the battle-gods | shone from his sword;
 The crags are sundered, | the giant-women sink,
 The dead throng Hel-way, | and heaven is cloven.

53. Now comes to Hlin | yet another hurt,
 When Othin fares | to fight with the wolf,
 And Beli's fair slayer | seeks out Surt,
 For there must fall | the joy of Frigg.

 [51. North: a guess; the manuscripts have "east," but there seems to be a confusion with stanza 50, line 1. People of Hel: the manuscripts have "people of Muspell," but these came over the bridge Bifrost (the rainbow), which broke beneath them, whereas the people of Hel came in a ship steered by Loki. The wolf: Fenrir. The brother of Byleist: Loki. Of Byleist (or Byleipt) no more is known.

52. Surt: the ruler of the fire-world. The scourge of branches: fire. This is one of the relatively rare instances in the Eddic poems of the type of poetic diction which characterizes the skaldic verse.

53. Hlin: apparently another name for Frigg, Othin's wife. After losing her son Baldr, she is fated now to see Othin slain by the wolf Fenrir. Beli's slayer: the god Freyr, who killed the giant Beli with his fist; cf. Skirnismol, 16 and note. On Freyr, who belonged to the race of the Wanes, and was the brother of Freyja, see especially Skirnismol, passim. The Joy of Frigg: Othin.]

 [p. 23]

54. Then comes Sigfather's | mighty son,
 Vithar, to fight | with the foaming wolf;
 In the giant's son | does he thrust his sword
 Full to the heart: | his father is avenged.

55. Hither there comes | the son of Hlothyn,
 The bright snake gapes | to heaven above;
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 Against the serpent | goes Othin's son.

56. In anger smites | the warder of earth,--
 Forth from their homes | must all men flee;-
 Nine paces fares | the son of Fjorgyn,
 And, slain by the serpent, | fearless he sinks.

 [54. As quoted by Snorri the first line of this stanza runs: "Fares Othin's son | to fight with the wolf." Sigfather ("Father of Victory"): Othin. His son, Vithar, is the silent god, famed chiefly for his great shield, and his strength, which is little less than Thor's. He survives the destruction. The giant's son: Fenrir.

55. This and the following stanza are clearly in bad shape. In Regius only lines I and 4 are found, combined with stanza 56 as a single stanza. Line I does not appear in the Hauksbok version, the stanza there beginning with line 2. Snorri, in quoting these two stanzas, omits 55, 2-4, and 56, 3, making a single stanza out of 55, I, and 56, 4, 2, I, in that order. Moreover, the Hauksbok manuscript at this point is practically illegible. The lacuna (line 3) is, of course, purely conjectural, and all sorts of arrangements of the lines have been attempted by editors, Hlothyn: another name for Jorth ("Earth"), Thor's mother; his father was Othin. The snake: Mithgarthsorm; cf. stanza 5c and note. Othin's son: Thor. The fourth line in Regius reads "against the wolf," but if this line refers to Thor at all, and not to Vithar, the Hauksbok reading, "serpent," is correct.

56. The warder of earth: Thor. The son of Fjorgyn: again [fp. 24] Thor, who, after slaying the serpent, is overcome by his venomous breath, and dies. Fjorgyn appears in both a masculine and a feminine form. in the masculine 1t is a name for Othin; in the feminine, as here and in Harbarthsljoth, 56, it apparently refers to Jorth.]

 [p. 24]

57. The sun turns black, | earth sinks in the sea,
 The hot stars down | from heaven are whirled;
 Fierce grows the steam | and the life-feeding flame,
 Till fire leaps high | about heaven itself.

58. Now Garm howls loud | before Gnipahellir,
 The fetters will burst, | and the wolf run free;
 Much do I know, | and more can see
 Of the fate of the gods, | the mighty in fight.

59. Now do I see | the earth anew
 Rise all green | from the waves again;
 The cataracts fall, | and the eagle flies,
 And fish he catches | beneath the cliffs.

60. The gods in Ithavoll | meet together,
 Of the terrible girdler | of earth they talk,

 [57. With this stanza ends the account of the destruction.

58. Again the refrain-stanza (cf. stanza 44 and note), abbreviated in both manuscripts, as in the case of stanza 49. It is probably misplaced here.

59. Here begins the description of the new world which is to rise out of the wreck of the old one. It is on this passage that a few critics have sought to base their argument that the poem is later than the introduction of Christianity (circa 1000), but this theory has never seemed convincing (cf. introductory note).

60. The third line of this stanza is not found in Regius. Ithavoll: cf. stanza 7 and note. The girdler of earth: Mithgarthsorm: [fp. 25], who, lying in the sea, surrounded the land. The Ruler of Gods: Othin. The runes were both magic signs, generally carved on wood, and sung or spoken charms.]

 [p. 25]

And the mighty past | they call to mind,
 And the ancient runes | of the Ruler of Gods.

61. In wondrous beauty | once again
 Shall the golden tables | stand mid the grass,
 Which the gods had owned | in the days of old,
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .

62. Then fields unsowed | bear ripened fruit,
 All ills grow better, | and Baldr comes back;
 Baldr and Hoth dwell | in Hropt's battle-hall,
 And the mighty gods: | would you know yet more?

63. Then Honir wins | the prophetic wand,
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 And the sons of the brothers | of Tveggi abide
 In Vindheim now: | would you know yet more?

 [61. The Hauksbok version of the first two lines runs:

"The gods shall find there, | wondrous fair,
 The golden tables | amid the grass."

No lacuna (line 4) is indicated in the manuscripts. Golden tables: cf. stanza 8 and note.

62. Baldr: cf. stanza 32 and note. Baldr and his brother, Hoth, who unwittingly slew him at Loki's instigation, return together, their union being a symbol of the new age of peace. Hropt: another name for Othin. His "battle-hall" is Valhall.

63. No lacuna (line 2) indicated in the manuscripts. Honir: cf. stanza 18 and note. In this new age he has the gift of foretelling the future. Tveggi ("The Twofold"): another name for [fp. 26] Othin. His brothers are Vili and Ve (cf. Lokasenna, 26, and note). Little is known of them, and nothing, beyond this reference, of their sons. Vindheim ("Home of the Wind"): heaven.]

 [p. 26] [p. 27]

64. More fair than the sun, | a hall I see,
 Roofed with gold, | on Gimle it stands;
 There shall the righteous | rulers dwell,
 And happiness ever | there shall they have.

65. There comes on high, | all power to hold,
 A mighty lord, | all lands he rules.
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .

66. From below the dragon | dark comes forth,
 Nithhogg flying | from Nithafjoll;
 The bodies of men on | his wings he bears,
 The serpent bright: | but now must I sink.

 [64. This stanza is quoted by Snorri. Gimle: Snorri makes this the name of the hall itself, while here it appears to refer to a mountain on which the hall stands. It is the home of the happy, as opposed to another hall, not here mentioned, for the dead. Snorri's description of this second hall is based on Voluspo, 38, which he quotes, and perhaps that stanza properly belongs after 64.

65. This stanza is not found in Regius, and is probably spurious. No lacuna is indicated in the Hauksbok version, but late paper manuscripts add two lines, running:

"Rule he orders, | and rights he fixes,
 Laws he ordains | that ever shall live."

The name of this new ruler is nowhere given, and of course the suggestion of Christianity is unavoidable. It is not certain, how ever, that even this stanza refers to Christianity, and if it does, it may have been interpolated long after the rest of the poem was composed.

66. This stanza, which fits so badly with the preceding ones, [fp. 27] may well have been interpolated. It has been suggested that the dragon, making a last attempt to rise, is destroyed, this event marking the end of evil in the world. But in both manuscripts the final half-line does not refer to the dragon, but, as the gender shows, to the Volva herself, who sinks into the earth; a sort of conclusion to the entire prophecy. Presumably the stanza (barring the last half-line, which was probably intended as the conclusion of the poem) belongs somewhere in the description of the great struggle. Nithhogg: the dragon at the roots of Yggdrasil; cf. stanza 39 and note. Nithafjoll ("the Dark Crags"); nowhere else mentioned. Must I: the manuscripts have "must she."]

 
      
The Poetic Edda, by Henry Adams Bellows, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 28]

 

HOVAMOL

 

The Ballad of the High One

 

INTRODUCTORY NOTE

This poem follows the Voluspo in the Codex Regius, but is preserved in no other manuscript. The first stanza is quoted by Snorri, and two lines of stanza 84 appear in one of the sagas.

In its present shape it involves the critic of the text in more puzzles than any other of the Eddic poems. Without going in detail into the various theories, what happened seems to have been somewhat as follows. There existed from very early times a collection of proverbs and wise counsels, which were attributed to Othin just as the Biblical proverbs were to Solomon. This collection, which presumably was always elastic in extent, was known as "The High One's Words," and forms the basis of the present poem. To it, however, were added other poems and fragments dealing with wisdom which seemed by their nature to imply that the speaker was Othin. Thus a catalogue of runes, or charms, was tacked on, and also a set of proverbs, differing essentially in form from those comprising the main collection. Here and there bits of verse more nearly narrative crept in; and of course the loose structure of the poem made it easy for any reciter to insert new stanzas almost at will. This curious miscellany is what we now have as the Hovamol.

Five separate elements are pretty clearly recognizable: (1) the Hovamol proper (stanzas 1-80), a collection of proverbs and counsels for the conduct of life; (2) the Loddfafnismol (stanzas 111-138), a collection somewhat similar to the first, but specific ally addressed to a certain Loddfafnir; (3) the Ljothatal (stanzas 147-165), a collection of charms; (4) the love-story of Othin and Billing's daughter (stanzas 96-102), with an introductory dissertation on the faithlessness of women in general (stanzas 81-95), which probably crept into the poem first, and then pulled the story, as an apt illustration, after it; (5) the story of how Othin got the mead of poetry--the draught which gave him the gift of tongues--from the maiden Gunnloth (stanzas 103-110). There is also a brief passage (stanzas 139 146) telling how Othin won the runes, this passage being a natural introduction to the Ljothatal, and doubtless brought into the poem for that reason.

[p. 29]

It is idle to discuss the authorship or date of such a series of accretions as this. Parts of it are doubtless among the oldest relics of ancient Germanic poetry; parts of it may have originated at a relatively late period. Probably, however, most of its component elements go pretty far back, although we have no way of telling how or when they first became associated.

It seems all but meaningless to talk about "interpolations" in a poem which has developed almost solely through the process of piecing together originally unrelated odds and ends. The notes, therefore, make only such suggestions as are needed to keep the main divisions of the poem distinct.

Few gnomic collections in the world's literary history present sounder wisdom more tersely expressed than the Hovamol. Like the Book of Proverbs it occasionally rises to lofty heights of poetry. If it presents the worldly wisdom of a violent race, it also shows noble ideals of loyalty, truth, and unfaltering courage.

1. Within the gates | ere a man shall go,
 (Full warily let him watch,)
 Full long let him look about him;
 For little he knows | where a foe may lurk,
 And sit in the seats within.

2. Hail to the giver! | a guest has come;
 Where shall the stranger sit?
 Swift shall he be who, | with swords shall try
 The proof of his might to make.

 [1. This stanza is quoted by Snorri, the second line being omitted in most of the Prose Edda manuscripts.

2. Probably the first and second lines had originally nothing to do with the third and fourth, the last two not referring to host or guest, but to the general danger of backing one's views with the sword.]

 [p. 30]

3. Fire he needs | who with frozen knees
 Has come from the cold without;
 Food and clothes | must the farer have,
 The man from the mountains come.

4. Water and towels | and welcoming speech
 Should he find who comes, to the feast;
 If renown he would get, | and again be greeted,
 Wisely and well must he act.

5. Wits must he have | who wanders wide,
 But all is easy at home;
 At the witless man | the wise shall wink
 When among such men he sits.

6. A man shall not boast | of his keenness of mind,
 But keep it close in his breast;
 To the silent and wise | does ill come seldom
 When he goes as guest to a house;
 (For a faster friend | one never finds
 Than wisdom tried and true.)

7. The knowing guest | who goes to the feast,
 In silent attention sits;
 With his ears he hears, | with his eyes he watches,
 Thus wary are wise men all.

 [6. Lines 5 and 6 appear to have been added to the stanza.]

 [p. 31]

8. Happy the one | who wins for himself
 Favor and praises fair;
 Less safe by far | is the wisdom found
 That is hid in another's heart.

9. Happy the man | who has while he lives
 Wisdom and praise as well,
 For evil counsel | a man full oft
 Has from another's heart.

10. A better burden | may no man bear
 For wanderings wide than wisdom;
 It is better than wealth | on unknown ways,
 And in grief a refuge it gives.

11. A better burden | may no man bear
 For wanderings wide than wisdom;
 Worse food for the journey | he brings not afield
 Than an over-drinking of ale.

12. Less good there lies | than most believe
 In ale for mortal men;
 For the more he drinks | the less does man
 Of his mind the mastery hold.

 [12. Some editors have combined this stanza in various ways with the last two lines of stanza it, as in the manuscript the first two lines of the latter are abbreviated, and, if they belong there at all, are presumably identical with the first two lines of stanza 10.]

 [p. 32]

13. Over beer the bird | of forgetfulness broods,
 And steals the minds of men;
 With the heron's feathers | fettered I lay
 And in Gunnloth's house was held.

14. Drunk I was, | I was dead-drunk,
 When with Fjalar wise I was;
 'Tis the best of drinking | if back one brings
 His wisdom with him home.

15. The son of a king | shall be silent and wise,
 And bold in battle as well;
 Bravely and gladly | a man shall go,
 Till the day of his death is come.

16. The sluggard believes | he shall live forever,
 If the fight he faces not;
 But age shall not grant him | the gift of peace,
 Though spears may spare his life.

17. The fool is agape | when he comes to the feast,
 He stammers or else is still;
 But soon if he gets | a drink is it seen
 What the mind of the man is like.

 [13. The heron: the bird of forgetfulness, referred to in line 1. Gunnloth: the daughter of the giant Suttung, from whom Othin won the mead of poetry. For this episode see stanzas 104-110.

14. Fjalar: apparently another name for Suttung. This stanza, and probably 13, seem to have been inserted as illustrative.]

 [p. 33]

18. He alone is aware | who has wandered wide,
 And far abroad has fared,
 How great a mind | is guided by him
 That wealth of wisdom has.

19. Shun not the mead, | but drink in measure;
 Speak to the point or be still;
 For rudeness none | shall rightly blame thee
 If soon thy bed thou seekest.

20. The greedy man, | if his mind be vague,
 Will eat till sick he is;
 The vulgar man, | when among the wise,
 To scorn by his belly is brought.

21. The herds know well | when home they shall fare,
 And then from the grass they go;
 But the foolish man | his belly's measure
 Shall never know aright.

22. A paltry man | and poor of mind
 At all things ever mocks;
 For never he knows, | what he ought to know,
 That he is not free from faults.

23. The witless man | is awake all night,
 Thinking of many things;
 Care-worn he is | when the morning comes,
 And his woe is just as it was.

24. The foolish man | for friends all those
 Who laugh at him will hold;

[p. 34]

When among the wise | he marks it not
 Though hatred of him they speak.

25. The foolish man | for friends all those
 Who laugh at him will hold;
 But the truth when he comes | to the council he learns,
 That few in his favor will speak.

26. An ignorant man | thinks that all he knows,
 When he sits by himself in a corner;
 But never what answer | to make he knows,
 When others with questions come.

27. A witless man, | when he meets with men,
 Had best in silence abide;
 For no one shall find | that nothing he knows,
 If his mouth is not open too much.
 (But a man knows not, | if nothing he knows,
 When his mouth has been open too much.)

28. Wise shall he seem | who well can question,
 And also answer well;
 Nought is concealed | that men may say
 Among the sons of men.

29. Often he speaks | who never is still
 With words that win no faith;

 [25. The first two lines are abbreviated in the manuscript, but are doubtless identical with the first two lines of stanza 24.

27. The last two lines were probably added as a commentary on lines 3 and 4.]

 [p. 35]

The babbling tongue, | if a bridle it find not,
 Oft for itself sings ill.

30. In mockery no one | a man shall hold,
 Although he fare to the feast;
 Wise seems one oft, | if nought he is asked,
 And safely he sits dry-skinned.

31. Wise a guest holds it | to take to his heels,
 When mock of another he makes;
 But little he knows | who laughs at the feast,
 Though he mocks in the midst of his foes.

32. Friendly of mind | are many men,
 Till feasting they mock at their friends;
 To mankind a bane | must it ever be
 When guests together strive.

33. Oft should one make | an early meal,
 Nor fasting come to the feast;
 Else he sits and chews | as if he would choke,
 And little is able to ask.

34. Crooked and far | is the road to a foe,
 Though his house on the highway be;
 But wide and straight | is the way to a friend,
 Though far away he fare.

35. Forth shall one go, | nor stay as a guest
 In a single spot forever;

[p. 36]

Love becomes loathing | if long one sits
 By the hearth in another's home.

36. Better a house, | though a hut it be,
 A man is master at home;
 A pair of goats | and a patched-up roof
 Are better far than begging.

37. Better a house, | though a hut it be,
 A man is master at home;
 His heart is bleeding | who needs must beg
 When food he fain would have.

38. Away from his arms | in the open field
 A man should fare not a foot;
 For never he knows | when the need for a spear
 Shall arise on the distant road.

39. If wealth a man | has won for himself,
 Let him never suffer in need;
 Oft he saves for a foe | what he plans for a friend,
 For much goes worse than we wish.

40. None so free with gifts | or food have I found
 That gladly he took not a gift,

 [36. The manuscript has "little" in place of "a hut" in line I, but this involves an error in the initial-rhymes, and the emendation has been generally accepted.

37. Lines I and 2 are abbreviated in the manuscript, but are doubtless identical with the first two lines of stanza 56.

39. In the manuscript this stanza follows stanza 40.]

 [p. 37]

Nor one who so widely | scattered his wealth
 That of recompense hatred he had.

41. Friends shall gladden each other | with arms and garments,
 As each for himself can see;
 Gift-givers' friendships | are longest found,
 If fair their fates may be.

42. To his friend a man | a friend shall prove,
 And gifts with gifts requite;
 But men shall mocking | with mockery answer,
 And fraud with falsehood meet.

43. To his friend a man | a friend shall prove,
 To him and the friend of his friend;
 But never a man | shall friendship make
 With one of his foeman's friends.

44. If a friend thou hast | whom thou fully wilt trust,
 And good from him wouldst get,
 Thy thoughts with his mingle, | and gifts shalt thou make,
 And fare to find him oft.

 [40. The key-word in line 3 is missing in the manuscript, but editors have agreed in inserting a word meaning "generous."

41. In line 3 the manuscript adds "givers again" to "gift-givers."]

 [p. 38]

45. If another thou hast | whom thou hardly wilt trust,
 Yet good from him wouldst get,
 Thou shalt speak him fair, | but falsely think,
 And fraud with falsehood requite.

46. So is it with him | whom thou hardly wilt trust,
 And whose mind thou mayst not know;
 Laugh with him mayst thou, | but speak not thy mind,
 Like gifts to his shalt thou give.

47. Young was I once, | and wandered alone,
 And nought of the road I knew;
 Rich did I feel | when a comrade I found,
 For man is man's delight.

48. The lives of the brave | and noble are best,
 Sorrows they seldom feed;
 But the coward fear | of all things feels,
 And not gladly the niggard gives.

49. My garments once | in a field I gave
 To a pair of carven poles;
 Heroes they seemed | when clothes they had,
 But the naked man is nought.

50. On the hillside drear | the fir-tree dies,
 All bootless its needles and bark;
 It is like a man | whom no one loves,--
 Why should his life be long?

[p. 39]

51. Hotter than fire | between false friends
 Does friendship five days burn;
 When the sixth day comes | the fire cools,
 And ended is all the love.

52. No great thing needs | a man to give,
 Oft little will purchase praise;
 With half a loaf | and a half-filled cup
 A friend full fast I made.

53. A little sand | has a little sea,
 And small are the minds of men;
 Though all men are not | equal in wisdom,
 Yet half-wise only are all.

54. A measure of wisdom | each man shall have,
 But never too much let him know;
 The fairest lives | do those men live
 Whose wisdom wide has grown.

55. A measure of wisdom | each man shall have,
 But never too much let him know;
 For the wise man's heart | is seldom happy,
 If wisdom too great he has won.

56. A measure of wisdom | each man shall have,
 But never too much let him know;

 [55-56. The first pairs of lines are abbreviated in the manuscript.]

 [p. 40]

Let no man the fate | before him see,
 For so is he freest from sorrow.

57. A brand from a brand | is kindled and burned,
 And fire from fire begotten;
 And man by his speech | is known to men,
 And the stupid by their stillness.

58. He must early go forth | who fain the blood
 Or the goods of another would get;
 The wolf that lies idle | shall win little meat,
 Or the sleeping man success.

59. He must early go forth | whose workers are few,
 Himself his work to seek;
 Much remains undone | for the morning-sleeper,
 For the swift is wealth half won.

60. Of seasoned shingles | and strips of bark
 For the thatch let one know his need,
 And how much of wood | he must have for a month,
 Or in half a year he will use.

61. Washed and fed | to the council fare,
 But care not too much for thy clothes;
 Let none be ashamed | of his shoes and hose,
 Less still of the steed he rides,
 (Though poor be the horse he has.)

 [61. The fifth line is probably a spurious addition.]

 [p. 41]

62. When the eagle comes | to the ancient sea,
 He snaps and hangs his head;
 So is a man | in the midst of a throng,
 Who few to speak for him finds.

63. To question and answer | must all be ready
 Who wish to be known as wise;
 Tell one thy thoughts, | but beware of two,--
 All know what is known to three.

64. The man who is prudent | a measured use
 Of the might he has will make;
 He finds when among | the brave he fares
 That the boldest he may not be.

65.     .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .
 .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .
 Oft for the words | that to others one speaks
 He will get but an evil gift.

66. Too early to many | a meeting I came,
 And some too late have I sought;
 The beer was all drunk, | or not yet brewed;
 Little the loathed man finds.

 [62. This stanza follows stanza 63 in the manuscript, but there are marks therein indicating the transposition.

65. The manuscript indicates no lacuna (lines I and 2). Many editors have filled out the stanza with two lines from late paper manuscripts, the passage running:

"A man must be watchful | and wary as well,
 And fearful of trusting a friend."

]

 [p. 42]

67. To their homes men would bid | me hither and yon,
 If at meal-time I needed no meat,
 Or would hang two hams | in my true friend's house,
 Where only one I had eaten.

68. Fire for men | is the fairest gift,
 And power to see the sun;
 Health as well, | if a man may have it,
 And a life not stained with sin.

69. All wretched is no man, | though never so sick;
 Some from their sons have joy,
 Some win it from kinsmen, | and some from their wealth,
 And some from worthy works.

70. It is better to live | than to lie a corpse,
 The live man catches the cow;
 I saw flames rise | for the rich man's pyre,
 And before his door he lay dead.

71. The lame rides a horse, | the handless is herdsman,
 The deaf in battle is bold;
 The blind man is better | than one that is burned,
 No good can come of a corpse.

 [70. The manuscript has "and a worthy life" in place of "than to lie a corpse" in line I, but Rask suggested the emendation as early as 1818, and most editors have followed him.]

 [p. 43]

72. A son is better, | though late he be born,
 And his father to death have fared;
 Memory-stones | seldom stand by the road
 Save when kinsman honors his kin.

73. Two make a battle, | the tongue slays the head;
 In each furry coat | a fist I look for.

74. He welcomes the night | whose fare is enough,
 (Short are the yards of a ship,)
 Uneasy are autumn nights;
 Full oft does the weather | change in a week,
 And more in a month's time.

75. A man knows not, | if nothing he knows,
 That gold oft apes begets;
 One man is wealthy | and one is poor,
 Yet scorn for him none should know.

76. Among Fitjung's sons | saw I well-stocked folds,--
 Now bear they the beggar's staff;

 [73-74. These seven lines are obviously a jumble. The two lines of stanza 73 not only appear out of place, but the verse form is unlike that of the surrounding stanzas. In 74, the second line is clearly interpolated, and line I has little enough connection with lines 3, 4 and 5. It looks as though some compiler (or copyist) had inserted here various odds and ends for which he could find no better place.

75. The word "gold" in line 2 is more or less conjectural, the manuscript being obscure. The reading in line 4 is also doubtful.]

 [p. 44]

Wealth is as swift | as a winking eye,
 Of friends the falsest it is.

77. Cattle die, | and kinsmen die,
 And so one dies one's self;
 But a noble name | will never die,
 If good renown one gets.

78. Cattle die, | and kinsmen die,
 And so one dies one's self;
 One thing now | that never dies,
 The fame of a dead man's deeds.

79. Certain is that | which is sought from runes,
 That the gods so great have made,
 And the Master-Poet painted;
 .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .
 .    .    .    .    .     of the race of gods:
 Silence is safest and best.

80. An unwise man, | if a maiden's love
 Or wealth he chances to win,

 [76. in the manuscript this stanza follows 79, the order being: 77, 78, 76, 80, 79, 81. Fitjung ("the Nourisher"): Earth.

79. This stanza is certainly in bad shape, and probably out of place here. Its reference to runes as magic signs suggests that it properly belongs in some list of charms like the Ljothatal (stanzas 147-165). The stanza-form is so irregular as to show either that something has been lost or that there have been interpolations. The manuscript indicates no lacuna; Gering fills out the assumed gap as follows:

"Certain is that which is sought from runes,
 The runes--," etc.

]

 [p. 45]

His pride will wax, but his wisdom never,
 Straight forward he fares in conceit.

*    *    *

81. Give praise to the day at evening, | to a woman on her pyre,
 To a weapon which is tried, | to a maid at wed lock,
 To ice when it is crossed, | to ale that is drunk.

82. When the gale blows hew wood, | in fair winds seek the water;
 Sport with maidens at dusk, | for day's eyes are many;
 From the ship seek swiftness, | from the shield protection,
 Cuts from the sword, | from the maiden kisses.

83. By the fire drink ale, | over ice go on skates;
 Buy a steed that is lean, | and a sword when tarnished,

 [81. With this stanza the verse-form, as indicated in the translation, abruptly changes to Malahattr. What has happened seems to have been something like this. Stanza 80 introduces the idea of man's love for woman. Consequently some reciter or compiler (or possibly even a copyist) took occasion to insert at this point certain stanzas concerning the ways of women. Thus stanza 80 would account for the introduction of stanzas 81 and 82, which, in turn, apparently drew stanza 83 in with them. Stanza 84 suggests the fickleness of women, and is immediately followed--again with a change of verse-form--by a list of things equally untrustworthy (stanzas 85-90). Then, after a few more stanzas on love in the regular measure of the Hovamol (stanza 91-9s), is introduced, by way of illustration, Othin's story of his [fp. 46] adventure with Billing's daughter (stanzas 96-102). Some such process of growth, whatever its specific stages may have been, must be assumed to account for the curious chaos of the whole passage from stanza 81 to stanza 102.]

 [p. 46]

The horse at home fatten, | the hound in thy dwelling.

*    *    *

84. A man shall trust not | the oath of a maid,
 Nor the word a woman speaks;
 For their hearts on a whirling | wheel were fashioned,
 And fickle their breasts were formed.

85. In a breaking bow | or a burning flame,
 A ravening wolf | or a croaking raven,
 In a grunting boar, | a tree with roots broken,
 In billowy seas | or a bubbling kettle,

86. In a flying arrow | or falling waters,
 In ice new formed | or the serpent's folds,
 In a bride's bed-speech | or a broken sword,
 In the sport of bears | or in sons of kings,

87. In a calf that is sick | or a stubborn thrall,
 A flattering witch | or a foe new slain.

 [84. Lines 3 and 4 are quoted in the Fostbraethrasaga.

85. Stanzas 85-88 and go are in Fornyrthislag, and clearly come from a different source from the rest of the Hovamol.

87. The stanza is doubtless incomplete. Some editors add from a late paper manuscript two lines running:

"In a light, clear sky | or a laughing throng,
 In the bowl of a dog | or a harlot's grief!"

]

 [p. 47]

88. In a brother's slayer, | if thou meet him abroad,
 In a half-burned house, | in a horse full swift--
 One leg is hurt | and the horse is useless--
 None had ever such faith | as to trust in them all.

89. Hope not too surely | for early harvest,
 Nor trust too soon in thy son;
 The field needs good weather, | the son needs wisdom,
 And oft is either denied.

*    *    *

90. The love of women | fickle of will
 Is like starting o'er ice | with a steed unshod,
 A two-year-old restive | and little tamed,
 Or steering a rudderless | ship in a storm,
 Or, lame, hunting reindeer | on slippery rocks.

*    *    *

91. Clear now will I speak, | for I know them both,
 Men false to women are found;
 When fairest we speak, | then falsest we think,
 Against wisdom we work with deceit.

92. Soft words shall he speak | and wealth shall he offer
 Who longs for a maiden's love,
 And the beauty praise | of the maiden bright;
 He wins whose wooing is best.

 [89. This stanza follows stanza 89 in the manuscript. Many editors have changed the order, for while stanza 89 is pretty clearly an interpolation wherever it stands, it seriously interferes with the sense if it breaks in between 87 and 88.]

 [p. 48]

93. Fault for loving | let no man find
 Ever with any other;
 Oft the wise are fettered, | where fools go free,
 By beauty that breeds desire.

94. Fault with another | let no man find
 For what touches many a man;
 Wise men oft | into witless fools
 Are made by mighty love.

95. The head alone knows | what dwells near the heart,
 A man knows his mind alone;
 No sickness is worse | to one who is wise
 Than to lack the longed-for joy.

96. This found I myself, | when I sat in the reeds,
 And long my love awaited;
 As my life the maiden | wise I loved,
 Yet her I never had.

97. Billing's daughter | I found on her bed,
 In slumber bright as the sun;
 Empty appeared | an earl's estate
 Without that form so fair.

 [96. Here begins the passage (stanzas 96-102) illustrating the falseness of woman by the story of Othin's unsuccessful love affair with Billing's daughter. Of this person we know nothing beyond what is here told, but the story needs little comment.]

 [p. 49]

98. "Othin, again | at evening come,
 If a woman thou wouldst win;
 Evil it were | if others than we
 Should know of such a sin."

99. Away I hastened, | hoping for joy,
 And careless of counsel wise;
 Well I believed | that soon I should win
 Measureless joy with the maid.

100. So came I next | when night it was,
 The warriors all were awake;
 With burning lights | and waving brands
 I learned my luckess way.

101. At morning then, | when once more I came,
 And all were sleeping still,
 A dog found | in the fair one's place,
 Bound there upon her bed.

102. Many fair maids, | if a man but tries them,
 False to a lover are found;
 That did I learn | when I longed to gain
 With wiles the maiden wise;

 [102. Rask adds at the beginning of this stanza two lines from a late paper manuscript, running:

"Few are so good | that false they are never
 To cheat the mind of a man."

He makes these two lines plus lines I and 2 a full stanza, and line 3, 4, 5, and 6 a second stanza.]

 [p. 50]

Foul scorn was my meed | from the crafty maid,
 And nought from the woman I won.

*    *    *

103. Though glad at home, | and merry with guests,
 A man shall be wary and wise;
 The sage and shrewd, | wide wisdom seeking,
 Must see that his speech be fair;
 A fool is he named | who nought can say,
 For such is the way of the witless.

104. I found the old giant, | now back have I fared,
 Small gain from silence I got;
 Full many a word, | my will to get,
 I spoke in Suttung's hall.

105. The mouth of Rati | made room for my passage,
 And space in the stone he gnawed;

 [103. With this stanza the subject changes abruptly, and apparently the virtues of fair speech, mentioned in the last three lines, account for the introduction, from what source cannot be known, of the story of Othin and the mead of song (stanzas 104-110).

104. The giant Suttung ("the old giant") possessed the magic mead, a draught of which conferred the gift of poetry. Othin, desiring to obtain it, changed himself into a snake, bored his way through a mountain into Suttung's home, made love to the giant's daughter, Gunnloth, and by her connivance drank up all the mead. Then he flew away in the form of an eagle, leaving Gunnloth to her fate. While with Suttung he assumed the name of Bolverk ("the Evil-Doer").

105. Rati ("the Traveller"): the gimlet with which Othin bored through the mountain to reach Suttung's home.]

 [p. 51]

Above and below | the giants' paths lay,
 So rashly I risked my head.

106. Gunnloth gave | on a golden stool
 A drink of the marvelous mead;
 A harsh reward | did I let her have
 For her heroic heart,
 And her spirit troubled sore.

107. The well-earned beauty | well I enjoyed,
 Little the wise man lacks;
 So Othrorir now | has up been brought
 To the midst of the men of earth.

108. Hardly, methinks, | would I home have come,
 And left the giants' land,
 Had not Gunnloth helped me, | the maiden good,
 Whose arms about me had been.

109. The day that followed, | the frost-giants came,
 Some word of Hor to win,
 (And into the hall of Hor;)

 [106. Probably either the fourth or the fifth line is a spurious addition.

107. Othrorir: here the name of the magic mead itself, whereas in stanza 141 it is the name of the vessel containing it. Othin had no intention of bestowing any of the precious mead upon men, but as he was flying over the earth, hotly pursued by Suttung, he spilled some of it out of his mouth, and in this way mankind also won the gift of poetry.

108. Hor: Othin ("the High One"). The frost-giants, Suttung's kinsmen, appear not to have suspected Othin of being [fp. 52] identical with Bolverk, possibly because the oath referred to in stanza I to was an oath made by Othin to Suttung that there was no such person as Bolverk among the gods. The giants, of course, fail to get from Othin the information they seek concerning Bolverk, but Othin is keenly conscious of having violated the most sacred of oaths, that sworn on his ring.]

 [p. 52]

Of Bolverk they asked, | were he back midst the gods,
 Or had Suttung slain him there?

110. On his ring swore Othin | the oath, methinks;
 Who now his troth shall trust?
 Suttung's betrayal | he sought with drink,
 And Gunnloth to grief he left.

*    *    *

111. It is time to chant | from the chanter's stool;
 By the wells of Urth I was,
 I saw and was silent, | I saw and thought,
 And heard the speech of Hor.
 (Of runes heard I words, | nor were counsels wanting,
 At the hall of Hor,
 In the hall of Hor;
 Such was the speech I heard.)

 [111. With this stanza begins the Loddfafnismol (stanzas 111-138). Loddfafnir is apparently a wandering singer, who, from his "chanter's stool," recites the verses which he claims to have received from Othin. Wells of Urth: cf. Voluspo, 19 and note. Urth ("the Past") is one of the three Norns. This stanza is apparently in corrupt form, and editors have tried many experiments with it, both in rejecting lines as spurious and in rear ranging the words and punctuation. It looks rather as though the first four lines formed a complete stanza, and the last four had crept in later. The phrase translated "the speech of Hor" is "Hova mol," later used as the title for the entire poem.]

 [p. 53]

112. I rede thee, Loddfafnir! | and hear thou my rede,---
 Profit thou hast if thou hearest,
 Great thy gain if thou learnest:
 Rise not at night, | save if news thou seekest,
 Or fain to the outhouse wouldst fare.

113. I rede thee, Loddfafnir! | and hear thou my rede,--
 Profit thou hast if thou hearest,
 Great thy gain if thou learnest:
 Beware of sleep | on a witch's bosom,
 Nor let her limbs ensnare thee.

114. Such is her might | that thou hast no mind
 For the council or meeting of men;
 Meat thou hatest, | joy thou hast not,
 And sadly to slumber thou farest.

115. I rede thee, Loddfafnir! | and hear thou my rede,--
 Profit thou hast if thou hearest,
 Great thy gain if thou learnest:

 [112. Lines 1-3 are the formula, repeated (abbreviated in the manuscript) in most of the stanzas, with which Othin prefaces his counsels to Loddfafnir, and throughout this section, except in stanzas 111 and 138, Loddfafnir represents himself as simply quoting Othin's words. The material is closely analogous to that contained in the first eighty stanzas of the poem. In some cases (e. g., stanzas 117, 119, 121, 126 and 130) the formula precedes a full four-line stanza instead of two (or three) lines.]

 [p. 54]

Seek never to win | the wife of another,
 Or long for her secret love.

116. I rede thee, Loddfafnir! | and hear thou my rede,--
 Profit thou hast if thou hearest,
 Great thy gain if thou learnest:
 If o'er mountains or gulfs | thou fain wouldst go,
 Look well to thy food for the way.

117. I rede thee, Loddfafnir! | and hear thou my rede,--
 Profit thou hast if thou hearest,
 Great thy gain if thou learnest:
 An evil man | thou must not let
 Bring aught of ill to thee;
 For an evil man | will never make
 Reward for a worthy thought.

118. I saw a man | who was wounded sore
 By an evil woman's word;
 A lying tongue | his death-blow launched,
 And no word of truth there was.

119. I rede thee, Loddfafnir! | and hear thou my rede,--
 Profit thou hast if thou hearest,
 Great thy gain if thou learnest:
 If a friend thou hast | whom thou fully wilt trust,
 Then fare to find him oft;
 For brambles grow | and waving grass
 On the rarely trodden road.

[p. 55]

120. I rede thee, Loddfafnir! | and hear thou my rede,--
 Profit thou hast if thou hearest,
 Great thy gain if thou learnest:
 A good man find | to hold in friendship,
 And give heed to his healing charms.

121. I rede thee, Loddfafnir! | and hear thou my rede,-
 Profit thou hast if thou hearest,
 Great thy gain if thou learnest:
 Be never the first | to break with thy friend
 The bond that holds you both;
 Care eats the heart | if thou canst not speak
 To another all thy thought.

122. I rede thee, Loddfafnir! | and hear thou my rede,--
 Profit thou hast if thou hearest,
 Great thy gain if thou learnest:
 Exchange of words | with a witless ape
 Thou must not ever make.

123. For never thou mayst | from an evil man
 A good requital get;
 But a good man oft | the greatest love
 Through words of praise will win thee.

124. Mingled is love | when a man can speak
 To another all his thought;

[p. 56]

Nought is so bad | as false to be,
 No friend speaks only fair.

125. I rede thee, Loddfafnir! | and hear thou my rede,--
 Profit thou hast if thou hearest,
 Great thy gain if thou learnest:
 With a worse man speak not | three words in dispute,
 Ill fares the better oft
 When the worse man wields a sword.

126. I rede thee, Loddfafnir! | and hear thou my rede,-
 Profit thou hast if thou hearest,
 Great thy gain if thou learnest:
 A shoemaker be, | or a maker of shafts,
 For only thy single self;
 If the shoe is ill made, | or the shaft prove false,
 Then evil of thee men think.

127. I rede thee, Loddfafnir! | and hear thou my rede,--
 Profit thou hast if thou hearest,
 Great thy gain if thou learnest:
 If evil thou knowest, | as evil proclaim it,
 And make no friendship with foes.

128. I rede thee, Loddfafnir! | and hear thou my rede,--
 Profit thou hast if thou hearest,

[p. 57]

Great thy gain if thou learnest:
 In evil never | joy shalt thou know,
 But glad the good shall make thee.

129. I rede thee, Loddfafnir! | and hear thou my rede,--
 Profit thou hast if thou hearest,
 Great thy gain if thou learnest:
 Look not up | when the battle is on,--
 (Like madmen the sons | of men become,--)
 Lest men bewitch thy wits.

130. I rede thee, Loddfafnir! | and hear thou my rede,-
 Profit thou hast if thou hearest,
 Great thy gain if thou learnest:
 If thou fain wouldst win | a woman's love,
 And gladness get from her,
 Fair be thy promise | and well fulfilled;
 None loathes what good he gets.

131. I rede thee, Loddfafnir! | and hear thou my rede,-
 Profit thou hast if thou hearest,
 Great thy gain if thou learnest:
 I bid thee be wary, | but be not fearful;
 (Beware most with ale or another's wife,
 And third beware | lest a thief outwit thee.)

 [129. Line 5 is apparently interpolated.

131. Lines 5-6 probably were inserted from a different poem.]

 [p. 58]

132. I rede thee, Loddfafnir! | and hear thou my rede,-
 Profit thou hast if thou hearest,
 Great thy gain if thou learnest:
 Scorn or mocking | ne'er shalt thou make
 Of a guest or a journey-goer.

133. Oft scarcely he knows | who sits in the house
 What kind is the man who comes;
 None so good is found | that faults he has not,
 Nor so wicked that nought he is worth.

134. I rede thee, Loddfafnir! | and hear thou my rede,--
 Profit thou hast if thou hearest,
 Great thy gain if thou learnest:
 Scorn not ever | the gray-haired singer,
 Oft do the old speak good;
 (Oft from shrivelled skin | come skillful counsels,
 Though it hang with the hides,
 And flap with the pelts,
 And is blown with the bellies.)

 [133. Many editors reject the last two lines of this stanza as spurious, putting the first two lines at the end of the preceding stanza. Others, attaching lines 3 and 4 to stanza 132, insert as the first two lines of stanza 133 two lines from a late paper manuscript, running:

"Evil and good | do men's sons ever
 "Mingled bear in their breasts."

134. Presumably the last four lines have been added to this stanza, for the parallelism in the last three makes it probable that they belong together. The wrinkled skin of the old man is [fp. 59] compared with the dried skins and bellies of animals kept for various purposes hanging in an Icelandic house.]

 [p. 59]

135. I rede thee, Loddfafnir! | and hear thou my rede,--
 Profit thou hast if thou hearest,
 Great thy gain if thou learnest:
 Curse not thy guest, | nor show him thy gate,
 Deal well with a man in want.

136. Strong is the beam | that raised must be
 To give an entrance to all;
 Give it a ring, | or grim will be
 The wish it would work on thee.

137. I rede thee, Loddfafnir! | and hear thou my rede,--
 Profit thou hast if thou hearest,
 Great thy gain if thou learnest:
 When ale thou drinkest) | seek might of earth,
 (For earth cures drink, | and fire cures ills,
 The oak cures tightness, | the ear cures magic,
 Rye cures rupture, | the moon cures rage,
 Grass cures the scab, | and runes the sword-cut;)
 The field absorbs the flood.

 [136. This stanza suggests the dangers of too much hospitality. The beam (bolt) which is ever being raised to admit guests be comes weak thereby. It needs a ring to help it in keeping the door closed, and without the ability at times to ward off guests a man becomes the victim of his own generosity.

137. The list of "household remedies" in this stanza is doubtless interpolated. Their nature needs no comment here.]

 [p. 60]

138. Now are Hor's words | spoken in the hall,
 Kind for the kindred of men,
 Cursed for the kindred of giants:
 Hail to the speaker, | and to him who learns!
 Profit be his who has them!
 Hail to them who hearken!

*    *    *

139. I ween that I hung | on the windy tree,
 Hung there for nights full nine;
 With the spear I was wounded, | and offered I was
 To Othin, myself to myself,
 On the tree that none | may ever know
 What root beneath it runs.

 [138. In the manuscript this stanza comes at the end of the entire poem, following stanza 165. Most recent editors have followed Mullenhoff in shifting it to this position, as it appears to conclude the passage introduced by the somewhat similar stanza 111.

139. With this stanza begins the most confusing part of the Hovamol: the group of eight stanzas leading up to the Ljothatal, or list of charms. Certain paper manuscripts have before this stanza a title: "Othin's Tale of the Runes." Apparently stanzas 139, 140 and 142 are fragments of an account of how Othin obtained the runes; 141 is erroneously inserted from some version of the magic mead story (cf. stanzas 104-110); and stanzas 143, 144, 145, and 146 are from miscellaneous sources, all, however, dealing with the general subject of runes. With stanza 147 a clearly continuous passage begins once more. The windy tree: the ash Yggdrasil (literally "the Horse of Othin," so called be cause of this story), on which Othin, in order to win the magic runes, hanged himself as an offering to himself, and wounded himself with his own spear. Lines 5 and 6 have presumably been borrowed from Svipdagsmol, 30.]

 [p. 61]

140. None made me happy | with loaf or horn,
 And there below I looked;
 I took up the runes, | shrieking I took them,
 And forthwith back I fell.

141. Nine mighty songs | I got from the son
 Of Bolthorn, Bestla's father;
 And a drink I got | of the goodly mead
 Poured out from Othrorir.

142. Then began I to thrive, | and wisdom to get,
 I grew and well I was;
 Each word led me on | to another word,
 Each deed to another deed.

143. Runes shalt thou find, | and fateful signs,
 That the king of singers colored,
 And the mighty gods have made;

 [141. This stanza, interrupting as it does the account of Othin's winning the runes, appears to be an interpolation. The meaning of the stanza is most obscure. Bolthorn was Othin's grandfather, and Bestla his mother. We do not know the name of the uncle here mentioned, but it has been suggested that this son of Bolthorn was Mimir (cf. Voluspo, 27 and note, and 47 and note). In any case, the nine magic songs which he learned from his uncle seem to have enabled him to win the magic mead (cf. stanzas 104-110). Concerning Othrorir, here used as the name of the vessel containing the mead, cf. stanza 107 and note.

143. This and the following stanza belong together, and in many editions appear as a single stanza. They presumably come from some lost poem on the authorship of the runes. Lines 2 and 3 follow line 4 in the manuscript; the transposition was suggested by Bugge. The king of singers: Othin. The magic signs (runes) were commonly carved in wood, then colored red.]

 [p. 62]

Full strong the signs, | full mighty the signs
 That the ruler of gods doth write.

144. Othin for the gods, | Dain for the elves,
 And Dvalin for the dwarfs,
 Alsvith for giants | and all mankind,
 And some myself I wrote.

145. Knowest how one shall write, | knowest how one shall rede?
 Knowest how one shall tint, | knowest how one makes trial?
 Knowest how one shall ask, | knowest how one shall offer?
 Knowest how one shall send, | knowest how one shall sacrifice?

 [144. Dain and Dvalin: dwarfs; cf. Voluspo, 14, and note. Dain, however, may here be one of the elves rather than the dwarf of. that name. The two names also appear together in Grimnismol, 33, where they are applied to two of the four harts that nibble at the topmost twigs of Yggdrasil. Alsvith ("the All Wise") appears nowhere else as a giant's name. Myself: Othin. We have no further information concerning the list of those who wrote the runes for the various races, and these four lines seem like a confusion of names in the rather hazy mind of some reciter.

145. This Malahattr stanza appears to be a regular religious formula, concerned less with the runes which one "writes" and "tints" (cf. stanza 79) than with the prayers which one "asks" and the sacrifices which one "offers" and "sends." Its origin is wholly uncertain, but it is clearly an interpolation here. In the manuscript the phrase "knowest?" is abbreviated after the first line.]

 [p. 63]

146. Better no prayer | than too big an offering,
 By thy getting measure thy gift;
 Better is none | than too big a sacrifice,
 .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .
 So Thund of old wrote | ere man's race began,
 Where he rose on high | when home he came.

*    *    *

147. The songs I know | that king's wives know not,
 Nor men that are sons of men;
 The first is called help, | and help it can bring thee
 In sorrow and pain and sickness.

148. A second I know, | that men shall need
 Who leechcraft long to use;
 .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .
 .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .

 [146. This stanza as translated here follows the manuscript reading, except in assuming a gap between lines 3 and 5. In Vigfusson and Powell's Corpus Poeticum Boreale the first three lines have somehow been expanded into eight. The last two lines are almost certainly misplaced; Bugge suggests that they belong at the end of stanza 144. Thund: another name for Othin. When home he came: presumably after obtaining the runes as described in stanzas 139 and 140.

147. With this stanza begins the Ljothatal, or list of charms. The magic songs themselves are not given, but in each case the peculiar application of the charm is explained. The passage, which is certainly approximately complete as far as it goes, runs to the end of the poem. In the manuscript and in most editions line 4 falls into two half-lines, running:

"In sickness and pain | and every sorrow."

]

 [p. 64]

149. A third I know, | if great is my need
 Of fetters to hold my foe;
 Blunt do I make | mine enemy's blade,
 Nor bites his sword or staff.

150. A fourth I know, | if men shall fasten
 Bonds on my bended legs;
 So great is the charm | that forth I may go,
 The fetters spring from my feet,
 Broken the bonds from my hands.

152. A fifth I know, | if I see from afar
 An arrow fly 'gainst the folk;
 It flies not so swift | that I stop it not,
 If ever my eyes behold it.

152. A sixth I know, | if harm one seeks
 With a sapling's roots to send me;
 The hero himself | who wreaks his hate
 Shall taste the ill ere I.

153. A seventh I know, | if I see in flames
 The hall o'er my comrades' heads;
 It burns not so wide | that I will not quench it,
 I know that song to sing.

 [148. Second, etc., appear in the manuscript as Roman numerals. The manuscript indicates no gap after line 2.

152. The sending of a root with runes written thereon was an excellent way of causing death. So died the Icelandic hero Grettir the Strong.]

 [p. 65]

154. An eighth I know, | that is to all
 Of greatest good to learn;
 When hatred grows | among heroes' sons,
 I soon can set it right.

155. A ninth I know, | if need there comes
 To shelter my ship on the flood;
 The wind I calm | upon the waves,
 And the sea I put to sleep.

156. A tenth I know, | what time I see
 House-riders flying on high;
 So can I work | that wildly they go,
 Showing their true shapes,
 Hence to their own homes.

157. An eleventh I know, | if needs I must lead
 To the fight my long-loved friends;
 I sing in the shields, | and in strength they go
 Whole to the field of fight,
 Whole from the field of fight,
 And whole they come thence home.

158. A twelfth I know, | if high on a tree
 I see a hanged man swing;

 [156. House-riders: witches, who ride by night on the roofs of houses, generally in the form of wild beasts. Possibly one of the last two lines is spurious.

157. The last line looks like an unwarranted addition, and line 4 may likewise be spurious.

158. Lines 4-5 are probably expanded from a single line.]

 [p. 66]

So do I write | and color the runes
 That forth he fares,
 And to me talks.

159. A thirteenth I know, | if a thane full young
 With water I sprinkle well;
 He shall not fall, | though he fares mid the host,
 Nor sink beneath the swords.

160. A fourteenth I know, | if fain I would name
 To men the mighty gods;
 All know I well | of the gods and elves,
 Few be the fools know this.

161. A fifteenth I know, | that before the doors
 Of Delling sang Thjothrorir the dwarf;
 Might he sang for the gods, | and glory for elves,
 And wisdom for Hroptatyr wise.

162. A sixteenth I know, | if I seek delight
 To win from a maiden wise;
 The mind I turn | of the white-armed maid,
 And thus change all her thoughts.

 [159. The sprinkling of a child with water was an established custom long before Christianity brought its conception of baptism.

161. This stanza, according to Mullenhoff, was the original conclusion of the poem, the phrase "a fifteenth" being inserted only after stanzas 162-165 had crept in. Delling: a seldom mentioned god who married Not (Night). Their son was Dag (Day). Thjothrorir: not mentioned elsewhere. Hroptatyr: Othin.]

 [p. 67]

163. A seventeenth I know, | so that seldom shall go
 A maiden young from me;
 .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .
 .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .

164. Long these songs | thou shalt, Loddfafnir,
 Seek in vain to sing;
 Yet good it were | if thou mightest get them,
 Well, if thou wouldst them learn,
 Help, if thou hadst them.

165. An eighteenth I know, | that ne'er will I tell
 To maiden or wife of man,--
 The best is what none | but one's self doth know,
 So comes the end of the songs,--
 Save only to her | in whose arms I lie,
 Or who else my sister is.

 [163. Some editors have combined these two lines with stanza 164. Others have assumed that the gap follows the first half-line, making "so that-from me" the end of the stanza.

164. This stanza is almost certainly an interpolation, and seems to have been introduced after the list of charms and the Loddfafnismol (stanzas 111-138) were combined in a single poem, for there is no other apparent excuse for the reference to Loddfafnir at this point. The words "if thou mightest get them" are a conjectural emendation.

165. This stanza is almost totally obscure. The third and fourth lines look like interpolations.]

 
      
The Poetic Edda, by Henry Adams Bellows, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 68]

 

VAFTHRUTHNISMOL

 

The Ballad of Vafthruthnir

 

INTRODUCTORY NOTE

The Vafthruthnismol follows the Hovamol in the Codex Regius. From stanza 20 on it is also included in the Arnamagnaean Codex, the first part evidently having appeared on leaf now lost. Snorri quotes eight stanzas of it in the Prose Edda, and in his prose text closely paraphrases many others.

The poem is wholly in dialogue form except for a single narrative stanza (stanza 5). After a brief introductory discussion between Othin and his wife, Frigg, concerning the reputed wisdom of the giant Vafthruthnir, Othin, always in quest of wisdom, seeks out the giant, calling himself Gagnrath. The giant immediately insists that they shall demonstrate which is the wiser of the two, and propounds four questions (stanzas 11, 13, 15, and 17), each of which Othin answers. It is then the god's turn to ask, and he begins with a series of twelve numbered questions regarding the origins and past history of life. These Vafthruthnir answers, and Othin asks five more questions, this time referring to what is to follow the destruction of the gods, the last one asking the name of his own slayer. Again Vafthruthnir answers, and Othin finally propounds the unanswerable question: "What spake Othin himself in the ears of his son, ere in the bale-fire he burned?" Vafthruthnir, recognizing his questioner as Othin himself, admits his inferiority in wisdom, and so the contest ends.

The whole poem is essentially encyclopaedic in character, and thus was particularly useful to Snorri in his preparation of the Prose Edda. The encyclopaedic poem with a slight narrative outline seems to have been exceedingly popular; the Grimnismol and the much later Alvissmol represent different phases of the same type. The Vafthruthnismol and Grimnismol together, in deed, constitute a fairly complete dictionary of Norse mythology. There has been much discussion as to the probable date of the Vafthruthnismol, but it appears to belong to about the same period as the Voluspo: in other words, the middle of the tenth century. While there may be a few interpolated passages in the poem as we now have it, it is clearly a united whole, and evidently in relatively good condition.

[p. 69]

 Othin spake:
 1, "Counsel me, Frigg, for I long to fare,
 And Vafthruthnir fain would find;
 fit wisdom old with the giant wise
 Myself would I seek to match."

 Frigg spake:
 2. "Heerfather here at home would I keep,
 Where the gods together dwell;
 Amid all the giants an equal in might
 To Vafthruthnir know I none."

 Othin spake:
 3. "Much have I fared, much have I found.
 Much have I got from the gods;
 And fain would I know how Vafthruthnir now
 Lives in his lofty hall."

 Frigg spake:
 4. "Safe mayst thou go, safe come again,
 And safe be the way thou wendest!
 Father of men, let thy mind be keen
 When speech with the giant thou seekest."

5. The wisdom then of the giant wise

 [1. The phrases "Othin spake," "Frigg spake," etc., appear in abbreviated form in both manuscripts. Frigg: Othin's wife; cf. Voluspo, 34 and note. Vafthruthnir ("the Mighty in Riddles"): nothing is known of this giant beyond what is told in this poem.

2. Heerfather ("Father of the Host"): Othin.

3. This single narrative stanza is presumably a later [fp. 70] interpolation. Im: the name appears to be corrupt, but we know nothing of any son of Vafthruthnir. Ygg ("the Terrible"): Othin.]

 [p. 70]

Forth did he fare to try;
 He found the hall | of the father of Im,
 And in forthwith went Ygg.

 Othin spake:
 6. "Vafthruthnir, hail! | to thy hall am I come,
 For thyself I fain would see;
 And first would I ask | if wise thou art,
 Or, giant, all wisdom hast won."

 Vafthruthnir spake:
 7. "Who is the man | that speaks to me,
 Here in my lofty hall?
 Forth from our dwelling | thou never shalt fare,
 Unless wiser than I thou art."

 Othin spake:
 8. "Gagnrath they call me, | and thirsty I come
 From a journey hard to thy hall;
 Welcome I look for, | for long have I fared,
 And gentle greeting, giant."

 Vafthruthnir spake:
 9. "Why standest thou there | on the floor whilst thou speakest?
 A seat shalt thou have in my hall;

 [8. Gagnrath ("the Gain-Counsellor"): Othin on his travels always assumes a name other than his own.]

 [p. 71]

Then soon shall we know | whose knowledge is more,
 The guest's or the sage's gray."

 Othin spake:
 10. "If a poor man reaches | the home of the rich,
 Let him wisely speak or be still;
 For to him who speaks | with the hard of heart
 Will chattering ever work ill."

 Vafthruthnir spake:
 11. "Speak forth now, Gagnrath, | if there from the floor
 Thou wouldst thy wisdom make known:
 What name has the steed | that each morn anew
 The day for mankind doth draw?"

 Othin spake:
 12. "Skinfaxi is he, | the steed who for men
 The glittering day doth draw;
 The best of horses | to heroes he seems,
 And brightly his mane doth burn."

 Vafthruthnir spake:
 13. "Speak forth now, Gagnrath, | if there from the floor

 [10. This stanza sounds very much like many of those in the first part of the Hovamol, and may have been introduced here from some such source.

12. Skinfaxi: "Shining-Mane."]

 [p. 72]

Thou wouldst thy wisdom make known:
 What name has the steed | that from East anew
 Brings night for the noble gods?"

 Othin spake:
 14. "Hrimfaxi name they | the steed that anew
 Brings night for the noble gods;
 Each morning foam | from his bit there falls,
 And thence come the dews in the dales."

 Vafthruthnir spake:
 15. "Speak forth now, Gagnrath, | if there from the floor
 Thou wouldst thy wisdom make known:
 What name has the river | that 'twixt the realms
 Of the gods and the giants goes?"

 Othin spoke:
 16. "Ifing is the river | that 'twixt the realms
 Of the gods and the giants goes;
 For all time ever | open it flows,
 No ice on the river there is."

 Vafthruthnir spake:
 17. "Speak forth now, Gagnrath, | if there from the floor

 [13. Here, and in general throughout the poem, the two-line introductory formulae are abbreviated in the manuscripts.

14. Hrimfaxi: "Frosty-Mane."

16. Ifing: there is no other reference to this river, which never freezes, so that the giants cannot cross it.]

 [p. 73]

Thou wouldst thy wisdom make known:
 What name has the field | where in fight shall meet
 Surt and the gracious gods?"

 Othin spake:
 18. "Vigrith is the field | where in fight shall meet
 Surt and the gracious gods;
 A hundred miles | each way does it measure.
 And so are its boundaries set."

 Vafthruthnir spake:
 19. "Wise art thou, guest! | To my bench shalt thou go,
 In our seats let us speak together;
 Here in the hall | our heads, O guest,
 Shall we wager our wisdom upon."

 Othin spake:
 20. "First answer me well, | if thy wisdom avails,
 And thou knowest it, Vafthruthnir, now:
 In earliest time | whence came the earth,
 Or the sky, thou giant sage?"

 [17. Surt: the ruler of the fire-world (Muspellsheim), who comes to attack the gods in the last battle; cf. Voluspo, 52.

18. Vigrith: "the Field of Battle." Snorri quotes this stanza. A hundred miles: a general phrase for a vast distance.

19. With this stanza Vafthruthnir, sufficiently impressed with his guest's wisdom to invite him to share his own seat, resigns the questioning to Othin.

20. The fragmentary version of this poem in the Arnamagnaean Codex begins in the middle of the first line of this stanza.]

 [p. 74]

 Vafthruthnir spake:
 21. "Out of Ymir's flesh | was fashioned the earth,
 And the mountains were made of his bones;
 The sky from the frost-cold | giant's skull,
 And the ocean out of his blood."

 Othin spake:
 22. "Next answer me well, | if thy wisdom avails,
 And thou knowest it, Vafthruthnir, now:
 Whence came the moon, | o'er the world of men
 That fares, and the flaming sun?"

 Vafthruthnir spake:
 23. "Mundilferi is he | who begat the moon,
 And fathered the flaming sun;
 The round of heaven | each day they run,
 To tell the time for men."

 Othin spake:
 24. "Third answer me well, | if wise thou art called,
 If thou knowest it, Vafthruthnir, now:
 Whence came the day, | o'er mankind that fares,
 Or night with the narrowing moon?"

 [21. Ymir: the giant out of whose body the gods made the world; cf. Voluspo, 3 and note.

22. In this and in Othin's following questions, both manuscripts replace the words "next," "third," "fourth," etc., by Roman numerals.

23. Mundilferi ("the Turner"?): known only as the father of Mani (the Moon) and Sol (the Sun). Note that, curiously [fp. 75] enough, Mani is the boy and Sol the girl. According to Snorri, Sol drove the horses of the sun, and Mani those of the moon, for the gods, indignant that they should have been given such imposing names, took them from their father to perform these tasks. Cf. Grimnismol, 37.]

 [p. 75]

 Vafthruthnir spake:
 25. "The father of day | is Delling called,
 And the night was begotten by Nor;
 Full moon and old | by the gods were fashioned,
 To tell the time for men."

 Othin spake:
 26. "Fourth answer me well, | if wise thou art called,
 If thou knowest it, Vafthruthnir, now:
 Whence did winter come, | or the summer warm,
 First with the gracious gods?"

 Vafthruthnir spake:
 27. "Vindsval he was | who was winter's father,
 And Svosuth summer begat;"
 .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .
 .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .

 [25. Delling ("the Dayspring"? Probably another form of the name, Dogling, meaning "Son of the Dew" is more correct): the husband of Not (Night); their son was Dag (Day); cf. Hovamol, 161. Nor: Snorri calls the father of Night Norvi or Narfi, and puts him among the giants. Lines 3-4: cf. Voluspo, 6.

27. Neither the Regius nor the Arnamagnaean Codex indicates a lacuna. Most editors have filled out the stanza with two lines from late paper manuscripts: "And both of these shall ever be, / Till the gods to destruction go." Bugge ingeniously paraphrases Snorri's prose: "Vindsval's father was Vosuth called, / And rough is all his race." Vindsval: "the Wind-Cold," also called Vindljoni, "the Wind-Man." Svosuth: "the Gentle."]

 [p. 76]

 Othin spake:
 28. "Fifth answer me well, | if wise thou art called,
 If thou knowest it, Vafthruthnir, now:
 What giant first | was fashioned of old,
 And the eldest of Ymir's kin?"

 Vafthruthnir spake:
 29. "Winters unmeasured | ere earth was made
 Was the birth of Bergelmir;
 Thruthgelmir's son | was the giant strong,
 And Aurgelmir's grandson of old."

 Othin spake:
 30. "Sixth answer me well, | if wise thou art called,
 If thou knowest it, Vafthruthnir, now:
 Whence did Aurgelmir come | with the giants' kin,
 Long since, thou giant sage?"

 Vafthruthnir spake:
 31. "Down from Elivagar | did venom drop,
 And waxed till a giant it was;

 [28. Ymir's kin: the giants.

29. Bergelmir: when the gods slew Ymir in order to make the world out of his body, so much blood flowed from him that all the frost-giants were drowned except Bergelmir and his wife, who escaped in a boat; cf. stanza 35. Of Thruthgelmir ("the Mightily Burning") we know nothing, but Aurgelmir was the frost-giants' name for Ymir himself. Thus Ymir was the first of the giants, and so Othin's question is answered.

31. Snorri quotes this stanza, and the last two lines are taken from his version, as both of the manuscripts omit them. Elivagar ("Stormy Waves"): Mogk suggests that this river may have been the Milky Way. At any rate, the venom carried in its waters [fp. 77] froze into ice-banks over Ginnunga-gap (the "yawning gap" referred to in Voluspo, 3), and then dripped down to make the giant Ymir.]

 [p. 77]

And thence arose | our giants' race,
 And thus so fierce are we found."

 Othin spake:
 32. "Seventh answer me well, | if wise thou art called,
 If thou knowest it, Vafthruthnir, now:
 How begat he children, | the giant grim,
 Who never a giantess knew?"

 Vafthruthnir spake:
 33. "They say 'neath the arms | of the giant of ice
 Grew man-child and maid together;
 And foot with foot | did the wise one fashion
 A son that six heads bore."

 Othin spake:
 34. "Eighth answer me well, | if wise thou art called,
 If thou knowest it, Vafthruthnir, now:
 What farthest back | dost thou bear in mind?
 For wide is thy wisdom, giant!"

 [33. Snorri gives, without materially elaborating on it, the same account of how Ymir's son and daughter were born under his left arm, and how his feet together created a son. That this offspring should have had six heads is nothing out of the ordinary, for various giants had more than the normal number, and Ymir's mother is credited with a little matter of nine hundred heads; cf. Hymiskvitha, 8. Of the career of Ymir's six headed son we know nothing; he may have been the Thruthgelmir of stanza 29.]

 [p. 78]

 Vafthruthnir spake:
 35. "Winters unmeasured | ere earth was made
 Was the birth of Bergelmir;
 This first knew I well, | when the giant wise
 In a boat of old was borne."

 Othin spake:
 36. "Ninth answer me well, | if wise thou art called
 If thou knowest it, Vafthruthnir, now:
 Whence comes the wind | that fares o'er the waves
 Yet never itself is seen?"

 Vafthruthnir spake:
 37. "In an eagle's guise | at the end of heaven
 Hraesvelg sits, they say;
 And from his wings | does the wind come forth
 To move o'er the world of men."

 Othin spake:
 38. "Tenth answer me now, | if thou knowest all
 The fate that is fixed for the gods:

 [35. Snorri quotes this stanza. Bergelmir: on him and his boat cf. stanza 29 and note.

37. Snorri quotes this stanza. Hraesvelg ("the Corpse-Eater") on this giant in eagle's form cf. Voluspo, So, and Skirnismol, 27.

38. With this stanza the question-formula changes, and Othin's questions from this point on concern more or less directly the great final struggle. Line 4 is presumably spurious. Njorth: on Njorth and the Wanes, who gave him as a hostage to the gods at the end of their war, cf. Voluspo, 21 and note.]

 [p. 79]

Whence came up Njorth | to the kin of the gods,--
 (Rich in temples | and shrines he rules,--)
 Though of gods he was never begot?"

 Vafthruthnir spake:
 39. "In the home of the Wanes | did the wise ones create him,
 And gave him as pledge to the gods;
 At the fall of the world | shall he fare once more
 Home to the Wanes so wise."

 Othin spake:
 40. "Eleventh answer me well, |  . . . . . . .
 . . . . . . . . . . . .
 What men . . . . . . | in . . . . . . home
 Each day to fight go forth?"

 Vafthruthnir spake:
 41. "The heroes all | in Othin's hall
 Each day to fight go forth;

 [40. In both manuscripts, apparently through the carelessness of some older copyist, stanzas 40 and 41 are run together: "Eleventh answer me well, what men in the home mightily battle each day? They fell each other, and fare from the fight all healed full soon to sit." Luckily Snorri quotes stanza 41 in full, and the translation is from his version. Stanza 40 should probably run something like this: "Eleventh answer me well, if thou knowest all / The fate that is fixed for the gods: / What men are they who in Othin's home / Each day to fight go forth?"

41. The heroes: those brought to Valhall by the Valkyries. After the day's fighting they are healed of their wounds and all feast together.]

 [p. 80]

They fell each other, | and fare from the fight
 All healed full soon to sit."

 Othin spake:
 42. "Twelfth answer me now | how all thou knowest
 Of the fate that is fixed for the gods;
 Of the runes of the gods | and the giants' race
 The truth indeed dost thou tell,
 (And wide is thy wisdom, giant!)"

 Vafthruthnir spake:
 43. "Of the runes of the gods | and the giants' race
 The truth indeed can I tell,
 (For to every world have I won;)
 To nine worlds came I, | to Niflhel beneath,
 The home where dead men dwell."

 Othin spake:
 44. "Much have I fared, | much have I found,
 Much have I got of the gods:
 What shall live of mankind | when at last there comes
 The mighty winter to men?"

 Vafthruthnir spake:
 45. "In Hoddmimir's wood | shall hide themselves
 Lif and Lifthrasir then;

 [43. Nine worlds: cf. Voluspo, 2. Niflhel: "Dark-Hell."

44. The mighty winter: Before the final destruction three winters follow one another with no intervening summers.

45. Snorri quotes this stanza. Hoddmimir's wood: probably [fp. 81] this is the ash-tree Yggdrasil, which is sometimes referred to as "Mimir's Tree," because Mimir waters it from his well; cf. Voluspo, 27 and note, and Svipdagsmol, 30 and note. Hoddmimir is presumably another name for Mimir. Lif ("Life") and Lifthrasir ("Sturdy of Life"?): nothing further is known of this pair, from whom the new race of men is to spring.]

 [p. 81]

The morning dews | for meat shall they have,
 Such food shall men then find."

 Othin spake:
 46. "Much have I fared, | much have I found,
 Much have I got of the gods:
 Whence comes the sun | to the smooth sky back,
 When Fenrir has snatched it forth?"

 Vafthruthnir spake:
 47. "A daughter bright | Alfrothul bears
 Ere Fenrir snatches her forth;
 Her mother's paths | shall the maiden tread
 When the gods to death have gone."

 Othin spake:
 48. "Much have I fared, | much have I found,
 Much have I got of the gods:
 What maidens are they, | so wise of mind.
 That forth o'er the sea shall fare?"

 [46. Fenrir: there appears to be a confusion between the wolf Fenrir (cf. Voluspo, 39 and note) and his son, the wolf Skoll, who steals the sun (cf. Voluspo, 40 and note).

47. Snorri quotes this stanza. Alfrothul ("the Elf-Beam") the sun.]

 [p. 82]

 Vafthruthnir spake:
 49. "O'er Mogthrasir's hill | shall the maidens pass,
 And three are their throngs that come;
 They all shall protect | the dwellers on earth,
 Though they come of the giants' kin."

 Othin spake:
 50. "Much have I fared, | much have I found,
 Much have I got of the gods:
 Who then shall rule | the realm of the gods,
 When the fires of Surt have sunk?"

 Vafthruthnir spake:
 51. "In the gods' home Vithar | and Vali shall dwell,
 When the fires of Surt have sunk;
 Mothi and Magni | shall Mjollnir have
 When Vingnir falls in fight."

 Othin spake:
 52. "Much have I fared, | much have I found,
 Much have I got of the gods:

 [49. Mogthrasir ("Desiring Sons"): not mentioned elsewhere in the Eddic poems, or by Snorri. The maidens: apparently Norns, like the "giant-maids" in Voluspo, 8. These Norns, how ever, are kindly to men.

50. Surt: cf. Voluspo, 52 and note.

51. Vithar: a son of Othin, who slays the wolf Fenrir; cf. Voluspo, 54 and note. Vali: the son whom Othin begot to avenge Baldr's death; cf. Voluspo, 33 and note. Mothi ("Wrath") and Magni ("Might"): the sons of the god Thor, who after his death inherit his famous hammer, Mjollnir. Concerning this hammer cf. especially Thrymskvitha, passim. Vingnir ("the [fp. 83] Hurler"): Thor. Concerning his death cf. Voluspo, 56. This stanza is quoted by Snorri.]

 [p. 83]

What shall bring the doom | of death to Othin,
 When the gods to destruction go?"

 Vafthruthnir spake:
 53. "The wolf shall fell | the father of men,
 And this shall Vithar avenge;
 The terrible jaws | shall he tear apart,
 And so the wolf shall he slay."

 Othin spake:
 54. "Much have I fared, | much have I found,
 Much have I got from the gods:
 What spake Othin himself | in the ears of his son,
 Ere in the bale-fire he burned?"

 Vafthruthnir spake:
 55. "No man can tell | what in olden time
 Thou spak'st in the ears of thy son;
 With fated mouth | the fall of the gods
 And mine olden tales have I told;
 With Othin in knowledge | now have I striven,
 And ever the wiser thou art."

 [53. The wolf: Fenrir; cf. Voluspo, 53 and 54.

54. His son: Baldr. Bugge changes lines 3-4 to run: "What did Othin speak | in the ear of Baldr, / When to the bale-fire they bore him?" For Baldr's death cf. Voluspo, 3a and note. The question is, of course, unanswerable save by Othin himself, and so the giant at last recognizes his guest.

55. Fated: in stanza 19 Vafthruthnir was rash enough to wager his head against his guest's on the outcome of the contest of wisdom, so he knows that his defeat means his death.]

 
      
The Poetic Edda, by Henry Adams Bellows, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 84]

 

GRIMNISMOL

 

The Ballad of Grimnir

 

INTRODUCTORY NOTE

The Grimnismol follows the Vafthruthnismol in the Codex Regius and is also found complete in the Arnamagnaean Codex, where also it follows the Vafthruthnismol. Snorri quotes over twenty of its stanzas.

Like the preceding poem, the Grimnismol is largely encyclopedic in nature, and consists chiefly of proper names, the last forty-seven stanzas containing no less than two hundred and twenty-five of these. It is not, however, in dialogue form. As Mullenhoff pointed out, there is underneath the catalogue of mythological names a consecutive and thoroughly dramatic story. Othin, concealed under the name of Grimnir, is through an error tortured by King Geirroth. Bound between two blazing fires, he begins to display his wisdom for the benefit of the king's little son, Agnar, who has been kind to him. Gradually he works up to the great final moment, when he declares his true name, or rather names, to the terrified Geirroth, and the latter falls on his sward and is killed.

For much of this story we do not have to depend on guesswork, for in both manuscripts the poem itself is preceded by a prose narrative of considerable length, and concluded by a brief prose statement of the manner of Geirroth's death. These prose notes, of which there are many in the Eddic manuscripts, are of considerable interest to the student of early literary forms. Presumably they were written by the compiler to whom we owe the Eddic collection, who felt that the poems needed such annotation in order to be clear. Linguistic evidence shows that they were written in the twelfth or thirteenth century, for they preserve none of the older word-forms which help us to date many of the poems two or three hundred years earlier.

Without discussing in detail the problems suggested by these prose passages, it is worth noting, first, that the Eddic poems contain relatively few stanzas of truly narrative verse; and second, that all of them are based on narratives which must have been more or less familiar to the hearers of the poems. In other words, the poems seldom aimed to tell stories, although most of them followed a narrative sequence of ideas. The stories

[p. 85]

themselves appear to have lived in oral prose tradition, just as in the case of the sagas; and the prose notes of the manuscripts, in so far as they contain material not simply drawn from the poems themselves, are relics of this tradition. The early Norse poets rarely conceived verse as a suitable means for direct story telling, and in some of the poems even the simplest action is told in prose "links" between dialogue stanzas.

The applications of this fact, which has been too often over looked, are almost limitless, for it suggests a still unwritten chapter in the history of ballad poetry and the so-called "popular" epic. It implies that narrative among early peoples may frequently have had a period of prose existence before it was made into verse, and thus puts, for example, a long series of transitional stages before such a poem as the Iliad. In any case, the prose notes accompanying the Eddic poems prove that in addition to the poems themselves there existed in the twelfth century a considerable amount of narrative tradition, presumably in prose form, on which these notes were based by the compiler.

Interpolations in such a poem as the Grimnismol could have been made easily enough, and many stanzas have undoubtedly crept in from other poems, but the beginning and end of the poem are clearly marked, and presumably it has come down to us with the same essential outline it had when it was composed, probably in the first half of the tenth century.

King Hrauthung had two sons: one was called Agnar, and the other Geirroth. Agnar was ten winters old, and Geirroth eight. Once they both rowed in a boat with their fishing-gear to catch little fish; and the wind drove them out into the sea. In the darkness of the night they were wrecked on the shore; and going up, they found a poor peasant, with whom they stayed through the winter. The housewife took care of Agnar, and the peasant cared for

 [Prose. The texts of the two manuscripts differ in many minor details. Hrauthung: this mythical king is not mentioned elsewhere. Geirroth: the manuscripts spell his name in various ways [fp. 86] Frigg: Othin's wife. She and Othin nearly always disagreed in some such way as the one outlined in this story. Hlithskjolf ("Gate-Shelf"): Othin's watch-tower in heaven, whence he can overlook all the nine worlds; cf. Skirnismol, introductory prose. Grimnir: "the Hooded One."]

 [p. 86]

Geirroth, and taught him wisdom. In the spring the peasant gave him a boat; and when the couple led them to the shore, the peasant spoke secretly with Geirroth. They had a fair wind, and came to their father's landing-place. Geirroth was forward in the boat; he leaped up on land, but pushed out the boat and said, "Go thou now where evil may have thee!" The boat drifted out to sea. Geirroth, however, went up to the house, and was well received, but his father was dead. Then Geirroth was made king, and became a renowned man.

Othin and Frigg sat in Hlithskjolf and looked over all the worlds. Othin said: "Seest thou Agnar, thy foster ling, how he begets children with a giantess in the cave? But Geirroth, my fosterling, is a king, and now rules over his land." Frigg said: "He is so miserly that he tortures his guests if he thinks that too many of them come to him." Othin replied that this was the greatest of lies; and they made a wager about this matter. Frigg sent her maid-servant, Fulla, to Geirroth. She bade the king beware lest a magician who was come thither to his land should bewitch him, and told this sign concerning him, that no dog was so fierce as to leap at him. Now it was a very great slander that King Geirroth was not hospitable; but nevertheless he had them take the man whom the dogs would not attack. He wore a dark-blue mantle and called himself Grimnir, but said no more about himself, though

[p. 87]

he was questioned. The king had him tortured to make him speak, and set him between two fires, and he sat there eight nights. King Geirroth had a son ten winters old, and called Agnar after his father's brother. Agnar went to Grimnir, and gave him a full horn to drink from, and said that the king did ill in letting him be tormented with out cause. Grimnir drank from the horn; the fire had come so near that the mantle burned on Grimnir's back. He spake:

1. Hot art thou, fire! | too fierce by far;
 Get ye now gone, ye flames!
 The mantle is burnt, | though I bear it aloft,
 And the fire scorches the fur.

2. 'Twixt the fires now | eight nights have I sat,
 And no man brought meat to me,
 Save Agnar alone, | and alone shall rule
 Geirroth's son o'er the Goths.

3. Hail to thee, Agnar! | for hailed thou art
 By the voice of Veratyr;

 [2. In the original lines 2 and 4 are both too long for the meter, and thus the true form of the stanza is doubtful. For line 4 both manuscripts have "the land of the Goths" instead of simply "the Goths." The word "Goths" apparently was applied indiscriminately to any South-Germanic people, including the Burgundians as well as the actual Goths, and thus here has no specific application; cf. Gripisspo, 35 and note.]

 [p. 88]

For a single drink | shalt thou never receive
 A greater gift as reward.

4. The land is holy | that lies hard by
 The gods and the elves together;
 And Thor shall ever | in Thruthheim dwell,
 Till the gods to destruction go.

5. Ydalir call they | the place where Ull
 A hall for himself hath set;
 And Alfheim the gods | to Freyr once gave
 As a tooth-gift in ancient times.

6. A third home is there, | with silver thatched
 By the hands of the gracious gods:
 Valaskjolf is it, | in days of old
 Set by a god for himself.

7. Sokkvabekk is the fourth, | where cool waves flow,

 [3. Veratyr ("Lord of Men"): Othin. The "gift" which Agnar receives is Othin's mythological lore.

4. Thruthheim ("the Place of Might"): the place where Thor, the strongest of the gods, has his hall, Bilskirnir, described in stanza 24.

5. Ydalir ("Yew-Dales"): the home of Ulf, the archer among the gods, a son of Thor's wife, Sif, by another marriage. The wood of the yew-tree was used for bows in the North just as it was long afterwards in England. Alfheim: the home of the elves. Freyr: cf. Skirnismol, introductory prose and note. Tooth-gift: the custom of making a present to a child when it cuts its first tooth is, according to Vigfusson, still in vogue in Iceland.

6. Valaskjolf ("the Shelf of the Slain"): Othin's home, in which is his watch-tower, Hlithskjolf. Gering identifies this with Valhall, and as that is mentioned in stanza 8, he believes stanza 6 to be an interpolation.]

 [p. 89]

And amid their murmur it stands;
 There daily do Othin | and Saga drink
 In gladness from cups of gold.

8. The fifth is Glathsheim, | and gold-bright there
 Stands Valhall stretching wide;
 And there does Othin | each day choose
 The men who have fallen in fight.

9. Easy is it to know | for him who to Othin
 Comes and beholds the hall;
 Its rafters are spears, | with shields is it roofed,
 On its benches are breastplates strewn.

10. Easy is it to know | for him who to Othin
 Comes and beholds the hall;
 There hangs a wolf | by the western door,
 And o'er it an eagle hovers.

11. The sixth is Thrymheim, | where Thjazi dwelt,
 The giant of marvelous might;

 [7. Sokkvabekk ("the Sinking Stream"): of this spot and of Saga, who is said to live there, little is known. Saga may be an hypostasis of Frigg, but Snorri calls her a distinct goddess, and the name suggests some relation to history or story-telling.

8. Glathsheim ("the Place of Joy"): Othin's home, the greatest and most beautiful hall in the world. Valhall ("Hall of the Slain"): cf. Voluspo, V and note. Valhall is not only the hall whither the slain heroes are brought by the Valkyries, but also a favorite home of Othin.

10. The opening formula is abbreviated in both manuscripts. A wolf: probably the wolf and the eagle were carved figures above the door.]

 [p. 90]

Now Skathi abides, | the god's fair bride,
 In the home that her father had.

12. The seventh is Breithablik; | Baldr has there
 For himself a dwelling set,
 In the land I know | that lies so fair,
 And from evil fate is free.

13. Himinbjorg is the eighth, | and Heimdall there
 O'er men holds sway, it is said;
 In his well-built house | does the warder of heaven
 The good mead gladly drink.

14. The ninth is Folkvang, | where Freyja decrees

 [11. Thrymheim ("the Home of Clamor"): on this mountain the giant Thjazi built his home. The god, or rather Wane, Njorth (cf. Voluspo, 21, note) married Thjazi's daughter, Skathi. She wished to live in her father's hall among the mountains, while Njorth loved his home, Noatun, by the sea. They agreed to compromise by spending nine nights at Thrymheim and then three at Noatun, but neither could endure the surroundings of the other's home, so Skathi returned to Thrymheim, while Njorth stayed at Noatun. Snorri quotes stanzas 11-15.

12. Breithablik ("Wide-Shining"): the house in heaven, free from everything unclean, in which Baldr (cf. Voluspo, 32, note), the fairest and best of the gods, lived.

13. Himinbjorg ("Heaven's Cliffs"): the dwelling at the end of the bridge Bifrost (the rainbow), where Heimdall (cf. Voluspo, 27) keeps watch against the coming of the giants. In this stanza the two functions of Heimdall--as father of mankind (cf. Voluspo, 1 and note, and Rigsthula, introductory prose and note) and as warder of the gods--seem both to be mentioned, but the second line in the manuscripts is apparently in bad shape, and in the editions is more or less conjectural.

14. Folkvang ("Field of the Folk): here is situated Freyja's [fp. 91] hall, Sessrymnir ("Rich in Seats"). Freyja, the sister of Freyr, is the fairest of the goddesses, and the most kindly disposed to mankind, especially to lovers. Half of the dead: Mogk has made it clear that Freyja represents a confusion between two originally distinct divinities: the wife of Othin (Frigg) and the northern goddess of love. This passage appears to have in mind her attributes as Othin's wife. Snorri has this same confusion, but there is no reason why the Freyja who was Freyr's sister should share the slain with Othin.]

 [p. 91]

Who shall have seats in the hall;
 The half of the dead | each day does she choose,
 And half does Othin have.

15. The tenth is Glitnir; | its pillars are gold,
 And its roof with silver is set;
 There most of his days | does Forseti dwell,
 And sets all strife at end.

16. The eleventh is Noatun; | there has Njorth
 For himself a dwelling set;
 The sinless ruler | of men there sits
 In his temple timbered high.

17. Filled with growing trees | and high-standing grass
 Is Vithi, Vithar's land;

 [15. Glitnir ("the Shining"): the home of Forseti, a god of whom we know nothing beyond what Snorri tells us: "Forseti is the son of Baldr and Nanna, daughter of Nep. All those who come to him with hard cases to settle go away satisfied; he is the best judge among gods and men."

16. Noatun ("Ships'-Haven"): the home of Njorth, who calms the waves; cf. stanza 11 and Voluspo, 21.

17. Vithi: this land is not mentioned elsewhere. Vithar avenged his father, Othin, by slaying the wolf Fenrir.]

 [p. 92]

But there did the son | from his steed leap down,
 When his father he fain would avenge.

18. In Eldhrimnir | Andhrimnir cooks
 Saehrimnir's seething flesh,--
 The best of food, | but few men know
 On what fare the warriors feast.

19. Freki and Geri | does Heerfather feed,
 The far-famed fighter of old:
 But on wine alone | does the weapon-decked god,
 Othin, forever live.

20. O'er Mithgarth Hugin | and Munin both
 Each day set forth to fly;
 For Hugin I fear | lest he come not home,
 But for Munin my care is more.

 [18. Stanzas 18-20 appear also in Snorri's Edda. Very possibly they are an interpolation here. Eldhrimnir ("Sooty with Fire"): the great kettle in Valhall, wherein the gods' cook, Andhrimnir ("The Sooty-Faced") daily cooks the flesh of the boar Saehrimnir ("The Blackened"). His flesh suffices for all the heroes there gathered, and each evening he becomes whole again, to be cooked the next morning.

19. Freki ("The Greedy") and Geri ("The Ravenous"): the two wolves who sit by Othin's side at the feast, and to whom he gives all the food set before him, since wine is food and drink alike for him. Heerfather: Othin.

20, Mithgarth ("The Middle Home"): the earth. Hugin ("Thought") and Munin ("Memory"): the two ravens who sit on Othin's shoulders, and fly forth daily to bring him news of the world.]

 [p. 93]

21. Loud roars Thund, | and Thjothvitnir's fish
 joyously fares in the flood;
 Hard does it seem | to the host of the slain
 To wade the torrent wild.

22. There Valgrind stands, | the sacred gate,
 And behind are the holy doors;
 Old is the gate, | but few there are
 Who can tell how it tightly is locked.

23. Five hundred doors | and forty there are,
 I ween, in Valhall's walls;
 Eight hundred fighters | through one door fare
 When to war with the wolf they go.

24. Five hundred rooms | and forty there are
 I ween, in Bilskirnir built;

 [21. Thund ("The Swollen" or "The Roaring"): the river surrounding Valhall. Thjothvitnir's fish: presumably the sun, which was caught by the wolf Skoll (cf. Voluspo, 40), Thjothvitnir meaning "the mighty wolf." Such a phrase, characteristic of all Skaldic poetry, is rather rare in the Edda. The last two lines refer to the attack on Valhall by the people of Hel; cf. Voluspo, 51.

22. Valgrind ("The Death-Gate"): the outer gate of Valhall; cf. Sigurtharkvitha en skamma, 68 and note.

23. This and the following stanza stand in reversed order in Regius. Snorri quotes stanza 23 as a proof of the vast size of Valhall. The last two lines refer to the final battle with Fenrir and the other enemies.

24. This stanza is almost certainly an interpolation, brought in through a confusion of the first two lines with those of stanza 23. Its description of Thor's house, Bilskirnir (cf. stanza 4 and [fp. 94] note) has nothing to do with that of Valhall. Snorri quotes the stanza in his account of Thor.]

 [p. 94]

Of all the homes | whose roofs I beheld,
 My son's the greatest meseemed.

25. Heithrun is the goat | who stands by Heerfather's hall,
 And the branches of Laerath she bites;
 The pitcher she fills | with the fair, clear mead,
 Ne'er fails the foaming drink.

26. Eikthyrnir is the hart | who stands by Heerfather's hall
 And the branches of Laerath he bites;
 From his horns a stream | into Hvergelmir drops,
 Thence all the rivers run.

 [25. The first line in the original is, as indicated in the translation, too long, and various attempts to amend it have been made. Heithrun: the she-goat who lives on the twigs of the tree Laerath (presumably the ash Yggdrasil), and daily gives mead which, like the boar's flesh, suffices for all the heroes in Valhall. In Snorri's Edda Gangleri foolishly asks whether the heroes drink water, whereto Har replies, "Do you imagine that Othin invites kings and earls and other noble men, and then gives them water to drink?"

26. Eikthyrnir ("The Oak-Thorned," i.e., with antlers, "thorns," like an oak): this animal presumably represents the clouds. The first line, like that of stanza 25, is too long in the original. Laerath: cf. stanza 25, note. Hvergelmir: according to Snorri, this spring, "the Cauldron-Roaring," was in the midst of Niflheim, the world of darkness and the dead, beneath the third root of the ash Yggdrasil. Snorri gives a list of the rivers flowing thence nearly identical with the one in the poem.]

 [p. 95]

27. Sith and Vith, | Saekin and Aekin,
 Svol and Fimbulthul, | Gunnthro, and Fjorm,
 Rin and Rinnandi,
 Gipul and Gopul, | Gomul and Geirvimul,
 That flow through the fields of the gods;
 Thyn and Vin, | Thol and Hol,
 Groth and Gunnthorin.

28. Vino is one, | Vegsvin another,
 And Thjothnuma a third;
 Nyt and Not, | Non and Hron,
 Slith and Hrith, | Sylg and Ylg,
 Vith and Von, | Vond and Strond,
 Gjol and Leipt, | that go among men,
 And hence they fall to Hel.

 [27. The entire passage from stanza 27 through stanza 35 is confused. The whole thing may well be an interpolation. Bugge calls stanzas 27-30 an interpolation, and editors who have accepted the passage as a whole have rejected various lines. The spelling of the names of the rivers varies greatly in the manuscripts and editions. It is needless here to point out the many attempted emendations of this list. For a passage presenting similar problems, cf. Voluspo, 10-16. Snorri virtually quotes stanzas 27-29 in his prose, though not consecutively. The name Rin, in line 3, is identical with that for the River Rhine which appears frequently in the hero poems, but the similarity is doubt less purely accidental.

28. Slith may possibly be the same river as that mentioned in Voluspo, 36, as flowing through the giants' land. Leipt: in Helgakvitha Hundingsbana II, 29, this river is mentioned as one by which a solemn oath is sworn, and Gering points the parallel to the significance of the Styx among the Greeks. The other rivers here named are not mentioned elsewhere in the poems.]

 [p. 96]

29. Kormt and Ormt | and the Kerlaugs twain
 Shall Thor each day wade through,
 (When dooms to give | he forth shall go
 To the ash-tree Yggdrasil;)
 For heaven's bridge | burns all in flame,
 And the sacred waters seethe.

30. Glath and Gyllir, | Gler and Skeithbrimir,
 Silfrintopp and Sinir,
 Gisl and Falhofnir, | Golltopp and Lettfeti,
 On these steeds the gods shall go
 When dooms to give | each day they ride
 To the ash-tree Yggdrasil.

 [29. This stanza looks as though it originally had had nothing to do with the two preceding it. Snorri quotes it in his description of the three roots of Yggdrasil, and the three springs be neath them. "The third root of the ash stands in heaven and beneath this root is a spring which is very holy, and is called Urth's well." (Cf. Voluspo, 19) "There the gods have their judgment-seat, and thither they ride each day over Bifrost, which is also called the Gods' Bridge." Thor has to go on foot in the last days of the destruction, when the bridge is burning. Another interpretation, however, is that when Thor leaves the heavens (i.e., when a thunder-storm is over) the rainbow-bridge becomes hot in the sun. Nothing more is known of the rivers named in this stanza. Lines 3-4 are almost certainly interpolated from stanza 30.

30. This stanza, again possibly an interpolation, is closely paraphrased by Snorri following the passage quoted in the previous note. Glath ("Joyous"): identified in the Skaldskaparmal with Skinfaxi, the horse of day; cf. Vafthruthnismol, 12. Gyllir: "Golden." Gler: "Shining." Skeithbrimir: "Swift-Going." Silfrintopp: "Silver-Topped." Sinir: "Sinewy." Gisl: the meaning is doubtful; Gering suggests "Gleaming." Falhofnir: [fp. 97]"Hollow-Hoofed." Golltopp ("Gold-Topped"): this horse be longed to Heimdall (cf. Voluspo, i and 46). It is noteworthy that gold was one of the attributes of Heimdall's belongings, and, because his teeth were of gold, he was also called Gullintanni ("Gold-Toothed"). Lettfeti: "Light-Feet." Othin's eight footed horse, Sleipnir, is not mentioned in this list.]

 [p. 97]

31. Three roots there are | that three ways run
 'Neath the ash-tree Yggdrasil;
 'Neath the first lives Hel, | 'neath the second the frost-giants,
 'Neath the last are the lands of men.

32. Ratatosk is the squirrel | who there shall run
 On the ash-tree Yggdrasil;
 From above the words | of the eagle he bears,
 And tells them to Nithhogg beneath.

33. Four harts there are, | that the highest twigs

 [31. The first of these roots is the one referred to in stanza 26; the second in stanza 29 (cf. notes). Of the third root there is nothing noteworthy recorded. After this stanza it is more than possible that one has been lost, paraphrased in the prose of Snorri's Edda thus: "An eagle sits in the branches of the ash tree, and he is very wise; and between his eyes sits the hawk who is called Vethrfolnir."

32. Ratatosk ("The Swift-Tusked"): concerning this squirrel, the Prose Edda has to add only that he runs up and down the tree conveying the abusive language of the eagle (see note on stanza 31) and the dragon Nithhogg (cf. Voluspo, 39 and note) to each other. The hypothesis that Ratatosk "represents the undying hatred between the sustaining and the destroying elements-the gods and the giants," seems a trifle far-fetched.

33. Stanzas 33-34 may well be interpolated, and are certainly in bad shape in the Mss. Bugge points out that they are probably of later origin than those surrounding them. Snorri [fp. 98] closely paraphrases stanza 33, but without elaboration, and nothing further is known of the four harts. It may be guessed, however, that they are a late multiplication of the single hart mentioned in stanza 26, just as the list of dragons in stanza 34 seems to have been expanded out of Nithhogg, the only authentic dragon under the root of the ash. Highest twigs: a guess; the Mss. words are baffling. Something has apparently been lost from lines 3-4, but there is no clue as to its nature.]

 [p. 98]

Nibble with necks bent back;
 Dain and Dvalin, |  . . . . . .
 Duneyr and Dyrathror.

34. More serpents there are | beneath the ash
 Than an unwise ape would think;
 Goin and Moin, | Grafvitnir's sons,
 Grabak and Grafvolluth,
 Ofnir and Svafnir | shall ever, methinks,
 Gnaw at the twigs of the tree.

35. Yggdrasil's ash | great evil suffers,
 Far more than men do know;

 [34. Cf. note on previous stanza. Nothing further is known of any of the serpents here listed, and the meanings of many of the names are conjectural. Snorri quotes this stanza. Editors have altered it in various ways in an attempt to regularize the meter. Goin and Moin: meaning obscure. Grafvitnir: "The Gnawing Wolf." Grabak: "Gray-Back." Grafvolluth: "The Field Gnawer." Ofnir and Svafnir ("The Bewilderer" and "The Sleep-Bringer"): it is noteworthy that in stanza 54 Othin gives himself these two names.

35. Snorri quotes this stanza, which concludes the passage, beginning with stanza 25, describing Yggdrasil. If we assume that stanzas 27-34 are later interpolations--possibly excepting 32--this section of the poem reads clearly enough.]

 [p. 99]

The hart bites its top, | its trunk is rotting,
 And Nithhogg gnaws beneath.

36. Hrist and Mist | bring the horn at my will,
 Skeggjold and Skogul;
 Hild and Thruth, | Hlok and Herfjotur,
 Gol and Geironul,
 Randgrith and Rathgrith | and Reginleif
 Beer to the warriors bring.

37. Arvak and Alsvith | up shall drag
 Weary the weight of the sun;
 But an iron cool | have the kindly gods
 Of yore set under their yokes.

 [36. Snorri quotes this list of the Valkyries, concerning whom cf. Voluspo, 31 and note, where a different list of names is given. Hrist: "Shaker." Mist: "Mist." Skeggjold: "Ax-Time." Skogul: "Raging" (?). Hild: "Warrior." Thruth: "Might." Hlok: "Shrieking." Herfjotur: "Host-Fetter." Gol: "Screaming." Geironul: "Spear-Bearer." Randgrith: "Shield-Bearer." Rathgrith: Gering guesses "Plan-Destroyer." Reginleif: "Gods'-Kin." Manuscripts and editions vary greatly in the spelling of these names, and hence in their significance.

37. Mullenhoff suspects stanzas 37-41 to have been interpolated, and Edzardi thinks they may have come from the Vafthruthnismol. Snorri closely paraphrases stanzas 37-39, and quotes 40-41. Arvak ("Early Waker") and Alsvith ("All Swift"): the horses of the sun, named also in Sigrdrifumol, 15. According to Snorri: "There was a man called Mundilfari, who had two children; they were so fair and lovely that he called his son Mani and his daughter Sol. The gods were angry at this presumption, and took the children and set them up in heaven; and they bade Sol drive the horses that drew the car of the sun [fp. 100] which the gods had made to light the world from the sparks which flew out of Muspellsheim. The horses were called Alsvith and Arvak, and under their yokes the gods set two bellows to cool them, and in some songs these are called 'the cold iron.'"]

 [p. 100]

38. In front of the sun | does Svalin stand,
 The shield for the shining god;
 Mountains and sea | would be set in flames
 If it fell from before the sun.

39. Skoll is the wolf | that to Ironwood
 Follows the glittering god,
 And the son of Hrothvitnir, | Hati, awaits
 The burning bride of heaven.

40. Out of Ymir's flesh | was fashioned the earth,
 And the ocean out of his blood;
 Of his bones the hills, | of his hair the trees,
 Of his skull the heavens high.

 [38. Svalin ("The Cooling"): the only other reference to this shield is in Sigrdrifumol, 15.

39. Skoll and Hati: the wolves that devour respectively the sun and moon. The latter is the son of Hrothvitnir ("The Mighty Wolf," i. e. Fenrir); cf. Voluspo, 40, and Vafthruthnismol, 46-47, in which Fenrir appears as the thief. Ironwood: a conjectural emendation of an obscure phrase; cf. Voluspo, 40.

40. This and the following stanza are quoted by Snorri. They seem to have come from a different source from the others of this poem; Edzardi suggests an older version of the Vafthruthnismol. This stanza is closely parallel to Vafthruthnismol, 21, which see, as also Voluspo, 3. Snorri, following this account, has a few details to add. The stones were made out of Ymir's teeth and such of his bones as were broken. Mithgarth was a mountain-wall made out of Ymir's eyebrows, and set around the earth because of the enmity of the giants.]

 [p. 101]

41. Mithgarth the gods | from his eyebrows made,
 And set for the sons of men;
 And out of his brain | the baleful clouds
 They made to move on high.

42. His the favor of Ull | and of all the gods
 Who first in the flames will reach;
 For the house can be seen | by the sons of the gods
 If the kettle aside were cast.

43. In days of old | did Ivaldi's sons
 Skithblathnir fashion fair,
 The best of ships | for the bright god Freyr,
 The noble son of Njorth.

 [42. With this stanza Othin gets back to his immediate situation, bound as he is between two fires. He calls down a blessing on the man who will reach into the fire and pull aside the great kettle which, in Icelandic houses, hung directly under the smoke vent in the roof, and thus kept any one above from looking down into the interior. On Ull, the archer-god, cf. stanza 5 and note. He is specified here apparently for no better reason than that his name fits the initial-rhyme.

43. This and the following stanza are certainly interpolated, for they have nothing to do with the context, and stanza 45 continues the dramatic conclusion of the poem begun in stanza 42. This stanza is quoted by Snorri. Ivaldi ("The Mighty"): he is known only as the father of the craftsmen-dwarfs who made not only the ship Skithblathnir, but also Othin's spear Gungnir, and the golden hair for Thor's wife, Sif, after Loki had maliciously cut her own hair off. Skithblathnir: this ship ("Wooden-Bladed") always had a fair wind, whenever the sail was set; it could be folded up at will and put in the pocket. Freyr: concerning him and his father, see Voluspo, 21, note, and Skirnismol, introductory prose and note.]

 [p. 102]

44. The best of trees | must Yggdrasil be,
 Skithblathnir best of boats;
 Of all the gods | is Othin the greatest,
 And Sleipnir the best of steeds;
 Bifrost of bridges, | Bragi of skalds,
 Hobrok of hawks, | and Garm of hounds.

45. To the race of the gods | my face have I raised,
 And the wished-for aid have I waked;
 For to all the gods | has the message gone
 That sit in Aegir's seats,
 That drink within Aegir's doors.

 [44. Snorri quotes this stanza. Like stanza 43 an almost certain interpolation, it was probably drawn in by the reference to Skithblathnir in the stanza interpolated earlier. It is presumably in faulty condition. One Ms. has after the fifth line half of a sixth,--"Brimir of swords." Yggdrasil: cf. stanzas 25-35. Skithblathnir: cf. stanza 43, note. Sleipnir: Othin's eight-legged horse, one of Loki's numerous progeny, borne by him to the stallion Svathilfari. This stallion belonged to the giant who built a fortress for the gods, and came so near to finishing it, with Svathilfari's aid, as to make the gods fear he would win his promised reward--Freyja and the sun and moon. To delay the work, Loki turned himself into a mare, whereupon the stallion ran away, and the giant failed to complete his task within the stipulated time. Bilrost: probably another form of Bifrost (which Snorri has in his version of the stanza), on which cf. stanza 29. Bragi: the god of poetry. He is one of the later figures among the gods, and is mentioned only three times in the poems of the Edda. In Snorri's Edda, however, he is of great importance. His wife is Ithun, goddess of youth. Perhaps the Norwegian skald Bragi Boddason, the oldest recorded skaldic poet, had been traditionally apotheosized as early as the tenth century. Hobrok: nothing further is known of him. Garm: cf. Voluspo, 44.

45. With this stanza the narrative current of the poem is resumed. Aegir: the sea-god; cf. Lokasenna, introductory prose.]

 [p. 103]

46. Grim is my name, | Gangleri am 1,
 Herjan and Hjalmberi,
 Thekk and Thrithi, | Thuth and Uth,
 Helblindi and Hor;

47. Sath and Svipal | and Sanngetal,
 Herteit and Hnikar,
 Bileyg, Baleyg, | Bolverk, Fjolnir,
 Grim and Grimnir, | Glapsvith, Fjolsvith.

48. Sithhott, Sithskegg, | Sigfather, Hnikuth,

 [46. Concerning the condition of stanzas 46-50, quoted by Snorri, nothing definite can be said. Lines and entire stanzas of this "catalogue" sort undoubtedly came and went with great freedom all through the period of oral transmission. Many of the names are not mentioned elsewhere, and often their significance is sheer guesswork. As in nearly every episode Othin appeared in disguise, the number of his names was necessarily almost limitless. Grim: "The Hooded." Gangleri: "The Wanderer." Herjan: "The Ruler." Hjalmberi: "The Helmet-Bearer." Thekk: "The Much-Loved." Thrithi: "The Third" (in Snorri's Edda the stories are all told in the form of answers to questions, the speakers being Har, Jafnhar and Thrithi. Just what this tripartite form of Othin signifies has been the source of endless debate. Probably this line is late enough to betray the somewhat muddled influence of early Christianity.) Thuth and Uth: both names defy guesswork. Helblindi: "Hel-Blinder" (two manuscripts have Herblindi--"Host-Blinder"). Hor: "The High One."

47. Sath: "The Truthful." Svipal: "The Changing." Sanngetal: "The Truth-Teller." Herteit: "Glad of the Host." Hnikar: "The Overthrower." Bileyg: "The Shifty-Eyed." Baleyg: "The Flaming-Eyed." Bolverk: "Doer of Ill" (cf. Hovamol, 104 and note). Fjolnir: "The Many-Shaped." Grimnir: "The Hooded." Glapswith: "Swift in Deceit." Fjolsvith: "Wide of Wisdom."

48. Sithhott: "With Broad Hat." Sithskegg: "Long-Bearded." [fp. 104] Sigfather: 'Father of Victory." Hnikuth: "Overthrower." Valfather: 'Father of the Slain." Atrith: "The Rider." Farmatyr: "Helper of Cargoes" (i. e., god of sailors).]

 [p. 104]

Allfather, Valfather, | Atrith, Farmatyr:
 A single name | have I never had
 Since first among men I fared.

49. Grimnir they call me | in Geirroth's hall,
 With Asmund Jalk am I;
 Kjalar I was | when I went in a sledge,
 At the council Thror am I called,
 As Vithur I fare to the fight;
 Oski, Biflindi, | Jafnhor and Omi,
 Gondlir and Harbarth midst gods.

So. I deceived the giant | Sokkmimir old
 As Svithur and Svithrir of yore;
 Of Mithvitnir's son | the slayer I was
 When the famed one found his doom.

 [49. Nothing is known of Asmund, of Othin's appearance as Jalk, or of the occasion when he "went in a sledge" as Kjalar ("Ruler of Keels"?). Thror and Vithur are also of uncertain meaning. Oski: "God of Wishes." Biflindi: the manuscripts vary widely in the form of this name. Jafnhor: "Equally High" (cf. note on stanza 46). Omi: "The Shouter." Gondlir: "Wand Bearer." Harbarth: "Graybeard" (cf. Harbarthsljoth, introduction).

50. Nothing further is known of the episode here mentioned Sokkmimir is presumably Mithvitnir's son. Snorri quotes the names Svithur and Svithrir, but omits all the remainder of the stanza.]

 [p. 105]

51. Drunk art thou, Geirroth, | too much didst thou drink,
 .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .
 Much hast thou lost, | for help no more
 From me or my heroes thou hast.

52. Small heed didst thou take | to all that I told,
 And false were the words of thy friends;
 For now the sword | of my friend I see,
 That waits all wet with blood.

53. Thy sword-pierced body | shall Ygg have soon,
 For thy life is ended at last;
 The maids are hostile; | now Othin behold!
 Now come to me if thou canst!

54. Now am I Othin, | Ygg was I once,
 Ere that did they call me Thund;
 Vak and Skilfing, | Vofuth and Hroptatyr,
 Gaut and Jalk midst the gods;
 Ofnir and Svafnir, | and all, methinks,
 Are names for none but me.

 [51. Again the poem returns to the direct action, Othin addressing the terrified Geirroth. The manuscripts show no lacuna. Some editors supply a second line from paper manuscripts: "Greatly by me art beguiled."

53. Ygg: Othin ("The Terrible"). The maids: the three Norns.

54. Possibly out of place, and probably more or less corrupt. Thund: "The Thunderer." Vak: "The Wakeful." Skilfing: "The Shaker." Vofuth: "The Wanderer." Hroptatyr: "Crier of the Gods." Gaut: "Father." Ofnir and Svafnir: cf. stanza 34.]

 [p. 106]

King Geirroth sat and had his sword on his knee, half drawn from its sheath. But when he heard that Othin was come thither, then he rose up and sought to take Othin from the fire. The sword slipped from his hand, and fell with the hilt down. The king stumbled and fell forward, and the sword pierced him through, and slew him. Then Othin vanished, but Agnar long ruled there as king.

      
The Poetic Edda, by Henry Adams Bellows, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 107]

 

SKIRNISMOL

 

The Ballad of Skirnir

 

INTRODUCTORY NOTE

The Skirnismol is found complete in the Codex Regius, and through stanza 27 in the Arnamagnaean Codex. Snorri quotes the concluding stanza. In Regius the poem is entitled "For Scirnis" ("Skirnir's journey").

The Skirnismol differs sharply from the poems preceding it, in that it has a distinctly ballad quality. As a matter of fact, however, its verse is altogether dialogue, the narrative being supplied in the prose "links," concerning which cf. introductory note to the Grimnismol. The dramatic effectiveness and vivid characterization of the poem seem to connect it with the Thrymskvitha, and the two may possibly have been put into their present form by the same man. Bugge's guess that the Skirnismol was the work of the author of the Lokasenna is also possible, though it has less to support it.

Critics have generally agreed in dating the poem as we now have it as early as the first half of the tenth century; Finnur Jonsson puts it as early as goo, and claims it, as usual, for Nor way. Doubtless it was current in Norway, in one form or another, before the first Icelandic settlements, but his argument that the thistle (stanza 31) is not an Icelandic plant has little weight, for such curse-formulas must have traveled freely from place to place. In view of the evidence pointing to a western origin for many or all of the Eddic poems, Jonsson's reiterated "Digtet er sikkert norsk og ikke islandsk" is somewhat exasperating. Wherever the Skirnismol was composed, it has been preserved in exceptionally good condition, and seems to be practically devoid of interpolations or lacunae.

__________________

Freyr, the son of Njorth, had sat one day in Hlithskjolf, and looked over all the worlds. He looked into Jotunheim, and saw there a fair maiden, as she went from her father's house to her bower. Forthwith he felt a mighty

[p. 108]

love-sickness. Skirnir was the name of Freyr's servant; Njorth bade him ask speech of Freyr. He said:

1. "Go now, Skirnir! | and seek to gain
 Speech from my son;
 And answer to win, | for whom the wise one
 Is mightily moved."

 Skirnir spake:
 2. "Ill words do I now | await from thy son,
 If I seek to get speech with him,
 And answer to win, | for whom the wise one
 Is mightily moved."

 [Prose. Freyr: concerning his father, Njorth, and the race of the Wanes in general, cf. Voluspo, 21 and note. Snorri thus describes Njorth's family: "Njorth begat two children in Noatun; the son was named Freyr, and the daughter Freyja; they were fair of aspect and mighty. Freyr is the noblest of the gods; he rules over rain and sunshine, and therewith the fruitfulness of the earth; it is well to call upon him for plenty and welfare, for he rules over wealth for mankind. Freyja is the noblest of the goddesses. When she rides to the fight, she has one-half of the slain, and Othin has half. When she goes on a journey, she drives her two cats, and sits in a cart. Love-songs please her well, and it is good to call on her in love-matters." Hlithskjolf: Othin's watch-tower; cf. Grimnismol, introductory prose. He said: both manuscripts have "Then Skathi said:" (Skathi was Njorth's wife), but Bugge's emendation, based on Snorri's version, is doubtless correct.

1. My son: both manuscripts, and many editors, have "our son," which, of course, goes with the introduction of Skathi in the prose. As the stanza is clearly addressed to Skirnir, the change of pronouns seems justified. The same confusion occurs in stanza 2, where Skirnir in the manuscripts is made to speak of Freyr as [fp. 108]"your son" (plural). The plural pronoun in the original involves a metrical error, which is corrected by the emendation.]

 [p. 109]

 Skirnir spake:
 3. "Speak prithee, Freyr, | foremost of the gods,
 For now I fain would know;
 Why sittest thou here | in the wide halls,
 Days long, my prince, alone?"

 Freyr spake:
 4. "How shall I tell thee, | thou hero young,
 Of all my grief so great?
 Though every day | the elfbeam dawns,
 It lights my longing never."

 Skirnir spake:
 5. "Thy longings, methinks, | are not so large
 That thou mayst not tell them to me;
 Since in days of yore | we were young together,
 We two might each other trust."

 Freyr spake:
 6. "From Gymir's house | I beheld go forth
 A maiden dear to me;
 Her arms glittered, | and from their gleam
 Shone all the sea and sky.

 [4. Elfbeam: the sun, so called because its rays were fatal to elves and dwarfs; cf. Alvissmol, 35.

6. Gymir: a mountain-giant, husband of Aurbotha, and father of Gerth, fairest among women. This is all Snorri tells of him in his paraphrase of the story.

7. Snorri's paraphrase of the poem is sufficiently close so that his addition of another sentence to Freyr's speech makes it probable [fp. 110] that a stanza has dropped out between 7 and 8. This has been tentatively reconstructed, thus: "Hither to me shalt thou bring the maid, / And home shalt thou lead her here, / If her father wills it or wills it not, / And good reward shalt thou get." Finn Magnusen detected the probable omission of a stanza here as early as 1821.]

 [p. 110]

7. "To me more dear | than in days of old
 Was ever maiden to man;
 But no one of gods | or elves will grant
 That we both together should be."

 Skirnir spake:
 8. "Then give me the horse | that goes through the dark
 And magic flickering flames;
 And the sword as well | that fights of itself
 Against the giants grim."

 Freyr spake:
 9. "The horse will I give thee | that goes through the dark
 And magic flickering flames,
 And the sword as well | that will fight of itself
 If a worthy hero wields it."

 [8. The sword: Freyr's gift of his sword to Skirnir eventually proves fatal, for at the last battle, when Freyr is attacked by Beli, whom he kills bare-handed, and later when the fire-demon, Surt, slays him in turn, he is weaponless; cf. Voluspo, 53 and note. Against the giants grim: the condition of this line makes it seem like an error in copying, and it is possible that it should be identical with the fourth line of the next stanza.]

 [p. 111]

 Skirnir spake to the horse:
 10. "Dark is it without, | and I deem it time
 To fare through the wild fells,
 (To fare through the giants' fastness;)
 We shall both come back, | or us both together
 The terrible giant will take."

Skirnir rode into Jotunheim to Gymir's house. There were fierce dogs bound before the gate of the fence which was around Gerth's hall. He rode to where a herdsman sat on a hill, and said:

11. "Tell me, herdsman, | sitting on the hill,
 And watching all the ways,
 How may I win | a word with the maid
 Past the hounds of Gymir here?"

 The herdsman spake:
 12. "Art thou doomed to die | or already dead,
 Thou horseman that ridest hither?
 Barred from speech | shalt thou ever be
 With Gymir's daughter good."

 Skirnir spake:
 13. "Boldness is better | than plaints can be
 For him whose feet must fare;

 [10. Some editors reject line 3 as spurious.

12. Line 2 is in neither manuscript, and no gap is indicated. I have followed Grundtvig's conjectural emendation.

13. This stanza is almost exactly like many in the first part of [fp. 112] the Hovamol, and may well have been a separate proverb. After this stanza the scene shifts to the interior of the house.]

 [p. 112]

To a destined day has mine age been doomed,
 And my life's span thereto laid."

 Gerth spake:
 14. "What noise is that which now so loud
 I hear within our house?
 The ground shakes, and the home of Gymir
 Around me trembles too."

 The Serving-Maid spake:
 15. "One stands without who has leapt from his steed,
 And lets his horse loose to graze;"
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .

 Gerth spake:
 16. "Bid the man come in, and drink good mead
 Here within our hall;
 Though this I fear, that there without
 My brother's slayer stands.

 [15. No gap indicated in either manuscript. Bugge and Niedner have attempted emendations, while Hildebrand suggests that the last two lines of stanza 14 are spurious, 14, 12, and 15 thus forming a single stanza, which seems doubtful.

16. Brother's slayer: perhaps the brother is Beli, slain by Freyr; the only other references are in Voluspo, 53, and in Snorri's paraphrase of the Skirnismol, which merely says that Freyr's gift of his sword to Skirnir "was the reason why he was weaponless when he met Beli, and he killed him bare-handed." Skirnir himself seems never to have killed anybody.]

 [p. 113]

17. "Art thou of the elves | or the offspring of gods,
 Or of the wise Wanes?
 How camst thou alone | through the leaping flame
 Thus to behold our home?"

 Skirnir spake:
 18. "I am not of the elves, | nor the offspring of gods,
 Nor of the wise Wanes;
 Though I came alone | through the leaping flame
 Thus to behold thy home.

19. "Eleven apples, | all of gold,
 Here will I give thee, Gerth,
 To buy thy troth | that Freyr shall be
 Deemed to be dearest to you."

 Gerth spake:
 20. "I will not take | at any man's wish
 These eleven apples ever;
 Nor shall Freyr and I | one dwelling find
 So long as we two live."

 Skirnir spake:
 21. "Then do I bring thee | the ring that was burned

 [17. Wise Wanes: Cf. Voluspo, 21 and note.

18. The Arnamagnaean Codex omits this stanza.

19. Apples: the apple was the symbol of fruitfulness, and also of eternal youth. According to Snorri, the goddess Ithun had charge of the apples which the gods ate whenever they felt themselves growing old.]

 [p. 114]

Of old with Othin's son;
 From it do eight | of like weight fall
 On every ninth night."

 Gerth spake:
 22. "The ring I wish not, | though burned it was
 Of old with Othin's son;
 In Gymir's home | is no lack of gold
 In the wealth my father wields."

 Skirnir spake:
 23. "Seest thou, maiden, | this keen, bright sword
 That I hold here in my hand?
 Thy head from thy neck | shall I straightway hew,
 If thou wilt not do my will."

 Gerth spake:
 24. "For no man's sake | will I ever suffer
 To be thus moved by might;
 But gladly, methinks, | will Gymir seek
 To fight if he finds thee here."

 Skirnir spake:
 25. "Seest thou, maiden, | this keen, bright sword
 That I hold here in my hand?

 [21. Ring: the ring Draupnir ("Dropper") was made by the dwarfs for Othin, who laid it on Baldr's pyre when the latter's corpse was burned (Cf. Voluspo, 32 and note, and Baldrs Draumar). Baldr, however, sent the ring back to Othin from hell. How Freyr obtained it is nowhere stated. Andvari's ring (Andvaranaut) had a similar power of creating gold; cf. Reginsmol, prose [fp. 115] after stanza 4 and note. Lines 3 and 4 of this stanza, and the first two of stanza 22, are missing in the Arnamagnaean Codex.]

 [p. 115]

Before its blade the | old giant bends,--
 Thy father is doomed to die.

26. "I strike thee, maid, | with my magic staff,
 To tame thee to work my will;
 There shalt thou go | where never again
 The sons of men shall see thee.

27. "On the eagle's hill | shalt thou ever sit,
 And gaze on the gates of Hel;
 More loathsome to thee | than the light-hued snake
 To men, shall thy meat become.

28. "Fearful to see, | if thou comest forth,
 Hrimnir will stand and stare,
 (Men will marvel at thee;)

 [25. The first two lines are abbreviated in both manuscripts.

26. With this stanza, bribes and threats having failed, Skirnir begins a curse which, by the power of his magic staff, is to fall on Gerth if she refuses Freyr.

27. Eagle's hill: the hill at the end of heaven, and consequently overlooking hell, where the giant Hraesvelg sits "in an eagle's guise," and makes the winds with his wings; cf. Vafthruthnismol, 37, also Voluspo, 50. The second line is faulty in both manuscripts; Hildebrand's emendation corrects the error, but omits an effective touch; the manuscript line may be rendered "And look and hanker for hell." The Arnamagnaean Codex breaks off with the fourth line of this stanza.

28. Hrimnir: a frost-giant, mentioned elsewhere only in Hyndluljoth, 33. Line 3 is probably spurious. Watchman of the gods: Heimdall; cf. Voluspo, 46.]

 [p. 116]

More famed shalt thou grow | than the watchman of the gods!
 Peer forth, then, from thy prison,

29. "Rage and longing, | fetters and wrath,
 Tears and torment are thine;
 Where thou sittest down | my doom is on thee
 Of heavy heart
 And double dole.

30. "In the giants' home | shall vile things harm thee
 Each day with evil deeds;
 Grief shalt thou get | instead of gladness,
 And sorrow to suffer with tears.

31. "With three-headed giants | thou shalt dwell ever,
 Or never know a husband;
 (Let longing grip thee, | let wasting waste thee,--)

 [29. Three nouns of doubtful meaning, which I have rendered rage, longing, and heart respectively, make the precise force of this stanza obscure. Niedner and Sijmons mark the entire stanza as interpolated, and Jonsson rejects line 5.

30. In Regius and in nearly all the editions the first two lines of this stanza are followed by lines 3-5 of stanza 35. I have followed Niedner, Sijmons, and Gering. The two words here translated vile things are obscure; Gering renders the phrase simply "Kobolde."

31. The confusion noted as to the preceding stanza, and a metrical error in the third line, have led to various rearrangements and emendations; line 3 certainly looks like an interpolation. Three-headed giants: concerning giants with numerous heads, cf. Vafthruthnismol, 33, and Hymiskvitha, 8.]

 [p. 117]

Be like to the thistle | that in the loft
 Was cast and there was crushed.

32. "I go to the wood, | and to the wet forest,
 To win a magic wand;
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 I won a magic wand.

33. "Othin grows angry, | angered is the best of the gods,
 Freyr shall be thy foe,
 Most evil maid, | who the magic wrath
 Of gods hast got for thyself.

34. "Give heed, frost-rulers, | hear it, giants.
 Sons of Suttung,
 And gods, ye too,
 How I forbid | and how I ban
 The meeting of men with the maid,
 (The joy of men with the maid.)

 [32. No gap indicated in the manuscript; Niedner makes the line here given as 4 the first half of line 3, and fills out the stanza thus: "with which I will tame you, / Maid, to work my will." The whole stanza seems to be either interpolated or out of place; it would fit better after stanza 25.

33. Jonsson marks this stanza as interpolated. The word translated most evil is another case of guesswork.

34. Most editors reject line 3 as spurious, and some also reject line 6. Lines 2 and 3 may have been expanded out of a single line running approximately "Ye gods and Suttung's sons." Suttung: concerning this giant cf. Hovamol, 104 and note.]

 [p. 118]

35. "Hrimgrimnir is he, | the giant who shall have thee
 In the depth by the doors of Hel;
 To the frost-giants' halls | each day shalt thou fare,
 Crawling and craving in vain,
 (Crawling and having no hope.)

36. "Base wretches there | by the root of the tree
 Will hold for thee horns of filth;
 A fairer drink | shalt thou never find,
 Maid, to meet thy wish,
 (Maid, to meet my wish.)

37. "I write thee a charm | and three runes therewith,
 Longing and madness and lust;
 But what I have writ | I may yet unwrite
 If I find a need therefor."

 [35. Most editors combine lines 1-2 with stanza 36 (either with the first two lines thereof or the whole stanza), as lines 3-5 stand in the manuscript after line 2 of stanza 30. Hrimgrimnir ("The Frost-Shrouded"): a giant not elsewhere mentioned. Line 5, as a repetition of line 4, is probably a later addition.

36. For the combination of this stanza with the preceding one, cf. note on stanza 35. The scribe clearly did not consider that the stanza began with line I, as the first word thereof in the manuscript does not begin with a capital letter and has no period before it. The first word of line 3, however, is so marked. Line 5 may well be spurious.

37. Again the scribe seems to have been uncertain as to the stanza divisions. This time the first line is preceded by a period, but begins with a small letter. Many editors have made line 2 [fp. 119] into two half-lines. A charm: literally, the rune Thurs (b); the runic letters all had magic attributes; cf. Sigrdrifumol, 6-7 and notes.]

 [p. 119]

 Gerth spake:
 38. "Find welcome rather, | and with it take
 The frost-cup filled with mead;
 Though I did not believe | that I should so love
 Ever one of the Wanes."

 Skirnir spake:
 39. "My tidings all | must I truly learn
 Ere homeward hence I ride:
 How soon thou wilt | with the mighty son
 Of Njorth a meeting make."

 Gerth spake:
 40. Barri there is, | which we both know well,
 A forest fair and still;
 And nine nights hence | to the son of Njorth
 Will Gerth there grant delight."

Then Skirnir rode home. Freyr stood without, and spoke to him, and asked for tidings:

41. "Tell me, Skimir, | ere thou take off the saddle,
 Or farest forward a step:
 What hast thou done | in the giants' dwelling
 To make glad thee or me?"

 [40. Barri: "The Leafy."]

 [p. 120]

 Skirnir spoke:
 42. "Barri there is, | which we both know well,
 A forest fair and still;
 And nine nights hence | to the son of Njorth
 Will Gerth there grant delight."

 Freyr spake:
 43. "Long is one night, | longer are two;
 How then shall I bear three?
 Often to me | has a month seemed less
 Than now half a night of desire."

 [42. Abbreviated to initial letters in the manuscript.

43. The superscription is lacking in Regius. Snorri quotes this one stanza in his prose paraphrase, Gylfaginning, chapter 37 The two versions are substantially the same, except that Snorri makes the first line read, "Long is one night, long is the second."]

 
      
The Poetic Edda, by Henry Adams Bellows, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 121]

 

HARBARTHSLJOTH

 

The Poem of Harbarth

 

INTRODUCTORY NOTE

The Harbarthsljoth is found complete in the Codex Regius, where it follows the Skirnismol, and from the fourth line of stana 19 to the end of the poem in the Arnamagnaean Codex, of which it occupies the first page and a half.

The poem differs sharply from those which precede it in the Codex Regius, both in metrical form and in spirit. It is, indeed, the most nearly formless of all the Eddic poems. The normal metre is the Malahattr (cf. Introduction, where an example is given). The name of this verse-form means "in the manner of conversation," and the Harbarthsljoth's verse fully justifies the term. The Atli poems exemplify the conventional use of Malahattr, but in the Harbarthsljoth the form is used with extraordinary freedom, and other metrical forms are frequently employed. A few of the speeches of which the poem is composed cannot be twisted into any known Old Norse metre, and appear to be simply prose.

How far this confusion is due to interpolations and faulty transmission of the original poem is uncertain. Finnur Jonsson has attempted a wholesale purification of the poem, but his arbitrary condemnation of words, lines, and entire stanzas as spurious is quite unjustified by any positive evidence. I have accepted Mogk's theory that the author was "a first-rate psychologist, but a poor poet," and have translated the poem as it stands in the manuscripts. I have preserved the metrical confusion of the original by keeping throughout so far as possible to the metres found in the poem; if the rhythm of the translation is often hard to catch, the difficulty is no less with the original Norse.

The poem is simply a contest of abuse, such as the early Norwegian and Icelander delighted in, the opposing figures being Thor and Othin, the latter appearing in the disguise of the ferryman Harbarth. Such billingsgate lent itself readily to changes, interpolations and omissions, and it is little wonder that the poem is chaotic. It consists mainly of boasting and of references, often luckily obscure, to disreputable events in the life of one or the other of the disputants. Some editors have sought to read a complex symbolism into it, particularly by representing

[p. 122]

it as a contest between the noble or warrior class (Othin) and the peasant (Thor). But it seems a pity to take such a vigorous piece of broad farce too seriously.

Verse-form, substance, and certain linguistic peculiarities, notably the suffixed articles, point to a relatively late date (eleventh century) for the poem in its present form. Probably it had its origin in the early days, but its colloquial nature and its vulgarity made it readily susceptible to changes.

Owing to the chaotic state of the text, and the fact that none of the editors or commentators have succeeded in improving it much, I have not in this case attempted to give all the important emendations and suggestions. The stanza-divisions are largely arbitrary.

__________________

Thor was on his way back from a journey in the East, and came to a sound; on the other side of the sound was a ferryman with a boat. Thor called out:

1. "Who is the fellow yonder, | on the farther shore of the sound?"

 [Prose. Harbarth ("Gray-Beard"): Othin. On the nature of the prose notes found in the manuscripts, cf. Grimnismol, introduction. Thor: the journeys of the thunder-god were almost as numerous as those of Othin; cf. Thrymskvitha and Hymiskvitha. Like the Robin Hood of the British ballads, Thor was often temporarily worsted, but always managed to come out ahead in the end. His "Journey in the East" is presumably the famous episode, related in full by Snorri, in the course of which he en countered the giant Skrymir, and in the house of Utgartha-Loki lifted the cat which turned out to be Mithgarthsorm. The Hymiskvitha relates a further incident of this journey.]

 [p. 123]

 The ferryman spake:
 2. "What kind of a peasant is yon, | that calls o'er the bay?"

 Thor spake:
 3. "Ferry me over the sound; | I will feed thee therefor in the morning;
 A basket I have on my back, | and food therein, none better;
 At leisure I ate, | ere the house I left,
 Of herrings and porridge, | so plenty I had."

 The ferryman spake:
 4. "Of thy morning feats art thou proud, | but the future thou knowest not wholly;
 Doleful thine home-coming is: | thy mother, me thinks, is dead."

 Thor spake:
 5. "Now hast thou said | what to each must seem
 The mightiest grief, | that my mother is dead."

 [2. The superscriptions to the speeches are badly confused in the manuscripts, but editors have agreed fairly well as to where they belong. 3. From the fact that in Regius line 3 begins with a capital letter, it is possible that lines 3-4 constitute the ferryman's reply, with something lost before stanza 4.

4. Thy mother: Jorth (Earth).

5. Some editors assume a lacuna after this stanza.

6. Three good dwellings: this has been generally assumed to mean three separate establishments, but it may refer simply to [fp. 124] the three parts of a single farm, the dwelling proper, the cattle barn and the storehouse; i.e., Thor is not even a respectable peasant.]

 [p. 124]

 The ferryman spake:
 6. "Three good dwellings, | methinks, thou hast not;
 Barefoot thou standest, | and wearest a beggar's dress;
 Not even hose dost thou have."

 Thor spake:
 7. "Steer thou hither the boat; | the landing here shall I show thee;
 But whose the craft | that thou keepest on the shore?"

 The ferryman spake:
 8. "Hildolf is he | who bade me have it,
 A hero wise; | his home is at Rathsey's sound.
 He bade me no robbers to steer, | nor stealers of steeds,
 But worthy men, | and those whom well do I know.
 Say now thy name, | if over the sound thou wilt fare."

 Thor spake:
 9. "My name indeed shall I tell, | though in danger I am,

 [9. Hildolf ("slaughtering wolf"): not elsewhere mentioned in the Edda. Rathsey ("Isle of Counsel"): likewise not mentioned elsewhere.

9. In danger: Thor is "sekr," i.e., without the protection of any law, so long as he is in the territory of his enemies, the [fp. 125] giants. Meili: a practically unknown son of Othin, mentioned here only in the Edda. Magni: son of Thor and the giantess Jarnsaxa; after Thor's fight with Hrungnir (cf. stanza 14, note) Magni, though but three days old, was the only one of the gods strong enough to lift the dead giant's foot from Thor's neck. After rescuing his father, Magni said to him: "There would have been little trouble, father, had I but come sooner; I think I should have sent this giant to hell with my fist if I had met him first." Magni and his brother, Mothi, inherit Thor's hammer.]

 [p. 125]

And all my race; | I am Othin's son,
 Meili's brother, | and Magni's father,
 The strong one of the gods; | with Thor now speech canst thou get.
 And now would I know | what name thou hast."

 The ferryman spake:
 10. "Harbarth am I, | and seldom I hide my name."

 Thor spake:
 11. "Why shouldst thou hide thy name, | if quarrel thou hast not?"

 Harbarth spake:
 12. "And though I had a quarrel, | from such as thou art
 Yet none the less | my life would I guard,
 Unless I be doomed to die."

 [12. This stanza is hopelessly confused as to form, but none of the editorial rearrangements have materially altered the meaning. Doomed to die: the word "feigr" occurs constantly in the Old Norse poems and sagas; the idea of an inevitable but unknown fate seems to have been practically universal through out the pre-Christian period. On the concealment of names from enemies, cf. Fafnismol, prose after stanza 1.]

 [p. 126]

 Thor spake:
 13. "Great trouble, methinks, | would it be to come to thee,
 To wade the waters across, | and wet my middle;
 Weakling, well shall I pay | thy mocking words,
 if across the sound I come."

 Harbarth spake:
 14. "Here shall I stand | and await thee here;
 Thou hast found since Hrungnir died | no fiercer man."

 Thor spake:
 15. "Fain art thou to tell | how with Hrungnir I fought,
 The haughty giant, | whose head of stone was made;
 And yet I felled him, | and stretched him before me.
 What, Harbarth, didst thou the while?"

 [13. This stanza, like the preceding one, is peculiarly chaotic in the manuscript, and has been variously emended.

14. Hrungnir: this giant rashly wagered his head that his horse, Gullfaxi, was swifter than Othin's Sleipnir. In the race, which Hrungnir lost, he managed to dash uninvited into the home of the gods, where he became very drunk. Thor ejected him, and accepted his challenge to a duel. Hrungnir, terrified, had a helper made for him in the form of a dummy giant nine miles high and three miles broad. Hrungnir himself had a three-horned heart of stone and a head of stone; his shield was of stone and his weapon was a grindstone. But Thjalfi, Thor's servant, told him the god would attack him out of the ground, wherefore Hrungnir laid down his shield and stood on it. The hammer Mjollnir shattered both the grindstone and Hrungnir's [fp. 127] head, but part of the grindstone knocked Thor down, and the giant fell with his foot on Thor's neck (cf. note on stanza 9). Meanwhile Thjalfi dispatched the dummy giant without trouble.]

 [p. 127]

 Harbarth spake:
 16. "Five full winters | with Fjolvar was I,
 And dwelt in the isle | that is Algron called;
 There could we fight, | and fell the slain,
 Much could we seek, | and maids could master."

 Thor spake:
 17. "How won ye success with your women?"

 Harbarth spake:
 18. "Lively women we had, | if they wise for us were;
 Wise were the women we had, | if they kind for us were;
 For ropes of sand | they would seek to wind,
 And the bottom to dig | from the deepest dale.
 Wiser than all | in counsel I was,
 And there I slept | by the sisters seven,
 And joy full great | did I get from each.
 What, Thor, didst thou the while?"

 [16. Fjolvar: not elsewhere mentioned in the poems; perhaps the father of the "seven sisters" referred to in stanza 18. Algron: "The All-Green": not mentioned elsewhere in the Edda.

17. Thor is always eager for stories of this sort; cf. stanzas 31 and 33.

19. Lines 1-2 are obscure, but apparently Harbarth means that the women were wise to give in to him cheerfully, resistance to his power being as impossible as (lines 3-4) making ropes of sand or digging the bottoms out of the valleys. Nothing further is known of these unlucky "seven sisters."]

 [p. 128]

 Thor spake:
 19. "Thjazi I felled, | the giant fierce,
 And I hurled the eyes | of Alvaldi's son
 To the heavens hot above;
 Of my deeds the mightiest | marks are these,
 That all men since can see.
 What, Harbarth, didst thou the while?"

 Harbarth spoke:
 20. "Much love-craft I wrought | with them who ride by night,
 When I stole them by stealth from their husbands;
 A giant hard | was Hlebarth, methinks:
 His wand he gave me as gift,
 And I stole his wits away."

 [19. Thjazi: this giant, by a trick, secured possession of the goddess Ithun and her apples (cf. Skirnismol, 19, note), and carried her off into Jotunheim. Loki, through whose fault she had been betrayed, was sent after her by the gods. He went in Freyja's "hawk's-dress" (cf. Thrymskvitha, 3), turned Ithun into a nut, and flew back with her. Thjazi, in the shape of an eagle, gave chase. But the gods kindled a fire which burnt the eagle's wings, and then they killed him. Snorri's prose version does not attribute this feat particularly to Thor. Thjazi's daughter was Skathi, whom the gods permitted to marry Njorth as a recompense for her father's death. Alvaldi: of him we know only that he was the father of Thjazi, Ithi and Gang, who divided his wealth, each taking a mouthful of gold. The name is variously spelled. It is not known which stars were called "Thjazi's Eyes." In the middle of line 4 begins the fragmentary version of the poem found in the Arnamagnaean Codex.

20. Riders by night: witches, who were supposed to ride on wolves in the dark. Nothing further is known of this adventure.]

 [p. 129]

 Thor spake:
 21. "Thou didst repay good gifts with evil mind."

 Harbarth spake:
 22. "The oak must have | what it shaves from another;
 In such things each for himself.
 What, Thor, didst thou the while?"

 Thor spake:
 23. "Eastward I fared, | of the giants I felled
 Their ill-working women | who went to the mountain;
 And large were the giants' throng | if all were alive;
 No men would there be | in Mithgarth more.
 What, Harbarth, didst thou the while?"

 Harbarth spake:
 24. "In Valland I was, | and wars I raised,
 Princes I angered, | and peace brought never;
 The noble who fall | in the fight hath Othin,
 And Thor hath the race of the thralls."

 [22. The oak, etc.: this proverb is found elsewhere (e.g., Grettissaga) in approximately the same words. its force is much like our "to the victor belong the spoils."

23. Thor killed no women of the giants' race on the "journey to the East" so fully described by Snorri, his great giant-killing adventure being the one narrated in the Thrymskvitha.

24. Valland: this mythical place ("Land of Slaughter") is elsewhere mentioned, but not further characterised; cf. prose introduction to Volundarkvitha, and Helreith Brynhildar, 2. On the bringing of slain heroes to Othin, cf. Voluspo, 31 and note, [fp. 130] and, for a somewhat different version, Grimnismol, 14. Nowhere else is it indicated that Thor has an asylum for dead peasants.]

 [p. 130]

 Thor spake:
 25. "Unequal gifts | of men wouldst thou give to the gods,
 If might too much thou shouldst have."

 Harbarth spake:
 26. "Thor has might enough, | but never a heart;
 For cowardly fear | in a glove wast thou fain to crawl,
 And there forgot thou wast Thor;
 Afraid there thou wast, | thy fear was such,
 To fart or sneeze | lest Fjalar should hear."

 Thor spake:
 27. "Thou womanish Harbarth, | to hell would I smite thee straight,
 Could mine arm reach over the sound."

 [26. The reference here is to one of the most familiar episodes in Thor's eastward journey. He and his companions came to a house in the forest, and went in to spend the night. Being disturbed by an earthquake and a terrific noise, they all crawled into a smaller room opening from the main one. In the morning, however, they discovered that the earthquake had been occasioned by the giant Skrymir's lying down near them, and the noise by his snoring. The house in which they had taken refuge was his glove, the smaller room being the thumb. Skrymir was in fact Utgartha-Loki himself. That he is in this stanza called Fjalar (the name occurs also in Hovamol, 14) is probably due to a confusion of the names by which Utgartha-Loki went. Loki taunts Thor with this adventure in Lokasenna, 60 and 62, line 3 of this stanza being perhaps interpolated from Lokasenna, 60, 4.]

 [p. 131]

 Harbarth spake:
 28. "Wherefore reach over the sound, | since strife we have none?
 What, Thor, didst thou do then?"

 Thor spake:
 29. "Eastward I was, | and the river I guarded well,
 Where the sons of Svarang | sought me there;
 Stones did they hurl; | small joy did they have of winning;
 Before me there | to ask for peace did they fare.
 What, Harbarth, didst thou the while?"

 Harbarth spake:
 30. "Eastward I was, | and spake with a certain one,
 I played with the linen-white maid, | and met her by stealth;
 I gladdened the gold-decked one, | and she granted me joy."

 Thor spake:
 31. "Full fair was thy woman-finding."

 [29. The river: probably Ifing, which flows between the land of the gods and that of the giants; cf. Vafthruthnismol, 16. Sons of Svarang: presumably the giants; Svarang is not else where mentioned in the poems, nor is there any other account of Thor's defense of the passage.

30. Othin's adventures of this sort were too numerous to make it possible to identify this particular person. By stealth: so the Arnamagnaean Codex; Regius, followed by several editors, has "long meeting with her."]

 [p. 132]

 Harbarth spake:
 32. "Thy help did I need then, Thor, | to hold the white maid fast."

 Thor spake:
 33. "Gladly, had I been there, | my help to thee had been given."

 Harbarth spake:
 34. "I might have trusted thee then, | didst thou not betray thy troth."

 Thor spake:
 35. "No heel-biter am I, in truth, | like an old leather shoe in spring."

 Harbarth spoke:
 36. "What, Thor, didst thou the while?"

 Thor spake:
 37. "In Hlesey the brides | of the Berserkers slew I;
 Most evil they were, | and all they betrayed."

 [35. Heel-biter: this effective parallel to our "back-biter" is not found elsewhere in Old Norse.

37. Hlesey: "the Island of the Sea-God" (Hler = Aegir), identified with the Danish island Laso, in the Kattegat. It appears again, much out of place, in Oddrunargratr, 28. Berserkers: originally men who could turn themselves into bears, hence the name, "bear-shirts"; cf. the werewolf or loupgarou. Later the name was applied to men who at times became seized with a madness for bloodshed; cf. Hyndluljoth, 23 and note. The women here mentioned are obviously of the earlier type.]

 [p. 133]

 Harbarth spake:
 38, "Shame didst thou win, | that women thou slewest, Thor."

 Thor spake:
 39. "She-wolves they were like, | and women but little;
 My ship, which well | I had trimmed, did they shake;
 With clubs of iron they threatened, | and Thjalfi they drove off.
 What, Harbarth, didst thou the while?"

 Harbarth spake:
 40. "In the host I was | that hither fared,
 The banners to raise, | and the spear to redden."

 Thor spake:
 41. "Wilt thou now say | that hatred thou soughtest to bring us?"

 Harbarth spake:
 42. "A ring for thy hand | shall make all right for thee,
 As the judge decides | who sets us two at peace."

 [39. Thjalfi: Thor's servant; cf. note on stanza 14.

40. To what expedition this refers is unknown, but apparently Othin speaks of himself as allied to the foes of the gods.

41. Hatred: so Regius; the other manuscript has, apparently, "sickness."

42. Just what Othin means, or why his words should so have enraged Thor, is not evident, though he may imply that Thor is open to bribery. Perhaps a passage has dropped out before stanza 43.]

 [p. 134]

 Thor spake:
 43. "Where foundest thou | so foul and scornful a speech?
 More foul a speech | I never before have heard."

 Harbarth spake:
 44. "I learned it from men, | the men so old,
 Who dwell in the hills of home."

 Thor spake:
 45. "A name full good | to heaps of stones thou givest
 When thou callest them hills of home."

 Harbarth spake:
 46. "Of such things speak I so."

 Thor spake:
 47. "Ill for thee comes | thy keenness of tongue,
 If the water I choose to wade;
 Louder, I ween, | than a wolf thou cryest,
 If a blow of my hammer thou hast."

 Harbarth spake:
 48. "Sif has a lover at home, | and him shouldst thou meet;
 More fitting it were | on him to put forth thy strength."

 [44. Othin refers to the dead, from whom he seeks information through his magic power.

48. Sit: Thor's wife, the lover being presumably Loki; cf. Lokasenna, 54.]

 [p. 135]

 Thor spake:
 49. "Thy tongue still makes thee say | what seems most ill to me,
 Thou witless man! Thou liest, I ween."

 Harbarth spake:
 50. "Truth do I speak, | but slow on thy way thou art;
 Far hadst thou gone | if now in the boat thou hadst fared."

 Thor spake:
 51. "Thou womanish Harbarth! | here hast thou held me too long."

 Harbarth spake:
 52. "I thought not ever | that Asathor would be hindered
 By a ferryman thus from faring."

 Thor spake:
 53. "One counsel I bring thee now: | row hither thy boat;
 No more of scoffing; | set Magni's father across."

 Harbarth spake:
 54. "From the sound go hence; | the passage thou hast not."

 [52. Asathor: Thor goes by various names in the poems: e.g., Vingthor, Vingnir, Hlorrithi. Asathor means "Thor of the Gods."

53. Magni: Thor's son; cf. stanza 9 and note.]

 [p. 136]

 Thor spake:
 55. "The way now show me, since thou takest me not o'er the water."

 Harbarth spake:
 56. "To refuse it is little, to fare it is long;
 A while to the stock, and a while to the stone;
 Then the road to thy left, till Verland thou reachest;
 And there shall Fjorgyn her son Thor find,
 And the road of her children she shows him to Othin's realm."

 Thor spake:
 57. "May I come so far in a day?"

 Harbarth spake:
 58. "With toil and trouble perchance,
 While the sun still shines, or so I think."

 Thor spake:
 59. "Short now shall be our speech, for thou speakest in mockery only;

 [56. Line 2: the phrases mean simply "a long way"; cf. "over stock and stone." Verland: the "Land of Men" to which Thor must come from the land of the giants. The Arnamagnaean Codex has "Valland" (cf. stanza 24 and note), but this is obviously an error. Fjorgyn: a feminine form of the same name, which belongs to Othin (cf. Voluspo, 56 and note); here it evidently means Jorth (Earth), Thor's mother. The road: the rainbow bridge, Bifrost; cf. Grimnismol, 29 and note.

58. Line 2: so Regius; the other manuscript has "ere sunrise."]

 [p. 137]

The passage thou gavest me not I shall pay thee if ever we meet."

 Harbarth spake:
 60. "Get hence where every evil thing shall have thee!"

 [60. The Arnamagnaean Codex clearly indicates Harbarth as the speaker of this line, but Regius has no superscription, and begins the line with a small letter not preceded by a period, thereby assigning it to Thor.]

 
      
The Poetic Edda, by Henry Adams Bellows, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 138]

 

HYMISKVITHA

 

The Lay of Hymir

 

INTRODUCTORY NOTE

The Hymiskvitha is found complete in both manuscripts; in Regius it follows the Harbarthsljoth, while in the Arnamagnaean Codex it comes after the Grimnismol. Snorri does not quote it, although he tells the main story involved.

The poem is a distinctly inferior piece of work, obviously based on various narrative fragments, awkwardly pieced together. Some critics, Jessen and Edzardi for instance, have maintained that the compiler had before him three distinct poems, which he simply put together; others, like Finnur Jonsson and Mogk, think that the author made a new poem of his own on the basis of earlier poems, now lost. It seems probable that he took a lot of odds and ends of material concerning Thor, whether in prose or in verse, and worked them together in a perfunctory way, without much caring how well they fitted. His chief aim was probably to impress the credulous imaginations of hearers greedy for wonders.

The poem is almost certainly one of the latest of those dealing with the gods, though Finnur Jonsson, in order to support his theory of a Norwegian origin, has to date it relatively early. If, as seems probable, it was produced in Iceland, the chances are that it was composed in the first half of the eleventh century. Jessen, rather recklessly, goes so far as to put it two hundred years later. In any case, it belongs to a period of literary decadence,--the great days of Eddic poetry would never have permitted the nine hundred headed person found in Hymir's home-- and to one in which the usual forms of diction in mythological poetry had yielded somewhat to the verbal subtleties of skaldic verse.

While the skaldic poetry properly falls outside the limits of this book, it is necessary here to say a word about it. There is preserved, in the sagas and elsewhere, a very considerable body of lyric poetry, the authorship of each poem being nearly always definitely stated, whether correctly or otherwise. This type of poetry is marked by an extraordinary complexity of diction, with a peculiarly difficult vocabulary of its own. It was to explain some of the "kennings" which composed this special

[p. 139]

vocabulary that Snorri wrote one of the sections of the Prose Edda. As an illustration, in a single stanza of one poem in the Egilssaga, a sword is called "the halo of the helm," "the wound-hoe," "the blood-snake" (possibly; no one is sure what the compound word means) and "the ice of the girdle," while men appear in the same stanza as "Othin's ash-trees," and battle is spoken of as "the iron game." One of the eight lines has defied translation completely.

Skaldic diction made relatively few inroads into the earlier Eddic poems, but in the Hymiskvitha these circumlocutions are fairly numerous. This sets the poem somewhat apart from the rest of the mythological collection. Only the vigor of the two main stories--Thor's expedition after Hymir's kettle and the fishing trip in which he caught Mithgarthsorm--saves it from complete mediocrity.

1. Of old the gods | made feast together,
 And drink they sought | ere sated they were;
 Twigs they shook, | and blood they tried:
 Rich fare in Aegir's | hall they found.

 [1. Twigs: Vigfusson comments at some length on "the rite practised in the heathen age of inquiring into the future by dipping bunches of chips or twigs into the blood (of sacrifices) and shaking them." But the two operations may have been separate, the twigs being simply "divining-rods" marked with runes. In either case, the gods were seeking information by magic as to where they could find plenty to drink. Aegir: a giant who is also the god of the sea; little is known of him outside of what is told here and in the introductory prose to the Lokasenna, though Snorri has a brief account of him, giving his home as Hlesey (Laso, cf. Harbarthsljoth, 37). Grimnismol, 45, has a reference to this same feast.]

 [p. 140]

2. The mountain-dweller | sat merry as boyhood,
 But soon like a blinded | man he seemed;
 The son of Ygg | gazed in his eyes:
 "For the gods a feast | shalt thou forthwith get."

3. The word-wielder toil | for the giant worked,
 And so revenge | on the gods he sought;
 He bade Sif's mate | the kettle bring:
 "Therein for ye all | much ale shall I brew."

4. The far-famed ones | could find it not,
 And the holy gods | could get it nowhere;
 Till in truthful wise | did Tyr speak forth,
 And helpful counsel | to Hlorrithi gave.

5. "There dwells to the east | of Elivagar
 Hymir the wise | at the end of heaven;
 A kettle my father | fierce doth own,
 A mighty vessel | a mile in depth."

 [2. Mountain-dweller: the giant (Aegir). Line 2: the principal word in the original has defied interpretation, and any translation of the line must be largely guesswork. Ygg: Othin; his son is Thor. Some editors assume a gap after this stanza.

3. Word-wielder: Thor. The giant: Aegir. Sif: Thor's wife; cf. Harbarthsljoth, 48. The kettle: Aegir's kettle is possibly the sea itself.

4. Tyr: the god of battle; his two great achievements were thrusting his hand into the mouth of the wolf Fenrir so that the gods might bind him, whereby he lost his hand (cf. Voluspo, 39, note), and his fight with the hound Garm in the last battle, in which they kill each other. Hlorrithi: Thor.

5. Elivagar ("Stormy Waves"): possibly the Milky Way; [fp. 141] cf. Vafthruthnismol, 31, note. Hymir: this giant figures only in this episode. It is not clear why Tyr, who is elsewhere spoken of as a son of Othin, should here call Hymir his father. Finnur Jonsson, in an attempt to get round this difficulty, deliberately changed the word "father" to "grandfather," but this does not help greatly.]

 [p. 141]

 Thor spake:
 6. "May we win, dost thou think, | this whirler of water?"
 Tyr spake:
 "Aye, friend, we can, | if cunning we are."

7. Forward that day | with speed they fared,
 From Asgarth came they | to Egil's home;
 The goats with horns | bedecked he guarded;
 Then they sped to the hall | where Hymir dwelt.

8. The youth found his grandam, | that greatly he loathed,

 [6. Neither manuscript has any superscriptions, but most editors have supplied them as above. From this point through stanza it the editors have varied considerably in grouping the lines into stanzas. The manuscripts indicate the third lines of stanzas 7, 8, 9, and to as beginning stanzas, but this makes more complications than the present arrangement. It is possible that, as Sijmons suggests, two lines have been lost after stanza 6.

7. Egil: possibly, though by no means certainly, the father of Thor's servant, Thjalfi, for, according to Snorri, Thor's first stop on this journey was at the house of a peasant whose children, Thjalfi and Roskva, he took into his service; cf. stanza 38, note. The Arnamagnaean Codex has "Aegir" instead of "Egil," but, aside from the fact that Thor had just left Aegir's house, the sea-god can hardly have been spoken of as a goat-herd.

8. The youth: Tyr, whose extraordinary grandmother is Hymir's mother. We know nothing further of her, or of the other, [fp. 141] who is Hymir's wife and Tyr's mother. It may be guessed, however, that she belonged rather to the race of the gods than to that of the giants.]

 [p. 142]

And full nine hundred | heads she had;
 But the other fair | with gold came forth,
 And the bright-browed one | brought beer to her son.

9. "Kinsman of giants, | beneath the kettle
 Will I set ye both, | ye heroes bold;
 For many a time | my dear-loved mate
 To guests is wrathful | and grim of mind."

10. Late to his home | the misshapen Hymir,
 The giant harsh, | from his hunting came;
 The icicles rattled | as in he came,
 For the fellow's chin-forest | frozen was.

11. "Hail to thee, Hymir! | good thoughts mayst thou have;
 Here has thy son | to thine hall now come;
 (For him have we waited, | his way was long;)
 And with him fares | the foeman of Hroth,
 The friend of mankind, | and Veur they call him.

 [11. Two or three editors give this stanza a superscription ("The concubine spake", "The daughter spake"). Line 3 is commonly regarded as spurious. The foeman of Hroth: of course this means Thor, but nothing is known of any enemy of his by this name. Several editors have sought to make a single word meaning "the famous enemy" out of the phrase. Concerning Thor as the friend of man, particularly of the peasant class, cf. introduction to Harbarthsljoth. Veur: another name, of uncertain meaning, for Thor.]

 [p. 143]

12. "See where under | the gable they sit!
 Behind the beam | do they hide themselves."
 The beam at the glance | of the giant broke,
 And the mighty pillar | in pieces fell.

13. Eight fell from the ledge, | and one alone,
 The hard-hammered kettle, | of all was whole;
 Forth came they then, | and his foes he sought,
 The giant old, | and held with his eyes.

14. Much sorrow his heart | foretold when he saw
 The giantess' foeman | come forth on the floor;
 Then of the steers | did they bring in three;
 Their flesh to boil | did the giant bid.

15. By a head was each | the shorter hewed,
 And the beasts to the fire | straight they bore;
 The husband of Sif, | ere to sleep he went,
 Alone two oxen | of Hymir's ate.

16. To the comrade hoary | of Hrungnir then
 Did Hlorrithi's meal | full mighty seem;
 "Next time at eve | we three must eat
 The food we have | s the hunting's spoil."

 [13. Eight: the giant's glance, besides breaking the beam, knocks down all the kettles with such violence that all but the one under which Thor and Tyr are hiding are broken.

14. Hymir's wrath does not permit him to ignore the duties of a host to his guests, always strongly insisted on.

15. Thor's appetite figures elsewhere; cf. Thrymskvitha, 24.

16. The comrade of Hrungnir: Hymir, presumably simply because both are giants; cf. Harbarthsljoth, 14 and note.]

 [p. 144]

17. .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 Fain to row on the sea | was Veur, he said,
 If the giant bold | would give him bait.

 Hymir spake:
 18. "Go to the herd, | if thou hast it in mind,
 Thou slayer of giants, | thy bait to seek;
 For there thou soon | mayst find, methinks,
 Bait from the oxen | easy to get."

19. Swift to the wood | the hero went,
 Till before him an ox | all black he found;
 From the beast the slayer | of giants broke
 The fortress high | of his double horns.

 Hymir spake:
 20. "Thy works, methinks, | are worse by far,

 [17. The manuscripts indicate no lacuna, and many editors unite stanza 17 with lines 1 and 2 of 18. Sijmons and Gering assume a gap after these two lines, but it seems more probable that the missing passage, if any, belonged before them, supplying the connection with the previous stanza.

18. The manuscripts have no superscription. Many editors combine lines 3 and 4 with lines 1 and 2 of stanza 19. In Snorri's extended paraphrase of the story, Hymir declines to go fishing with Thor on the ground that the latter is too small a person to be worth bothering about. "You would freeze," he says, "if you stayed out in mid-ocean as long as I generally do." Bait (line 4): the word literally means "chaff," hence any small bits; Hymir means that Thor should collect dung for bait.

19. Many editors combine lines 3 and 4 with stanza 20. Fortress, etc.: the ox's head; cf. introductory note concerning the diction of this poem. Several editors assume a lacuna after stanza 19, but this seems unnecessary.]

 [p. 145]

Thou steerer of ships, | than when still thou sittest."
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .

21. The lord of the goats | bade the ape-begotten
 Farther to steer | the steed of the rollers;
 But the giant said | that his will, forsooth,
 Longer to row | was little enough.

22. Two whales on his hook | did the mighty Hymir
 Soon pull up | on a single cast;
 In the stern the kinsman | of Othin sat,
 And Veur with cunning | his cast prepared.

23. The warder of men, | the worm's destroyer,
 Fixed on his hook | the head of the ox;
 There gaped at the bait | the foe of the gods,
 The girdler of all | the earth beneath.

 [20. The manuscripts have no superscription. Steerer of ships: probably merely a reference to Thor's intention to go fishing. The lacuna after stanza 20 is assumed by most editors.

21. Lord of the goats: Thor, because of his goat-drawn chariot. Ape-begotten: Hymir; the word "api," rare until relatively late times in its literal sense, is fairly common with the meaning of "fool." Giants were generally assumed to be stupid. Steed of the rollers: a ship, because boats were pulled up on shore by means of rollers.

23. Warder of men: Thor; cf. stanza 11. Worm's destroyer: likewise Thor, who in the last battle slays, and is slain by, Mithgarthsorm; cf. Voluspo, 56. The foe of the gods: Mithgarthsorm, who lies in the sea, and surrounds the whole earth.]

 [p. 146]

24. The venomous serpent | swiftly up
 To the boat did Thor, | the bold one, pull;
 With his hammer the loathly | hill of the hair
 Of the brother of Fenrir | he smote from above.

25. The monsters roared, | and the rocks resounded,
 And all the earth | so old was shaken;
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 Then sank the fish | in the sea forthwith.

26. .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 Joyless as back | they rowed was the giant;
 Speechless did Hymir | sit at the oars,
 With the rudder he sought | a second wind.

 Hymir spake:
 27. "The half of our toil | wilt thou have with me,

 [24. Hill of the hair: head,--a thoroughly characteristic skaldic phrase. Brother of Fenrir: Mithgarthsorm was, like the wolf Fenrir and the goddess Hel, born to Loki and the giantess Angrbotha (cf. Voluspo, 39 and note), and I have translated this line accordingly; but the word used in the text has been guessed as meaning almost anything from "comrade" to "enemy."

25. No gap is indicated in the manuscripts, but that a line or more has been lost is highly probable. In Snorri's version, Thor pulls so hard on the line that he drives both his feet through the flooring of the boat, and stands on bottom. When he pulls the serpent up, Hymir cuts the line with his bait-knife, which explains the serpent's escape. Thor, in a rage, knocks Hymir overboard with his hammer, and then wades ashore. The lines of stanzas 25 and 26 have been variously grouped.

26. No gap is indicated in the manuscripts, but line 2 begins with a small letter. A second wind: another direction, i. e., he put about for the shore.]

 [p. 147]

And now make fast | our goat of the flood;
 Or home wilt thou bear | the whales to the house,
 Across the gorge | of the wooded glen?"

28. Hlorrithi stood | and the stem he gripped,
 And the sea-horse with water | awash he lifted;
 Oars and bailer | and all he bore
 With the surf-swine home | to the giant's house.

29. His might the giant | again would match,
 For stubborn he was, | with the strength of Thor;
 None truly strong, | though stoutly he rowed,
 Would he call save one | who could break the cup.

30. Hlorrithi then, | when the cup he held,
 Struck with the glass | the pillars of stone;
 As he sat the posts | in pieces he shattered,
 Yet the glass to Hymir whole they brought.

31. But the loved one fair | of the giant found
 A counsel true, | and told her thought:

 [27. No superscription in the manuscripts. In its place Bugge supplies a line--"These words spake Hymir, | the giant wise." The manuscripts reverse the order of lines 2 and 3, and in both of them line 4 stands after stanza 28. Goat of the flood: boat.

28. Sea-horse: boat. Surf-swine: the whales.

29. Snorri says nothing of this episode of Hymir's cup. The glass which cannot be broken appears in the folklore of various races.

31. The loved one: Hymir's wife and Tyr's mother; cf. stanza 8 and note. The idea that a giant's skull is harder than stone or anything else is characteristic of the later Norse folk-stories, and [fp. 148] in one of the so-called "mythical sagas" we find a giant actually named Hard-Skull.]

 [p. 148]

"Smite the skull of Hymir, | heavy with food,
 For harder it is | than ever was glass."

32. The goats' mighty ruler | then rose on his knee,
 And with all the strength | of a god he struck;
 Whole was the fellow's | helmet-stem,
 But shattered the wine-cup | rounded was.

 Hymir spake:
 33. "Fair is the treasure | that from me is gone,
 Since now the cup | on my knees lies shattered;"
 So spake the giant: | "No more can I say
 In days to be, | 'Thou art brewed, mine ale.'

34. "Enough shall it be | if out ye can bring
 Forth from our house | the kettle here."
 Tyr then twice | to move it tried,
 But before him the kettle | twice stood fast.

35. The father of Mothi | the rim seized firm,
 And before it stood | on the floor below;
 Up on his head | Sif's husband raised it,
 And about his heels | the handles clattered.

 [32. Helmet-stem: head.

33. The manuscripts have no superscription. Line 4 in the manuscripts is somewhat obscure, and Bugge, followed by some editors, suggests a reading which may be rendered (beginning with the second half of line 3): "No more can I speak / Ever again | as I spoke of old."

35, The father of Mothi and Sif's husband: Thor.]

 [p. 149]

36. Not long had they fared, | ere backwards looked
 The son of Othin, | once more to see;
 From their caves in the east | beheld he coming
 With Hymir the throng | of the many-headed.

37. He stood and cast | from his back the kettle,
 And Mjollnir, the lover | of murder, he wielded;
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 So all the whales | of the waste he slew.

38. Not long had they fared | ere one there lay
 Of Hlorrithi's goats | half-dead on the ground;
 In his leg the pole-horse | there was lame;
 The deed the evil | Loki had done.

 [36. The many-headed: The giants, although rarely designated as a race in this way, sometimes had two or more heads; cf. stanza 8, Skirnismol, V and Vafthruthnismol, 33. Hymir's mother is, however, the only many-headed giant actually to appear in the action of the poems, and it is safe to assume that the tradition as a whole belongs to the period of Norse folk-tales of the marchen order.

37. No gap is indicated in the manuscripts. Some editors put the missing line as 2, some as 3, and some, leaving the present three lines together, add a fourth, and metrically incorrect, one from late paper manuscripts: "Who with Hymir followed after." Whales of the waste: giants.

38. According to Snorri, when Thor set out with Loki (not Tyr) for the giants' land, he stopped first at a peasant's house (cf. stanza 7 and note). There he proceeded to cook his own goats for supper. The peasant's son, Thjalfi, eager to get at the marrow, split one of the leg-bones with his knife. The next morning, when Thor was ready to proceed with his journey, he called the goats to life again, but one of them proved irretrievably lame. His wrath led the peasant to give him both his children as [fp. 150] servants (cf. stanza 39). Snorri does not indicate that Loki was in any way to blame.]

 [p. 150]

39. But ye all have heard,-- | for of them who have
 The tales of the gods, | who better can tell?
 What prize he won | from the wilderness-dweller,
 Who both his children | gave him to boot.

40. The mighty one came | to the council of gods,
 And the kettle he had | that Hymir's was;
 So gladly their ale | the gods could drink
 In Aegir's hall | at the autumn-time.

 [39. This deliberate introduction of the story-teller is exceedingly rare in the older poetry.

40. The translation of the last two lines is mostly guess work, as the word rendered "gods" is uncertain, and the one rendered "at the autumn-time" is quite obscure.]

 
      
The Poetic Edda, by Henry Adams Bellows, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 151]

 

LOKASENNA

 

Loki's Wrangling

 

INTRODUCTORY NOTES

The Lokasenna is found only in Regius, where it follows the Hymiskvitha; Snorri quotes four lines of it, grouped together as a single stanza.

The poem is one of the most vigorous of the entire collection, and seems to have been preserved in exceptionally good condition. The exchange or contest of insults was dear to the Norse heart, and the Lokasenna consists chiefly of Loki's taunt; to the assembled gods and goddesses, and their largely ineffectual attempts to talk back to him. The author was evidently well versed in mythological fore, and the poem is full of references to incidents not elsewhere recorded. As to its date and origin there is the usual dispute, but the latter part of the tenth century and Iceland seem the best guesses.

The prose notes are long and of unusual interest. The introductory one links the poem closely to the Hymiskvitha, much as the Reginsmol, Fafnismol and Sigrdrifumol are linked together; the others fill in the narrative gaps in the dialogue--very like stage directions,--and provide a conclusion by relating Loki's punishment, which, presumably, is here connected with the wrong incident. It is likely that often when the poem was recited during the two centuries or so before it was committed to writing, the speaker inserted some such explanatory comments, and the compiler of the collection followed this example by adding such explanations as he thought necessary. The Lokasenna is certainly much older than the Hymiskvitha, the connection between them being purely one of subject-matter; and the twelfth-century compiler evidently knew a good deal less about mythology than the author whose work he was annotating.

__________________

Aegir, who was also called Gymir, had prepared ale for the gods, after he had got the mighty kettle, as now has been told. To this feast came Othin and Frigg, his wife. Thor came not, as he was on a journey in the East. Sif,

[p. 152]

Thor's wife, was there, and Brag, with Ithun, his wife. Tyr, who had but one hand, was there; the wolf Fenrir had bitten off his other hand when they had bound him. There were Njorth and Skathi his wife, Freyr and Freyja, and Vithar, the son of Othin. Loki was there, and Freyr's

 [Prose. Aegir: the sea-god; Snorri gives Hler as another of his names, but he is not elsewhere called Gymir, which is the name of the giant, Gerth's father, in the Skirnismol. On Aegir cf. Grimnismol, 45, and Hymiskvitha, 1. Frigg: though Othin's wife is often mentioned, she plays only a minor part in the Eddic poems; cf. Voluspo, 34, Vafthruthnismol, I, and Grimnismol, introductory prose. Thor: the compiler is apparently a trifle confused as to Thor's movements; the "Journey in the East" here mentioned cannot be the one described in the Hymiskvitha, nor yet the one narrated by Snorri, as Loki was with Thor through out that expedition. He probably means no more than that Thor was off killing giants. Sif: concerning Thor's wife the chief incident is that Loki cut off her hair, and, at the command of the wrathful Thor, was compelled to have the dwarfs fashion her a new supply of hair out of gold; cf. Harbarthsljoth, 48. Bragi: the god of poetry; cf. Grimnismol, 44 and note. Ithun: the goddess of youth; cf. note on Skirnismol, 19. Ithun is not mentioned by name in any other of the Eddic poems, but Snorri tells in detail how the giant Thjazi stole her and her apples, explaining the reference in Harbarthsljoth, 19 (q. v.). Tyr: the god of battle; cf. Hymiskvitha, 4, and (concerning his dealings with the wolf Fenrir) Voluspo, 39, note. Njorth: the chief of the Wanes, and father of Freyr and Freyja; cf. (concerning the whole family) Skirnismol, introductory prose and note, also Voluspo, 21 and note. Skathi: Njorth's wife was the daughter of the giant Thjazi; cf. Harbarthsljoth, 19, note, and Grimnismol, 17. Vithar: the silent god, the son of Othin who avenged his father by slaying the wolf Fenrir; cf. Voluspo, 54, Vafthruthnismol, 51, and Grimnismol, 17. Loki: the mischief-making fire-god; in addition to the many references to his career in the Lokasenna, cf. particularly Voluspo, 32 and 35, and notes. Byggvir and Beyla: not mentioned elsewhere in the poems; Freyr's conspicuous servant is Skirnir, hero of the Skirnismol. Fimafeng ("The Swift Handler") [fp. 153] and Eldir ("The Man of the Fire"): mentioned only in connection with this incident. Glittering gold: Aegir's use of gold to light his hall, which was often thought of as under the sea, was responsible for the phrase "flame of the flood," and sundry kindred phrases, meaning "gold."]

 [p. 153]

servants Byggvir and Beyla. Many were there of the gods and elves.

Aegir had two serving-men, Fimafeng and Eldir. Glittering gold they had in place of firelight; the ale came in of itself; and great was the peace. The guests praised much the ability of Aegir's serving-men. Loki might not endure that, and he slew Fimafeng. Then the gods shook their shields and howled at Loki and drove him away to the forest, and thereafter set to drinking again. Loki turned back, and outside he met Eldir. Loki spoke to him:

1. "Speak now, Eldir, | for not one step
 Farther shalt thou fare;
 What ale-talk here | do they have within,
 The sons of the glorious gods?"

 Eldir spake:
 2. "Of their weapons they talk, | and their might in war,
 The sons of the glorious gods;
 From the gods and elves | who are gathered here
 No friend in words shalt thou find."

 Loki spake:
 3. "In shall I go | into Aegir's hall,
 For the feast I fain would see;

[p. 154]

Bale and hatred | I bring to the gods,
 And their mead with venom I mix."

 Eldir spake:
 4. "If in thou goest | to Aegir's hall,
 And fain the feast wouldst see,
 And with slander and spite | wouldst sprinkle the gods,
 Think well lest they wipe it on thee."

 Loki spake:
 5. "Bethink thee, Eldir, | if thou and I
 Shall strive with spiteful speech;
 Richer I grow | in ready words
 If thou speakest too much to me."

Then Loki went into the hall, but when they who were there saw who had entered, they were all silent.

 Loki spake:
 6. "Thirsty I come | into this thine hall,
 I, Lopt, from a journey long,
 To ask of the gods | that one should give
 Fair mead for a drink to me.

7. "Why sit ye silent, | swollen with pride,
 Ye gods, and no answer give?

 [6. Lopt: like Lothur (cf. Voluspo, 18) another name for Loki; cf. Hyndluljoth, 43, and Svipdagsmol, 42.

7. in the manuscript this stanza begins with a small letter, and Heinzel unites it with stanza 6.]

 [p. 155]

At your feast a place | and a seat prepare me,
 Or bid me forth to fare."

 Bragi spake:
 8. "A place and a seat | will the gods prepare
 No more in their midst for thee;
 For the gods know well | what men they wish
 To find at their mighty feasts."

 Loki spake:
 9. "Remember, Othin, | in olden days
 That we both our blood have mixed;
 Then didst thou promise | no ale to pour,
 Unless it were brought for us both."

 Othin spake:
 10. "Stand forth then, Vithar, | and let the wolf's father
 Find a seat at our feast;

 [9. Bragi: cf. note on introductory prose. Why Loki taunts him with cowardice (stanzas 11-13-15) is not clear, for poetry, of which Bragi was the patron, was generally associated in the Norse mind with peculiar valor, and most of the skaldic poets were likewise noted fighters.

9. There exists no account of any incident in which Othin and Loki thus swore blood-brotherhood, but they were so often allied in enterprises that the idea is wholly reasonable. The common process of "mingling blood" was carried out quite literally, and the promise of -which Loki speaks is characteristic of those which, in the sagas, often accompanied the ceremony; cf. Brot af Sigurtharkvithu, 18 and note.

10. In stanzas 10-31 the manuscript has nothing to indicate the identity of the several speakers, but these are uniformly clear [fp. 156] enough through the context. Vithar: cf. note on introductory prose. The wolf's father: Loki; cf. Voluspo, 39 and note.]

 [p. 156]

Lest evil should Loki | speak aloud
 Here within Aegir's hall."

Then Vithar arose and poured drink for Loki; but before he drank he spoke to the gods:

11. "Hail to you, gods! | ye goddesses, hail!
 Hail to the holy throng!
 Save for the god | who yonder sits,
 Bragi there on the bench."

 Bragi spake:
 12. "A horse and a sword | from my hoard will I give,
 And a ring gives Bragi to boot,
 That hatred thou makst not | among the gods;
 So rouse not the great ones to wrath."

 Loki spake:
 13. "In horses and rings | thou shalt never be rich,
 Bragi, but both shalt thou lack;
 Of the gods and elves | here together met
 Least brave in battle art thou,
 (And shyest thou art of the shot.)"

 Bragi spake:
 14. "Now were I without | as I am within,

 [13. Sijmons makes one line of lines 4-5 by cutting out a part of each; Finnur Jonsson rejects 5 as spurious.

14. The text of line 4 is somewhat obscure, and has been [fp. 157] variously emended, one often adopted suggestion making the line read, "Little is that for thy lies."]

 [p. 157]

And here in Aegir's hall,
 Thine head would I bear | in mine hands away,
 And pay thee the price of thy lies."

 Loki spake:
 15. "In thy seat art thou bold, | not so are thy deeds,
 Bragi, adorner of benches!
 Go out and fight | if angered thou feelest,
 No hero such forethought has."

 Ithun spake:
 16. "Well, prithee, Bragi, | his kinship weigh,
 Since chosen as wish-son he was;
 And speak not to Loki | such words of spite
 Here within Aegir's hall."

 Loki spake:
 17. "Be silent, Ithun! | thou art, I say,

 [15. Adorner of benches: this epithet presumably implies that Bragi is not only slothful, but also effeminate, for a very similar word, "pride of the benches," means a bride.

16. Ithun: Bragi's wife; cf. note on introductory prose. The goddesses who, finding that their husbands are getting the worst of it, take up the cudgels with Loki, all find themselves confronted with undeniable facts in their own careers; cf. stanzas 26 (Frigg), 52 (Skathi) and 54 (Sif). Gefjun and Freyja are silenced in similar fashion. Wish-son: adopted son; Loki was the son of the giant Farbauti and the giantess Laufey, and hence was not of the race of the gods, but had been virtually adopted by Othin, who subsequently had good reason to regret it.]

 [p. 158]

Of women most lustful in love,
 Since thou thy washed-bright | arms didst wind
 About thy brother's slayer."

 Ithun spake:
 18. "To Loki I speak not | with spiteful words
 Here within Aegir's hall;
 And Bragi I calm, | who is hot with beer,
 For I wish not that fierce they should fight."

 Gefjun spake:
 19. "Why, ye gods twain, | with bitter tongues
 Raise hate among us here?
 Loki is famed | for his mockery foul,
 And the dwellers in heaven he hates."

 Loki spake:
 20. "Be silent, Gefjun! | for now shall I say
 Who led thee to evil life;
 The boy so fair | gave a necklace bright,
 And about him thy leg was laid."

 [17. We do not even know who Ithun's brother was, much less who slew him.

19. Gefjun: a goddess, not elsewhere mentioned in the poems, who, according to Snorri, was served by the women who died maidens. Beyond this nothing is known of her. Lines 3-4 in the manuscript are puzzling, and have been freely emended.

20. Nothing is known of the incident here mentioned. There is a good deal of confusion as to various of the gods and goddesses, and it has been suggested that Gefjun is really Frigg under an other name, with a little of Freyja--whose attributes were frequently confused with Frigg's--thrown in. Certainly Othin's [fp. 159] answer (stanza 21, lines 3-4) fits Frigg perfectly, for she shared his knowledge of the future, whereas it has no relation to any thing known of Gefjun. As for the necklace (line 3), it may be the Brisings' necklace, which appears in the Thrymskvitha as Freyja's, but which, in some mythological writings, is assigned to Frigg.]

 [p. 159]

 Othin spake:
 21. "Mad art thou, Loki, | and little of wit,
 The wrath of Gefjun to rouse;
 For the fate that is set | for all she sees,
 Even as I, methinks."

 Loki spake:
 22. "Be silent, Othin! | not justly thou settest
 The fate of the fight among men;
 Oft gavst thou to him | who deserved not the gift,
 To the baser, the battle's prize."

 Othin spake:
 23. "Though I gave to him | who deserved not the gift,
 To the baser, the battle's prize;
 Winters eight | wast thou under the earth,
 Milking the cows as a maid,
 (Ay, and babes didst thou bear;
 Unmanly thy soul must seem.)"

 [21. Snorri quotes line 1; cf. note on stanza 29.

23. There is no other reference to Loki's having spent eight years underground, or to his cow-milking. On one occasion, however, he did bear offspring. A giant had undertaken to build the gods a fortress, his reward being Freyja and the sun and moon, provided the work was done by a given time. His sole helper was his horse, Svathilfari. The work being nearly done, and the gods fearing to lose Freyja and the sun and moon, Loki [fp. 160] turned himself into a mare, and so effectually distracted Svathilfari from his task that shortly afterwards Loki gave birth to Othin's eight-legged horse, Sleipnir. In such contests of abuse a man was not infrequently taunted with having borne children; cf. Helgakvitha Hundingsbana I, 39-45. One or two of the last three lines may be spurious.]

 [p. 160]

 Loki spake:
 24. "They say that with spells | in Samsey once
 Like witches with charms didst thou work;
 And in witch's guise | among men didst thou go;
 Unmanly thy soul must seem."

 Frigg spake:
 25. "Of the deeds ye two | of old have done
 Ye should make no speech among men;
 Whate'er ye have done | in days gone by,
 Old tales should ne'er be told."

 Loki spake:
 26. "Be silent, Frigg! | thou art Fjorgyn's wife,
 But ever lustful in love;
 For Vili and Ve, | thou wife of Vithrir,
 Both in thy bosom have lain."

 [24. Samsey: perhaps the Danish island of Samso. Othin was the god of magic, but there is no other reference to his ever having disguised himself as a witch.

25. Frigg: Othin's wife; cf. note to introductory prose.

26. Fjorgyn: Othin; cf. Voluspo, 56 and note. Vili and Ve: Othin's brothers, who appear merely as, with Othin, the sons of Bur and Bestla; cf. Voluspo, 4. The Ynglingasaga says that, during one of Othin's protracted absences, his two brothers took Frigg as their mistress. Vithrir: another name for Othin.]

 [p. 161]

 Frigg spake:
 27. "If a son like Baldr | were by me now,
 Here within Aegir's hall,
 From the sons of the gods | thou shouldst go not forth
 Till thy fierceness in fight were tried."

 Loki spake:
 28. "Thou wilt then, Frigg, | that further I tell
 Of the ill that now I know;
 Mine is the blame | that Baldr no more
 Thou seest ride home to the hall."

 Freyja spake:
 29. "Mad art thou, Loki, | that known thou makest
 The wrong and shame thou hast wrought;
 The fate of all | does Frigg know well,
 Though herself she says it not."

 Loki spake:
 30. "Be silent, Freyja! | for fully I know thee,
 Sinless thou art not thyself;

 [27. On the death of Baldr, slain through Loki's cunning by the blind Hoth, cf. Voluspo, 32 and note.

29. Freyja: daughter of Njorth and sister of Freyr; cf. note on introductory prose. Snorri, in speaking of Frigg's knowledge of the future, makes a stanza out of Lokasenna, 21, 1; 47, 2; 29, 3-4, thus: "Mad art thou, Loki, | and little of wit, / Why, Loki, leavst thou this not? / The fate of all | does Frigg know well, / Though herself she says it not."

30. According to Snorri, Freyja was a model of fidelity to her husband, Oth.]

 [p. 162]

Of the gods and elves | who are gathered here,
 Each one as thy lover has lain."

 Freyja spake:
 31. "False is thy tongue, | and soon shalt thou find
 That it sings thee an evil song;
 The gods are wroth, | and the goddesses all,
 And in grief shalt thou homeward go."

 Loki spake:
 32. "Be silent, Freyja! | thou foulest witch,
 And steeped full sore in sin;
 In the arms of thy brother | the bright gods caught thee
 When Freyja her wind set free."

 Njorth spake:
 33. "Small ill does it work | though a woman may have
 A lord or a lover or both;
 But a wonder it is | that this womanish god
 Comes hither, though babes he has borne."

 [32. Before each of stanzas 32-42 the manuscript indicates the speaker, through the initial letter of the name written in the margin. Thy brother: Freyr; there is no other indication that such a relation existed between these two, but they themselves were the product of such a union; cf. stanza 36 and note.

33. Njorth: father of Freyr and Freyja, and given by the Wanes as a hostage, in exchange for Honir, at the close of the first war; Cf. Voluspo, 21 and note, also Skirnismol, introductory prose and note. Babes: cf. stanza 23 and note. Bugge suggests that this clause may have been a late insertion.]

 [p. 163]

 Loki spake:
 34. "Be silent, Njorth; | thou wast eastward sent,
 To the gods as a hostage given;
 And the daughters of Hymir | their privy had
 When use did they make of thy mouth."

 Njorth spake:
 35. "Great was my gain, | though long was I gone,
 To the gods as a hostage given;
 The son did I have | whom no man hates,
 And foremost of gods is found."

 Loki spake:
 36. "Give heed now, Njorth, | nor boast too high,
 No longer I hold it hid;
 With thy sister hadst thou | so fair a son,
 Thus hadst thou no worse a hope."

 Tyr spake:
 37. "Of the heroes brave | is Freyr the best
 Here in the home of the gods;

 [34. Daughters of Hymir: we have no clue to who these were, though Hymir is doubtless the frost-giant of the Hymiskvitha (q.v.). Loki's point is that Njorth is not a god, but the product of an inferior race (the Wanes).

35. The son: Freyr.

36. Thy sister: the Ynglingasaga supports this story of Njorth's having had two children by his sister before he came among the gods. Snorri, on the other hand, specifically says that Freyr and Freyja were born after Njorth came to the gods.

37. Tyr: the god of battle; cf. notes on Hymiskvitha, 4, and Voluspo, 39. Freyr; concerning his noble qualities cf. Skirnismol, introductory prose and note.]

 [p. 164]

He harms not maids | nor the wives of men,
 And the bound from their fetters he frees."

 Loki spake:
 38. "Be silent, Tyr! | for between two men
 Friendship thou ne'er couldst fashion;
 Fain would I tell | how Fenrir once
 Thy right hand rent from thee."

 Tyr spake:
 39. "My hand do I lack, | but Hrothvitnir thou,
 And the loss brings longing to both;
 Ill fares the wolf | who shall ever await
 In fetters the fall of the gods."

 Loki spake:
 40. "Be silent, Tyr! | for a son with me
 Thy wife once chanced to win;
 Not a penny, methinks, | wast thou paid for the wrong,
 Nor wast righted an inch, poor wretch."

 Freyr spake:
 41. "By the mouth of the river | the wolf remains

 [38. Snorri mentions Tyr's incompetence as a peacemaker. Fenrir: the wolf, Loki's son; cf. Voluspo, 39.

39. Hrothvitnir ("The Mighty Wolf"): Fenrir, who awaits in chains the final battle and death at the hands of Vithar. The manuscript has a metrical error in line 3, which has led to various emendations, all with much the same meaning.

40. Thy wife: there is no other reference to Tyr's wife, nor do we know who was the son in question.]

 [p. 165]

Till the gods to destruction go;
 Thou too shalt soon, | if thy tongue is not stilled,
 Be fettered, thou forger of ill."

 Loki spake:
 42. "The daughter of Gymir | with gold didst thou buy,
 And sold thy sword to boot;
 But when Muspell's sons | through Myrkwood ride,
 Thou shalt weaponless wait, poor wretch."

 Byggvir spake:
 43. "Had I birth so famous | as Ingunar-Freyr,
 And sat in so lofty a seat,

 [41. The mouth of the river: according to Snorri, the chained Fenrir "roars horribly, and the slaver runs from his mouth, and makes the river called Vam; he lies there till the doom of the gods." Freyr's threat is actually carried out; cf. concluding prose.

42. The daughter of Gymir: Gerth, heroine of the Skirnismol, which gives the details of Freyr's loss of his sword. Muspell's sons: the name Muspell is not used elsewhere in the poems; Snorri uses it frequently, but only in this same phrase, "Muspell's sons." They are the dwellers in the fire-world, Muspellsheim, led by Surt against the gods in the last battle; cf. Voluspo, 47 and 52 and notes. Myrkwood: here the dark forest bounding the fire-world; in the Atlakvitha (stanza 3) the name is used of another boundary forest.

43. Byggvir: one of Freyr's two servants; cf. introductory prose. Ingunar-Freyr: the name is not used elsewhere in the poems, or by Snorri; it may be the genitive of a woman's name, Ingun, the unknown sister of Njorth who was Freyr's mother (cf. stanza 36), or a corruption of the name Ingw, used for Freyr (Fro) in old German mythology.]

 [p. 166]

I would crush to marrow | this croaker of ill,
 And beat all his body to bits."

 Loki spake:
 44. "What little creature | goes crawling there,
 Snuffling and snapping about?
 At Freyr's ears ever | wilt thou be found,
 Or muttering hard at the mill."

 Byggvir spake:
 45. "Byggvir my name, | and nimble am I,
 As gods and men do grant;
 And here am I proud | that the children of Hropt
 Together all drink ale."

 Loki spake:
 46. "Be silent, Byggvir! | thou never couldst set
 Their shares of the meat for men;
 Hid in straw on the floor, | they found thee not
 When heroes were fain to fight."

 Heimdall spake:
 47. "Drunk art thou, Loki, | and mad are thy deeds,
 Why, Loki, leavst thou this not?

 [44. Beginning with this stanza, the names of the speakers are lacking in the manuscript. The mill: i.e., at slaves' tasks.

45. Nothing further is known of either Byggvir's swiftness or his cowardice. Hropt: Othin.

47. Heimdall: besides being the watchman of the gods (cf. Voluspo, 27), he appears also as the god of light (cf. Thrymskvitha, 14), and possibly also as a complex cultural deity in the [fp. 167] Rigsthula. He was a son of Othin, born of nine sisters; cf. Hyndluljoth, 37-40. In the last battle he and Loki slay one an other. Line 2 is quoted by Snorri; cf. stanza 29, note.]

 [p. 167]

For drink beyond measure | will lead all men
 No thought of their tongues to take."

 Loki spake:
 48. "Be silent, Heimdall! | in days long since
 Was an evil fate for thee fixed;
 With back held stiff | must thou ever stand,
 As warder of heaven to watch."

 Skathi spake:
 49. "Light art thou, Loki, | but longer thou mayst not
 In freedom flourish thy tail;
 On the rocks the gods bind thee | with bowels torn
 Forth from thy frost-cold son."

 Loki spake:
 50. "Though on rocks the gods bind me | with bowels torn
 Forth from my frost-cold son,

 [49. Skathi: the wife of Njorth, and daughter of the giant Thjazi, concerning whose death cf. Harbarthsljoth, 19, note. Bowels, etc.: according to the prose note at the end of the Lokasenna, the gods bound Loki with the bowels of his son Vali, and changed his other son, Narfi, into a wolf. Snorri turns the story about Vali being the wolf, who tears his brother to pieces, the gods then using Narfi's intestines to bind Loki. Narfi--and presumably Vali--were the sons of Loki and his wife, Sigyn. They appear only in this episode, though Narfi (or Nari) is named by Snorri in his list of Loki's children. Cf. concluding prose, and note.]

 [p. 168]

I was first and last | at the deadly fight
 There where Thjazi we caught."

 Skathi spake:
 51. "Wert thou first and last | at the deadly fight
 There where Thjazi was caught,
 From my dwellings and fields | shall ever come forth
 A counsel cold for thee."

 Loki spake:
 52. "More lightly thou spakest | with Laufey's son,
 When thou badst me come to thy bed;
 Such things must be known | if now we two
 Shall seek our sins to tell."

Then Sif came forward and poured mead for Loki in a crystal cup, and said:

53. "Hail too thee, Loki, | and take thou here
 The crystal cup of old mead;
 For me at least, | alone of the gods,
 Blameless thou knowest to be."

 [52. Laufey's son: Loki; not much is known of his parents beyond their names. His father was the giant Farbauti, his mother Laufey, sometimes called Nal. There is an elaborate but far fetched hypothesis explaining these three on the basis of a nature-myth. 'There is no other reference to such a relation between Skathi and Loki as he here suggests.

53. Sif: Thor's wife; cf. Harbarthsljoth, 48, where her infidelity is again mentioned. The manuscript omits the proper name [fp. 169] from the preceding prose, and a few editors have, obviously in error, attributed the speech to Beyla.]

 [p. 169]

He took the horn, and drank therefrom:

54. "Alone thou wert | if truly thou wouldst
 All men so shyly shun;
 But one do I know | full well, methinks,
 Who had thee from Hlorrithi's arms,--
 (Loki the crafty in lies.)"

 Beyla spake:
 55. "The mountains shake, | and surely I think
 From his home comes Hlorrithi now;
 He will silence the man | who is slandering here
 Together both gods and men."

 Loki spake:
 56. "Be silent, Beyla! | thou art Byggvir's wife,
 And deep art thou steeped in sin;
 A greater shame | to the gods came ne'er,
 Befouled thou art with thy filth."

Then came Thor forth, and spake:

57. "Unmanly one, cease, | or the mighty hammer,
 Mjollnir, shall close thy mouth;

 [54. Hlorrithi: Thor. Line 5 is probably spurious.

55. Beyla: Freyr's servant, wife of Byggvir; cf. introductory prose and note.

57. Mjollnir: concerning Thor's famous hammer see particularly Thrymskvitha, 1 and note. Shoulder-cliff: head; concerning [fp. 170] the use of such diction in the Edda, cf. introductory note to Hymiskvitha. The manuscript indicates line 3 as the beginning of a stanza, but this is apparently a scribal error.]

 [p. 170]

Thy shoulder-cliff | shall I cleave from thy neck,
 And so shall thy life be lost."

 Loki spake:
 58. "Lo, in has come | the son of Earth:
 Why threaten so loudly, Thor?
 Less fierce thou shalt go | to fight with the wolf
 When he swallows Sigfather up."

 Thor spake:
 59. "Unmanly one, cease, | or the mighty hammer,
 Mjollnir, shall close thy mouth;
 I shall hurl thee up | and out in the East,
 Where men shall see thee no more."

 Loki spake:
 60. "That thou hast fared | on the East-road forth
 To men shouldst thou say no more;

 [58. Son of Earth: Thor, son of Othin and Jorth (Earth). The manuscript omits the word "son," but all editors have agreed in supplying it. The wolf: Fenrir, Loki's son, who slays Othin (Sigfather: "Father of Victory") in the final battle. Thor, according to Snorri and to the Voluspo, 56, fights with Mithgarthsorm and not with Fenrir, who is killed by Vithar.

59. Lines 1-2 are abbreviated in the manuscript, as also in stanzas 61 and 63.

60. Loki's taunt that Thor hid in the thumb of Skrymir's glove is similar to that of Othin, Harbarthsljoth, 26, in the note to which the story is outlined. Line 4 is identical with line 5 of Harbarthsljoth, 26.]

 [p. 171]

In the thumb of a glove | didst thou hide, thou great one,
 And there forgot thou wast Thor."

 Thor spake:
 61. "Unmanly one, cease, | or the mighty hammer,
 Mjollnir, shall close thy mouth;
 My right hand shall smite thee | with Hrungnir's slayer,
 Till all thy bones are broken."

 Loki spake:
 62. "Along time still | do I think to live,
 Though thou threatenest thus with thy hammer;
 Rough seemed the straps | of Skrymir's wallet,
 When thy meat thou mightest not get,
 (And faint from hunger didst feel.)"

 Thor spake:
 63. "Unmanly one, cease, | or the mighty hammer,
 Mjollnir, shall close thy mouth;

 [61. Hrungnir's slayer: the hammer; the story of how Thor slew this stone-headed giant is indicated in Harbarthsljoth, 14-15, and outlined in the note to stanza 14 of that poem.

62. On the day following the adventure of the glove, Thor, Loki and Thor's servants proceed on their way in company with Skrymir, who puts all their food in his wallet. At evening Skrymir goes to sleep, and Thor tries to get at the food, but cannot loosen the straps of the wallet. In a rage he smites Skrymir three times on the head with his hammer, but the giant--who, it subsequently appears, deftly dodges the blows--is totally undisturbed. Line 5 may well be spurious.]

 [p. 172] [p. 173]

The slayer of Hrungnir | shall send thee to hell,
 And down to the gate of death."

 Loki spake:
 64. "'1 have said to the gods | and the sons of the god,
 The things that whetted my thoughts;
 But before thee alone | do I now go forth,
 For thou fightest well, I ween.

65. "Ale hast thou brewed, | but, Aegir, now
 Such feasts shalt thou make no more;
 O'er all that thou hast | which is here within
 Shall play the flickering flames,
 (And thy back shall be burnt with fire.)"

And after that Loki hid himself in Franang's waterfall in the guise of a salmon, and there the gods took him. He was bound with the bowels of his son Vali, but his son Narfi was changed to a wolf. Skathi took a poison-snake and fastened it up over Loki's face, and the poison dropped thereon. Sigyn, Loki's wife, sat there and held a shell under the poison, but when the shell was full she bore away the poison, and meanwhile the poison dropped on Loki. Then he struggled so hard that the whole earth shook therewith; and now that is called an earthquake.

 [65. The flames: the fire that consumes the world on the last day; cf. Voluspo, 57. Line 5 may be spurious.

 Prose: Snorri tells the same story, with minor differences, but makes it the consequence of Loki's part in the slaying of Baldr, which undoubtedly represents the correct tradition. The compiler of the poems either was confused or thought the incident was [fp. 173] useful as indicating what finally happened to Loki. Possibly he did not mean to imply that Loki's fate was brought upon him by his abuse of the gods, but simply tried to round out the story. Franang: "Gleaming Water." Vali and Narfi: cf. stanza 49 and note. Sigyn: cf. Voluspo, 35, the only other place where she is mentioned in the poems. Snorri omits the naive note about earth quakes, his narrative ending with the words, "And there he lies till the destruction of the gods."]

 
      
The Poetic Edda, by Henry Adams Bellows, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 174]

 

THRYMSKVITHA

 

The Lay of Thrym

 

INTRODUCTORY NOTE

The Thrymskvitha is found only in the Codex Regius, where it follows the Lokasenna. Snorri does not quote from it, nor, rather oddly, does the story occur in the Prose Edda.

Artistically the Thrymskvitha is one of the best, as it is, next to the Voluspo, the most famous, of the entire collection. It has, indeed, been called "the finest ballad in the world," and not without some reason. Its swift, vigorous action, the sharpness of its characterization and the humor of the central situation combine to make it one of the most vivid short narrative poems ever composed. Of course we know nothing specific of its author, but there can be no question that he was a poet of extraordinary ability. The poem assumed its present form, most critics agree, somewhere about 900, and thus it is one of the oldest in the collection. It has been suggested, on the basis of stylistic similarity, that its author may also have composed the Skirnismol, and possibly Baldrs Draumar. There is also some resemblance between the Thrymskvitha and the Lokasenna (note, in this connection, Bugge's suggestion that the Skirnismol and the Lokasenna may have been by the same man), and it is not impossible that all four poems have a single authorship.

The Thrymskvitha has been preserved in excellent condition, without any serious gaps or interpolations. In striking contrast to many of the poems, it contains no prose narrative links, the story being told in narrative verse--a rare phenomenon in the poems of the Edda.

1. Wild was Vingthor | when he awoke,
 And when his mighty | hammer he missed;

 [1. Vingthor ("Thor the Hurler"): another name for Thor, equivalent to Vingnir (Vafthruthnismol, 51). Concerning Thor and his hammer, Mjollnir, cf. Hymiskvitha, Lokasenna, and Harbarthsljoth, passim. Jorth: Earth, Thor's mother, Othin being his father.]

 [p. 175]

He shook his beard, | his hair was bristling,
 As the son of Jorth | about him sought.

2. Hear now the speech | that first he spake:
 "Harken, Loki, | and heed my words,
 Nowhere on earth | is it known to man,
 Nor in heaven above: | our hammer is stolen."

3. To the dwelling fair | of Freyja went they,
 Hear now the speech | that first he spake:
 "Wilt thou, Freyja, | thy feather-dress lend me,
 That so my hammer | I may seek?"

 Freyja spake:
 4. "Thine should it be | though of silver bright,
 And I would give it | though 'twere of gold."
 Then Loki flew, | and the feather-dress whirred,
 Till he left behind him | the home of the gods,
 And reached at last | the realm of the giants.

 [2. Loki: cf. Lokasenna, passim.

3. Freyja: Njorth's daughter, and sister of Freyr; cf. Lokasenna, introductory prose and note, also Skirnismol, introductory prose. Freyja's house was Sessrymnir ("Rich in Seats") built in Folkvang ("Field of the Folk"); cf. Grimnismol, 14. Feather-dress: this flying equipment of Freyja's is also used in the story of Thjazi, wherein Loki again borrows the "hawk's dress" of Freyja, this time to rescue Ithun; cf. Harbarthsljoth, 19 and note.

4. The manuscript and most editions have lines 1-2 in inverse order. Several editors assume a lacuna before line I, making a stanza out of the two conjectural lines (Bugge actually supplies them) and lines 1-2 of stanza 4. Thus they either make a separate stanza out of lines 3-5 or unite them in a six-line stanza with 5. The manuscript punctuation and capitalization--not [fp. 176] wholly trustworthy guides--indicate the stanza divisions as in this translation.]

 [p. 176]

5. Thrym sat on a mound, | the giants' master,
 Leashes of gold | he laid for his dogs,
 And stroked and smoothed | the manes of his steeds.

 Thrym spake:
 6. "How fare the gods, | how fare the elves?
 Why comst thou alone | to the giants' land?"

 Loki spake:
 "III fare the gods, | ill fare the elves!
 Hast thou hidden | Hlorrithi's hammer?"

 Thrym spake:
 7. "I have hidden | Hlorrithi's hammer,
 Eight miles down | deep in the earth;
 And back again | shall no man bring it
 If Freyja I win not | to be my wife."

8. Then Loki flew, | and the feather-dress whirred,
 Till he left behind him | the home of the giants,
 And reached at last | the realm of the gods.
 There in the courtyard | Thor he met:
 Hear now the speech | that first he spake:

 [5. Thrym: a frost-giant. Gering declares that this story of the theft of Thor's hammer symbolizes the fact that thunderstorms rarely occur in winter.

6. Line 1: cf. Voluspo, 48, 1. The manuscript does not indicate Loki as the speaker of lines 3-4. Hlorrithi: Thor.

7. No superscription in the manuscript. Vigfusson made up [fp. 177] and inserted lines like "Then spake Loki the son of Laufey" whenever he thought they would be useful.]

 [p. 177]

9. "Hast thou found tidings | as well as trouble?
 Thy news in the air | shalt thou utter now;
 Oft doth the sitter | his story forget,
 And lies he speaks | who lays himself down."

 Loki spake:
 I0. "Trouble I have, | and tidings as well:
 Thrym, king of the giants, | keeps thy hammer,
 And back again | shall no man bring it
 If Freyja he wins not | to be his wife."

11. Freyja the fair | then went they to find
 Hear now the speech | that first he spake:
 "Bind on, Freyja, | the bridal veil,
 For we two must haste | to the giants' home."

12. Wrathful was Freyja, | and fiercely she snorted,
 And the dwelling great | of the gods was shaken,
 And burst was the mighty | Brisings' necklace:
 "Most lustful indeed | should I look to all
 If I journeyed with thee | to the giants' home."

 [9. The manuscript marks line 2, instead of line I, as the beginning of a stanza, which has caused editors some confusion in grouping the lines of stanzas 8 and 9.

10. No superscription in the manuscript.

12. Many editors have rejected either line 2 or line s. Vigfusson inserts one of his own lines before line 4. Brisings' necklace: a marvelous necklace fashioned by the dwarfs, here called Brisings (i.e., "Twiners"); cf. Lokasenna, 20 and note.]

 [p. 178]

13. Then were the gods | together met,
 And the goddesses came | and council held,
 And the far-famed ones | a plan would find,
 How they might Hlorrithi's | hammer win.

14. Then Heimdall spake, | whitest of the gods,
 Like the Wanes he knew | the future well:
 "Bind we on Thor | the bridal veil,
 Let him bear the mighty | Brisings' necklace;

15. "Keys around him | let there rattle,
 And down to his knees | hang woman's dress;
 With gems full broad | upon his breast,
 And a pretty cap | to crown his head."

16. Then Thor the mighty | his answer made:
 "Me would the gods | unmanly call
 If I let bind | the bridal veil."

17. Then Loki spake, | the son of Laufey:
 "Be silent, Thor, | and speak not thus;

 [13. Lines 1-3 are identical with Baldrs Draumar, I, 1-3.

14. Heimdall: the phrase "whitest of the gods" suggests that Heimdall was the god of light as well as being the watchman. His wisdom was probably connected with his sleepless watching over all the worlds; cf. Lokasenna, 47 and note. On the Wanes Cf. Voluspo, 21 and note. They are not elsewhere spoken of as peculiarly gifted with knowledge of future events.

16. Possibly a line has been lost from this stanza.

17. Laufey: Loki's mother, cf. Lokasenna, 52 and note.]

 [p. 179]

Else will the giants | in Asgarth dwell
 If thy hammer is brought not | home to thee."

8. Then bound they on Thor | the bridal veil,
 And next the mighty | Brisings' necklace.

19. Keys around him | let they rattle,
 And down to his knees | hung woman's dress;
 With gems full broad | upon his breast,
 And a pretty cap | to crown his head.

20. Then Loki spake, | the son of Laufey:
 "As thy maid-servant thither | I go with thee;
 We two shall haste | to the giants' home."

21. Then home the goats | to the hall were driven,
 They wrenched at the halters, | swift were they to run;
 The mountains burst, | earth burned with fire,
 And Othin's son | sought Jotunheim.

22. Then loud spake Thrym, | the giants' leader:
 "Bestir ye, giants, | put straw on the benches;

 [18-19. The manuscript abbreviates all six lines, giving only the initial letters of the words. The stanza division is thus arbitrary; some editors have made one stanza of the six lines, others have combined the last two lines of stanza 19 with stanza 20. It is possible that a couple of lines have been lost.

21. Goats: Thor's wagon was always drawn by goats; cf. Hymiskvitha, 38 and note. Jotunheim: the world of the giants.

22. Njorth: cf. Voluspo, 21, and Grimnismol, 11 and 16. Noatun [fp. 180] ("Ships'-Haven"): Njorth's home, where his wife, Skathi, found it impossible to stay; cf. Grimnismol, 11 and note.]

 [p. 180]

Now Freyja they bring | to be my bride,
 The daughter of Njorth | out of Noatun.

23. "Gold-horned cattle | go to my stables,
 Jet-black oxen, | the giant's joy;
 Many my gems, | and many my jewels,
 Freyja alone | did I lack, methinks."

24. Early it was | to evening come,
 And forth was borne | the beer for the giants;
 Thor alone ate an ox, | and eight salmon,
 All the dainties as well | that were set for the women;
 And drank Sif's mate | three tuns of mead.

25. Then loud spake Thrym, | the giants' leader:
 "Who ever saw bride | more keenly bite?
 I ne'er saw bride | with a broader bite,
 Nor a maiden who drank | more mead than this!"

26. Hard by there sat | the serving-maid wise,
 So well she answered | the giant's words:
 "From food has Freyja | eight nights fasted,
 So hot was her longing | for Jotunheim."

 [24. Grundtvig thinks this is all that is left of two stanzas describing Thor's supper. Some editors reject line 4. in line 3 the manuscript has "he," the reference being, of course, to Thor, on whose appetite cf. Hymiskvitha, 15. Sif: Thor's wife; cf. Lokasenna, note to introductory prose and stanza 53.]

 [p. 181]

27. Thrym looked 'neath the veil, | for he longed to kiss,
 But back he leaped | the length of the hall:
 "Why are so fearful | the eyes of Freyja?
 Fire, methinks, | from her eyes burns forth."

28. Hard by there sat | the serving-maid wise,
 So well she answered | the giant's words:
 "No sleep has Freyja | for eight nights found,
 So hot was her longing | for Jotunheim."

29. Soon came the giant's | luckless sister,
 Who feared not to ask | the bridal fee:
 "From thy hands the rings | of red gold take,
 If thou wouldst win | my willing love,
 (My willing love | and welcome glad.)"

30: Then loud spake Thrym, | the giants' leader:
 "Bring in the hammer | to hallow the bride;
 On the maiden's knees | let Mjollnir lie,
 That us both the band | of Vor may bless."

 [27. For clearness I have inserted Thrym's name in place of the pronoun of the original. Fire: the noun is lacking in the manuscript; most editors have inserted it, however, following a late paper manuscript.

28. In the manuscript the whole stanza is abbreviated to initial letters, except for "sleep," "Freyja," and "found."

29. Luckless: so the manuscript, but many editors have altered the word "arma" to "aldna," meaning "old," to correspond with line 1 of stanza 32. Line 5 may well be spurious.

30. Hallow: just what this means is not clear, but there are {footnote po. 181 references to other kinds of consecration, though not of a bride, with the "sign of the hammer." According to Vigfusson, "the hammer was the holy sign with the heathens, answering to the cross of the Christians." In Snorri's story of Thor's resuscitation of his cooked goat (cf. Hymiskvitha, 38, note) the god "hallows" the goat with his hammer. One of the oldest runic signs, sup posed to have magic power, was named Thor's-hammer. Vor: the goddess of vows, particularly between men and women; Snorri lists a number of little-known goddesses similar to Vor, all of them apparently little more than names for Frigg.]

 }[p. 182]

31. The heart in the breast | of Hlorrithi laughed
 When the hard-souled one | his hammer beheld;
 First Thrym, the king | of the giants, he killed,
 Then all the folk | of the giants he felled.

32. The giant's sister | old he slew,
 She who had begged | the bridal fee;
 A stroke she got | in the shilling's stead,
 And for many rings | the might of the hammer.

33. And so his hammer | got Othin's son.

 [33. Some editors reject this line, which, from a dramatic stand point, is certainly a pity. In the manuscript it begins with a capital letter, like: the opening of a new stanza.]

 
      
The Poetic Edda, by Henry Adams Bellows, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 183]

 

ALVISSMOL

 

The Ballad of Alvis

 

INTRODUCTORY NOTE

No better summary of the Alvissmol can be given than Gering's statement that "it is a versified chapter from the skaldic Poetics." The narrative skeleton, contained solely in stanzas 1-8 and in 35, is of the slightest; the dwarf Alvis, desirous of marrying Thor's daughter, is compelled by the god to answer a number of questions to test his knowledge. That all his answers are quite satisfactory makes no difference whatever to the outcome. The questions and answers differ radically from those of the Vafthruthnismol. Instead of being essentially mythological, they all concern synonyms. Thor asks what the earth, the sky, the moon, and so on, are called " in each of all the worlds," but there is no apparent significance in the f act that the gods call the earth one thing and the giants call it another; the answers are simply strings of poetic circumlocutions, or "kennings." Concerning the use of these "kennings" in skaldic poetry, cf. introductory note to the Hymiskvitha.

Mogk is presumably right in dating the poem as late as the twelfth century, assigning it to the period of "the Icelandic renaissance of skaldic poetry." It appears to have been the work of a man skilled in poetic construction,--Thor's questions, for instance, are neatly balanced in pairs,--and fully familiar with the intricacies of skaldic diction, but distinctly weak in his mythology. In other words, it is learned rather than spontaneous poetry. Finnur Jonsson's attempt to make it a tenth century Norwegian poem baffles logic. Vigfusson is pretty sure the poem shows marked traces of Celtic influence, which is by no means incompatible with Mogk's theory (cf. introductory note to the Rigsthula).

The poem is found only in Regius, where it follows the Thrymskvitha. Snorri quotes stanzas 2c, and 30, the manuscripts of the Prose Edda giving the name of the poem as Alvissmol, Alsvinnsmol or Olvismol. It is apparently in excellent condition, without serious errors of transmission, although interpolations or omissions in such a poem might have been made so easily as to defy detection.

The translation of the many synonyms presents, of course,

[p. 184]

unusual difficulties, particularly as many of the Norse words can be properly rendered in English only by more or less extended phrases. I have kept to the original meanings as closely as I could without utterly destroying the metrical structure.

 Alvis spake:
 1. "Now shall the bride | my benches adorn,
 And homeward haste forthwith;
 Eager for wedlock | to all shall I seem,
 Nor at home shall they rob me of rest."

 Thor spake:
 2. "What, pray, art thou? | Why so pale round the nose?
 By the dead hast thou lain of late?
 To a giant like | dost thou look, methinks;
 Thou wast not born for the bride."

 Alvis spake:
 3. "Alvis am I, | and under the earth
 My home 'neath the rocks I have;

 [1. Alvis ("All-Knowing"): a dwarf, not elsewhere mentioned. The manuscript nowhere indicates the speakers' name. The bride in question is Thor's daughter; Thruth ("Might") is the only daughter of his whose name is recorded, and she does not appear elsewhere in the poems. Her mother was Sif, Thor's wife, whereas the god's sons were born of a giantess. Benches: cf. Lokasenna, 15 and note.

2. The dwarfs, living beyond the reach of the sun, which was fatal to them (cf. stanzas 16 and 35), were necessarily pale. Line 3 is, of course, ironical.

3. Wagon-guider: Thor, who travels habitually on his goat drawn wagon. Bugge changes "Vagna vets" to "Vapna verys," [fp. 185] rendering the line "I am come to seek the cost of the weapons." In either case, Alvis does not as yet recognize Thor.]

 [p. 185]

With the wagon-guider | a word do I seek,
 Let the gods their bond not break."

 Thor spake:
 4. "Break it shall I, | for over the bride
 Her father has foremost right;
 At home was I not | when the promise thou hadst,
 And I give her alone of the gods."

 Alvis spake:
 5. "What hero claims | such right to hold
 O'er the bride that shines so bright?
 Not many will know thee, | thou wandering man!
 Who was bought with rings to bear thee?"

 Thor spake:
 6. "Vingthor, the wanderer | wide, am I,
 And I am Sithgrani's son;
 Against my will | shalt thou get the maid,
 And win the marriage word."

 [4. Apparently the gods promised Thor's daughter in marriage to Alvis during her father's absence, perhaps as a reward for some craftsmanship of his (cf. Bugge's suggestion as to stanza 3). The text of line 4 is most uncertain.

5. Hero: ironically spoken; Alvis takes Thor for a tramp, the god's uncouth appearance often leading to such mistakes; cf. Harbarthsljoth, 6. Line 4 is a trifle uncertain; some editors alter the wording to read "What worthless woman bore thee?"

6. Vingthor ("Thor the Hurler"): cf. Thrymskvitha, 1. Sithgrani ("Long-Beard"): Othin.]

 [p. 186]

 Alvis spake:
 7. "Thy good-will now | shall I quickly get,
 And win the marriage word;
 I long to have, | and I would not lack,
 This snow-white maid for mine."

 Thor spake:
 8. "The love of the maid | I may not keep thee
 From winning, thou guest so wise,
 If of every world | thou canst tell me all
 That now I wish to know.

9. "Answer me, Alvis! | thou knowest all,
 Dwarf, of the doom of men:
 What call they the earth, | that lies before all,
 In each and every world?"

 Alvis spake:
 10. " 'Earth' to men, 'Field' | to the gods it is,
 'The Ways' is it called by the Wanes;

 [8. Every world: concerning the nine worlds, cf. Voluspo, 2 and note. Many editors follow this stanza with one spoken by Alvis, found in late paper manuscripts, as follows: "Ask then, Vingthor, since eager thou art / The lore of the dwarf to learn; / Oft have I fared in the nine worlds all, / And wide is my wisdom of each."

10. Men, etc.: nothing could more clearly indicate the author's mythological inaccuracy than his confusion of the inhabitants of the nine worlds. Men (dwellers in Mithgarth) appear in each of Alvis's thirteen answers; so do the gods (Asgarth) and the giants (Jotunheim). The elves (Alfheim) appear in eleven [fp. 187] answers, the Wanes (Vanaheim) in nine, and the dwarfs (who occupied no special world, unless one identifies them with the dark elves of Svartalfaheim) in seven. The dwellers "in hell" appear in six stanzas; the phrase probably refers to the world of the dead, though Mogk thinks it may mean the dwarfs. In stanzas where the gods are already listed appear names else where applied only to them,--"holy ones," "sons of the gods" and "high ones,"--as if these names meant beings of a separate race. "Men" appears twice in the same stanza, and so do the giants, if one assumes that they are "the sons of Suttung." Altogether it is useless to pay much attention to the mythology of Alvis's replies.]

 [p. 187]

'Ever Green' by the giants, | 'The Grower' by elves,
 'The Moist' by the holy ones high."

 Thor spake:
 11. "Answer me, Alvis! | thou knowest all,
 Dwarf, of the doom of men:
 What call they the heaven, | beheld of the high one,
 In each and every world?"

 Alvis spake:
 12. " 'Heaven' men call it, | 'The Height' the gods,
 The Wanes 'The Weaver of Winds';
 Giants 'The Up-World,' | elves 'The Fair-Roof,'
 The dwarfs 'The Dripping Hall.'"

 [11. Lines I, 2, and 4 of Thor's questions are regularly abbreviated in the manuscript. Beheld, etc.: the word in the manuscript is almost certainly an error, and all kinds of guesses have been made to rectify it. All that can be said is that it means "beheld of" or "known to" somebody.]

 [p. 188]

 Thor spake:
 13. "Answer me, Alvis! | thou knowest all,
 Dwarf, of the doom of men.:
 What call they the moon, | that men behold,
 In each and every world?"

 Alvis spake:
 14. "'Moon' with men, 'Flame' | the gods among,
 'The Wheel' in the house of hell;
 'The Goer' the giants, | 'The Gleamer' the dwarfs,
 The elves 'The Teller of Time."

 Thor spake:
 15. "Answer me, Alvis! | thou knowest all,
 Dwarf, of the doom of men:
 What call they the sun, | that all men see,
 In each and every world?"

 Alvis spake:
 16. "Men call it 'Sun,' | gods 'Orb of the Sun,'
 'The Deceiver of Dvalin' the dwarfs;
 The giants 'The Ever-Bright,' | elves 'Fair Wheel,'
 'All-Glowing' the sons of the gods."

 [14. Flame: a doubtful word; Vigfusson suggests that it properly means a "mock sun." Wheel: the manuscript adds the adjective "whirling," to the destruction of the metre; cf. Hovamol, 84, 3.

16. Deceiver of Dvalin: Dvalin was one of the foremost dwarfs; cf. Voluspo, 14, Fafnismol, 13, and Hovamol, 144. The [fp. 189] sun "deceives" him because, like the other dwarfs living under ground, he cannot live in its light, and always fears lest sunrise may catch him unaware. The sun's rays have power to turn the dwarfs into stone, and the giantess Hrimgerth meets a similar fate (cf. Helgakvitha Hjorvarthssonar, 30). Alvis suffers in the same way; cf. stanza 35.]

 [p. 189]

 Thor spake:
 17. "Answer me, Alvis! | thou knowest all,
 Dwarf, of the doom of men:
 What call they the clouds, | that keep the rains,
 In each and every world?"

 Alvis spake:
 18. "'Clouds' men name them, | 'Rain-Hope' gods call them,
 The Wanes call them 'Kites of the Wind';
 'Water-Hope' giants, | 'Weather-Might' elves,
 'The Helmet of Secrets' in hell."

 Thor spake:
 19. "Answer me, Alvis! | thou knowest all,
 Dwarf, of the doom of men:
 What call they the wind, | that widest fares,
 In each and every world?"

 Alvis spake:
 20. "'Wind' do men call it, | the gods 'The Waverer,'
 'The Neigher' the holy ones high;

 [20. Snorri quotes this stanza in the Skaldskaparmal. Waverer: the word is uncertain, the Prose Edda manuscripts giving it in various forms. Blustering Blast: two Prose Edda manuscripts give a totally different word, meaning "The Pounder."]

 [p. 190]

'The Wailer' the giants, | 'Roaring Wender' the elves,
 In hell 'The Blustering Blast.'

 Thor spake:
 21. "Answer me, Alvis! | thou knowest all
 Dwarf, of the doom of men:
 What call they the calm, | that quiet lies,
 In each and every world?"

 Alvis spake:
 22. " 'Calm' men call it, | 'The Quiet' the gods,
 The Wanes 'The Hush of the Winds';
 'The Sultry' the giants, | elves 'Day's Stillness,'
 The dwarfs 'The Shelter of Day.'

 Thor spake:
 23. "Answer me, Alvis! | thou knowest all,
 Dwarf, of the doom of men:
 What call they the sea, | whereon men sail,
 In each and every world?"

 Alvis spake:
 24. " 'Sea' men call it, | gods 'The Smooth-Lying,'
 'The Wave' is it called by the Wanes;

 [22. Hush, etc.: the manuscript, by inserting an additional letter, makes the word practically identical with that translated "Kite" in stanza 18. Most editors have agreed as to the emendation.

24. Drink-Stuff: Gering translates the word thus; I doubt it, but can suggest nothing better.]

 [p. 191]

'Eel-Home' the giants, | 'Drink-Stuff' the elves,
 For the dwarfs its name is 'The Deep.'

 Thor spake:
 25. "Answer me, Alvis! | thou knowest all,
 Dwarf, of the doom of men:
 What call they the fire, | that flames for men,
 In each of all the worlds?"

 Alvis spake:
 26. " 'Fire' men call it, | and 'Flame' the gods,
 By the Wanes is it 'Wildfire' called;
 'The Biter' by giants, | 'The Burner' by dwarfs,
 'The Swift' in the house of hell."

 Thor spake:
 27. "Answer me, Alvis! | thou knowest all,
 Dwarf, of the doom of men:
 What call they the wood, | that grows for mankind,
 In each and every world?"

 Alvis spake:
 28. "Men call it 'The Wood, | gods 'The Mane of the Field,'

 [26. Wildfire: the word may mean any one of various things, including "Wave," which is not unlikely.

28. In hell: the word simply means "men," and it is only a guess, though a generally accepted one, that here it refers to the dead.]

 [p. 192]

'Seaweed of Hills' in hell;
 'Flame-Food' the giants, | 'Fair-Limbed' the elves,
 'The Wand' is it called by the Wanes."

 Thor spake:
 29. "Answer me, Alvis! | thou knowest all,
 Dwarf, of the doom of men:
 What call they the night, | the daughter of Nor,
 In each and every world?"

 Alvis spake:
 30. "'Night' men call it, | 'Darkness' gods name it,
 'The Hood' the holy ones high;
 The giants 'The Lightless,' | the elves 'Sleep's joy"
 The dwarfs 'The Weaver of Dreams."'

 Thor spake:
 31. "Answer me, Alvis! | thou knowest all,
 Dwarf, of the doom of men:
 What call they the seed, | that is sown by men,
 In each and every world?"

 [29. Nor: presumably the giant whom Snorri calls Norvi or Narfi, father of Not (Night) and grandfather of Dag (Day). Cf. Vafthruthnismol, 25.

30. Snorri quotes this stanza in the Skaldskaparmal. The various Prose Edda manuscripts differ considerably in naming the gods, the giants, etc. Lightless: some manuscripts have "The Unsorrowing."

32. Grain: the two words translated "grain" and "corn" apparently both meant primarily barley, and thence grain in [fp. 193] general, the first being the commoner term of the two. Drink-Stuff: the word is identical with the one used, and commented on, in stanza 24, and again I have followed Gering's interpretation for want of a better one. If his guess is correct, the reference here is evidently to grain as the material from which beer and other drinks are brewed.]

 [p. 193]

 Alvis spake:
 32. "Men call it 'Grain,' | and 'Corn' the gods,
 'Growth' in the world of the Wanes;
 'The Eaten' by giants, | 'Drink-Stuff' by elves,
 In hell 'The Slender Stem.'

 Thor spake:
 33. "Answer me, Alvis! | thou knowest all,
 Dwarf, of the doom of men:
 What call they the ale, | that is quaffed of men,
 In each and every world?"

 Alvis spake:
 34. "'Ale' among men, | 'Beer' the gods among,
 In the world of the Wanes 'The Foaming';
 'Bright Draught' with giants, | 'Mead' with dwellers in hell,
 'The Feast-Draught' with Suttung's sons."

 Thor spake:
 .3.5. "In a single breast | I never have seen
 More wealth of wisdom old;

 [34. Suttung's sons: these ought to be the giants, but the giants are specifically mentioned in line 3. The phrase "Suttung's sons" occurs in Skirnismol, 34, clearly meaning the giants. Concerning Suttung as the possessor of the mead of poetry, cf. Hovamol, 104.]

 [p. 194]

But with treacherous wiles | must I now betray thee:
 The day has caught thee, dwarf!
 (Now the sun shines here in the hall.)"

 [35. Concerning the inability of the dwarfs to endure sunlight, which turns them into stone, cf. stanza 16 and note. Line 5 may be spurious.]

 
      
The Poetic Edda, by Henry Adams Bellows, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 195]

 

BALDRS DRAUMAR

 

Baldr's Dreams

 

INTRODUCTORY NOTE

 Baldrs Draumar is found only in the Arnamagnaean Codex, where it follows the Harbarthsljoth fragment. It is preserved in various late paper manuscripts, with the title Vegtamskvitha (The Lay of Vegtam), which has been used by some editors.

The poem, which contains but fourteen stanzas, has apparently been preserved in excellent condition. Its subject-matter and style link it closely with the Voluspo. Four of the five lines of stanza 11 appear, almost without change, in the Voluspo, 32-33, and the entire poem is simply an elaboration of the episode outlined in those and the preceding stanzas. It has been suggested that Baldrs Draumar and the Voluspo may have been by the same author. There is also enough similarity in style between Baldrs Draumar and the Thrymskvitha (note especially the opening stanza) to give color to Vigfusson's guess that these two poems had a common authorship. In any case, Baldrs Draumar presumably assumed its present form not later than the first half of the tenth century.

Whether the Volva (wise-woman) of the poem is identical with the speaker in the Voluspo is purely a matter for conjecture. Nothing definitely opposes such a supposition. As in the longer poem she foretells the fall of the gods, so in this case she prophesies the first incident of that fall, the death of Baldr. Here she is called up from the dead by Othin, anxious to know the meaning of Baldr's evil dreams; in the Voluspo it is likewise intimated that the Volva has risen from the grave.

The poem, like most of the others in the collection, is essentially dramatic rather than narrative, summarizing a story which was doubtless familiar to every one who heard the poem recited.

__________________

1. Once were the gods | together met,
 And the goddesses came | and council held,

 [1. Lines 1-3 are identical with Thrymskvitha, 13, 1-3. Baldr: concerning this best and noblest of the gods, the son of Othin and [fp. 196] Frigg, who comes again among the survivors after the final battle, cf. Voluspo, 32 and 62, and notes. He is almost never mentioned anywhere except in connection with the story of his death, though Snorri has one short passage praising his virtue and beauty. After stanza 1 two old editions, and one later one, insert four stanzas from late paper manuscripts.]

 [p. 196]

And the far-famed ones | the truth would find,
 Why baleful dreams | to Baldr had come.

2. Then Othin rose, | the enchanter old,
 And the saddle he laid | on Sleipnir's back;
 Thence rode he down | to Niflhel deep,
 And the hound he met | that came from hell.

3. Bloody he was | on his breast before,
 At the father of magic | he howled from afar;
 Forward rode Othin, | the earth resounded
 Till the house so high | of Hel he reached.

4. Then Othin rode | to the eastern door,
 There, he knew well, | was the wise-woman's grave;
 Magic he spoke | and mighty charms,
 Till spell-bound she rose, | and in death she spoke:

 [2. Sleipnir: Othin's eight-legged horse, the son of Loki and the stallion Svathilfari; cf. Lokasenna, 23, and Grimnismol, 44, and notes. Niflhel: the murky ("nifl") dwelling of Hel, goddess of the dead. The hound: Garm; cf. Voluspo, 44.

3. Father of magic: Othin appears constantly as the god of magic. Hel: offspring of Loki and the giantess Angrbotha, as were the wolf Fenrir and Mithgarthsorm. She ruled the world of the unhappy dead, either those who had led evil lives or, according to another tradition, those who had not died in battle. The [fp. 197] manuscript marks line 3 as the beginning of a stanza, and thus the editions vary in their grouping of the lines of this and the succeeding stanzas.]

 [p. 197]

5. "What is the man, | to me unknown,
 That has made me travel | the troublous road?
 I was snowed on with snow, | and smitten with rain,
 And drenched with dew; | long was I dead."

 Othin spake:
 6. "Vegtam my name, | I am Valtam's son;
 Speak thou of hell, | for of heaven I know:
 For whom are the benches | bright with rings,
 And the platforms gay | bedecked with gold?"

 The Wise-Woman spake:
 7. "Here for Baldr | the mead is brewed,
 The shining drink, | and a shield lies o'er it;
 But their hope is gone | from the mighty gods.
 Unwilling I spake, | and now would be still."

 [6. The manuscript has no superscriptions indicating the speakers. Vegtam ("The Wanderer"): Othin, as usual, conceals his identity, calling himself the son of Valtam ("The Fighter"). In this instance he has unusual need to do so, for as the wise-woman belongs apparently to the race of the giants, she would be unwilling to answer a god's questions. Heaven: the word used includes all the upper worlds, in contrast to hell. Benches, etc.: the adornment of the benches and raised platforms, or elevated parts of the house, was a regular part of the preparation for a feast of welcome. The text of the two last lines is somewhat uncertain.

7. Grundtvig, followed by, Edzardi, thinks a line has been lost between lines 3 and 4.]

 [p. 198]

 Othin spake:
 8. "Wise-woman, cease not! | I seek from thee
 All to know | that I fain would ask:
 Who shall the bane | of Baldr become,
 And steal the life | from Othin's son?"

 The Wise-Woman spake:
 9. "Hoth thither bears | the far-famed branch,
 He shall the bane | of Baldr become,
 And steal the life | from Othin's son.
 Unwilling I spake, | and now would be still."

 Othin spake:
 10. "Wise-woman, cease not! | I seek from thee
 All to know | that I fain would ask:
 Who shall vengeance win | for the evil work,
 Or bring to the flames | the slayer of Baldr?"

 The Wise-Woman spake:
 11. "Rind bears Vali | in Vestrsalir,
 And one night old | fights Othin's son;

 [9. Concerning the blind Hoth, who, at Loki's instigation, cast the fatal mistletoe at Baldr, cf. Voluspo, 32-33 and notes. In the manuscript the last line is abbreviated, as also in stanza 11.

10. In the manuscript lines 1-2 are abbreviated, as also in stanza 12.

11. Rind: mentioned by Snorri as one of the goddesses. Concerning her son Vali, begotten by Othin for the express purpose of avenging Baldr's death, and his slaying of Hoth the day after his birth, cf. Voluspo, 33-34, where the lines of this stanza appear practically verbatim. Vestrsalir ("The Western Hall"): not else where mentioned in the poems.]

 [p. 199]

His hands he shall wash not, | his hair he shall comb not,
 Till the slayer of Baldr | he brings to the flames.
 Unwilling I spake, | and now would be still."

 Othin spake:
 12. "Wise-woman, cease not! | I seek from thee
 All to know | that I fain would ask:
 What maidens are they | who then shall weep,
 And toss to the sky | the yards of the sails?"

 The Wise-Woman spake:
 13. "Vegtam thou art not, | as erstwhile I thought;
 Othin thou art, | the enchanter old."

 Othin spake:
 "No wise-woman art thou, | nor wisdom hast;
 Of giants three | the mother art thou."

 The Wise-Woman spake:
 14. "Home ride, Othin, | be ever proud;
 For no one of men | shall seek me more

 [12. The manuscript marks the third line as the beginning of a stanza; something may have been lost. Lines 3.4 are thoroughly obscure. According to Bugge the maidens who are to weep for Baldr are the daughters of the sea-god Aegir, the waves, whose grief will be so tempestuous that they will toss the ships up to the very sky. "Yards of the sails" is a doubtfully accurate rendering; the two words, at any rate in later Norse nautical speech, meant respectively the "tack" and the "sheet" of the square sail.

13. Possibly two separate stanzas. Enchanter: the meaning of the original word is most uncertain.]

 [p. 200]

Till Loki wanders | loose from his bonds,
 And to the last strife | the destroyers come."

 [14. Concerning Loki's escape and his relation to the destruction of the gods, cf. Voluspo, 35 and 51, and notes. While the wise-woman probably means only that she will never speak again till the end of the world, it has been suggested, and is certainly possible, that she intends to give Loki her counsel, thus revenging herself on Othin.]

 
      
The Poetic Edda, by Henry Adams Bellows, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 201]

 

RIGSTHULA

 

The Song of Rig

 

INTRODUCTORY NOTE

The Rigsthula is found in neither of the principal codices. The only manuscript containing it is the so-called Codex Wormanius, a manuscript of Snorri's Prose Edda. The poem appears on the last sheet of this manuscript, which unluckily is incomplete, and thus the end of the poem is lacking. In the Codex Wormanius itself the poem has no title, but a fragmentary parchment included with it calls the poem the Rigsthula. Some late paper manuscripts give it the title of Rigsmol.

The Rigsthula is essentially unlike anything else which editors have agreed to include in the so-called Edda. It is a definitely cultural poem, explaining, on a mythological basis, the origin of the different castes of early society: the thralls, the peasants, and the warriors. From the warriors, finally, springs one who is destined to become a king, and thus the whole poem is a song in praise of the royal estate. This fact in itself would suffice to indicate that the Rigsthula was not composed in Iceland, where for centuries kings were regarded with profound disapproval.

Not only does the Rigsthula praise royalty, but it has many of the earmarks of a poem composed in praise of a particular king. The manuscript breaks off at a most exasperating point, just as the connection between the mythical "Young Kon" (Konr ungr, konungr, "king"; but cf. stanza 44, note) and the monarch in question is about to be established. Owing to the character of the Norse settlements in Iceland, Ireland, and the western islands generally, search for a specific king leads back to either Norway or Denmark; despite the arguments advanced by Edzardi, Vigfusson, Powell, and others, it seems most improbable that such a poem should have been produced elsewhere than on the Continent, the region where Scandinavian royalty most flourished. Finnur Jonsson's claim for Norway, with Harald the Fair-Haired as the probable king in question, is much less impressive than Mogk's ingenious demonstration that the poem was in all probability composed in Denmark, in honor of either Gorm the Old or Harald Blue-Tooth. His proof is based chiefly on the evidence provided by stanza 49, and is summarized in the note to that stanza.

[p. 202]

The poet, however, was certainly not a Dane, but probably a wandering Norse singer, who may have had a dozen homes, and who clearly had spent much time in some part of the western island world chiefly inhabited by Celts. The extent of Celtic influence on the Eddic poems in general is a matter of sharp dispute. Powell, for example, claims almost all the poems for the "Western Isles," and attributes nearly all their good qualities to Celtic influence. Without here attempting to enter into the details of the argument, it may be said that the weight of authoritative opinion, while clearly recognizing the marks of Celtic influence in the poems, is against this view; contact between the roving Norsemen of Norway and Iceland and the Celts of Ireland and the "Western Isles," and particularly the Orkneys, was so extensive as to make the presumption of an actual Celtic home for the poems seem quite unnecessary.

In the case of the Rigsthula the poet unquestionably had not only picked up bits of the Celtic speech (the name Rig itself is almost certainly of Celtic origin, and there are various other Celtic words employed), but also had caught something of the Celtic literary spirit. This explains the cultural nature of the poem, quite foreign to Norse poetry in general. On the other hand, the style as a whole is vigorously Norse, and thus the explanation that the poem was composed by an itinerant Norse poet who had lived for some time in the Celtic islands, and who was on a visit to the court of a Danish king, fits the ascertainable facts exceedingly well. As Christianity was introduced into Denmark around 960, the Rigsthula is not likely to have been composed much after that date, and probably belongs to the first half of the tenth century. Gorm the Old died about the year 935, and was succeeded by Harald Blue-Tooth, who died about 985.

The fourteenth (or late thirteenth) century annotator identifies Rig with Heimdall, but there is nothing in the poem itself, and very little anywhere else, to warrant this, and it seems likely that the poet had Othin, and not Heimdall, in mind, his purpose being to trace the origin of the royal estate to the chief of the gods. The evidence bearing on this identification is briefly summed up in the note on the introductory prose passage, but the question involves complex and baffling problems in mythology, and from very early times the status of Heimdall was unquestionably confusing to the Norse mind.

[p. 203]

They tell in old stories that one of the gods, whose name was Heimdall, went on his way along a certain seashore, and came to a dwelling, where he called himself Rig. According to these stories is the following poem:

1. Men say there went | by ways so green
 Of old the god, | the aged and wise,
 Mighty and strong | did Rig go striding.
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .

 [Prose. It would be interesting to know how much the annotator meant by the phrase old stories. Was he familiar with the tradition in forms other than that of the poem? If so, his introductory note was scanty, for, outside of identifying Rig as Heimdall, he provides no information not found in the poem. Probably he meant simply to refer to the poem itself as a relic of antiquity, and the identification of Rig as Heimdall may well have been an attempt at constructive criticism of his own. The note was presumably written somewhere about 1300, or even later, and there is no reason for crediting the annotator with any considerable knowledge of mythology. There is little to favor the identification of Rig with Heimdall, the watchman of the gods, beyond a few rather vague passages in the other poems. Thus in Voluspo, I, the Volva asks hearing "from Heimdall's sons both high and low"; in Grimnismol, 13, there is a very doubtful line which may mean that Heimdall "o'er men holds sway, it is said," and in "the Short Voluspo" (Hyndluljoth, 40) he is called "the kinsman of men." On the other hand, everything in the Rigsthula, including the phrase "the aged and wise" in stanza I, and the references to runes in stanzas 36, 44, and 46, fits Othin exceedingly well. It seems probable that the annotator was wrong, and that Rig is Othin, and not Heimdall. Rig: almost certainly based on the Old Irish word for "king," "ri" or "rig."

1. No gap is indicated, but editors have generally assumed one. Some editors, however, add line 1 of stanza 2 to stanza 1.]

 [p. 204]

2. Forward he went | on the midmost way,
 He came to a dwelling, | a door on its posts;
 In did he fare, | on the floor was a fire,
 Two hoary ones | by the hearth there sat,
 Ai and Edda, | in olden dress.

3. Rig knew well | wise words to speak,
 Soon in the midst | of the room he sat,
 And on either side | the others were.

4. A loaf of bread | did Edda bring,
 Heavy and thick | and swollen with husks;
 Forth on the table | she set the fare,
 And broth for the meal | in a bowl there was.
 (Calf's flesh boiled | was the best of the dainties.)

5. Rig knew well | wise words to speak,
 Thence did he rise, | made ready to sleep;
 Soon in the bed | himself did he lay,
 And on either side | the others were.

 [2. Most editions make line 5 a part of the stanza, as here, but some indicate it as the sole remnant of one or more stanzas descriptive of Ai and Edda, just as Afi and Amma, Fathir and Mothir, are later described. Ai and Edda: Great-Grandfather and Great-Grandmother; the latter name was responsible for Jakob Grimm's famous guess at the meaning of the word "Edda" as applied to the whole collection (cf. Introduction).

3. A line may have been lost from this stanza.

4. Line 5 has generally been rejected as spurious.

5. The manuscript has lines 1-2 in inverse order, but marks the word "Rig" as the beginning of a stanza.]

 [p. 205]

6. Thus was he there | for three nights long,
 Then forward he went | on the midmost way,
 And so nine months | were soon passed by.

7. A son bore Edda, | with water they sprinkled him,
 With a cloth his hair | so black they covered;
 Thraell they named him, |     .    .    .    .    .

8. The skin was wrinkled | and rough on his hands,
 Knotted his knuckles, |     .    .    .    .    .
 Thick his fingers, | and ugly his face,
 Twisted his back, | and big his heels.

9. He began to grow, | and to gain in strength,
 Soon of his might | good use he made;

 [6. The manuscript does not indicate that these lines form a separate stanza, and as only one line and a fragment of another are left of stanza 7, the editions have grouped the lines in all sorts of ways, with, of course, various conjectures as to where lines may have been lost.

7. After line 1 the manuscript has only four words: "cloth," "black," "named," and "Thraell." No gap is anywhere indicated. Editors have pieced out the passage in various ways. Water, etc.: concerning the custom of sprinkling water on children, which long antedated the introduction of Christianity, cf. Hovamol, 159 and note. Black: dark hair, among the blond Scandinavians, was the mark of a foreigner, hence of a slave. Thraell: Thrall or Slave.

8. In the manuscript line 1 of stanza 9 stands before stanza 8, neither line being capitalized as the beginning of a stanza. I have followed Bugge's rearrangement. The manuscript indicates no gap in line 2, but nearly all editors have assumed one, Grundtvig supplying "and rough his nails."

9. The manuscript marks line 2 as the beginning of a stanza.]

 [p. 206]

With bast he bound, | and burdens carried,
 Home bore faggots | the whole day long.

10. One came to their home, | crooked her legs,
 Stained were her feet, | and sunburned her arms,
 Flat was her nose; | her name was Thir.

11. Soon in the midst | of the room she sat,
 By her side there sat | the son of the house;
 They whispered both, | and the bed made ready,
 Thraell and Thir, | till the day was through.

12. Children they had, | they lived and were happy,
 Fjosnir and Klur | they were called, methinks,
 Hreim and Kleggi, | Kefsir, Fulnir,
 Drumb, Digraldi, | Drott and Leggjaldi,
 Lut and Hosvir; | the house they cared for,
 Ground they dunged, | and swine they guarded,
 Goats they tended, | and turf they dug.

 [10. A line may well have dropped out, but the manuscript is too uncertain as to the stanza-divisions to make any guess safe. Crooked: the word in the original is obscure. Stained: literally, "water was on her soles." Thir: "Serving-Woman."

12. There is some confusion as to the arrangement of th lines and division into stanzas of 12 and 13. The names mean: Fjosnir, "Cattle-Man"; Klur, "The Coarse"; Hreim, "The Shouter"; Kleggi, "The Horse-Fly"; Kefsir, "Concubine-Keeper"; Fulnir, "The Stinking"; Drumb, "The Log"; Digraldi, "The Fat"; Drott, "The Sluggard"; Leggjaldi, "The Big-Legged"; Lut, "The Bent"; Hosvir, "The Grey."]

 [p. 207]

13. Daughters had they, | Drumba and Kumba,
 Okkvinkalfa, | Arinnefla,
 Ysja and Ambott, | Eikintjasna,
 Totrughypja | and Tronubeina;
 And thence has risen | the race of thralls.

14. Forward went Rig, | his road was straight,
 To a hall he came, | and a door there hung;
 In did he fare, | on the floor was a fire:
 Afi and Amma | owned the house.

15. There sat the twain, | and worked at their tasks:
 The man hewed wood | for the weaver's beam;
 His beard was trimmed, | o'er his brow a curl,
 His clothes fitted close; | in the corner a chest.

16. The woman sat | and the distaff wielded,
 At the weaving with arms | outstretched she worked;
 On her head was a band, | on her breast a smock;
 On her shoulders a kerchief | with clasps there was.

 [13. The names mean: Drumba, "The Log"; Kumba, "The Stumpy"; Okkvinkalfa, "Fat-Legged"; Arinnefla, "Homely Nosed"; Ysja, "The Noisy"; Ambott, "The Servant"; Eikintjasna, "The Oaken Peg" (?); Totrughypja, "Clothed in Rags"; Tronubeina, "Crane-Legged."

14. In the manuscript line 4 stands after line 4 of stanza 16, but several editors have rearranged the lines, as here. Afi and Amma: Grandfather and Grandmother.

15. There is considerable confusion among the editors as to where this stanza begins and ends.

16. The manuscript marks line 3 as the beginning of a stanza.]

 [p. 208]

17. Rig knew well | wise words to speak,
 Soon in the midst | of the room he sat,
 And on either side | the others were.

18. Then took Amma |     .    .    .    .    .
 The vessels full | with the fare she set,
 Calf's flesh boiled | was the best of the dainties.

19. Rig knew well | wise words to speak,
 He rose from the board, | made ready to sleep;
 Soon in the bed | himself did he lay,
 And on either side | the others were.

20. Thus was he there | for three nights long,
 Then forward he went | on the midmost way,
 And so nine months | were soon passed by.

21. A son bore Amma, | with water they sprinkled him,
 Karl they named him; | in a cloth she wrapped him,
 He was ruddy of face, | and flashing his eyes.

 [17. The manuscript jumps from stanza 17, line I, to stanza 19, line 2. Bugge points out that the copyist's eye was presumably led astray by the fact that 17, I, and 19, I, were identical. Lines 2-3 of 17 are supplied from stanzas 3 and 29.

18. I have followed Bugge's conjectural construction of the missing stanza, taking lines 2 and 3 from stanzas 31 and 4.

19. The manuscript marks line 2 as the beginning of a stanza.

20. The manuscript omits line 2, supplied by analogy with stanza 6.]

 [p. 209]

22. He began to grow, | and to gain in strength,
 Oxen he ruled, | and plows made ready,
 Houses he built, | and barns he fashioned,
 Carts he made, | and the plow he managed.

23. Home did they bring | the bride for Karl,
 In goatskins clad, | and keys she bore;
 Snor was her name, | 'neath the veil she sat;
 A home they made ready, | and rings exchanged,
 The bed they decked, | and a dwelling made.

24. Sons they had, | they lived and were happy:
 Hal and Dreng, | Holth, Thegn and Smith,
 Breith and Bondi, | Bundinskeggi,
 Bui and Boddi, | Brattskegg and Segg.

 [21. Most editors assume a lacuna, after either line 2 or line 3. Sijmons assumes, on the analogy of stanza 8, that a complete stanza describing Karl ("Yeoman") has been lost between stanzas 21 and 22.

22. No line Indicated in the manuscript as beginning a stanza. Cart: the word in the original, "kartr," is one of the clear signs of the Celtic influence noted in the introduction.

23. Bring: the word literally means "drove in a wagon"--a mark of the bride's social status. Snor: "Daughter-in-Law." Bugge, followed by several editors, maintains that line 4 was wrongly interpolated here from a missing stanza describing the marriage of Kon.

24. No line indicated in the manuscript as beginning a stanza. The names mean: Hal, "Man"; Dreng, "The Strong"; Holth, "The Holder of Land"; Thegn, "Freeman"; Smith, "Craftsman"; Breith, "The Broad-Shouldered"; Bondi, "Yeoman"; Bundinskeggi, "With Beard Bound" (i.e., not allowed to hang unkempt); Bui, "Dwelling-Owner"; Boddi, "Farm-Holder"; Brattskegg, "With Beard Carried High"; Segg, "Man."]

 [p. 210]

25. Daughters they had, | and their names are here:
 Snot, Bruth, Svanni, | Svarri, Sprakki,
 Fljoth, Sprund and Vif, | Feima, Ristil:
 And thence has risen | the yeomen's race.

26. Thence went Rig, | his road was straight,
 A hall he saw, | the doors faced south;
 The portal stood wide, | on the posts was a ring,
 Then in he fared; | the floor was strewn.

27. Within two gazed | in each other's eyes,
 Fathir and Mothir, | and played with their fingers;
 There sat the house-lord, | wound strings for the bow,
 Shafts he fashioned, | and bows he shaped.

28. The lady sat, | at her arms she looked,
 She smoothed the cloth, | and fitted the sleeves;
 Gay was her cap, | on her breast were clasps,
 Broad was her train, | of blue was her gown,

 [25. No line indicated in the manuscript as beginning a stanza. The names mean: Snot, "Worthy Woman"; Bruth, "Bride"; Svanni, "The Slender"; Svarri, "The Proud"; Sprakki, "The Fair"; Fljoth, "Woman" (?); Sprund, "The Proud"; Vif, "Wife"; Feima, "The Bashful"; Ristil, "The Graceful."

26. Many editors make a stanza out of line 4 and lines 1-2 of the following stanza. Strewn: with fresh straw in preparation for a feast; cf. Thrymskvitha, 22.

27. Fathir and Mothir: Father and Mother. Perhaps lines 3-4 should form a stanza with 28, 1-3.

28. Bugge thinks lines 5-6, like 23, 4, got in here from the lost stanzas describing Kon's bride and his marriage.]

 [p. 211]

Her brows were bright, | her breast was shining,
 Whiter her neck | than new-fallen snow.

29. Rig knew | well wise words to speak,
 Soon in the midst | of the room he sat,
 And on either side | the others were.

30. Then Mothir brought | a broidered cloth,
 Of linen bright, | and the board she covered;
 And then she took | the loaves so thin,
 And laid them, white | from the wheat, on the cloth.

31. Then forth she brought | the vessels full,
 With silver covered, | and set before them,
 Meat all browned, | and well-cooked birds;
 In the pitcher was wine, | of plate were the cups,
 So drank they and talked | till the day was gone.

32. Rig knew well | wise words to speak,
 Soon did he rise, | made ready to sleep;
 So in the bed | himself did he lay,
 And on either side | the others were.

 [31. The manuscript of lines 1-3 is obviously defective, as there are too many words for two lines, and not enough for the full three. The meaning, however, is clearly very much as indicated in the translation. Gering's emendation, which I have followed, consists simply in shifting "set before them" from the first line to the second--where the manuscript has no verb,--and supplying the verb "brought" in line 1. The various editions contain all sorts of suggestions.

32. The manuscript begins both line 1 and line 2 with a capital [fp. 212] preceded by a period, which has led to all sorts of strange stanza-combinations and guesses at lost lines in the various editions. The confusion includes stanza 33, wherein no line is marked in the manuscript as beginning a stanza.]

 [p. 212]

33. Thus was he there | for three nights long,
 Then forward he went | on the midmost way,
 And so nine months | were soon passed by.

34. A son had Mothir, | in silk they wrapped him,
 With water they sprinkled him, | Jarl he was;
 Blond was his hair, | and bright his cheeks,
 Grim as a snake's | were his glowing eyes.

35. To grow in the house | did Jarl begin,
 Shields he brandished, | and bow-strings wound,
 Bows he shot, | and shafts he fashioned,
 Arrows he loosened, | and lances wielded,
 Horses he rode, | and hounds unleashed,
 Swords he handled, | and sounds he swam.

36. Straight from the grove | came striding Rig,
 Rig came striding, | and runes he taught him;
 By his name he called him, | as son he claimed him,

 [34. Jarl: "Nobly-Born."

35. Various lines have been regarded as interpolations, 3 and 6 being most often thus rejected.

36. Lines I, 2, and 5 all begin with capitals preceded by periods, a fact which, taken in conjunction with the obviously defective state of the following stanza, has led to all sorts of conjectural emendations. The exact significance of Rig's giving his own name to Jarl (cf. stanza 46), and thus recognizing him, potentially at least, as a king, depends on the conditions under [fp. 213] which the poem was composed (cf. Introductory Note). The whole stanza, particularly the reference to the teaching of magic (runes), fits Othin far better than Heimdall.] 

 [p. 213]

And bade him hold | his heritage wide,
 His heritage wide, | the ancient homes.

37. .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    . 
 Forward he rode | through the forest dark,
 O'er the frosty crags, | till a hall he found.

38. His spear he shook, | his shield he brandished,
 His horse he spurred, | with his sword he hewed;
 Wars he raised, | and reddened the field,
 Warriors slew he, | and land he won.

39. Eighteen halls | ere long did he hold,
 Wealth did he get, | and gave to all,
 Stones and jewels | and slim-flanked steeds,
 Rings he offered, | and arm-rings shared.

40. His messengers went | by the ways so wet,
 And came to the hall | where Hersir dwelt;
 His daughter was fair | and slender-fingered,
 Erna the wise | the maiden was.

 [37. Something--one or two lines, or a longer passage--has clearly been lost, describing the beginning of Jarl's journey. Yet many editors, relying on the manuscript punctuation, make 37 and 38 into a single stanza.

39. The manuscript marks both lines 1 and 2 as beginning stanzas.

40. Hersir: "Lord"; the hersir was, in the early days before the establishment of a kingdom in Norway, the local chief, and [fp. 214] hence the highest recognized authority. During and after the time of Harald the Fair-Haired the name lost something of its distinction, the hersir coming to take rank below the jarl. Erna: "The Capable."]

 [p. 214]

41. Her hand they sought, | and home they brought her,
 Wedded to Jarl | the veil she wore;
 Together they dwelt, | their joy was great,
 Children they had, | and happy they lived.

42. Bur was the eldest, | and Barn the next,
 Joth and Athal, | Arfi, Mog,
 Nith and Svein, | soon they began-
 Sun and Nithjung-- | to play and swim;
 Kund was one, | and the youngest Kon.

43. Soon grew up | the sons of Jarl,
 Beasts they tamed, | and bucklers rounded,
 Shafts they fashioned, | and spears they shook.

44. But Kon the Young | learned runes to use,
 Runes everlasting, | the runes of life;

 [42. The names mean: Bur, "Son"; Barn, "Child"; Joth, "Child"; Athal, "Offspring"; Arfi, "Heir"; Mog, "Son"; Nith, "Descendant"; Svein, "Boy"; Sun, "Son"; Nithjung, "Descend ant"; Kund, "Kinsman"; Kon, "Son" (of noble birth). Concerning the use made of this last name, see note on stanza 44. It is curious that there is no list of the daughters of Jarl and Erna, and accordingly Vigfusson inserts here the names listed in stanza 25. Grundtvig rearranges the lines of stanzas 42 and 43.

44. The manuscript indicates no line as beginning a stanza. Kon the Young: a remarkable bit of fanciful etymology; the [fp. 215] phrase is "Konr ungr," which could readily be contracted into "Konungr," the regular word meaning "king." The "kon" part is actually not far out, but the second syllable of "konungr" has nothing to do with "ungr" meaning "young." Runes: a long list of just such magic charms, dulling swordblades, quenching flames, and so on, is given in Hovamol, 147-163.]

 [p. 215]

Soon could he well | the warriors shield,
 Dull the swordblade, | and still the seas.

45. Bird-chatter learned he, | flames could he lessen.,
 Minds could quiet, | and sorrows calm;
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 The might and strength | of twice four men.

46. With Rig-Jarl soon | the runes he shared,
 More crafty he was, | and greater his wisdom;
 The right he sought, | and soon he won it,
 Rig to be called, | and runes to know.

47. Young Kon rode forth | through forest and grove,
 Shafts let loose, | and birds he lured;
 There spake a crow | on a bough that sat:
 "Why lurest thou, Kon, | the birds to come?

 [45. The manuscript indicates no line as beginning a stanza. Minds: possibly "seas,"' the word being doubtful. Most editors assume the gap as indicated.

4.6. The manuscript indicates no line as beginning a stanza. Rig-Jarl: Kon's father; cf. stanza 36.

47. This stanza has often been combined with 48, either as a whole or in part. Crow: birds frequently play the part of mentor in Norse literature; cf., for example, Helgakvitha Hundingsbana I, 5, and Fafnismol, 32.]

 [p. 216]

48. " 'Twere better forth | on thy steed to fare,
     .    .    .    .    . | and the host to slay.

49. "The halls of Dan | and Danp are noble,
 Greater their wealth | than thou bast gained;
 Good are they | at guiding the keel,
 Trying of weapons, | and giving of wounds.

 [48. This fragment is not indicated as a separate stanza in the manuscript. Perhaps half a line has disappeared, or, as seems more likely, the gap includes two lines and a half. Sijmons actually constructs these lines, largely on the basis of stanzas 35 and 38, Bugge fills in the half-line lacuna as indicated above with "The sword to wield."

49. Dan and Danp: These names are largely responsible for the theory that the Rigsthula was composed in Denmark. According to the Latin epitome of the Skjoldungasaga by Arngrimur Jonsson, "Rig (Rigus) was a man not the least among the great ones of his time. He married the daughter of a certain Danp, lord of Danpsted, whose name was Dana; and later, having won the royal title for his province, left as his heir his son by Dana, called Dan or Danum, all of whose subjects were called Danes." This may or may not be conclusive, and it is a great pity that the manuscript breaks off abruptly at this stanza.]

 
      
The Poetic Edda, by Henry Adams Bellows, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 217]

 

HYNDLULJOTH

 

The Poem of Hyndla

 

INTRODUCTORY NOTE

The Hyndluljoth is found in neither of the great manuscripts of the Poetic Edda, but is included in the so-called Flateyjarbok (Book of the Flat Island), an enormous compilation made some where about 1400. The lateness of this manuscript would of itself be enough to cast a doubt upon the condition in which the poem has been preserved, and there can be no question that what we have of it is in very poor shape. It is, in fact, two separate poems, or parts of them, clumsily put together. The longer one, the Poem of Hyndla proper, is chiefly a collection of names, not strictly mythological but belonging to the semi-historical hero-sagas of Norse tradition. The wise-woman, Hyndla, being asked by Freyja to trace the ancestry of her favorite, Ottar, for the purpose of deciding a wager, gives a complex genealogy including many of the heroes who appear in the popular sagas handed down from days long before the Icelandic settlements. The poet was learned, but without enthusiasm; it is not likely that he composed the Hyndluljoth much before the twelfth century, though the material of which it is compounded must have been very much older. Although the genealogies are essentially continental, the poem seems rather like a product of the archaeological period of Iceland.

Inserted bodily in the Hyndluljoth proper is a fragment of fifty-one lines, taken from a poem of which, by a curious chance, we know the name. Snorri quotes one stanza of it, calling it "the short Voluspo." The fragment preserved gives, of course, no indication of the length of the original poem, but it shows that it was a late and very inferior imitation of the great Voluspo. Like the Hyndluljoth proper, it apparently comes from the twelfth century; but there is nothing whatever to indicate that the two poems were the work of the same man, or were ever connected in any way until some blundering copyist mixed them up. Certainly the connection did not exist in the middle of the thirteenth century, when Snorri quoted "the short Voluspo."

Neither poem is of any great value, either as mythology or as poetry. The author of "the short Voluspo" seems, indeed, to have been more or less confused as to his facts; and both poets were

[p. 218]

too late to feel anything of the enthusiasm of the earlier school. The names of Hyndla's heroes, of course, suggest an unlimited number of stories, but as most of these have no direct relation to the poems of the Edda, I have limited the notes to a mere record of who the persons mentioned were, and the saga-groups in which they appeared.

 Freyja spake:
 1. "Maiden, awake! | wake thee, my friend,
 My sister Hyndla, | in thy hollow cave!
 Already comes darkness, | and ride must we
 To Valhall to seek | the sacred hall.

2. "The favor of Heerfather | seek we to find,
 To his followers gold | he gladly gives;
 To Hermoth gave he | helm and mail-coat,
 And to Sigmund he gave | a sword as gift.

 [1. Freyja: The names of the speakers do not appear in the manuscripts. On Freyja cf. Voluspo, 21 and note; Skirnismol, introductory prose and note; Lokasenna, introductory prose and note. As stanzas 9-10 show, Ottar has made a wager of his entire inheritance with Angantyr regarding the relative loftiness of their ancestry, and by rich offerings (Hyndla hints at less commendable methods) has induced Freyja to assist him in establishing his genealogy. Freyja, having turned Ottar for purposes of disguise into a boar, calls on the giantess Hyndla ("She-Dog") to aid her. Hyndla does not appear elsewhere in the poems.

2. Heerfather: Othin; cf. Voluspo, 30. Hermoth: mentioned in the Prose Edda as a son of Othin who is sent to Hel to ask for the return of the slain Baldr. Sigmund: according to the Volsungasaga Sigmund was the son of Volsung, and hence Othin's great-great-grandson (note that Wagner eliminates all the intervening generations by the simple expedient of using [fp. 219] Volsung's name as one of Othin's many appellations). Sigmund alone was able to draw from the tree the sword which a mysterious stranger (Othin, of course) had thrust into it (compare the first act of Wagner's Die Walkure).]

 [p. 219]

3. "Triumph to some, | and treasure to others,
 To many wisdom | and skill in words,
 Fair winds to the sailor, | to the singer his art,
 And a manly heart | to many a hero.

4. "Thor shall I honor, | and this shall I ask,
 That his favor true | mayst thou ever find;
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 Though little the brides | of the giants he loves.

5. "From the stall now | one of thy wolves lead forth,
 And along with my boar | shalt thou let him run;
 For slow my boar goes | on the road of the gods,
 And I would not weary | my worthy steed."

 Hyndla spake:
 6. "Falsely thou askest me, | Freyja, to go,
 For so in the glance | of thine eyes I see;

 [3. Sijmons suggests that this stanza may be an interpolation.

4. No lacuna after line 2 is indicated in the manuscript. Editors have attempted various experiments in rearranging this and the following stanza.

5. Some editors, following Simrock, assign this whole stanza to Hyndla; others assign to her lines 3-4. Giving the entire stanza to Freyja makes better sense than any other arrangement, but is dependent on changing the manuscript's "thy" in line 3 to "my", as suggested by Bugge. The boar on which Freyja rides ("my worthy steed") is, of course, Ottar.

6. Hyndla detects Ottar, and accuses Freyja of having her [fp. 220] lover with her. Unless Ottar is identical with Oth (cf. Voluspo, 25 and note), which seems most unlikely, there is no other reference to this love affair. The way of the slain: the road to Valhall.]

 [p. 220]

On the way of the slain | thy lover goes with thee.
 Ottar the young, | the son of Instein."

 Freyja spake:
 7. "Wild dreams, methinks, | are thine when thou sayest
 My lover is with me | on the way of the slain;
 There shines the boar | with bristles of gold,
 Hildisvini, | he who was made
 By Dain and Nabbi, | the cunning dwarfs.

8. "Now let us down | from our saddles leap,
 And talk of the race | of the heroes twain;
 The men who were born | of the gods above,
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .

9. "A wager have made | in the foreign metal
 Ottar the young | and Angantyr;

 [7. Various experiments have been made in condensing the stanza into four lines, or in combining it with stanza 8. Hildisvini ("Battle-Swine"): perhaps Freyja refers to the boar with golden bristles given, according to Snorri, to her brother Freyr by the dwarfs. Dain: a dwarf; cf. Voluspo, 11. Nabbi: a dwarf nowhere else mentioned.

8. The first line is obviously corrupt in the manuscript, and has been variously emended. The general assumption is that in the interval between stanzas 7 and 8 Freyja and Hyndla have arrived at Valhall. No lacuna is indicated in the manuscript.

9. Foreign metal: gold. The word valr, meaning "foreign," [fp. 221] and akin to "Welsh," is interesting in this connection, and some editors interpret it frankly as "Celtic," i.e., Irish.]

 [p. 221]

We must guard, for the hero | young to have,
 His father's wealth, | the fruits of his race.

10. "For me a shrine | of stones he made,--
 And now to glass | the rock has grown;--
 Oft with the blood | of beasts was it red;
 In the goddesses ever | did Ottar trust.

11. "Tell to me now | the ancient names,
 And the races of all | that were born of old:
 Who are of the Skjoldungs, | who of the Skilfings,
 Who of the Othlings, | who of the Ylfings,
 Who are the free-born, | who are the high-born,
 The noblest of men | that in Mithgarth dwell?"

 [10. To glass: i.e., the constant fires on the altar have fused the stone into glass. Glass beads, etc., were of very early use, though the use of glass for windows probably did not begin in Iceland much before 1200.

11. Possibly two stanzas, or perhaps one with interpolations. The manuscript omits the first half of line 4, here filled out from stanza 16, line 2. Skjoldungs: the descendants of Skjold, a mythical king who was Othin's son and the ancestor of the Danish kings; cf. Snorri's Edda, Skaldskaparmal, 43. Skilfings: mentioned by Snorri as descendants of King Skelfir, a mythical ruler in "the East." In Grimnismol, 54, the name Skilfing appears as one of Othin's many appellations. Othlings: Snorri derives this race from Authi, the son of Halfdan the Old (cf. stanza 14). Ylfings: some editors have changed this to "Ynglings," as in stanza 16, referring to the descendants of Yng or Yngvi, another son of Halfdan, but the reference may be to the same mythical family to which Helgi Hundingsbane belonged (cf. Helgakvitha Hundingsbana I, 5).]

 [p. 222]

 Hyndla spake:
 12. "Thou art, Ottar, | the son of Instein,
 And Instein the son | of Alf the Old,
 Alf of Ulf, | Ulf of Saefari,
 And Saefari's father | was Svan the Red.

13. "Thy mother, bright | with bracelets fair,
 Hight, methinks, | the priestess Hledis;
 Frothi her father, | and Friaut her mother;--
 Her race of the mightiest | men must seem.

14. "Of old the noblest | of all was Ali,
 Before him Halfdan, | foremost of Skjoldungs;
 Famed were the battles | the hero fought,
 To the corners of heaven | his deeds were carried.

15. "Strengthened by Eymund, | the strongest of men,
 Sigtrygg he slew | with the ice-cold sword;
 His bride was Almveig, | the best of women,
 And eighteen boys | did Almveig bear him.

 [12. Instein: mentioned in the Halfssaga as one of the warriors of King Half of Horthaland (the so-called Halfsrekkar). The others mentioned in this stanza appear in one of the later mythical accounts of the settlement of Norway.

14. Stanzas 14-16 are clearly interpolated, as Friaut (stanza 13, line S) is the daughter of Hildigun (stanza 17, line 1). Halfdan the Old, a mythical king of Denmark, called by Snorri "the most famous of all kings," of whom it was foretold that "for three hundred years there should be no woman and no man in his line who was not of great repute." After the. slaying of Sigtrygg he married Almveig (or Alvig), daughter of King Eymund of Holmgarth (i.e., Russia), who bore him eighteen [fp. 223] sons, nine at one birth. These nine were all slain, but the other nine were traditionally the ancestors of the most famous families in Northern hero lore.]

 [p. 223]

16. "Hence come the Skjoldungs, | hence the Skilfings,
 Hence the Othlings, | hence the Ynglings,
 Hence come the free-born, | hence the high-born,
 The noblest of men | that in Mithgarth dwell:
 And all are thy kinsmen, | Ottar, thou fool!

17. "Hildigun then | her mother hight,
 The daughter of Svava | and Saekonung;
 And all are thy kinsmen, | Ottar, thou fool!
 It is much to know,-- | wilt thou hear yet more?

18. "The mate of Dag | was a mother of heroes,
 Thora, who bore him | the bravest of fighters,
 Frathmar and Gyrth | and the Frekis twain,
 Am and Jofurmar, | Alf the Old;
 It is much to know,-- | wilt thou hear yet more?

19. "Her husband was Ketil, | the heir of Klypp,
 He was of thy mother | the mother's-father;

 [16. Compare stanza 11. All or part of this stanza may be interpolated.

17. Hildigun (or Hildiguth): with this the poem returns to Ottar's direct ancestry, Hildigun being Friaut's mother. Line 4: cf. the refrain-line in the Voluspo (stanzas 27, 29, etc.).

18. Another interpolation, as Ketil (stanza 19, line 1) is the husband of Hildigun (stanza 17). Dag: one of Halfdan's sons, and ancestor of the Doglings. Line 5 may be a late addition.

19. Ketil: the semi-mythical Ketil Hortha-Kari, from whom various Icelandic families traced their descent. Hoalf: probably King Half of Horthaland, hero of the Halfssaga, and son of Hjorleif and Hild (cf. stanza 12, note).]

 [p. 224]

Before the days | of Kari was Frothi,
 And horn of Hild | was Hoalf then.

20. "Next was Nanna, | daughter of Nokkvi,
 Thy father's kinsman | her son became;
 Old is the line, | and longer still,
 And all are thy kinsmen, | Ottar, thou fool!

21. "Isolf and Osolf, | the sons of Olmoth,
 Whose wife was Skurhild, | the daughter of Skekkil,
 Count them among | the heroes mighty,
 And all are thy kinsmen, | Ottar, thou fool!

22. "Gunnar the Bulwark, | Grim the Hardy,
 Thorir the Iron-shield, | Ulf the Gaper,
 Brodd and Horvir | both did I know;
 In the household they were | of Hrolf the Old.

 [20. Nanna: the manuscript has "Manna." Of Nanna and her father, Nokkvi, we know nothing, but apparently Nanna's son married a sister of Instein, Ottar's father.

21. Olmoth: one of the sons of Ketil Hortha-Kari. Line 4: here, and generally hereafter when it appears in the poem, this refrain-line is abbreviated in the manuscript to the word "all."

22. An isolated stanza, which some editors place after stanza 24, others combining lines 1-2 with the fragmentary stanza 23 In the manuscript lines 3-4 stand after stanza 24, where they fail to connect clearly with anything. Hrolf the Old: probably King Hrolf Gautreksson of Gautland, in the saga relating to whom (Fornaldar sogur III, 57 ff.) appear the names of Thorir the iron-shield and Grim Thorkelsson.]

 [p. 225]

23. "Hervarth, Hjorvarth, | Hrani, Angantyr,
 Bui and Brami, | Barri and Reifnir,
 Tind and Tyrfing, | the Haddings twain,--
 And all are thy kinsmen, | Ottar, thou fool!

24. "Eastward in Bolm | were born of old
 The sons of Arngrim | and Eyfura;
 With berserk-tumult | and baleful deed
 Like fire o'er land | and sea they fared,
 And all are thy kinsmen, | Ottar, thou fool!

25. "The sons of Jormunrek | all of yore
 To the gods in death | were as offerings given;

 [23. Stanzas 23 and 24 name the twelve Berserkers, the sons of Arngrim and Eyfura, the story of whom is told in the Hervararsaga and the Orvar-Oddssaga. Saxo Grammaticus tells of the battle between them and Hjalmar and Orvar-Odd. Line 1 does not appear in the manuscript, but is added from the list of names given in the sagas. The Berserkers were wild warriors, distinguished above all by the fits of frenzy to which they were subject in battle; during these fits they howled like wild beasts, foamed at the mouth, and gnawed the iron rims of their shields. At such times they were proof against steel or fire, but when the fever abated they were weak. The etymology of the word berserk is disputed; probably, however, it means "bear-shirt."

24. The manuscript omits the first half of line I, here supplied from the Orvar-Oddssaga. Bolm: probably the island of Bolmso, in the Swedish province of Smaland. In the manuscript and in most editions stanza 24 is followed by lines 3-4 of stanza 22. Some editors reject line 5 as spurious.

25. In the manuscript line 1 stands after line 4 of stanza 29. Probably a stanza enumerating Jormunrek's sons has been lost. Many editors combine lines 3-4 of stanza 22 and lines 2-4 of [fp. 226] stanza 25 into one stanza. Jormunrek: the historical Ermanarich, king of the Goths, who died about 376. According to Norse tradition, in which Jormunrek played a large part, he slew his own sons (cf. Guthrunarhvot and Hamthesmol). In the saga Jormunrek married Sigurth's daughter, Svanhild. Stanzas 25-27 connect Ottar's descent with the whole Volsung-Sigurth-Jormunrek-Gjuki genealogy. The story of Sigurth is the basis for most of the heroic poems of the Edda, of the famous Volsungasaga, and, in Germany, of the Nibelungenlied. On his battle with the dragon Fafnir cf. Fafnismol.]

 [p. 226]

He was kinsman of Sigurth,-- | hear well what I say,--
 The foe of hosts, | and Fafnir's slayer.

26., "From Volsung's seed | was the hero sprung,
 And Hjordis was born | of Hrauthung's race,
 And Eylimi | from the Othlings came,--
 And all are thy kinsmen, | Ottar, thou fool!

27. "Gunnar and Hogni, | the heirs of Gjuki,
 And Guthrun as well, | who their sister was;
 But Gotthorm was not | of Gjuki's race,
 Although the brother | of both he was:
 And all are thy kinsmen, | Ottar, thou fool!

 [26. Volsung: Sigurth's grandfather and Othin's great-grand son. Hjordis: daughter of King Eylimi, wife of Sigmund and mother of Sigurth. Othlings: cf. stanza 11.

27. Gunnar, Hogni, and Guthrun: the three children of the Burgundian king Gjuki and his wife Grimhild (Kriemhild); Guthrun was Sigurth's wife. Gotthorm, the third brother, who killed Sigurth at Brynhild's behest, was Grimhild's son, and thus a step-son of Gjuki. These four play an important part in the heroic cycle of Eddic poems. Cf. Gripisspo, introductory note.]

 [p. 227]

28. "Of Hvethna's sons | was Haki the best,
 And Hjorvarth the father | of Hvethna was;
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .

29. "Harald Battle-tooth | of Auth was born,
 Hrorek the Ring-giver | her husband was;
 Auth the Deep-minded | was Ivar's daughter,
 But Rathbarth the father | of Randver was:
 And all are thy kinsmen, | Ottar, thou fool!"

*    *    *

 Fragment of "The Short Voluspo"

 30. Eleven in number | the gods were known,
 When Baldr o'er the hill | of death was bowed;
 And this to avenge | was Vali swift,
 When his brother's slayer | soon he slew.

 [28. In the manuscript and in many editions these two lines stand between stanzas 33 and 34. The change here made follows Bugge. The manuscript indicates no gap between stanzas 27 and 29. Hvethna: wife of King Halfdan of Denmark.

29. The manuscript and many editions include line 1 of stanza 25 after line 4 of stanza 29. The story of Harald Battle-tooth is told in detail by Saxo Grammaticus. Harald's father was Hrorek, king of Denmark; his mother was Auth, daughter of Ivar, king of Sweden. After Ivar had treacherously detroyed {sic Hrorek, Auth fled with Harald to Russia, where she married King Rathbarth. Harald's warlike career in Norway, and his death on the Bravalla-field at the hands of his nephew, Sigurth Ring, son of Randver and grandson of Rathbarth and Auth, were favorite saga themes.

30. At this point begins the fragmentary and interpolated "short Voluspo" identified by Snorri. The manuscript gives no indication of the break in the poem's continuity. Eleven: there [fp. 228] are various references to the "twelve" gods (including Baldr) Snorri (Gylfaginning, 20-33) lists the following twelve in addition to Othin: Thor, Baldr, Njorth, Freyr, Tyr, Bragi, Heimdall, Hoth, Vithar, Vali, Ull and Forseti; he adds Loki as of doubtful divinity. Baldr and Vali: cf. Voluspo, 32-33.]

 }[p. 228]

31. The father of Baldr | was the heir of Bur,
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .

32. Freyr's wife was Gerth, | the daughter of Gymir,
 Of the giants' brood, | and Aurbotha bore her;
 To these as well | was Thjazi kin,
 The dark-loving giant; | his daughter was Skathi.

33. Much have I told thee, | and further will tell;
 There is much that I know;-- | wilt thou hear yet more?

34. Heith and Hrossthjof, | the children of Hrimnir.
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .

 [31. The fragmentary stanzas 31-34 have been regrouped in various ways, and with many conjectures as to omissions, none of which are indicated in the manuscript. The order here is as in the manuscript, except that lines 1-2 of stanza 28 have been transposed from after line 2 of stanza 33. Bur's heir: Othin; cf. Voluspo, 4.

32. Freyr, Gerth, Gymir: cf. Skirnismol. Aurbotha: a giantess, mother of Gerth. Thjazi and Skathi: cf. Lokasenna, 49, and Harbarthsljoth, 19. 33. Cf. Voluspo, 44 and 27.

34. Heith ("Witch") and Hrossthjof ("Horse-thief"): the only other reference to the giant Hrimnir (Skirnismol, 28) makes no mention of his children.]

 [p. 229]

35. The sybils arose | from Vitholf's race,
 From Vilmeith all | the seers are,
 And the workers of charms | are Svarthofthi's children,
 And from Ymir sprang | the giants all.

36. Much have I told thee, | and further will tell;
 There is much that I know;-- | wilt thou hear yet more?

37. One there was born | in the bygone days,
 Of the race of the gods, | and great was his might;
 Nine giant women, | at the world's edge,
 Once bore the man | so mighty in arms.

38. Gjolp there bore him, | Greip there bore him,
 Eistla bore him, | and Eyrgjafa,
 Ulfrun bore him, | and Angeyja,
 Imth and Atla, | and Jarnsaxa.

 [35. This stanza is quoted by Snorri (Gylfaginning, 5). Of Vitholf ("Forest Wolf'), Vilmeith ("Wish-Tree") and Svarthofthi ("Black Head") nothing further is known. Ymir: cf. Voluspo, 3.

37. According to Snorri (Gylfaginning, 27) Heimdall was the son of Othin and of nine sisters. As Heimdall was the watch man of the gods, this has given rise to much "solar myth" discussion. The names of his nine giantess mothers are frequently said to denote attributes of the sea.

38. The names of Heimdall's mothers may be rendered "Yelper," "Griper," "Foamer," "Sand-Strewer," "She-Wolf," "Sorrow-Whelmer," "Dusk," "Fury," and "Iron-Sword."]

 [p. 230]

39. Strong was he made | with the strength of earth,
 With the ice-cold sea, | and the blood of swine.

40. One there was born, | the best of all,
 And strong was he made | with the strength of earth;
 The proudest is called | the kinsman of men
 Of the rulers all | throughout the world.

41. Much have I told thee, | and further will tell;
 There is much that I know;-- | wilt thou hear yet more?

42. The wolf did Loki | with Angrbotha win,
 And Sleipnir bore he | to Svathilfari;
 The worst of marvels | seemed the one
 That sprang from the brother | of Byleist then.

 [39. It has been suggested that these lines were interpolated from Guthrunarkvitha II, 22. Some editors add the refrain of stanza 36. Swine's blood: to Heimdall's strength drawn from earth and sea was added that derived from sacrifice.

40. In the manuscript this stanza stands after stanza 44. Regarding Heimdall's kinship to the three great classes of men, cf. Rigsthula, introductory note, wherein the apparent confusion of his attributes with those of Othin is discussed.

42. Probably a lacuna before this stanza. Regarding the wolf Fenrir, born of Loki and the giantess Angrbotha, cf. Voluspo, 39 and note. Sleipnir: Othin's eight-legged horse, born of the stallion Svathilfari and of Loki in the guise of a mare (cf. Grimnismol, 44). The worst: doubtless referring to Mithgarthsorm, another child of Loki. The brother of Byleist: Loki; cf. Voluspo, 51.]

 [p. 231]

43. A heart ate Loki,-- | in the embers it lay,
 And half-cooked found he | the woman's heart;--
 With child from the woman | Lopt soon was,
 And thence among men | came the monsters all.

44. The sea, storm-driven, | seeks heaven itself,
 O'er the earth it flows, | the air grows sterile;
 Then follow the snows | and the furious winds,
 For the gods are doomed, | and the end is death.

45. Then comes another, | a greater than all,
 Though never I dare | his name to speak;
 Few are they now | that farther can see
 Than the moment when Othin | shall meet the wolf.

*    *    *

 Freyja spake:
 46. "To my boar now bring | the memory-beer,
 So that all thy words, | that well thou hast spoken,

 [43. Nothing further is known of the myth here referred to, wherein Loki (Lopt) eats the cooked heart of a woman and thus himself gives birth to a monster. The reference is not likely to be to the serpent, as, according to Snorri (Gylfaginning, 34), the wolf, the serpent, and Hel were all the children of Loki and Angrbotha.

44. Probably an omission, perhaps of considerable length, before this stanza. For the description of the destruction of the world, cf. Voluspo, 57.

45. Cf. Voluspo, 65, where the possible reference to Christianity is noted. With this stanza the fragmentary "short Voluspo" ends, and the dialogue between Freyja and Hyndla continues.

46. Freyja now admits the identity of her boar as Ottar, who [fp. 232] with the help of the "memory-beer" is to recall the entire genealogy he has just heard, and thus win his wager with Angantyr.]

 [p. 232]

The third morn hence | he may hold in mind,
 When their races Ottar | and Angantyr tell."

 Hyndla spake:
 47. "Hence shalt thou fare, | for fain would I sleep,
 From me thou gettest | few favors good;
 My noble one, out | in the night thou leapest
 As. Heithrun goes | the goats among.

48. "To Oth didst thou run, | who loved thee ever,
 And many under | thy apron have crawled;
 My noble one, out | in the night thou leapest,
 As Heithrun goes | the goats among."

 Freyja spake:
 49. "Around the giantess | flames shall I raise,
 So that forth unburned | thou mayst not fare."

 [47. Heithrun: the she-goat that stands by Valhall (cf. Grimnismol, 25), the name being here used simply of she-goats in general, in caustic comment on Freyja's morals. Of these Loki entertained a similar view; cf. Lokasenna, 30.

48. Oth: cf. stanza 6 and note, and Voluspo, 25 and note. Lines 3-4, abbreviated in the manuscript, are very likely repeated here by mistake.

49. The manuscript repeats once again lines 3-4 of stanza 47 as the last two lines of this stanza. It seems probable that two lines have been lost, to the effect that Freyja will burn the giantess alive "If swiftly now | thou dost not seek, / And hither bring | the memory-beer."]

 [p. 233]

 Hyndla spake:
 50. "Flames I see burning, | the earth is on fire,
 And each for his life | the price must lose;
 Bring then to Ottar | the draught of beer,
 Of venom full | for an evil fate."

 Freyja spake:
 51. "Thine evil words | shall work no ill,
 Though, giantess, bitter | thy baleful threats;
 A drink full fair | shall Ottar find,
 If of all the gods | the favor I get."

      
The Poetic Edda, by Henry Adams Bellows, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 234]

 

SVIPDAGSMOL

 

The Ballad of Svipdag

 

INTRODUCTORY NOTE

The two poems, Grougaldr (Groa's Spell) and Fjolsvinnsmol (the Ballad of Fjolsvith), which many editors have, very wisely, united under the single title of Svipdagsmol, are found only in paper manuscripts, none of them antedating the seventeenth century. Everything points to a relatively late origin for the poems: their extensive use of "kennings" or poetical circumlocutions, their romantic spirit, quite foreign to the character of the unquestionably older poems, the absence of any reference to them in the earlier documents, the frequent errors in mythology, and, finally, the fact that the poems appear to have been preserved in unusually good condition. Whether or not a connecting link of narrative verse joining the two parts has been lost is an open question; on the whole it seems likely that the story was sufficiently well known so that the reciter of the poem (or poems) merely filled in the gap with a brief prose summary in pretty much his own words. The general relationship between dialogue and narrative in the Eddic poems is discussed in the introductory note to the Grimnismol, in connection with the use of prose links.

The love story of Svipdag and Mengloth is not referred to elsewhere in the Poetic Edda, nor does Snorri mention it; however, Groa, who here appears as Svipdag's mother, is spoken of by Snorri as a wise woman, the wife of Orvandil, who helps Thor with her magic charms. On the other hand, the essence of the story, the hero's winning of a bride ringed about by flames, is strongly suggestive of parts of the Sigurth-Brynhild traditions. Whether or not it is to be regarded as a nature or solar myth depends entirely on one's view of the whole "solar myth" school of criticism, not so highly esteemed today as formerly; such an interpretation is certainly not necessary to explain what is, under any circumstances, a very charming romance told, in the main, with dramatic effectiveness.

In later years the story of Svipdag and Mengloth became popular throughout the North, and was made the subject of many Danish and Swedish as well as Norwegian ballads. These have greatly assisted in the reconstruction of the outlines of the narrative surrounding the dialogue poems here given.

[p. 235]

 

I. GROUGALDR

 

GROA'S SPELL

 Svipdag spake:
 1. "Wake thee, Groa! | wake, mother good!
 At the doors of the dead I call thee;
 Thy son, bethink thee, | thou badst to seek
 Thy help at the hill of death."

 Groa spake:
 2. "What evil vexes | mine only son,
 What baleful fate hast thou found,
 That thou callest thy mother, | who lies in the mould,
 And the world of the living has left?"

 Svipdag spake:
 3. "The woman false | whom my father embraced
 Has brought me a baleful game;
 For she bade me go forth | where none may fare,
 And Mengloth the maid to seek."

 Groa spake:
 4. "Long is the way, | long must thou wander,
 But long is love as well;
 Thou mayst find, perchance, | what thou fain wouldst have,
 If the fates their favor will give."

 [1. Svipdag ("Swift Day"): the names of the speakers are lacking in the manuscripts.

3. The woman: Svipdag's stepmother, who is responsible for [fp. 236] his search for Mengloth ("Necklace-Glad"). This name has suggested that Mengloth is really Frigg, possessor of the famous Brisings' necklace, or else Freyja (cf. Lokasenna, 20: note).]

 [p. 236]

 Svipdag spake:
 5. "Charms full good | then chant to me, mother,
 And seek thy son to guard;
 For death do I fear | on the way I shall fare,
 And in years am I young, methinks."

 Groa spake:
 6. "Then first I will chant thee | the charm oft-tried,
 That Rani taught to Rind;
 From the shoulder whate'er | mislikes thee shake,
 For helper thyself shalt thou have.

7. "Then next I will chant thee, | if needs thou must travel,
 And wander a purposeless way:
 The bolts of Urth | shall on every side
 Be thy guards on the road thou goest.

8. "Then third I will chant thee, | if threatening streams
 The danger of death shall bring:

 [6. For this catalogue of charms (stanzas 6-14) cf. the Ljothatal (Hovamol, 147-165). Rani and Rind: the manuscripts, have these words in inverse relation; I have followed Neckel's emendation. Rind was the giantess who became the mother of Vali, Othin's son, the one-night-old avenger of Baldr (cf. Voluspo, 33-34, and Baldrs Draumar, 11 and note). Rani is presumably Othin, who, according to a skaldic poem, won Rind by magic.

7. Urth: one of the three Norns, or Fates; Cf. Voluspo, 20.]

 [p. 237]

Yet to Hel shall turn | both Horn and Ruth,
 And before thee the waters shall fail.

9. "Then fourth I will chant thee, | if come thy foes
 On the gallows-way against thee:
 Into thine hands | shall their hearts be given,
 And peace shall the warriors wish.

10. "Then fifth I will chant thee, | if fetters perchance
 Shall bind thy bending limbs:
 O'er thy thighs do I chant | a loosening-charm,
 And the lock is burst from the limbs,
 And the fetters fall from the feet.

11. "Then sixth I will chant thee, | if storms on the sea
 Have might unknown to man:
 Yet never shall wind | or wave do harm,
 And calm is the course of thy boat.

12. "Then seventh I chant thee, | if frost shall seek
 To kill thee on lofty crags:
 The fatal cold | shall not grip thy flesh,
 And whole thy body shall be.

 [8. Horn and Ruth: these two rivers, here used merely to symbolize all dangerous streams, are not included in the catalogue of rivers given in Grimnismol, 27-29, for which reason some editors have changed the names to Hron and Hrith.

10. This stanza is a close parallel to Hovamol, 150, and the fifth line may well be an interpolation from line 4 of that stanza.]

 [p. 238]

13. "Then eighth will I chant thee, | if ever by night
 Thou shalt wander on murky ways:
 Yet never the curse | of a Christian woman
 From the dead shall do thee harm.

14. "Then ninth will I chant thee, | if needs thou must strive
 With a warlike giant in words:
 Thy heart good store | of wit shall have,
 And thy mouth of words full wise.

15. "Now fare on the way | where danger waits,
 Let evils not lessen thy love!
 I have stood at the door | of the earth-fixed stones,
 The while I chanted thee charms.

16. "Bear hence, my son, | what thy mother hath said,
 And let it live in thy breast;
 Thine ever shall be the | best of fortune,
 So long as my words shall last."

 [13. A dead Christian woman: this passage has distressed many editors, who have sought to emend the text so as to make it mean simply "a dead witch." The fact seems to be, however, that this particular charm was composed at a time when Christians were regarded by all conservative pagans as emissaries of darkness. A dead woman's curse would naturally be more potent, whether she was Christian or otherwise, than a living one's. Presumably this charm is much older than the poem in which it here stands.

16. At this point Groa's song ends, and Svipdag, thus fortified, goes to seek Mengloth. All the link that is needed between the poems is approximately this: "Then Svipdag searched long for [fp. 239] Mengloth, and at last he came to a great house set all about with flames. And before the house there was a giant."] 

 [p. 239]

 

II. FJOLMINNSMOL

 

THE LAY OF FJOLSVITH

17. Before the house | he beheld one coming
 To the home of the giants high.

 Svipdag spake:
 "What giant is here, | in front of the house,
 And around him fires are flaming?"

 Fjolsvith spake:
 3. "What seekest thou here? | for what is thy search?
 What, friendless one, fain wouldst thou know?
 By the ways so wet | must thou wander hence,
 For, weakling, no home hast thou here."

 Svipdag spake:
 19. "What giant is here, | in front of the house,
 To the wayfarer welcome denying?"

 [17. Most editors have here begun a new series of stanza numbers, but if the Grougaldr and the Fjolsvinnsmol are to be considered. as a single poem, it seems more reasonable to continue the stanza numbers consecutively. Bugge thinks a stanza has been lost before 17, including Fjolsvith's name, so that the "he" in line 1 might have something to refer to. However, just such a prose link as I have suggested in the note on stanza 16 would serve the purpose. Editors have suggested various rearrange merits in the lines of stanzas 17-19. The substance, however, is clear enough. The giant Fjolsvith ("Much-Wise"), the warder of the house in which Mengloth dwells, sees Svipdag coming and stops him with the customary threats. The assignment of the [fp. 240] speeches in stanzas 17-20, in the absence of any indications in the manuscripts, is more or less guesswork.]

 [p. 240]

 Fjolsvith spake:
 "Greeting full fair | thou never shalt find,
 So hence shalt thou get thee home.

20. "Fjolsvith am I, | and wise am I found,
 But miserly am I with meat;
 Thou never shalt enter | within the house,--
 Go forth like a wolf on thy way!"

 Svipdag spake:
 21. "Few from the joy | of their eyes will go forth,
 When the sight of their loves they seek;
 Full bright are the gates | of the golden hall,
 And a home shall I here enjoy."

 Fjolsvith spake:
 22. "Tell me now, fellow, | what father thou hast,
 And the kindred of whom thou camst."

 Svipdag spake:
 "Vindkald am I, | and Varkald's son,
 And Fjolkald his father was.

23. "Now answer me, Fjolsvith, | the question I ask,
 For now the truth would I know:

 [22. Vindkald ("Wind-Cold"), Varkald ("Cold of Early Spring') and Fjolkald ("Much Cold"): Svipdag apparently seeks to persuade Fjolsvith that he belongs to the frost giants.]

 [p. 241]

Who is it that holds | and has for his own
 The rule of the hall so rich?"

 Fjolsvith spake:
 224. "Mengloth is she, | her mother bore her
 To the son of Svafrthorin;
 She is it that holds | and has for her own
 The rule of the hall so rich."

 Svipdag spake:
 25. "Now answer me, Fjolsvith, | the question I ask,
 For now the truth would I know:
 What call they the gate? | for among the gods
 Ne'er saw man so grim a sight."

 Fjolsvith spake:
 26. "Thrymgjol they call it; | 'twas made by the three,
 The sons of Solblindi;
 And fast as a fetter | the farer it holds,
 Whoever shall lift the latch."

 Svipdag spake:
 27. "Now answer me, Fjolsvith, | the question I ask,
 For now the truth would I know:

 [24. Svafrthorin: who he was, or what his name means, or who his son was, are all unknown.

26. Thrymgjol ("Loud-Clanging"): this gate, like the gate of the dead, shuts so fast as to trap those who attempt to use it (cf. Sigurtharkvitha en skamma, 68 and note). it was made by the dwarfs, sons of Solblindi ("Sun-Blinded"), the traditional crafts men, who could not endure the light of day.]

 [p. 242]

What call they the house? | for no man beheld
 'Mongst the gods so grim a sight."

 Fjolsvith spake:
 28. "Gastropnir is it, | of old I made it
 From the limbs of Leirbrimir;
 I braced it so strongly | that fast it shall stand
 So long as the world shall last."

 Svipdag spake:
 29. "Now answer me, Fjolsvith, | the question I ask,
 For now the truth would I know:
 What call they the tree | that casts abroad
 Its limbs o'er every land?"

 Fjolsvith spake:
 30. "Mimameith its name, | and no man knows
 What root beneath it runs;
 And few can guess | what shall fell the tree,
 For fire nor iron shall fell it."

 Svipdag spake:
 31. "Now answer me, Fjolsvith, | the question I ask,
 For now the truth would I know:

 [28. Gastropnir: "quest-Crusher." Leirbrimir's ("Clay-Giant's") limbs: a poetic circumlocution for "clay"; cf. the description of the making of earth from the body of the giant Ymir, Vafthruthnismol, 21.

30. Mimameith ("Mimir's Tree"): the ash Yggdrasil, that overshadows the whole world. The well of Mimir was situated at its base; Cf. Voluspo, 27-29.]

 [p. 243]

What grows from the seed | of the tree so great,
 That fire nor iron shall fell?"

 Fjolsvith spake:
 32. "Women, sick | with child, shall seek
 Its fruit to the flames to bear;
 Then out shall come | what within was hid,
 And so is it mighty with men."

 Svipdag spake:
 33. "Now answer me, Fjolsvith, | the question I ask,
 For now the truth would I know:
 What cock is he | on the highest bough,
 That glitters all with gold?"

 Fjolsvith spake:
 34. "Vithofnir his name, | and now he shines
 Like lightning on Mimameith's limbs;
 And great is the trouble | with which he grieves
 Both Surt and Sinmora."

 [32. Gering suggests that two stanzas have been lost between stanzas 15 and 16, but the giant's answer fits the question quite well enough. The fruit of Yggdrasil, when cooked, is here assumed to have the power of assuring safe childbirth.

34. Vithofnir ("Tree-Snake"): apparently identical with either the cock Gollinkambi (cf. Voluspo, 43) or Fjalar (cf. Voluspo, 42), the former of which wakes the gods to battle, and the latter the giants. Surt: the giant mentioned in Voluspo, 52, as ruler of the fire-world; here used to represent the giants in general, who are constantly in terror of the cock's eternal watchfulness. Sinmora: presumably Surt's wife, the giantess who possesses the weapon by which alone the cock Vithofnir may be slain.]

 [p. 244]

 Svipdag spake:
 35. "Now answer me, Fjolsvith, | the question I ask,
 For now the truth would I know:
 What call they the hounds, | that before the house
 So fierce and angry are?"

 Fjolsvith spake:
 36. "Gif call they one, | and Geri the other,
 If now the truth thou wouldst know;
 Great they are, | and their might will grow,
 Till the gods to death are doomed."

 Svipdag spake:
 37. "Now answer me, Fjolsvith, | the question I ask,
 For now the truth would I know:
 May no man hope | the house to enter,
 While the hungry hounds are sleeping?"

 Fjolsvith spake:
 38. "Together they sleep not, | for so was it fixed
 When the guard to them was given;
 One sleeps by night, | the next by day,
 So no man may enter ever."

 Svipdag spake:
 39, "Now answer me, Fjolsvith, | the question I ask,
 For now the truth would I know:

 [35. The last two lines have been variously emended.

36. Gif and Geri: both names signify "Greedy." The first part of line 3 is conjectural; the manuscripts indicate the word "eleven," which clearly fails to make sense.]

 [p. 245]

Is there no meat | that men may give them,
 And leap within while they eat?"

 Fjolsvith spake:
 40. "Two wing-joints there be | in Vithofnir's body,
 If now the truth thou wouldst know;
 That alone is the meat | that men may give them,
 And leap within while they eat."

 Svipdag spake:
 41. "Now answer me, Fjolsvith, | the question I ask,
 For now the truth would I know:
 What weapon can send | Vithofnir to seek
 The house of Hel below?"

 Fjolsvith spake:
 42. "Laevatein is there, | that Lopt with runes
 Once made by the doors of death;
 In Laegjarn's chest | by Sinmora lies it,
 And nine locks fasten it firm."

 Svipdag spake:
 43. "Now answer me, Fjolsvith, | the question I ask,
 For now the truth would I know:
 May a man come thence, | who thither goes,
 And tries the sword to take?"

 [42. Laevetein ("Wounding Wand"): the manuscripts differ as to the form of this name. The suggestion that the reference is to the mistletoe with which Baldr was killed seems hardly reason able. Lopt: Loki. Laegjarn ("Lover of Ill"): Loki; cf. Voluspo, 35, [fp. 246] where the term appears as an adjective applied to Loki. This is Falk's emendation for the manuscripts' "Saegjarn," meaning "Sea Lover." Sinmora: cf. stanza 34.]

 [p. 246]

 Fjolsvith spake:
 44. "Thence may he come | who thither goes,
 And tries the sword to take,
 If with him he carries | what few can win,
 To give to the goddess of gold."

 Svipdag spake:
 45. "Now answer me, Fjolsvith, | the question I ask,
 For now the truth would I know:
 What treasure is there | that men may take
 To rejoice the giantess pale?"

 Fjolsvith spake:
 46. "The sickle bright | in thy wallet bear,
 Mid Vithofnir's feathers found;
 To Sinmora give it, | and then shall she grant
 That the weapon by thee be won."

 Svipdag spake:
 47. "Now answer me, Fjolsvith, | the question I ask,
 For now the truth would I know:
 What call they the hall, | encompassed here
 With flickering magic flames?"

 [44. Goddess of gold: poetic circumlocution for "woman," here meaning Sinmora.

46. Sickle: i.e., tail feather. With this the circle of impossibilities is completed. To get past the dogs, they must be fed with the wing-joints of the cock Vithofnir; the cock can be killed only [fp. 247] with the sword in Sinmora's possession, and Sinmora will give up the sword only in return for the tail feather of the cock.]

 [p. 247]

 Fjolsvith spake:
 48. "Lyr is it called, | and long it shall
 On the tip of a spear-point tremble;
 Of the noble house | mankind has heard,
 But more has it never known."

 Svipdag spake:
 49. "Now answer me, Fjolsvith, | the question I ask,
 For now the truth would I know:
 What one of the gods | has made so great
 The hall I behold within?"

 Fjolsvith spake:
 50. "Uni and Iri, | Bari and Jari,
 Var and Vegdrasil,
 Dori and Ori, | Delling, and there
 Was Loki, the fear of the folk."

 [48. Lyr ("Heat-Holding"): just what the spear-point reference means is not altogether clear. Presumably it refers to the way in which the glowing brightness of the lofty hall makes it seem to quiver and turn in the air, but the tradition, never baffled by physical laws, may have actually balanced the whole building on a single point to add to the difficulties of entrance.

50. Loki, the one god named, was the builder of the hall, with the aid of the nine dwarfs. Jari, Dori, and Ori appear in the Voluspo catalogue of the dwarfs (stanzas 13 and 15); Delling appears in Hovamol, 161, and Vafthruthnismol, 25, in the latter case, however, the name quite possibly referring to some one else. The other dwarfs' names do not appear elsewhere. The manuscripts differ as to the forms of many of these names.]

 [p. 248]

 Svipdag spake:
 51. "Now answer me, Fjolsvith, | the question I ask,
 For now the truth would I know:
 What call they the mountain | on which the maid
 Is lying so lovely to see?"

 Fjolsvith spake:
 52. "Lyfjaberg is it, | and long shall it be
 A joy to the sick and the sore;
 For well shall grow | each woman who climbs it,
 Though sick full long she has lain."

 Svipdag spake:
 53. "Now answer me, Fjolsvith, | the question I ask,
 For now the truth would I know:
 What maidens are they | that at Mengloth's knees
 Are sitting so gladly together?"

 Fjolsvith spake:
 54. "Hlif is one named, | Hlifthrasa another,
 Thjothvara call they the third;

 [52. Lyfjaberg ("Hill of Healing"): the manuscripts vary as to this name; I have followed Bugge's suggestion. This stanza implies that Mengloth is a goddess of healing, and hence, per haps, an hypostasis of Frigg, as already intimated by her name (cf. stanza 3, note). In stanza 54 Eir appears as one of Mengloth's handmaidens, and Eir, according to Snorri (Gylfaginning, 35) is herself the Norse Hygeia. Compare this stanza with stanza 32.

54. The manuscripts and editions show many variations in these names. They may be approximately rendered thus: Helper, Help-Breather, Folk-Guardian, Shining, White, Blithe, Peaceful, Kindly (?), and Gold-Giver.]

 [p. 249]

Bjort and Bleik, | Blith and Frith,
 Eir and Aurbotha."

 Svipdag spake:
 55. "Now answer me, Fjolsvith, | the question I ask,
 For now the truth would I know:
 Aid bring they to all | who offerings give,
 If need be found therefor?"

 Fjolsvith spake:
 56. "Soon aid they all | who offerings give
 On the holy altars high;
 And if danger they see | for the sons of men,
 Then each from ill do they guard."

 Svipdag spake:
 57. "Now answer me, Fjolsvith, | the question I ask,
 For now the truth would I know:
 Lives there the man | who in Mengloth's arms
 So fair may seek to sleep?"

 Fjolsvith spake:
 58. "No man there is | who in Mengloth's arms
 So fair may seek to sleep,
 Save Svipdag alone, | for the sun-bright maid
 Is destined his bride to be."

 [55. One of the manuscripts omits stanzas 55 and 56.

56. The first line is based on a conjectural emendation.]

 [p. 250]

 Svipdag spake:
 59. "Fling back the gates! | make the gateway wide!
 Here mayst thou Svipdag see!
 Hence get thee to find | if gladness soon
 Mengloth to me will give."

 Fjolsvith spake:
 60. "Hearken, Mengloth, | a man is come;
 Go thou the guest to see!
 The hounds are fawning, | the house bursts open,--
 Svipdag, methinks, is there."

 Mengloth spake:
 61. "On the gallows high | shall hungry ravens
 Soon thine eyes pluck out,
 If thou liest in saying | that here at last
 The hero is come to my hall.

62. "Whence camest thou hither? | how camest thou here?
 What name do thy kinsmen call thee?
 Thy race and thy name | as a sign must I know,
 That thy bride I am destined to be."

 Svipdag spake:
 63. "Svipdag am I, | and Solbjart's son;
 Thence came I by wind-cold ways;

 [63. Solbjart ("Sun-B right"): not elsewhere mentioned. The words of Urth: i.e., the decrees of fate; cf. stanza 7.]

 [p. 251]

With the words of Urth | shall no man war,
 Though unearned her gifts be given."

 Mengloth spake:
 64. "Welcome thou art, | for long have I waited;
 The welcoming kiss shalt thou win!
 For two who love | is the longed-for meeting
 The greatest gladness of all.

65. "Long have I sat | on Lyfjaberg here,
 Awaiting thee day by day;
 And now I have | what I ever hoped,
 For here thou art come to my hall.

66. "Alike we yearned; | I longed for thee,
 And thou for my love hast longed;
 But now henceforth | together we know
 Our lives to the end we shall live."

 [65. Lyfjaberg cf. stanza 52 and note.]

 
      
The Poetic Edda, by Henry Adams Bellows, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 252]

 

THE POETIC EDDA

 

VOLUME II

 

LAYS OF THE HEROES

 

VOLUNDARKVITHA

 

The Lay of Volund

 

INTRODUCTORY NOTE

Between the Thrymskvitha and the Alvissmol in the Codex Regius stands the Volundarkvitha. It was also included in the Arnamagnaean Codex, but unluckily it begins at the very end of the fragment which has been preserved, and thus only a few lines of the opening prose remain. This is doubly regrettable because the text in Regius is unquestionably in very bad shape, and the other manuscript would doubtless have been of great assistance in the reconstruction of the poem.

There has been a vast amount written regarding the Weland tradition as a whole, discussing particularly the relations between the Volundarkvitha and the Weland passage in Deor's Lament. There can be little question that the story came to the North from Saxon regions, along with many of the other early hero tales. In stanza 16 the Rhine is specifically mentioned as the home of treasure; and the presence of the story in Anglo-Saxon poetry probably as early as the first part of the eighth century proves beyond a doubt that the legend cannot have been a native product of Scandinavia. In one form or another, however, the legend of the smith persisted for centuries throughout all the Teutonic lands, and the name of Wayland Smith is familiar to all readers of Walter Scott, and even of Rudyard Kipling's tales of England.

In what form this story reached the North is uncertain. Sundry striking parallels between the diction of the Volundarkvitha and that of the Weland passage in Deor's Lament make it distinctly probable that a Saxon song on this subject had found its way to Scandinavia or Iceland. But the prose introduction to the poem mentions the "old sagas" in which Volund was celebrated, and in the Thithrekssaga we have definite evidence of the existence of such prose narrative in the form of the Velentssaga (Velent, Volund, Weland, and Wayland all being, of course, identical), which gives a long story for which the Volundarkvitha can have supplied relatively little, if any, of the material. It is probable, then, that Weland stories were current in both prose and verse in Scandinavia as early as the latter part of the ninth century.

[p. 253]

Once let a figure become popular in oral tradition, and the number and variety of the incidents connected with his name will increase very rapidly. Doubtless there were scores of Weland stories current in the eighth, ninth, and tenth centuries, many of them with very little if any traditional authority. The main one, however, the story of the laming of the smith by King Nithuth (or by some other enemy) and of Weland's terrible revenge, forms the basis of the Volundarkvitha. To this, by way of introduction, has been added the story of Volund and the wan-maiden, who, to make things even more complex, is likewise aid to be a Valkyrie. Some critics maintain that these two sections were originally two distinct poems, merely strung together by the compiler with the help of narrative prose links; but the poem as a whole has a kind of dramatic unity which suggests rather that an early poet--for linguistically the poem belongs among the oldest of the Eddic collection--used two distinct legends, whether in prose or verse, as the basis for the composition of a new and homogeneous poem.

The swan-maiden story appears, of course, in many places quite distinct from the Weland tradition, and, in another form, became one of the most popular of German folk tales. Like the story of Weland, however, it is of German rather than Scandinavian origin, and the identification of the swan-maidens as Valkyries, which may have taken place before the legend reached the North, may, on the other hand, have been simply an attempt to connect southern tradition with figures well known in northern mythology.

The Volundarkvitha is full of prose narrative links, including an introduction. The nature of such prose links has already been discussed in the introductory note to the Grimnismol; the Volundarkvitha is a striking illustration of the way in which the function of the earlier Eddic verse was limited chiefly to dialogue or description, the narrative outline being provided, if at all, in prose. This prose was put in by each reciter according to his fancy and knowledge, and his estimate of his hearers' need for such explanations; some of it, as in this instance, eventually found its way into the written record.

The manuscript of the Volundarkvitha is in such bad shape, and the conjectural emendations have been so numerous, that in the notes I have attempted to record only the most important of them.

[p. 254]

There was a king in Sweden named Nithuth. He had two sons and one daughter; her name was Bothvild. There were three brothers, sons of a king of the Finns: one was called Slagfith, another Egil, the third Volund. They went on snowshoes and hunted wild beasts. They came into Ulfdalir and there they built themselves a house; there was a lake there which is called Ulfsjar. Early one morning they found on the shore of the lake three women, who were spinning flax. Near them were their swan garments, for they were Valkyries. Two of them were daughters of King Hlothver, Hlathguth the Swan-White and Hervor the All-Wise, and the third was Olrun, daughter of Kjar from Valland. These did they bring

 [Prose. Nithuth ("Bitter Hater"): here identified as a king of Sweden, is in the poem (stanzas 9, 15 and 32) called lord of the Njars, which may refer to the people of the Swedish district of Nerike. In any case, the scene of the story has moved from Saxon lands into the Northeast. The first and last sentences of the introduction refer to the second part of the poem; the rest of it concerns the swan-maidens episode. Bothvild ("Warlike Maid"): Volund's victim in the latter part of the poem. King of the Finns: this notion, clearly later than the poem, which calls Volund an elf, may perhaps be ascribed to the annotator who composed the prose introduction. The Finns, meaning the dwellers in Lapland, were generally credited with magic powers. Egil appears in the Thithrekssaga as Volund's brother, but Slagfith is not elsewhere mentioned. Ulfdalir ("Wolf-Dale"), Ulfsjar ("Wolf-Sea"), Valland ("Slaughter-Land"): mythical, places without historical identification. Valkyries: cf. Voluspo, 31 and note; there is nothing in the poem to identify the three swan maidens as Valkyries except one obscure word in line 2 of stanza 1 and again in line 5 of stanza 5, which may mean, as Gering translates it, "helmed," or else "fair and wise." I suspect that the annotator, anxious to give the Saxon legend as much northern local color as possible, was mistaken in his mythology, and that [fp. 255] the poet never conceived of his swan-maidens as Valkyries at all. However, this identification of swan-maidens with Valkyries was not uncommon; cf. Helreith Brynhildar, 7. The three maidens' names, Hlathguth, Hervor, and Olrun, do not appear in the lists of Valkyries. King Hlothver: this name suggests the southern origin of the story, as it is the northern form of Ludwig; the name appears again in Guthrunarkvitha II, 26, and that of Kjar is found in Atlakvitha, 7, both of these poems being based on German stories. It is worth noting that the composer of this introductory note seems to have had little or no information beyond what was actually contained in the poem as it has come down to us; he refers to the "old stories" about Volund, but either he was unfamiliar with them in detail or else he thought it needless to make use of them. His note simply puts in clear and connected form what the verse tells somewhat obscurely; his only additions are making Nithuth a king of Sweden and Volund's father a king of the Finns, supplying the name Ulfsjar for the lake, identifying the swan-maidens as Valkyries, and giving Kjar a home in Valland.]

 [p. 255]

home to their hall with them. Egil took Olrun, and Slagfith Swan-White, and Volund All-Wise. There they dwelt seven winters; but then they flew away to find battles, and came back no more. Then Egil set forth on his snowshoes to follow Olrun, and Slagfith followed Swan White, but Volund stayed in Ulfdalir. He was a most skillful man, as men know from old tales. King Nithuth had him taken by force, as the poem here tells.

1. Maids from the south | through Myrkwood flew,
 Fair and young, | their fate to follow;
 On the shore of the sea | to rest them they sat,
 The maids of the south, | and flax they spun.

 [1. The manuscript indicates line 3 as the beginning of a stanza; two lines may have been lost before or after lines 1-2, [fp. 256] and two more, or even six, with the additional stanza describing the theft of the swan-garments, after line 4. Myrkwood: a stock name for a magic, dark forest; cf. Lokasenna, 42.]

 [p. 256]

2. .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 Hlathguth and Hervor, | Hlothver's children,
 And Olrun the Wise | Kjar's daughter was.

3. .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 One in her arms | took Egil then
 To her bosom white, | the woman fair.

4. Swan-White second,-- | swan-feathers she wore,
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 And her arms the third | of the sisters threw
 Next round Volund's | neck so white.

5. There did they sit | for seven winters,
 In the eighth at last | came their longing again,
 (And in the ninth | did need divide them).
 The maidens yearned | for the murky wood,
 The fair young maids, | their fate to follow.

 [2. In the manuscript these two lines stand after stanza 16; editors have tried to fit them into various places, but the prose indicates that they belong here, with a gap assumed.

3. In the manuscript these two lines follow stanza 1, with no gap indicated, and the first line marked as the beginning of a stanza. Many editors have combined them with stanza 4.

4. No lacuna indicated in the manuscript; one editor fills the stanza out with a second line running: "Then to her breast Slagfith embraced."

5. Line 3 looks like an interpolation, but line 5, identical with line 2 of stanza 1, may be the superfluous one.]

 [p. 257]

6. Volund home | from his hunting came,
 From a weary way, | the weather-wise bowman,
 Slagfith and Egil | the hall found empty,
 Out and in went they, | everywhere seeking.

7. East fared Egil | after Olrun,
 And Slagfith south | to seek for Swan-White;
 Volund alone | in Ulfdalir lay,
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .

8. Red gold he fashioned | with fairest gems,
 And rings he strung | on ropes of bast;
 So for his wife | he waited long,
 If the fair one home | might come to him.

9. This Nithuth learned, | the lord of the Njars,
 That Volund alone | in Ulfdalir lay;

 [6. The phrase "Volund home from a weary way" is an emendation of Bugge's, accepted by many editors. Some of those who do not include it reject line 4, and combine the remainder of the stanza with all or part of stanza 7.

7. The manuscript marks the second, and not the first, line as the beginning of a stanza. Some editors combine lines 2-3 with all or part of stanza 8. No gap is indicated in the manuscript, but many editors have assumed one, some of them accepting Bugge's suggested "Till back the maiden bright should come."

8. No line in this stanza is indicated in the manuscript as be ginning a new stanza; editors have tried all sorts of experiments in regrouping the lines into stanzas with those of stanzas 7 and 9. In line 3 the word long is sheer guesswork, as the line in the manuscript contains a metrical error.

9. Some editors combine the first two lines with parts of stanza 8, and the last two with the first half of stanza 10. Njars: [fp. 258] there has been much, and inconclusive, discussion as to what this name means; probably it applies to a semi-mythical people somewhere vaguely in "the East."]

 [p. 258]

By night went his men, | their mail-coats were studded,
 Their shields in the waning | moonlight shone.

10. From their saddles the gable | wall they sought,
 And in they went | at the end of the hall;
 Rings they saw there | on ropes of bast,
 Seven hundred | the hero had.

11. Off they took them, | but all they left
 Save one alone | which they bore away.
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .

12. Volund home | from his hunting came,
 From a weary way, | the weather-wise bowman;
 A brown bear's flesh | would he roast with fire;
 Soon the wood so dry | was burning well,
 (The wind-dried wood | that Volund's was).

 [10. Some editors combine lines 3-4 with the fragmentary stanza 11.

11. No gap indicated in the manuscript; some editors combine these lines with lines 3-4 of stanza to, while others combine them with the first two lines of stanza 12. The one ring which Nithuth's men steal is given to Bothvild, and proves the cause of her undoing.

12. The manuscript indicates line 3, and not line 1, as the beginning of a stanza, which has given rise to a large amount of conjectural rearrangement. Line 2 of the original is identical with the phrase added by Bugge in stanza 6. Line 5 may be [fp. 259] spurious, or lines 4-5 may have been expanded out of a single line running "The wind-dried wood for | Volund burned well."]

 [p. 259]

13. On the bearskin he rested, | and counted the rings,
 The master of elves, | but one he missed;
 That Hlothver's daughter | had it he thought,
 And the all-wise maid | had come once more.

14. So long he sat | that he fell asleep,
 His waking empty | of gladness was;
 Heavy chains | he saw on his hands,
 And fetters bound | his feet together.

 Volund spake:
 15. "What men are they | who thus have laid
 Ropes of bast | to bind me now?"

Then Nithuth called, | the lord of the Njars:
 "How gottest thou, Volund, | greatest of elves,
 These treasures of ours | in Ulfdalir?"

 Volund spake:
 16. "The gold was not | on Grani's way,

 [13. Elves: the poem here identifies Volund as belonging to the race of the elves. Hlothver's daughter: Hervor; many editors treat the adjective "all-wise" here as a proper name.

15. In this poem the manuscript indicates the speakers. Some editors make lines 1-2 into a separate stanza, linking lines 3-5 (or 4-5) with stanza 16. Line 3 is very possibly spurious, a mere expansion of "Nithuth spake." Nithuth, of course, has come with his men to capture Volund, and now charges him with having stolen his treasure.

16. The manuscript definitely assigns this stanza to Volund, but many editors give the first two lines to Nithuth. In the manuscript [fp. 260] stanza 16 is followed by the two lines of stanza 2, and many editions make of lines 3-4 of stanza 16 and stanza 2 a single speech by Volund. Grani's way: Grani was Sigurth's horse, on which he rode to slay Fafnir and win Andvari's hoard; this and the reference to the Rhine as the home of wealth betray the southern source of the story. If lines 1-2 belong to Volund, they mean that Nithuth got his wealth in the Rhine country, and that Volund's hoard has nothing to do with it; if the speaker is Nithuth, they mean that Volund presumably has not killed a dragon, and that he is far from the wealth of the Rhine, so that he must have stolen his treasure from Nithuth himself.]

 [p. 260]

Far, methinks, is our realm | from the hills of the Rhine;
 I mind me that treasures | more we had
 When happy together | at home we were."

17. Without stood the wife | of Nithuth wise,
 And in she came | from the end of the hall;
 On the floor she stood, | and softly spoke:
 "Not kind does he look | who comes from the wood."

King Nithuth gave to his daughter Bothvild the gold ring that he had taken from the bast rope in Volund's

 [17. Line 1 is lacking in the manuscript, lines 2-4 following immediately after the two lines here given as stanza 2. Line 1, borrowed from line I of stanza 32, is placed here by many editors, following Bugge's suggestion. Certainly it is Nithuth's wife who utters line 4. Who comes from the wood: Volund, noted as a hunter. Gering assumes that with the entrance of Nithuth's wife the scene has changed from Volund's house to Nithuth's, but I cannot see that this is necessary.

 Prose. The annotator inserted this note rather clumsily in the midst of the speech of Nithuth's wife.]

 [p. 261]

house, and he himself wore the sword that Volund had had. The queen spake:

18. "The glow of his eyes | is like gleaming snakes,
 His teeth he gnashes | if now is shown
 The sword, or Bothvild's | ring he sees;
 Let them straightway cut | his sinews of strength,
 And set him then | in Saevarstath."

So was it done: the sinews in his knee-joints were cut, and he was set in an island which was near the mainland, and was called Saevarstath. There he smithied for the king all kinds of precious things. No man dared to go to him, save only the king himself. Volund spake:

19. "At Nithuth's girdle | gleams the sword
 That I sharpened keen | with cunningest craft,
 (And hardened the steel | with highest skill;)
 The bright blade far | forever is borne,
 (Nor back shall I see it | borne to my smithy;)
 Now Bothvild gets | the golden ring
 (That was once my bride's,-- | ne'er well shall it be.)"

 [18. In the manuscript lines 2-3 stand before line 1; many editors have made the transposition here indicated. Some editors reject line 3 as spurious. Saevarstath: "Sea-Stead."

19. This stanza is obviously in bad shape. Vigfusson makes two stanzas of it by adding a first line: "Then did Volund speak, | sagest of elves." Editors have rejected various lines, and some have regrouped the last lines with the first two of [fp. 262] stanza 20. The elimination of the passages in parenthesis produces a four-line stanza which is metrically correct, but it has little more than guesswork to support it.]

 [p. 262]

20. He sat, nor slept, | and smote with his hammer,
 Fast for Nithuth | wonders he fashioned;
 Two boys did go | in his door to gaze,
 Nithuth's sons, | into Saevarstath.

21. They came to the chest, | and they craved the keys,
 The evil was open | when in they looked;
 To the boys it seemed | that gems they saw,
 Gold in plenty | and precious stones.

 Volund spake:
 22. "Come ye alone, | the next day come,
 Gold to you both | shall then be given;
 Tell not the maids | or the men of the hall,
 To no one say | that me you have sought."

 [20. The editions vary radically in combining the lines of this stanza with those of stanzas 19 and 21, particularly as the manuscript indicates the third line as the beginning of a stanza. The meaning, however, remains unchanged.

211. Several editions make one stanza out of lines 1-4 of stanza 20 and lines 1-2 of stanza 21, and another out of the next four lines. The evil was open: i.e., the gold in the chest was destined to be their undoing.

22. The manuscript indicates line 3 as the beginning of a stanza, and several editors have adopted this grouping. In the Thithrekssaga Volund sends the boys away with instructions not to come back until just after a fall of snow, and then to approach his dwelling walking backward. The boys do this, and when, after he has killed them, Volund is questioned regarding them, he points to the tracks in the snow as evidence that they had left his house.]

 [p. 263]

23. .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 Early did brother | to brother call:
 "Swift let us go | the rings to see."

24. They came to the chest, | and they craved the keys,
 The evil was open | when in they looked;
 He smote off their heads, | and their feet he hid
 Under the sooty | straps of the bellows.

25. Their skulls, once hid | by their hair, he took,
 Set them in silver | and sent them to Nithuth;
 Gems full fair | from their eyes he fashioned,
 To Nithuth's wife | so wise he gave them.

26. And from the teeth | of the twain he wrought
 A brooch for the breast, | to Bothvild he sent it;
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .

27. Bothvild then | of her ring did boast,
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .

 [23. No gap indicated in the manuscript. Some editors assume it, as here; some group the lines with lines 3-4 of stanza 22, and some with lines 1-2 of stanza 24.

24. Some editions begin a new stanza with line 3.

25. The manuscript indicates line 3 as the beginning of a stanza, and many editors have adopted this grouping.

26. These two lines have been grouped in various ways, either with lines 3-4 of stanza 25 or with the fragmentary stanza 27 No gap is indicated in the manuscript, but the loss of something is so obvious that practically all editors have noted it, although they have differed as to the number of lines lost.

27. No gap indicated in the manuscript; the line and a half [fp. 263] might be filled out (partly with the aid of late paper manuscripts) thus: "But soon it broke, | and swiftly to Volund / She bore it and said--"]

 [p. 264]

.    .    .    .    . | "The ring I have broken,
 I dare not say it | save to thee."

 Volund spake:
 28. 'I shall weld the break | in the gold so well
 That fairer than ever | thy father shall find it,
 And better much | thy mother shall think it,
 And thou no worse | than ever it was."

29. Beer he brought, | he was better in cunning,
 Until in her seat | full soon she slept.

 Volund spake:
 "Now vengeance I have | for all my hurts,
 Save one alone, | on the evil woman."

30. .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 Quoth Volund: "Would | that well were the sinews
 Maimed in my feet | by Nithuth's men."

 [29. The manuscript does not name Volund as the speaker before line 3; Vigfusson again inserts his convenient line, "Then Volund spake, sagest of elves." A few editions combine lines 3-4 with the two lines of stanza 30.

30. No gap indicated in the manuscript; some editors combine the two lines with lines 3-4 of stanza 29, and many with the three lines of stanza 31.]

 [p. 265]

31. Laughing Volund | rose aloft,
 Weeping Bothvild | went from the isle,
 For her lover's flight | and her father's wrath.

32. Without stood the wife | of Nithuth wise,
 And in she came | from the end of the hall;
 But he by the wall | in weariness sat:
 "Wakest thou, Nithuth, | lord of the Njars?"

 Nithuth spake:
 33. "Always I wake, | and ever joyless,
 Little I sleep | since my sons were slain;
 Cold is my head, | cold was thy counsel,
 One thing, with Volund | to speak, I wish.

34. .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .

 [31. Something has probably been lost before this stanza, explaining how Volund made himself wings, as otherwise, owing to his lameness, he could not leave the island. The Thithrekssaga tells the story of how Volund's brother, Egil, shot birds and gave him the feathers, out of which he made a feather-garment. This break in the narrative illustrates the lack of knowledge apparently possessed by the compiler who was responsible for the prose notes; had he known the story told in the Thithrekssaga, it is hardly conceivable that he would have failed to indicate the necessary connecting link at this point. Some editors reject line 3 as spurious. The manuscript does not indicate any lacuna.

32. The manuscript indicates line 4 as the beginning of a stanza, and many editors have followed this arrangement.

33. The manuscript does not name the speaker. It indicates line 3 as the beginning of a new stanza. Vigfusson adds before line 1, "Then spake Nithuth, lord of the Njars."

34. No gap indicated in the manuscript, but it seems clear [fp. 266] that something has been lost. Some editors combine these two lines with lines 3-4 of stanza 33. Volund is now flying over Nithuth's hall.]

 [p. 266]

"Answer me, Volund, | greatest of elves,
 What happed with my boys | that hale once were?"

 Volund spake:
 35. "First shalt thou all | the oaths now swear,
 By the rail of ship, | and the rim of shield,
 By the shoulder of steed, | and the edge of sword,
 That to Volund's wife | thou wilt work no ill,
 Nor yet my bride | to her death wilt bring,
 Though a wife I should have | that well thou knowest,
 And a child I should have | within thy hall.

36. "Seek the smithy | that thou didst set,
 Thou shalt find the bellows | sprinkled with blood;
 I smote off the heads | of both thy sons,
 And their feet 'neath the sooty | straps I hid.

37. "Their skulls, once hid | by their hair, I took,
 Set them in silver | and sent them to Nithuth;

 [35. The manuscript does not name the speaker; Vigfusson again makes two full stanzas with the line, "Then did Volund speak, sagest of elves." Some editors begin a new stanza with line 4, while others reject as interpolations lines 2-3 or 5-7. Volund's wife: the reference is to Bothvild, as Volund wishes to have his vengeance fall more heavily on her father than on her.

36. Lines 3-4 are nearly identical with lines 3-4 of stanza 24.

37. Identical, except for the pronouns, with stanza 25.]

 [p. 267]

Gems full fair | from their eyes I fashioned,
 To Nithuth's wife | so wise I gave them.

38. "And from the teeth | of the twain I wrought
 A brooch for the breast, | to Bothvild I gave it;
 Now big with child | does Bothvild go,
 The only daughter | ye two had ever."

 Nithuth spake:
 39. "Never spakest thou word | that worse could hurt me,
 Nor that made me, Volund, | more bitter for vengeance;
 There is no man so high | from thy horse to take thee,
 Or so doughty an archer | as down to shoot thee,
 While high in the clouds | thy course thou takest."

40. Laughing Volund | rose aloft,
 But left in sadness | Nithuth sat.
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .

 [38. Lines 1-2: Cf. stanza 26.

39. The manuscript does not name the speaker. Either line 4 or line 5 may be an interpolation; two editions reject lines 3-5, combining lines 1-2 with stanza 40. In the Thithrekssaga Nithuth actually compels Egil, Volund's brother, to shoot at Volund. The latter has concealed a bladder full of blood under his left arm, and when his brother's arrow pierces this, Nithuth assumes that his enemy has been killed. This episode likewise appears among the scenes from Volund's career rudely carved on an ancient casket of ivory, bearing an Anglo-Saxon inscription in runic letters, which has been preserved.

40. Line 1: cf. stanza 3 1. The manuscript indicates no lacuna.]

 [p. 268]

41. Then spake Nithuth, | lord of the Njars:
 "Rise up, Thakkrath, | best of my thralls,
 Bid Bothvild come, | the bright-browed maid,
 Bedecked so fair, | with her father to speak."

42. .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 "Is it true, Bothvild, | that which was told me;
 Once in the isle | with Volund wert thou?"

 Bothvild spake:
 43. "True is it, Nithuth, | that which was told thee,
 Once in the isle | with Volund was I,
 An hour of lust, | alas it should be!
 Nought was my might | with such a man,
 Nor from his strength | could I save myself."

 [41. The first line is a conjectural addition. Thakkrath is probably the northern form of the Middle High German name Dancrat.

42. The manuscript indicates no gap, but indicates line 3 as the beginning of a stanza; Vigfusson's added "Then Nithuth spake, lord of the Njars" seems plausible enough.

43. The manuscript does not name the speaker. Different editors have rejected one or another of the last three lines, and as the manuscript indicates line 4 as the beginning of a new stanza, the loss of two or three lines has likewise been suggested. According to the Thithrekssaga, the son of Volund and Bothvild was Vithga, or Witege, one of the heroes of Dietrich of Bern.]

 
      
The Poetic Edda, by Henry Adams Bellows, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 269]

 

HELGAKVITHA HJORVARTHSSONAR

 

The Lay of Helgi the Son of Hjorvarth

 

INTRODUCTORY NOTE

The three Helgi lays, all found in the Codex Regius, have been the subjects of a vast amount of discussion, in spite of which many of the facts regarding them are still very far from settled. It is, indeed, scarcely possible to make any unqualified statement regarding these three poems for which a flat contradiction cannot be found in the writings of some scholar of distinction. The origin of the Helgi tradition, its connection with that of Sigurth, the authorship, date and home of the poems, the degree to which they have been altered from their original forms, the status of the composer of the copious prose notes: these and many other allied questions have been and probably always will be matters of dispute among students of the Edda's history.

Without attempting to enter into the discussion in detail, certain theories should be noted. Helgi appears originally to have been a Danish popular hero, the son of King Halfdan. Saxo Grammaticus has a good deal to say about him in that capacity, and it has been pointed out that many of the place names in the Helgi lays can be pretty clearly identified with parts of Denmark and neighboring stretches of the Baltic. The Danish Helgi, according to Saxo, was famed as the conqueror of Hunding and Hothbrodd, the latter as the result of a naval expedition at the head of a considerable fleet.

From Denmark the story appears to have spread northward into Norway and westward into the Norse settlements among the islands. Not many of its original features remained, and new ones were added here and there, particularly with regard to Helgi's love affair with Sigrun. The victories over Hunding and Hothbrodd, however, were generally retained, and out of material relating to these two fights, and to the Helgi-Sigrun story, were fashioned the two lays of Helgi Hundingsbane.

How the Helgi legend became involved with that of the Volsungs is an open question. Both stories travelled from the South, and presumably about the same time, so it is not unnatural

[p. 270]

that some confusion should have arisen. At no time, however, was the connection particularly close so far as the actual episodes of the two stories were concerned. In the two lays of Helgi Hundingsbane the relationship is established only by the statement that Helgi was the son of Sigmund and Borghild; Sigurth is not mentioned, and in the lay of Helgi the son of Hjorvarth there is no connection at all. On the other hand, Helgi does not appear in any of the Eddic poems dealing directly with the Volsung stories, although in one passage of doubtful authenticity (cf. Reginsmol, introductory note) his traditional enemy, Hunding, does, represented by his sons. In the Volsungasaga the story of Helgi, including the fights with Hunding and Hothbrodd and the love affair with Sigrun, is told in chapters 8 and 9 without otherwise affecting the course of the narrative. Here, as in the Helgi lays, Helgi is the son of Sigmund Volsungsson and Borghild; Sigurth, on the other hand, is the son of Sigmund and Hjordis, the latter being the daughter of King Eylimi. Still another son, who complicates both stories somewhat, is Sinfjotli, son of Sigmund and his own sister, Signy. Sinfjotli appears in both of the Helgi Hundingsbane lays and in the Volsungasaga, but not in any of the Eddic poems belonging to the Volsung cycle (cf. Fra Dautha Sinfjotla and note).

There is a certain amount of resemblance between the story of Helgi and Sigrun and that of Sigurth and Brynhild, particularly as the annotator responsible for the prose notes insists that Sigrun was a Valkyrie. Whether this resemblance was the cause of bringing the two stories together, or whether the identification of Helgi as Sigmund's son resulted in alterations of the love story in the Helgi poems, cannot be determined. The first of the three Helgi poems, the lay of Helgi the son of Hjorvarth, is a somewhat distant cousin of the other two. The Helgi in question is apparently the same traditional figure, and he leads a naval expedition, but he is not the son of Sigmund, there is no connection with the Volsung cycle, and his wife is Svava, not Sigrun. At the same time, the points of general resemblance with the two Helgi Hundingsbane lays are such as to indicate a common origin, provided one goes far enough back. The annotator brings the stories together by the naive expedient of having Helgi "born again," and not once only, but twice.

[p. 271]

The first Helgi lay, is manifestly in bad shape, and includes at least two distinct poems, differentiated not only by subject matter but by metrical form. Although the question is debatable, the longer of these poems (stanzas 1-11 and 31-43) seems in turn to have been compounded out of fragments of two or more Helgi poems. The first five stanzas are a dialogue between a bird and Atli, one of Hjorvarth's followers, concerning the winning of Sigrlin, who is destined to be Hjorvarth's wife and Helgi's mother. Stanzas 6-11 are a dialogue between Helgi and a Valkyrie (the accompanying prose so calls her, and identifies her as Svava, but there is nothing in the verse to prove this). Stanzas 12-30 form a fairly consecutive unit, in which Atli, on guard over Helgi's ship, has a vigorous argument with a giantess, Hrimgerth, whence this section has sometimes been called the Hrimgertharmol (Lay of Hrimgerth). The last section, stanzas 31-43, is, again fairly consecutive, and tells of the death of Helgi following the rash oath of his brother, Hethin, to win Svava for himself.

Parts I, II, and IV may all have come from the same poem or they may not; it is quite impossible to tell surely. All of them are generally dated by commentators not later than the first half of the tenth century, whereas the Hrimgertharmol (section III) is placed considerably later. When and by whom these fragments were pieced together is another vexed question, and this involves a consideration of the prose notes and links, of which the Helgakvitha Hjorvarthssonar has a larger amount than any other poem in the Edda. These prose links contain practically all the narrative, the verse being almost exclusively dialogue. Whoever composed them seems to have been consciously trying to bring his chaotic verse material into some semblance of unity, but he did his work pretty clumsily, with manifest blunders and contradictions. Bugge has advanced the theory that these prose passages are to be regarded as an original and necessary part of the work, but this hardly squares with the evidence.

It seems probable, rather, that as the Helgi tradition spread from its native Denmark through the Norse regions of the North and West, and became gradually interwoven, although not in essentials, with the other great hero cycle from the South, that of the Volsungs, a considerable number of poems dealing with Helgi were composed, at different times and in different places,

[p. 272]

reflecting varied forms of the story. Many generations after wards, when Iceland's literary period had arrived, some zealous scribe committed to writing such poems or fragments of poems as he knew, piecing them together and annotating them on the basis of information which had reached him through other channels. The prose notes to Helgakvitha Hundingsbana II frankly admit this patchwork process: a section of four stanzas (13-16) is introduced with the phrase, "as is said in the Old Volsung Lay"; the final prose note cites an incident "told in the Karuljoth (Lay of Kara)," and a two-line speech is quoted "as it was written before in the Helgakvitha."

The whole problem of the origin, character and home of the Helgi poems has been discussed in great detail by Bugge in his Helge-Digtene i den Aeldre Edda, Deres Hjem og Forbindelser, which, as translated by W. H. Schofield under the title The Home of the Eddic Poems, is available for readers of English. This study is exceedingly valuable, if not in all respects convincing. The whole matter is so complex and so important in the history of Old Norse literature, and any intelligent reading of the Helgi poems is so dependent on an understanding of the conditions under which they have come down to us, that I have here discussed the question more extensively than the scope of a mere introductory note to a single poem would warrant.

 

(I)

 

OF HJORVARTH AND SIGRLIN

Hjorvarth was the name of a king, who had four wives: one was called Alfhild, and their son was named Hethin; the second was called Saereith, and their son was named Humlung; the third was called Sinrjoth, and their son was

 [Prose: In the manuscript the sub-title, "Of Hjorvarth and Sigrlin," stands as the title for the whole poem, though it clearly applies only to the first five stanzas. Most editions employ the title here given. Hjorvarth: the name is a not uncommon one; [fp. 273] there are two men of that name mentioned in the mythical heroic genealogies of the Hyndluljoth (stanzas 23 and 28), and Hjorvarth appears in Helgakvitha Hundingsbana I (stanza 14) and II (prose after stanza 12) as a son of Hunding. This particular Hjorvarth is called by the annotator, but not directly so in the verse, a king of Norway. The name means "Sword-Guardian." Four wives: polygamy, while very. infrequent, appears occasionally in the Norse sagas. Alfhild: "Elf-Warrior." Hethin: "Fur-Clothed" (?). Saereith: "Sea-Rider." Sinrjoth: "Ever-Red." The fourth wife, not here named, may be Sigrlin. It has been suggested that Saereith and Sinrjoth may be northern and southern forms of the same name, as also Humlung and Hymling, their sons. Svafnir: the annotator calls him king of Svavaland, apparently a place on the mainland which could be reached from Norway either by land or by sea. Sigrlin: "The Conquering Serpent." Atli: Norse form of the Gothic Attila (Etzel). Alof: perhaps a feminine form of Olaf. A bird: compare the counsel given by the birds to Sigurth after the slaying of Fafnir (Fafnismol, stanzas 32-38). This is one of the many curious resemblances between the Helgi and the Sigurth stories.]

 [p. 273]

named Hymling. King Hjorvarth had made a great vow to have as wife whatsoever woman he knew was fairest. He learned that King Svafnir had a daughter fairer than all others, whose name was Sigrlin. Ithmund was the name of one of his jarls; he had a son called Atli, who went to woo Sigrlin on behalf of the king. He dwelt the winter long with King Svafnir. There was a jarl called Franmar, Sigrlin's foster-father; his daughter was named Alof. The jarl told him that the maiden's hand was denied, and Atli went home. Atli, the jarl's son, stood one day in a certain wood; a bird sat in the branches up over him, and it had heard that his men called Hjorvarth's wives the fairest of women. The bird twittered, and Atli hearkened to what it spoke. It said:

[p. 274]

1. "Sawest thou Sigrlin, | Svafnir's daughter,
 The fairest maid | in her home-land found?
 Though Hjorvath's wives | by men are held
 Goodly to see | in Glasir's wood."

 Atli spake:
 2. "Now with Atli, | Ithmund's son,
 Wilt thou say more, | thou bird so wise?"

 The bird spake:
 "I may if the prince | an offering makes,
 And I have what I will | from the house of the king."

 Atli spake:
 3. "Choose not Hjorvarth, | nor sons of his,
 Nor the wives so fair | of the famous chief;
 Ask not the brides | that the prince's are;
 Fair let us deal | in friendly wise."

 The bird spake:
 4. "A fane will I ask, | and altars many,
 Gold-horned cattle | the prince shall give me,
 If Sigrlin yet | shall sleep in his arms,
 Or free of will | the hero shall follow."

 [1. Glasir's wood: Snorri in the Skaldskaparmal quotes a half stanza to the effect that "Glasir stands with golden leaves before Othin's hall," and calls it "the fairest wood among gods and men." The phrase as used here seems to mean little.

4. The bird's demands would indicate that it is in reality one of the gods. Gold-horned cattle: cf. Thrymskvitha, 23. There [fp. 275] are other references to gilding the horns of cattle, particularly for sacrificial purposes.]

 [p. 275]

This was before Atli went on his journey; but when he came home, and the king asked his tidings, he said:

5. "Trouble we had, | but tidings none,
 Our horses failed | in the mountains high,
 The waters of Saemorn | we needs must wade;
 Svafnir's daughter, | with rings bedecked,
 She whom we sought, | was still denied us."

The king bade that they should go another time, and he went with them himself, But when they came up on the mountain, they saw Svavaland burning and mighty dust-clouds from many steeds. The king rode from the mountain forward into the land, and made a night's stay hard by a stream. Atli kept watch and went over the stream; he found there a house. A great bird sat on the housetop to guard it, but he was asleep. Atli hurled his spear at the bird and slew it, and in the house he found Sigrlin the king's daughter and Alof the jarl's daughter, and he brought them both thence with him. Jarl Franmar had changed himself into the likeness of an eagle, and guarded them from the enemy host by magic. Hrothmar was the name of a king, a wooer of Sigrlin; he slew the

 [Prose. The annotator contradicts himself here, as he had already stated that Atli was on his way home.

5. Possibly the remains of two stanzas, or perhaps a line has been added. Saemorn: this river is nowhere else mentioned.

 Prose. Sigrlin and Alof, protected by the latter's father, Franmar, have fled before the ravaging army of Sigrlin's rejected [fp. 276] suitor, Hrothmar. The beginning of a new section (II) is indicated in the manuscript only by the unusually large capital letter with which "Hjorvarth" begins. No name, etc.: this probably means that Helgi had always been so silent that he would answer to no name, with the result that he had none. Valkyries: cf. Voluspo, 31 and note. The annotator insists here and in the prose after stanza 9 that Svava was a Valkyrie, but there is nothing in the verse to prove it, or, indeed, to identify the Svava of the last section of the poem with the person who gave Helgi his name. In the Volsungasaga Sigmund himself names his son Helgi, and gives him a sword, following Helgakvitha Hundingsbana I.]

 [p. 276]

king of Svavaland and had plundered and burned his land. King Hjorvarth took Sigrlin, and Atli took Alof.

 

(II)

Hjorvarth and Sigrlin had a son, mighty and of noble stature; he was a silent man, and no name stuck fast to him. He sat on a hill, and saw nine Valkyries riding; one of them was the fairest of all. She spake:

6. "Late wilt thou, Helgi, | have hoard of rings,
 Thou battle-tree fierce, | or of shining fields,--
 The eagle screams soon,-- | if never thou speakest,
 Though, hero, hard | thy heart may cry."

 Helgi spake:
 7. "What gift shall I have | with Helgi's name,
 Glorious maid, | for the giving is thine?

 [6. Battle-free: poetic phrase for "warrior." Shining fields: the words in the manuscript may form a proper name, Rothulsvoll, having this meaning.

7. Gift: not only was it customary to give gifts with the naming [fp. 276] of a child, but the practice frequently obtained when a permanent epithet was added to the name of an adult.]

 [p. 277]

All thy words | shall I think on well,
 But I want them not | if I win not thee."

 The Valkyrie spake:
 8. "Swords I know lying | in Sigarsholm,
 Fifty there are | save only four;
 One there is | that is best of all,
 The shield-destroyer, | with gold it shines.

9. "In the hilt is fame, | in the haft is courage,
 In the point is fear, | for its owner's foes;
 On the blade there lies | a blood-flecked snake,
 And a serpent's tail | round the flat is twisted."

Eylimi was the name of a king, whose daughter was Svava; she was a Valkyrie, and rode air and sea. She gave Helgi this name, and shielded him oft thereafter in battle. Helgi spake:

10. "Hjorvarth, king, | unwholesome thy counsels,
 Though famed thou art | in leading the folk,

 [8. Sigarsholm ("Isle of Sigar"): a place not identified, but probably related to the Sigarsvoll where Helgi was slain (stanza 35).

9. The sword is carved with magic runes and with snakes. Fame: the original word is uncertain.

 Prose. Eylimi: this name is another link with the Sigurth story, as it is likewise the name of the father of Sigurth's mother, Hjordis.

10. With this stanza begins a new episode, that of Helgi's [fp. 277] victory over King Hrothmar, who had killed his mother's father (cf. prose after stanza 5). It has been suggested, in consequence, that stanzas 10-11 may be a separate fragment. The verse tells nothing of the battle, merely giving Helgi's reproaches to his father for having left Svafnir's death and the burning of Svavaland unavenged.]

 [p. 278]

Letting fire the homes of heroes eat,
 Who evil deed had never done thee.

11. "Yet Hrothmar still the hoard doth hold,
 The wealth that once our kinsmen wielded;
 Full seldom care the king disturbs,
 Heir to dead men he deems himself."

Hjorvarth answered that he would give Helgi a following if he fain would avenge his mother's father. Then Helgi got the sword that Svava had told him of. So he went, and Atli with him, and they slew Hrothmar, and they did many great deeds.

 

(III)

He slew the giant Hati, whom he found sitting on a certain mountain. Helgi and Atli lay with their ships in Hatafjord. Atli kept watch during the first part of the night. Hrimgerth, Hati's daughter, spake:

12. "Who are the heroes | in Hatafjord?
 The ships are covered with shields;

 [Prose. The manuscript does not indicate any break, but the episode which forms the basis of the Hrimgertharmol (stanzas 12-30) clearly begins with the slaying of the giant Hati ("The Hateful" ). Hatafjord: "Hati's Fjord." Hrimgerth: "Frost Shrouded"]

 [p. 279]

Bravely ye look, | and little ye fear,
 The name of the king would I know."

 Atli spake:
 13. "Helgi his name, | and never thou mayst
 Harm to the hero bring;
 With iron is fitted | the prince's fleet,
 Nor can witches work us ill."

 Hrimgerth spake:
 14. "Who now, thou mighty | man, art thou?
 By what name art thou known to men?
 He trusts thee well, | the prince who wills
 That thou stand at the stem of his ship."

 Atli spake:
 15. "Atli am I, | and ill shalt thou find me,
 Great hate for witches I have;
 Oft have I been | in the dripping bows,
 And to dusk-riders death have brought.

16. "Corpse-hungry giantess, | how art thou called?
 Say, witch, who thy father was!

 [13. Iron: the keels of Norse ships were sometimes fitted with iron "shoes" at bow and stern, but it is not certain that this practice much antedated the year 1000, and thus this line has raised some question as to the antiquity of this stanza, if not of the entire Hrimgertharmol, which may have been composed as late as the eleventh century.

15. The manuscript does not indicate the speaker. The pun on "Atli" and "atall" (meaning "ill") is untranslatable.]

 [p. 280]

Nine miles deeper | down mayst thou sink,
 And a tree grow tall on thy bosom."

 Hrimgerth spake:
 17. "Hrimgerth am I, | my father was Hati,
 Of giants the most in might;
 Many a woman | he won from her home,
 Ere Helgi hewed him down."

 Atli spake:
 18. "Witch, in front | of the ship thou wast,
 And lay before the fjord;
 To Ron wouldst have given | the ruler's men,
 If a spear had not stuck in thy flesh."

 Hrimgerth spake:
 19. "Dull art thou, Atli, | thou dreamest, methinks,
 The lids lie over thine eyes;
 By the leader's ships | my mother lay,
 Hlothvarth's sons on the sea I slew.

 [17. The manuscript does not indicate the speaker.

18. From this point to the end the manuscript does not indicate the speakers. Ron: wife of the sea-god Aegir, who draws drowning men into the sea with her net. There is no other reference to the wounding of Hrimgerth.

19. Apparently both Hrimgerth and her mother, Hati's wife, had sought to destroy Helgi's ships, and had actually killed some of his companions, the sons of Hlothvarth, concerning whom nothing more is known. Many editors assume that a stanza containing a speech by Atli has been lost after stanza 19.]

 [p. 281]

20. "Thou wouldst neigh, Atli, | but gelded thou art,
 See, Hrimgerth hoists her tail;
 In thy hinder end | is thy heart, methinks,
 Though thy speech is a stallion's cry."

 Atli spake:
 21. "A stallion I seem | if thou seekest to try me,
 And I leap to land from the sea;
 I shall smite thee to bits, | if so I will,
 And heavy sinks Hrimgerth's tail."

 Hrimgerth spake:
 22. "Go ashore then, Atli, | if sure of thy might,
 Let us come to Varin's cove;
 Straight shall thy rounded | ribs be made
 If thou comest within my claws."

 Atli spake:
 23. "I will not go | till the warriors wake,
 Again their chief to guard;
 I should wonder not, | foul witch, if up
 From beneath our keel thou shouldst come."

 Hrimgerth spake:
 24. "Awake now, Helgi, | and Hrimgerth requite,
 That Hati to death thou didst hew;

 [20. Apparently Hrimgerth has assumed the form of a mare.

22. Varin's cove: the name of Varin appears twice in place names in Helgakvitha Hundingsbana I (stanzas 27 and 39). The sagas mention a mythical King Varin who lived at Skorustrond in Rogaland (Norway).]

 [p. 282]

If a single night | she can sleep by the prince,
 Then requited are all her ills."

 Helgi spake:
 25. " 'Tis Lothin shall have thee,-- | thou'rt loathsome to men,--
 His home in Tholley he has;
 Of the wild-dwellers worst | is the giant wise,
 He is meet as a mate for thee."

 Hrimgerth spake:
 26. "More thou lovest her | who scanned the harbor,
 Last night among the men;
 (The gold-decked maid | bore magic, rnethinks,
 When the land from the sea she sought,
 And fast she kept your fleet;)
 She alone is to blame | that I may not bring
 Death to the monarch's men."

 Helgi spake:
 27. "Hrimgerth, mark, | if thy hurts I requite,
 Tell now the truth to the king;

 [25. Of the giant Lothin ("The Shaggy") and his home in Tholley ("Pine Island") nothing is known. Cf. Skirnismol, 35.

26. Something is clearly wrong with this stanza, and the manuscript indicates line 6 as the beginning of a new one. Perhaps a line (between lines 4 and 5) has been lost, or perhaps the lines in parenthesis are interpolations. Hrimgerth here refers to Svava, or to the protectress with whom the annotator has identified her, as having saved Helgi and his, ships from the vengeance of the giantesses. In the original line 1 includes Helgi's name, which makes it metrically incorrect.]

 [p. 283]

Was there one who the ships | of the warrior warded,
 Or did many together go?"

 Hrimgerth spake:
 28. "Thrice nine there were, | but one rode first,
 A helmed maid white of hue;
 Their horses quivered, | there came from their manes
 Dew in the dales so deep,
 (Hail on the woods so high,
 Thence men their harvest have,
 But ill was the sight I saw.)"

 Atli spake:
 29. "Look eastward, Hrimgerth, | for Helgi has struck thee
 Down with the runes of death;
 Safe in harbor floats | the prince's fleet,
 And safe are the monarch's men."

 Helgi spake:
 30. "It is day, Hrimgerth, | for Atli held thee
 Till now thy life thou must lose;

 [28. Again something is clearly wrong, and the last three lines look like interpolations, though some editors have tried to reconstruct two full stanzas. The passage suggests the identification of the Valkyries with the clouds.

29. Some editions give this speech to Helgi. Eastward: Atli and Helgi have held Hrimgerth in talk till sunrise, and the sun's rays turn her into stone. But dwarfs rather than giants were the victims of sunlight; cf. Alvissmol, stanzas 16 and 35.]

 [p. 284]

As a harbor mark | men shall mock at thee,
 Where in stone thou shalt ever stand."

 

(IV)

King Helgi was a mighty warrior. He came to King Eylimi and sought the hand of his daughter, Svava. Then Helgi and Svava exchanged vows, and greatly they loved each other. Svava was at home with her father, while Helgi was in the field; Svava was still a Valkyrie as before.

Hethin was at home with his father, King Hjorvarth, in Norway. Hethin was coming home alone from the forest one Yule-eve, and found a troll-woman; she rode

 [30. Most editions give this stanza to Atli. With this the Hrimgertharmol ends, and after the next prose passage the meter reverts to that of the earlier sections.

 Prose. The manuscript does not indicate a new section of the poem. Eylimi: cf. note on prose after stanza 9. Valkyrie: here, as before, the annotator has apparently nothing but his own imagination on which to base his statement. Svava in the ensuing stanzas certainly does not behave like a Valkyrie. Norway: the annotator doubtless based this statement on the reference to Norway in line 2 of stanza 31. Yule-eve: the Yule feast, marking the new year, was a great event in the heathen North. It was a time of feasting and merrymaking, vows ("New Year's resolutions"), ghosts and witches; the spirits had their greatest power on Yule-eve. The king's toast: vows made at the passing of the king's cup at the Yule feast were particularly sacred. Sacred boar: a boar consecrated to Freyr, an integral part of the Yule rites. Hethin's vow, which is, of course, the vengeance of the troll-woman, is too sacred to be broken, but he immediately realizes the horror of his oath.]

 [p. 285]

on a wolf, and had snakes in place of a bridle. She asked Hethin for his company. "Nay," said he. She said, "Thou shalt pay for this at the king's toast." That evening the great vows were taken; the sacred boar was brought in, the men laid their hands thereon, and took their vows at the king's toast. Hethin vowed that he would have Svava, Eylimi's daughter, the beloved of his brother Helgi; then such great grief seized him that he went forth on wild paths southward over the land, and found Helgi, his brother. Helgi said:

3 1. "Welcome, Hethin! | what hast thou to tell
 Of tidings new | that from Norway come?
 Wherefore didst leave | thy land, O prince,
 And fared alone | to find us here?"

 Hethin spake:
 32. "A deed more evil | I have done
 Than, brother mine, | thou e'er canst mend;
 For I have chosen | the child of the king,
 Thy bride, for mine | at the monarch's toast."

 [31. From Norway: Bugge uses this phrase as evidence that the poem was composed in one of the Icelandic settlements of the western islands, but as the annotator himself seems to have thought that Hethin came to Helgi by land ("on wild paths southward"), this argument does not appear to have much weight.

32. The second line is conjectural; a line has; clearly been lost from this stanza, and various emendations have been suggested.]

 [p. 286]

 Helgi spake:
 33. "Grieve not, Hethin, | for true shall hold
 The words we both | by the beer have sworn;
 To the isle a warrior | wills that I go,
 (There shall I come | the third night hence;)
 And doubtful must be | my coming back,
 (So may all be well, | if fate so wills.)"

 Hethin spake:
 34. "Thou saidst once, Helgi, | that Hethin was
 A friend full good, | and gifts didst give him;
 More seemly it were | thy sword to redden,
 Than friendship thus | to thy foe to-give."

Helgi spoke thus because he foresaw his death, for his following-spirits had met Hethin when he saw the woman riding on the wolf. Alf was the name of a king, the son of Hrothmar, who had marked out a battle-place with

 [33. Perhaps this is the remnant of two stanzas, or perhaps two lines (probably the ones in parenthesis) have been interpolated. The isle: duels were commonly fought on islands, probably to guard against treacherous interference, whence the usual name for a duel was "isle-going." A duel was generally fought three days after the challenge. Reckoning the lapse of time by nights instead of days was a common practice throughout the German and Scandinavian peoples.

 Prose. Some editors place all or part of this prose passage after stanza 35. Following-spirits: the "fylgja" was a female guardian spirit whose appearance generally betokened death. The belief was common throughout the North, and has come down to recent times in Scottish and Irish folk-lore. Individuals and sometimes whole families had these following-spirits, but it was most unusual for a person to have more than one of them. Alf: son of the Hrothmar who killed Helgi's grandfather, and [fp. 287] who was in turn later killed by Helgi. Sigarsvoll ("Sigar's Field"): cf. stanza 8 and note; the Sigar in question may be the man who appears as Helgi's messenger in stanzas 36-39.] 

 [p. 287]

Helgi at Sigarsvoll after a stay of three nights. Then Helgi spake:

35. "On a wolf there rode, | when dusk it was,
 A woman who fain | would have him follow;
 Well she knew | that now would fall
 Sigrlin's son | at Sigarsvoll."

There was a great battle, and there Helgi got a mortal wound.

36. Sigar riding | did Helgi send
 To seek out Eylimi's | only daughter:
 "Bid her swiftly | ready to be,
 If her lover | alive she would find."

 Sigar spake:
 37. "Hither now | has Helgi sent me,
 With thee, Svava, | thyself to speak;
 The hero said | he fain would see thee
 Ere life the nobly | born should leave."

 Svava spake:
 A "What chanced with Helgi, | Hjorvarth's son?
 Hard to me | is harm now come;
 If the sea smote him, | or sword bit him,
 Ill shall I bring | to all his foes."

 [36. Sigar ("The Victorious"): cf. the foregoing note.]

 [p. 288]

 Sigar spake:
 39. "In the morn he fell | at Frekastein,
 The king who was noblest | beneath the sun;
 Alf has the joy | of victory all,
 Though need therefor | is never his."

 Helgi spake:
 40. "Hail to thee, Svava! | thy sorrow rule,
 Our meeting last | in life is this;
 Hard the wounds | of the hero bleed,
 And close to my heart | the sword has come.

41. "I bid thee, Svava,-- | weep not, bride,--
 If thou wilt hearken | to these my words,
 The bed for Hethin | have thou ready,
 And yield thy love | to the hero young."

 Svava spake:
 42. "A vow I had | in my dear-loved home,
 When Helgi sought | with rings to have me,
 That not of my will, | if the warrior died,
 Would I fold in my arms | a man unfamed."

 Hethin spake:
 43. "Kiss me, Svava, | I come not back,

 [39. Frekastein ("Wolf-Crag"): the name appears several times in the Helgi lays applied to battlefields; cf. Helgakvitha Hundingsbana I, 46 and 55, and II, 18 and 24. Need: i. e., Alf deserves no credit for the victory, which was due to the troll woman's magic.]

 [p. 289]

Rogheim to see, | or Rothulsfjoll,
 Till vengeance I have | for the son of Hjorvarth,
 The king who was noblest | beneath the sun."

Of Helgi and Svava it is said that they were born again.

 [41. One or two editors ascribe this stanza to Hethin.

43. A few editions make the extraordinary blunder of ascribing this speech to the dying Helgi. The point, of course, is that Hethin will satisfy Svava's vow by becoming famous as the slayer of Alf. Rogheim ("Rome of Battle") and Rothulsfjoll ("Sun-Mountain"): nowhere else mentioned; Hethin means simply that he will not come back to Svava till he has won fame.

 Prose. Regarding this extraordinary bit see the prose note at the end of Helgakvitha Hundingsbana II. Gering thinks the reborn Helgi Hjorvarthsson was Helgi Hundingsbane, while Svava, according to the annotator himself, became Sigrun. The point seems to be simply that there were so many Helgi stories current, and the hero died in so many irreconcilable ways, that tradition had to have him born over again, not once only but several times, to accommodate his many deaths, and to avoid splitting him up into several Helgis. Needless to say, the poems themselves know nothing of this rebirth, and we owe the suggestion entirely to the annotator, who probably got it from current tradition.]

 
      
The Poetic Edda, by Henry Adams Bellows, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 290]

 

HELGAKVITHA HUNDINGSBANA I

 

The First Lay of Helgi Hundingsbane

 

INTRODUCTORY NOTE

The general subject of the Helgi lays is considered in the introduction to Helgakvitha Hjorvarthssonar, and it is needless here to repeat the statements there made. The first lay of Helgi Hundingsbane is unquestionably one of the latest of the Eddic poems, and was composed probably not earlier than the second quarter of the eleventh century. It presents several unusual characteristics. For one thing, it is among the few essentially narrative poems in the whole collection, telling a consecutive story in verse, and, except for the abusive dialogue between Sinfjotli and Gothmund, which clearly was based on another and older poem, it does so with relatively little use of dialogue. It is, in fact, a ballad, and in the main an exceedingly vigorous one. The annotator, who added his prose narrative notes so freely in the other Helgi poems, here found nothing to do. The available evidence indicates that narrative verse was a relatively late development in Old Norse poetry, and it is significant that most of the poems which consist chiefly, not of dialogue, but of narrative stanzas, such as the first Helgi Hundingsbane lay and the two Atli lays, can safely be dated, on the basis of other evidence, after the year 1000.

The first Helgi Hundingsbane lay is again differentiated from most of the Eddic poems by the character of its language. It is full of those verbal intricacies which were the delight of the Norse skalds, and which made Snorri's dictionary of poetic phrases an absolute necessity. Many of these I have paraphrased in the translation; some I have simplified or wholly avoided. A single line will serve to indicate the character of this form of complex diction (stanza 56, line 4): "And the horse of the giantess raven's-food had." This means simply that wolves (giantesses habitually rode on wolves) ate the bodies of the dead.

Except for its intricacies of diction, and the possible loss of a stanza here and there, the poem is comparatively simple. The story belongs in all its essentials to the Helgi tradition, with the Volsung cycle brought in only to the extent of making Helgi the son of Sigmund, and in the introduction of Sinfjotli, son of Sigmund and his sister Signy, in a passage which has

[p. 291]

little or nothing to do with the course of the narrative, and which looks like an expansion of a passage from some older poem, perhaps from the "old Volsung lay" to which the annotator of the second Helgi Hundingsbane lay refers (prose after stanza 12). There are many proper names, some of which betray the confusion caused by the blending of the two sets of traditions; for example, Helgi appears indiscriminately as an Ylfing (which presumably he was before the Volsung story became involved) and as a Volsung. Granmar and his sons are called Hniflungs (Nibelungen) in stanza 50, though they seem to have had no connection with this race. The place names have aroused much debate as to the localization of the action, but while some of them probably reflect actual places, there is so much geographical confusion, and such a profusion of names which are almost certainly mythical, that it is hard to believe that the poet had any definite locations in mind.

1. In olden days, | when eagles screamed,
 And holy streams | from heaven's crags fell,
 Was Helgi then, | the hero-hearted,
 Borghild's son, | in Bralund born.

2. 'Twas night in the dwelling, | and Norns there came,
 Who shaped the life | of the lofty one;
 They bade him most famed | of fighters all
 And best of princes | ever to be.

 [1. The manuscript contains the superscription: "Here begins the lay of Helgi Hundingbane and h. (Hothbrodd?) The lay of the Volsungs." Eagles, etc.: the screaming of eagles and water pouring from heaven were portents of the birth of a hero. Borghild: Sigmund's first wife; Bralund was her home, not Sigmund's.

2. Norns: cf. Voluspo, 20 and note. Here it is the Norns who [fp. 292] preside over Helgi's early destiny, and not a Valkyrie, as in Helgakvitha Hjorvarthssonar.]

 [p. 292]

3. Mightily wove they | the web of fate,
 While Bralund's towns | were trembling all;
 And there the golden | threads they wove,
 And in the moon's hall | fast they made them.

4. East and west | the ends they hid,
 In the middle the hero | should have his land;
 And Neri's kinswoman | northward cast
 A chain, and bade it | firm ever to be.

5. Once sorrow had | the Ylfings' son,
 And grief the bride | who the loved one had borne.

*    *    *    *    *    *

Quoth raven to raven, | on treetop resting,
 Seeking for food, | "There is something I know.

 [3. Line 2 is largely guesswork, the manuscript being obscure. Moon's hall: the sky.

4. East, etc.: the Norris give Helgi fame in the East, West, and North; in the North his renown is particularly to endure. This suggests that the poet was aware of the spread of the Helgi story over many lands. Neri's kinswoman: evidently one of the Norns, but nothing further is known of Neri, and the word may not be a proper name at all.

5. The manuscript indicates no gap, but it looks as though something had been lost after line 2. Ylfings' son: Sigmund is evidently meant, though calling him an Ylfing (cf. Hyndluljoth, 11 and note) is a manifest error. Helgi, in the tradition as it came from Denmark, was undoubtedly an Ylfing, and the poet, in order to combine the two legends, has to treat the Ylfings and Volsungs as if they were the same family.]

 [p. 293]

6. "In mail-coat stands | the son of Sigmund,
 A half-day old; | now day is here;
 His eyes flash sharp | as the heroes' are,
 He is friend of the wolves; | full glad are we."

7. The warrior throng | a ruler thought him,
 Good times, they said, | mankind should see;
 The king himself | from battle-press came,
 To give the prince | a leek full proud.

8. Helgi he named him, | and Hringstathir gave him,
 Solfjoll, Snaefjoll, | and Sigarsvoll,
 Hringstoth, Hotun, | and Himinvangar,
 And a blood-snake bedecked | to Sinfjotli's brother.

 [6. Sigmund: the chief link between the Helgi and Sigurth stories. He was the son of Volsung, great-grandson of Othin. His children by his first wife, Borghild, were Helgi and Hamund (belonging to the Helgi cycle); his son by his second wife, Hjordis, was Sigurth. An incestuous connection with his sister, Signy (cf. Wagner's Siegmund and Sieglinde) resulted in the birth of Sinfjotli (cf. Fra Dautha Sinfjotla and note).

7. The king: Sigmund, who gives his son a symbol of the lands which he bestows on him. Regarding the leek, cf. Voluspo, 4; Guthrunarkvitha I, 17, and Sigrdrifumol, 7.

8. Hringstathir ("Ring-Stead"): quite possibly the historical Ringsted, long a possession of the Danish kings, and thus a relic of the old Helgi tradition. Hringstoth may be another form of the same name. Solfjoll ("Sun-Mountain") and Snaefjoll ("Snow-Mountain") are fictitious names. Regarding Sigarsvoll cf. Helgakvitha Hjorvarthssonar, stanzas 8 and 35. Saxo mentions a Danish king named Sigar, and the frequency with which the name appears in the Helgi poems may be taken as a reminiscence of Denmark. Hotun ("High Place"): possibly the village of Tune in Seeland. Himinvangar ("Heaven's Field"): an imaginary place. Blood-snake: a sword. Sinfjotli: cf. note on stanza 6.]

 [p. 294]

9. Mighty he grew | in the midst of his friends,
 The fair-born elm, | in fortune's glow;
 To his comrades gold | he gladly gave,
 The hero spared not | the blood-flecked hoard.

10. Short time for war | the chieftain waited,
 When fifteen winters | old he was;
 Hunding he slew, | the hardy wight
 Who long had ruled | o'er lands and men.

11. Of Sigmund's son | then next they sought
 Hoard and rings, | the sons of Hunding;
 They bade the prince | requital pay
 For booty stolen | and father slain.

12. The prince let not | their prayers avail,
 Nor gold for their dead | did the kinsmen get;
 Waiting, he said, | was a mighty storm
 Of lances gray | and Othin's grimness.

13. The warriors forth | to the battle went,
 The field they chose | at Logafjoll;

 [9. Elm: a not uncommon word for "man." Blood-flecked: i.e., won in battle.

10. Fifteen: until early in the eleventh century a Norwegian or Icelandic boy became "of age" at twelve, and Maurer cites this passage as added proof of the poem's lateness. Hunding: the annotator (introductory prose to Helgakvitha Hundingsbana II) calls him king of Hundland, which shows no great originality. Saxo mentions a Hunding who was a Saxon king ruling in Jutland, probably the origin of Helgi's traditional foe.

12. Storm, etc.: war.

13. Logafjoll ("Flame-Mountain"): a mythical name. Frothi: [fp. 295] a traditional king of Denmark, whose peaceful reign was so famous that "Frothi's peace" became a by-word for peace of any kind. Vithrir's hounds: wolves; Vithrir is Othin, and his hounds are the wolves Freki and Geri.]

 [p. 295]

Frothi's peace | midst foes they broke,
 Through the isle went hungrily | Vithrir's hounds.

14. The king then sat, | when he had slain
 Eyjolf and Alf, | 'neath the eagle-stone;
 Hjorvarth and Hovarth, | Hunding's sons,
 The kin of the spear-wielder, | all had he killed.

15. Then glittered light | from Logafjoll,
 And from the light | the flashes leaped;
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .

16. .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 High under helms | on heaven's field;
 Their byrnies all | with blood were red,
 And from their spears | the sparks flew forth.

 [14. In this poem Helgi kills all the sons of Hunding, but in the poems of the Sigurth cycle, and the prose notes attached thereto, Sigmund and his father-in-law, Eylimi, are killed by Hunding's sons, on whom Sigurth subsequently takes vengeance (cf. Fra Dautha Sinfjotla and Reginsmol).

15. No gap indicated in the manuscript, but almost certainly something has been lost mentioning more specifically the coming of the Valkyries. The lightning which accompanies them suggests again their identification with the clouds (cf. Helgakvitha Hjorvarthssonar, 28).

16. Some editions fill out the first line: "He saw there mighty maidens riding." The manuscript indicates line 4 as the beginning of a new stanza.]

 [p. 296]

17. Early then | in wolf-wood asked
 The mighty king | of the southern maid,
 If with the hero | home would she
 Come that night; | the weapons clashed.

18. Down from her horse | sprang Hogni's daughter,--
 The shields were still,-- | and spake to the hero:
 "Other tasks | are ours, methinks,
 Than drinking beer | with the breaker of rings.

19. "My father has pledged | his daughter fair
 As bride to Granmar's | son so grim;
 But, Helgi, I | once Hothbrodd called
 As fine a king | as the son of a cat.

 [17. Wolf-wood: dark forest; the original word is not altogether clear. Southern: this variety of Valkyrie, like the swan maidens of the Volundarkvitha, was clearly regarded as of southern (i.e., German) origin. Here again there is a confusion of traditions; the Valkyries of the Voluspo were as essentially Norse as any part of the older mythology. I doubt if a poet much earlier than the author of the first Helgi Hundingsbane lay would have made his Sigrun, daughter of Hogni, a Valkyrie. It is to be noted that the same complication appears in the Sigurth story, where the undoubted Valkyrie, Brynhild-Sigrdrifa (the latter name is really only an epithet) is hopelessly mixed up with the quite human Brynhild, daughter of Buthli.

18. Breaker of rings: generous prince, because the breaking of rings was the customary form of distributing gold.

19. Granmar: the annotator gives an account of him and his family in the prose following stanza 12 of Helgakvitha Hundingsbana II.

20. No gap indicated in the manuscript; some editors combine the stanza with the fragmentary stanza 21, and others fill in with "And home will carry | Hogni's daughter."]

 [p. 297]

20. "Yet the hero will come | a few nights hence,
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 Unless thou dost bid him | the battle-ground seek,
 Or takest the maid | from the warrior mighty."

 Helgi spake:
 21. "Fear him not, | though Isung he felled,
 First must our courage | keen be tried,
 Before unwilling | thou fare with the knave;
 Weapons will clash, | if to death I come not."

22. Messengers sent | the mighty one then,
 By land and by sea, | a host to seek,
 Store of wealth | of the water's gleam,
 And men to summon, | and sons of men.

23. "Bid them straightway | seek the ships,
 And off Brandey | ready to be!"
 There the chief waited | till thither were come
 Men by hundreds | from Hethinsey.

 [21. The manuscript has only lines 1 and 4 with the word "first" of line 2, and does not indicate Helgi as the speaker. The Volsungasaga, which follows this poem pretty closely, expands Helgi's speech, and lines 2-3 are conjectural versifications of the saga's prose. Isung: nothing is known of him beyond the fact, here indicated, that Hothbrodd killed him.

22. Water's gleam: gold.

23. Brandey ("Brand-Isle"): not mentioned elsewhere. Hethinsey ("Hethin's Isle"): possibly the island of Hiddensee, east of Rugen.]

 [p. 298]

24. Soon off Stafnsnes | stood the ships,
 Fair they glided | and gay with gold;
 Then Helgi spake | to Hjorleif asking:
 "Hast thou counted | the gallant host?"

25. The young king answered | the other then:
 "Long were it to tell | from Tronueyr
 The long-stemmed ships | with warriors laden
 That come from without | into Orvasund.

26. .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 "There are hundreds twelve | of trusty men,
 But in Hotun lies | the host of the king,
 Greater by half; | I have hope of battle."

27. The ship's-tents soon | the chieftain struck,
 And waked the throng | of warriors all;

 [24. Stafnsnes ("Steersman's Cape"): an unidentifiable promontory. Fair: a guess, as the adjective in the manuscript is obscure. Hjorleif does not appear elsewhere, and seems to be simply one of Helgi's lieutenants.

25. Tronueyr: "Crane-Strand." Long-stemmed: literally "long-headed," as the high, curving stem of a Norse ship was often carved to represent a head and neck. Orvasund: almost certainly the Danish Oresund, off Seeland. Such bits of geography as this followed Helgi persistently.

26. No gap indicated in the manuscript. Hotun: cf. stanza 8 and note.

27. Line 3 seems to have been interpolated from line 4 of Helgakvitha Hundingsbana II, 42. Ship's-tents: the awnings spread over the deck to shelter the crews from sun and rain when the ships were at anchor. Varinsfjord: cf. Helgakvitha Hjorvarthssonar, 22 and note.]

 [p. 299]

(The heroes the red | of dawn beheld;)
 And on the masts | the gallant men
 Made fast the sails | in Varinsfjord.

28. There was beat of oars | and clash of iron,
 Shield smote shield | as the ships'-folk rowed;
 Swiftly went | the warrior-laden
 Fleet of the ruler | forth from the land.

29. So did it sound, | when together the sisters
 Of Kolga struck | with the keels full long,
 As if cliffs were broken | with beating surf,
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .

30. Helgi bade higher | hoist the sails,
 Nor did the ships'-folk | shun the waves,
 Though dreadfully | did Aegir's daughters
 Seek the steeds | of the sea to sink.

31. But from above | did Sigrun brave
 Aid the men and | all their faring;

 [28. The manuscript indicates line 3 as the beginning of a new stanza, and some editions follow this arrangement, making lines 1-2 a separate stanza.

29. The manuscript indicates no gap, and some editions combine the stanza with lines 3-4 of stanza 28. Sisters of Kolga: the waves, Kolga ("The Gold") being one of the daughters of the sea-god, Aegir. As the Volsungasaga says, "Now there was a great storm."

30. Helgi demonstrates his courage, whatever one may think of his seamanship. Aegir's daughters: the waves; cf. stanza 29 and note.]

 [p. 300]

Mightily came | from the claws of Ron
 The leader's sea-beast | off Gnipalund.

32. At evening there | in Unavagar
 Floated the fleet | bedecked full fair;
 But they who saw | from Svarin's hill,
 Bitter at heart | the host beheld.

33. Then Gothmund asked, | goodly of birth,
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 "Who is the monarch | who guides the host,
 And to the land | the warriors leads?"

34. Sinfjotli answered, | and up on an oar
 Raised a shield all red | with golden rim;

 [31. Sigrun here appears again as a Valkyrie. Ron: Aegir's wife; cf. Helgakvitha Hjorvarthssonar, 18 and note. Sea-beast: ship. Gnipalund: "Crag-Wood."

32. Unavagar: "Friendly Waves." Svarin's hill: the hill where Granmar had his dwelling.

33. Here begins the long dialogue between Gothmund, one of Gramnar's sons, and Sinfjotli, Helgi's half-brother. Two lines (stanza 33, lines 3-4) are quoted by the annotator in the prose note following stanza 16 of the second Helgi Hundingsbane lay, and the dialogue, in much abbreviated form, together with Helgi's admonition to Sinfjotli to cease talking, is closely paralleled in stanzas 22-27 of that poem. It has been suggested that this whole passage (stanzas 33-48) is an interpolation, perhaps from "the Old Volsung lay." This may be, but it seems more probable that the poet used an older poem simply as the basis for this passage, borrowing a little but making up a great deal more. The manuscript indicates no gap in stanza 33.

34. Sinfjotli: cf. note on stanza 6. Red: raising a red shield was the signal for war.]

 [p. 301]

A sea-sentry was he, | skilled to speak,
 And in words with princes | well to strive.

35. "Say tonight | when you feed the swine,
 And send your bitches | to seek their swill,
 That out of the East | have the Ylfings come,
 Greedy for battle, | to Gnipalund.

36. "There will Hothbrodd | Helgi find,
 In the midst of the fleet, | and flight he scorns;
 Often has he | the eagles gorged,
 Whilst thou at the quern | wert slave-girls kissing."

 Gothmund spake:
 37. "Hero, the ancient | sayings heed,
 And bring not lies | to the nobly born.
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .

38. "Thou hast eaten | the entrails of wolves,
 And of thy brothers | the slayer been;
 Oft wounds to suck | thy cold mouth sought,
 And loathed in rocky | dens didst lurk."

 [35. Ylfings: cf. stanza 5 and note.

36. Quern: turning the hand mill was, throughout antiquity, the task of slaves.

37. The manuscript does not name the speakers in this dialogue. No gap indicated in the manuscript, and editors have attempted various combinations of stanzas 37 and 38.

38. Wolves: the Volsungasaga tells that Sigmund and Sinfjotli lived in the woods for a time as werewolves. Brothers: [fp. 302] Sinfjotli killed the two sons of his mother, Signy, and her husband, Siggeir, as part of the vengeance wreaked on Siggeir for the treacherous murder of Sigmund's father, Volsung, and nine of his brothers (cf. Fra Dautha Sinfjotla and note). The manuscript marks line 3 as the beginning of a new stanza.]

 [p. 302]

 Sinfjotli spake:
 39. "A witch in Varin's | isle thou wast,
 A woman false, | and lies didst fashion;
 Of the mail-clad heroes | thou wouldst have
 No other, thou saidst, | save Sinfjotli only.

40. "A Valkyrie wast thou, | loathly Witch,
 Evil and base, | in Allfather's home;
 The warriors all | must ever fight,
 Woman subtle, | for sake of thee.

41. ".    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 Nine did we | in Sogunes
 Of wolf-cubs have; | I their father was."

 [39. Varin's isle: cf. stanza 27 and note, and Helgakvitha Hjorvarthssonar, 22. Reproaching a man with having been a woman and borne children was not uncommon.

40. This stanza may be an interpolation in the dialogue passage. Allfather: Othin. We have no information regarding Gothmund's career, but it looks as though Sinfjotli were drawing solely on his imagination for his taunts, whereas Gothmund's insults have a basis in Sinfjotli's previous life.

41. No gap indicated in the manuscript; some editors combine the two lines with stanza 40, some regard them as the first instead of the last lines of a separate stanza, and some assume the lacuna here indicated. Sogunes ("Saga's Cape"): of the goddess Saga little is known; cf. Grimnismol, 7.]

 [p. 303]

 Gothmund spake:
 42. "Thou didst not father | Fenrir's-wolves,
 Though older thou art | than all I know;
 For they gelded thee | in Gnipalund,
 The giant-women | at Thorsnes once.

43. "Under houses the stepson | of Siggeir lay,
 Fain of the wolf's cry | out in the woods;
 Evil came then all | to thy hands,
 When thy brothers' | breasts thou didst redden,
 Fame didst thou win | for foulest deeds.

44. "In Bravoll wast thou | Grani's bride,
 Golden-bitted | and ready to gallop;
 I rode thee many | a mile, and down
 Didst sink, thou giantess, | under the saddle."

 Sinfjotli spake:
 45. "A brainless fellow | didst seem to be,
 When once for Gollnir | goats didst milk,

 [42. Fenrir's-wolves: wolves in general. Thorsnes: "Thor's Cape."

43, The phrase "under houses," which follows the manuscript, may be an error for "in wolf-caves." Line 3 (or 4) may be an interpolation. The manuscript indicates line 5 as the beginning of a new stanza. Siggeir: cf. stanza 38, note.

44. Several editions assign this stanza to Sinfjotli instead of to Gothmund. Bravoll ("Field of the Brow"): not elsewhere mentioned in the poems. Grani: Sigurth's horse (cf. Volundarkvitha, 16 and note); Gothmund means that Sinfjotli had turned into a mare, after the fashion of Loki (cf. Grimnismol, 44, note). The meaning of line 4 in the original is uncertain.

45. A few editions give this stanza to Gothmund. Gollnir: [fp. 304] possibly a giant. Imth: nothing is known of him or his daughter.]

 [p. 304]

And another time | when as Imth's daughter
 In rags thou wentest; | wilt longer wrangle?"

 Gothmund spake:
 46. "Sooner would I | at Frekastein
 Feed the ravens | with flesh of thine
 Than send your bitches | to seek their swill,
 Or feed the swine; | may the fiends take you!"

 Helgi spake:
 47. "Better, Sinfjotli, | thee 'twould beseem
 Battle to give | and eagles to gladden,
 Than vain and empty | words to utter,
 Though ring-breakers oft | in speech do wrangle.

48. "Good I find not | the sons of Granmar,
 But for heroes 'tis seemly | the truth to speak;
 At Moinsheimar | proved the men
 That hearts for the wielding | of swords they had."

49. Mightily then | they made to run
 Sviputh and Sveggjuth | to Solheimar;

 [46. A few editions give this stanza to Sinfjotli. Frekastein: cf. Helgakvitha Hjorvarthssonar, 39 and note. A stanza may have been lost after stanza 46, parallel to stanza 25 of the second Helgi Hundingsbane lay.

47. Ring-breakers: cf. stanza 318 and note.

48. Moinsheimar: a battlefield of which nothing is known, where, however, the sons of Granmar appear to have fought bravely.

49. Here the scene shifts to the shore among Hothbrodd's followers. [fp. 305] Sviputh and Sveggjuth ("Swift" and "Lithe"): horses' names. Mist's horse: the Valkyrie's name is the same as the English word "mist," and the "horse" on which the mist rides is the earth. The two lines in parenthesis may be interpolated, or line 5 may begin a new stanza, as the manuscript indicates.]

 [p. 305]

(By dewy dales | and chasms dark,
 Mist's horse shook | where the men went by;)
 The king they found | at his courtyard gate,
 And told him the foeman | fierce was come.

50. Forth stood Hothbrodd, | helmed for battle,
 Watched the riding | of his warriors;
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 "Why are the Hniflungs | white with fear?"

 Gothmund spake:
 51. "Swift keels lie | hard by the land,
 (Mast-ring harts | and mighty yards,
 Wealth of shields | and well-planed oars;)
 The king's fair host, | the Ylfings haughty;
 Fifteen bands | to land have fared,
 But out in Sogn | are seven thousand.

 [50. No gap indicated in the manuscript. Hniflungs: cf. introductory note.

51. Lines 2-3 may be interpolated, or a new stanza may begin, as the manuscript indicates, with line 5. Many editors combine lines 5-6 with all or part of stanza 52. Possibly Gothmund is not the speaker. Mast-ring harts: ships, so called from the ring attaching the yard to the mast. Ylfings: cf. stanza 5 and note. Sogn: this name, which actually belongs in western Norway, seems to have been used here with no particular significance.

52. The manuscript indicates line 3 as beginning a new stanza; some editors combine lines 3-4 with all or part of stanza [fp. 306]53, while others assume the loss of two lines following line 4. Fire-beasts: dragons,, i.e., ships. The Norse ships of war, as distinguished from merchant vessels, were often called dragons because of their shape and the carving of their stems.]

 [p. 306]

52. "At anchor lying | off Gnipalund
 Are fire-beasts black, | all fitted with gold;
 There wait most | of the foeman's men,
 Nor will Helgi long | the battle delay."

 Hothbrodd spake:
 53. "Bid the horses run | to the Reginthing,
 Melnir and Mylnir | to Myrkwood now,
 (And Sporvitnir | to Sparinsheith;)
 Let no man seek | henceforth to sit
 Who the flame of wounds | knows well to wield.

54. "Summon Hogni, | the sons of Hring,
 Atli and Yngvi | and Alf the Old;
 Glad they are | of battle ever;
 Against the Volsungs | let us go."

 [53. The manuscript does not indicate the speaker, and a few editors assume the loss of one or two lines embodying the phrase "Hothbrodd spake." In the manuscript line 3, which many editors have suspected of being spurious, stands before line 2. Possibly lines 4-5 are the remains of a separate stanza. Reginthing ("The Great Council"): apparently the council-place for the whole country, as distinct from the local council, or "herathsthing." Melnir ("Bit-Bearer"), Mylnir ("The Biter") and Spornvitnir ("Spur-Wolf"): horses' names. Myrkwood: a not uncommon name for a dark forest; cf. Lokasenna, 42, and Atlakvitha, 3. Sparinsheith ("Sparin's Heath"): nothing more is known of Sparin or his heath. Flame of wounds: sword.

54. Hogni: the father of Sigrun; cf. Helgakvitha Hundingsbana [fp. 307] II, 18. Of Hring and his sons nothing further is known. Volsungs: here for the first time the poet gives Helgi and Sinfjotli the family name to which, as sons of Sigmund Volsungsson, they are entitled.]

 [p. 307]

55. Swift as a storm | there smote together
 The flashing blades | at Frekastein;
 Ever was Helgi, | Hunding's slayer,
 First in the throng | where warriors fought;
 (Fierce in battle, | slow to fly,
 Hard the heart | of the hero was.)

56. From heaven there came | the maidens helmed,--
 The weapon-clang grew,-- | who watched o'er the king;
 Spake Sigrun fair,-- | the wound-givers flew,
 And the horse of the giantess | raven's-food had:--

57. "Hail to thee, hero! | full happy with men,
 Offspring of Yngvi, | shalt ever live,
 For thou the fearless | foe hast slain
 Who to many the dread | of death had brought.

 [55. The manuscript indicates line 5 as the beginning of a new stanza, but many editors have rejected lines 5-6 as spurious, while others regard them as the first half of a stanza the last two lines of which have been lost.

56. Wound-givers: probably this means "Valkyries," but there is considerable doubt as to the original word. Horse, etc.: i.e., the wolf (because giantesses customarily had wolves for their steeds) ate corpses (the food of birds of prey).

57. Yngvi: one of the sons of Halfdan the Old, and traditional ancestor of the Ynglings, with whom the Ylfings seem to have been confused (cf. Hynduljoth, 11 and note). The confusion between the Ylfings (or Ynglings) and Volsungs was carried far [fp. 308] enough so that Sigurth himself is once called a descendant of Yngvi (Reginsmol, 14). Gering identifies the name of Yngvi with the god Freyr, but the Volsungs certainly claimed descent from Othin, not Freyr, and there is nothing to indicate that Helgi in the Danish tradition was supposed to be descended from Freyr, whereas his descent from Yngvi Halfdansson fits well with the rest of his story. However, cf. Sigurtharkvitha en skamma, 24 and note.]

 [p. 308]

58. "Warrior, well | for thyself hast won
 Red rings bright | and the noble bride;
 Both now, warrior, | thine shall be,
 Hogni's daughter | and Hringstathir,
 Wealth and triumph; | the battle wanes."

 [58. This entire stanza may be an interpolation; nearly every edition has a different way of dealing with it. Hringstathir: as this place had been given to Helgi by his father (cf. stanza 8 and note), the poet has apparently made a mistake in naming it here as a conquest from Granmar's sons, unless, indeed, they had previously captured it from Helgi, which seems unlikely.]

 
      
The Poetic Edda, by Henry Adams Bellows, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 309]

 

HELGAKVITHA HUNDINGSBANA II

 

The Second Lay of Helgi Hundingsbane

 

INTRODUCTORY NOTE

As the general nature of the Helgi tradition has been considered in the introductory note to Helgakvitha Hjorvarthssonar, it is necessary here to discuss only the characteristics of this particular poem. The second Helgi Hundingsbane lay is in most respects the exact opposite of the first one: it is in no sense consecutive; it is not a narrative poem, and all or most of it gives evidence of relatively early composition, its origin probably going well back into the tenth century.

It is frankly nothing but a piece of, in the main, very clumsy patchwork, made up of eight distinct fragments, pieced together awkwardly by the annotator with copious prose notes. One of these fragments (stanzas 13-16) is specifically identified as coming from "the old Volsung lay." What was that poem, and how much more of the extant Helgi-lay compilation was taken from it, and did the annotator know more of it than he included in his patchwork? Conclusive answers to these questions have baffled scholarship, and probably always will do so. My own guess is that the annotator knew little or nothing more than he wrote down; having got the first Helgi Hundingsbane lay, which was obviously in fairly good shape, out of the way, he proceeded to assemble all the odds and ends of verse about Helgi which he could get hold of, putting them together on the basis of the narrative told in the first Helgi lay and of such stories as his knowledge of prose sagas may have yielded.

Section I (stanzas 1-4) deals with an early adventure of Helgi's, -in which he narrowly escapes capture when he ventures into Hunding's home in disguise. Section II (stanzas 5-12) is a dialogue between Helgi and Sigrun at their first meeting. Section III (stanzas 13-16, the "old Volsung lay" group) is another dialogue between Helgi and Sigrun when she invokes his aid to save her from Hothbrodd. Section IV (stanzas 17-20, which may well be from the same poem as Section III, is made up of speeches by Helgi and Sigrun after the battle in which Hothbrodd is killed; stanza 21, however, is certainly an interpolation from another poem, as it is in a different meter. Section V (stanzas 22-27) is the dispute between Sinfjotli and Gothmund, evidently

[p. 310]

in an older form than the one included in the first Helgi Hundingsbane lay. Section VI (stanzas 28-37) gives Dag's speech to his sister, Sigrun, telling of Helgi's death, her curse on her brother and her lament for her slain husband. Section VII (stanza 38) is the remnant of a dispute between Helgi and Hunding, here inserted absurdly out of place. Section VIII (stanzas 39-50) deals with the return of the dead Helgi and Sigrun's visit to him in the burial hill.

Sijmons maintains that sections I and II are fragments of the Kara lay mentioned by the annotator in his concluding prose note, and that sections IV, VI, and VIII are from a lost Helgi-Sigrun poem, while Section III comes, of course, from the "old Volsung lay." This seems as good a guess as any other, conclusive proof being quite out of the question.

Were it not for sections, VI and VIII the poem would be little more than a battle-ground for scholars, but those two sections are in many ways as fine as anything in Old Norse poetry. Sigrun's curse of her brother for the slaying of Helgi and her lament for her dead husband, and the extraordinary vividness of the final scene in the burial hill, have a quality which fully offsets the baffling confusion of the rest of the poem.

__________________

King Sigmund, the son of Volsung, had as wife Borghild, from Bralund. They named their son Helgi, after Helgi Hjorvarthsson; Hagal was Helgi's foster-father. Hunding was the name of a powerful king, and Hundland is named from him. He was a mighty warrior, and had many sons with him on his campaigns. There was enmity and strife between these two, King Hunding and

 [Prose. In the manuscript the poem is headed "Of the Volsungs," but most editions give it the title used here. Sigmund: cf. Helgakvitha Hundingsbana I, 6 and note, which also mentions Volsung. Borghild and Bralund: cf. Helgakvitha Hundingsbana I, 1 and note. Helgi: the annotator's explanation that the child [fp. 311] was named after Helgi Hjorvarthsson is a naive way of getting around the difficulties created by the two sets of Helgi stories. He might equally well have said that the new Helgi was the old one born again, as he accounts for Sigrun in this way ("she was Svava reborn"). Hagal: not elsewhere mentioned; it was a common custom to have boys brought up by foster-parents. Hunding and Hundland: cf. Helgakvitha Hundingsbana I, 10 and note. Volsungs and Ylfings: regarding this confusion of family names cf. Helgakvitha Hundingsbana I, 5 and note. Haeming: his name does not appear in the list of Hunding's sons. It is quite possible that these opening stanzas (1-4) do not refer to Hunding at all.] 

 [p. 311]

King Sigmund, and each slew the other's kinsmen. King Sigmund and his family were called Volsungs and Ylfings. Helgi went as a spy to the home of King Hunding in disguise. Haeming, a son of King Hunding's, was at home. When Helgi went forth, then he met a young herdsman, and said:

1. "Say to Haeming | that Helgi knows
 Whom the heroes | in armor hid;
 A gray wolf had they | within their hall,
 Whom King Hunding | Hamal thought."

Hamal was the name of Hagal's son. King Hunding

 [1. Helgi appears to have stayed with Hunding under the name of Hamal, but now, thinking himself safe, he sends word of who he really is. Hunding: it has been suggested that the compiler may have inserted this name to fit what he thought the story ought to be, in place of Haeming, or even Hadding. If stanzas 1-4 are a fragment of the Karuljoth (Lay of Kara), this latter suggestion is quite reasonable, for in that poem, which we do not possess, but which supplied material for the compilers of the Hromundar saga Greipssonar, Helgi appears as Helgi Haddingjaskati (cf. final prose note). Nothing beyond this one name connects stanzas 1-4 with Hunding.]

 [p. 312]

 

sent men to Hagal to seek Helgi, and Helgi could not save himself in any other way, so he put on the clothes of a bond-woman and set to work at the mill. They sought Helgi but found him not.

2. Then Blind spake out, | the evil-minded:
 " Of Hagal's bond-woman | bright are the eyes;
 Yon comes not of churls | who stands at the quern;
 The millstones break, | the boards are shattered.

3. "The hero has | a doom full hard,
 That barley now | he needs must grind;
 Better befits | his hand to feel
 The hilt of the sword | than the millstone's handle."

Hagal answered and said:

4. "Small is the wonder | if boards are splintered
 By a monarch's daughter | the mill is turned;

 [Prose. Hagal: Helgi's foster-father, who naturally protects him.

2. The manuscript indicates line 2 as the beginning of the stanza, the copyist evidently regarding line 1 as prose. This has caused various rearrangements in the different editions. Blind: leader of the band sent to capture Helgi.

3. The manuscript marks line 3 as the beginning of a stanza. Barley: the word literally means "foreign grain," and would afford an interesting study to students of early commerce.

4. Possibly two stanzas with one line lost, or perhaps the lines in parenthesis are spurious; each editor has his own guess, Sigar and Hogni: it seems unlikely that Hagal refers to the Hogni who was Sigrun's father, for this part of the story has nothing whatever to do with Sigrun. As Hagal is, of course, deliberately [fp. 313] lying, it is useless to test any part of his speech for accuracy.]

 [p. 313]

Once through clouds | she was wont to ride,
 And battles fought | like fighting men,
 (Till Helgi a captive | held her fast;
 Sister she is | of Sigar and Hogni,
 Thus bright are the eyes | of the Ylfings' maid.)"

Helgi escaped and went to a fighting ship. He slew King Hunding, and thenceforth was called Helgi Hundingsbane.

 

(II)

He lay with his host in Brunavagar, and they had there a strand-slaughtering, and ate the flesh raw. Hogni was the name of a king. His daughter was Sigrun; she was a Valkyrie and rode air and water; she was Svava reborn. Sigrun rode to Helgi's ship and said:

5. "Who rules the ship | by the shore so steep?
 Where is the home | ye warriors have?
 Why do ye bide | in Brunavagar,
 Or what the way | that ye wish to try?"

 [Prose. No division indicated in the manuscript. Brunavagar ("Bruni's Sea"): mentioned only in this section. Strand-slaughtering: a killing on the shore of cattle stolen in a raid. Hogni and Sigrun: cf. Helgakvitha Hundingsbana I, 17 and note; the annotator's notion of Sigrun as the reincarnated Svava (cf. Helgakvitha Hjorvarthssonar, concluding prose note) represents a naive form of scholarship. There is nothing in stanzas 5-12 which clearly identifies Sigrun as a Valkyrie, or which, except for the last line of stanza 12, identifies the speaker as Sigrun. Some editors, therefore, call her simply "the Valkyrie," while [fp. 314] Vigfusson, who thinks this section is also a remnant of the Karuljoth, calls her Kara.]

 [p. 314]

 Helgi spake:
 6 "Hamal's the ship | by the shore so steep,
 Our home in Hlesey | do we have;
 For fair wind bide we | in Brunavagar,
 Eastward the way | that we wish to try."

 Sigrun spake:
 7. "Where hast thou, warrior, | battle wakened,
 Or gorged the birds | of the sisters of Guth?
 Why is thy byrnie | spattered with blood,
 Why helmed dost feast | on food uncooked?"

 Helgi spake:
 8. "Latest of all, | the Ylfings' son
 On the western sea, | if know thou wilt,
 Captured bears | in Bragalund,
 And fed the eagles | with edge of sword.
 Now is it shown | why our shirts are bloody,
 And little our food | with fire is cooked."

 [6. The manuscript does not indicate the speakers. Hamal: Helgi's assumption of this name seems to link this section (stanzas 5-12) with stanza 1. Hlesey ("Island of Hler"--i.e., Aegir, the sea-god): generally identified as the Danish island of Laso; cf. Harbarthsljoth, 37 and note.

7. Guth: a Valkyrie (cf. Voluspo, 31) the birds of her sisters are the kites and ravens.

8. The manuscript indicates line 5 as the beginning of a new stanza; some editors reject lines 1-2, while others make lines 5-6 into a fragmentary stanza. Ylfings: cf. introductory prose and note. Bragalund ("Bragi's Wood"): a mythical place. Bears: presumably Berserkers, regarding whom cf. Hyndluljoth, 23.]

 [p. 315]

 Sigrun spake:
 9. "Of battle thou tellest, | and there was bent
 Hunding the king | before Helgi down;
 There was carnage when thou | didst avenge thy kin,
 And blood flowed fast | on the blade of the sword."

 Helgi spake:
 10. "How didst thou know | that now our kin,
 Maiden wise, | we have well avenged?
 Many there are | of the sons of the mighty
 Who share alike | our lofty race."

 Sigrun spake:
 11. "Not far was I | from the lord of the folk,
 Yester morn, | when the monarch was slain;
 Though crafty the son | of Sigmund, methinks,
 When he speaks of the fight | in slaughter-runes.

12. "On the long-ship once | I saw thee well,
 When in the blood-stained | bow thou wast,

 [10. Helgi's meaning in lines 3-4 is that, although he has al ready declared himself an Ylfing (stanza 8, line 1), there are many heroes of that race, and he does not understand how Sigrun knows him to be Helgi.

11. Slaughter-runes: equivocal or deceptive speech regarding the battle. The word "rune" had the meaning of "magic" or "mystery" long before it was applied to the signs or characters with which it was later identified.

12. Some editors reject line 3, others line 5. The manuscript omits Helgi's name in line 5, thereby destroying both the sense and the meter. Vigfusson, following his Karuljoth theory (cf. [fp. 316] note on prose following stanza 4), changes Hogni to Halfdan, father of Kara.]

 [p. 316]

(And round thee icy | waves were raging;)
 Now would the hero | hide from me,
 But to Hogni's daughter | is Helgi known."

 

(III)

Granmar was the name of a mighty king, who dwelt at Svarin's hill. He had many sons; one was named Hothbrodd, another Gothmund, a third Starkath. Hothbrodd was in a kings' meeting, and he won the promise of having Sigrun, Hogni's daughter, for his wife. But when she heard this, she rode with the Valkyries over air and sea to seek Helgi. Helgi was then at Logafjoll, and had fought with Hunding's sons; there he killed Alf and Eyolf, Hjorvarth and Hervarth. He was all weary with battle, and sat under the eagle-stone. There Sigrun found him, and ran to throw her arms about his neck, and kissed him, and told him her tidings, as is set forth in the old Volsung lay:

13. Sigrun the joyful | chieftain sought,
 Forthwith Helgi's | hand she took;

 [Prose. The manuscript indicates no division. Most of this prose passage is evidently based on Helgakvitha Hundingsbana I; the only new features are the introduction of Starkath as a third son of Granmar, which is clearly an error based on a misunderstanding of stanza 19, and the reference to the kings' meeting, based on stanza 15. Kings' meetings, or councils, were by no means unusual; the North in early days was prolific in kings. For the remaining names, cf. Helgakvitha Hundingsbana I: [fp. 317] Granmar, stanza 19; Hothbrodd, stanza 33; Gothmund, stanza 33; Svarin's hill, stanza 32; Logafjoll, stanza 13; .41f, Eyjolf, Hjorvarth and Hervarth, stanza 14. The old Volsung lay: cf. Introductory Note.]

 [p. 317]

She greeted the hero | helmed and kissed him,
 The warrior's heart | to the woman turned.

14. From her heart the daughter | of Hogni spake,
 Dear was Helgi, | she said, to her;
 "Long with all | my heart I loved
 Sigmund's son | ere ever I saw him.

15. "At the meeting to Hothbrodd | mated I was,
 But another hero | I fain would have;
 Though, king, the wrath | of my kin I fear,
 Since I broke my father's | fairest wish."

 Helgi spake:
 16. "Fear not ever | Hogni's anger,
 Nor yet thy kinsmen's | cruel wrath;
 Maiden, thou | with me shalt live,
 Thy kindred, fair one, | I shall not fear."

 [13. Some editions combine lines 3-4, Or line 4, with part of stanza 14.

14. The lines of stanzas 14 and 15 are here rearranged in accordance with Bugge's emendation; in the manuscript they stand as follows: lines 3-4 of stanza 14; stanza 15; lines 1-2 of stanza 14. This confusion has given rise to various editorial conjectures.

 Prose. The manuscript indicates no division. Here again, the annotator has drawn practically all his information from Helgakvitha [fp. 317] Hundingsbana I, which he specifically mentions and even quotes. The only new features are the names of Hogni's sons, Bragi and Dag. Bragi is mentioned in stanza 19, though it is not there stated that he is Hogni's son. Dag, who figures largely in stanzas 28-34, is a puzzle, for the verse never names him, and it is an open question where the annotator got his name. Frekastein: cf. Helgakvitha Hjorvarthssonar, 39 and note. As is written: the two lines are quoted, with a change of two words, from Helgakvitha Hundingsbana I, 33. Sinfjotli: cf. Helgakvitha Hundingsbana I, 6 and note, and stanzas 33-48, in which the whole dialogue is given. Loyalty: apparently the annotator got this bit of information out of stanza 29, in which Sigrun refers to the oaths which her brother had sworn to Helgi.]

 [p. 318]

(IV)

Helgi then assembled a great sea-host and went to Frekastein. On the sea he met a perilous storm; lightning flashed overhead and the bolts struck the ship. They saw in the air that nine Valkyries were riding, and recognized Sigrun among them. Then the storm abated, and they came safe and sound to land. Granmar's sons sat on a certain mountain as the ships sailed toward the land. Gothmund leaped on a horse and rode for news to a promontory near the harbor; the Volsungs were even then lowering their sails. Then Gothmund said, as is written before in the Helgi lay:

"Who is the king | who captains the fleet,
 And to the land | the warriors leads?"

Sinfjotli, Sigmund's son, answered him, and that too is written.
 Gothmund rode home with his tidings of the host;

[p. 319]

then Granmar's sons summoned an army. Many kings came there; there were Hogni, Sigrun's father, and his sons Bragi and Dag. There was a great battle, and all Granmar's sons were slain and all their allies; only Dag, Hogni's son, was spared, and he swore loyalty to the Volsungs. Sigrun went among the dead and found Hothbrodd at the coming of death. She said:

17. "Never shall Sigrun | from Sevafjoll,
 Hothbrodd king, | be held in thine arms;
 Granmar's sons | full cold have grown,
 And the giant-steeds gray | on corpses gorge."

Then she sought out Helgi, and was full of joy He said:

18. "Maid, not fair | is all thy fortune,
 The Norris I blame | that this should be;
 This morn there fell | at Frekastein
 Bragi and Hogni | beneath my hand.

19. "At Hlebjorg fell | the sons of Hrollaug,
 Starkath the king | at Styrkleifar;

 [17. Sevafjoll ("Wet Mountain"): mentioned only in this poem. Giant-steeds: wolves, the usual steeds of giantesses; cf. Helgakvitha Hundingsbana I, 56.

18. Maid: the word thus rendered is the same doubtful one which appears in Volundarkvitha, 1 and 5, and which may mean specifically a Valkyrie (Gering translates it "helmed" or "heroic") or simply "wise." Cf. Volundarkvitha, note on introductory prose. Norns: cf. Voluspo, 20 and note. In stanza 33 Dag similarly lays the blame for the murder he has committed on Othin. Bragi: probably Sigrun's brother.

19. This stanza looks like an interpolation, and there is little [fp. 320] or nothing to connect it with the slaying of Gramnar's sons. In the manuscript line 2, indicated as the beginning of a stanza, precedes line 1. Hlebjorg ("Sea-Mountain") and Styrkleifar ("Battle-Cliffs"): place names not elsewhere mentioned. Of Hrollaug's sons nothing further is known. Starkath: this name gives a hint of the origin of this stanza, for Saxo Grammaticus tells of the slaying of the Swedish hero Starkath ("The Strong") the son of Storverk, and describes how his severed head bit the ground in anger (cf. line 4). In all probability this stanza is from an entirely different poem, dealing with the Starkath story, and the annotator's attempt to identify the Swedish hero as a third son of Granmar is quite without foundation.]

 [p. 320]

Fighters more noble | saw I never,
 The body fought | when the head had fallen.

20. "On the ground full low | the slain are lying,
 Most are there | of the men of thy race;
 Nought hast thou won, | for thy fate it was
 Brave men to bring | to the battle-field."

Then Sigrun wept. | Helgi said:

21. "Grieve not, Sigrun, | the battle is gained,
 The fighter can shun not his fate."
 Sigrun spake:
 "To life would I call | them who slaughtered lie,
 If safe on thy breast I might be."

 [21. The difference of meter would of itself be enough to indicate that this stanza comes from an entirely different poem. A few editions assign the whole stanza to Helgi, but lines 3-4. are almost certainly Sigrun's, and the manuscript begins line 3 with a large capital letter following a period.]

 [p. 321]

 

(V)

This Gothmund the son of Granmar spoke:

22. "What hero great | is guiding the ships?
 A golden flag | on the stem he flies;
 I find not peace in | the van of your faring,
 And round the fighters | is battle-light red."

 Sinfjotli spake:
 23. "Here may Hothbrodd | Helgi find,
 The hater of flight, | in the midst of the fleet;
 The home of all | thy race he has,
 And over the realm | of the fishes he rules."

 [22. With this stanza begins the dispute between Gothmund and Sinfjotli which, together with Helgi's rebuke to his half brother, appears at much greater length in Helgakvitha Hundingsbana I, 33-48. It is introduced here manifestly in the wrong place. The version here given is almost certainly the older of the two, but the resemblance is so striking, and in some cases (notably in Helgi's rebuke) the stanzas are so nearly identical, that it seems probable that the composer of the first Helgi Hundingsbane lay borrowed directly from the poem of which the present dialogue is a fragment. Flag: the banner ("gunnfani," cf. "gonfalon") here serves as the signal for war instead of the red shield mentioned in Helgakvitha Hundingsbana I, 34. Battle-light: perhaps the "northern lights."

23. Lines 3-4 are obscure, and in the manuscript show signs of error. Helgi had not at this time, so far as we know, conquered any of Hothbrodd's land. The realm of the fishes, in line 4, presumably means the sea, but the word here translated "fishes" is obscure, and many editors treat it as a proper name, "the realm of the Fjorsungs," but without further suggestion as to who or what the Fjorsungs are.]

 [p. 322]

 Gothmund spake:
 24. "First shall swords | at Frekastein
 Prove our worth | in place of words;
 Time is it, Hothbrodd, | vengeance to have,
 If in battle worsted | once we were."

 Sinfjotli spake:
 25. "Better, Gothmund, | to tend the goats,
 And climb the rocks | of the mountain cliffs;
 A hazel switch | to hold in thy hand
 More seemly were | than the hilt of a sword."

 Helgi spake:
 26. "Better, Sinfjotli, | thee 'twould beseem
 Battles to give, | and eagles to gladden,
 Than vain and empty | speech to utter,
 Though warriors oft | with words do strive.

27. "Good I find not | the sons of Granmar,
 But for heroes 'tis seemly | the truth to speak;
 At Moinsheimar | proved the men
 That hearts for the wielding | of swords they had,
 (And ever brave | the warriors are.)"

 [24. The word here translated swords is a conjectural emendation; the manuscript implies merely an invitation to continue the quarrel at Frekastein. Hothbrodd: apparently he is here considered as present during the dispute; some editors, in defiance of the meter, have emended the line to mean "Time is it for Hothbrodd | vengeance to have."

26-27. Cf. Helgakvitha Hundingsbana I, 47-48, which are nearly identical. Stanza 27 in the manuscript is abbreviated to the first letters of the words, except for line 5, which does not appear in the other poem, and which looks like an interpolation.]

 [p. 323]

 

(VI)

Helgi took Sigrun to wife, and they had sons. Helgi did not reach old age. Dag, the son of Hogni, offered sacrifice to Othin to be avenged for his father's death; Othin gave Dag his spear. Dag found Helgi, his brother-in-law, at a place which is called Fjoturlund. He thrust the spear through Helgi's body. Then Helgi fell, and Dag rode to Sevafjoll and told Sigrun the tidings:

28. "Sad am I, sister, | sorrow to tell thee,
 Woe to my kin | unwilling I worked;
 In the morn there fell | at Fjoturlund
 The noblest prince | the world has known,
 (And his heel he set | on the heroes' necks.)"

 Sigrun spake:
 29. "Now may every | oath thee bite
 That with Helgi | sworn thou hast,
 By the water | bright of Leipt,
 And the ice-cold | stone of Uth.

 [Prose. Here begins a new section of the poem, dealing with Helgi's death at the hands of Dag, Sigrun's brother. The note is based wholly on stanzas 28-34, except for the introduction of Dag's name (cf. note on prose following stanza 16), and the reference to Othin's spear, the weapon which made victory certain, and which the annotator brought in doubtless on the strength of Dag's statement that Othin was responsible for Helgi's death (stanza 33). Fjoturlund ("Fetter-Wood"): mentioned only here and in stanza 28.

28. Line 5 looks like an interpolation.

29. Leipt: this river is mentioned in Grimnismol, 29. Uth: a [fp. 324] daughter of the sea-god Aegir; regarding her sacred stone we know nothing. According to the annotator, Dag's life had been spared because he swore loyalty to Helgi.]

 [p. 324]

30. "The ship shall sail not | in which thou sailest,
 Though a favoring wind | shall follow after;
 The horse shall run not | whereon thou ridest,
 Though fain thou art | thy foe to flee.

31. .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
     .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 "The sword shall bite not | which thou bearest,
 Till thy head itself | it sings about.

32. "Vengeance were mine | for Helgi's murder,
 Wert thou a wolf | in the woods without,
 Possessing nought | and knowing no joy,
 Having no food | save corpses to feed on."

 Dag spake:
 33. "Mad art thou, sister, | and wild of mind,
 Such a curse | on thy brother to cast;
 Othin is ruler | of every ill,
 Who sunders kin | with runes of spite.

34. "Thy brother rings | so red will give thee,
 All Vandilsve | and Vigdalir;

 [31. No gap indicated in the manuscript, but most editors have assumed that either the first or the last two lines have been lost. Bugge adds a line: "The shield shall not help thee which thou holdest."

34. Vandilsve ("Vandil's Shrine): who Vandil was we do not [fp. 325] know; this and Vigdalir ("Battle-Dale") are purely mythical places.]

 [p. 325]

Take half my land | to pay the harm,
 Ring-decked maid, | and as meed for thy sons."

 Sigrun spake:
 35. "I shall sit not happy | at Sevafjoll,
 Early or late, | my life to love,
 If the light cannot show, | in the leader's band,
 Vigblaer bearing him | back to his home,
 (The golden-bitted; | I shall greet him never.)

36. "Such the fear | that Helgi's foes
 Ever felt, | and all their kin,
 As makes the goats | with terror mad
 Run from the wolf | among the rocks.

37. "Helgi rose | above heroes all
 Like the lofty ash | above lowly thorns,
 Or the noble stag, | with dew besprinkled,
 Bearing his head | above all beasts,
 (And his horns gleam bright | to heaven itself.)

A hill was made in Helgi's memory. And when he

 [35. Line 5 may be spurious. Vigblaer ("Battle-Breather") Helgi's horse.

37. Line 5 (or possibly line 4) may be spurious. Cf. Guthrunarkvitha I, 17, and Guthrunarkvitha II, 2.

 Prose. Valhall, etc.: there is no indication as to where the annotator got this notion of Helgi's sharing Othin's rule. It is [fp. 326] most unlikely that such an idea ever found place in any of the Helgi poems, or at least in the earlier ones; probably it was a late development of the tradition in a period when Othin was no longer taken seriously.]

 [p. 326]

came to Valhall, then Othin bade him rule over every thing with himself.

 

(VII)

 Helgi said:
 A "Thou shalt, Hunding, | of every hero
 Wash the feet, | and kindle the fire,
 Tie up dogs, | and tend the horses,
 And feed the swine | ere to sleep thou goest."

 

(VIII)

One of Sigrun's maidens went one evening to Helgi's hill, and saw that Helgi rode to the hill with many men, The maiden said:

39. "Is this a dream | that methinks I see,
 Or the doom of the gods, | that dead men ride,

 [38. This stanza apparently comes from an otherwise lost passage containing a contest of words between Helgi and Hunding; indeed the name of Hunding may have been substituted for another one beginning with "H," and the stanza originally have had no connection with Helgi at all. The annotator inserts it here through an obvious misunderstanding, taking it to be Helgi's application of the power conferred on him by Othin.

39. Here begins the final section (stanzas 39-50), wherein Sigrun visits the dead Helgi in his burial hill. Doom of the gods: the phrase "ragna rok" has been rather unfortunately Anglicized into the work "ragnarok" (the Norse term is not a proper name), [fp. 326] and rok, "doom," has been confused with rokkr, "darkness," and so translated "dusk of the Gods," or "Gotterdammerung."]

 [p. 327]

And hither spurring | urge your steeds,
 Or is home-coming now | to the heroes granted?"

 Helgi spake:
 40. "No dream is this | that thou thinkest to see,
 Nor the end of the world, | though us thou beholdest,
 And hither spurring | we urge our steeds,
 Nor is home-coming now | to the heroes granted."

The maiden went home and said to Sigrun:

41. "Go forth, Sigrun, | from Sevafjoll,
 If fain the lord | of the folk wouldst find;
 (The hill is open, | Helgi is come;)
 The sword-tracks bleed; | the monarch bade
 That thou his wounds | shouldst now make well."

Sigrun went in the hill to Helgi, and said:

42. "Now am I glad | of our meeting together,
 As Othin's hawks, | so eager for prey,
 When slaughter and flesh | all warm they scent,
 Or dew-wet see | the red of day.

 [40. In the manuscript most of this stanza is abbreviated to the first letters of the words.

41. Line 5 (or possibly line 2) may be spurious. Sword-tracks: wounds. One edition places stanza 48 after stanza 42, and an other does the same with stanza 50.]

 [p. 328]

43. "First will I kiss | the lifeless king,
 Ere off the bloody | byrnie thou cast;
 With frost thy hair | is heavy, Helgi,
 And damp thou art | with the dew of death;
 (Ice-cold hands | has Hogni's kinsman,
 What, prince, can I | to bring thee ease?)"

 Helgi spake:
 44. "Thou alone, Sigrun | of Sevafjoll,
 Art cause that Helgi | with dew is heavy;
 Gold-decked maid, | thy tears are grievous,
 (Sun-bright south-maid, | ere thou sleepest;)
 Each falls like blood | on the hero's breast,
 (Burned-out, cold, | and crushed with care.)

45. "Well shall we drink | a noble draught,
 Though love and lands | are lost to me;
 No man a song | of sorrow shall sing,
 Though bleeding wounds | are on my breast;

 [43. Possibly lines 5-6 are spurious, or part of a stanza the rest of which has been lost. It has also been suggested that two lines may have been lost after line 2, making a new stanza of lines 3-6. Kinsman: literally "son-in-law."

44.. Lines 4 and 6 have been marked by various editors as probably spurious. Others regard lines 1-2 as the beginning of a stanza the rest of which has been lost, or combine lines 5-6 with lines 5-6 of stanza 45 to make a new stanza. South-maid: cf. Helgakvitha Hundingsbana I, 17 and note.

45. Both lines 3-4 and lines 5-6 have been suspected by editors of being interpolated, and the loss of two lines has also been suggested. Brides: the plural here is perplexing. Gering insists that only Sigrun is meant, and translates the word as singular, but both "brides" and "loves" are uncompromisingly plural in [fp. 329] the text. Were the men of Helgi's ghostly following likewise visited by their wives? The annotator may have thought so, for in the prose he mentions the "women" returning to the house, al though, of course, this may refer simply to Sigrun and the maid.]

 [p. 329]

Now in the hill | our brides we hold,
 The heroes' loves, | by their husbands dead."

Sigrun made ready a bed in the hill.

46. "Here a bed | I have made for thee, Helgi,
 To rest thee from care, | thou kin of the Ylfings;
 I will make thee sink | to sleep in my arms,
 As once I lay | with the living king."

 Helgi spake:
 47. "Now do I say | that in Sevafjoll
 Aught may happen, | early or late,
 Since thou sleepest clasped | in a corpse's arms,
 So fair in the hill, | the daughter of Hogni!
 (Living thou comest, | a daughter of kings.)

48. "Now must I ride | the reddened ways,
 And my bay steed set | to tread the sky;
 Westward I go | to wind-helm's bridges,
 Ere Salgofnir wakes | the warrior throng."

Then Helgi and his followers rode on their way, and

 [47. Line 5 (or possibly line 4) may be interpolated.

48. Wind-helm: the sky; the bridge is Bifrost, the rainbow (cf. Grimnismol, 29). Salgofnir ("Hall-Crower"): the cock Gollinkambi who awakes the gods and warriors for the last battle.]

 [p. 330] [p. 331]

the women went home to the dwelling. Another evening Sigrun bade the maiden keep watch at the hill. And at sunset when Sigrun came to the hill she said:

49. "Now were he come, | if come he might,
 Sigmund's son, | from Othin's seat;
 Hope grows dim | of the hero's return
 When eagles sit | on the ash-tree boughs,
 And men are seeking | the meeting of dreams."

 The Maiden said:
 50. "Mad thou wouldst seem | alone to seek,
 Daughter of heroes, | the house of the dead;
 For mightier now | at night are all
 The ghosts of the dead | than when day is bright."

Sigrun was early dead of sorrow and grief. It was believed in olden times that people were born again, but that is now called old wives' folly. Of Helgi and Sigrun it is said that they were born again; he became Helgi Haddingjaskati, and she Kara the daughter of Halfdan, as is told in the Lay of Kara, and she was a Valkyrie.

 [49. Many editors assign this speech to the maid. Line 5 (or 4) may be spurious. Meeting of dreams ("Dream-Thing"'): sleep.

 Prose. The attitude of the annotator is clearly revealed by his contempt for those who put any faith in such "old wives' folly" as the idea that men and women could be reborn. As in the case of Helgi Hjorvarthsson, the theory of the hero's rebirth seems to have developed in order to unite around a single Helgi

[fp. 331]

the various stories in which the hero is slain. The Lay of Kara (Karuljoth) is lost, although, as has been pointed out, parts of the Helgakvitha Hundingsbana II may be remnants of it, but we find the main outlines of the story in the Hromundar saga Greipssonar, whose compilers appear to have known the Karuljoth. In the saga Helgi Haddingjaskati (Helgi the Haddings' Hero) is protected by the Valkyrie Kara, who flies over him in the form of a swan (note once more the Valkyrie swan-maiden confusion); but in his fight with Hromund he swings his sword so high that he accidentally gives Kara a mortal wound, where upon Hromund cuts off his head. As this makes the third recorded death of Helgi (once at the hands of Alf, once at those of Dag, and finally in the fight with Hromund), the phenomenon of his rebirth is not surprising. The points of resemblance in all the Helgi stories, including the one told in the lost Karuljoth, are sufficiently striking so that it is impossible not to see in them a common origin, and not to believe that Helgi the son of Hjorvarth, Helgi the son of Sigmund and Helgi the Haddings'-Hero (not to mention various other Helgis who probably figured in songs and stories now lost) were all originally the same Helgi who appears in the early traditions of Denmark.]

 
      
The Poetic Edda, by Henry Adams Bellows, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 332]

 

FRA DAUTHA SINFJOTLA

 

Of Sinfjotli's Death

 

INTRODUCTORY NOTE

It has been pointed out that the Helgi tradition, coming originally from Denmark, was early associated with that of the Volsungs, which was of German, or rather of Frankish, origin (cf. Introductory Note to Helgakvitha Hjorvarthssonar). The connecting links between these two sets of stories were few in number, the main point being the identification of Helgi as a son of Sigmund Volsungsson. Another son of Sigmund, however, appears in the Helgi poems, though not in any of the poems dealing with the Volsung cycle proper. This is Sinfjotli, whose sole function in the extant Helgi lays is to have a wordy dispute with Gothmund Granmarsson.

Sinfjotli's history is told in detail in the early chapters of the Volsungasaga. The twin sister of Sigmund Volsungsson, Signy, had married Siggeir, who hated his brother-in-law by reason of his desire to possess a sword which had belonged to Othin and been won by Sigmund. Having treacherously invited Volsung and his ten sons to visit him, Siggeir slew Volsung and captured his sons, who were set in the stocks. Each night a wolf ("some men say that she was Siggeir's mother") came out of the woods and ate up one of the brothers, till on the tenth night Sigmund alone was left. Then, however, Signy aided him to escape, and incidentally to kill the wolf. He vowed vengeance on Siggeir, and Signy, who hated her husband, was determined to help him. Convinced that Sigmund must have a helper of his own race, Signy changed forms with a witch, and in this guise sought out Sigmund, who, not knowing who she was, spent three nights with her. Thereafter she gave birth to a boy, whom she named Sinfjotli ("The Yellow-Spotted"?), whom she sent to Sigmund. For a time they lived in the woods, occasionally turning into wolves (whence perhaps Sinfjotli's name). When Sinfjotli was full grown, he and his father came to Siggeir's house, but were seen and betrayed by the two young sons of Signy and Siggeir, whereupon Sinfjotli slew them. Siggeir promptly had Sigmund and Sinfjotli buried alive, but Signy managed to smuggle Sigmund's famous sword into the grave, and with this the father and son dug themselves out. The next night they burned Siggeir's

[p. 333]

house, their enemy dying in the flames, and Signy, who had at the last refused to leave her husband, from a sense of somewhat belated loyalty, perishing with him.

Was this story, which the Volsungasaga relates in considerable detail, the basis of an old poem which has been lost? Almost certainly it was, although, as I have pointed out, many if not most of the old stories appear to have been handed down rather in prose than in verse, for the Volsungasaga quotes two lines of verse regarding the escape from the grave. At any rate, Sinfjotli early became a part of the Volsung tradition, which, in turn, formed the basis for no less than fifteen poems generally included in the Eddic collection. Of this tradition we may recognize three distinct parts: the Volsung-Sigmund-Sinfjotli story; the Helgi story, and the Sigurth story, the last of these three being by far the most extensive, and suggesting an almost limitless amount of further subdivision. With the Volsung-Sigmund-Sinfjotli story the Sigurth legend is connected only by the fact that Sigurth appears as Sigmund's son by his last wife, Hjordis; with the Helgi legend it is not connected directly at all. Aside from the fact that Helgi appears as Sigmund's son by his first wife, Borghild, the only link between the Volsung story proper and that of Helgi is the appearance of Sinfjotli in two of the Helgi poems. Originally it is altogether probable that the three stories, or sets of stories, were entirely distinct, and that Sigurth (the familiar Siegfried) had little or nothing more to do with the Volsungs of northern mythological-heroic tradition than he had with Helgi.

The annotator or compiler of the collection of poems preserved in the Codex Regius, having finished with the Helgi lays, had before him the task of setting down the fifteen complete or fragmentary poems dealing with the Sigurth story. Before doing this, however, he felt it incumbent on him to dispose of both Sigmund and Sinfjotli, the sole links with the two other sets of stories. He apparently knew of no poem or poems concerning the deaths of these two; perhaps there were none, though this is unlikely. Certainly the story of how Sinfjotli and Sigmund died was current in oral prose tradition, and this story the compiler set forth in the short prose passage entitled Of Sinfjotli's Death which, in Regius, immediately follows the second lay of Helgi Hundingsbane. The relation of this passage to the prose of the Reginsmol is discussed in the introductory note to that poem.

[p. 334]

Sigmund, the son of Volsung, was a king in the land of the Franks; Sinfjotli was his eldest son, the second was Helgi, and the third Hamund. Borghild, Sigmund's wife, had a brother who was named -----. Sinfjotli, her stepson, and ----- both wooed the same woman, wherefore Sinfjotli slew him. And when he came home, Borghild bade him depart, but Sigmund offered her atonement-money, and this she had to accept. At the funeral feast Borghild brought in ale; she took poison, a great horn full, and brought it to Sinfjotli. But when he looked into the horn, he saw that it was poison, and said to Sigmund: "Muddy is the drink, Father!" Sigmund took the horn and drank therefrom. It is said that Sigmund was so hardy that poison might not harm him, either outside or in, but all his sons could withstand poison only without on their skin. Borghild bore another horn to Sinfjotli and bade him drink, and all happened as before. And yet a third time she brought him a horn, and spoke therewith scornful

 [Prose. Regarding Sigmund, Sinfjotli, and Volsung see Introductory Note. The Franks: although the Sigurth story had reached the North as early as the sixth or seventh century, it never lost all the marks of its Frankish origin. Helgi and Hamund: sons of Sigmund and Borghild; Helgi is, of course Helgi Hundingsbane; of Hamund nothing further is. recorded. Borghild: the manuscript leaves a blank for the name of her brother; evidently the compiler hoped some day to discover it and write it in, but never did. A few editions insert wholly unauthorized names from late paper manuscripts, such as Hroar, Gunnar, or Borgar. In the Volsungasaga Borghild bids Sinfjotli drink "if he has the courage of a Volsung." Sigmund gives his advice because "the king was very drunk, and that was why he spoke thus." Gering, on the other hand, gives Sigmund credit for having believed that the draught would deposit its poisonous [fp. 335] contents in Sinfjotli's beard, and thus do him no harm. Boat: the man who thus carries off the dead Sinfjotli in his boat is presumably Othin. Denmark: Borghild belongs to the Danish Helgi part of the story. The Franks: with this the Danish and Norse stories of Helgi and Sinfjotli come to an end, and the Frankish story of Sigurth begins. Sigmund's two kingdoms are an echo of the blended traditions. Hjordis: just where this name came from is not clear, for in the German story Siegfried's mother is Sigelint, but the name of the father of Hjordis, Eylimi, gives a clew, for Eylimi is the father of Svava, wife of Helgi Hjorvarthsson. [fp. 336] Doubtless the two men are not identical, but it seems likely that both Eylimi and Hjordis were introduced into the Sigmund-Sigurth story, the latter replacing Sigelint, from some version of the Helgi tradition. Hunding: in the Helgi lays the sons of Hunding are all killed, but they reappear here and in two of the poems (Gripisspo, 9, and Reginsmol, 15), and the Volsungasaga names Lyngvi as the son of Hunding who, as the rejected lover of Hjordis, kills Sigmund and his father-in-law, Eylimi, as well. The episode of Hunding and his sons belongs entirely to the Danish (Helgi) part of the story; the German legend knows nothing of it, and permits the elderly Sigmund to outlive his son. There was doubtless a poem on this battle, for the Volsungasaga quotes two lines spoken by the dying Sigmund to Hjordis before he tells her to give the pieces of his broken sword to their unborn son. Alf: after the battle, according to the Volsungasaga, Lyngvi Hundingsson tried to capture Hjordis, but she was rescued by the sea-rover Alf, son of King Hjalprek of Denmark, who subsequently married her. Here is another trace of the Danish Helgi tradition. The Nornageststhattr briefly tells the same story.]

 [p. 335] [p. 336]

words of him if he should not drink from it. He spoke as before with Sigmund. The latter said: "Let it trickle through your beard, Son!" Sinfjotli drank, and straight way was dead. Sigmund bore him a long way in his arms, and came to a narrow and long fjord, and there was a little boat and a man in it. He offered to take Sigmund across the fjord. But when Sigmund had borne the corpse out into the boat, then the craft was full. The man told Sigmund to go round the inner end of the fjord. Then the man pushed the boat off, and disappeared.

King Sigmund dwelt long in Denmark in Borghild's kingdom after he had married her. Thereafter Sigmund went south into the land of the Franks, to the kingdom which he had there. There he married Hjordis, the daughter of King Eylimi; their son was Sigurth. King Sigmund fell in a battle with the sons of Hunding, and Hjordis then married Alf the son of King Hjalprek. There Sigurth grew up in his boyhood. Sigmund and all his sons were far above all other men in might and stature and courage and every kind of ability. Sigurth, however, was the fore most of all, and all men call him in the old tales the noblest of mankind and the mightiest leader.

      
The Poetic Edda, by Henry Adams Bellows, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 337]

 

GRIPISSPO

 

Gripir's Prophecy

 

INTRODUCTORY NOTE

The Gripisspo immediately follows the prose Fra Dautha Sinfjotla in the Codex Regius, and is contained in no other early manuscript. It is unquestionably one of the latest of the poems in the Eddic collection; most critics agree in calling it the latest of all, dating it not much before the year 1200. Its author (for in this instance the word may be correctly used) was not only familiar with the other poems of the Sigurth cycle, but seems to have had actual written copies of them before him; it has, indeed, been suggested, and not without plausibility, that the Gripisspo may have been written by the very man who compiled and annotated the collection of poems preserved in the Codex Regius.

In form the poem is a dialogue between the youthful Sigurth and his uncle, Gripir, but in substance it is a condensed outline of Sigurth's whole career as told piecemeal in the older poems. The writer was sufficiently skillful in the handling of verse, but he was utterly without inspiration; his characters are devoid of vitality, and their speeches are full of conventional phrases, with little force or incisiveness. At the same time, the poem is of considerable interest as giving, in brief form, a summary of the story of Sigurth as it existed in Iceland (for the Gripisspo is almost certainly Icelandic) in the latter half of the twelfth century.

It is not desirable here to go in detail into the immensely complex question of the origin, growth, and spread of the story of Sigurth (Siegfried). The volume of critical literature on the subject is enormous, and although some of the more patently absurd theories have been eliminated, there are still wide divergencies of opinion regarding many important points. At the same time, a brief review of the chief facts is necessary in order to promote a clearer understanding of the poems which follow, and which make up more than a third of the Eddic collection.

That the story of Sigurth reached the North from Germany, having previously developed among the Franks of the Rhine country, is now universally recognized. How and when it spread from northwestern Germany into Scandinavia are less certainly known. It spread, indeed, in every direction, so that traces of it

[p. 338]

are found wherever Frankish influence was extensively felt; but it was clearly better known and more popular in Norway, and in the settlements established by Norwegians, than anywhere else. We have historical proof that there was considerable contact, commercial and otherwise, between the Franks of northwestern Germany and the Norwegians (but not the Swedes or the Danes) throughout the period from 600 to 800; coins of Charlemagne have been found in Norway, and there is other evidence showing a fairly extensive interchange of ideas as well as of goods. Presumably, then, the story of the Frankish hero found its way into Norway in the seventh century. While, at this stage of its development, it may conceivably have included a certain amount of verse, it is altogether probable that the story as it came into Norway in the seventh century was told largely in prose, and that, even after the poets had got hold of it, the legend continued to live among the people in the form of oral prose saga.

The complete lack of contemporary material makes it impossible for us to speak with certainty regarding the character and content of the Sigurth legend as it existed in the Rhine country in the seventh century. It is, however, important to remember the often overlooked fact that any popular traditional hero became a magnet for originally unrelated stories of every kind. It must also be remembered that in the early Middle Ages there existed no such distinction between fiction and history as we now make; a saga, for instance, might be anything from the most meticulously accurate history to the wildest of fairy tales, and a single saga might (and sometimes did) combine both elements. This was equally true of the Frankish traditions, and the two principles just stated account for most of the puzzling phenomena in the growth of the Sigurth story.

Of the origin of Sigurth himself we know absolutely nothing. No historical analogy can be made to fit in the slightest degree. If one believes in the possibility of resolving hero stories into nature myths, he may be explained in that fashion, but such a solution is not necessary. The fact remains that from very early days Sigurth (Sifrit) was a great traditional hero among the Franks. The tales of his strength and valor, of his winning of a great treasure, of his wooing a more or less supernatural bride, and of his death at the hands of his kinsmen, probably were early features of this legend.

The next step was the blending of this story with one which

[p. 339]

had a clear basis in history. In the year 437 the Burgundians, under their king, Gundicarius (so the Latin histories call him), were practically annihilated by the Huns. The story of this great battle soon became one of the foremost of Rhineland traditions; and though Attila was presumably not present in person, he was quite naturally introduced as the famous ruler of the invading hordes. The dramatic story of Attila's death in the year 453 was likewise added to the tradition, and during the sixth century the chain was completed by linking together the stories of Sigurth and those of the Burgundian slaughter. Gundicarius becomes the Gunther of the Nibelungenlied and the Gunnar of the Eddic poems; Attila becomes Etzel and Atli. A still further development came through the addition of another, and totally unrelated, set of historical traditions based on the career of Ermanarich, king of the Goths, who died about the year 376. Ermanarich figures largely in many stories unconnected with the Sigurth cycle, but, with the zeal of the medieval story-tellers for connecting their heroes, he was introduced as the husband of Sigurth's daughter, Svanhild, herself originally part of a separate narrative group, and as Jormunrek he plays a considerable part in a few of the Eddic poems.

Such, briefly, appears to have been the development of the legend before it came into Norway. Here it underwent many changes, though the clear marks of its southern origin were never obliterated. The names were given Scandinavian forms, and in some cases were completely changed (e.g., Kriemhild becomes Guthrun). New figures, mostly of secondary importance, were introduced, and a large amount of purely Northern local color was added. Above all, the earlier part of the story was linked with Northern mythology in a way which seems to have had no counterpart among the southern Germanic peoples. The Volsungs become direct descendants of Othin; the gods are closely concerned with Fafnir's treasure, and so on. Above all, the Norse story-tellers and poets changed the figure of Brynhild. In making her a Valkyrie, sleeping on the flame-girt rock, they were never completely successful, as she persisted in remaining, to a considerable extent, the entirely human daughter of Buthli whom Sigurth woos for Gunnar. This confusion, intensified by a mixing of names (cf. Sigrdrifumol, introductory note), and much resembling that which existed in the parallel cases of Svava and Sigrun in the Helgi tradition, created difficulties

[p. 340]

which the Norse poets and story-tellers were never able to smooth out, and which have perplexed commentators ever since.

Those who read the Sigurth poems in the Edda, or the story told in the Volsungasaga, expecting to find a critically accurate biography of the hero, will, of course, be disappointed. If, how. ever, they will constantly keep in mind the general manner in which the legend grew, its accretions ranging all the way from the Danube to Iceland, they will find that most of the difficulties are simply the natural results of conflicting traditions. just as the Danish Helgi had to be "reborn" twice in order to enable three different men to kill him, so the story of Sigurth, as told in the Eddic poems, involves here and there inconsistencies explicable only when the historical development of the story is taken into consideration.

__________________

Gripir was the name of Eylimi's son, the brother of Hjordis; he ruled over lands and was of all men the wisest and most forward-seeing. Sigurth once was riding alone and came to Gripir's hall. Sigurth was easy to recognize; he found out in front of the hall a man whose name was Geitir. Then Sigurth questioned him and asked:

1. "Who is it has | this dwelling here,
 Or what do men call | the people's king?"

 [Prose. The manuscript gives the poem no title. Gripir: this uncle of Sigurth's was probably a pure invention of the poet's. The Volsungasaga mentions him, but presumably only because of his appearance here. On Eylimi and Hjordis see Fra Dautha Sinfjotla and note. Geitir, the serving-man, is likewise apparently an invention of the poet's.

1. The manuscript does not indicate the speakers anywhere in the poem. Some editors have made separate stanzas out of the two-line speeches in stanzas 1, 3 and 6.]

 [p. 341]

 Geitir spake:
 "Gripir the name | of the chieftain good
 Who holds the folk | and the firm-ruled land."

 Sigurth spake:
 2. "Is the king all-knowing | now within,
 Will the monarch come | with me to speak?
 A man unknown | his counsel needs,
 And Gripir fain | I soon would find."

 Geitir spake:
 3. "The ruler glad | of Geitir will ask
 Who seeks with Gripir | speech to have."

 Sigurth spake:
 "Sigurth am I, | and Sigmund's son,
 And Hjordis the name | of the hero's mother."

4. Then Geitir went | and to Gripir spake:
 "A stranger comes | and stands without;
 Lofty he is | to look upon,
 And, prince, thyself | he fain would see."

5. From the hall the ruler | of heroes went,

 [3. Sigurth: a few editions use in the verse the older form of this name, "Sigvorth," though the manuscript here keeps to the form used in this translation. The Old High German "Sigifrid" ("Peace-Bringer through Victory") became the Norse "Sigvorth" ("Victory-Guarder"), this, in turn, becoming "Sigurth."

4. Bugge thinks a stanza has been lost after stanza 4, in which Geitir tells Gripir who Sigurth is.]

 [p. 342]

And greeted well | the warrior come:
 "Sigurth, welcome | long since had been thine;
 Now, Geitir, shalt thou | Grani take."

6. Then of many | things they talked,
 When thus the men | so wise had met.

 Sigurth spake:
 "To me, if thou knowest, | my mother's brother,
 Say what life | will Sigurth's be."

 Gripir spake:
 7. "Of men thou shalt be | on earth the mightiest,
 And higher famed | than all the heroes;
 Free of gold-giving, | slow to flee,
 Noble to see, | and sage in speech."

 Sigurth spake:
 8. "Monarch wise, | now more I ask;
 To Sigurth say, | if thou thinkest to see,
 What first will chance | of my fortune fair,
 When hence I go | from out thy home?"

 Gripir spake:
 9. "First shalt thou, prince, | thy father avenge,
 And Eylimi, | their ills requiting;

 [5. Grani. Sigurth's horse. According to the Volsungasaga his father was Sleipnir, Othin's eight-legged horse, and Othin him self gave him to Sigurth. The introductory note to the Reginsmol tells a different story.

9. Thy father: on The death of Sigmund and Eylimi at the hands of Hunding's sons see Fra Dautha Sinfjotla and note.]

 [p. 343]

The hardy sons | of Hunding thou
 Soon shalt fell, | and victory find."

 Sigurth spake:
 10. "Noble king, | my kinsman, say
 Thy meaning true, | for our minds we speak:
 For Sigurth mighty | deeds dost see,
 The highest beneath | the heavens all?"

 Gripir spake:
 IT. "The fiery dragon | alone thou shalt fight
 That greedy lies | at Gnitaheith;
 Thou shalt be of Regin | and Fafnir both
 The slayer; truth | doth Gripir tell thee."

 Sigurth spake:
 12. "Rich shall I be | if battles I win
 With such as these, | as now thou sayest;
 Forward look, | and further tell:
 What the life | that I shall lead?"

 Gripir spake:
 13. "Fafnir's den | thou then shalt find,
 And all his treasure | fair shalt take;

 [11. The dragon: Fafnir, brother of the dwarf Regin, who turns himself into a dragon to guard Andvari's hoard; cf. Reginsmol and Fafnismol. Gnitaheith: a relic of the German tradition; it has been identified as lying south of Paderborn.

13. Gjuki: the Norse form of the name Gibeche ("The Giver"). Gjuki is the father of Gunnar, Hogni, and Guthrun, the family which reflects most directly the Burgundian part of [fp. 343] the tradition (cf. Introductory Note). The statement that Sigurth is to go direct from the slaying of Fafnir to Gjuki's hall involves one of the confusions resulting from the dual personality of Brynhild. In the older (and the original South Germanic) story, Sigurth becomes a guest of the Gjukungs before he has ever heard of Brynhild, and first sees her when, having changed forms with Gunnar, he goes to woo her for the latter. In an other version he finds Brynhild before he visits the Gjukungs, only to forget her as the result of the magic-draught administered by Guthrun's mother. Both these versions are represented in the poems of which the author of the Gripisspo made use, and he tried, rather clumsily, to combine them, by having Sigurth go to Gjuki's house, then find the unnamed Valkyrie, and then return to Gjuki, the false wooing following this second visit.]

 [p. 344]

Gold shalt heap | on Grani's back,
 And, proved in fight, | to Gjuki fare."

 Sigurth spake:
 14. "To the warrior now | in words. so wise,
 Monarch noble, | more shalt tell;
 I am Gjuki's guest, | and thence I go:
 What the life | that I shall lead?"

 Gripir spake:
 15. "On the rocks there sleeps | the ruler's daughter,
 Fair in armor, | since Helgi fell;
 Thou shalt cut | with keen-edged sword,
 And cleave the byrnie | with Fafnir's killer."

 [15. Basing his story on the Sigrdrifumol, the poet here tells of Sigurth's finding of the Valkyrie, whom he does not identify with Brynhild, daughter of Buthli (stanza 27), at all. His error in this respect is not surprising, in view of Brynhild's dual identity (cf. Introductory Note, and Fafnismol, 44 and note). [fp. 345] Helgi: according to Helreith Brynhildar (stanza 8), with which the author of the Gripisspo was almost certainly familiar, the hero for whose death Brynhild was punished was named Hjalmgunnar. Is Helgi here identical with Hjalmgunnar, or did the author make a mistake? Finnur Jonsson thinks the author regarded Sigurth's Valkyrie as a fourth incarnation of Svava Sigrun-Kara, and wrote Helgi's name in deliberately. Many editors, following Bugge, have tried to reconstruct line 2 so as to get rid of Helgi's name.]

 [p. 345]

 Sigurth spake:
 16. "The mail-coat is broken, | the maiden speaks,
 The woman who | from sleep has wakened;
 What says the maid | to Sigurth then
 That happy fate | to the hero brings?"

 Gripir spake:
 17. "Runes to the warrior | will she tell,
 All that men | may ever seek,
 And teach thee to speak | in all men's tongues,
 And life with health; | thou'rt happy, king!"

 Sigurth spake:
 18. "Now is it ended, | the knowledge is won,
 And ready I am | forth thence to ride;
 Forward look | and further tell:
 What the life | that I shall lead?"

 Gripir spake:
 19. "Then to Heimir's | home thou comest,
 And glad shalt be | the guest of the king;

 [19. Heimir: the Volsungasaga says that Heimir was the husband of Brynhild's sister, Bekkhild. Brynhild's family connections [fp. 346] involve a queer mixture of northern and southern legend. Heimir and Bekkhild are purely of northern invention; neither of them is mentioned in any of the earlier poems, though Brynhild speaks of her "foster-father" in Helreith Brynhildar. In the older Norse poems Brynhild is a sister of Atli (Attila), a relationship wholly foreign to the southern stories, and the father of this strangely assorted pair is Buthli, who in the Nibelungenlied is apparently Etzel's grandfather. Add to this her role of Valkyrie, and it is small wonder that the annotator himself was puzzled.]

 [p. 346]

Ended, Sigurth, | is all I see,
 No further aught | of Gripir ask."

 Sigurth spake:
 20. "Sorrow brings me | the word thou sayest,
 For, monarch, forward | further thou seest;
 Sad the grief | for Sigurth thou knowest,
 Yet nought to me, Gripir, | known wilt make."

 Gripir spake:
 21. "Before me lay | in clearest light
 All of thy youth | for mine eyes to see;
 Not rightly can I | wise be called,
 Nor forward-seeing; | my wisdom is fled."

 Sigurth spake:
 22. "No man, Gripir, | on earth I know
 Who sees the future | as far as thou;
 Hide thou nought, | though hard it be,
 And base the deeds | that I shall do."

 Gripir spake:
 2Z. "With baseness never | thy life is burdened,

[p. 347]

Hero noble, | hold that sure;
 Lofty as long | as the world shall live,
 Battle-bringer, | thy name shall be."

 Sigurth spake:
 24. "Nought could seem worse, | but now must part
 The prince and Sigurth, | since so it is,
 My road I ask,-- | the future lies open,--
 Mighty one, speak, | my mother's brother."

 Gripir spake:
 25. "Now to Sigurth | all shall I say,
 For to this the warrior | bends my will;
 Thou knowest well | that I will not lie,--
 A day there is | when thy death is doomed."

 Sigurth spake:
 26. "No scorn I know | for the noble king,
 But counsel good | from Gripir I seek;
 Well will I know, | though evil awaits,
 What Sigurth may | before him see."

 Gripir spake:
 27. "A maid in Heimir's | home there dwells,
 Brynhild her name | to men is known,
 Daughter of Buthli, | the doughty king,
 And Heimir fosters | the fearless maid."

 [27. Brynhild ("Armed Warrior"): on her and her family see introductory Note and note to stanza 19.]

 [p. 348]

 Sigurth spake:
 28. "What is it to me, | though the maiden be
 So fair, and of Heimir | the fosterling is?
 Gripir, truth | to me shalt tell,
 For all of fate | before me thou seest."

 Gripir spake:
 29. "Of many a joy | the maiden robs thee,
 Fair to see, | whom Heimir fosters;
 Sleep thou shalt find not, | feuds thou shalt end not,
 Nor seek out men, | if the maid thou seest not."

 Sigurth spake:
 30. "What may be had | for Sigurth's healing?
 Say now, Gripir, | if see thou canst;
 May I buy the maid | with the marriage-price,
 The daughter fair | of the chieftain famed?"

 Gripir spake:
 31. "Ye twain shall all | the oaths then swear
 That bind full fast; | few shall ye keep;
 One night when Gjuki's | guest thou hast been,
 Will Heimir's fosterling | fade from thy mind."

 Sigurth spake:
 32. "What sayst thou, Gripir? | give me the truth,
 Does fickleness hide | in the hero's heart?
 Can it be that troth | I break with the maid,
 With her I believed | I loved so dear?"

[p. 349]

 Gripir spake:
 33. "Tricked by another, | prince, thou art,
 And the price of Grimhild's | wiles thou must pay;
 Fain of thee | for the fair-haired maid,
 Her daughter, she is, | and she drags thee down."

 Sigurth spake:
 34. "Might I with Gunnar | kinship make,
 And Guthrun win | to be my wife,
 Well the hero | wedded would be,
 If my treacherous deed | would trouble me not."

 Gripir spake:
 35. "Wholly Grimhild | thy heart deceives,
 She will bid thee go | and Brynhild woo
 For Gunnar's wife, | the lord of the Goths;
 And the prince's mother | thy promise shall win."

 [33. Most editions have no comma after line 3, and change the meaning to "Fain of thee | the fair-haired one / For her daughter is." Grimhild: in the northern form of the story Kriemhild, Gunther's sister and Siegfried's wife, becomes Grimhild, mother of Gunnar and Guthrun, the latter taking Kriemhild's place. The Volsungasaga tells how Grimhild gave Sigurth a magic draught which made him utterly forget Brynhild. Edzardi thinks two stanzas have been lost after stanza 33, their remains appearing in stanza 37.

35. In the Volsungasaga Grimhild merely advises Gunnar to seek Brynhild for his wife, and to have Sigurth ride with him. Goths: the historical Gunnar (Gundicarius, cf. Introductory Note) was not a Goth, but a Burgundian, but the word "Goth" was applied in the North without much discrimination to the southern Germanic peoples.]

 [p. 350]

 Sigurth spake:
 36. "Evil waits me, | well I see it,
 And gone is Sigurth's | wisdom good,
 If I shall woo | for another to win
 The maiden fair | that so fondly I loved."

 Gripir spake:
 37. "Ye three shall | all the oaths then take,
 Gunnar and Hogni, | and, hero, thou;
 Your forms ye shall change, | as forth ye tare,
 Gunnar and thou; | for Gripir lies not."

 Sigurth spake:
 38. "How meanest thou? | Why make we the change
 Of shape and form | as forth we fare?
 There must follow | another falsehood
 Grim in all ways; | speak on, Gripir!"

 [17. In the Nibelungenlied Siegfried merely makes himself invisible in order to lend Gunther his strength for the feats which must be performed in order to win the redoubtable bride. In the northern version Sigurth and Gunnar change forms, "as Grimhild had taught them how to do." The Volsungasaga tells how Sigurth and Gunnar came to Heimir, who told them that to win Brynhild one must ride through the ring of fire which surrounded her hall (cf. the hall of Mengloth in Svipdagsmol). Gunnar tries it, but his horse balks; then he mounts Grani, but Grani will not stir for him. So they change forms, and Sigurth rides Grani through the flames. Oaths: the blood-brotherhood sworn by Sigurth, Gunnar, and Hogni makes it impossible for the brothers to kill him themselves, but they finally get around the difficulty by inducing their half-brother, Gotthorm (cf. Hyndluljoth, 27 and note) to do it.]

 [p. 351]

 Gripir spake:
 39. "The form of Gunnar | and shape thou gettest,
 But mind and voice | thine own remain;
 The hand of the fosterling | noble of Heimir
 Now dost thou win, | and none can prevent."

 Sigurth spake:
 40. "Most evil it seems, | and men will say
 Base is Sigurth | that so he did;
 Not of my will shall | I cheat with wiles
 The heroes' maiden | whom noblest I hold."

 Gripir spake:
 41. "Thou dwellest, leader | lofty of men,
 With the maid as if | thy mother she were;
 Lofty as long | as the world shall live,
 Ruler of men, | thy name shall remain."

 [39. The last half of line 4 is obscure, and the reading is conjectural.

41. Something is clearly wrong with stanzas 41-43. in the manuscript the order is 41, 43, 42, which brings two of Gripir's answers together, followed by two of Sigurth's questions. Some editors have arranged the stanzas as in this translation, while others have interchanged 41 and 43. In any case, Sigurth in stanza 42 asks about the "three nights" which Gripir has never mentioned. I suspect that lines 3-4 of stanza 41, which are practically identical with lines 3-4 of stanza 23, got in here by mistake, replacing two lines which may have run thus: "With thy sword between, | three nights thou sleepest / With her thou winnest | for Gunnar's wife." The subsequent poems tell how Sigurth laid his sword Gram between himself and Brynhild.]

 [p. 352]

 Sigurth spake:
 42. "Shall Gunnar have | a goodly wife,
 Famed among men,-- | speak forth now, Gripir!
 Although at my side | three nights she slept,
 The warrior's bride? | Such ne'er has been."

 Gripir spake:
 43. "The marriage draught | will be drunk for both,
 For Sigurth and Gunnar, | in Gjuki's hall;
 Your forms ye change, | when home ye fare,
 But the mind of each | to himself remains."

 Sigurth spake:
 44. "Shall the kinship new | thereafter come
 To good among us? | Tell me, Gripir!
 To Gunnar joy | shall it later give,
 Or happiness send | for me myself?"

 Gripir spake:
 45. "Thine oaths remembering, | silent thou art,
 And dwellest with Guthrun | in wedlock good;
 But Brynhild shall deem | she is badly mated,
 And wiles she seeks, | herself to avenge."

 [45. The simultaneous weddings of Sigurth and Gunnar form a memorable feature of the German tradition as it appears in the Nibelungenlied, but in the Volsungasaga Sigurth marries Guthrun before he sets off with Gunnar to win Brynhild.

45. According to the Volsungasaga, Sigurth remembers his oaths to Brynhild almost immediately after his return to Gunnar's house. Brynhild, on the other hand, knows nothing until the [fp. 353] famous quarrel between herself and Guthrun at the bath (an other reminiscence of the German story), when she taunts Guthrun with Sigurth's inferiority to Gunnar, and Guthrun retorts with the statement that it was Sigurth, and not Gunnar, who rode through the flames.]

 [p. 353]

 Sigurth spake:
 46. "What may for the bride | requital be,
 The wife we won | with subtle wiles?
 From me she has | the oaths I made,
 And kept not long; | they gladdened her little."

 Gripir spake:
 47. "To Gunnar soon | his bride will say
 That ill didst thou | thine oath fulfill,
 When the goodly king, | the son of Gjuki,
 With all his heart | the hero trusted."

 Sigurth spake:
 48. "What sayst thou, Gripir? | give me the truth!
 Am I guilty so | as now is said,

 [47. Brynhild tells Gunnar that Sigurth really possessed her during the three nights when he slept by her in Gunnar's form, thus violating his oath. Here again there is a confusion of two traditions. If Sigurth did not meet Brynhild until after his oath to Gunnar (cf. note on stanza 13), Brynhild's charge is entirely false, as she herself admits in Helreith Brynhildar. On the other hand, according to the version in which Sigurth finds Brynhild before he meets Gjuki's sons, their union was not only completed, but she had by him a daughter, Aslaug, whom she leaves in Heimir's charge before going to become Gunnar's wife. This is the Volsungasaga version, and thus the statement Brynhild makes to Gunnar, as a result of which Sigurth is slain, is quite true.]

 [p. 354]

Or lies does the far-famed | queen put forth
 Of me and herself? | Yet further speak."

 Gripir spake:
 49. "In wrath and grief | full little good
 The noble bride | shall work thee now;
 No shame thou gavest | the goodly one,
 Though the monarch's wife | with wiles didst cheat."

 Sigurth spake:
 50. "Shall Gunnar the wise | to the woman's words,
 And Gotthorm and Hogni, | then give heed?
 Shall Gjuki's sons, | now tell me, Gripir,
 Redden their blades | with their kinsman's blood?"

 Gripir spake:
 51. "Heavy it lies | on Guthrun's heart,
 When her brothers all | shall bring thee death;
 Never again | shall she happiness know,
 The woman so fair; | 'tis Grimhild's work."

 Sigurth spake:
 52. "Now fare thee well! | our fates we shun not;
 And well has Gripir | answered my wish;
 More of joy | to me wouldst tell
 Of my life to come | if so thou couldst."

 [50. Gotthorm: Gunnar's half-brother, and slayer of Sigurth.

52. The manuscript has stanzas 52 and 53 in inverse order.]

 [p. 355]

 Gripir spake:
 53 "Ever remember, ruler of men,
 That fortune lies in the hero's life;
 A nobler man shall never live
 Beneath the sun than Sigurth shall seem."

      
The Poetic Edda, by Henry Adams Bellows, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 356]

 

REGINSMOL

 

The Ballad of Regin

 

INTRODUCTORY NOTE

The Reginsmol immediately follows the Gripisspo in the Codex Regius, and in addition stanzas 1, 2, 6, and 18 are quoted in the Volsungasaga, and stanzas 11-26 in the Nornageststhattr. In no instance is the title of the poem stated, and in Regius there stands before the introductory prose, very faintly written, what appears to be "Of Sigurth." As a result, various titles have been affixed to it, the two most often used being "the Ballad of Regin" and "the First Lay of Sigurth Fafnisbane."

As a matter of fact, it is by no means clear that the compiler of the Eddic collection regarded this or either of the two following poems, the Fafnismol and the Sigrdrifumol, as separate and distinct poems at all. There are no specific titles given, and the prose notes link the three poems in a fairly consecutive whole. Furthermore, the prose passage introducing the Reginsmol connects directly with Fra Dautha Sinfjotla, and only the insertion of the Gripisspo at this point, which may well have been done by some stupid copyist, breaks the continuity of the story. For convenience I have here followed the usual plan of dividing this material into distinct parts, or poems, but I greatly doubt if this division is logically sound. The compiler seems, rather, to have undertaken to set down the story of Sigurth in consecutive form, making use of all the verse with which he was familiar, and which, by any stretch of the imagination, could be made to fit, filling up the gaps with prose narrative notes based on the living oral tradition.

This view is supported by the fact that not one of the three poems in question, and least of all the Reginsmol, can possibly be regarded as a unit. For one thing, each of them includes both types of stanza commonly used in the Eddic poems, and this, notwithstanding the efforts of Grundtvig and Mullenhoff to prove the contrary, is almost if not quite conclusive proof that each poem consists of material taken from more than one source. Furthermore, there is nowhere continuity within the verse itself for more than a very few stanzas. An analysis of the Reginsmol shows that stanzas 1-4, 6-10, and 12, all in Ljothahattr stanza form, seem to belong together as fragments of a poem dealing with

[p. 357]

Loki's (not Andvari's) curse on the gold taken by the gods from Andvari and paid to Hreithmar, together with Hreithmar's death at the hands of his son, Fafnir, as the first result of this curse. Stanza 5, in Fornyrthislag, is a curse on the gold, here ascribed to Andvari, but the only proper name in the stanza, Gust, is quite unidentifiable, and the stanza may originally have had to do with a totally different story. Stanza 11, likewise in Fornyrthislag, is merely a father's demand that his daughter rear a family to avenge his death; there is nothing in it to link it necessarily with the dying Hreithmar. Stanzas 13-18, all in Fornyrthislag, give Regin's welcome to Sigurth (stanzas 13,14), Sigurth's announcement that he will avenge his father's death on the sons of Hunding before he seeks any treasure (stanza 15), and a dialogue between a certain Hnikar, who is really Othin, and Regin, as the latter and Sigurth are on the point of being shipwrecked. This section (stanzas 13-19) bears a striking resemblance to the Helgi lays, and may well have come originally from that cycle. Next follows a passage in Ljothahattr form (stanzas 19-22 and 24-25) in which Hnikar-Othin gives some general advice as to lucky omens and good conduct in battle; the entire passage might equally well stand in the Hovamol, and I suspect that it originally came from just such a collection of wise saws. Inserted in this passage is stanza 23, in Fornyrthislag, likewise on the conduct of battle, with a bit of tactical advice included. The "poem" ends with a single stanza, in Fornyrthislag, simply stating that the bloody fight is over and that Sigurth fought well--a statement equally applicable to any part of the hero's career.

Finnur Jonsson has divided the Reginsmol into two poems, or rather into two sets of fragments, but this, as the foregoing analysis has indicated, does not appear to go nearly far enough. It accords much better with the facts to assume that the compiler of the collection represented by the Codex Regius, having set out to tell the story of Sigurth, took his verse fragments pretty much wherever he happened to find them. In this connection, it should be remembered that in the fluid state of oral tradition poems, fragments, and stanzas passed readily and frequently from one story to another. Tradition, never critical, doubtless connected with the Sigurth story much verse that never originated there.

If the entire passage beginning with the prose Fra Dautha Sinfjotla, and, except for the Gripisspo, including the Reginsmol, Fafnismol, and Sigrdrifumol, be regarded as a highly uncritical

[p. 358]

piece of compilation, rendered consecutive by the compiler's prose narrative, its difficulties are largely smoothed away; any other way of looking at it results in utterly inconclusive attempts to reconstruct poems some of which quite possibly never existed. The twenty-six stanzas and accompanying prose notes included under the heading of Reginsmol belong almost wholly to the northern part of the Sigurth legend; the mythological features have no counterpart in the southern stories, and only here and there is there any betrayal of the tradition's Frankish home. The story of Andvari, Loki, and Hreithmar is purely Norse, as is the concluding section containing Othin's counsels. If we assume that the passage dealing with the victory over Hunding's sons belongs to the Helgi cycle (cf. introductory notes to Helgakvitha Hjorvarthssonar and Helgakvitha Hundingsbana I), there is very little left to reflect the Sigurth tradition proper.

Regarding the general development of the story of Sigurth in the North, see the introductory note to the Gripisspo.

__________________

Sigurth went to Hjalprek's stud and chose for himself a horse, who thereafter was called Grani. At that time Regin, the son of Hreithmar, was come to Hjalprek's home; he was more ingenious than all other men, and a dwarf in stature; he was wise, fierce and skilled in magic. Regin undertook Sigurth's bringing up and teaching, and loved him much. He told Sigurth of his forefathers, and also of this: that once Othin and Honir and Loki had come to Andvari's waterfall, and in the fall were many fish. Andvari was a dwarf, who had dwelt long in the waterfall in the shape of a pike, and there he got his food. "Otr was the name of a brother of ours," said. Regin, "who often went into the fall in the shape of an otter; he had caught a salmon, and sat on the high bank eating it with his eyes shut. Loki threw a stone at him and killed him; the gods thought they bad had great good luck, and

[p. 359]

stripped the skin off the otter. That same evening they sought a night's lodging at Hreithmar's house, and showed their booty. Then we seized them, and told them, as ransom for their lives, to fill the otter skin with gold, and completely cover it outside as well with red gold. Then they sent Loki to get the gold; he went to Ron and got her net, and went then to Andvari's fall and cast the net in front of the pike, and the pike leaped into the net." Then Loki said:

1. "What is the fish | that runs in the flood,
 And itself from ill cannot save?
 If thy head thou wouldst | from hell redeem,
 Find me the water's flame."

 [Prose. Hjalprek: father of Alf, Sigurth's step-father; cf. Fra Dautha Sinfjotla, and note. Grani: cf. Gripisspo, 5 and note. Regin ("Counsel-Giver"): undoubtedly he goes back to the smith of the German story; in the Thithrekssaga version he is called Mimir, while Regin is there the name of the dragon (here Regin's brother, Fafnir). The Voluspo (stanza 12) names a Regin among the dwarfs, and the name may have assisted in making Regin a dwarf here. Hreithmar: nothing is known of him outside of this story. Othin, Honir and Loki: these same three gods appear in company in Voluspo, 17-18. Andvari's fall: according to Snorri, who tells this entire story in the Skaldskaparmal, Andvari's fall was in the world of the dark elves, while the one when Loki killed the otter was not; here, however, the two are considered identical. With his eyes shut: according to Snorri, Otr ate with his eyes shut because be was so greedy that he could not bear to see the food before him diminishing. Ron: wife of the sea-god Aegir, who draws down drowning men with her net; cf. Helgakvitha Hjorvarthssonar, 18 and note. Snorri says that Loki caught the pike with his hands.

1. Snorri quotes this stanza. Water's game: gold, so called because Aegir, the sea-god, was wont to light his hall with gold.]

 [p. 360]

 Andvari spake:
 2. "Andvari am I, | and Oin my father,
 In many a fall have I fared;
 An evil Norn | in olden days
 Doomed me In waters to dwell."

 Loki spake:
 3. "Andvari, say, | if thou seekest still
 To live in the land of men,
 What payment is set | for the sons of men
 Who war with lying words?"

 Andvari spake:
 4. "A mighty payment | the men must make
 Who in Valthgelmir's waters wade;
 On a long road lead | the lying words
 That one to another utters."

Loki saw all the gold that Andvari had. But when

 [2. Snorri quotes this stanza. The name of the speaker is not given in the manuscripts. Oin: nothing further is known of Andvari's father. Norn: cf. Voluspo, 20.

3. Stanzas 3-4 may well be fragments of some other poem. Certainly Loki's question does not fit the situation, and the passage looks like an extract from some such poem as Vafthruthnismol. In Regius the phrase "Loki spake" stands in the middle of line 1.

4. The manuscript does not name the speaker. Vathgelmir ("Raging to Wade"): a river not elsewhere mentioned, but cf. Voluspo, 39.

 Prose. Snorri says Andvari's ring had the power to create new gold. In this it resembled Baldr's ring, Draupnir; c.f. Skirnismol, 21 and note.]

 [p. 361]

he had brought forth all the gold, he held back one ring, and Loki took this from him. The dwarf went into his rocky hole and said:

5. "Now shall the gold | that Gust once had
 Bring their death | to brothers twain,
 And evil be | for heroes eight;
 joy of my wealth | shall no man win."

The gods gave Hreithmar the gold, and filled up the otter-skin, and stood it on its feet. Then the gods had to heap up gold and hide it. And when that was done, Hreithmar came forward and saw a single whisker, and bade them cover it. Then Othin brought out the ring Andvaranaut and covered the hair. Then Loki said:

6. "The gold is given, | and great the price
 Thou hast my head to save;

 [5. This stanza apparently comes from a different source from stanzas 1-4 (or 1-2 if 3-4 are interpolated) and 6-10; cf. Introductory Note. In the Volsungasaga Andvari lays his curse particularly on the ring. Gust: possibly a name for Andvari himself, or for an earlier possessor of the treasure. Brothers twain: Fafnir and Regin. Heroes eight: the word "eight" may easily have been substituted for something like "all" to make the stanza fit the case; the "eight" in question are presumably Sigurth, Gotthorm, Gunnar, Hogni, Atli, Erp, Sorli and Hamther, all of whom are slain in the course of the story. But the stanza may originally not have referred to Andvari's treasure at all.

 Prose. Andvaranaut: "Andvari's Gem."

6. Snorri quotes this stanza, introducing it, as here, with "Then Loki said" in the prose. Regius omits this phrase, but inserts "said Loki" in line 1.]

 [p. 362]

But fortune thy sons | shall find not there,
 The bane of ye both it is."

 Hreithmar spake:
 7. "Gifts ye gave, | but ye gave not kindly,
 Gave not with hearts that were whole;
 Your lives ere this | should ye all have lost,
 If sooner this fate I had seen."

 Loki spake:
 8. "Worse is this | that methinks I see,
 For a maid shall kinsmen clash;
 Heroes unborn | thereby shall be,
 I deem, to hatred doomed."

 Hreithmar spake:
 9. "The gold so red | shall I rule, methinks,
 So long as I shall live;
 Nought of fear | for thy threats I feel,
 So get ye hence to your homes."

Fafnir and Regin asked Hreithmar for a share of the wealth that was paid for the slaying of their brother, Otr. This he refused, and Fafnir thrust his sword through the

 [8. The word translated "maid" in line 2 is obscure, and "gold" may be meant. Apparently, however, the reference is to the fight between Sigurth and the sons of Gjuki over Brynhild. The manuscript does not name the speaker, and many editions assign this stanza to Hreithmar.

9. The manuscript includes "said Hreithmar" (abbreviated) in the middle of line 1, and some editors have followed this.]

 [p. 363]

body of his father, Hreithmar, while he was sleeping. Hreithmar called to his daughters:

10. "Lyngheith and Lofnheith, | fled is my life,
 And mighty now is my need!"

 Lyngheith spake:
 "Though a sister loses | her father, seldom
 Revenge on her brother she brings."

 Hreithmar spake:
 11. "A daughter, woman | with wolf's heart, bear,
 If thou hast no son | with the hero brave;
 If one weds the maid, | for the need is mighty,
 Their son for thy hurt | may vengeance seek."

Then Hreithmar died, and Fafnir took all the gold. Thereupon Regin asked to have his inheritance from his father, but Fafnir refused this. Then Regin asked counsel

 [10. Hreithmar's daughters do not appear elsewhere. It has been suggested that originally stanza 10 was followed by one in which Lofnheith lamented her inability to avenge her father, as she was married and had no son.

11. Apparently an interpolation (cf. Introductory Note). Vigfusson tries to reconstruct lines 2 and 4 to fit the Ljothahattr rhythm, but without much success. Hreithmar urges his daughter, as she has no sons, to bear a daughter who, in turn, will have a son to avenge his great-grandfather. Grundtvig worked out an ingenious theory to fit this stanza, making Sigurth's grand-father, Eylimi, the husband of Lyngheith's daughter, but there is absolutely no evidence to support this. The stanza may have nothing to do with Hreithmar.]

 [p. 364]

of Lyngheith, his sister, how he should win his inheritance. She said:

12. "In friendly wise | the wealth shalt thou ask
 Of thy brother, and better will;
 Not seemly is it | to seek with the sword
 Fafnir's treasure to take."

All these happenings did Regin tell to Sigurth.

One day, when he came to Regin's house, he was gladly welcomed. Regin said:

13. "Hither the son | of Sigmund is come,
 The hero eager, | here to our hall;
 His courage is more | than an ancient man's,
 And battle I hope | from the hardy wolf.

14. "Here shall I foster | the fearless prince,
 Now Yngvi's heir | to us is come;
 The noblest hero | beneath the sun,
 The threads of his fate | all lands enfold."

 [13. This and the following stanza may be out of place here, really belonging, together with their introductory prose sentence, in the opening prose passage, following the first sentence describing Regin. Certainly they seem to relate to Regin's first meeting with Sigurth. Stanzas 13-26, interspersed with prose, are quoted in the Nornageststhattr. Stanzas 13-18 may be the remnants of a lost poem belonging to the Helgi cycle (cf. Introductory Note). Hardy wolf: warrior, i. e., Sigurth.

14. Yngvi's heir: Yngvi was one of the sons of the Danish king Halfdan the Old, and traditionally an ancestor of Helgi (cf. Helgakvitha Hundingsbana I, 57 and note). Calling Sigurth [fp. 365] a descendant of Yngvi is, of course, absurd, and the use of this phrase is one of the many reasons for believing that stanzas 13-18 belonged originally to the Helgi cycle. The threads, etc.: another link with Helgi; cf. Helgakvitha Hundingsbana I, 3-4. As Helgi was likewise regarded as a son of Sigmund, stanzas 15-14 would fit him just as well as Sigurth.]

 [p. 365]

Sigurth was there continually with Regin, who said to Sigurth that Fafnir lay at Gnitaheith, and was in the shape of a dragon. He had a fear-helm, of which all living creatures were terrified. Regin made Sigurth the sword which was called Gram; it was so sharp that when he thrust it down into the Rhine, and let a strand of wool drift against it with the stream, it cleft the strand asunder as if it were water. With this sword Sigurth cleft asunder Regin's anvil. After that Regin egged Sigurth on to slay Fafnir, but he said:

15. "Loud will the sons | of Hunding laugh,
 Who low did Eylimi | lay in death,
 If the hero sooner | seeks the red
 Rings to find | than his father's vengeance."

King Hjalprek gave Sigurth a fleet for the avenging

 [Prose. Gnitaheith: cf. Gripisspo, 11 and note. Fear-helm: the word "aegis-hjalmr," which occurs both here and in Fafnismol, suggests an extraordinarily interesting, and still disputed, question of etymology. Gram: according to the Volsungasaga Regin forged this sword from the fragments of the sword given by Othin to Sigmund (cf. Fra Dautha Sinfjotla and note).

15. Regarding the sons of Hunding and Eylimi, father of Sigurth's mother, all of whom belong to the Helgi-tradition, cf. Fra Dautha Sinfjotla and note.

 Prose. The fleet, and the subsequent storm, are also reminiscent [fp. 366] of the Helgi cycle; cf. Helgakvitha Hundingsbana I, 29-31, and 11, prose after stanza 16. A man: Othin.]

 [p. 366]

of his father. They ran into a great storm, and were off a certain headland. A man stood on the mountain, and said:

16. "Who yonder rides | on Raevil's steeds,
 O'er towering waves | and waters wild?
 The sail-horses all | with sweat are dripping,
 Nor can the sea-steeds | the gale withstand."

 Regin answered:
 17. "On the sea-trees here | are Sigurth and I,
 The storm wind drives us | on to our death;
 The waves crash down | on the forward deck,
 And the roller-steeds sink; | who seeks our names?"

 The Man spake:
 18. "Hnikar I was | when Volsung once
 Gladdened the ravens | and battle gave;
 Call me the Man | from the Mountain now,
 Feng or Fjolnir; | with you will I fare."

 [16. Raevil's steeds (Raevil was a sea-king, possibly the grandson of Ragnar Lothbrok mentioned in the Hervararsaga), sail-horses and sea-steeds all mean "ships."

17. Sea-trees and roller-steeds (the latter because ships were pulled up on shore by means of rollers) both mean "ships."

18. The Volsungasaga quotes this stanza. Hnikar and Fjolnir: Othin gives himself both these names in Grimnismol, 47; Feng ("The Seizer") does not appear elsewhere. According to the Volsungasaga, no one knew Othin's name when he came to Volsung's house and left the sword there for Sigmund.]

 [p. 367]

They sailed to the land, and the man went on board the ship, and the storm subsided. Sigurth spake:

19. "Hnikar, say, | for thou seest the fate
 That to gods and men is given;
 What sign is fairest | for him who fights,
 And best for the swinging of swords?"

 Hnikar spake:
 20. "Many the signs, | if men but knew,
 That are good for the swinging of swords;
 It is well, methinks, | if the warrior meets
 A raven black on his road.

21. "Another it is | if out thou art come,
 And art ready forth to fare,
 To behold on the path | before thy house
 Two fighters greedy of fame.

22. "Third it is well | if a howling wolf
 Thou hearest under the ash;
 And fortune comes | if thy foe thou seest
 Ere thee the hero beholds.

23. "A man shall fight not | when he must face
 The moon's bright sister setting late;

 [19. This and the following stanzas are strongly suggestive of the Hovamol, and probably came originally from some such collection.

23. This stanza is clearly an interpolation, drawn in by the [fp. 368] common-sense advice, as distinct from omens, given in the last lines of stanza 22. Moon's sister: the sun; cf. Vafthruthnismol, 23 and note. Wedge-like: the wedge formation (prescribed anew in 1920 for the United States Army under certain circumstances) was said to have been invented by Othin himself, and taught by him only to the most favored warriors.]

 [p. 368]

Win he shall | who well can see,
 And wedge-like forms | his men for the fray.

24. "Foul is the sign | if thy foot shall stumble
 As thou goest forth to fight;
 Goddesses baneful | at both thy sides
 Will that wounds thou shalt get.

25. "Combed and washed | shall the wise man go,
 And a meal at mom shall take;
 For unknown it is | where at eve he may be;
 It is ill thy luck to lose."

Sigurth had a great battle with Lyngvi, the son of

 [24. Goddesses: Norse mythology included an almost limitless number of minor deities, the female ones, both kind and unkind, being generally classed among the lesser Norns.

25. This stanza almost certainly had nothing originally to do with the others in this passage; it may have been taken from a longer version of the Hovamol itself.

 Prose. Lyngvi: the son of Hunding who killed Sigmund in jealousy of his marriage with Hjordis; cf. Fra Dautha Sinfjotla and note. The Volsungasaga names one brother who was with Lyngvi in the battle, Hjorvarth, and Sigurth kills him as readily as if he had not already been killed long before by Helgi. But, as has been seen, it was nothing for a man to be killed in two or three different ways.]

 [p. 369]

Hunding, and his brothers; there Lyngvi fell, and his two brothers with him. After the battle Regin said:

26. "Now the bloody eagle | with biting sword
 Is carved on the back | of Sigmund's killer;
 Few were more fierce | in fight than his son,
 Who reddened the earth | and gladdened the ravens."

Sigurth went home to Hjalprek's house; thereupon Regin egged him on to fight with Fafnir.

 [26. Bloody eagle, etc.: the Nornageststhattr describes the manner in which the captured Lyngvi was put to death. "Regin advised that they should carve the bloody eagle on his back. So Regin took his sword and cleft Lyngvi's back so that he severed his back from his ribs, and then drew out his lungs. So died Lyngvi with great courage."

 Prose. In Regius there is no break of any kind between this prose passage and the prose introduction to the Fafnismol (cf. Introductory Note).]

 
      
The Poetic Edda, by Henry Adams Bellows, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 370]

 

FAFNISMOL

 

The Ballad of Fafnir

 

INTRODUCTORY NOTE

The so-called Fafnismol, contained in full in the Codex Regius, where it immediately follows the Reginsmol without any indication of a break, is quoted by Snorri in the Gylfaginning (stanza 13) and the Skaldskaparmal (stanzas 32 and 33), and stanzas 6, 3, and 4 appear in the Sverrissaga. Although the Volsungasaga does not actually quote any of the stanzas, it gives a very close prose parallel to the whole poem in chapters 18 and 19.

The general character of the Fafnismol, and its probable relation to the Reginsmol and the Sigrdrifumol, have been discussed in the introductory note to the Reginsmol. While it is far more nearly a unit than the Reginsmol, it shows many of the same characteristics. It has the same mixture of stanza forms, although in this case only nine stanzas (32-33, 35-36 and 40-44) vary from the normal Ljothahattr measure. It shows, though to a much less marked extent, the same tendency to introduce passages from extraneous sources, such as the question-and-answer passage in stanzas 11-15. At the same time, in this instance it is quite clear that one distinct poem, including probably stanzas 1-10, 16-23, 25-31, and 34-39, underlay the compilation which we here have. This may, perhaps, have been a long poem (not, however, the "Lone' Sigurth Lay; see introductory note to Brot af Sigurtharkvithu) dealing with the Regin-Fafnir-Sigurth-Brynhild story, and including, besides most of the Fafnismol, stanzas 1-4 and 6-11 of the Reginsmol and part of the so-called Sigrdrifumol, together with much that has been lost. The original poem may, on the other hand, have confined itself to the Fafnir episode. In any case, and while the extant Fafnismol can be spoken of as a distinct poem far more justly than the Reginsmol, there is still no indication that the compiler regarded it as a poem by itself. His prose notes run on without a break, and the verses simply cover a dramatic episode in Sigurth's early life. The fact that the work of compilation has been done more intelligently than in the case of the Reginsmol seems to have resulted chiefly from the compiler's having been familiar with longer consecutive verse passages dealing with the Fafnir episode.

[p. 371]

The Reginsmol is little more than a clumsy mosaic, but in the Fafnismol it is possible to distinguish between the main substance of the poem and the interpolations.

Here, as in the Reginsmol, there is very little that bespeaks the German origin of the Sigurth story. Sigurth's winning of the treasure is in itself undoubtedly a part of the earlier southern legend, but the manner in which he does it is thoroughly Norse. Moreover, the concluding section, which points toward the finding of the sleeping Brynhild, relates entirely to the northern Valkyrie, the warrior-maiden punished by Othin, and not at all to the southern Brynhild the daughter of Buthli. The Fafnismol is, however, sharply distinguished from the Reginsmol by showing no clear traces of the Helgi tradition, although a part of the bird song (stanzas 40-44, in Fornyrthislag form, as distinct from the body of the poem) sounds suspiciously like the bird passage in the beginning of the Helgakvitha Hjorvarthssonar. Regarding the general relations of the various sets of traditions in shaping the story of Sigurth, see the introductory note to Gripisspo.

The Fafnismol, together with a part of the Sigrdrifumol, has indirectly become the best known of all the Eddic poems, for the reason that Wagner used it, with remarkably little change of outline, as the basis for his "Siegfried."

__________________

Sigurth and Regin went up to the Gnitaheith, and found there the track that Fafnir made when he crawled to water. Then Sigurth made a great trench across the path, and took his place therein. When Fafnir crawled from his gold, he blew out venom, and it ran down from above on Sigurth's head. But when Fafnir crawled over the trench, then Sigurth thrust his sword into his body

 [Prose. The prose follows the concluding prose passage of the Reginsmol without any interruption; the heading "Of Fafnir's Death" is written in the manuscript very faintly just before stanza 1. Gnitaheith: cf. Gripisspo, ii and note. Fafnir: Regin's brother: cf. Reginsmol, prose after stanza 14. Venom: in the Volsungasaga [fp. 371] it was the blood, and not the venom, that poured down on Sigurth's head. Sigurth was much worried about this danger, and before he dug the trench asked Regin what would happen if the dragon's blood overcame him. Regin thereupon taunted him with cowardice (Sigurth refers to this taunt in stanza 30, but the stanza embodying it has disappeared). After Sigurth had dug his trench, an old man (Othin, of course) appeared and advised him to dig other trenches to carry off the blood, which he did, thereby escaping harm.]

 [p. 372]

to the heart. Fafnir writhed and struck out with his head and tail. Sigurth leaped from the trench, and each looked at the other. Fafnir said:

1. "Youth, oh, youth! | of whom then, youth, art thou born?
 Say whose son thou art,
 Who in Fafnir's blood | thy bright blade reddened,
 And struck thy sword to my heart."

Sigurth concealed his name because it was believed in olden times that the word of a dying man might have great power if he cursed his foe by his name. He said:

2. "The Noble Hart | my name, and I go
 A motherless man abroad;
 Father I had not, | as others have,
 And lonely ever I live."

 [1. The first line in the original, as here, is unusually long, but dramatically very effective on that account.

3. The names of the speakers do not appear in the manuscript, though they seem originally to have been indicated in the [fp. 373] margin for stanzas 3-30. The last two lines of stanza 3 are missing in the manuscript, with no gap indicated, but the Volsungasaga prose paraphrase indicates that something was omitted, and the lines here given are conjecturally reconstructed from this paraphrase.]

 [p. 373]

 Fafnir spake:
 3. "If father thou hadst not, | as others have,
 By what wonder wast thou born?
 (Though thy name on the day | of my death thou hidest,
 Thou knowest now thou dost lie.)"

 Sigurth spake:
 4. "My race, methinks, | is unknown to thee,
 And so am I myself;
 Sigurth my name, | and Sigmund's son,
 Who smote thee thus with the sword."

 Fafnir spake:
 5. "Who drove thee on? | why wert thou driven
 My life to make me lose?
 A father brave | had the bright-eyed youth,
 For bold in boyhood thou art."

 Sigurth spake:
 6. "My heart did drive me, | my hand fulfilled,
 And my shining sword so sharp;
 Few are keen | when old age comes,
 Who timid in boyhood be."

 [4. The manuscript marks line 3 as the beginning of a stanza.

5. Line 4, utterly obscure in the manuscript, is guesswork.]

 [p. 374]

 Fafnir spake:
 7. "If thou mightest grow | thy friends among,
 One might see thee fiercely fight;
 But bound thou art, | and in battle taken,
 And to fear are prisoners prone."

 Sigurth spake:
 8. "Thou blamest me, Fafnir, | that I see from afar
 The wealth that my father's was;
 Not bound am I, | though in battle taken,
 Thou hast found that free I live."

 Fafnir spake:
 9. "In all I say | dost thou hatred see,
 Yet truth alone do I tell;
 The sounding gold, | the glow-red wealth,
 And the rings thy bane shall be."

 Sigurth spake:
 10. "Some one the hoard | shall ever hold,
 Till the destined day shall come;
 For a time there is | when every man
 Shall journey hence to hell."

 Fafnir spake:
 11. "The fate of the Norns | before the headland

 [7. Fafnir here refers to the fact that Hjordis, mother of the still unborn Sigurth, was captured by Alf after Sigmund's death; cf. Fra Dautha Sinfjotla, note.

11. Stanzas 11-15 are probably interpolated, and come from [fp. 375] a poem similar to Vafthruthnismol. The headland: Fafnir is apparently quoting proverbs; this one seems to mean that disaster ("the fate of the Norns") awaits when one rounds the first headland (i. e., at the beginning of life's voyage, in youth). The third line is a commentary on obstinate rashness. The Volsungasaga paraphrases stanzas 11-15 throughout.] 

 [p. 375]

Thou findest, and doom of a fool;
 In the water shalt drown | if thou row 'gainst the wind,
 All danger is near to death."

 Sigurth spake:
 12. "Tell me then, Fafnir, | for wise thou art famed,
 And much thou knowest now:
 Who are the Norns | who are helpful in need,
 And the babe from the mother bring?"

 Fafnir spake:
 13. "Of many births | the Norns must be,
 Nor one in race they were;
 Some to gods, others | to elves are kin,
 And Dvalin's daughters some."

 Sigurth spake:
 14. "Tell me then, Fafnir, | for wise thou art famed,
 And much thou knowest now:

 [12. Norns: cf. stanza 13 and note. Sigurth has no possible interest in knowing what Norns are helpful in childbirth, but interpolations were seldom logical.

13. Snorri quotes this stanza. There were minor Norns, or fates, in addition to the three great Norns, regarding whom cf. Voluspo, 20. Dvalin: chief of the dwarfs; cf. Voluspo, 14.]

 [p. 376]

How call they the isle | where all the gods
 And Surt shall sword-sweat mingle?"

 Fafnir spake:
 15. "Oskopnir is it, | where all the gods
 Shall seek the play of swords;
 Bilrost breaks | when they cross the bridge,
 And the steeds shall swim in the flood.

16. "The fear-helm I wore | to afright mankind,
 While guarding my gold I lay;
 Mightier seemed I | than any man,
 For a fiercer never I found."

 Sigurth spake:
 17. "The fear-helm surely | no man shields
 When he faces a valiant foe;
 Oft one finds, | when the foe he meets,
 That he is not the bravest of all."

 Fafnir spake:
 18. "Venom I breathed | when bright I lay
 By the hoard my father had;

 [14. Surt: ruler of the fire world; the reference is to the last great battle. Sword-sweat: blood.

15. Oskopnir ("Not-Made"): apparently another name for Vigrith, which is named in Vafthruthnismol, 19, as the final battle-ground. Bilrost (or Bifrost): the rainbow bridge which breaks beneath Surt's followers; cf. Grimnismol, 29 and note.

16. With this stanza Fafnir returns to the situation. Fear-helm: regarding the "aegis-hjalmr" cf. Reginsmol, prose after stanza 14 and note.]

 [p. 377]

(There was none so mighty | as dared to meet me,
 And weapons nor wiles I feared.)"

 Sigurth spake:
 19. "Glittering worm, | thy hissing was great,
 And hard didst show thy heart;
 But hatred more | have the sons of men
 For him who owns the helm."

 Fafnir spake:
 20. "I counsel thee, Sigurth, | heed my speech,
 And ride thou homeward hence,
 The sounding gold, | the glow-red wealth,
 And the rings thy bane shall be."

 Sigurth spake:
 21. "Thy counsel is given, | but go I shall
 To the gold in the heather hidden;
 And, Fafnir, thou | with death dost fight,
 Lying where Hel shall have thee."

 Fafnir spake:
 22. "Regin betrayed me, | and thee will betray,
 Us both to death will he bring;

 [18. Lines 3-4 do not appear in the manuscript and no gap is indicated; they are here conjecturally paraphrased from the prose passage in the Volsungasaga.

20. It has been suggested that this stanza is spurious, and that stanza 21 ought to follow stanza 22. Lines 3-4, abbreviated in the manuscript, are identical with lines 3-4 of stanza 9. The Volsungasaga paraphrase in place of these two lines makes [fp. 378] Fafnir say: "For it often happens that he who gets a deadly wound yet avenges himself." It is quite likely that two stanzas have been lost.]

 [p. 378]

His life, methinks, | must Fafnir lose,
 For the mightier man wast thou."

Regin had gone to a distance while Sigurth fought Fafnir, and came back while Sigurth was wiping the blood from his sword. Regin said:

23. "Hail to thee, Sigurth! | Thou victory hast,
 And Fafnir in fight hast slain;
 Of all the men | who tread the earth,
 Most fearless art thou, methinks."

 Sigurth spake:
 24. "Unknown it is, | when all are together,
 (The sons of the glorious gods,)
 Who bravest born shall seem;
 Some are valiant | who redden no sword
 In the blood of a foeman's breast."

 Regin spake:
 25. "Glad art thou, Sigurth, | of battle gained,
 As Gram with grass thou cleansest;
 My brother fierce | in fight hast slain,
 And somewhat I did myself."

 [22. The Volsungasaga places its paraphrase of this stanza between those of stanzas 15 and 16.

24. Line 2 is probably spurious, but it is a phrase typical of such poems as Grimnismol or Vafthruthnismol.

25. Grain: Sigurth's sword; cf. Reginsmol, prose after 14.]

 [p. 379]

 Sigurth spake:
 26. "Afar didst thou go | while Fafnir reddened
 With his blood my blade so keen;
 With the might of the dragon | my strength I matched,
 While thou in the heather didst hide."

 Regin spake:
 27. "Longer wouldst thou | in the heather have let
 Yon hoary giant hide,
 Had the weapon availed not | that once I forged,
 The keen-edged blade thou didst bear."

 Sigurth spake:
 28. "Better is heart | than a mighty blade
 For him who shall fiercely fight;
 The brave man well | shall fight and win,
 Though dull his blade may be.

29. "Brave men better | than cowards be,
 When the clash of battle comes;
 And better the glad | than the gloomy man
 Shall face what before him lies.

30. "Thy rede it was | that I should ride

 [26. In the manuscript stanzas 26-29 stand after stanza 31, which fails to make clear sense; they are here rearranged in accordance with the Volsungasaga paraphrase.

28-29. Almost certainly interpolated from some such poem as the Hovamol. Even the faithful Volsungasaga fails to paraphrase stanza 29.]

 [p. 380]

Hither o'er mountains high;
 The glittering worm | would have wealth and life
 If thou hadst not mocked at my might."

Then Regin went up to Fafnir and cut out his heart with his sword, that was named Rithil, and then he drank blood from the wounds. Regin said:

31. "Sit now, Sigurth, | for sleep will I,
 Hold Fafnir's heart to the fire;
 For all his heart | shall eaten be,
 Since deep of blood I have drunk."

Sigurth took Fafnir's heart and cooked it on a spit. When he thought that it was fully cooked, and the blood foamed out of the heart, then he tried it with his finger to see whether it was fully cooked. He burned his finger, and put it in his mouth. But when Fafnir's heart's-blood came on his tongue, he understood the speech of birds. He heard nut-hatches chattering in the thickets. A nut hatch said:

32. "There sits Sigurth, | sprinkled with blood,
 And Fafnir's heart | with fire he cooks;

 [30. Something has evidently been lost before this stanza. Sigurth clearly refers to Regin's reproach when he was digging the trench (cf. note on introductory prose), but the poem does not give such a passage.

 Prose. Rithil ("Swift-Moving"): Snorri calls the sword Refil ("Serpent").

32. That the birds' stanzas come from more than one source [fp. 381] is fairly apparent, but whether from two or from three or more is uncertain. It is also far from clear how many birds are speaking. The manuscript numbers II, III, and IV in the margin with numerals; the Volsungasaga makes a different bird speak each time. There are almost as many guesses as there are editions. I suspect that in the original poem there was one bird, speaking stanzas 34 and 37. Stanza 38 is little more, than a repetition of stanza 34, and may well have been a later addition. As for the stanzas in Fornyrthislag (32-53 and 35-36), they apparently come from another poem, in which several birds speak (cf. "we sisters" in stanza 35). This may be the same poem from which stanzas 40-44 were taken, as well as some of the Fornyrthislag stanzas in the Sigrdrifumol.]

 [p. 381]

Wise were the breaker | of rings, I ween,
 To eat the life-muscles | all so bright."

 A second spake:
 33. "There Regin lies, | and plans he lays
 The youth to betray | who trusts him well;
 Lying words | with wiles will he speak,
 Till his brother the maker | of mischief avenges."

 A third spake:
 34. "Less by a head | let the chatterer hoary
 Go from here to hell;
 Then all of the wealth | he alone can wield,
 The gold that Fafnir guarded."

 A fourth spake:
 35. "Wise would he seem | if so he would heed
 The counsel good | we sisters give;

 [34. Some editions turn this speech from the third person into the second, but the manuscript is clear enough.]

 [p. 382]

Thought he would give, | and the ravens gladden,
 There is ever a wolf | where his ears I spy."

 A fifth spake:
 36. "Less wise must be | the tree of battle
 Than to me would seem | the leader of men,
 If forth he lets | one brother fare,
 When he of the other | the slayer is."

 A sixth spake:
 37. "Most foolish he seems | if he shall spare
 His foe, the bane of the folk,
 There Regin lies, | who hath wronged him so,
 Yet falsehood knows he not."

 A seventh spake:
 38. "Let the head from the frost-cold | giant be hewed,
 And let him of rings be robbed;
 Then all the wealth | which Fafnir's was
 Shall belong to thee alone."

 Sigurth spake:
 39. "Not so rich a fate | shall Regin have

 [35. Wolf, etc.: the phrase is nearly equivalent to "there must be fire where there is smoke." The proverb appears else where in Old Norse.

36. Tree of battle: warrior.

37. Here, as in stanza 34, some editions turn the speech from the third person into the second.

38. Giant: Regin was certainly not a frost-giant, and the whole stanza looks like some copyist's blundering reproduction of stanza 34.]

 [p. 383]

As the tale of my death to tell;
 For soon the brothers | both shall die,
 And hence to hell shall go."

Sigurth hewed off Regin's head, and then he ate Fafnir's heart, and drank the blood of both Regin and Fafnir. Then Sigurth heard what the nut-hatch said:

40. "Bind, Sigurth, the golden | rings together,
 Not kingly is it | aught to fear;
 I know a maid, | there is none so fair,
 Rich in gold, | if thou mightest get her.

41. "Green the paths | that to Gjuki lead,

 [40. Neither the manuscript nor any of the editions suggest the existence of more than one bird in stanzas 40-44. it seems to me, however, that there are not only two birds, but two distinct stories. Stanzas 40-41 apply solely to Guthrun, and suggest that Sigurth will go straight to Gunnar's hall. Stanzas 42-44, on the other hand, apply solely to Brynhild, and indicate that Sigurth will find her before he visits the Gjukungs. The confusion which existed between these two versions of the story, and which involved a fundamental difference in the final working out of Brynhild's revenge, is commented on in the note on Gripisspo, 13. In the present passage it is possible that two birds are speaking, each reflecting one version of the story; it seems even more likely that one speech or the other (40-41 or 42-44) reflects the original form of the narrative, the other having been added, either later or from another poem. In the Volsungasaga the whole passage is condensed into a few words by one bird: "Wiser were it if he should then ride up on Hindarfjoll, where Brynhild sleeps, and there would he get much wisdom." The Guthrun-bird does not appear at all.

41. Gjuki: father of Gunnar and Guthrun: cf. Gripisspo, 13 and note.]

 [p. 384]

And his fate the way | to the wanderer shows;
 The doughty king | a daughter has,
 That thou as a bride | mayst, Sigurth, buy."

 Another spake:
 42. "A hall stands high | on Hindarfjoll,
 All with flame | is it ringed without;
 Warriors wise | did make it once
 Out of the flaming | light of the flood.

43. "On the mountain sleeps | a battle-maid,
 And about her plays | the bane of the wood;
 Ygg with the thorn | hath smitten her thus,
 For she felled the fighter | he fain would save.

44. "There mayst thou behold | the maiden helmed,
 Who forth on Vingskornir | rode from the fight;
 The victory-bringer | her sleep shall break not,
 Thou heroes' son, | so the Norns have set."

 [42. Hindarfjoll: "Mountain of the Hind." Light of the flood: gold; cf. Reginsmol, 1 and note.

43. Battle-maid: Brynhild, here clearly defined as a Valkyrie. Bane of the wood: fire. Ygg: Othin; cf. Grimnismol, 53. The thorn: a prose note in Sigrdrifumol calls it "sleep-thorn." The fighter: the story of the reason for Brynhild's punishment is told in the prose following stanza 4 of Sigrdrifumol.

44. Vingskornir: Brynhild's horse, not elsewhere mentioned. Victory-bringer: the word thus translated is in the original "sigrdrifa." The compiler of the collection, not being familiar with this word, assumed that it was a proper name, and in the prose following stanza 4 of the Sigrdrifumol he specifically states that this was the Valkyrie's name. Editors, until recently, [fp. 385] have followed him in this error, failing to recognize that "sigrdrifa" was simply an epithet for Brynhild. It is from this blunder that the so-called Sigrdrifumol takes its name. Brynhild's dual personality as a Valkyrie and as the daughter of Buthli has made plenty of trouble, but the addition of a second Valkyrie in the person of the supposed "Sigrdrifa" has made still more.]

 [p. 385]

Sigurth rode along Fafnir's trail to his lair, and found it open. The gate-posts were of iron, and the gates; of iron, too, were all the beams in the house, which was dug down into the earth. There Sigurth found a mighty store of gold, and he filled two chests full thereof; he took the fear-helm and a golden mail-coat and the sword Hrotti, and many other precious things, and loaded Grani with them, but the horse would not go forward until Sigurth mounted on his back.

 [Prose. There is no break in the manuscript between the end of this prose passage and the beginning of the one introducing the Sigrdrifumol: some editors include the entire prose passage with one poem or the other. Hrotti: "Thruster."]

 
      
The Poetic Edda, by Henry Adams Bellows, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 386]

 

SIGRDRIFUMOL

 

The Ballad of The Victory-Bringer

 

INTRODUCTORY NOTE

The so-called Sigrdrifumol, which immediately follows the Fafnismol in the Codex Regius without any indication of a break, and without separate title, is unquestionably the most chaotic of all the poems in the Eddic collection. The end of it has been entirely lost, for the fifth folio of eight sheets is missing from Regius, the gap coming after the first line of stanza 29 of this poem. That stanza has been completed, and eight more have been added, from much later paper manuscripts, but even so the conclusion of the poem is in obscurity.

Properly speaking, however, the strange conglomeration of stanzas which the compiler of the collection has left for us, and which, in much the same general form, seems to have lain before the authors of the Volsungasaga, in which eighteen of its stanzas are quoted, is not a poem at all. Even its customary title is an absurd error. The mistake made by the annotator in thinking that the epithet "sigrdrifa," rightly applied to Brynhild as a "bringer of victory," was a proper name has already been explained and commented on (note on Fafnismol, 44). Even if the collection of stanzas were in any real sense a poem, which it emphatically is not, it is certainly not the "Ballad of Sigrdrifa" which it is commonly called. "Ballad of Brynhild" would be a sufficiently suitable title, and I have here brought the established name "Sigrdrifumol" into accord with this by translating the epithet instead of treating it as a proper name.

Even apart from the title, however, the Sigrdrifumol has little claim to be regarded as a distinct poem, nor is there any indication that the compiler did so regard it. Handicapped as we are by the loss of the concluding section, and of the material which followed it on those missing pages, we can yet see that the process which began with the prose Fra Dautha Sinfjotla, and which, interrupted by the insertion of the Gripisspo, went on through the Reginsmol and the Fafnismol, continued through as much of the Sigrdrifumol as is left to us. In other words, the compiler told the story of Sigurth in mixed prose and verse, using whatever verse he could find without much questioning as to its origin, and filling in the gaps with hii own prose. Fra

 [p. 387]

 Dautha Sinfjotla, Reginsmol, Fafnismol, and Sigrdrifumol are essentially a coherent unit, but one of the compiler's making only; they represent neither one poem nor three distinct poems, and the divisions and titles which have been almost universally adopted by editors are both arbitrary and misleading.

The Sigrdrifumol section as we now have it is an extraordinary piece of patchwork. It is most unlikely that the compiler himself brought all these fragments together for the first time; little by little, through a process of accretion and also, unluckily, through one of elimination, the material grew into its present shape. Certainly the basis of it is a poem dealing with the finding of Brynhild by Sigurth, but of this original poem only five stanzas (2-4 and 20-21) can be identified with any degree of confidence. To these five stanzas should probably, however, be added some, if not all, of the passage (stanzas 6-12) in which Brynhild teaches Sigurth the magic runes. These stanzas of rune-lore attracted sundry similar passages from other sources, including stanza 5, in which a magic draught is administered (not necessarily by Brynhild or to Sigurth), the curious rune-chant in stanzas 15-17, and stanzas 13-14 and 18-19. Beginning with stanza 22, and running to the end of the fragment (stanza 37), is a set of numbered counsels closely resembling the Loddfafnismol (Hovamol, stanzas 111-138), which manifestly has nothing whatever to do with Brynhild. Even in this passage there are probably interpolations (stanzas 25, 27, 30, 54, and 36). Finally, and bespeaking the existence at some earlier time of another Sigurth-Brynhild poem, is stanza 1, sharply distinguished by its metrical form from stanzas 2-4 and 20-21. Many critics argue that stanzas 6-10 of Helreith Brynildar belonged originally to the same poem as stanza 1 of the Sigrdrifumol.

The Sigrdrifumol, then, must be regarded simply as a collection of fragments, most of them originally having no relation to the main subject. All of the story, the dialogue and the characterization are embodied in stanzas 1-4 and 20-21 and in the prose notes accompanying the first four stanzas; all of the rest might equally well (or better) be transferred to the Hovamol, where its character entitles it to a place. Yet stanzas 2-4 are as fine as anything in Old Norse poetry, and it is out of the scanty material of these three stanzas that Wagner constructed much of the third act of "Siegfried."

[p. 388]

The Sigrdrifumol represents almost exclusively the contributions of the North to the Sigurth tradition (cf. introductory note to the Gripisspo). Brynhild, here disguised by the annotator as "Sigrdrifa," appears simply as a battle-maid and supernatural dispenser of wisdom; there is no trace of the daughter of Buthli and the rival of Guthrun. There is, however, so little of the "poem" which can definitely be assigned to the Sigurth cycle that it is impossible to trace back any of the underlying narrative substance.

The nature and condition of the material have made editorial conjectures and emendations very numerous, and as most of the guesses are neither conclusive nor particularly important, only a few of their are mentioned in the notes.

__________________

Sigurth rode up on Hindarfjoll and turned southward toward the land of the Franks. On the mountain he saw a great light, as if fire were burning, and the glow reached up to heaven. And when he came thither, there stood a tower of shields, and above it was a banner. Sigurth went into the shield-tower, and saw that a man lay there sleeping with all his war-weapons. First he took the helm from his head, and then he saw that it was a woman. The mail-coat was as fast as if it had grown to the flesh. Then he cut the mail-coat from the

 [Prose. The introductory prose follows without break the prose concluding the Fafnismol, the point of division being arbitrary and not agreed upon by all editors. Hindarfjoll: cf. Fafnismol, 42 and note. Franks: this does not necessarily mean that Sigurth was on his way to the Gjukungs' home, for Sigmund had a kingdom in the land of the Franks (cf. Fra Dautha Sinfjotla). Shields: the annotator probably drew the notion of the shield-tower from the reference in Helreith Brynhildar, 9. The flame-girt tower was not uncommon; cf. Mengloth's hall in Svipdagsmol.]

 [p. 389]

head-opening downward, and out to both the arm-holes. Then he took the mail-coat from her, and she awoke, and sat up and saw Sigurth, and said:

1. "What bit through the byrnie? | how was broken my sleep?
 Who made me free | of the fetters pale?"

 He answered:
 "Sigmund's son, | with Sigurth's sword,
 That late with flesh | hath fed the ravens."

Sigurth sat beside her and asked her name. She took a horn full of mead and gave him a memory-draught.

2. "Hail, day! | Hail, sons of day!
 And night and her daughter now!
 Look on us here | with loving eyes,
 That waiting we victory win.

 [1. This stanza, and the two lines included in the prose after stanza 4, and possibly stanza 5 as well, evidently come from a different poem from stanzas 2-4. Lines 3-4 in the original are obscure, though the general meaning is clear.

 Prose (after stanza 1). In the manuscript stanza 4 stands before this prose note and stanzas 2-3. The best arrangement of the stanzas seems to be the one here given, following Mullenhoff's suggestion, but the prose note is out of place anywhere. The first sentence of it ought to follow stanza 4 and immediately precede the next prose note; the second sentence ought to precede stanza 5.

2. Sons of day: the spirits of light. The daughter of night (Not), according to Snorri, was Jorth (Earth).]

 [p. 390]

3. "Hail to the gods! | Ye goddesses, hail,
 And all the generous earth!
 Give to us wisdom | and goodly speech,
 And healing hands, life-long.

4. "Long did I sleep, | my slumber was long,
 And long are the griefs of life;
 Othin decreed | that I could not break
 The heavy spells of sleep."

Her name was Sigrdrifa, and she was a Valkyrie. She said that two kings fought in battle; one was called Hjalmgunnar, an old man but a mighty warrior, and Othin had promised him the victory, and

The other was Agnar, | brother of Autha,
 None he found | who fain would shield him.

Sigrdrifa, slew Hjalmgunnar in the battle, and Othin pricked her with the sleep-thorn in punishment for this, and said that she should never thereafter win victory in battle, but that she should be wedded. "And I said to him that I had made a vow in my turn, that I would

 [Prose (after stanza 4). Sigrdrifa: on the error whereby this epithet, "victory-bringer," became a proper name cf. Fafnismol, 44 and note. Hjalmgunnar: in Helreith Brynhildar (stanza 8) he is called a king of the Goths, which means little; of him and his adversary, Agnar, we know, nothing beyond what is told here. The two lines quoted apparently come from the same poem as stanza 1; the two first lines of the stanza have been reconstructed from the prose thus: "Hjalmgunnar was one, | the hoary king, / And triumph to him | had Heerfather promised." A few editions insert in this prose passage stanzas 7-10 of Helreith Brynhildar, which may or may not have be longed originally to this poem.]

 [p. 391]

never marry a man who knew the meaning of fear." Sigurth answered and asked her to teach him wisdom, if she knew of what took place in all the worlds. Sigrdrifa said:

5. "Beer I bring thee, | tree of battle,
 Mingled of strength | and mighty fame;
 Charms it holds | and healing signs,
 Spells full good, | and gladness-runes."

*    *    *    *    *    *

6. Winning-runes learn, | if thou longest to win,
 And the runes on thy sword-hilt write;
 Some on the furrow, | and some on the flat,
 And twice shalt thou call on Tyr.

7. Ale-runes learn, | that with lies the wife
 Of another betray not thy trust;

 [5. This stanza is perhaps, but by no means surely, from the same poem as stanza 1. Tree of battle: warrior. Runes: the earliest runes were not letters, but simply signs supposed to possess magic power; out of them developed the "runic alphabet."

6. Stanzas 6-12 give a list of runes which probably had no original connection with the Brynhild-Sigurth story. Tyr: the sword-god (cf. Hymiskvitha, 4 and note); "tyr" is also the name of a rune which became "T."

7. Regius gives only lines 1-6; lines 7-8 are added from Volsungasaga. Lies, etc.: a guest on his arrival received a draught of ale from the hands of his host's wife, and it was to prevent this draught from bewitching him that the runes were recommended. Need: the word "nauth," meaning "need," is also the name of the rune which became "N." Leek: leeks were long supposed to have the power of counteracting poison or witchcraft.]

 [p. 392]

On the horn thou shalt write, | and the backs of thy hands,
 And Need shalt mark on thy nails.
 Thou shalt bless the draught, | and danger escape,
 And cast a leek in the cup;
 (For so I know | thou never shalt see
 Thy mead with evil mixed.)

8. Birth-runes learn, | if help thou wilt lend,
 The babe from the mother to bring;
 On thy palms shalt write them, | and round thy joints,
 And ask the fates to aid.

9. Wave-runes learn, | if well thou wouldst shelter
 The sail-steeds out on the sea;
 On the stem shalt thou write, | and the steering blade,
 And burn them into the oars;
 Though high be the breakers, | and black the waves,
 Thou shalt safe the harbor seek.

10. Branch-runes learn, | if a healer wouldst be,
 And cure for wounds wouldst work;

 [9. Sail-steeds: ships.

10. Branch-runes: runes cut in the bark of trees. Such runes were believed to transfer sickness from the invalid to the tree. Some editors, however, have changed "limrunar" ("branch runes") to "lifrunar" ("life-runes").]

 [p. 393]

On the bark shalt thou write, | and on trees that be
 With boughs to the eastward bent.

11. Speech-runes learn, | that none may seek
 To answer harm with hate;
 Well he winds | and weaves them all,
 And sets them side by side,
 At the judgment-place, | when justice there
 The folk shall fairly win.

12. Thought-runes learn, | if all shall think
 Thou art keenest minded of men.

*    *    *    *    *    *

13. Them Hropt arranged, | and them he wrote,
 And them in thought he made,

 [11. Lines 3-6 look like an accidental addition, replacing two lines now lost. They mean, apparently, that the man who interweaves his speech with "speech-runes" when he pleads his case at the "Thing," or popular tribunal, will not unduly enrage his adversary in the argument of the case.

12. Here the list of runes breaks off, though the manuscript indicates no gap, and three short passages of a different type, though all dealing with runes, follow.

13. Stanzas 13-14 appear to have come from a passage regarding Othin's getting of the runes similar to Hovamol, 139-146. Editors have tried various combinations of the lines in stanzas 12-14. Hropt: Othin; cf. Voluspo, 62. The draught, etc.: apparently the reference is to the head of Mim, from which Othin derived his wisdom in magic (cf. Voluspo, 47 and note); Heithdraupnir ("Light-Dropper") and Hoddrofnir ("Treasure-Opener") seem to be names for Mim.]

 [p. 394]

Out of the draught | that down had dropped
 From the head of Heithdraupnir,
 And the horn of Hoddrofnir.

14. On the mountain he stood | with Brimir's sword,
 On his head the helm he bore;
 Then first the head | of Mim spoke forth,
 And words of truth it told.

*    *    *    *    *    *

15. He bade write on the shield | before the shining goddess,
 On Arvak's ear, | and on Alsvith's hoof,
 On the wheel of the car | of Hrungnir's killer,
 On Sleipnir's teeth, | and the straps of the sledge.

16. On the paws of the bear, | and on Bragi's tongue,

 [14. This stanza is clearly in bad shape; perhaps, as the manuscript indicates, a new stanza, of which most has been lost, should begin with line 3. Brimir: a giant (cf. Voluspo, 9 and 37); why Othin should have his sword is unknown.

15. Stanzas 15-17 constitute a wholly distinct rune-chant. Line 1 is unusually long in the original, as here. Shield: the shield Svalin ("Cooling") that stands in front of the sun; cf. Grimnismol, 38. Arvak ("Early Waker"') and Alsvith ("All Swift"): the horses that draw the sun's car; cf. Grimnismol, 37, Hrungnir: the slayer of the giant Hrungnir was Thor (cf. Harbarthsljoth, 14 and note), but the line is in bad shape; the name may not be Hrungnir, and "killer" is 2 conjectural addition. Sleipnir: Othin's eight-legged horse; cf. Grimnismol, 44 and note. Sledge: perhaps the one mentioned in Grimnismol, 49- 16. Bragi: the god of poetry; cf. Grimnismol, 44 and note.]

 [p. 395]

On the wolf's claws bared, | and the eagle's beak,
 On bloody wings, | and bridge's end,
 On freeing hands | and helping foot-prints.

17. On glass and on gold, | and on goodly charms,
 In wine and in beer, | and on well-loved seats,
 On Gungnir's point, | and on Grani's breast,
 On the nails of Norns, | and the night-owl's beak.

*    *    *    *    *    *

18. Shaved off were the runes | that of old were written,
 And mixed with the holy mead,
 And sent on ways so wide;
 So the gods had them, | so the elves got them,
 And some for the Wanes so wise,
 And some for mortal men.

19. Beech-runes are there, | birth-runes are there,
 And all the runes of ale,

 [17. Charms: the wearing of amulets was very common. Gungnir: Othin's spear, made by the dwarfs, which he occasionally lent to heroes to whom he granted victory. Grani: Sigurth's horse; the Volsungasaga has "giantesses'."

19. Stanzas 18-19, which editors have freely rearranged, apparently come from another source than any of the rest. Shaved off: the runes were shaved off by Othin from the wood on which they were carved, and the shavings bearing them were put into the magic mead. Wanes: cf. Voluspo, 21, note.

19. Lines 3, 6, and 7 look like spurious additions, but the whole stanza is chaotic. Beech-runes: runes carved on beech trees.]

 [p. 396]

And the magic runes of might;
 Who knows them rightly | and reads them true,
 Has them himself to help;
 Ever they aid,
 Till the gods are gone.

*    *    *    *    *    *

 Brynhild spake:
 20. "Now shalt thou choose, | for the choice is given,
 Thou tree of the biting blade;
 Speech or silence, | 'tis thine to say,
 Our evil is destined all."

 Sigurth spake:
 21. "I shall not flee, | though my fate be near,
 I was born not a coward to be;

 [20. Stanzas 20-21 are all that remains of the dialogue between Brynhild and Sigurth from the poem to which stanzas 2-4 belong; cf. Introductory Note. In the intervening lost stanzas Brynhild has evidently warned Sigurth of the perils that will follow if he swears loyalty to her; hence the choice to which she here refers. Tree, etc.: warrior. The manuscript does not indicate the speaker of either this or the following stanza; the Volsungasaga names Sigurth before stanza 21.

21. It is quite possible that the original poem concluded with two stanzas after this, paraphrased thus in the Volsungasaga: "Sigurth said: 'Nowhere is to be found any one wiser than thou, and this I swear, that I shall have thee for mine, and that thou art after my heart's desire.' She answered: 'I would rather have thee though I might choose among all men.' And this they bound between them with oaths." Stanzas 22-37, which the Volsungasaga paraphrases, may have been introduced at a relatively early time, but can hardly have formed part of the original poem.]

 [p. 397]

Thy loving word | for mine will I win,
 As long as I shall live."

22. Then first I rede thee, | that free of guilt
 Toward kinsmen ever thou art;
 No vengeance have, | though they work thee harm,
 Reward after death thou shalt win.

23. Then second I rede thee, | to swear no oath
 If true thou knowest it not;
 Bitter the fate | of the breaker of troth,
 And poor is the wolf of his word.

24. Then third I rede thee, | that thou at the Thing
 Shalt fight not in words with fools;
 For the man unwise | a worser word
 Than he thinks doth utter oft.

25. Ill it is | if silent thou art,
 A coward born men call thee,
 And truth mayhap they tell;

 [22. With this stanza begins the list of numbered counsels, closely resembling the Loddfafnismol (Hovamol, 111-138), here attributed to Brynhild. That the section originally had anything to do with Brynhild is more than improbable.

23. Wolf of his word: oath-destroyer, oath-breaker.

25. This chaotic and obscure jumble of lines has been unsuccessfully "improved" by various editors. It is clearly an interpolation, meaning, in substance: "It is dangerous to keep silent too long, as men may think you a coward; but if any one taunts [fp. 398] you falsely because of your silence, do not argue with him, but the next morning kill him as proof that he is a liar."]

 [p. 398]

Seldom safe is fame,
 Unless wide renown be won;
 On the day thereafter | send him to death,
 Let him pay the price of his lies.

26. Then fourth I rede thee, | if thou shalt find
 A wily witch on thy road,
 It is better to go | than her guest to be,
 Though night enfold thee fast.

27. Eyes that see | need the sons of men
 Who fight in battle fierce;
 Oft witches evil | sit by the way,
 Who blade and courage blunt.

28. Then fifth I rede thee, | though maidens fair
 Thou seest on benches sitting,
 Let the silver of kinship | not rob thee of sleep,
 And the kissing of women beware.

29. Then sixth I rede thee, | if men shall wrangle,
 And ale-talk rise to wrath,
 No words with a drunken | warrior have,
 For wine steals many men's wits.

 [27. Probably another interpolation.

28. Silver of kinship: the passage is doubtful, but apparently it means the "marriage-price" for which a bride was "bought."

29. Line 1 comes at the end of the thirty-second leaf of Regius, and whatever further was contained in that manuscript has vanished [fp. 399] with the lost eight-leaf folio (cf. Introductory Note). The rest of stanza 29, and stanzas 50-37, are added from later paper manuscripts, which were undoubtedly copied from an old parchment, though probably not from the complete Regius. The Volsungasaga paraphrases these additional stanzas.]

 [p. 399]

30. Brawls and ale | full oft have been
 An ill to many a man,
 Death for some, | and sorrow for some;
 Full many the woes of men.

31. Then seventh I rede thee, | if battle thou seekest
 With a foe that is full of might;
 It is better to fight | than to burn alive
 In the hall of the hero rich.

32. Then eighth I rede thee, | that evil thou shun,
 And beware of lying words;
 Take not a maid, | nor the wife of a man,
 Nor lure them on to lust.

33. Then ninth I rede thee: | burial render
 If thou findest a fallen corpse,
 Of sickness dead, | or dead in the sea,
 Or dead of weapons' wounds.

34. A bath shalt thou give them | who corpses be,

 [30. Probably an interpolation.

31. The meaning is that it is better to go forth to battle than to stay at home and be burned to death. Many a Norse warrior met his death in this latter way; the burning of the house in the Njalssaga is the most famous instance.

34. Probably an interpolation.]

 [p. 400]

And hands and head shalt wash;
 Wipe them and comb, | ere they go in the coffin,
 And pray that they sleep in peace.

35. Then tenth I rede thee, | that never thou trust
 The word of the race of wolves,
 (If his brother thou broughtest to death,
 Or his father thou didst fell;)
 Often a wolf | in a son there is,
 Though gold he gladly takes.

36. Battle and hate | and harm, methinks,
 Full seldom fall asleep;
 Wits and weapons | the warrior needs
 If boldest of men he would be.

37. Then eleventh I rede thee, | that wrath thou shun,
 And treachery false with thy friends;
 Not long the leader's | life shall be,
 For great are the foes he faces.

 [35. Lines 3-4 are probably interpolated. Race of wolves: family of a slain foe.

36. Probably an interpolation.

37. Lines 3-4 may well have come from the old Sigurth-Brynhild poem, like stanzas 2-4 and 20-21, being inserted here, where they do not fit particularly well, in place of the two lines with which the eleventh counsel originally ended. Perhaps they formed part of the stanza of warning which evidently preceded Brynhild's speech in stanza 20. In the Volsungasaga they are paraphrased at the end of Brynhild's long speech of advice (stanzas 20-37), and are immediately followed by the prose passage given in the note on stanza 21. It seems likely, therefore, [fp. 401] that the paper manuscripts have preserved all of the so-called Sigrdrifumol which was contained in the lost section of Regius, with the possible exception of these two concluding stanzas, and these may very well have been given only in the form of a prose note, though it is practically certain that at one time they existed in verse form.]

 [p. 401]

      
The Poetic Edda, by Henry Adams Bellows, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 402]

 

BROT AF SIGURTHARKVITHU

 

Fragment of a Sigurth Lay

 

INTRODUCTORY NOTE

The gap of eight leaves in the Codex Regius (cf. introductory note to the Sigrdrifumol) is followed by a passage of twenty stanzas which is evidently the end of a longer poem, the greater part of it having been contained in the lost section of the manuscript. There is here little question of such a compilation as made up the so-called Reginsmol, Fafnismol, and Sigrdrifumol; the extant fragment shows every sign of being part of a poem which, as it stood in the manuscript, was a complete and definite unit. The end is clearly marked; the following poem, Guthrunarkvitha I, carries a specific heading in the manuscript, so that there is no uncertainty as to where the fragment closes.

It seems altogether likely that the twenty stanzas thus remaining are the end of a poem entitled Sigurtharkvitha (Lay of Sigurth), and, more specifically, the "Long" Lay of Sigurth. The extant and complete Sigurth lay, a relatively late work, is referred to by the annotator as the "Short" Lay of Sigurth, which, of course, presupposes the existence of a longer poem with the same title. As the "short" lay is one of the longest poems in the whole collection (seventy stanzas), it follows that the other one must have been considerably more extensive in order to have been thus distinguished by its length. It may be guessed, then, that not less than eighty or a hundred stanzas, and possibly more, of the "Long" Lay of Sigurth have been lost with the missing pages of Regius.

The narrative, from the point at which the so-called Sigrdrifumol breaks off to that at which the Brot takes it up, is given with considerable detail in the Volsungasaga. In this prose narrative four stanzas are quoted, and one of them is specifically introduced with the phrase: "as is told in the Lay of Sigurth." It is possible, but most unlikely, that the entire passage paraphrases this poem alone; such an assumption would give the Lay of Sigurth not less than two hundred and fifty stanzas (allowing about fifteen stanzas to each of the missing pages), and moreover there are inconsistencies in the Volsungasaga narrative suggesting that different and more or less conflicting poems were used as sources. The chances are that the "Long" Lay of Sigurth

[p. 403]

filled approximately the latter half of the lost section of the manuscript, the first half including poems of which the only trace is to be found in the Volsungasaga prose paraphrase and in two of the stanzas therein quoted.

The course of the Volsungasaga's story from the Sigrdrifumol to the Brot is, briefly, as follows. After leaving the Valkyrie, Sigurth comes to the dwelling of Heimir, Brynhild's brother-in-law, where he meets Brynhild and they swear oaths of fidelity anew (the Volsungasaga is no more lucid with regard to the Brynhild-Sigrdrifa confusion than was the annotator of the poems). Then the scene shifts to the home of the Gjukungs. Guthrun, Gjuki's daughter, has a terrifying dream, and visits Brynhild to have it explained, which the latter does by foretelling pretty much everything that is going to happen; this episode was presumably the subject of a separate poem in the lost section of the manuscript. Guthrun returns home, and Sigurth soon arrives, to be made enthusiastically welcome. Grimhild, mother of Gunnar and Guthrun, gives him a magic draught which makes him forget all about Brynhild, and shortly thereafter he marries Guthrun.

Then follows the episode of the winning of Brynhild for Gunnar (cf. Gripisspo, 97 and note). This was certainly the subject of a poem, possibly of the first part of the "Long" Lay of Sigurth, although it seems more likely that the episode was dealt with in a separate poem. The Volsungasaga quotes two stanzas describing Sigurth's triumphant passing through the flames after Gunnar has failed and the two have changed forms. They run thus:

The fire raged, | the earth was rocked,
 The flames leaped high | to heaven itself;
 Few were the hardy | heroes would dare
 To ride or leap | the raging flames.

Sigurth urged Grani | then with his sword,
 The fire slackened | before the hero,
 The flames sank low | for the greedy of fame,
 The armor flashed | that Regin had fashioned.

After Sigurth has spent three nights with Brynhild, laying his sword between them (cf. Gripisspo, 41 and note), he and Gunnar return home, while Brynhild goes to the dwelling of her brother-in-law, Heimir, and makes ready for her marriage with Gunnar,

[p. 404]

directing Heimir to care for her daughter by Sigurth, Aslaug. The wedding takes place, to be followed soon after by the quarrel between Guthrun and Brynhild, in which the former betrays the fact that it was Sigurth, and not Gunnar, who rode through the flames. Brynhild speaks with contempt of Guthrun and her whole family, and the following stanza, which presumably be longs to the same Sigurth lay as the Brot, is quoted at this point:

Sigurth the dragon | slew, and that
 Will men recall | while the world remains;
 But little boldness | thy brother had
 To ride or leap | the raging flames.

Gunnar and Sigurth alike try to appease the angry Brynhild, but in vain. After Sigurth has talked with her, his leaving her hall is described in the following stanza, introduced by the specific phrase: "as is said in the Lay of Sigurth":

Forth went Sigurth, | and speech he sought not,
 The friend of heroes, | his head bowed down;
 Such was his grief | that asunder burst
 His mail-coat all | of iron wrought.

Brynhild then tells Gunnar that she had given herself wholly to Sigurth before she had become Gunnar's wife (the confusion between the two stories is commented on in the note to Gripisspo, 47), and Gunnar discusses plans of vengance with his brother, Hogni. It is at this point that the action of the Brot begins. Beginning with this poem, and thence to the end of the cycle, the German features of the narrative predominate (cf. introductory note to Gripisspo).

__________________

 Hogni spake:
 1. "(What evil deed | has Sigurth) done,
 That the hero's life | thou fain wouldst have?"

 [1. The fragment begins with the last words of line I (probably line 3 of the stanza). A few editors ascribe this speech to Gunnar and the next to Brynhild; one reconstruction of lines 1-2 on this probably false assumption runs: "Why art thou, Brynhild, | [fp. 405] daughter of Buthli, / Scheming ill | with evil counsel?" Hogni (German Hagene): brother of Gunnar and Guthrun.]

 [p. 405]

 Gunnar spake:
 2. "Sigurth oaths | to me hath sworn,
 Oaths hath sworn, | and all hath broken;
 He betrayed me there | where truest all
 His oaths, methinks, | he ought to have kept."

 Hogni spake:
 3. "Thy heart hath Brynhild | whetted to hate,
 Evil to work | and harm to win,
 She grudges the honor | that Guthrun has,
 And that joy of herself | thou still dost have."

4. They cooked a wolf, | they cut up a snake,
 They gave to Gotthorm | the greedy one's flesh,
 Before the men, | to murder minded,
 Laid their hands | on the hero bold.

5. Slain was Sigurth | south of the Rhine;
 From a limb a raven | called full loud:

 [2. A few editors ascribe this speech to Brynhild. Gunnar, if the stanza is his, has believed Brynhild's statement regarding Sigurth's disloyalty to his blood-brother.

4. The Volsungasaga quotes a somewhat different version of this stanza, in which the snake is called "wood-fish" and the third line adds "beer and many things." Eating snakes and the flesh of beasts of prey was commonly supposed to induce ferocity. Gotthorm: Grimhild's son, half-brother to Gunnar. He it is who, not having sworn brotherhood with Sigurth, does the killing.

5. In the manuscript this stanza stands between stanzas 11 and 12; most editions have made the change here indicated. [fp. 406] South of the Rhine: the definite localization of the action shows how clearly all this part of the story was recognized in the North as of German origin. Atli (Attila; cf. introductory note to Gripisspo): the Northern version of the story makes him Brynhild's brother. His marriage with Guthrun, and his slaying of hex brothers, are told in the Atli poems. Regarding the manner of Sigurth's death cf. concluding prose passage and note. Stanza 13 indicates that after stanza 5 a stanza containing the words of an eagle has been lost.]

 [p. 406]

"Your blood shall redden | Atli's blade,
 And your oaths shall bind | you both in chains."

6. Without stood Guthrun, | Gjuki's daughter,
 Hear now the speech | that first she spake:
 "Where is Sigurth now, | the noble king,
 That my kinsmen riding | before him come?"

7. Only this | did Hogni answer:
 "Sigurth we | with our swords have slain;
 The gray horse mourns | by his master dead."

8. Then Brynhild spake, | the daughter of Buthli:
 "Well shall ye joy | in weapons and lands;
 Sigurth alone | of all had been lord,
 If a little longer | his life had been.

9. "Right were it not | that so he should rule
 O'er Gjuki's wealth | and the race of the Goths;

 [7. One line of this stanza, but it is not clear which, seems to have been lost. The gray horse: Grani.

8. Some editions set stanzas 8 and 9 after stanza 11; Sijmons marks them as spurious. Buthli: cf. Gripisspo, 19, note.

9. Goths: a generic term for any German race; cf. Gripisspo, [fp. 407] 35 and note. Five sons: according to the Volsungasaga Sigurth had only one son, named Sigmund, who was killed at Brynhild's behest. Sigurtharkvitha en skamma and Guthrunarkvitha II like wise mention only one son. The daughter of Sigurth and Guthrun, Svanhild, marries Jormunrek (Ermanarich).]

 [p. 407]

Five are the sons | for ruling the folk,
 And greedy of fight, | that he hath fathered."

10. Then Brynhild laughed-- | and the building echoed--
 Only once, | with all her heart;
 "Long shall ye joy | in lands and men,
 Now ye have slain | the hero noble."

11. Then Guthrun spake, | the daughter of Gjuki:
 "Much thou speakest | in evil speech;
 Accursed be Gunnar, | Sigurth's killer,
 Vengeance shall come | for his cruel heart."

12. Early came evening, | and ale was drunk,
 And among them long | and loud they talked.;
 They slumbered all | when their beds they sought,
 But Gunnar alone | was long awake.

13. His feet were tossing, | he talked to himself,
 And the slayer of hosts | began to heed
 What the twain from the tree | had told him then,
 The raven and eagle, | as home they rode.

 [12. The manuscript marks line 4 as the beginning of a new stanza, and a few editions combine it with stanza 13.

13. Slayer of hosts: warrior (Gunnar). Raven and eagle: cf. note on stanza 5.]

 [p. 408]

14. Brynhild awoke, | the daughter of Buthli,
 The warrior's daughter, | ere dawn of day:
 "Love me or hate me, | the harm is done,
 And my grief cries out, | or else I die."

15. Silent were all | who heard her speak,
 And nought of the heart | of the queen they knew,
 Who wept such tears | the thing to tell
 That laughing once | of the men she had won.

 Brynhild spake:
 16. "Gunnar, I dreamed | a dream full grim:
 In the hall were corpses; | cold was my bed;
 And, ruler, thou | didst joyless ride,
 With fetters bound | in the foemen's throng.

17. ".    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 Utterly now your | Niflung race
 All shall die; | your oaths ye have broken.

 [16. Mogk regards stanzas 16 and 17 as interpolated, but on not very satisfactory grounds. On the death of Gunnar cf. Drap Niflunga.

17. No gap is indicated in the manuscript, and some editions attach these two lines to stanza 16. Niflungs: this name (German Nibelungen), meaning "sons of the mist," seems to have belonged originally to the race of supernatural beings to which the treasure belonged in the German version. It was subsequently ex tended to include the Gjukungs and their Burgundians. This question, of minor importance in the Norse poems, has evoked an enormous amount of learned discussion in connection with the Nibelungenlied.]

 [p. 409]

18. "Thou hast, Gunnar, | the deed forgot,
 When blood in your footprints | both ye mingled;
 All to him | hast repaid with ill
 Who fain had made thee | the foremost of kings.

19. "Well did he prove, | when proud he rode
 To win me then | thy wife to be,
 How true the host-slayer | ever had held
 The oaths he had made | with the monarch young.

20. "The wound-staff then, | all wound with gold,
 The hero let | between us lie;
 With fire the edge | was forged full keen,
 And with drops of venom | the blade was damp."

Here it is told in this poem about the death of Sigurth, and the story goes here that they slew him out of doors, but some say that they slew him in the house, on his bed

 [19. Footprints: the actual mingling of blood in one another's footprints was a part of the ceremony of swearing blood-brother hood, the oath which Gunnar and Sigurth had taken. The fourth line refers to the fact that Sigurth had won many battles for Gunnar.

20. Regarding the sword episode cf. Gripisspo, 41 and note. Wound-staff: sword.

 Prose. This prose passage has in the manuscript, written in red, the phrase "Of Sigurth's Death" as a heading; there is no break between it and the prose introducing Guthrunarkvitha I, the heading for that poem coming just before stanza 1. This note is of special interest as an effort at real criticism. The annotator, troubled by the two versions of the story of Sigurth's death, feels it incumbent on him not only to point the fact out, but to cite the authority of "German men" for the form which appears [fp. 410] in this poem. The alternative version, wherein Sigurth is slain in bed, appears in Sigurtharkvitha en skamma, Guthrunarhvot, and Hamthesmol, and also in the Volsungasaga, which tells how Gotthorm tried twice to kill Sigurth but was terrified by the brightness of his eyes, and succeeded only after the hero had fallen asleep, That the annotator was correct in citing German authority for the slaying of Sigurth in the forest is shown by the Nibelungenlied and the Thithrekssaga. The "old" Guthrun lay is unquestionably Guthrunarkvitha II.] 

 [p. 410]

while he was sleeping. But German men say that they killed him out of doors in the forest; and so it is told in the old Guthrun lay, that Sigurth and Gjuki's sons had ridden to the council-place, and that he was slain there. But in this they are all agreed, that they deceived him in his trust of them, and fell upon him when he was lying down and unprepared.

      
The Poetic Edda, by Henry Adams Bellows, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 411]

 

GUTHRUNARKVITHA I

 

The First Lay of Guthrun

 

INTRODUCTORY NOTE

The First Lay of Guthrun, entitled in the Codex Regius simply Guthrunarkvitha, immediately follows the remaining fragment of the "long" Sigurth lay in that manuscript. Unlike the poems dealing with the earlier part of the Sigurth cycle, the so-called Reginsmol, Fafnismol, and Sigrdrifumol, it is a clear and distinct unit, apparently complete and with few and minor interpolations. It is also one of the finest poems in the entire collection, with an extraordinary emotional intensity and dramatic force. None of its stanzas are quoted elsewhere, and it is altogether probable that the compilers of the Volsungasaga were unfamiliar with it, for they do not mention the sister and daughter of Gjuki who appear in this poem, or Herborg, "queen of the Huns" (stanza 6).

The lament of Guthrun (Kriemhild) is almost certainly among the oldest parts of the story. The lament was one of the earliest forms of poetry to develop among the Germanic peoples, and I suspect, though the matter is not susceptible of proof, that the lament of Sigurth's wife had assumed lyric form as early as the seventh century, and reached the North in that shape rather than in prose tradition (cf. Guthrunarkvitha II, introductory note). We find traces of it in the seventeenth Aventiure of the Nibelungenlied, and in the poems of the Edda it dominates every appearance of Guthrun. The two first Guthrun lays (I and II) are both laments, one for Sigurth's death and the other including both that and the lament over the slaying of her brothers; the lament theme is apparent in the third Guthrun lay and in the Guthrunarhvot.

In their present forms the second Guthrun lay is undoubtedly older than he first; in the prose following the Brot the annotator refers to the "old" Guthrun lay in terms which can apply only to the second one in the collection. The shorter and "first" lay, therefore, can scarcely have been composed much before the year 1000, and may be somewhat later. The poet appears to have known and made use of the older lament; stanza 17, for example, is a close parallel to stanza 2 of the earlier poem; but whatever material he used he fitted into a definite poetic scheme of his

[p. 412]

own. And while this particular poem is, as critics have generally agreed, one of the latest of the collection, it probably represents one of the earliest parts of the entire Sigurth cycle to take on verse form.

 Guthrunarkvitha I, so far as the narrative underlying it is concerned, shows very little northern addition to the basic German tradition. Brynhild appears only as Guthrun's enemy and the cause of Sigurth's death; the three women who attempt to comfort Guthrun, though unknown to the southern stories, seem to have been rather distinct creations of the poet's than traditional additions to the legend. Regarding the relations of the various elements in the Sigurth cycle, cf. introductory note to Gripisspo.

__________________

Guthrun sat by the dead Sigurth; she did not weep as other women, but her heart was near to bursting with grief. The men and women came to her to console her, but that was not easy to do. It is told of men that Guthrun had eaten of Fafnir's heart, and that she under stood the speech of birds. This is a poem about Guthrun.

1. Then did Guthrun | think to die,
 When she by Sigurth | sorrowing sat;
 Tears she had not, | nor wrung her hands,
 Nor ever wailed, | as other women.

 [Prose. The prose follows the concluding prose of the Brot without indication of a break, the heading standing immediately before stanza 1. Fafnir's heart: this bit of information is here quite without point, and it is nowhere else stated that Guthrun understood the speech of birds. In the Volsungasaga it is stated that Sigurth gave Guthrun some of Fafnir's heart to eat, "and thereafter she was much grimmer than before, and wiser."

1. This stanza seems to be based on Guthrunarkvitha II, 11-12.]

 [p. 413]

2. To her the warriors | wise there came,
 Longing her heavy | woe to lighten;
 Grieving could not | Guthrun weep,
 So sad her heart, | it seemed, would break.

3. Then the wives | of the warriors came,
 Gold-adorned, | and Guthrun sought;
 Each one then | of her own grief spoke,
 The bitterest pain | she had ever borne.

4. Then spake Gjaflaug, | Gjuki's sister:
 "Most joyless of all | on earth am I;
 Husbands five | were from me taken,
 (Two daughters then, | and sisters three,)
 Brothers eight, | yet I have lived."

5. Grieving could not | Guthrun weep,
 Such grief she had | for her husband dead,
 And so grim her heart | by the hero's body.

6. Then Herborg spake, | the queen of the Huns:

 [4. Gjaflaug: nothing further is known of this aunt of Guthrun, or of the many relatives whom she has lost. Very likely she is an invention of the poet's, for it seems improbable that other wise all further trace of her should have been lost. Line 4 has been marked by many editors as spurious.

5. Some editors assume the loss of a line, after either line 1 or line 3. I prefer to believe that here and in stanza 10 the poet knew exactly what he was doing, and that both stanzas are correct.

6. Herborg: neither she nor her sorrows are elsewhere mentioned, [fp. 415] nor is it clear what a "queen of the Huns" is doing in Gunnar's home, but the word "Hun" has little definiteness of meaning in the poems, and is frequently applied to Sigurth himself (cf. note on stanza 24). Herborg appears from stanza 11 to have been the foster-mother of Gollrond, Guthrun's sister. Lines 5-7 may be interpolations, or may form a separate stanza.]

 [p. 414]

"I have a greater | grief to tell;
 My seven sons | in the southern land,
 And my husband, fell | in fight all eight.
 (Father and mother | and brothers four
 Amid the waves | the wind once smote,
 And the seas crashed through | the sides of the ship.)

7. "The bodies all | with my own hands then
 I decked for the grave, | and the dead I buried;
 A half-year brought me | this to bear;
 And no one came | to comfort me.

8. "Then bound I was, | and taken in war,
 A sorrow yet | in the same half-year;
 They bade me deck | and bind the shoes
 Of the wife of the monarch | every morn.

9. "In jealous rage | her wrath she spake,
 And beat me oft | with heavy blows;

 [7. Lines 1 and 2 stand in reversed order in the manuscript; I have followed Gering's conjectural transposition.

9. Herborg implies that the queen's jealousy was not altogether misplaced.]

 [p. 415]

Never a better | lord I knew,
 And never a woman | worse I found."

10. Grieving could not | Guthrun weep,
 Such grief she had | for her husband dead,
 And so grim her heart | by the hero's body.

11. Then spake Gollrond, | Gjuki's daughter:
 "Thy wisdom finds not, | my foster-mother,
 The way to comfort | the wife so young."
 She bade them uncover | the warrior's corpse.

12. The shroud she lifted | from Sigurth, laying
 His well-loved head | on the knees of his wife:
 "Look on thy loved one, | and lay thy lips
 To his as if yet | the hero lived."

13. Once alone did | Guthrun look;
 His hair all clotted | with blood beheld,
 The blinded eyes | that once shone bright,
 The hero's breast | that the blade had pierced.

14. Then Guthrun bent, | on her pillow bowed,

 [10. Cf. stanza 5 and note. The manuscript abbreviates to first letters.

11. Gollrond: not elsewhere mentioned. Line 4 looks like an interpolation replacing a line previously lost.

12. The manuscript indicates line 3 as the beginning of a stanza. and some editors have attempted to follow this arrangement. Many editors assume the loss of a line from this stanza.]

 [p. 416]

Her hair was loosened, | her cheek was hot,
 And the tears like raindrops | downward ran.

15. Then Guthrun, daughter | of Gjuki, wept,
 And through her tresses | flowed the tears;
 And from the court | came the cry of geese,
 The birds so fair | of the hero's bride.

16. Then Gollrond spake, | the daughter of Gjuki:
 "Never a greater | love I knew
 Than yours among | all men on earth;
 Nowhere wast happy, | at home or abroad,
 Sister mine, | with Sigurth away."

 Guthrun spake:
 17. "So was my Sigurth | o'er Gjuki's sons
 As the spear-leek grown | above the grass,
 Or the jewel bright | borne on the band,
 The precious stone | that princes wear.

18. "To the leader of men | I loftier seemed
 And higher than all | of Herjan's maids;

 [15. The word here translated "tresses" is sheer guesswork. The detail of the geese is taken from Sigurtharkvitha en skamma, 29, line 3 here being identical with line 4 of that stanza.

16. Line 1, abbreviated in the manuscript, very likely should be simply "Gollrond spake."

17. Cf. Guthrunarkvitha II, 2. The manuscript does not name the speaker, and some editions have a first line, "Then Guthrun spake, the daughter of Gjuki."

18. Herjan: Othin; his maids are the Valkyries; cf. Voluspo, 31, where the same phrase is used.]

 [p. 417]

As little now | as the leaf I am
 On the willow hanging; | my hero is dead.

19. "In his seat, in his bed, | I see no more
 My heart's true friend; | the fault is theirs,
 The sons of Gjuki, | for all my grief,
 That so their sister | sorely weeps.

20. "So shall your land | its people lose
 As ye have kept | your oaths of yore;
 Gunnar, no joy | the gold shall give thee,
 (The rings shall soon | thy slayers be,)
 Who swarest oaths | with Sigurth once.

21. "In the court was greater | gladness then
 The day my Sigurth | Grani saddled,
 And went forth Brynhild's | hand to win,
 That woman ill, | in an evil hour."

22. Then Brynhild spake, | the daughter of Buthli:
 "May the witch now husband | and children want
 Who, Guthrun, loosed | thy tears at last,
 And with magic today | hath made thee speak."

 [20. Line 4 looks like an interpolation (cf. Fafnismol, 9, line 4), but some editors instead have queried line 5. How Guthrun's curse is fulfilled is told in the subsequent poems. That desire for Sigurth's treasure (the gold cursed by Andvari and Loki) was one of the motives for his murder is indicated in Sigurtharkvitha en skamma (stanza 16), and was clearly a part of the German tradition, as it appears in the Nibelungenlied.

21. Cf. Gripisspo, 35 and note.

22. Line 1 is abbreviated in the manuscript.]

 [p. 418]

23. Then Gollrond, daughter | of Gjuki, spake:
 "Speak not such words, | thou hated woman;
 Bane of the noble | thou e'er hast been,
 (Borne thou art | on an evil wave,
 Sorrow hast brought | to seven kings,)
 And many a woman | hast loveless made."

24. Then Brynhild, daughter | of Buthli, spake:
 "Atli is guilty | of all the sorrow,
 (Son of Buthli | and brother of mine,)
 When we saw in the hall | of the Hunnish race
 The flame of the snake's bed | flash round the hero;
 (For the journey since | full sore have I paid,
 And ever I seek | the sight to forget.)"

 [23. Editors are agreed that this stanza shows interpolations, but differ as to the lines to reject. Line 4 (literally "every wave of ill-doing drives thee") is substantially a proverb, and line 5, with its apparently meaningless reference to "seven" kings, may easily have come from some other source.

24. The stanza is obviously in bad shape; perhaps it represents two separate stanzas, or perhaps three of the lines are later additions. Atli: Brynhild here blames her brother, following the frequent custom of transferring the responsibility for a murder (cf. Helgakvitha Hundingsbana II, 33), because he compelled her to marry Gunnar against her will, an idea which the poet seems to have gained from Sigurtharkvitha en skamma, 32-39. These stanzas represent an entirely different version of the story, wherein Atli, attacked by Gunnar and Sigurth, buys them off by giving Gunnar his sister, Brynhild, as wife. He seems to have induced the latter to marry Gunnar by falsely telling her that Gunnar was Sigurth (a rationalistic explanation of the interchange of forms described in the Volsungasaga and Gripisspo, 37-39). In the present stanza Atli is made to do this out of desire for Sigurth's treasure. Hunnish race: this may be [fp. 419] merely an error (neither Gunnar nor Sigurth could properly have been connected in any way with Atli and his Huns), based on Sigurtharkvitha en skamma, wherein Sigurth appears more than once as the "Hunnish king." The North was very much in the dark as to the differences between Germans, Burgundians, Franks, Goths, and Huns, and used the words without much discrimination. On the other hand, it may refer to Sigurth's appearance when, adorned with gold, he came with Gunnar to besiege Atli, in the alternative version of the story just cited (cf. Sigurtharkvitha en skamma, 36). Flame of the snake's bed: gold, so called because serpents and dragons were the' traditional guardians of treasure, on which they lay.]

 [p. 419]

25. By the pillars she stood, | and gathered her strength,
 From the eyes of Brynhild, | Buthli's daughter,
 Fire there burned, | and venom she breathed,
 When the wounds she saw | on Sigurth then.

Guthrun went thence away to a forest in the waste, and journeyed all the way to Denmark, and was there seven half-years with Thora, daughter of Hokon. Brynhild would not live after Sigurth. She had eight of her thralls slain and five serving-women. Then she killed her self with a sword, as is told in the Short Lay of Sigurth.

 [Prose. The manuscript has "Gunnar" in place of "Guthrun," but this is an obvious mistake; the entire prose passage is based on Guthrunarkvitha II, 14. The Volsungasaga likewise merely paraphrases Guthrunarkvitha II, and nothing further is known of Thora or her father, Hokon, though many inconclusive attempts have been made to identify the latter. Brynhild: the story of her death is told in great detail in the latter part of Sigurtharkvitha en skamma.]

 
      
The Poetic Edda, by Henry Adams Bellows, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 420]

 

SIGURTHARKVITHA EN SKAMMA

 

The Short Lay of Sigurth

 

INTRODUCTORY NOTE

 Guthrunarkvitha I is immediately followed in the Codex Regius by a long poem which in the manuscript bears the heading "Sigurtharkvitha," but which is clearly referred to in the prose link between it and Guthrunarkvitha I as the "short" Lay of Sigurth. The discrepancy between this reference and the obvious length of the poem has led to many conjectures, but the explanation seems to be that the "long" Sigurth lay, of which the Brot is presumably a part, was materially longer even than this poem. The efforts to reduce the "short" Sigurth lay to dimensions which would justify the appellation in comparison with other poems in the collection, either by separating it into two poems or by the rejection of many stanzas as interpolations, have been utterly inconclusive.

Although there are probably several interpolated passages, and indications of omissions are not lacking, the poem as we now have it seems to be a distinct and coherent unit. From the narrative point of view it leaves a good deal to be desired, for the reason that the poet's object was by no means to tell a story, with which his hearers were quite familiar, but to use the narrative simply as the background for vivid and powerful characterization. The lyric element, as Mogk points out, overshadows the epic throughout, and the fact that there are frequent confusions of narrative tradition does not trouble the poet at all.

The material on which the poem was based seems to have existed in both prose and verse form; the poet was almost certainly familiar with some of the other poems in the Eddic collection, with poems which have since been lost, and with the narrative prose traditions which never fully assumed verse form. The fact that he seems to have known and used the Oddrunargratr, which can hardly have been composed before 1050, and that in any case he introduces the figure of Oddrun, a relatively late addition to the story, dates the poem as late as the end of the eleventh century, or even the first half of the twelfth. There has been much discussion as to where it was composed, the debate centering chiefly on the reference to glaciers (stanza 8). There is something to be said in favor of Greenland

[p. 421]

as the original home of the poem (cf. introductory note to Atlakvitha), but the arguments for Iceland are even stronger; Norway in this case is practically out of the question.

The narrative features of the poem are based on the German rather than the Norse elements of the story (cf. introductory note to Gripisspo), but the poet has taken whatever material he wanted without much discrimination as to its source. By the year 1100 the story of Sigurth, with its allied legends, existed through out the North in many and varied forms, and the poem shows traces of variants of the main story which do not appear elsewhere.

1. Of old did Sigurth | Gjuki seek,
 The Volsung young, | in battles victor;
 Well he trusted | the brothers twain,
 With mighty oaths | among them sworn.

2. A maid they gave him, | and jewels many,
 Guthrun the young, | the daughter of Gjuki;
 They drank and spake | full many a day,
 Sigurth the young | and Gjuki's sons.

3. Thereafter went they | Brynhild to woo,
 And so with them | did Sigurth ride,

 [1. Gjuki: father of the brothers twain, Gunnar and Hogni, and of Guthrun. In this version of the story Sigurth goes straight to the home of the Gjukungs after his victory over the dragon Fafnir, without meeting Brynhild on the way (cf. Gripisspo, 13 and note). Volsung: Sigurth's grandfather was Volsung; cf. Fra Dautha Sinfjotla and note. Oaths: regarding the blood-brother hood sworn by Sigurth, Gunnar, and Hogni cf. Brot, 18 and note.

3. Brynhild: on the winning of Brynhild by Sigurth in Gunnar's shape cf. Gripisspo, 37 and note. The poet here omits details, [fp. 422] and in stanzas 32-39 appears a quite different tradition regarding the winning of Brynhild, which I suspect he had in mind throughout the poem.]

 [p. 422]

The Volsung young, | in battle valiant,--
 Himself would have had her | if all he had seen.

4. The southern hero | his naked sword,
 Fair-flashing, let | between them lie;
 (Nor would he come | the maid to kiss;)
 The Hunnish king | in his arms ne'er held
 The maiden he gave | to Gjuki's sons.

5. Ill she had known not | in all her life,
 And nought of the sorrows | of men she knew;
 Blame she had not, | nor dreamed she should bear it,
 But cruel the fates | that among them came.

 [4. Southern hero: Sigurth, whose Frankish origin is seldom wholly lost sight of in the Norse versions of the story. On the episode of the sword cf. Gripisspo, 41 and note. Line 3 may well be an interpolation; both lines 4 and 5 have also been questioned, and some editions combine line 5 with lines 1-3 of stanza 5. Hunnish king: Sigurth, who was, of course, not a king of the Huns, but was occasionally so called in the later poems owing to the lack of ethnological distinction made by the Norse poets (cf. Guthrunarkvitha I, 24 and note).

5. This stanza may refer, as Gering thinks, merely to the fact that Brynhild lived happy and unsuspecting as Gunnar's wife until the fatal quarrel with Guthrun (cf. Gripisspo, 45 and note) revealed to her the deceit whereby she had been won, or it may refer to the version of the story which appears in stanzas 32-39, wherein Brynhild lived happily with Atli, her brother, until he was attacked by Gunnar and Sigurth, and was compelled to give his sister to Gunnar, winning her consent thereto by representing [fp. 432] Gunnar as Sigurth, her chosen hero (cf. Guthrunarkvitha I, 24 and note). The manuscript marks line 4 as the beginning of a new stanza, and many editors combine it with stanza 6.] 

 [p. 423]

6. By herself at the end | of day she sat,
 And in open words | her heart she uttered:
 "I shall Sigurth have, | the hero young,
 E'en though within | my arms he die.

7. "The word I have spoken; | soon shall I rue it,
 His wife is Guthrun, | and Gunnar's am I;
 Ill Norns set for me | long desire."

8. Oft did she go | with grieving heart
 On the glacier's ice | at even-tide,
 When Guthrun then | to her bed was gone,
 And the bedclothes Sigurth | about her laid.

9. " (Now Gjuki's child | to her lover goes,)

 [6. Brynhild has now discovered the deceit that has been practised on her. That she had loved Sigurth from the outset (cf. stanza 40) fits well with the version of the story wherein Sigurth meets her before he comes to Gunnar's home (the version not used in this poem), or the one outlined in the note on stanza 5, but does not accord with the story of Sigurth's first meeting Brynhild in Gunnar's form-an added reason for believing that the poet in stanzas 5-6 had in mind the story represented by stanzas 32-39. The hero: the manuscript originally had the phrase thus, then corrected it to "though I die," and finally crossed out the correction. Many editions have "I."

7. Perhaps a line is missing after line 3.

8. Glacier: a bit of Icelandic (or Greenland) local color.

9. Line 1 does not appear in the manuscript, and is based on [fp. 424] a conjecture by Bugge. Some editions add line 2 to stanza 8. The manuscript indicates line 3 as the beginning of a stanza, and some editors assume a gap of two lines after line 4. Hunnish king: cf. stanza 4.]

 [p. 424]

And the Hunnish king | with his wife is happy;
 Joyless I am | and mateless ever,
 Till cries from my heavy | heart burst forth."

10. In her wrath to battle | she roused herself:
 "Gunnar, now | thou needs must lose
 Lands of mine | and me myself,
 No joy shall I have | with the hero ever.

11. "Back shall I fare | where first I dwelt,
 Among the kin | that come of my race,
 To wait there, sleeping | my life away,
 If Sigurth's death | thou shalt not dare,
 (And best of heroes | thou shalt not be.)

12. "The son shall fare | with his father hence,
 And let not long | the wolf-cub live;
 Lighter to pay | is the vengeance-price
 After the deed | if the son is dead."

13. Sad was Gunnar, | and bowed with grief,
 Deep in thought | the whole day through;

 [10. Lands: Brynhild's wealth again points to the story represented by stanzas 32-39; elsewhere she is not spoken of as bringing wealth to Gunnar.

11. Line 5, or perhaps line 3, may be interpolated.

12. The son: the three-year-old son of Sigurth and Guthrun, Sigmund, who was killed at Brynhild's behest.]

 [p. 425]

Yet from his heart | it was ever hid
 What deed most fitting | he should find,
 (Or what thing best | for him should be,
 Or if he should seek | the Volsung to slay,
 For with mighty longing | Sigurth he loved.)

14. Much he pondered | for many an hour;
 Never before | was the wonder known
 That a queen should thus | her kingdom leave;
 In counsel then | did he Hogni call,
 (For him in truest | trust he held.)

15. "More than all | to me is Brynhild,
 Buthli's child, | the best of women;
 My very life | would I sooner lose
 Than yield the love | of yonder maid.

16. "Wilt thou the hero | for wealth betray?

 [13. This stanza has been the subject of many conjectural emendations. Some editions assume a gap after line 2, and make a separate stanza of lines 3-7; others mark lines 5-7 as spurious. The stanza seems to have been expanded by repetition. Grief (line 1): the manuscript has "wrath," involving a metrical error.

14. Bugge and Gering transfer lines 4-5 to the beginning of stanza 16, on the basis of the Volsungasaga paraphrase, and assume a gap of one line after line 3. Line 5, which is in the nature of a stereotyped clause, may well be interpolated.

15. After "Buthli" in line 2 the manuscript has "my brother," apparently a scribal error. In line 4 the manuscript has "wealth" instead of "love," apparently with stanza 10, in mind, but the Volsungasaga paraphrase has "love," and many editors have suspected an error.

16. Cf. note on stanza 14. After thus adding lines 4-5 of [fp. 426] stanza 14 at the beginning of stanza 16, Gering marks line 4 as probably spurious; others reject both lines 3 and 4 as mere repetitions. Rhine: the Rhine, the sands of which traditionally contained gold, was apparently the original home of the treasure of the Nibelungs, converted in the North to Andvari's treasure (cf. Reginsmol, 1-9). That greed for Sigurth's wealth was one of the motives for his slaying is indicated likewise in Guthrunarkvitha I, 20, and in the German versions of the story.]

 [p. 426]

'Twere good to have | the gold of the Rhine,
 And all the hoard | in peace to hold,
 And waiting fortune | thus to win."

17. Few the words | of Hogni were:
 "Us it beseems not | so to do,
 To cleave with swords | the oaths we swore,
 The oaths we swore | and all our vows.

18. "We know no mightier | men on earth
 The while we four | o'er the folk hold sway,
 And while the Hunnish | hero lives,
 Nor higher kinship | the world doth hold.

19. "If sons we five | shall soon beget,
 Great, methinks, | our race shall grow;

 [18. We four: if line 1 of stanza 19 is spurious, or the reference therein to "five" is a blunder, as may well be the case, then the "four" are Sigurth and the three brothers, Gunnar, Hogni, and Gotthorm. But it may be that the poet had in mind a tradition which, as in the Thithrekssaga, gave Gjuki a fourth son, in which case the "four" refers only to the four Gjukungs. Hunnish hero: Sigurth; cf. stanza 4 and note. Some editions put line 4 between lines 1 and 2. Some add lines 1-2 of stanza 19 to stanza 18, marking them as spurious.

19. We five: see note on preceding stanza. Some editors mark [fp. 427] lines 1-2 as spurious, and either assume a gap of two lines after line 4 or combine lines 5-4 with stanza 20. Whence lead the ways: a proverbial expression signifying "whence the trouble comes."]

 [p. 427]

Well I see | whence lead the ways;
 Too bitter far | is Brynhild's hate."

 Gunnar spake:
 20. "Gotthorm to wrath | we needs must rouse,
 Our younger brother, | in rashness blind;
 He entered not | in the oaths we swore,
 The oaths we swore | and all our vows."

21. It was easy to rouse | the reckless one.
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 The sword in the heart | of Sigurth stood.

22. In vengeance the hero | rose in the hall,
 And hurled his sword | at the slayer bold;

 [20. The manuscript does not name the speaker. Gotthorm (the name is variously spelt): half-brother of Gunnar and Hogni (cf. Hyndluljoth, 27 and note, and Brot, 4 and note). The name is the northern form of Gundomar; a prince of this name is mentioned in the Lex Burgundionum, apparently as a brother of Gundahari (Gundicarius). In the Nibelungenlied the third brother is called Gernot.

21. No gap is indicated in the manuscript, and many editors combine stanza 21 with stanza 22, but it seems likely that not only two lines, but one or more stanzas in addition, have been lost; cf. Brot, 4, and also the detailed account of the slaying of Sigurth in the Volsungasaga, wherein, as here, Sigurth is killed in his bed (cf. stanza 24) and not in the forest.

22. Some editions combine lines 3-4 with stanza 23. Gram: {footnote p,. 428 Sigurth's sword (cf. Reginsmol, prose after stanza 14); the word here, however, may not be a proper name, but may mean "the hero."]

 }[p. 428]

At Gotthorm flew | the glittering steel
 Of Gram full hard | from the hand of the king.

23. The foeman cleft | asunder fell,
 Forward hands | and head did sink,
 And legs and feet | did backward fall.

24. Guthrun soft | in her bed had slept,
 Safe from care | at Sigurth's side;
 She woke to find | her joy had fled,
 In the blood of the friend | of Freyr she lay.

25. So hard she smote | her hands together
 That the hero rose up, | iron-hearted:
 "Weep not, Guthrun, | grievous tears,
 Bride so young, | for thy brothers live.

26. "Too young, methinks, | is my son as yet,
 He cannot flee | from the home of his foes;

 [23. A line may well have been lost from this stanza.

24. Freyr: if the phrase "the friend of Freyr" means any thing more than "king" (cf. Rigsthula, 46 etc.), which I doubt, it has reference to the late tradition that Freyr, and not Othin, was the ancestor of the Volsungs (cf. Helgakvitha Hundingsbana I, 57 and note).

25. Mullenhoff thinks this stanza, or at any rate lines 1-2, a later addition based on stanza 29.

26. My son: Sigmund; cf. stanza 12 and note, and also Brot, 9 and note.]

 [p. 429]

Fearful and deadly | the plan they found,
 The counsel new | that now they have heeded.

27. "No son will ride, | though seven thou hast,
 To the Thing as the son | of their sister rides;
 Well I see | who the ill has worked,
 On Brynhild alone | lies the blame for all.

28. "Above all men | the maiden loved me,
 Yet false to Gunnar | I ne'er was found;
 I kept the oaths | and the kinship I swore;
 Of his queen the lover | none may call me.

29. In a swoon she sank | when Sigurth died;
 So hard she smote | her hands together
 That all the cups | in the cupboard rang,
 And loud in the courtyard | cried the geese.

30. Then Brynhild, daughter | of Buthli, laughed,
 Only once, | with all her heart,
 When as she lay | full loud she heard
 The grievous wail | of Gjuki's daughter.

 [27. Sigurth means that although Guthrun may have seven sons by a later marriage, none of them will equal Sigmund, "son of their (i.e., Gunnar's and Hogni's) sister." Thing: council.

28. Sigurth's protestation of guiltlessness fits perfectly with the story of his relations with Brynhild used in this poem, but not, of course, with the alternative version, used in the Gripisspo and elsewhere, wherein Sigurth meets Brynhild before he woos her for Gunnar, and they have a daughter, Aslaug.

29. Cf. Guthrunarkvitha I, 115.

30. Cf. Brot, 10.]

 [p. 430]

31. Then Gunnar, monarch | of men, spake forth:
 "Thou dost not laugh, | thou lover of hate,
 In gladness there, | or for aught of good;
 Why has thy face | so white a hue,
 Mother of ill? | Foredoomed thou art.

32. "A worthier woman | wouldst thou have been
 If before thine eyes | we had Atli slain;
 If thy brother's bleeding | body hadst seen
 And the bloody wounds | that thou shouldst End."

 Brynhild spake:
 33. "None mock thee, Gunnar! | thou hast mightily fought,
 But thy hatred little | doth Atli heed;
 Longer than thou, | methinks, shall he live,
 And greater in might | shall he ever remain.

 [31. Line 1 may well be a mere expansion of "Gunnar spake." The manuscript marks line 4 as the beginning of a new stanza, and some editions combine lines 4-5 with stanza 32.

32. This stanza, which all editors have accepted as an integral part of the poem, apparently refers to the same story represented by stanzas 37-39, which most editors have (I believe mistakenly) marked as interpolated. As is pointed out in the notes on stanzas 3, 5, 6 and 10, the poet throughout seems to have accepted the version of the story wherein Gunnar and Sigurth besiege Atli, and are bought off by the gift of Atli's sister, Brynhild, to Gunnar as wife, her consent being won by Atli's representation that Gunnar is Sigurth (cf. also Guthrunarkvitha I, 24 and note).

33. The manuscript does not name the speaker, and some editions add a first line: "Then Brynhild, daughter | of Buthli, spake."]

 [p. 431]

34. "To thee I say, | and thyself thou knowest,
 That all these ills | thou didst early shape;
 No bonds I knew, | nor sorrow bore,
 And wealth I had | in my brother's home.

35. "Never a husband | sought I to have,
 Before the Gjukungs | fared to our land;
 Three were the kings | on steeds that came,--
 Need of their journey | never there was.

36. "To the hero great | my troth I gave
 Who gold-decked sat | on Grani's back;
 Not like to thine | was the light of his eyes,
 (Nor like in form | and face are ye,)
 Though kingly both | ye seemed to be.

37. "And so to me | did Atli say
 That share in our wealth | I should not have,

 [34. Cf. stanza 5.

35. Three kings: Gunnar, Hogni, and Sigurth.

36. Some editions place this stanza after stanza 39, on the theory that stanzas 37-39 are interpolated. Line 4, as virtually a repetition of line 3, has generally been marked as spurious. In this version of the winning of Brynhild it appears that Atli pointed out Sigurth as Gunnar, and Brynhild promptly fell in love with the hero whom, as he rode on Grani and was decked with some of the spoils taken from Fafnir, she recognized as the dragon's slayer. Thus no change of form between Sigurth and Gunnar was necessary. The oath to marry Gunnar had to be carried out even after Brynhild had discovered the deception.

37. Most editors mark stanzas 37-39 as interpolated, but cf. note on stanza 32. Stanza 37 has been variously emended. Lines 4 and 6 look like interpolated repetitions, but many editors make [fp. 432] two stanzas, following the manuscript in beginning a new stanza with line 4. After line I Grundtvig adds: "Son of Buthli, | and brother of mine." After line 6 Bugge adds: "Not thou was it, Gunnar, | who Grani rode, / Though thou my brother | with rings didst buy." Regarding Brynhild's wealth cf. stanza 10 and note.]

 [p. 432]

Of gold or lands, | if my hand I gave not;
 (More evil yet, | the wealth I should yield,)
 The gold that he | in my childhood gave me,
 (The wealth from him | in my youth I had.)

38. "Oft in my mind | I pondered much
 If still I should fight, | and warriors fell,
 Brave in my byrnie, | my brother defying;
 That would wide | in the world be known,
 And sorrow for many | a man would make.

39. "But the bond at last | I let be made,
 For more the hoard | I longed to have,
 The rings that the son | of Sigmund won;
 No other's treasure | e'er I sought.

40. "One-alone | of all I loved,
 Nor changing heart | I ever had;
 All in the end | shall Atli know,

 [38. Brynhild here again appears as a Valkyrie. The manuscript marks line 4 as the beginning of a new stanza. Any one of the last three lines may be spurious.

39. Some editions combine this stanza with lines 4-5 of stanza 38, with lines 1-2 of stanza 40, or with the whole of stanza 40. The bond: Brynhild thought she was marrying Sigurth, owner of the treasure, whereas she was being tricked into marrying Gunnar.]

 [p. 433]

When he hears I have gone | on the death-road hence."

*    *    *    *    *    *

41. "Never a wife | of fickle will
 Yet to another | man should yield.
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 So vengence for all | my ills shall come."

42, Up rose Gunnar, | the people's ruler,
 And flung his arms | round her neck so fair;
 And all who came, | of every kind,
 Sought to hold her | with all their hearts.

43. But back she cast | all those who came,
 Nor from the long road | let them hold her;

 [41. At this point there seem to be several emissions. Brynhild's statement in lines 1-2 seems to refer to the episode, not here mentioned but told in detail in the Volsungasaga, of Sigurth's effort to repair the wrong that has been done her by himself giving up Guthrun in her favor, an offer which she refuses. The lacuna here suggested, which is not indicated in the manuscript, may be simply a single line (line 1) or a stanza or more. After line 2 there is almost certainly a gap of at least one stanza, and possibly more, in which Brynhild states her determination to die.

42. Hardly any two editions agree as to the arrangement of the lines in stanzas 42-44. I have followed the manuscript except in transposing line 4 of stanza 43 to this position from the place it holds in the manuscript after line 4 of stanza 14. All the other involve the rejection of two or more lines as spurious and the assumption of various gaps. Gering and Sijmons both arrange the lines thus: 42, 1-2; two-line gap; 43, 3 [fp. 434] (marked probably spurious); 44, 1-4; 43-4 (marked probably spurious); 42, 3-4; 43, 1-2.]

 [p. 434]

In counsel then | did he Hogni call:
 "Of wisdom now | full great is our need.

44. "Let the warriors here | in the hall come forth,
 Thine and mine, | for the need is mighty,
 If haply the queen | from death they may hold,
 Till her fearful thoughts | with time shall fade."

45. (Few the words | of Hogni were:)
 "From the long road now | shall ye hold her not,
 That born again | she may never be!
 Foul she came | from her mother forth,
 And born she was | for wicked deeds,
 (Sorrow to many | a man to bring.)"

46. From the speaker gloomily | Gunnar turned,
 For the jewel-bearer | her gems was dividing;

 [43. Cf. note on preceding stanza.

44. Cf. note on stanza 42.

45. Perhaps the remains of two stanzas; the manuscript marks line 4 as the beginning of a new stanza, and after line 4 an added line has been suggested: "She was ever known for evil thoughts." On the other hand, line 1, identical with line 31 of stanza 17, may well be a mere expansion of "Hogni spake," and line 6 may have been introduced, with a slight variation, from line 5 of stanza 38. Born again: this looks like a trace of Christian influence (the poem was composed well after the coming of Christianity to Iceland) in the assumption that if Brynhild killed herself she could not be "born again" (cf. concluding prose to Helgakvitha Hundingsbana II).

46. The manuscript marks line 3 as beginning a stanza; some [fp. 435] editions treat lines 1-2 as a separate stanza, and combine lines 3-4 with lines 1-2 of stanza 47. Jewel-bearer (literally "land of jewels"): woman, here Brynhild. Bond-women, etc.: in stanza 69 we learn that five female slaves and eight serfs were killed to be burned on the funeral pyre, and thus to follow Sigurth in death.]

 [p. 435]

On all her wealth | her eyes were gazing,
 On the bond-women slain | and the slaughtered slaves.

47. Her byrnie of gold | she donned, and grim
 Was her heart ere the point | of her sword had pierced it;
 On the pillow at last | her head she laid,
 And, wounded, her plan | she pondered o'er.

48. "Hither I will | that my women come
 Who gold are fain | from me to get;
 Necklaces fashioned | fair to each
 Shall I give, and cloth, | and garments bright."

49. Silent were all | as so she spake,
 And all together | answer made:
 "Slain are enough; | we seek to live,
 Not thus thy women | shall honor win."

 [47. The manuscript marks line 3, and not line 1, as beginning a stanza, and some editions treat lines 3-4 as a separate stanza, or combine them with stanza 48.

48. Brynhild means, as stanzas 49-51 show, that those of her women who wish to win rewards must be ready to follow her in death. The word translated "women" in line 1 is conjectural, but the general meaning is clear enough.

49. In place of "as so she spake" in line 1 the manuscript has [fp. 436]"of their plans they thought," which involves a metrical error.]

 [p. 436]

50. Long the woman, | linen-decked, pondered,--
 --Young she was,-- | and weighed her words:
 "For my sake now | shall none unwilling
 Or loath to die | her life lay down.

51. "But little of gems | to gleam on your limbs
 Ye then shall find | when forth ye fare
 To follow me, | or of Menja's wealth.
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .

52. "Sit now, Gunnar! | for I shall speak
 Of thy bride so fair | and so fain to die;
 Thy ship in harbor | home thou hast not,
 Although my life | I now have lost.

53. "Thou shalt Guthrun requite | more quick than thou thinkest,
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 Though sadly mourns | the maiden wise
 Who dwells with the king, | o'er her husband dead.

 [51. No gap indicated in the manuscript; many editions place it between lines 3 and 4. Menja's wealth: gold; the story of the mill Grotti, whereby the giantesses Menja and Fenja ground gold for King Frothi, is told in the Grottasongr.

52. With this stanza begins Brynhild's prophesy of what is to befall Gunnar, Guthrun, Atli, and the many others involved in their fate. Line 3 is a proverbial expression meaning simply "your troubles are not at an end."

53. No gap is indicated in the manuscript; one suggestion for line 2 runs: "Grimhild shall make her | to laugh once [fp. 437] more." Gering: suggests a loss of three lines, and joins lines 3-4 with stanza 54.]

 [p. 437]

54. "A maid shall then | the mother bear;
 Brighter far | than the fairest day
 Svanhild shall be, | or the beams of the sun.

55. "Guthrun a noble | husband thou givest,
 Yet to many a warrior | woe will she bring,
 Not happily wedded | she holds herself;
 Her shall Atli | hither seek,
 (Buthli's son, | and brother of mine.)

56. "Well I remember | how me ye treated
 When ye betrayed me | with treacherous wiles;
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 Lost was my joy | as long as I lived.

 [54. Probably a line has been lost from this stanza. Grundtvig adds as a new first line: "Her shalt thou find in the hall of Half." Some editions query line 3 as possibly spurious. Svanhild: the figure of Svanhild is exceedingly old. The name means "Swan-Maiden-Warrior," applying to just such mixtures of swan-maiden and Valkyrie as appear in the Volundarkvitha. Originally part of a separate tradition, Svanhild appears first to have been incorporated in the Jormunrek (Ermanarich) story as the unhappy wife of that monarch, and much later to have been identified as the daughter of Sigurth and Guthrun, thus linking the two sets of legends.

55. Line 2 in the original is almost totally obscure. Line 4 should very possibly precede line 2, while line 5 looks like an unwarranted addition.

56. This stanza probably ought to follow stanza 52, as it refers solely to) the winning of Brynhild by Gunnar and Sigurth. Mullenhoff regards stanzas 53-55 as interpolated. The manuscript indicates no gap after line 3.]

 [p. 438]

57. "Oddrun as wife | thou fain wouldst win,
 But Atli this | from thee withholds;
 Yet in secret tryst | ye twain shall love;
 She shall hold thee dear, | as I had done
 If kindly fate | to us had fallen.

58. "Ill to thee | shall Atli bring,
 When he casts thee down | in the den of snakes.

59. "But soon thereafter | Atli too
 His life, methinks, | as thou shalt lose,
 (His fortune lose | and the lives of his sons;)
 Him shall Guthrun, | grim of heart,
 With the biting blade | in his bed destroy.

60. "It would better beseem | thy sister fair

 [57. Stanzas 57-58 seem to be the remains of two stanzas, but the Volsungasaga paraphrase follows closely the form here given. Line 3 may well be spurious; line 5 has likewise been questioned. Oddrun: this sister of Atli and Brynhild, known mainly through the Oddrunargratr, is a purely northern addition to the cycle, and apparently one of a relatively late date. She figures solely by reason of her love affair with Gunnar.

58. Possibly two lines have been lost; many editions combine the two remaining lines with lines 1-3 of stanza 59. Concerning the manner of Gunnar's death cf. Drap Niflunga.

59. Line 3 may well be spurious, as it is largely repetition. The manuscript has "sofa" ("sleep") in place of "sona" ("sons"), but the Volsungasaga paraphrase says clearly "sons." The slaying of Atli by Guthrun in revenge for his killing of her brothers is told in the two Atli lays. The manuscript marks line 4 as the beginning of a new stanza, and some editions make a separate stanza out of lines 4-5, or else combine them with stanza 60.

60. To follow in death: this phrase is not in Regius, but is [fp. 439] included in late paper manuscripts, and has been added in most editions.]

 [p. 439]

To follow her husband | first in death,
 If counsel good | to her were given,
 Or a heart akin | to mine she had.

61. "Slowly I speak,-- | but for my sake
 Her life, methinks, | she shall not lose;
 She shall wander over | the tossing waves,
 To where Jonak rules | his father's realm.

62. "Sons to him | she soon shall bear,
 Heirs therewith | of Jonak's wealth;
 But Svanhild far | away is sent,
 The child she bore | to Sigurth brave.

63. "Bikki's word | her death shall be,
 For dreadful the wrath | of Jormunrek;
 So slain is all | of Sigurth's race,
 And greater the woe | of Guthrun grows.

 [61. Jonak: this king, known only through the Hamthesmol and the stories which, like this one, are based thereon, is another purely northern addition to the legend. The name is apparently of Slavic origin. He appears solely as Guthrun's third husband and the father of Hamther, Sorli, and Erp (cf. introductory prose to Guthrunarhvot).

62. Svanhild: cf. stanza 54 and note.

63. Bikki: Svanhild is married to the aged Jormunrek (Ermanarich), but Eikki, one of his followers, suggests that she is unduly intimate with Jormunrek's son, Randver. Thereupon Jormunrek has Randver hanged, and Svanhild torn to pieces by wild horses. Ermanarich's cruelty and his barbarous slaying of his wife and son were familiar traditions long before they be [fp. 440] came in any way connected with the Sigurth cycle (cf. introductory note to Gripisspo).]

 [p. 440]

64. "Yet one boon | I beg of thee,
 The last of boons | in my life it is:
 Let the pyre be built | so broad in the field
 That room for us all | will ample be,
 (For us who slain | with Sigurth are.)

65. "With shields and carpets | cover the pyre,
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 Shrouds full fair, | and fallen slaves,
 And besides the Hunnish | hero burn me.

66. "Besides the Hunnish | hero there
 Slaves shall burn, | full bravely decked,
 Two at his head | and two at his feet,
 A brace of hounds | and a pair of hawks,
 For so shall all | be seemly done.

67. "Let between us | lie once more

 [64. Line 5 is very probably spurious.

65. The manuscript indicates no gap; a suggested addition runs "Gold let there be, and jewels bright." Fallen slaves: cf. stanzas 66 and 69. Hunnish hero: cf. stanza 4 and note.

66. In place of lines 3-4 the manuscript has one line "Two at his head, and a pair of hawks"; the addition is made from the Volsungasaga paraphrase. The burning or burying of slaves or beasts to accompany their masters in death was a general custom in the North. The number of slaves indicated in this stanza does not tally with the one given in stanza 69, wherefore Vigfusson rejects most of this stanza.]

 [p. 441]

The steel so keen, | as so it lay
 When both within | one bed we were,
 And wedded mates | by men were called.

68. "The door of the hall | shall strike not the heel
 Of the hero fair | with flashing rings,
 If hence my following | goes with him;
 Not mean our faring | forth shall be.

69. "Bond-women five | shall follow him,
 And eight of my thralls, | well-born are they,
 Children with me, | and mine they were
 As gifts that Buthli | his daughter gave.

70. "Much have I told thee, | and more would say
 If fate more space | for speech had given;
 My voice grows weak, | my wounds are swelling;
 Truth I have said, | and so I die."

 [67. Cf. Gripisspo, 41 and note. After line I the manuscript adds the phrase "bright, ring-decked," referring to the sword, but it is metrically impossible, and many editions omit it.

68. The door: The gate of Hel's domain, like that of Mengloth's house (cf. Svipdagsmol, 26 and note), closes so fast as to catch any one attempting to pass through. Apparently the poet here assumes that the gate of Valhall does likewise, but that it will be kept open for Sigurth's retinue.

69. Cf. stanza 66.]

 
      
The Poetic Edda, by Henry Adams Bellows, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 442]

 

HELREITH BRYNHILDAR

 

Brynhild's Hell-Ride

 

INTRODUCTORY NOTE

The little Helreith Brynhildar immediately follows the "short" Sigurth lay in the Codex Regius, being linked to it by the brief prose note; the heading, "Brynhild's Ride on Hel-Way," stands just before the first stanza. The entire poem, with the exception of stanza. 6, is likewise quoted in the Nornageststhattr. Outside of one stanza (No. 11), which is a fairly obvious interpolation, the poem possesses an extraordinary degree of dramatic unity, and, certain pedantic commentators notwithstanding, it is one of the most vivid and powerful in the whole collection. None the less, it has been extensively argued that parts of it belonged originally to the so-called Sigrdrifumol. That it stands in close relation to this poem is evident enough, but it is difficult to believe that such a masterpiece of dramatic poetry was ever the result of mere compilation. It seems more reasonable to regard the Helreith, with the exception of stanza 11 and allowing for the loss of two lines from stanza 6, as a complete and carefully constructed unit, based undoubtedly on older poems, but none the less an artistic creation in itself.

The poem is generally dated as late as the eleventh century, and the concluding stanza betrays Christian influence almost unmistakably. It shows the confusion of traditions manifest in all the later poems; for example, Brynhild is here not only a Valkyrie but also a swan-maiden. Only three stanzas have any reference to the Guthrun-Gunnar part of the story; otherwise the poem is concerned solely with the episode of Sigurth's finding the sleeping Valkyrie. Late as it is, therefore, it is essentially a Norse creation, involving very few of the details of the German cycle (cf. introductory note to Gripisspo).

__________________

After the death of Brynhild there were made two bale-fires, the one for Sigurth, and that burned first, and on the other was Brynhild burned, and she was on a

[p. 443]

wagon which was covered with a rich cloth. Thus it is told, that Brynhild went in the wagon on Hel-way, and passed by a house where dwelt a certain giantess. The giantess spake:

1. "Thou shalt not further | forward fare,
 My dwelling ribbed | with rocks across;
 More seemly it were | at thy weaving to stay,
 Than another's husband | here to follow.

2. "What wouldst thou have | from Valland here,
 Fickle of heart, | in this my house?
 Gold-goddess, now, | if thou wouldst know,
 Heroes' blood | from thy hands hast washed."

 Brynhild spake:
 3. "Chide me not, woman | from rocky walls,
 Though to battle once | I was wont to go;
 Better than thou | I shall seem to be,
 When men us two | shall truly know."

 The giantess spake:
 4. "Thou wast, Brynhild, | Buthli's daughter,

 [Prose. The prose follows the last stanza of Sigurtharkvitha en skamma without break. Two bale-fires: this contradicts the statement made in the concluding stanzas of Sigurtharkvitha en skamma, that Sigurth and Brynhild were burned on the same pyre; there is no evidence that the annotator here had anything but his own mistaken imagination to go on.

2. Valland: this name ("Land of Slaughter") is used else where of mythical places; cf. Harbarthsljoth, 24, and prose introduction to Volundarkvitha; it may here not be a proper name at all, Gold-goddess: poetic circumlocution for "woman."]

 [p. 444]

For the worst of evils | born in the world;
 To death thou hast given | Gjuki's children,
 And laid their lofty | house full low."

 Brynhild spake:
 5. "Truth from the wagon | here I tell thee,
 Witless one, | if know thou wilt
 How the heirs of Gjuki | gave me to be
 joyless ever, | a breaker of oaths.

6. "Hild the helmed | in Hlymdalir
 They named me of old, | all they who knew me.
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .

7. "The monarch bold | the swan-robes bore
 Of the sisters eight | beneath an oak;

 [6. In Regius these two lines stand after stanza 7, but most editions; place them as here. They are not quoted in the Nornageststhattr. Presumably two lines, and perhaps more, have been lost. It has frequently been argued that all or part of the passage from stanza 6 through stanza 10 (6-10, 7-10 or 8-10) comes originally from the so-called Sigrdrifumol, where it would undoubtedly fit exceedingly well. Hild: a Valkyrie name meaning "Fighter" (cf. Voluspo, 31). in such compound names as Brynhild ("Fighter in Armor") the first element was occasionally omitted. Hlymdalir ("Tumult-Dale"): a mythical name, merely signifying the place of battle as the home of Valkyries.

7. Regarding the identification of swan-maidens with Valkyries, and the manner in which men could get them in their power by stealing their swan-garments, cf. Volundarkvitha, introductory prose and note, where the same thing happens. The monarch: perhaps Agnar, brother of Autha, mentioned in Sigrdrifumol (prose and quoted verse following stanza 4) as the warrior for [fp. 445] whose sake Brynhild defied Othin in slaying Hjalmgunnar. Eight: the Nornageststhattr manuscripts have "sisters of Atli" instead of "sisters eight."]

 [p. 445]

Twelve winters I was, | if know thou wilt,
 When oaths I yielded | the king so young.

8. "Next I let | the leader of Goths,
 Hjalmgunnar the old, | go down to hell,
 And victory brought | to Autha's brother;
 For this was Othin's | anger mighty.

9. "He beset me with shields | in Skatalund,
 Red and white, | their rims o'erlapped;
 He bade that my sleep | should broken be
 By him who fear | had nowhere found.

10. "He let round my hall, | that southward looked,
 The branches' foe | high-leaping burn;
 Across it he bade | the hero come
 Who brought me the gold | that Fafnir guarded

11. On Grani rode | the giver of gold,

 [8. Hjalmgunnar: regarding this king of the Goths (the phrase means little) and his battle with Agnar, brother of Autha cf. Sigrdrifumol, prose after stanza 4. One Nornageststhattr manuscript has "brother of the giantess" in place of "leader of Goths."

9. Cf. Sigrdrifumol, prose introduction. Skatalund ("Warriors' Grove"): a mythical name; elsewhere the place where Brynhild lay is called Hindarfjoll.

10. Branches' foe: fire. Regarding the treasure cf. Fafnismol.

11. This stanza is presumably an interpolation, reflecting a different version of the story, wherein Sigurth meets Brynhild at the home of her brother-in-law and foster-father, Heimir (cf. [fp. 446] Gripisspo, 19 and 27). Grani: Sigurth's horse. Danes: nowhere else does Sigurth appear in this capacity. Perhaps this is a curious relic of the Helgi tradition.]

 [p. 446]

Where my foster-father | ruled his folk;
 Best of all | he seemed to be,
 The prince of the Danes, | when the people met.

12. "Happy we slept, | one bed we had,
 As he my brother | born had been;
 Eight were the nights | when neither there
 Loving hand | on the other laid.

13. "Yet Guthrun reproached me, | Gjuki's daughter,
 That I in Sigurth's | arms had slept;
 Then did I hear | what I would were hid,
 That they had betrayed me | in taking a mate.

14. "Ever with grief | and all too long
 Are men and women | born in the world;
 But yet we shall live | our lives together,
 Sigurth and I. | Sink down, Giantess!"

 [12. Eight nights: elsewhere (cf. Gripisspo, 4.2) the time is stated as three nights, not eight. There is a confusion of traditions here, as in Gripisspo. In the version of the story wherein Sigurth met Brynhild before he encountered the Gjukungs, Sigurth was bound by no oaths, and the union was completed; it is only in the alternative version that the episode of the sword laid between the two occurs.

14. The idea apparently conveyed in the concluding lines, that Sigurth and Brynhild will be together in some future life, is utterly out of keeping with the Norse pagan traditions, and the whole stanza indicates the influence of Christianity.]

 
      
The Poetic Edda, by Henry Adams Bellows, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 447]

 

DRAP NIFLUNGA

 

The Slaying of The Niflungs

 

INTRODUCTORY NOTE

It has been already pointed out (introductory note to Reginsmol) that the compiler of the Eddic collection had clearly undertaken to formulate a coherent narrative of the entire Sigurth cycle, piecing together the various poems by means of prose narrative links. To some extent these links were based on traditions existing outside of the lays themselves, but in the main the material was gathered from the contents of the poems. The short prose passage entitled Drap Niflunga, which in the Codex Regius immediately follows the Helreith Brynhildar, is just such a narrative link, and scarcely deserves a special heading, but as nearly all editions separate it from the preceding and following poems, I have followed their example.

With Sigurth and Brynhild both dead, the story turns to the slaying of the sons of Gjuki by Atli, Guthrun's second husband, and to a few subsequent incidents, mostly late incorporations from other narrative cycles, including the tragic death of Svanhild, daughter of Sigurth and Guthrun and wife of Jormunrek (Ermanarich), and the exploits of Hamther, son of Guthrun and her third husband, Jonak. These stories are told, or outlined, in the two Atli lays, the second and third Guthrun lays, the Oddrunargratr, the Guthrunarhvot, and the Hamthesmol. Had the compiler seen fit to put the Atli lays immediately after the Helreith Brynhildar, he would have needed only a very brief transitional note to make the course of the story clear, but as the second Guthrun lay, the next poem in the collection, is a lament following the death of Guthrun's brothers, some sort of a narrative bridge was manifestly needed.

 Drap Niflunga is based entirely on the poems which follow it in the collection, with no use of extraneous material. The part of the story which it summarizes belongs to the semi-historical Burgundian tradition (cf. introductory note to Gripisspo), in many respects parallel to the familiar narrative of the Nibelungenlied, and, except in minor details, showing few essentially Northern additions. Sigurth is scarcely mentioned, and the outstanding episode is the slaying of Gunnar and Hogni, following their journey to Atli's home.

[p. 448]

__________________

Gunnar and Hogni then took all the gold that Fafnir had had. There was strife between the Gjukungs and Atli, for he held the Gjukungs guilty of Brynhild's death. It was agreed that they should give him Guthrun as wife, and they gave her a draught of forgetfulness to drink before she would consent to be wedded to Atli. The sons of Atli were Erp and Eitil, and Svanhild was the daughter of Sigurth and Guthrun. King Atli invited Gunnar and Hogni to come to him, and sent as messenger Vingi or Knefroth. Guthrun was aware of treachery, and sent with him a message in runes that they should not come, and as a token she sent to Hogni the ring Andvaranaut and tied a wolf's hair in it. Gunnar had sought Oddrun, Atli's sister, for his wife, but had her not; then he married Glaumvor, and Hogni's wife was

 [Prose. Niflungs: regarding the mistaken application of this name to the sons of Gjuki, who were Burgundians, cf. Brot, 17 and note. Draught of forgetfulness: according to the Volsungasaga Grimhild, Guthrun's mother, administered this, just as she did the similar draught which made Sigurth forget Brynhild. Erp and Eitil: Guthrun kills her two sons by Atli as part of her revenge; the annotator here explains her act further by saying that Guthrun asked her sons to intercede with their father in favor of Guthrun's brothers, but that they refused, a detail which he appears to have invented, as it is found nowhere else. Svanhild: cf. Sigurtharkvitha en skamma, 54 and note. Vingi or Knefroth: Atlakvitha (stanza 1) calls the messenger Knefroth; Atlamol (stanza 4) speaks of two messengers, but names only one of them, Vingi. The annotator has here tried, unsuccessfully, to combine the two accounts. Andvaranaut: regarding the origin of Andvari's ring cf. Reginsmol, prose after stanzas 4 and 5 and notes; Sigurth gave the ring to Guthrun. Here again the annotator is combining two stories; in Atlakvitha (stanza 8) Guthrun sends a ring (not Andvaranaut) with a wolf's hair; in Atlamol (stanza 4) she sends a message written [fp. 449] in runes. The messenger obscures these runes, and Kostbera, Hogni's wife, who attempts to decipher them, is not clear as to their meaning, though she suspects danger. Oddrun: cf. Sigurtharkvitha en skamma, 57 and note. Glaumvor: almost nothing is told of Gunnar's second wife, though she appears frequently in the Atlamol. Kostbera (or Bera), Hogni's wife, is known only as skilled in runes. Her brother was Orkning. The sons of Hogni and Kostbera, according to the Atlamol (stanza 28), were Solar and Snaevar; the third son, Gjuki, named after his grandfather, seems to be an invention of the annotator's. Adder: according to Oddrunargratr (stanza 30) Atli's mother assumed this form in order to complete her son's vengeance.]

 [p. 449]

Kostbera; their sons were Solar and Snaevar and Gjuki. And when the Gjukungs came to Atli, then Guthrun be sought her sons to plead for the lives of both the Gjukungs, but they would not do it. Hogni's heart was cut out, and Gunnar was cast into the serpent's den. He smote on the harp and put the serpents to sleep, but an adder stung him in the liver.

      
The Poetic Edda, by Henry Adams Bellows, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 450]

 

GUTHRUNARKVITHA II, EN FORNA

 

The Second, or Old, Lay of Guthrun

 

INTRODUCTORY NOTE

It has already been pointed out (introductory note to Guthrunarkvitha I) that the tradition of Guthrun's lament was known wherever the Sigurth story existed, and that this lament was probably one of the earliest parts of the legend to assume verse form. Whether it reached the North as verse cannot, of course, be determined, but it is at least possible that this was the case, and in any event it is clear that by the tenth and eleventh centuries there were a number of Norse poems with Guthrun's lament as the central theme. Two of these are included in the Eddic collection, the second one being unquestionably much the older. It is evidently the poem referred to by the annotator in the prose note following the Brot as "the old Guthrun lay," and its character and state of preservation have combined to lead most commentators to date it as early as the first half of the tenth century, whereas Guthrunarkvitha I belongs a hundred years later.

The poem has evidently been preserved in rather bad shape, with a number of serious omissions and some interpolations, but in just this form it lay before the compilers of the Volsungasaga, who paraphrased it faithfully, and quoted five of its stanzas. The interpolations are on the whole unimportant; the omissions, while they obscure the sense of certain passages, do not destroy the essential continuity of the poem, in which Guthrun reviews her sorrows from the death of Sigurth through the slaying of her brothers to Atli's dreams foretelling the death of their sons. It is, indeed, the only Norse poem of the Sigurth cycle antedating the year 1000 which has come down to us in anything approaching complete form; the Reginsmol, Fafnismol, and Sigrdrifumol are all collections of fragments, only a short bit of the "long" Sigurth lay remains, and the others--Gripisspo, Guthrunarkvitha I and III, Sigurtharkvitha en skamma, Helreith Brynhildar, Oddrunargratr, Guthrunarhvot, Hamthesmol, and the two Atli lays--are all generally dated from the eleventh and even the twelfth centuries.

An added reason for believing that Guthrunarkvitha II traces its origin back to a lament which reached the North

[p. 451]

from Germany in verse form is the absence of most characteristic Norse additions to the narrative, except in minor details. Sigurth is slain in the forest, as "German men say" (cf. Brot, concluding prose); the urging of Guthrun by her mother 2nd brothers to become Atli's wife, the slaying of the Gjukungs (here only intimated, for at that point something seems to have been lost), and Guthrun's prospective revenge on Atli, all belong directly to the German tradition (cf. introductory note to Gripisspo).

In the Codex Regius the poem is entitled simply Guthrunarkvitha; the numeral has been added in nearly all editions to distinguish this poem from the other two Guthrun lays, and the phrase "the old" is borrowed from the annotator's comment in the prose note at the end of the Brot.

__________________

King Thjothrek was with Atli, and had lost most of his men. Thjothrek and Guthrun lamented their griefs together. She spoke to him, saying:

1. A maid of maids | my mother bore me,
 Bright in my bower, | my brothers I loved,
 Till Gjuki dowered | me with gold,
 Dowered with gold, | and to Sigurth gave me.

 [Prose. Thjothrek: the famous Theoderich, king of the Ostrogoths, who became renowned in German story as Dietrich von Bern. The German tradition early accepted the anachronism of bringing together Attila (Etzel, Atli), who died in 453, and Theoderich. who was born about 455, and adding thereto Ermanarich (Jormunrek), king of the Goths, who died about 376. Ermanarich, in German tradition, replaced Theoderich's actual enemy, Odovakar, and it was in battle with Jormunrek (i. e., Odovakar) that Thjothrek is here said to have lost most WE his men. The annotator found the material for this note in Guthrunarkvitha III, in which Guthrun is accused of having Thjothrek as her lover. At the time when Guthrunarkvitha II [fp. 452] was composed (early tenth century) it is probable that the story of Theoderich had not reached the North at all, and the annotator is consequently wrong in giving the poem its setting.]

 [p. 452]

2. So Sigurth rose | o'er Gjuki's sons
 As the leek grows green | above the grass,
 Or the stag o'er all | the beasts doth stand,
 Or as glow-red gold | above silver gray.

3. Till my brothers let me | no longer have
 The best of heroes | my husband to be;
 Sleep they could not, | or quarrels settle,
 Till Sigurth they | at last had slain.

4. From the Thing ran Grani | with thundering feet,
 But thence did Sigurth | himself come never;
 Covered with sweat | was the saddle-bearer,
 Wont the warrior's | weight to bear.

5. Weeping I sought | with Grani to speak,
 With tear-wet cheeks | for the tale I asked;
 The head of Grani | was bowed to the grass,
 The steed knew well | his master was slain.

6. Long I waited | and pondered well
 Ere ever the king | for tidings I asked.
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .

 [2. Cf. Guthrunarkvitha I, 17.

4. Regarding the varying accounts of the manner of Sigurth's death cf. Brot, concluding prose and note. Grani: cf. Brot, 7.

6. No gap indicated in the manuscript. Some editions combine these two lines with either stanza 5 or stanza 7.]

 [p. 453]

7. His head bowed Gunnar, | but Hogni told
 The news full sore | of Sigurth slain:
 "Hewed to death | at our hands he lies,
 Gotthorm's slayer, | given to wolves.

8. "On the southern road | thou shalt Sigurth see,
 Where hear thou canst | the ravens cry;
 The eagles cry | as food they crave,
 And about thy husband | wolves are howling."

9. "Why dost thou, Hogni, | such a horror
 Let me hear, | all joyless left?
 Ravens yet | thy heart shall rend
 In a land that never | thou hast known."

10. Few the words | of Hogni were,
 Bitter his heart | from heavy sorrow:
 "Greater, Guthrun, | thy grief shall be
 If the ravens so | my heart shall rend."

11. From him who spake | I turned me soon,
 In the woods to find | what the wolves had left;
 Tears I had not, | nor wrung my bands,

 [7. Gotthorm: from this it appears that in both versions of the death of Sigurth the mortally wounded hero killed his murderer, the younger brother of Gunnar and Hogni. The story of how Gotthorm, was slain after killing Sigurth in his bed is told in Sigurtharkvitha en skamma, 22-23, and in the Volsungasaga.

11. On lines 3-4 cf. Guthrunarkvitha I, 1. Line 5 is probably spurious.]

 [p. 454]

Nor wailing went, | as other women,
 (When by Sigurth | slain I sat).

12. Never so black | had seemed the night
 As when in sorrow | by Sigurth I sat;
 The wolves .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 13. .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 Best of all | methought 'twould be
 If I my life | could only lose,
 Or like to birch-wood | burned might be.

14. From the mountain forth | five days I fared,
 Till Hoalf's hall | so high I saw;

 [12. Many editions make one stanza of stanzas 12 and 13, reconstructing line 3; the manuscript shows no gap. Bugge fills out the stanza thus: "The wolves were howling | on all the ways, / The eagles cried as their food they craved."

13. Cf. note on preceding stanza. Grundtvig suggests as a first line: "Long did I bide, | my brothers awaiting." Many editors reject line 4.

14. The manuscript marks line 3 as beginning a stanza, and many editions combine lines 3-4 with lines 1-2 of stanza 15 Hoalf (or Half): Gering thinks this Danish king may be identical with Alf, son of King Hjalprek, and second husband of Hjordis, Sigurth's mother (cf. Fra Dautha Sinfjotla and note), but the name was a common one. Thora and Hokon have not been identified (cf. Guthrunarkvitha I, concluding prose, which is clearly based on this stanza). A Thora appears in Hyndluljoth, 18, as the wife of Dag, one of the sons of Halfdan the Old, the most famous of Denmark's mythical kings, and one of her sons is Alf (Hoalf?).]

 [p. 455]

Seven half-years | with Thora I stayed,
 Hokon's daughter, | in Denmark then.

15. With gold she broidered, | to bring me joy,
 Southern halls | and Danish swans;
 On the tapestry wove we | warrior's deeds,
 And the hero's thanes | on our handiwork;
 (Flashing shields | and fighters armed,
 Sword-throng, helm-throng, | the host of the king).

16. Sigmund's ship | by the land was sailing,
 Golden the figure-head, | gay the beaks;
 On board we wove | the warriors faring,
 Sigar and Siggeir, | south to Fjon.

17. Then Grimhild asked, | the Gothic queen,
 Whether willingly would I        .    .    .    .    .
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .

 [15. The manuscript marks line 3 as the beginning of a stanza. Some editors combine lines 5-6 with lines 1-2 of stanza 16, while others mark them as interpolated.

16. Some editions combine lines 3-4 with stanza 17. Sigmund: Sigurth's father, who here appears as a sea-rover in Guthrun's tapestry. Sigar: named in Fornaldar sogur II, 10, as the father of Siggeir, the latter being the husband of Sigmund's twin sister, Signy (cf. Fra Dautha Sinfjotla). Fjon: this name, referring to the Danish island of Funen, is taken from the Volsungasaga paraphrase as better fitting the Danish setting of the stanza than the name in Regius, which is "Fife" (Scotland).

17. No gap is indicated in the manuscript, and most editions combine these two lines either with lines 3-4 of stanza 16, with lines 1-2 of stanza 18, or with the whole of stanza 18. Line 2 [fp. 456] has been filled out in various ways. The Volsungasaga paraphrase indicates that these two lines are the remains of a full stanza, the prose passage running: "Now Guthrun was some what comforted of her sorrows. Then Grimhild learned where Guthrun was now dwelling." The first two lines may be the ones missing. Gothic: the term "Goth" was used in the North without much discrimination to apply to all south-Germanic peoples. In Gripisspo, 35, Gunnar, Grimhild's son, appears as "lord of the Goths."]

 [p. 456]

18. Her needlework cast she | aside, and called
 Her sons to ask, | with stern resolve,
 Who amends to their sister | would make for her son,
 Or the wife requite | for her husband killed.

19. Ready was Gunnar | gold to give,
 Amends for my hurt, | and Hogni too;
 Then would she know | who now would go,
 The horse to saddle, | the wagon to harness,
 (The horse to ride, | the hawk to fly,
 And shafts from bows | of yew to shoot).

20. (Valdar, king | of the Danes, was come,
 With Jarizleif, Eymoth, | and Jarizskar).

 [18. The manuscript marks line 3 as the beginning of a stanza. Grimhild is eager to have amends made to Guthrun for the slaying of Sigurth and their son, Sigmund, because Atli has threatened war if he cannot have Guthrun for his wife.

19. Lines 5-6 are almost certainly interpolations, made by a scribe with a very vague understanding of the meaning of the stanza, which refers simply to the journey of the Gjukungs to bring their sister home from Denmark.

20. Lines 1-2 are probably interpolated, though the Volsungasaga includes the names. Some one apparently attempted to [fp. 457] supply the names of Atli's messengers, the "long-beard men" of line 4, who have come to ask for Guthrun's hand. Some commentators assume, as the Volsungasaga does, that these messengers went with the Gjukungs to Denmark in search of Guthrun, but it seems more likely that a transitional stanza has dropped out after stanza 19, and that Guthrun received Atli's emissaries in her brothers' home. Long-beards: the word may actually mean Langobards or Lombards, but, if it does, it is presumably without any specific significance here. Certainly the names in the interpolated two lines do not fit either Lombards or Huns, for Valdar is identified as a Dane, and Jarizleif and Jarizskar are apparently Slavic. The manuscript indicates line 5 as beginning a new stanza.]

 [p. 457]

In like princes | came they all,
 The long-beard men, | with mantles red,
 Short their mail-coats, | mighty their helms,
 Swords at their belts, | and brown their hair.

21. Each to give me | gifts was fain,
 Gifts to give, | and goodly speech,
 Comfort so | for my sorrows great
 To bring they tried, | but I trusted them not.

22. A draught did Grimhild | give me to drink,
 Bitter and cold; | I forgot my cares;

 [21. Each: the reference is presumably to Gunnar and Hogni, and perhaps also Grimhild, I suspect that this stanza belongs before stanza 20.

22. Stanzas 22-25 describe the draught of forgetfulness which Grimhild gives Guthrun, just as she gave one to Sigurth (in one version of the story) to make him forget Brynhild. The draught does not seem to work despite Guthrun's statement in stanza 25 (cf. stanza 30), for which reason Vigfusson, not unwisely, places stanzas 22-25 after stanza 34. Blood of swine: cf. Hyndluljoth, 39 and note.]

 [p. 458]

For mingled therein was magic earth,
 Ice-cold sea, and the blood of swine.

23. In the cup were runes of every kind,
 Written and reddened, I could not read them;
 A heather-fish from the Haddings' land,
 An ear uncut, and the entrails of beasts.

24. Much evil was brewed within the beer,
 Blossoms of trees, and acorns burned,
 Dew of the hearth, and holy entrails,
 The liver of swine,-- all grief to allay.

25. Then I forgot, when the draught they gave me,
 There in the hall, my husband's slaying;
 On their knees the kings all three did kneel,
 Ere she herself to speak began:

 [23. The Volsungasaga quotes stanzas 23-24. Heather-fish: a snake. Haddings' land: the world of the dead, so called because, according to Saxo Grammaticus, the Danish king Hadingus once visited it. It is possible that the comma should follow "heather fish," making the "ear uncut" (of grain) come from the world of the dead.

24. Dew of the hearth: soot.

25. In the manuscript, and in some editions, the first line is in the third person plural: "Then they forgot, when the draught they had drunk." The second line in the original is manifestly in bad shape, and has been variously emended. I forgot: this emendation is doubtful, in view of stanza 30, but cf. note to stanza 22. The kings all three: probably Atli's emissaries, though the interpolated lines of stanza 20 name four of them. I suspect that line 4 is wrong, and should read: "Ere he himself (Atli) to speak began." Certainly stanzas 26-27 [fp. 459] fit Atli much better than they do Grimhild, and there is nothing unreasonable in Atli's having come in person, along with his tributary kings, to seek Guthrun's hand. However, the "three kings" may not be Atli's followers at all, but Gunnar, Hogni, and the unnamed third brother possibly referred to in Sigurtharkvitha en skamma, 18.]

 [p. 459]

26. "Guthrun, gold | to thee I give,
 The wealth that once | thy father's was,
 Rings to have, | and Hlothver's halls,
 And the hangings all | that the monarch had.

27. "Hunnish women, | skilled in weaving,
 Who gold make fair | to give thee joy,
 And the wealth of Buthli | thine shall be,
 Gold-decked one, | as Atli's wife."

 Guthrun spake:
 28. "A husband now | I will not have,
 Nor wife of Brynhild's | brother be;
 It beseems me not | with Buthli's son
 Happy to be, | and heirs to bear."

 [26. Thy father's: So the manuscript, in which case the reference is obviously to Gjuki. But some editions omit the "thy," and if Atli, and not Grimhild, is speaking (cf. note on stanza 25), the reference may be, as in line 3 of stanza 27, to the wealth of Atli's father, Buthli. Hlothver: the northern form of the Frankish name Chlodowech (Ludwig), but who this Hlothver was, beyond the fact that he was evidently a Frankish king, is uncertain. If Atli is speaking, he is presumably a Frankish ruler whose land Atli and his Huns have conquered.

27. Cf. note on stanza 25 as to the probable speaker.

28. In stanzas 28-32 the dialogue, in alternate stanzas, is clearly between Guthrun and her mother, Grimhild, though the manuscript does not indicate the speakers.]

 [p. 460]

 Grimhild spake:
 29. "Seek not on men | to avenge thy sorrows,
 Though the blame at first | with us hath been;
 Happy shalt be | as if both still lived,
 Sigurth and Sigmund, | if sons thou bearest."

 Guthrun spake:
 30. "Grimhild, I may not | gladness find,
 Nor hold forth hopes | to heroes now,
 Since once the raven | and ravening wolf
 Sigurth's heart's-blood | hungrily lapped."

 Grimhild spake:
 31. "Noblest of birth | is the ruler now
 I have found for thee, | and foremost of all;
 Him shalt thou have | while life thou hast,
 Or husbandless be | if him thou wilt choose not."

 Guthrun spake:
 32. "Seek not so eagerly | me to send
 To be a bride | of yon baneful race;
 On Gunnar first | his wrath shall fall,
 And the heart will he tear | from Hogni's breast."

 [29. Sigmund: son of Sigurth and Guthrun, killed at Brynhild's behest.

30. This stanza presents a strong argument for transposing the description of the draught of forgetfulness (stanzas 22-24 and lines 1-2 of stanza 25) to follow stanza 33. Raven, etc.: the original is somewhat obscure, and the line may refer simply to the "corpse-eating raven." 32. In the manuscript this stanza is immediately followed by the two lines which here, following Bugge's suggestion, appear [fp. 461] as stanza 35. In lines 5-4 Guthrun foretells what will (and actually does) happen if she is forced to become Atli's wife. If stanza 35 really belongs here, it continues the prophesy to the effect that Guthrun will have no rest till she has avenged her brothers' death.]

 [p. 461]

33. Weeping Grimhild | heard the words
 That fate full sore | for her sons foretold,
 (And mighty woe | for them should work;)
 "Lands I give thee, | with all that live there,
 (Vinbjorg is thine, | and Valbjorg too,)
 Have them forever, | but hear me, daughter."

34. So must I do | as the kings besought,
 And against my will | for my kinsmen wed,
 Ne'er with my husband | joy I had,
 And my sons by my brothers' | fate were saved not.

35. .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 I could not rest | till of life I had robbed
 The warrior bold, | the maker of battles.

36. Soon on horseback | each hero was,

 [33. Very likely the remains of two stanzas; the manuscript marks line 4 as beginning a new stanza. On the other band, lines 3 and 5 may be interpolations. Vinbjorg and Valbjorg: apparently imaginary place-names.

34. The kings: presumably Gunnar and Hogni. My sons: regarding Guthrun's slaying of her two sons by Atli, Erp and Eitil, cf. Drap Niflunga, note.

35. In the manuscript this stanza follows stanza 32. The loss of two lines, to the effect that "Ill was that marriage for my brothers, and ill for Atli himself," and the transposition of the remaining two lines to this point, are indicated in a number of editions. The warrior, etc.: Atli, whom Guthrun kills.]

 [p. 462]

And the foreign women | in wagons faring;
 A week through lands | so cold we went,
 And a second week | the waves we smote,
 (And a third through lands | that water lacked).

37. The warders now | on the lofty walls
 Opened the gates, | and in we rode.

*    *    *    *    *    *

38. Atli woke me, | for ever I seemed
 Of bitterness full | for my brothers' death.

 Atli spake:
 39. "Now from sleep | the Norris have waked me
 With visions of terror,-- | to thee will I tell them;
 Methought thou, Guthrun, | Gjuki's daughter,
 With poisoned blade | didst pierce my body."

 [36. The stanza describes the journey to Atli's home, and sundry unsuccessful efforts have been made to follow the travellers through Germany and down the Danube. Foreign women: slaves. Line 5, which the manuscript marks as be ginning a stanza, is probably spurious.

37. After these two lines there appears to be a considerable gap, the lost stanzas giving Guthrun's story of the slaying of her brothers. It is possible that stanzas 38-45 came originally from another poem, dealing with Atli's dream, and were here substituted for the original conclusion of Guthrun's lament. Many editions combine stanzas 37 and 38, or combine stanza 38 (the manuscript marks line I as beginning a stanza) with lines 1-2 of stanza 39.

39. The manuscript indicates line 3 as the beginning of a stanza. The manuscript and most editions do not indicate the speakers in this and the following stanzas.]

 [p. 463]

 Guthrun spake:
 40. "Fire a dream | of steel shall follow
 And willful pride | one of woman's wrath;
 A baneful sore | I shall burn from thee,
 And tend and heal thee, | though hated thou am"

 Atli spake:
 41. "Of plants I dreamed, | in the garden drooping,
 That fain would I have | full high to grow;
 Plucked by the roots, | and red with blood,
 They brought them hither, | and bade me eat.

42. "I dreamed my hawks | from my hand had flown,
 Eager for food, | to an evil house;
 I dreamed their hearts | with honey I ate,
 Soaked in blood, | and heavy my sorrow.

43. "Hounds I dreamed | from my hand I loosed,
 Loud in hunger | and pain they howled;
 Their flesh methought | was eagles' food,
 And their bodies now | I needs must eat."

 Guthrun spake:
 44. "Men shall soon | of sacrifice speak,

 [40. Guthrun, somewhat obscurely, interprets Atli's first dream (stanza 39) to mean that she will cure him of an abscess by cauterizing it. Her interpretation is, of course, intended merely to blind him to her purpose.

41. In stanzas 41-43 Atli's dreams forecast the death of his two sons, whose flesh Guthrun gives him to eat (cf. Atlakvitha, 39, and Atlamol, 78).

44. This stanza is evidently Guthrun's intentionally cryptic [fp. 464] interpretation of Atli's dreams, but the meaning of the original is more than doubtful. The word here rendered "sacrifice" may mean "sea-catch," and the one rendered "beasts" may mean "whales." None of the attempted emendations have rendered the stanza really intelligible, but it appears to mean that Atli will soon make a sacrifice of beasts at night, and give their bodies to the people. Guthrun of course has in mind the slaying of his two sons.]

 [p. 464]

And off the heads | of beasts shall hew
 Die they shall | ere day has dawned,
 A few nights hence, | and the folk shall have them."

 Atli spake:
 45. "On my bed I sank, | nor slumber sought,
 Weary with woe,-- | full well I remember.
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .

 [45. With these two lines the poem abruptly ends; some editors assign the speech to Atli (I think rightly), others to Guthrun. Ettmuller combines the lines with stanza 38. Whether stanzas 38-45 originally belonged to Guthrun's lament, or were interpolated here in place of the lost conclusion of that poem from another one dealing with Atli's dreams (cf. note on stanza 37), it is clear that the end has been lost.]

 
      
The Poetic Edda, by Henry Adams Bellows, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 465]

 

GUTHRUNARKVITHA III

 

The Third Lay of Guthrun

 

INTRODUCTORY NOTE

The short Guthrunarkvitha III, entitled in the manuscript simply Guthrunarkvitha, but so numbered in most editions to distinguish it from the first and second Guthrun lays, appears only in the Codex Regius. It is neither quoted nor paraphrased in the Volsungasaga, the compilers of which appear not to have known the story with which it deals. The poem as we have it is evidently complete and free from serious interpolations. It can safely be dated from the first half of the eleventh century, for the ordeal by boiling water, with which it is chiefly concerned, was first introduced into Norway by St. Olaf, who died in 1030, and the poem speaks of it in stanza 7 as still of foreign origin.

The material for the poem evidently came from North Germany, but there is little indication that the poet was working on the basis of a narrative legend already fully formed. The story of the wife accused of faithlessness who proves her innocence by the test of boiling water had long been current in Germany, as elsewhere, and had attached itself to various women of legendary fame, but not except in this poem, so far as we can judge, to Guthrun (Kriemhild). The introduction of Thjothrek (Theoderich, Dietrich, Thithrek) is another indication of relative lateness, for the legends of Theoderich do not appear to have reached the North materially before the year 1000. On the anachronism of bringing Thjothrek to Atli's court cf. Guthrunarkvitha II, introductory prose, note, in which the development of the Theoderich tradition in its relation to that of Atli is briefly outlined.

 Guthrunarkvitha III is, then, little more than a dramatic German story made into a narrative lay by a Norse poet, with the names of Guthrun, Atli, Thjothrek, and Herkja incorporated for the sake of greater effectiveness. Its story probably nowhere formed a part of the living tradition c)f Sigurth and Atli, but the poem has so little distinctively Norse coloring that it may Possibly have been based on a story or even a poem which its composer heard in Germany or from the lips of a German narrator.

[p. 466]

__________________

Herkja was the name of a serving-woman of Atli's; she had been his concubine. She told Atli that she had seen Thjothrek and Guthrun both together. Atli was greatly angered thereby. Then Guthrun said:

1. "What thy sorrow, Atli, | Buthli's son?
 Is thy heart heavy-laden? | Why laughest thou never?
 It would better befit | the warrior far
 To speak with men, | and me to look on."

 Atli spake:
 2. "It troubles me, Guthrun, | Gjuki's daughter,
 What Herkja here | in the hall hath told me,
 That thou in the bed | with Thjothrek liest,
 Beneath the linen | in lovers' guise."

 Guthrun spake:
 3. "This shall I | with oaths now swear,
 Swear by the sacred | stone so white,
 That nought was there | with Thjothmar's son
 That man or woman | may not know.

 [Prose. The annotator derived all the material for this note from the poem itself, except for the reference to Herkja as Atli's former concubine. Herkja: the historical Kreka and the Helche of the Nibelungenlied, who there appears as Etzel's (Attila's) first wife. Thjothrek: cf. Introductory Note.

2. The manuscript omits the names of the speakers through out.

3. Holy stone: just what this refers to is uncertain; it may be identical with the "ice-cold stone of Uth" mentioned in an oath in Helgakvitha Hundingsbana II, 29. Thjothmar's son: the manuscript has simply "Thjothmar." Some editions change it as [fp. 467] here, some assume that Thjothmar is another name or an error for Thjothrek, and Finnur Jonsson not only retains Thjothmar here but changes Thjothrek to Thjothmar in stanza 5 to conform to it.]

 [p. 467]

4. "Nor ever once | did my arms embrace
 The hero brave, | the leader of hosts;
 In another manner | our meeting was,
 When our sorrows we | in secret told.

5. "With thirty warriors | Thjothrek came,
 Nor of all his men | doth one remain;
 Thou hast murdered my brothers | and mail-clad men,
 Thou hast murdered all | the men of my race.

6. "Gunnar comes not, | Hogni I greet not,
 No longer I see | my brothers loved;
 My sorrow would Hogni | avenge with the sword,
 Now myself for my woes | I shall payment win.

7. "Summon Saxi, | the southrons' king,
 For be the boiling | kettle can hallow."

 [5. Regarding the death of Thjothrek's men cf. Guthrunarkvitha II, introductory prose, note. It was on these stanzas of Guthrunarkvitha III that the annotator based his introduction to Guthrunarkvitha II. The manuscript repeats the "thirty" in line 2, in defiance of metrical requirements.

6. In the manuscript this stanza follows stanza 7; many editions have made the transposition.

7. Who Saxi may be is not clear, but the stanza clearly points to the time when the ordeal by boiling water was still regarded as a foreign institution, and when a southern king (i. e., a Christian from some earlier-converted region) was necessary [fp. 467] to consecrate the kettle used in the test. The ordeal by boiling water followed closely the introduction of Christianity, which took place around the year 1000. Some editions make two stanzas out of stanza 7, and Mullenhoff contends that lines 1-2 do not constitute part of Guthrun's speech.]

 [p. 468]

Seven hundred | there were in the hall,
 Ere the queen her hand | in the kettle thrust.

8. To the bottom she reached | with hand so bright,
 And forth she brought | the flashing stones:
 "Behold, ye warriors, | well am I cleared
 Of sin by the kettle's | sacred boiling."

9. Then Atli's heart | in happiness laughed,
 When Guthrun's hand | unhurt he saw;
 "Now Herkja shall come | the kettle to try,
 She who grief | for Guthrun planned."

10. Ne'er saw man sight | more sad than this,
 How burned were the hands | of Herkja then;
 In a bog so foul | the maid they flung,
 And so was Guthrun's | grief requited.

 [10. The word "requited" in line 4 is omitted in the manuscript, but it is clear that some such word was intended. The punishment of casting a culprit into a bog to be drowned was particularly reserved for women, and is not infrequently mentioned in the sagas.]

 
      
The Poetic Edda, by Henry Adams Bellows, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 469]

 

ODDRUNARGRATR

 

The Lament of Oddrun

 

INTRODUCTORY NOTE

The Oddrunargratr follows Guthrunarkvitha III in the Codex Regius; it is not quoted or mentioned elsewhere, except that the composer of the "short" Sigurth lay seems to have been familiar with it. The Volsungasaga says nothing of the story on which it is based, and mentions Oddrun only once, in the course of its paraphrase of Brynhild's prophecy from the "short" Sigurth lay. That the poem comes from the eleventh century is generally agreed; prior to the year 1000 there is no trace of the figure of Oddrun, Atli's sister, and yet the Oddrunargratr is almost certainly older than the "short" Sigurth lay, so that the last half of the eleventh century seems to be a fairly safe guess.

Where or how the figure of Oddrun entered the Sigurth-Atli cycle is uncertain. She does not appear in any of the extant German versions, and it is generally assumed that she was a creation of the North, though the poet refers to "old tales" concerning her. She does not directly affect the course of the story at all, though the poet has used effectively the episode of Gunnar's death, with the implication that Atli's vengeance on Gunnar and Hogni was due, at least in part, to his discovery of Gunnar's love affair with Oddrun. The material which forms the background of Oddrun's story belongs wholly to the German part of the legend (cf. introductory note to Gripisspo), and is paralleled with considerable closeness in the Nibelungenlied; only Oddrun herself and the subsidiary figures of Borgny and Vilmund are Northern additions. The geography, on the other hand, is so utterly chaotic as to indicate that the original localization of the Atli story had lost all trace of significance by the time this poem was composed.

In the manuscript the poem, or rather the brief introductory prose note, bears the heading "Of Borgny and Oddrun," but nearly all editions, following late paper manuscripts, have given the poem the title it bears here. Outside of a few apparently defective stanzas, and some confusing transpositions, the Poem has clearly been preserved in good condition, and the beginning and end are definitely marked.

[p. 470]

__________________

Heithrek was the name of a king, whose daughter was called Borgny. Vilmund was the name of the man who was her lover. She could not give birth to a child until Oddrun, Atli's sister, had come to her; Oddrun had been beloved of Gunnar, son of Gjuki. About this story is the following poem.

1. I have heard it told | in olden tales
 How a maiden came | to Morningland;
 No one of all | on earth above
 To Heithrek's daughter | help could give.

2. This Oddrun learned, | the sister of Atli,
 That sore the maiden's | sickness was;
 The bit-bearer forth | from his stall she brought,
 And the saddle laid | on the steed so black.

3. She let the horse go | o'er the level ground,
 Till she reached the hall | that loftily rose,

 [Prose. Nothing further is known of Heithrek, Borgny or Vilmund. The annotator has added the name of Borgny's father, but otherwise his material comes from the poem itself. Oddrun, sister of Atli and Brynhild, here appears as proficient in birth. runes (cf. Sigrdrifumol, 8). Regarding her love for Gunnar, Guthrun's brother, and husband of her sister, Brynhild, cf. Sigurtharkvitha en skamma, 57 and note.

1. Olden tales: this may be merely a stock phrase, or it may really mean that the poet found his story in oral prose tradition. Morningland: the poem's geography is utterly obscure. "Morningland" is apparently identical with "Hunland" (stanza 4), and yet Oddrun is herself sister of the king of the Huns. Vigfusson tries to make "Mornaland" into "Morva land" and explain it as Moravia. Probably it means little more than a country lying vaguely in the East. With stanza 28 the confusion grows worse.]

 [p. 471]

(And in she went | from the end of the hall;)
 From the weary steed | the saddle she took;
 Hear now the speech | that first she spake:

4. "What news on earth, |     .    .    .    .    .
 Or what has happened | in Hunland now?"

 A serving-maid spake:
 "Here Borgny lies | in bitter pain,
 Thy friend, and, Oddrun, | thy help would find."

 Oddrun spake:
 5. 'Who worked this woe | for the woman thus,
 Or why so sudden | is Borgny sick?"

 The serving-maid spake:
 "Vilmund is he, | the heroes' friend,
 Who wrapped the woman | in bedclothes warm,
 (For winters five, | yet her father knew not)."

6. Then no more | they spake, methinks;
 She went at the knees | of the woman to sit;

 [3. Line 3 (cf. Volundarkvitha, 17) or line 5 (cf. Thrymskvitha, 2), both quoted from older poems, is probably spurious; the manuscript marks line 3 as the beginning of a new stanza.

4. Line 1 in the original appears to have lost its second half. In line 2 the word rendered "has happened" is doubtful. The manuscript does not indicate the speaker of lines 3-4, and a few editors assign them to Borgny herself.

5. The manuscript does not indicate the speakers. For the woman: conjectural; the manuscript has instead: "What warrior now hath worked this woe?" The manuscript indicates line 3 as beginning a new stanza. Line 5, apparently modeled on line, 4 of stanza n, is probably spurious.]

 [p. 472]

With magic Oddrun | and mightily Oddrun
 Chanted for Borgny | potent charms.

7. At last were born | a boy and girl,
 Son and daughter | of Hogni's slayer;
 Then speech the woman | so weak began,
 Nor said she aught | ere this she spake:

8. "So may the holy | ones thee help,
 Frigg and Freyja | and favoring gods,
 As thou hast saved me | from sorrow now."

 Oddrun spake:
 9. "I came not hither | to help thee thus
 Because thou ever | my aid didst earn;
 I fulfilled the oath | that of old I swore,
 That aid to all | I should ever bring,
 (When they shared the wealth | the warriors had)."

 [6. Charms: cf. Sigrdrifumol, 8.

7. Hogni's slayer: obviously Vilmund, but unless he was the one of Atli's followers who actually cut out Hogni's heart (cf. Drap Niflunga), there is nothing else to connect him with Hogni's death. Sijmons emends the line to read "Born of the sister | of Hogni's slayer."'

8. Regarding Frigg as a goddess of healing cf. Svipdagsmol, 52, note. Regarding Freyja as the friend of lovers cf. Grimnismol, 14, note. A line is very possibly missing from this stanza.

9. The manuscript does not name the speaker. In line 2 the word rendered "earn" is omitted in the manuscript, but nearly all editions have supplied it. Line 5 is clearly either interpolated or out of place. It may be all that is left of a stanza which stood between stanzas 15 and 16, or it may belong in stanza 12.]

 [p. 473]

 Borgny spake:
 10. "Wild art thou, Oddrun, | and witless now,
 That so in hatred | to me thou speakest;
 I followed thee | where thou didst fare,
 As we had been born | of brothers twain."

 Oddrun spake:
 11. "I remember the evil | one eve thou spakest,
 When a draught I gave | to Gunnar then;
 Thou didst say that never | such a deed
 By maid was done | save by me alone."

12. Then the sorrowing woman | sat her down
 To tell the grief | of her troubles great.

 [10-20. In the manuscript the order is as follows: 12; 13; 14; 15, 3-4; 10; 11; 16; 17; 15; 19, 1-2; 19, 1-2; 19, 3-4; 20. The changes made here, following several of the editions, are: (a) the transposition of stanzas 10-11, which are clearly dialogue, out of the body of the lament to a position just before it; (b) the transposition of lines 1-2 of stanza 15 to their present position from the middle of stanza 19.

10. The manuscript does not name the speaker; cf. note on stanzas 10-20.

11. The manuscript does not name the speaker; cf. note on stanzas 10-20. The word rendered "evil" in line 1 is a conjectural addition. Apparently Borgny was present at Atli's court while the love affair between Oddrun and Gunnar was in progress, and criticised Oddrun for her part in it. A draught, etc.: apparently in reference to a secret meeting of the lovers.

12. In the manuscript this stanza follows stanza 9; cf. note on stanzas 10-20. No gap is indicated, but something has presumably been lost. Grundtvig supplies as a first line: "The maid her evil days remembered," and inserts as a second line line 5 of stanza 9.]

 [p. 474]

13. "Happy I grew | in the hero's hall
 As the warriors wished, | and they loved me well;
 Glad I was | of my father's gifts,
 For winters five, | while my father lived.

14. "These were the words | the weary king,
 Ere he died, | spake last of all:
 He bade me with red gold | dowered to be,
 And to Grimhild's son | in the South be wedded.

15. "But Brynhild the helm | he bade to wear,
 A wish-maid bright | he said she should be;
 For a nobler maid | would never be born
 On earth, he said, | if death should spare her.

16. "At her weaving Brynhild | sat in her bower,
 Lands and folk | alike she had;

 [13. The manuscript indicates line 3 as the beginning of a new stanza; many editions combine lines 1-2 with stanza 12 and lines 3-4 with lines 1-2 of stanza 14. The hero: Buthli, father of Oddrun, Atli, and Brynhild.

14. The manuscript indicates line 3, but not line 1, as the beginning of a new stanza; some editions combine lines 3-4 with lines 3-4 of stanza 15. Making Buthli plan the marriage of Oddrun and Gunnar may be a sheer invention of the poet, or may point to an otherwise lost version of the legend.

15. Lines 1-2 have here been transposed from the middle of stanza 19; cf. note on stanzas 10-20. Wish-maid: a Valkyrie, so called because the Valkyries fullfilled Othin's wish in choosing the slain heroes for Valhall. The reference to Brynhild as a Valkyrie by no means fits with the version of the story used in stanzas 16-17, and the poet seems to have attempted to combine the two contradictory traditions, cf. Fafnismol, note on stanza 44. In the manuscript stanzas 10-11 follow line 4 of stanza 15.]

 [p. 475]

The earth and heaven | high resounded
 When Fafnir's slayer | the city saw.

17. "Then battle was fought | with the foreign swords,
 And the city was broken | that Brynhild had;
 Not long thereafter, | but all too soon,
 Their evil wiles | full well she knew.

18. "Woeful for this | her vengeance was,
 As so we learned | to our sorrow all;
 In every land | shall all men hear
 How herself at Sigurth's | side she slew.

19. "Love to Gunnar | then I gave,
 To the breaker of rings, | as Brynhild might;
 To Atli rings | so red they offered,
 And mighty gifts | to my brother would give.

 [16. In stanzas 16-17 the underlying story seems to be the one used in Sigurtharkvitha en skamma (particularly stanzas 32-39), and referred to in Guthrunarkvitha I, 24, wherein Gunnar and Sigurth lay siege to Atli's city (it here appears as Brynhild's) and are bought off only by Atli's giving Brynhild to Gunnar as wife, winning her consent thereto by falsely representing to her that Gunnar is Sigurth. This version is, of course, utterly at variance with the one in which Sigurth wins Brynhild for Gunnar by riding through the ring of flames, and is probably more closely akin to the early German traditions. In the Nibelungenlied Brynhild appears as a queen ruling over lands and peoples. Fafnir's slayer: Sigurth.

17. Cf. note on preceding stanza.

19. Cf. Sigurtharkvitha en skamma, stanzas 64-70.

19. In the manuscript lines 1-2 of stanza 15 follow line 2, resulting in various conjectural combinations. The manuscript marks line 3 as beginning a new stanza. Rings, etc.: possibly, as [fp. 476] Gering maintains, payment offered by Gunnar and Hogni for Brynhild's death, but more probably, as in stanza 20, Gunnar's proffered "marriage gold" for the hand of Oddrun.]

 [p. 476]

20. "Fifteen dwellings | fain would he give
 For me, and the burden | that Grani bore;
 But Atli said | he would never receive
 Marriage gold | from Gjuki's son.

21. "Yet could we not | our love o'ercome,
 And my head I laid | on the hero's shoulder;
 Many there were | of kinsmen mine
 Who said that together | us they had seen.

22. "Atli said | that never I
 Would evil plan, | or ill deed do;
 But none may this | of another think,
 Or surely speak, | when love is shared.

23. "Soon his men | did Atli send,
 In the murky wood | on me to spy;
 Thither they came | where they should not come,
 Where beneath one cover | close we lay.

24. "To the warriors ruddy | rings we offered,
 That nought to Atli | e'er they should say;

 [20. Grani's burden: the treasure won by Sigurth from Fafnir; cf. Fafnismol, concluding prose. The manuscript marks line 3 as beginning a new stanza, as also in stanzas 21 and 22.

23. Murky wood: the forest which divided Atli's realm from that of the Gjukungs is in Atlakvitha, 3, called Myrkwood. This hardly accords with the extraordinary geography of stanzas 28-29, or with the journey described in Guthrunarkvitha II, 36.]

 [p. 477]

But swiftly home | they hastened thence,
 And eager all | to Atli told.

25. "But close from Guthrun | kept they hid
 What first of all | she ought to have known.
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .

26. "Great was the clatter | of gilded hoofs
 When Gjuki's sons | through the gateway rode;
 The heart they hewed | from Hogni then,
 And the other they cast | in the serpents' cave.

27. "The hero wise | on his harp then smote,
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 For help from me | in his heart yet hoped
 The high-born king, | might come to him.

 [24. In the manuscript lines 3 and 4 stand in reversed order.

25. No gap is indicated in the manuscript; some editors assume the loss not only of two lines, but of an additional stanza. Evidently Guthrun has already become Atli's wife.

26. If a stanza has been lost after stanza 25, it may well have told of Atli's treacherous invitation to the Gjukungs to visit him; cf. Drap Niflunga, which likewise tells of the slaying of Hogni and Gunnar (the other).

27. In the manuscript these three lines follow line 2 of stanza 28. No gap is indicated in the manuscript, In the Volsungasaga Guthrun gives her brother the harp, with which he puts the serpents to sleep. The episode is undoubtedly related to the famous thirtieth Aventiure {sic of the Nibelungenlied, in which Volker plays the followers of Gunther to sleep before the final battle.]

 }[p. 478]

28. "Alone was I gone | to Geirmund then,
 The draught to mix | and ready to make;
 Sudden I heard | from Hlesey clear
 How in sorrow the strings | of the harp resounded.

29. "I bade the serving-maids | ready to be,
 For I longed the hero's | life to save;
 Across the sound | the boats we sailed,
 Till we saw the whole | of Atli's home.

30. "Then crawling the evil | woman came,
 Atli's mother-- | may she ever rot!

 [28. In the manuscript the three lines of stanza 27 follow line 2, and line 3 is marked as beginning a new stanza. Geirmund: nothing further is known of him, but he seems to be an ally or retainer of Atli, or possibly his brother. Hlesey: the poet's geography is here in very bad shape. Hlesey is (or may be) the Danish island of Laso, in the Kattegat (cf. Harbarthsljoth, 37 and note), and thither he has suddenly transported not only Gunnar's death-place but Atli's whole dwelling (cf. stanza 29), despite his previous references to the ride to Hunland (stanzas 3-4) and the "murky wood" (stanza 23). Geirmund's home, where Oddrun has gone, is separated from Hlesey and Atli's dwelling by a sound (stanza 29). However, geographical accuracy is seldom to be looked for in heroic epic poetry.

29. Many editions combine this stanza with lines 3-4 of stanza 28. The sound: cf. note on stanza 28.

30. The manuscript marks line 3 as beginning a new stanza. Atli's mother: the Volsungasaga does not follow this version; Gunnar puts all the serpents but one to sleep with his harp playing, "but a mighty and evil adder crawled to him and drove his fangs into him till they reached his heart, and so he died." It is possible that "Atli" is a scribal error for a word meaning "of serpents."]

 [p. 479]

And hard she bit | to Gunnar's heart,
 So I could not help | the hero brave.

31. "Oft have I wondered | how after this,
 Serpents'-bed goddess! | I still might live,
 For well I loved | the warrior brave,
 The giver of swords, | as my very self.

32. "Thou didst see and listen, | the while I said
 The mighty grief | that was mine and theirs;
 Each man lives | as his longing wills,--
 Oddrun's lament | is ended now."

 [31. Serpents'-bed goddess: woman (i. e., Borgny); "goddess of gold" was a frequent term for a woman, and gold was often called the "serpents' bed" (cf. Guthrunarkvitha I, 24 and note).

32. Some editions make line 4 a statement of the poet's, and not part of Oddrun's speech.]

 
      
The Poetic Edda, by Henry Adams Bellows, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 480]

 

ATLAKVITHA EN GRONLENZKA

 

The Greenland Lay of Atli

 

INTRODUCTORY NOTE

There are two Atli poems in the Codex Regius, the Atlakvitha (Lay of Atli) and the Atlamol (Ballad of Atli). The poems are not preserved or quoted in any other old manuscript, but they were extensively used by the compilers of the Volsungasaga. In the manuscript superscription to each of these poems appears the word "Greenland," which has given rise to a large amount of argument. The scribe was by no means infallible, and in this case his statement proves no more than that in the period round 1300 there was a tradition that these two poems originated in the Greenland settlement.

The two Atli poems deal with substantially the same material: the visit of the sons of Gjuki to Atli's court, their deaths, and the subsequent revenge of their sister, Guthrun, Atli's wife, on her husband. The shorter of the two, the Atlakvitha, tells the story with little elaboration; the Atlamol, with about the same narrative basis, adds many details, some of them apparently of the poet's invention, and with a romantic, not to say sentimental, quality quite lacking in the Atlakvitha. Both poems are sharply distinguished from the rest of the collection by their metrical form, which is the Malahattr (used irregularly also in the Harbarthsljoth), employed consistently and smoothly in the Atlamol, and with a considerable mixture of what appear to be Fornyrthislag lines (cf. Introduction) in the Atlakvitha.

It is altogether probable that both poems belong to the eleventh century, the shorter Atlakvitha being generally dated from the first quarter thereof, and the longer Atlamol some fifty years or more later. In each case the poet was apparently a Christian; in the Atlamol (stanza 82) Guthrun expresses her readiness to die and "go into another light," and in the Atlakvitha there is frequent use of mythological names (e.g., Valhall, Hlithskjolf) with an evident lack of understanding of their relation to the older gods. These facts fit the theory of a Greenland origin exceedingly well, for the Greenland settlement grew rapidly after the first explorations of Eirik the Red, which were in 982-985, and its most flourishing period was in the eleventh century. The internal evidence, particularly in the case of the Atlamol, points

[p. 481]

likewise to an origin remote from Iceland, Norway, and the "Western Isles"; and the two poems are sufficiently alike so that, despite the efforts of Finnur Jonsson and others to separate them, assigning one to Greenland and the other to Norway or else where, it seems probable that the manuscript statement is correct in both instances, and that the two Atli poems did actually originate in Greenland. An interesting account of this Greenland settlement is given in William Hovgaard's Voyages of the Norsemen to America, published by the American-Scandinavian Foundation in 1914, and an extraordinarily vivid picture of the sufferings of the early settlers appears in Maurice Hewlett's Thorgils, taken from the Floamannasaga.

From the standpoint of narrative material there is little that is distinctively Norse in either the Atlakvitha or the Atlamol. The story is the one outlined in the prose Drap Niflunga (largely based on these two poems), representing almost exclusively the southern blending of the Attila and Burgundian legends (cf. introductory note to Gripisspo). In the Atlakvitha, indeed, the word "Burgundians" is actually used. Brynhild is not mentioned in either poem; Sigurth's name appears but once, in the Atlamol. Thus the material goes directly back to its South-Germanic origins, with little of the Northern making-over which resulted in such extensive changes in most parts of the Sigurth story. The general atmosphere, on the other hand, particularly in the Atlamol, is essentially Norse.

As has been said, the Atlakvitha is metrically in a chaotic state, the normal Malahattr lines being frequently interspersed with lines and even stanzas which apparently are of the older Fornyrthislag type. How much of this confusion is due to faulty transmission is uncertain, but it has been suggested that the composer of the Atlakvitha made over in Malahattr an older Atli poem in Fornyrthislag, and this suggestion has much to recommend it. That he worked on the basis of an older poem is, indeed, almost certain, for in oral prose tradition a far larger number of distinctively Norse traits would unquestionably have crept in than are found in the material of the Atlakvitha. As for the Atlamol, here again the poet seems to have used an older poem as his basis, possibly the Atlakvitha itself, although in that case he must have had other material as well, for there are frequent divergences in such matters as proper names. The translation of the Atlakvitha is rendered peculiarly difficult 

[p. 482]

by the irregularity of the metre, by the evident faultiness of the transmission, and above all by the exceptionally large number of words found nowhere else in Old Norse, involving much guesswork as to their meanings. The notes do not attempt to indicate all the varying suggestions made by editors and commentators as to the reconstruction of defective stanzas and the probable meanings of obscure passages; in cases which are purely or largely guesswork the notes merely point out the uncertainty without cataloguing the proposed solutions.

__________________

Guthrun, Gjuki's daughter, avenged her brothers, as has become well known. She slew first Atli's sons, and thereafter she slew Atli, and burned the hall with his whole company. Concerning this was the following poem made:

1. Atli sent | of old to Gunnar
 A keen-witted rider, | Knefroth did men call him;
 To Gjuki's home came he | and to Gunnar's dwelling,
 With benches round the hearth, | and to the beer so sweet.

 [Prose. On the marriage of Guthrun to Atli at the instigation of her brothers, Gunnar and Hogni, and on the slaying of Atli and his two sons, Erp and Eitil, cf. Drap Niflunga and note.

1. Line 1 apparently is in Fornyrthislag. Knefroth (the name is spelt in various ways, and its meaning is uncertain): in the Atlamol (stanza 4) there are two messengers, one named Vingi and the other unnamed; the annotator combines the two versions in the Drap Niflunga. Benches, etc.: the adjective rendered "round the hearth," which etymologically it ought to mean, is made obscure by its application to "helmets" in stanzas 3 and 17.]

 [p. 483]

2. Then the followers, hiding | their falseness, all drank
 Their wine in the war-hall, | of the Huns' wrath wary;
 And Knefroth spake loudly, | his words were crafty,
 The hero from the south, | on the high bench sitting:

3. "Now Atli has sent me | his errand to ride,
 On my bit-champing steed | through Myrkwood the secret,
 To bid You, Gunnar, | to his benches to come,
 With helms round the hearth, | and Atli's home seek.

4. "Shields shall ye choose there, | and shafts made of ash-wood,
 Gold-adorned helmets, | and slaves out of Hunland,

 [2. Falseness: i.e., Gunnar's followers concealed their fear and hatred of the Huns at the feast; but the word may mean "fear of treachery." War-hall: the word used is "Valhall," the name of Othin's hall of slain warriors.

3. Myrkwood the secret (the adjective is literally "unknown") the which divided Atli's realm from that of the Gjukungs; cf. Oddrunargratr, 23 and note. Around the hearth: the adjective is the same one which is applied to "benches" in stanza 1 (cf. note); it may be an error here, or it may possibly have the force of "of your followers," i.e., Gunnar is to arm the men of his household (those who are round his hearth) for the journey.

4. Slaves, etc.: some editions have "swords in plenty." Scarlet: the word apparently means "slaughter-red," "blood-red," but it may mean something entirely different.]

 [p. 484]

Silver-gilt saddle-cloths, | shirts of bright scarlet,
 With lances and spears too, | and bit-champing steeds.

5. "The field shall be given you | of wide Gnitaheith,
 With loud-ringing lances, | and stems gold-o'er-laid,
 Treasures full huge, | and the home of Danp,
 And the mighty forest | that Myrkwood is called."

6. His head turned Gunnar, | and to Hogni he said:
 "What thy counsel, young hero, | when such things we hear?
 No gold do I know | on Gnitaheith lying
 So fair that other | its equal we have not.

7. "We have seven halls, | each of swords is full,

 [5. Gnitaheith: here the dragon Fafnir had his lair (cf. Gripisspo, 11). Sigurth doubtless owned it after Fafnir's death, and the Gjukungs after they had killed Sigurth. Possibly they had given it to Atli in recompense for the death of his sister, Brynhild, and he now offered to restore it to them, or--as seems more likely--the poet was not very clear about its ownership himself. Stems: i.e., the gilded stems of ships, carved like dragons,--an evident northern touch, if the word is correct, which is by no means certain . Danp: this name was early applied to a mythical Danish king (cf. Rigsthula, 49 and note) but it may have been fabricated by error out of the word "Danparstayir" (the phrase here used is "stayi Danpar"), used in the Hervararsaga of a field of battle between the Goths and the Huns, and quite possibly referring to the region of the Dnieper. The name seems to have clung to the Atli tradition long after it had lost all definite significance. Myrkwood: cf. note on stanza 3.]

 [p. 485]

(And all of gold | is the hilt of each;)
 My steed is the swiftest, | my sword is sharpest,
 My bows adorn benches, | my byrnies are golden,
 My helm is the brightest | that came from Kjar's hall,
 (Mine own is better | than all the Huns' treasure.)"

 Hogni spake:
 8. "What seeks she to say, | that she sends us a ring,
 Woven with a wolf's hair? | methinks it gives warning;
 In the red ring a hair | of the heath-dweller found I,
 Wolf-like shall our road be | if we ride on this journey."

9. Not eager were his comrades, | nor the men of his kin,

 [7. The stanza is clearly in bad shape; the manuscript indicates line 5 as beginning a new stanza. In line 5 the manuscript has "and shield" after "helm." Kjar: Gering ingeniously identifies this Kjar with Kjar the father of Olrun, mentioned in the Volundarkvitha, introductory prose and stanza 2, on the basis of a genealogy in the Flateyjarbok, in which Authi, the grand father of Kjar (by no means certainly the same man) and Buthli, father of Atli, are mentioned as making a raiding voyage together. This identification, however, rests on slight evidence.

8. The manuscript does not name the speaker. One editor gives the first sentence to Gunnar. She, etc.: Guthrun, seeking to warn her brothers of Atli's treachery, sends them a ring with a wolf's hair as a sign of danger; in the Atlamol (stanza 4) she sends a message written in runes; cf. Drap Niflunga. Heath-dweller: wolf.]

 [p. 486]

The wise nor the wary, | nor the warriors bold.
 But Gunnar spake forth | as befitted a king,
 Noble in the beer-hall, | and bitter his scorn:

10. "Stand forth now, Fjornir! | and hither on the floor
 The beakers all golden | shalt thou bring to the warriors.
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .

11. "The wolves then shall rule | the wealth of the Niflungs,
 Wolves aged and grey-hued, | if Gunnar is lost,
 And black-coated bears | with rending teeth bite,
 And make glad the dogs, | if Gunnar returns not."

 [9. In line 1 the manuscript has "His comrades did not urge Gunnar," but the name, involving a metrical error, seems to have been inserted through a scribal blunder.

10. The manuscript indicates no lacuna, but probably two lines have dropped out, for the Volsungasaga paraphrase runs: "Give us to drink in great cups, for it may well be that this shall be our last feast." Fjornir: Gunnar's cup-bearer.

11. Bugge thinks this stanza is spoken by Gunnar's terrified followers; Grundtvig assigns it to Hogni. Apparently, however, Gunnar means that if he and his men are not valiant enough to make the journey and return safely, it matters little what may happen to them. Niflungs: regarding the application of this name to Gunnar's Burgundians cf. Brot, 17 and note. Bears: these "black" bears have been used as arguments against the Greenland origin of the poem. And make glad the dogs: i.e., by giving them corpses to eat, but the phrase in the original is more than doubtful.]

 [p. 487]

12. A following gallant | fared forth with the ruler,
 Yet they wept as their home | with the hero they left;
 And the little heir | of Hogni called loudly:
 "Go safe now, ye wise ones, | wherever ye will!"

13. Then let the bold heroes | their bit-champing horses
 On the mountains gallop, | and through Myrkwood the secret;
 All Hunland was shaken | where the hard-souled ones rode,
 On the whip-fearers fared they | through fields that were green.

14. Then they saw Atli's halls, | and his watch-towers high,

 [12. Some editions in line 2 read "home of the Niflungs" instead of "their home," and others "home of the Huns," the manuscript reading being "home of the men." Heir: the Atlamol (stanza 28) names two sons of Hogni, Snaevar and Solar, both of whom make the journey with their father and are killed. The Volsungasaga, combining the two versions, says that Snaevar and Solar went with their father, and implies that it was a third and still younger son who said: "Farewell, and have a good time" (thus literally).

11. Myrkwood: cf. stanza 3 and note; the journey is here made by land, whereas in the Atlamol it is made partly by boat; cf. Atlamol, 34 and note. Whip-fearers: horses, but there is some uncertainty as to the word.

13. In line 1 the manuscript has "land" instead of "halls," which involves a metrical error. Watch-towers: the word used is identical with the name of Othin's watch-tower, Hlithskjolf (cf. Grimnismol, introductory prose). Buthli: the manuscript has "Bikki," which has. led some editors to transfer this stanza to [fp. 488] the Hamthesmol, placing it between stanzas 16 and 17; it seems more likely, however, that "Bikki" was a scribal error for "Buthli." Regarding Bikki cf. Sigurtharkvitha en skamma, 63 and note. Line 4 is apparently in Fornyrthislag.]

 [p. 488]

On the walls so lofty | stood the warriors of Buthli;
 The hall of the southrons | with seats was surrounded,
 With targets bound | and shields full bright.

15. Mid weapons and lances | did Atli his wine
 In the war-hall drink, | without were his watchmen,
 For Gunnar they waited, | if forth he should go,
 With their ringing spears | they would fight with the ruler.

16. This their sister saw, | as soon as her brothers
 Had entered the hall,-- | little ale had she drunk:
 "Betrayed art thou, Gunnar! | what guard hast thou, hero,
 'Gainst the plots of the Huns? | from the hall flee swiftly!

17. "Brother, 'twere far better | to have come in byrnie,
 With thy household helmed, | to see Atli's home,

 [15. Line 1 in the manuscript is apparently incorrectly copied, and some editions omit "Mid weapons and lances" and assume a gap in either line 1 or line 3.

17. This may be the remains of two stanzas, the manuscript marks line 5 as beginning a new stanza. Editorial conjectures are [fp. 489] numerous and varied. Household: the phrase is the same "helms round the hearth" commented on in stanza 3. Some editions insert a conjectural line after line 3. Sword-norns, etc.: the line is exceedingly obscure, and the phrase rendered "sword-norns" may mean "corpse-norns." Apparently it refers to the warrior-women of the Huns, the "shield-maids" of line 5 and of stanza 45. Roman writers refer to the warrior-women among the early Germanic tribes, and the tradition, closely allied to that of the Valkyries, attached itself readily to the ferocious Huns. Den of snakes: concerning the manner of Gunnar's death cf. Drap Niflunga.] 

 [p. 489]

And to sit in the saddle | all day 'neath the sun,
 (That the sword-norns might weep | for the death-pale warriors,
 And the Hunnish shield-maids | might shun not the sword,)
 And send Atli himself | to the den of the snakes;
 (Now the den of the snakes | for thee is destined.

 Gunnar spake:
 18. .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 "Too late is it, sister, | to summon the Niflungs,
 Long is it to come | to the throng of our comrades,
 The heroes gallant, | from the hills of the Rhine."

*    *    *    *    *    *

19. Then Gunnar they seized, | and they set him in chains,

 [18. The manuscript indicates no lacuna and does not name the speaker; perhaps a line similar to line 1 of stanza 24 (or 26) should be inserted here. Rhine: Gunnar's Burgundian home is here clearly localized. After this stanza it is probable that a passage describing the battle has been lost.

19. These two lines, apparently the remains of a full stanza, [fp. 490] may belong after stanza 20. Burgundians' king: the phrase may mean "Burgundians' men," i.e., they bound all the Burgundians who were left alive after the battle. This is the only place in the poems in which the name "Burgundian" appears; that the poet had no very clear conception of its meaning is indicated by the fact that in stanza 21 he calls Gunnar "king of the Goths."]

 [p. 490]

The Burgundians' king, | and fast they bound him.

20. Hogni slew seven | with sword so keen,
 And an eighth he flung | in the fire hot;
 A hero should fight | with his foemen thus,
 As Hogni strove | in Gunnar's behalf.

21. .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 The leader they asked | if his life he fain
 With gold would buy, | the king of the Goths.

 Gunnar spake:
 22. "First the heart of Hogni | shall ye lay in my hands,

 [20. Apparently a Fornyrthislag stanza, though most editions have attempted to expand the lines into Malahattr. The exploits of Hogni (Hagene), with the names of many of his victims, are told in the Nibelungenlied. The fire: in the Nibelungenlied Kriemhild has the hall set on fire, and the Burgundians fight amid the flames. Line 4 is clearly defective, and some editors regard the name "Gunnar" as all that is left of the first two lines of stanza 21.

21. Again apparently the remains of a Fornyrthislag stanza. Editors have attempted various combinations of the lines. Gold: presumably Sigurth's treasure.

22. The manuscript does not indicate the speaker; perhaps a first line similar to line 1 of stanza 24 should appear here. Some editors, however, assume that a line is missing after line 3. [fp. 491] Gunnar demands proof that Hogni is dead because, as stanza 29 shows, he is unwilling to die himself until he is assured that the secret of the treasure will perish with him. He did not, of course, intend that the heart should be cut from the living Hogni.]

 [p. 491]

All bloody from the breast | of the bold one cut
 With ke-en-biting sword, | from the son of the king."

23. .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 They cut out the heart | from the breast of Hjalli,
 On a platter they bore it, | and brought it to Gunnar.

24. Then Gunnar spake forth, | the lord of the folk:
 "Here have I the heart | of Hjalli the craven,
 Unlike to the heart | of Hogni the valiant,
 For it trembles still | as it stands on the platter;
 Twice more did it tremble | in the breast of the man.

25. Then Hogni laughed | when they cut out the heart
 Of the living helm-hammerer; | tears he had not.
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 On a platter they bore it, | and brought it to Gunnar.

 [23. Most editions assume a gap (lines 1-2, 2-3 or 3-4). Hjalli: Atli's cook, killed to deceive Gunnar, as Atli hoped to wring the secret of the hoard from Hogni if Gunnar remained silent. In the Atlamol (stanzas 59-60) Atli's men prepare to kill Hjalli, but he is spared at Hogni's intercession.

25. Helm-hammerer (literally "helmet-smith"): warrior, i.e., Hogni. No gap indicated in the manuscript.]

 [p. 492]

26. Then Gunnar spake forth, | the spear of the Niflungs:
 "Here have I the heart | of Hogni the valiant,
 Unlike to the heart | of Hjalli the craven,
 Little it trembles | as it lies on the platter,
 Still less did it tremble | when it lay in his breast.

27. "So distant, Atli, | from all men's eyes,
 Shalt thou be as thou | . . . . . from the gold.
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .

28. "To no one save me | is the secret known
 Of the Niflungs' hoard, | now Hogni is dead;
 Of old there were two, | while we twain were alive,
 Now is none but I, | for I only am living.

29. "The swift Rhine shall hold | the strife-gold of heroes,
 That once was the gods', | the wealth of the Niflungs,

 [26. Line 1 may belong elsewhere (stanzas 18 or 22).

27. Apparently the remains of two Fornyrthislag lines; the manuscript combines them with lines 1-2 of stanza 28. Gunnar foretells Atli's speedy death.

28. Apparently in Fornyrthislag. The manuscript indicates line 3 as the beginning of a stanza, and many editions combine lines 3-4 with stanza 29. This stanza explains Gunnar's demand for Hogni's heart in stanza 22.

29. The manuscript marks line 3, and not line 1, as the beginning of a stanza. Rhine, etc.: the stanza shows the blending of [fp. 493] three different traditions with regard to the treasure: the German tradition of the gold of the Rhine (cf. Volundarkvitha, 16, and Sigurtharkvitha en skamma, 16), the tradition, likewise German, of the hoard of the Nibelungen (Niflungs), early blended with the first one, and finally the northern tradition of the theft of Andvari's treasure by Othin, Honir, and Loki (cf. Reginsmol, 1-9).]

 [p. 493]

In the depths of the waters | the death-rings shall glitter,
 And not shine on the hands | of the Hunnish men."

 Atli spake:
 30. "Ye shall bring the wagon, | for now is he bound."

*    *    *    *    *    *

31. On the long-maned Glaum | rode Atli the great,
 About him were warriors |     .    .    .    .    .
 But Guthrun, akin | to the gods of slaughter,
 Yielded not to her tears | in the hall of tumult.

 [30. Apparently all that is left of a full stanza. The manuscript does not name Atli as the speaker, and Grundtvig inserts: "Then Atli called, | the king of the Huns," as a first line. Some editors combine this line with the two lines of stanza 33. Wagon: in Brot, 16, Gunnar is led to his death in the serpents' den on horseback, not in a wagon.

31. The stanza in the original is hopelessly confused. Glaum: this horse of Atli's is mentioned by name elsewhere. Long-maned: uncertain. The manuscript indicates no gap, but something has evidently been lost. Gods of slaughter: perhaps the phrase, usually applied to Othin and the other gods, is here used simply to mean "heroes," i.e., Atli, Gunnar, and Hogni. Line 4 suggests Guthrun's tearlessness after Sigurth's death (cf. Guthrunarkvitha II, 11)]

 [p. 494]

Guthrun spake:
 32. "It shall go with thee, Atli, | as with Gunnar thou heldest
 The oaths ofttimes sworn, | and of old made firm,
 By the sun in the south, | by Sigtyr's mountain,
 By the horse of the rest-bed, | and the ring of Ull."

33. Then the champer of bits | drew the chieftain great,
 The gold-guarder, down | to the place of death.
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .

34. By the warriors' host | was the living hero
 Cast in the den | where crawling about
 Within were serpents, | but soon did Gunnar
 With his hand in wrath | on the harp-strings smite;

 [32. The manuscript does not indicate the speaker. Sigtyr ("Victory-God"): Othin; what particular mountain (if any) is meant is unknown. Horse of the rest-bed: probably this means "bedpost," i.e., the support of the marriage-bed. Ull: the archer god, cf. Grimnismol, 5 and note. Nothing is known of his ring.

33. Apparently the remains of a Fornyrthislag stanza. Some editors combine the two lines with the line here indicated as stanza 30. Champer of bits: horse. The manuscript indicates no gap.

54. Six Fornyrthislag lines which editors have tried to reconstruct in all sorts of ways. The manuscript marks line 5 as the beginning of a new stanza, Regarding the serpents' den, Gunnar's harp-playing, and the manner of his death, cf. Drop Niflunga and Oddrunargratr, 27-30, and notes. In Atlamol, 62, Gunnar plays the harp with his feet, his hands being bound, and some editors change hand in line 4 to "foot." Lines 5-6 may be interpolated, or, as Bugge maintains, lines 1-4 may have been expanded out of two lines.]

 [p. 495]

The strings resounded,-- | so shall a hero,
 A ring-breaker, gold | from his enemies guard.

35. Then Atli rode | on his earth-treading steed,
 Seeking his home, | from the slaughter-place;
 There was clatter of hoofs | of the steeds in the court,
 And the clashing of arms | as they came from the field.

36. Out then came Guthrun | to meeting with Atli,
 With a golden beaker | as gift to the monarch:
 "Thou mayst eat now, chieftain, | within thy dwelling,
 Blithely with Guthrun | young beasts fresh slaughtered."

37. The wine-heavy ale-cups | of Atli resounded,
 When there in the hall | the Hunnish youths clamored,
 And the warriors bearded, | the brave ones, entered.

 [35. The manuscript marks line 3 as beginning a new stanza. Two (possibly three) of the lines appear to, be in Fornyrthislag. Field: so the manuscript, involving a metrical error; many editions have "wood."

36. Young beasts: Guthrun means Atli's sons, Erp and Eitil, but of course he thinks she refers to newly slaughtered beasts; cf. Guthrunarkvitha II, 41-45.

37. Youths: a conjectural addition. The brave ones is also conjectural, the manuscript having "each." No gap indicated in the manuscript; some editions insert as line 3 or line 4 a slightly altered version of line 2 of stanza 45.]

 [p. 496]

38. Then in came the shining one, |     .    .    .    .    .
     .    .    .    .    . | and drink she bore them;
 Unwilling and bitter | brought she food to the warrior,
 Till in scorn to the white-faced | Atli did she speak:

39. "Thou giver of swords, | of thy sons the hearts
 All heavy with blood | in honey thou hast eaten;
 Thou shalt stomach, thou hero, | the flesh of the slain,
 To eat at thy feast, | and to send to thy followers.

40. "Thou shalt never call | to thy knees again
 Erp or Eitil, | when merry with ale;
 Thou shalt never see | in their seats again
 The sharers of gold | their lances shaping,
 (Clipping the manes | or minding their steeds.)"

41. There was clamor on the benches, | and the cry of men,

 [38. No gap indicated in the manuscript, but the two fragments cannot be fitted together as one line. The shining one: Guthrun.

39. Giver of swords: generous prince, i.e., Atli. Honey: cf. Guthrunarkvitha II, 42. To send to thy followers: literally, "to send from thy high seat."

40. Apparently a Fornyrthislag stanza. Merry with ale: presumably this refers to Atli, but the manuscript reading makes it apply to the two boys. Sharers of gold: princes. Line 5 is either interpolated or all that is left of a separate stanza.

41. The text of the whole stanza has required a considerable amount of emendation. Lines 3-5 may have been expanded out of two lines, or line 5 may be an interpolation, possibly from stanza [fp. 497] 12 of the Guthrunarhvot. Weapons: the word literally means "good-weaving," and may refer to silken garments, but this hardly fits the noun here rendered "clashing." Wept not: cf. stanza 31 and note.]

 [p. 497]

The clashing of weapons, | and weeping of the Huns,
 Save for Guthrun only, | she wept not ever
 For her bear-fierce brothers, | or the boys so dear,
 So young and so unhappy, | whom with Atli she had.

42. Gold did she scatter, | the swan-white one,
 And rings of red gold | to the followers gave she;
 The fate she let grow, | and the shining wealth go,
 Nor spared she the treasure | of the temple itself.

43. Unwise then was Atli, | he had drunk to wildness,
 No weapon did he have, | and of Guthrun bewared not;
 Oft their play was better | when both in gladness
 Each other embraced | among princes all.

44. With her sword she gave blood | for the bed to drink,

 [42. Line 1 appears to be in Fornyrthislag. Guthrun distributes Atli's treasures among his followers apparently to prevent their wrath at the slaying of Erp and Eitil from turning against her; Atli, as stanza 43 shows, is too drunk to realize or prevent what she is doing.

43. The second half of line 4 is apparently an error, but none of the editorial suggestions have improved it.

44. Guthrun allows the dogs and the house-thralls, who had no part in Gunnar's death, to escape before she burns the dwelling [fp. 498] with all who are left therein. In Atlamol, stanzas 83-84, Atli is slain by a son of Hogni (Hniflung?) with Guthrun's help.]

 [p. 498]

With her death-dealing hand, | and the hounds she loosed,
 The thralls she awakened, | and a firebrand threw
 In the door of the hall; | so vengeance she had.

45. To the flames she gave all | who yet were within,
 And from Myrkheim had come | from the murder of Gunnar;
 The timbers old fell, | the temple was in flames,
 The dwelling of the Buthlungs, | and the shield-maids burned,
 They were slain in the house, | in the hot flames they sank.

46. Now the tale is all told, | nor in later time
 Will a woman in byrnie | avenge so her brothers;
 The fair one to three | of the kings of the folk
 Brought the doom of death | ere herself she died.

Still more is told in the Greenland ballad of Atli.

 [45. Some editions transfer line 2 to stanza 37; others reject line 3 as interpolated. Myrkheim ("Dark-Home"): probably identical with Myrkwood; cf. stanza 3. Temple: probably both here and in stanza 42 the word means little more than the place where Atli's treasures were kept; the poet was by no means literal in his use of terms connected with the heathen religion. Buthlungs: sons of Buthli, i.e., Atli and his family. Shield-maids: cf. stanza 17 and note.

46. The entire stanza is very likely a later addition. Three kings: Atli and his two sons, Erp and Eitil.]

 
      
The Poetic Edda, by Henry Adams Bellows, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 499]

 

ATLAMOL EN GRONLENZKU

 

The Greenland Ballad of Atli

 

INTRODUCTORY NOTE

Many of the chief facts regarding the Atlamol, which follows the Atlakvitha in the Codex Regius, are outlined in the introductory note to the earlier Atli lay. That the superscription in the manuscript is correct, and that the poem was actually composed in Greenland, is generally accepted; the specific reference to polar bears (stanza 17), and the general color of the entire poem make this origin exceedingly likely. Most critics, again, agree in dating the poem nearer 1100 than 1050. As to its state of preservation there is some dispute, but, barring one or two possible gaps of some importance, and the usual number of passages in which the interpolation or omission of one or two lines may be suspected, the Atlamol has clearly come down to us in fairly good shape.

Throughout the poem the epic quality of the story itself is overshadowed by the romantically sentimental tendencies of the poet, and by his desire to adapt the narrative to the understanding of his fellow-Greenlanders. The substance of the poem is the same as that of the Atlakvitha; it tells of Atli's message to the sons of Gjuki, their journey to Atli's home, the slaying of Hogni and Gunnar, Guthrun's bitterness over the death of her brothers, and her bloody revenge on Atli. Thus in its bare out line the Atlamol represents simply the Frankish blending of the legends of the slaughter of the Burgundians and the death of Attila (cf. Gripisspo, introductory note). But here the resemblance ends. The poet has added characters, apparently of his own creation, for the sake of episodes which would appeal to both the men and the women of the Greenland settlement. Sea voyages take the place of journeys by land; Atli is reproached, not for cowardice in battle, but for weakness at the Thing or great council. The additions made by the poet are responsible for the Atlamol's being the longest of all the heroic poems in the Eddic collection, and they give it a kind of emotional vivid ness, but it has little of the compressed intensity of the older poems. Its greatest interest lies in its demonstration of the manner in which a story brought to the North from the South Germanic lands could be adapted to the understanding and tastes of its

[p. 500]

eleventh century hearers without any material change of the basic narrative.

In what form or forms the story of the Gjukungs and Atli reached the Greenland poet cannot be determined, but it seems likely that he was familiar with older poems on the subject, and possibly with the Atlakvitha itself. That the details which are peculiar to the Atlamol, such as the figures of Kostbera and Glaumvor, existed in earlier tradition seems doubtful, but the son of Hogni, who aids Guthrun in the slaying of Atli, appears, though under another name, in other late versions of the story, and it is impossible to say just how much the poet relied on his own imagination and how far he found suggestions and hints in the prose or verse stories of Atli with which he was familiar.

The poem is in Malahattr (cf. Introduction) throughout, the verse being far more regular than in the Atlakvitha. The compilers of the Volsungasaga evidently knew it in very much the form in which we now have it, for in the main it is paraphrased with great fidelity.

1. There are many who know | how of old did men
 In counsel gather; | little good did they get;
 In secret they plotted, | it was sore for them later,
 And for Gjuki's sons, | whose trust they deceived.

2. Fate grew for the princes, | to death they were given;
 Ill counsel was Atli's, | though keenness he had;

 [1. Men: Atli and his advisers, with whom he planned the death of the sons of Gjuki, Gunnar and Hogni. The poet's reference to the story as well known explains the abruptness of his introduction, without the mention of Atli's name, and his reference to Guthrun in stanza 3 simply as "the woman" ("husfreyja," goddess of the house).

2. Princes: Atli, Gunnar, and Hogni. Bulwark: Atli's slaying [fp. 501] of his wife's brothers, who were ready to support and defend him in his greatness, was the cause of his own death.]

 [p. 501]

He felled his staunch bulwark, | his own sorrow fashioned,
 Soon a message he sent | that his kinsmen should seek him.

3. Wise was the woman, | she fain would use wisdom,
 She saw well what meant | all they said in secret;
 From her heart it was hid | how help she might render,
 The sea they should sail, | while herself she should go not.

4. Runes did she fashion, | but false Vingi made them,
 The speeder of hatred, | ere to give them he sought;
 Then soon fared the warriors | whom Atli had sent,
 And to Limafjord came, | to the home of the kings.

5. They were kindly with ale, | and fires they kindled,

 [3. The woman: Guthrun, concerning whose marriage to Atli cf. Guthrunarkvitha II. The sea: a late and essentially Greenland variation of the geography of the Atli story. Even the Atlakvitha, perhaps half a century earlier, separates Atli's land from that of the Gjukungs only by a forest.

4. Runes: on the two versions of Guthrun's warning, and also on the name of the messenger (here Vingi), cf. Drap Niflunga and note. Limafjord: probably the Limfjord of northern Jutland, an important point in the wars of the eleventh century. The name was derived from "Eylimafjory," i.e., Eylimi's fjord. The poet may really have thought that the kingdom of the Burgundians was in Jutland, or he may simply have taken a well-known name for the sake of vividness.]

 [p. 502]

They thought not of craft | from the guests who had come;
 The gifts did they take | that the noble one gave them,
 On the pillars they hung them, | no fear did they harbor.

6. Forth did Kostbera, | wife of Hogni, then come,
 Full kindly she was, | and she welcomed them both;
 And glad too was Glaumvor, | the wife of Gunnar,
 She knew well to care | for the needs of the guests.

7. Then Hogni they asked | if more eager he were,
 Full clear was the guile, | if on guard they had been;
 Then Gunnar made promise, | if Hogni would go,
 And Hogni made answer | as the other counseled.

8. Then the famed ones brought mead, | and fair was the feast,

 [5. Some editors assume a gap after this stanza.

6. Some editions place this stanza between stanzas 7 and 8. Kostbera ("The Giver of Food") and Glaumvor ("The Merry"): presumably creations of the poet. Both: Atli's two emissaries, Vingi and the one here unnamed (Knefroth?).

7. It is altogether probable that a stanza has been lost between stanzas 6 and 7, in which Gunnar is first invited, and replies doubtfully. Made promise: many editions emend the text to read "promised the journey." The text of line 4 is obscure; the manuscript reads "nitti" ("refused"), which many editors have changed to "hlitti," which means exactly the opposite. 8. No gap is indicated in the manuscript; Bugge adds (line [fp. 503] 3): "Then the warriors rose, | and to slumber made ready." The manuscript indicates line 4 as beginning a new stanza, and some editions make a separate stanza out of lines 1-2. Others suggest the loss of a line after line 4.]

 [p. 503]

Full many were the horns, | till the men had drunk deep;
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 Then the mates made ready | their beds for resting.

9. Wise was Kostbera, | and cunning in rune-craft,
 The letters would she read | by the light of the fire;
 But full quickly her tongue | to her palate clave,
 So strange did they seem | that their meaning she saw not.

10. Full soon then his bed | came Hogni to seek,
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 The clear-souled one dreamed, | and her dream she kept not,
 To the warrior the wise one | spake when she wakened:

11. "Thou wouldst go hence, | Hogni, but heed my counsel,--

 [9. The manuscript does not indicate line 1 as the beginning of a stanza; cf. note on stanza 8.

10. Some editions combine this stanza with lines 1-2 of stanza 11. The manuscript indicates no gap. Grundtvig adds (line 2) "But sleep to the woman | so wise came little."

11. Some editions make a separate stanza out of lines 1-2, or combine them with stanza 10, and combine lines 3-4 with stanza [fp. 504]12 (either lines 1-4 or 1-2). The manuscript marks line 3 as beginning a new stanza.]

 [p. 504]

Known to few are the runes,-- | and put off thy faring;
 I have read now the runes | that thy sister wrote,
 And this time the bright one | did not bid thee to come.

12. "Full much do I wonder, | nor well can I see,
 Why the woman wise | so wildly hath written;
 But to me it seems | that the meaning beneath
 Is that both shall be slain | if soon ye shall go.
 But one rune she missed, | or else others have marred it."

 Hogni spake:
 13. "All women are fearful; | not so do I feel,
 Ill I seek not to find | till I soon must avenge it;
 The king now will give us | the glow-ruddy gold;
 I never shall fear, | though of dangers I know."

 Kostbera spake:
 14. "In danger ye fare, | if forth ye go thither,

 [12. Line 5 may be spurious, or else all that is left of a lost stanza. The manuscript marks it as the beginning of a new stanza, which, as the text stands, is clearly impossible.

13. The manuscript, followed by some editions, has "Hogni spake" in the middle of line 1. Ill: the manuscript and many editions have "this." The king: Atli.

14. The manuscript does not indicate the speakers in this dialogue between Kostbera and Hogni (stanzas 14-19). Two line, may possibly have been lost after line 2, filling out stanza 14 and [fp. 505] making stanza 15 (then consisting of lines 3-4 of stanza 14 and lines 1-2 of stanza 15) the account of Kostbera's first dream. The manuscript marks line 3 as beginning a new stanza. In any case, the lost lines cannot materially have altered the meaning.]

 [p. 505]

No welcoming friendly | this time shall ye find;
 For I dreamed now, Hogni, | and nought will I hide,
 Full evil thy faring, | if rightly I fear.

15. "Thy bed-covering saw I | in the flames burning,
 And the fire burst high | through the walls of my home."
 Hogni spake:
 "Yon garment of linen | lies little of worth,
 It will soon be burned, | so thou sawest the bed-cover."

 Kostbera spake:
 16. "A bear saw I enter, | the pillars he broke,
 And he brandished his claws | so that craven we were;
 With his mouth seized he many, | and nought was our might,
 And loud was the tumult, | not little it was."

 [15. Saw I: the manuscript here, as also in stanzas 16, 18, 2r, 22, and 24, has "methought," which involves a metrical error. Some editors regard lines 3-4 as the remains of a four-line stanza. Regarding Kostbera's warning dreams, and Hogni's matter-of-fact interpretations of them, cf. Guthrunarkvitha II, 39-44.

16. The meaning of the first half of line 3 in the original is obscure.]

 [p. 506]

 Hogni spake:
 17. "Now a storm is brewing, | and wild it grows swiftly,
 A dream of an ice-bear | means a gale from the east."

 Kostbera spake:
 18. "An eagle I saw flying | from the end through the house,
 Our fate must be bad, | for with blood he sprinkled us;
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 From the evil I fear | that 'twas Atli's spirit."

 Hogni spake:
 19. "They will slaughter soon, | and so blood do we see,
 Oft oxen it means | when of eagles one dreams;

 [17. Two lines may have been lost after line 2, but the Volsungasaga paraphrase gives no clue. Ice-bear: polar bears, common in Greenland, are very rarely found in Iceland, and never in Norway, a fact which substantiates the manuscript's reference to Greenland as the home of the poem.

18. The manuscript indicates no gap, but most editors assume the loss of a line after line 1 or 2; Grundtvig adds, after line 1: "Black were his feathers, | with blood was he covered." Atli's spirit: the poet's folk-lore seems here a bit weak. Presumably he means such a female following-spirit ("fylgja") as appears in Helgakvitha Hjorvarthssonar, prose following stanza 34 (cf. note thereon), but the word he uses, "hamr" (masculine) means "skin," "shape." He may, however, imply that Atli had assumed the shape of an eagle for this occasion.

19. The manuscript indicates line 4 as beginning a new stanza.]

 [p. 507]

True is Atli's heart, | whatever thou dreamest."
 Then silent they were, | and nought further they said.

20. The high-born ones wakened, | and like speech they had,
 Then did Glaumvor tell | how in terror she dreamed,
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 .    .    .    .    . Gunnar | two roads they should go.

 Glaumvor spake:
 21. "A gallows saw I ready, | thou didst go to thy hanging,
 Thy flesh serpents ate, | and yet living I found thee;
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 The gods' doom descended; | now say what it boded."

*    *    *    *    *    *

22. "A sword drawn bloody | from thy garments I saw,--

 [20. The manuscript indicates no gap, but none of the many attempted emendations have made sense out of the words as they stand. The proper location for' the missing words is sheer guesswork. Two roads: probably the meaning is that their way (i.e., their success) would be doubtful.

21. The manuscript does not indicate the speakers in this dialogue (stanzas 21-26). No gap is indicated after line 2. Most editors assume the loss of two lines or of a full stanza after [fp. 508] stanza 21 giving Gunnar's interpretation of Glaumvor's dream, but the Volsungasaga gives no clue, as it does not mention this first dream at all. Grundtvig suggests as Gunnar's answer: "Banners are gleaming, | since of gallows didst dream, / And wealth it must mean | that thou serpents didst watch." Gods' doom: an odd, and apparently mistaken, use of the phrase "ragna rok" (cf. Voluspo, introductory note).]

 [p. 508]

Such a dream is hard | o a husband to tell,--
 A spear stood, methought, | through thy body thrust,
 And at head and feet | the wolves were howling."

 Gunnar spake:
 23. "The hounds are running, | loud their barking is heard,
 Oft hounds' clamor follows | the flying of spears."

 Glaumvor spake:
 24. "A river the length | of the hall saw I run,
 Full swiftly it roared, | o'er the benches it swept;
 O'er the feet did it break | of ye brothers twain,
 The water would yield not; | some meaning there was."

*    *    *    *    *    *

25. "I dreamed that by night | came dead women hither,

 [25. Perhaps two lines have been lost after line 2. Possibly the concluding phrase of line 2 should be "bloody spears," as in the Volsungasaga paraphrase.

24. Again Gunnar's interpretation is missing, and most editors either assume a gap or construct two Malahattr lines (out of the Volsungasaga prose paraphrase, which runs: "The grain shall [fp. 509] flow, since thou hast dreamed of rivers, and when we go to the fields, often the chaff rises above our feet."]

 [p. 509]

Sad were their garments, | and thee were they seeking;
 They bade thee come swiftly | forth to their benches,
 And nothing, methinks, | could the Norns avail thee. "

 Gunnar spake:
 26. "Too late is thy speaking, | for so is it settled
 From the faring I turn not, | the going is fixed,
 Though likely it is | that our lives shall be short."

27. Then bright shone the morning, | the men all were ready,
 They said, and yet each | would the other hold back;
 Five were the warriors, | and their followers all
 But twice as many,-- | their minds knew not wisdom.

28. Snaevar and Solar, | they were sons of Hogni,
 Orkning was he called | who came with the others,

 [25. The meaning of line 4 is uncertain, but apparently it refers to the guardian spirits or lesser Norns (cf. Fafnismol, 12-13 and notes).

26. Possibly a line has been lost from this stanza.

27. Five: Gunnar, Hogni, and the three mentioned in Stanza 28.

28. Perhaps a line has been lost before line 1; Grundtvig supplies: "Gunnar and Hogni, the heirs twain of Gjuki." Snaevar (the manuscript here has "Snevar"), Solar and Orkning [fp. 510] appear only in this poem and in the prose narratives based on it. Lines 2-3 may have been expanded out of one line, or possibly line 3 is spurious. The manuscript indicates line 4 as beginning a new stanza, and many editions make a separate stanza out of lines 4-5, many of them assuming the loss of two lines. Shield-tree: warrior (Orkning), here identified as Kostbera's brother. Fair-decked ones: women, i.e., Glaumvor and Kostbera. Fjord: perhaps specifically the Limafjord mentioned in stanza 4.]

 [p. 510]

Blithe was the shield-tree, | the brother of Kostbera;
 The fair-decked ones followed, | till the fjord divided them,
 Full hard did they plead, | but the others would hear not.

29. Then did Glaumvor speak forth, | the wife of Gunnar,
 To Vingi she said | that which wise to her seemed:
 "I know not if well | thou requitest our welcome,
 Full ill was thy coming | if evil shall follow."

30. Then did Vingi swear, | and full glib was his speech,
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 "May giants now take me | if lies I have told ye,
 And the gallows if hostile | thought did I have."

31. Then did Bera speak forth, | and fair was her thought,

 [30. The manuscript indicates no gap. Grundtvig inserts (line 2): "The evil was clear when his words he uttered."

31. Bera: Kostbera; the first element in compound feminine [fp. 511] proper names was not infrequently omitted; cf. Hild for Brynhild (Helreith Brynhildar, 6). The manuscript indicates no gap; Grundtvig inserts (line 2): "And clear was her cry to her kinsmen dear."]

 [p. 511]

.    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 "May ye sail now happy, | and victory have,
 To fare as I bid ye, | may nought your way bar."

32. Then Hogni made answer,-- | dear held he his kin,-
 "Take courage, ye wise ones, | whatsoever may come;
 Though many may speak, | yet is evil oft mighty,
 And words avail little | to lead one homeward."

33. They tenderly looked | till each turned on his way,
 Then with changing fate | were their farings divided.

34. Full stoutly they rowed, | and the keel clove asunder,
 Their backs strained at the oars, | and their strength was fierce;

 [32. Hogni's method of cheering his wife and sister-in-law is somewhat unusual, for the meaning of lines 3-4 is that good wishes and blessings are of little use in warding off danger.

33. Perhaps two lines have been lost after line 2; Grundtvig supplies: "Then weeping did | Glaumvor go to her rest-bed, / And sadly did Bera | her spinning wheel seek."

34. Keel, etc.: in the Nibelungenlied, and presumably in the older German tradition, Hagene breaks his oar steering the Burgundians across the Danube (stanza 1564), and, after all have landed, splinters the boat (stanza 1581) in order that there may be no retreating. The poet here seems to have confused the story, [fp. 512] connecting the breaking of the ship's keel with the violence of the rowing, but echoing the older legend in the last line, wherein the ship is allowed to drift away after the, travellers have landed. Oar-loops: the thongs by which the oars in a Norse boat were made fast to the thole-pins, the combination taking the place of the modern oarlock.]

 [p. 512]

The oar-loops were burst, | the thole-pins, were broken,
 Nor the ship made they fast | ere from her they fared.

35. Not long was it after-- | the end must I tell--
 That the home they beheld | that Buthli once had;
 Loud the gates resounded | when Hogni smote them;
 Vingi spake then a word | that were better unsaid:

36. "Go ye far from the house, | for false is its entrance,
 Soon shall I burn you, | ye are swiftly smitten;
 I bade ye come fairly, | but falseness was under,
 Now bide ye afar | while your gallows I fashion."

37. Then Hogni made answer, | his heart yielded little,

 [35. The manuscript indicates line 4 as beginning a new stanza, and many editions combine it with stanza 36, some of them assuming the loss of a line from stanza 35. In the Volsungasaga paraphrase the second half of line 4 is made a part of Vingi's speech: "Better had ye left this undone."

36. Cf. note on preceding stanza; the manuscript does not indicate line I as beginning a stanza. Line 3 may be spurious.

37. In the Volsungasaga paraphrase the second half of line 1 and the first half of line 2 are included in Hogni's speech.]

 [p. 513]

And nought did he fear | that his fate held in store:
 "Seek not to affright us, | thou shalt seldom succeed;
 If thy words are more, | then the worse grows thy fate."

38. Then Vingi did they smite, | and they sent him to hell,
 With their axes they clove him | while the death rattle came.

39. Atli summoned his men, | in mail-coats they hastened,
 All ready they came, | and between was the courtyard.

*    *    *    *    *    *

40. Then came they to words, | and full wrathful they were:

 [38. Possibly two lines have been lost after line 2.

39. It is probable that a considerable passage has been lost between stanzas 39 and 40, for the Volsungasaga paraphrase includes a dialogue at this point. The manuscript indicates no gap, and most editions combine stanzas 39 and 40 as a single stanza. The prose passage, indicating the substance of what, if any thing, is lost, runs as follows: "'Be welcome among us, and give me that store of gold which is ours by right, the gold that Sigurth had, and that now belongs to Guthrun.' Gunnar said: 'Never shalt thou get that gold, and men of might shalt thou find here, ere we give up our lives, if it is battle thou dost offer us; in truth it seems that thou hast prepared this feast in kingly fashion, [fp. 514] and with little grudging toward eagle and wolf."' The demand for the treasure likewise appears in the Nibelungenlied.]

 [p. 514]

"Long since did we plan | how soon we might slay you."

 Hogni spake:
 41. "Little it matters | if long ye have planned it;
 For unarmed do ye wait, | and one have we felled,
 We smote him to hell, | of your host was he once."

42. Then wild was their anger | when all heard his words;
 Their fingers were swift | on their bowstrings to seize,
 Full sharply they shot, | by their shields were they guarded.

43. In the house came the word | how the heroes with out

 [40. These two lines, which most editions combine with stanza 39, may be the first or last two of a four-line stanza. The Volsungasaga gives Atli's speech very much as it appears here.

41. The manuscript does not indicate the speaker; Grundtvig adds as a first line: "Then Hogni laughed loud where the slain Vingi lay." Many editors assume the loss of a line somewhere in the stanza. Unarmed: Hogni does not see Atli's armed followers, who are on the other side of the courtyard (stanza 39). One: Vingi.

42. Most editors assume the loss of one line, after either line 1 or line 3.

45. The manuscript reading of lines 1-2, involving a metrical error, is: "In the house came the word | of the warring without, / Loud in front of the hall | they heard a thrall shouting." Some editors assume a gap of two lines after line [fp. 515] 2, the missing passage giving the words of the thrall. The manuscript marks line 3 as the beginning of a stanza, and many editions make a separate stanza of lines 3-5, same of them assuming the loss of a line after line 3. With the stanza as here given, line 5 may well be spurious.]

 [p. 515]

Fought in front of the hall; | they heard a thrall tell it;
 Grim then was Guthrun, | the grief when she heard,
 With necklaces fair, | and she flung them all from her,
 (The silver she hurled | so the rings burst asunder.)

44. Then out did she go, | she flung open the doors,
 All fearless she went, | and the guests did she welcome;
 To the Niflungs she went-- | her last greeting it was,--
 In her speech truth was clear, | and much would she speak.

45. "For your safety I sought | that at home ye should stay;
 None escapes his fate, | so ye hither must fare."
 Full wisely she spake, | if yet peace they might win,

 [44. Niflungs: regarding the application of this term to the Burgundians cf. Atlakvitha, 11, and Brot, 17, and notes. The manuscript here spells the name with an initial N, as elsewhere, but in stanza 83 the son of Hogni appears with the name "Hniflung." In consequence, some editors change the form in this stanza to "Hniflungs," while others omit the initial H in both cases. I have followed the manuscript, though admittedly its spelling is illogical.]

 [p. 516]

But to nought would they hearken, | and "No" said they all.

46. Then the high-born one saw | that hard was their battle,
 In fierceness of heart | she flung off her mantle;
 Her naked sword grasped she | her kin's lives to guard,
 Not gentle her hands | in the hewing of battle.

47. Then the daughter of Gjuki | two warriors smote down,
 Atli's brother she slew, | and forth then they bore him;
 (So fiercely she fought | that his feet she clove off;)
 Another she smote | so that never he stood,
 To hell did she send him,-- | her hands trembled never.

 [46. The warlike deeds of Guthrun represent an odd transformation of the German tradition. Kriemhild, although she did no actual fighting in the Nibelungenlied, was famed from early times for her cruelty and fierceness of heart, and this seems to have inspired the poet of the Atlamol to make his Guthrun into a warrior outdoing Brynhild herself. Kriemhild's ferocity of course, was directed against Gunther and especially Hagene, for whose slaying she rather than Etzel was responsible; here, on the other hand, Guthrun's is devoted to the defense of her brothers.

47. Line 3 is very likely an interpolation. The manuscript marks line 4 as the beginning of a new stanza, and some editions make a separate stanza of lines 4-5. Atli's brother: doubtless a reminiscence of the early tradition represented in the Nibelungenlied by the slaying of Etzel's brother, Bloedelin (the historical Bleda), by Dancwart.]

 [p. 517]

48. Full wide was the fame | of the battle they fought,
 'Twas the greatest of deeds | of the sons of Gjuki;
 Men say that the Niflungs, | while themselves they were living,
 With their swords fought mightily, | mail-coats they sundered,
 And helms did they hew, | as their hearts were fearless.

49. All the morning they fought | until midday shone,
 (All the dusk as well | and the dawning of day,)
 When the battle was ended, | the field flowed with blood;
 Ere they fell, eighteen | of their foemen were slain,
 By the two sons of Bera | and her brother as well.

50. Then the warrior spake, | and wild was his anger:
 "This is evil to see, | and thy doing is all;

 [48. Line 3 may well be spurious, for it implies that Gunnar and Hogni were killed in battle, whereas they were taken prisoners. Some editors, in an effort to smooth out the inconsistency, change "themselves" in this line to "sound." Line 5 has also been questioned as possibly interpolated. Niflungs: on the spelling of this name in the manuscript and the various editions cf. note on stanza 44.

49. Line 2 is probably an interpolation, and the original apparently lacks a word. There is some obscurity as to the exact meaning of lines 4-5. The two sons of Bera: Snaevar and Solar; her brother is Orkning; cf. stanza 28.

50. The warrior: Atli. Thirty: perhaps an echo of the "thirty warriors" of Thjothrek (cf. Guthrunarkvitha III, 5). Subtracting the eighteen killed by Snaevar, Solar and Orkning (stanza 49), and Vingi, killed by the whole company (stanza [fp. 518] 38), we have eleven left, as Atli says, but this does not allow much for the exploits of Gunnar and Hogni, who, by this reckoning, seem to have killed nobody. The explanation probably is that lines 4-5 of stanza 49 are in bad shape.]

 [p. 518]

Once we were thirty, | we thanes, keen for battle,
 Now eleven are left, | and great is our lack.

51. "There were five of us brothers | when Buthli we lost,
 Now Hel has the half, | and two smitten lie here;
 A great kinship had I,-- | the truth may I hide not,--
 From a wife bringing slaughter | small joy could I win.

52. We lay seldom together | since to me thou wast given,
 Now my kin all are gone, | of my gold am I robbed;
 Nay, and worst, thou didst send | my sister to hell."

 [51. Five brothers: the Volsungasaga speaks of four (not five) sons of Buthli, but names only Atli. Regarding the death of the first two brothers cf. stanza 91 and note. The manuscript marks line 3 as beginning a stanza, and many editions combine lines 3-4 with stanza 52. Some insert lines 2-3 of stanza 52 ahead of lines 3-4 of stanza 51.

52. Possibly a line has been lost from this stanza. The manuscript marks line 3 as beginning a new stanza, which is impossible unless something has been lost. Gold: the meaning of this half line is somewhat doubtful, but apparently Atli refers to Sigurth's treasure, which should have been his as Brynhild's brother. Sister: Brynhild; regarding Guthrun's indirect responsibility for Brynhild's death cf. Gripisspo, 45 and note.]

 [p. 519]

 Guthrun spake:
 53. "Hear me now, Atli! | the first evil was thine;
 My mother didst thou take, | and for gold didst murder her,
 My sister's daughter | thou didst starve in a prison.
 A jest does it seem | that thy sorrow thou tellest,
 And good do I find it | that grief to thee comes."

 Atli spake:
 54. "Go now, ye warriors, | and make greater the grief
 Of the woman so fair, | for fain would I see it;
 So fierce be thy warring | that Guthrun shall weep,
 I would gladly behold | her happiness lost.

55. "Seize ye now Hogni, | and with knives shall ye hew him,
 His heart shall ye cut out, | this haste ye to do;
 And grim-hearted Gunnar | shall ye bind on the gallows,

 [53. The manuscript does not name the speaker. The Volsungasaga gives the speech, in somewhat altered form, to Hogni. "Why speakest thou so? Thou wast the first to break peace; thou didst take my kinswoman and starved her in a prison, and murdered her and took her wealth; that was not kinglike; and laughable does it seem to me that thou talkest of thy sorrow, and good shall I find it that all goes ill with thee." This presumably represents the correct form of the stanza, for nowhere else is it intimated that Atli killed Guthrun's mother, Grimhild, nor is the niece elsewhere mentioned. Some editions make a separate stanza of lines 4-5, Grundtvig adding a line after line 3 and two more after line 5. Other editors are doubtful about the authenticity of either line 3 or line 5.

54. The manuscript does not indicate the speaker.]

 [p. 520]

Swift shall ye do it, | to serpents now cast him."

 Hogni spake:
 56. "Do now as thou wilt, | for glad I await it,
 Brave shalt thou find me, | I have faced worse before;
 We held thee at bay | while whole we were fighting,
 Now with wounds are we spent, | so thy will canst thou work."

57. Then did Beiti speak, | he was Atli's steward:
 "Let us seize now Hjalli, | and Hogni spare we!
 Let us fell the sluggard, | he is fit for death,
 He has lived too long, | and lazy men call him."

58. Afraid was the pot-watcher, | he fled here and yon,
 And crazed with his terror | he climbed in the corners:

 [56. The text of the first half of line 3 is somewhat uncertain, but the general meaning of it is clear enough.

57. Beiti: not elsewhere mentioned. The Atlakvitha version of this episode (stanzas 23-25) does not mention Beiti, and in the Volsungasaga the advice to cut out Hjalli's heart instead of Hogni's is given by an unnamed "counsellor of Atli." In the Atlakvitha Hjalli is actually killed; the Volsungasaga combines the two versions by having Hjalli first let off at Hogni's intercession and then seized a second time and killed, thus introducing the Atlakvitha episode of the quaking heart (stanza 24). The text of the first half of line 3 is obscure, and there are many and widely varying suggestions as to the word here rendered "sluggard."

58. Some editions mark line 5 as probably interpolated.]

 [p. 521]

"Ill for me is this fighting, | if I pay for your fierceness,
 And sad is the day | to die leaving my swine
 And all the fair victuals | that of old did I have."

59. They seized Buthli's cook, | and they came with the knife,
 The frightened thrall howled | ere the edge did he feel;
 He was willing, he cried, | to dung well the court yard,
 Do the basest of work, | if spare him they would;
 Full happy were Hjalli | if his life he might have.

60. Then fain was Hogni-- | there are few would do thus--
 To beg for the slave | that safe hence he should go;
 "I would find it far better | this knife-play to feel,
 Why must we all hark | to this howling longer?"

61. Then the brave one they seized; | to the warriors bold
 No chance was there left | to delay his fate longer;
 Loud did Hogni laugh, | all the sons of day heard him,

 [59. Cook: the original word is doubtful. The Volsungasaga does not paraphrase lines 3-5; the passage may be a later addition, and line 5 is almost certainly so.

61. It is probable that a stanza describing the casting of Gunnar into the serpents' den has been lost after this stanza. Sons of day: the phrase means no more than "men."]

 [p. 522]

So valiant he was | that well he could suffer.

*    *    *    *    *    *

62. A harp Gunnar seized, | with his toes he smote it
 So well did he strike | that the women all wept,
 And the men, when clear | they heard it, lamented;
 Full noble was his song, | the rafters burst asunder.

63. Then the heroes died | ere the day was yet come;
 Their fame did they leave | ever lofty to live.
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .

64. Full mighty seemed Atli | as o'er them he stood,
 The wise one he blamed, | and his words reproached her:
 "It is morning, Guthrun; | now thy dear ones dost miss,
 But the blame is part thine | that thus it has chanced."

 [67. Regarding Gunnar's harp-playing, and his death, cf. Oddrunargratr, 27-30 and notes, and Atlakvitha, 34. Toes (literally "sole-twigs"): the Volsungasaga explains that Gunnar's hands were bound. Rafters: thus literally, and probably correctly; Gering has an ingenious but unlikely theory that the word means "harp."

63. There is some doubt as to the exact meaning of line 2. After this line two lines may have! been lost; Grundtvig adds: "Few braver shall ever | be found on the earth, / Or loftier men | in the world ever give."

64. Wise one: Guthrun. The manuscript marks line 3 as beginning a new stanza.]

 [p. 523]

 Guthrun spake:
 65. "Thou art joyous, Atli, | for of evil thou tellest,
 But sorrow is thine | if thou mightest all see;
 Thy heritage heavy | here can I tell thee,
 Sorrow never thou losest | unless I shall die."

 Atli spake:
 66. "Not free of guilt am I; | a way shall I find
 That is better by far,-- | oft the fairest we shunned;--
 With slaves I console thee, | with gems fair to see,
 And with silver snow-white, | as thyself thou shalt choose."

 Guthrun spake:
 67. "No hope shall this give thee, | thy gifts I shall take not,
 Requital I spurned | when my sorrows were smaller;
 Once grim did I seem, | but now greater my grimness,
 There was nought seemed too hard | while Hogni was living.

 [65. The manuscript does not indicate the speaker.

66. The manuscript does not name the speaker. The negative in the first half of line 1 is uncertain, and most editions make the clause read "Of this guilt I can free myself." The fairest, etc.: i. e., I have often failed to do the wise thing.

67. The manuscript does not indicate the speaker. Requital, etc.: it is not clear just to what Guthrun refers; perhaps she is thinking of Sigurth's death, or possibly the poet had in mind his reference to the slaying of her mother in stanza 53.]

 [p. 524]

68. "Our childhood did we have | in a single house,
 We played many a game, | in the grove did we grow;
 Then did Grimhild give us | gold and necklaces,
 Thou shalt ne'er make amends | for my brother's murder,
 Nor ever shalt win me | to think it was well.

69. "But the fierceness of men | rules the fate of women,
 The tree-top bows low | if bereft of its leaves,
 The tree bends over | if the roots are cleft under it;
 Now mayest thou, Atli, | o'er all things here rule."

70. Full heedless the warrior | was that he trusted her,
 So clear was her guile | if on guard he had been;
 But crafty was Guthrun, | with cunning she spake,
 Her glance she made pleasant, | with two shields she played.

 [68. Line 5 is very probably a later addition, though some editors question line 3 instead.

69. Guthrun suddenly changes her tone in order to make Atli believe that she is submissive to his will, and thus to gain time for her vengeance. Line 2 in the original is thoroughly obscure; it runs literally: "On the knee goes the fist if the twigs are taken off." Perhaps the word meaning "fist" may also have meant "tree-top," as Gering suggests, or perhaps the line is an illogical blending of the ideas contained in lines 1 and 3.

70. The manuscript indicates line 3 as the beginning of a new stanza, Two shields, etc.: i. e., Guthrun concealed her hostility (symbolized by a red shield, cf. Helgakvitha Hundingsbana I, 34) by a show of friendliness (a white shield).]

 [p. 525]

71. The beer then she brought | for her brothers' death feast,
 And a feast Atli made | for his followers dead
 No more did they speak, | the mead was made ready,
 Soon the men were gathered | with mighty uproar.

72. Thus bitterly planned she, | and Buthli's race threatened,
 And terrible vengeance | on her husband would take;
 The little ones called she, | on a block she laid them;
 Afraid were the proud ones, | but their tears did not fall;
 To their mother's arms went they, | and asked what she would.

 Guthrun spake:
 73. "Nay, ask me no more! | You both shall I murder,

 [71. Many editions make a separate stanza of lines 1-2, some of them suggesting the loss of two lines, and combine lines 5-4 with lines 1-2 of stanza 72, The manuscript marks both lines 1 and 3 as beginning stanzas.

72. The manuscript marks line 3 as beginning a new stanza; some editions make a separate stanza of lines 3-5, while others combine them with lines 1-2 of stanza 73. Line 2 in the original is clearly defective, the verb being omitted. The meaning of line 3 is uncertain; the Volsungasaga paraphrase has: "At evening she took the sons of King Atli (Erp and Eitil) where they were playing with a block of wood." Probably the text of the line as we have it is faulty. Lines 4-5 may possibly have been expanded out of a single line, or line 5 may be spurious.]

 [p. 526]

For long have I wished | your lives to steal from you.

 The boys spake:
 "Slay thy boys as thou wilt, | for no one may bar it,
 Short the angry one's peace | if all thou shalt do."

74. Then the grim one slew both | of the brothers young,
 Full hard was her deed | when their heads she smote off;
 Fain was Atli to know | whither now they were gone,
 The boys from their sport, | for nowhere he spied them.

 Guthrun spake:
 75. "My fate shall I seek, | all to Atli saying,
 The daughter of Grimhild | the deed from thee hides not;
 No joy thou hast, Atli, | if all thou shalt hear,
 Great sorrow didst wake | when my brothers thou slewest.

 [73. The manuscript does not name the speakers. It indicates line 3 as beginning a new stanza, in which it is followed by many editions. The Volsungasaga paraphrases line 4 thus: "But it is shameful for thee to do this." Either the text of the line has been changed or the Volsungasaga compilers misunderstood it. The angry one: Atli.

74. The manuscript indicates line 3 as beginning a new stanza.

75. The manuscript does not name the speaker.]

 [p. 527]

76. '1 have seldom slept | since the hour they were slain,
 Baleful were my threats, | now I bid thee recall them;
 Thou didst say it was morning,-- | too well I remember,--
 Now is evening come, | and this question thou askest.

77. "Now both of thy sons | thou hast lost .    .    .    .
     .    .    .    .    .    | as thou never shouldst do;
 The skulls of thy boys | thou as beer-cups didst have,
 And the draught that I made thee | was mixed with their blood.

78. 'I cut out their hearts, | on a spit I cooked them,
 I came to thee with them, | and calf's flesh I called them;
 Alone didst thou eat them, | nor any didst leave,

 [76. Morning: Guthrun refers to Atli's taunt in stanza 64.

77. The manuscript indicates no gap (lines 1-2), and most editions make a single line, despite the defective meter: "Thy sons hast thou lost | as thou never shouldst lose them." The second part of line 2 is in the original identical with the second half of line 3 of stanza 80, and may perhaps have been inserted here by mistake. Skulls: it is possible that line 3 was borrowed from a poem belonging to the Volund tradition (cf. Volundarkvitha, 25 and 37), and the idea doubtless came from some such source, but probably the poet inserted it in a line of his own composition to give an added touch of horror. The Volsungasaga follows the Atlamol in including this incident.]

 [p. 528]

Thou didst greedily bite, | and thy teeth were busy.

79. "Of thy sons now thou knowest; | few suffer more sorrow;
 My guilt have I told, | fame it never shall give me."

 Atli spake:
 80. "Grim wast thou, Guthrun, | in so grievous a deed,
 My draught with the blood | of thy boys to mingle;
 Thou hast slain thine own kin, | most ill it be seemed thee,
 And little for me | twixt my sorrows thou leavest."

 Guthrun spake:
 81. "Still more would I seek | to slay thee thyself,
 Enough ill comes seldom | to such as thou art;
 Thou didst folly of old, | such that no one shall find

 [78. Some editions add lines 5-4 to stanza 79; Finnur Jonsson marks them as probably spurious.

79. Perhaps these two lines should form part of stanza 78, or perhaps they, rather than lines 3-4 of stanza 78, are a later addition. A gap of two lines after line 1 has also been conjectured.

80. The manuscript does not indicate the speaker.

81. The manuscript does not indicate the speaker. Lines 1-2 may be the remains of a separate stanza; Grundtvig adds: "Thou wast foolish, Atli, | when wise thou didst feel, / Ever the whole | of thy race did I hate." The Volsungasaga paraphrase, however, indicates no gap. Many editions make a separate stanza of lines 3-6, which, in the Volsungasaga, are paraphrased as a speech of Atli's. Lines 5-6 may be spurious.]

 [p. 529]

In the whole world of men | a match for such madness.
 Now this that of late | we learned hast thou added,
 Great evil hast grasped, | and thine own death feast made."

 Atli spake:
 82. "With fire shall they burn thee, | and first shall they stone thee,
 So then hast thou earned | what thou ever hast sought for."

 Guthrun spake:
 "Such woes for thyself | shalt thou say in the morning,
 From a finer death I | to another light fare."

83. Together they sat | and full grim were their thoughts,
 Unfriendly their words, | and no joy either found;
 In Hniflung grew hatred, | great plans did he have,
 To Guthrun his anger | against Atli was told.

 [82. The manuscript does not indicate the speakers. Many editions make two separate stanzas of the four lines. Another light: a fairly clear indication of the influence of Christianity; cf. Introductory Note.

83. The manuscript marks line 3 as the beginning of a new stanza. Hniflung: the Volsungasaga says that "Hogni had a son who was called Hniflung," but the name appears to be nothing more than the familiar "Niflung" applied in general to the sons of Gjuki and their people. On the spelling cf. note on stanza 44. [fp. 530] This son of Hogni appears in later versions of the story. In the Thithrekssaga he is called Aldrian, and is begotten by Hogni the night before his death. Aldrian grows up and finally shuts Attila in a cave where he starves to death. The poet here has incorporated the idea, which finds no parallel in the Atlakvitha, without troubling himself to straighten out the chronology.]

 [p. 530]

84. To her heart came ever | the fate of Hogni,
 She told him 'twere well | if he vengeance should win;
 So was Atli slain,-- | 'twas not slow to await,--
 Hogni's son slew him, | and Guthrun herself.

85. Then the warrior spake, | as from slumber he wakened,
 Soon he knew for his wounds | would the bandage do nought:
 "Now the truth shalt thou say: | who has slain Buthli's son?
 Full sore am I smitten, | nor hope can I see."

 Guthrun spake:
 86. "Ne'er her deed from thee hides | the daughter of Grimhild,

 [84. Line 4 may be in Fornyrthislag, and from another poem.

85. The manuscript marks line 3 as beginning a new stanza.

The Volsungasaga makes line 2 part of Atli's speech.

86. The manuscript does not name the speakers. It marks line 4 as the beginning of a new stanza, and many editions follow this arrangement, in most cases making a stanza of lines 4-5 and line 1 of stanza 87. However, line 1 may well have been interpolated here from stanza 75. Grundtvig adds after line 3: "His father he avenged, and his kinsmen fully." Some editors assume the loss of one or two lines after line 5.]

 [p. 531]

I own to the guilt | that is ending thy life,
 And the son of Hogni; | 'tis so thy wounds bleed."

 Atli spake:
 "To murder hast thou fared, | though foul it must seem;
 Ill thy friend to betray | who trusted thee well.

87. "Not glad went I hence | thy hand to seek, Guthrun,
 In thy widowhood famed, | but haughty men found thee;
 My belief did not lie, | as now we have learned;
 I brought thee home hither, | and a host of men with us.

88. "Most noble was all | when of old we journeyed,
 Great honor did we have | of heroes full worthy;
 Of cattle had we plenty, | and greatly we prospered,
 Mighty was our wealth, | and many received it.

89. "To the famed one as bride-gift | I gave jewels fair,

 [87. The manuscript marks line 2 as beginning a new stanza, and some editions make a stanza out of lines 2-4 and line 1 of stanza 88.

8. The manuscript marks line 2 as the beginning of a stanza, and many editions make a stanza out of lines 2-4, or combine them with stanza 89. Some question the genuineness of line 4. 89. Many editions assume a gap of one line after line 3; [fp. 532] Grundtvig adds: "Bit-champing horses and wheel-wagons bright." Line 4 may be spurious. Greater: i. e., the silver which Atli gave Guthrun was of greater value even than the honor of receiving such royal gifts. Line 4 may be spurious.]

 [p. 532]

I gave thirty slaves, | and handmaidens seven;
 There was honor in such gifts, | yet the silver was greater.

90. "But all to thee was | as if nought it were worth,
 While the land lay before thee | that Buthli had left me;
 Thou in secret didst work | so the treasure I won not;
 My mother full oft | to sit weeping didst make,
 No wedded joy found I | in fullness of heart."

 Guthrun spake:
 91. "Thou liest now, Atli, | though little I heed it;

 [90. Some editions mark line 3 as spurious or defective. The manuscript marks line 4 as the beginning of a new stanza. The land, etc.: there is much obscurity as to the significance of this line. Some editors omit or question "me," in which case Atli is apparently reproaching Guthrun for having incited him to fight with his brothers to win for himself the whole of Buthli's land. In stanza 91 Guthrun denies that she was to blame for Atli's quarrels with his brothers. The Volsungasaga reading supports this interpretation. The historical Attila did actually have his brother, Bleda, killed in order to have the sole rule. The treasure: Sigurth's hoard, which Atli claimed as the brother of Brynhild and husband of Guthrun, Sigurth's widow, but which Gunnar and Hogni kept for themselves, with, as Atli here charges, Guthrun's connivance. My mother: the only other reference to Atli's mother is in Oddrunargratr, 30, wherein she appears as the adder who stings Gunnar to death, and in the prose passages based on that stanza.]

 [p. 533]

If I seldom was kindly, | full cruel wast thou;
 Ye brothers fought young, | quarrels brought you to battle,
 And half went to hell | of the sons of thy house,
 And all was destroyed | that should e'er have done good.

92. "My two brothers and I | were bold in our thoughts,
 From the land we went forth, | with Sigurth we fared;
 Full swiftly we sailed, | each one steering his ship,
 So our fate sought we e'er | till we came to the East.

93. "First the king did we slay, | and the land we seized,

 [91. The manuscript does not indicate the speaker. It marks both lines 4 and 5 as beginning new stanzas, but line 5 is presumably an interpolation. The text of the second half of line 2 is obscure, and many emendations have been suggested. Ye brothers: cf. note on stanza go. Half: i. e., two of Atli's brothers were killed, the other two dying in the battle with Gunnar and Hogni; cf. stanza 51.

92. From the land: this maritime expedition of Guthrun and her two brothers, Gunnar and Hogni (the poet seems to know nothing of her half-brother, Gotthorm), with Sigurth seems to have been a pure. invention of the poet's, inserted for the benefit of his Greenland hearers. Nothing further is reported concerning it.

93. The forest: i. e., men who were outlawed in the conquered land were restored to their rights--another purely Norse touch.]

 [p. 534]

The princes did us service, | for such was their fear;
 From the forest we called | them we fain would have guiltless,
 And rich made we many | who of all were bereft.

94. "Slain was the Hun-king, | soon happiness vanished,
 In her grief the widow | so young sat weeping;
 Yet worse seemed the sorrow | to seek Atli's house,
 A hero was my husband, | and hard was his loss.

95. "From the Thing thou camst never, | for thus have we heard,
 Having won in thy quarrels, | or warriors smitten;
 Full yielding thou wast, | never firm was thy will,
 In silence didst suffer, |     .    .    .    .    .

 Atli spake:
 96. "Thou liest now, Guthrun, | but little of good

 [94. Hun-king: Sigurth, though most illogically so called; cf. Sigurtharkvitha en skamma, 4 and note. The Volsungasaga paraphrase of line 2 is so remote as to be puzzling: "It was little to bear the name of widow." Perhaps, however, the word "not" fell out between "was" and "little."

95. Thing, etc.: here the poet makes Atli into a typical Norse land-owner, going to the "Thing," or general law council, to settle his disputes. Even the compilers of the Volsungasaga could not accept this, and in their paraphrase changed "Thing" to "battle." The text of the second half of line 2 is uncertain. The manuscript leaves a blank to indicate the gap in-line 4; Grundtvig adds: "as beseems not a king."]

 [p. 535]

Will it bring to either, | for all have we lost;
 But, Guthrun, yet once | be thou kindly of will,
 For the honor of both, | when forth I am home."

 Guthrun spake:
 97. "A ship will I buy, | and a bright-hued coffin,
 I will wax well the shroud | to wind round thy body,
 For all will I care | as if dear were we ever."

98. Then did Atli die, | and his heirs' grief doubled;
 The high-born one did | as to him she had promised;
 Then sought Guthrun the wise | to go to her death,
 But for days did she wait, | and 'twas long ere she died.

99. Full happy shall he be | who such offspring has,
 Or children so gallant, | as Gjuki begot;
 Forever shall live, | and in lands far and wide,
 Their valor heroic | wherever men hear it.

 [97. The manuscript does not indicate the speaker. Many editors assume a gap either before or after line 1. A ship: the burial of Norse chiefs in ships was of frequent occurrence, but the Greenland poet's application of the custom to Atli is some what grotesque.

98. Heirs, etc.: merely a stock phrase, here quite meaningless, as Atli's heirs had all been killed. Long: cf. Guthrunarhvot, introductory prose.]

 
      
The Poetic Edda, by Henry Adams Bellows, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 536]

 

GUTHRUNARHVOT

 

Guthrun's Inciting

 

INTRODUCTORY NOTE

The two concluding poems in the Codex Regius, the Guthrunarhvot (Guthrun's Inciting) and the Hamthesmol (The Ballad of Hamther), belong to a narrative cycle connected with those of Sigurth, the Burgundians, and Atli (cf. Gripisspo, introductory note) by only the slenderest of threads. Of the three early historical kings who gradually assumed a dominant place in Germanic legend, Ermanarich, king of the East Goths in the middle of the fourth century, was actually the least important, even though Jordanes, the sixth century author of De Rebus Getecis, compared him to Alexander the Great. Memories of his cruelty and of his tragic death, however, persisted along with the real glories of Theoderich, a century and a half later, and of the conquests of Attila, whose lifetime approximately bridged the gap between Ermanarich's death and Theoderich's birth.

Chief among the popular tales of Ermanarich's cruelty was one concerning the death of a certain Sunilda or Sanielh, whom, according to Jordanes, he caused to be torn asunder by wild horses because of her husband's treachery. Her brothers, Sarus and Ammius, seeking to avenge her, wounded but failed to kill Ermanarich. In this story is the root of the two Norse poems included in the Codex Regius. Sunilda easily became the wife as well as the victim of the tyrant, and, by the process of legend-blending so frequently observed, the story was connected with the more famous one of the Nibelungs by making her the daughter of Sigurth and Guthrun. To account for her brothers, a third husband had to be found for Guthrun; the Sarus and Ammius of Jordanes are obviously the Sorli and Hamther, sons of Guthrun and Jonak, of the Norse poems. The blending of the Sigurth and Ermanarich legends probably, though not certainly, took place before the story reached the North, in other words before the end of the eighth century.

Regarding the exact status of the Guthrunarhvot and the Hamthesmol there has been a great deal of discussion. That they are closely related is obvious; indeed the first parts of the two poems are nearly identical in content and occasionally so in actual diction. The annotator, in his concluding prose note, refers to

[p. 537]

the second poem as the "old" ballad of Hamther, wherefore it has been assumed by some critics that the composer of the Guthrunarhvot used the Hamthesmol, approximately as it now stands, as the source of part of his material. The extant Hamthesmol, however, is almost certainly a patchwork; part of it is in Fornyrthislag (cf. Introduction), including most of the stanzas paralleled in the Guthrunarhvot, and likewise the stanza followed directly by the reference to the "old" ballad, while the rest is in Malahattr. The most reasonable theory, therefore, is that there existed an old ballad of Hamther, all in Fornyrthislag, from which the composer of the Guthrunarhvot borrowed a few stanzas as the introduction for his poem, and which the composer of the extant, or "new," Hamthesmol likewise used, though far more clumsily.

The title "Guthrunarhvot," which appears in the Codex Regius, really applies only to stanzas 1-8, all presumably borrowed from the "old" ballad of Hamther. The rest of the poem is simply another Guthrun lament, following the tradition exemplified by the first and second Guthrun lays; it is possible, indeed, that it is made up of fragments of two separate laments, one (stanzas 9-18) involving the story of Svanhild's death, and the other (stanzas 19-21) coming from an otherwise lost version of the story in which Guthrun closely follows Sigurth and Brynhild in death. In any event the present title is really a misnomer; the poet, who presumably was an eleventh century Icelander, used the episode of Guthrun's inciting her sons to vengeance for the slaying of Svanhild simply as an introduction to his main subject, the last lament of the unhappy queen.

The text of the poem in Regius is by no means in good shape, and editorial emendations have been many and varied, particularly in interchanging lines between the Guthrunarhvot and the Hamthesmol. The Volsungasaga paraphrases the poem with such fidelity as to prove that it lay before the compilers of the saga approximately in its present form.

__________________

Guthrun went forth to the sea after she had slain Atli. She went out into the sea and fain would drown herself, but she could not sink. The waves bore her across the

[p. 538]

fjord to the land of King Jonak; he took her as wife; their sons were Sorli and Erp and Hamther. There was brought up Svanhild, Sigurth's daughter; she was married to the mighty Jormunrek. With him was Bikki, who counselled that Randver, the king's son, should have her. This Bikki told to the king. The king had Randver hanged, and Svanhild trodden to death under horses' feet. And when Guthrun learned this, she spake with her sons.

 [Prose. In the manuscript the prose is headed "Of Guthrun," the title "Guthrunarhvot" preceding stanza 1. The prose introduction is used both by Snorri (Skaldskaparmal, chapter 42) and in the Volsungasaga. It would be interesting to know on what the annotator based this note, for neither Bikki nor Randver is mentioned by name in either the Guthrunarhvot or the Hamthesmol. On the prose notes in general, cf. Reginsmol, introductory note. Guthrun: on the slaying of Atli by his wife, Guthrun, Sigurth's widow, cf. Atlamol, 83-86 and notes. Jonak: a Northern addition to the legend, introduced to account for Svanhild's half-brothers; the name is apparently of Slavic origin. Sorli, Erp, and Hamther: Sorli and Hamther are the Sarus and Ammius of the Jordanes story (cf. introductory note). The Volsungasaga follows this note in making Erp likewise a son of Guthrun, but in the Hamthesmol he is a son of Jonak by another wife. Svanhild: cf. Sigurtharkvitha en skamma, 54 and note. Jormunrek (Ermanarich): cf. introductory note. Bikki: the Sifka or Sibicho of the Gothic legends of Ermanarich, whose evil counsel always brings trouble. Randver: in the Volsungasaga Jormunrek sends his son Randver with Bikki to seek Svanhild's hand. On the voyage home Bikki says to Randver: "It were right for you to have so fair a wife, and not such an old man." Randver was much pleased with this advice, "and he spake to her with gladness, and she to him." Thus the story becomes near of kin to those of Tristan and Iseult and Paolo and Francesca. According to the Volsungasaga, Bikki told Ermanarich that a guilty love existed between his son and his young wife, and presumably the annotator here meant as much by his vague "this."]

 [p. 539]

1. A word-strife I learned, | most woeful of all,
 A speech from the fullness | of sorrow spoken,
 When fierce of heart | her sons to the fight
 Did Guthrun whet | with words full grim.

2. "Why sit ye idle, | why sleep out your lives,
 Why grieve ye not | in gladness to speak?
 Since Jormunrek | your sister young
 Beneath the hoofs | of horses hath trodden,
 (White and black | on the battle-way,
 Gray, road-wonted, | the steeds of the Goths.)

3. "Not like are ye | to Gunnar of yore,
 Nor have ye hearts | such as Hogni's was;
 Vengeance for her | ye soon would have
 If brave ye were | as my brothers of old,
 Or hard your hearts | as the Hunnish kings'."

4. Then Hamther spake, | the high of heart:
 "Little the deed | of Hogni didst love,

 [1. The poet's introduction of himself in this stanza is a fairly certain indication of the relative lateness of the poem.

2. Idle: a guess; a word is obviously missing in the original. The manuscript marks line 5 as beginning a new stanza, and lines 5-6 may well have been inserted from another part of the "old" Hamthesmol (cf. Hamthesmol, 3).

3. Gunnar and Hogni: cf. Drap Niflunga. Line 5 may be interpolated. Hunnish: here used, as often, merely as a generic term for all South Germanic peoples; the reference is to the Burgundian Gunnar and Hogni.

4. Hamther: some editions spell the name "Hamthir." Sigurth, etc.: cf. Sigurtharkvitha en skamma, 21-24, and Brot, concluding prose. This stanza has been subjected to many conjectural re-arrangements, [fp. 539] some editors adding two or three lines from the Hamthesmol.]

 [p. 540]

When Sigurth they wakened | from his sleep;
 Thy bed-covers white | were red with blood
 Of thy husband, drenched | with gore from his heart.

5. "Bloody revenge | didst have for thy brothers,
 Evil and sore, | when thy sons didst slay;
 Else yet might we all | on Jormunrek
 Together our sister's | slaying avenge.

6. .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 The gear of the Hunnish | kings now give us!
 Thou hast whetted us so | to the battle of swords."

7. Laughing did Guthrun | go to her chamber,
 The helms of the kings | from the cupboards she took,
 And mail-coats broad, | to her sons she bore them;
 On their horses' backs | the heroes leaped.

8. Then Hamther spake, | the high of heart:

 [5. Bloody: a guess; a word in the original is clearly missing, and the same is true of all in line 3. Thy sons: i.e., by killing her sons Erp and Eitil (cf. Atlamol, 72-74) Guthrun deprived Hamther, Sorli, and the second Erp of valuable allies in avenging Svanhild's death.

6. The manuscript indicates no gap, but most editors assume the loss of one, two or even more lines before the two here given.

7. The manuscript indicates line 4 as beginning a new stanza.

8. Line 1, identical with line 1 of stanza 4, may be interpolated [fp. 541] here. Spear-god: warrior, i.e., Hamther himself. With this stanza the introductory hvot ("inciting") ends, and stanza 9 introduces the lament which forms the real body of the poem.]

 [p. 541]

"Homeward no more | his mother to see
 Comes the spear-god, | fallen mid Gothic folk;
 One death-draught thou | for us all shalt drink,
 For Svanhild then | and thy sons as well."

9. Weeping Guthrun, | Gjuki's daughter,
 Went sadly before | the gate to sit,
 And with tear-stained cheeks | to tell the tale
 Of her mighty griefs, | so many in kind.

10. "Three home-fires knew I, | three hearths I knew,
 Home was I brought | by husbands three;
 But Sigurth only | of all was dear,
 He whom my brothers | brought to his death.

11. "A greater sorrow | I saw not nor knew,
 Yet more it seemed | I must suffer yet
 When the princes great | to Atli gave me.

12. "The brave boys I summoned | to secret speech;
 For my woes requital | I might not win
 Till off the heads | of the Hniflungs I hewed.

 [11. Line 1 in the original is of uncertain meaning. Many editors assume the loss of a line after line 1, and some completely reconstruct line 1 on the basis of a hypothetical second line. Princes: Gunnar and Hogni.

12. Some editors assume the loss of one line, or more, before line 1. Hniflungs: Erp and Eitil, the sons of Guthrun and Atli. On the application of the name Niflung (or, as later spelt, [fp. 542] Hniflung) to the descendants of Gjuki, Guthrun's father, cf. Brot, 17, note.]

 [p. 542]

13. "To the sea I went, | my heart full sore
 For the Norns, whose wrath | I would now escape;
 But the lofty billows | bore me undrowned,
 Till to land I came, | so I longer must live.

14. "Then to the bed-- | of old was it better!--
 Of a king of the folk | a third time I came;
 Boys I bore | his heirs to be,
 Heirs so young, | the sons of Jonak.

15. "But round Svanhild | handmaidens sat,
 She was dearest ever | of all my children;
 So did Svanhild | seem in my hall
 As the ray of the sun | is fair to see.

16. "Gold I gave her | and garments bright,
 Ere I let her go | to the Gothic folk;
 Of my heavy woes | the hardest it was
 When Svanhild's tresses | fair were trodden
 In the mire by hoofs | of horses wild.

17. "The sorest it was | when Sigurth mine

 [13. Norns: the fates; cf. Voluspo, 8 and note.

14. The manuscript omits the first half of line 4.

16. Some editors assume a gap of two lines after line 2, and make a separate stanza of lines 3-5; Gering adds a sixth line of his own coining, while Grundtvig inserts one between lines 3 and 4. The manuscript indicates line 5 as beginning a new stanza.

17. The manuscript does not indicate line I as beginning a stanza (cf. note on stanza 16). Stanzas 17 and 18 are very likely [fp. 543] later interpolations, although the compilers of the Volsungasaga knew them as they stand here. The whole passage depends on the shades of difference in the meanings of the various superlatives: haryastr, "hardest"; sarastr, "sorest"; grimmastr, "grimmest," and hvassastr, "keenest." Snakes: cf. Drap Niflunga.]

 [p. 543]

On his couch, of victory | robbed, they killed;
 And grimmest of all | when to Gunnar's heart
 There crept the bright-hued | crawling snakes.

18. "And keenest of all | when they cut the heart
 From the living breast | of the king so brave;
 Many woes I remember, |     .    .    .    .    .
 .    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .

19. "Bridle, Sigurth, | thy steed so black,
 Hither let run | thy swift-faring horse;
 Here there sits not | son or daughter
 Who yet to Guthrun | gifts shall give.

 [18. The king: Hogni; cf. Atlakvitha, 25. The manuscript marks line 3 as beginning a new stanza. Most editors agree that there is a more or less extensive gap after stanza 19, and some of them contend that the original ending of the poem is lost, stanzas 19-21 coming from a different poem, probably a lament closely following Sigurth's death.

19. The manuscript does not indicate line 1 as beginning a stanza, and it immediately follows the fragmentary line 3 of stanza 18. The resemblance between stanzas 19-21 and stanzas 64-69 of Sigurtharkvitha en skamma suggests that, in some other wise lost version of the story, Guthrun, like Brynhild, sought to die soon after Sigurth's death. Thy steed: Guthrun's appeal to the dead Sigurth to ride back to earth to meet her is reminiscent of the episode related in Helgakvitha Hundingsbana II, 39-48 The promise mentioned in stanza 20 is spoken of elsewhere only in the Volsungasaga paraphrase of this passage.]

 [p. 544]

20. "Remember, Sigurth, | what once we said,
 When together both | on the bed we sat,
 That mightily thou | to me wouldst come
 From hell and I | from earth to thee.

21. "Pile ye up, jarls, | the pyre of oak,
 Make it the highest | a hero e'er had;
 Let the fire burn | my grief-filled breast,
 My sore-pressed heart, | till my sorrows melt."

22. May nobles all | less sorrow know,
 And less the woes | of women become,
 Since the tale of this | lament is told.

 [21. Perhaps something has been lost between stanzas 20 and 21, or possibly stanza 21, while belonging originally to the same poem as stanzas 19 and 20, did not directly follow them. Sore-pressed: a guess; a word seems to have been omitted in the original.

22. Words of the poet's, like stanza 1, and perhaps constituting a later addition. Many editors assume the loss of a line after line 3. The meaning, of course, is that the poet hopes the story of Guthrun's woes will make all other troubles seem light by comparison.]

 
      
The Poetic Edda, by Henry Adams Bellows, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 545]

 

HAMTHESMOL

 

The Ballad of Hamther

 

INTRODUCTORY NOTE

The Hamthesmol, the concluding poem in the Codex Regius, is on the whole the worst preserved of all the poems in the collection. The origin of the story, the relation of the Hamthesmol to the Guthrunarhvot, and of both poems to the hypothetical "old" Hamthesmol, are outlined in the introductory note to the Guthrunarhvot. The Hamthesmol as we have it is certainly not the "old" poem of that name; indeed it is so pronounced a patch work that it can hardly be regarded as a coherent poem at all. Some of the stanzas are in Fornyrthislag, some are in Malahattr, one (stanza 29) appears to be in Ljothahattr, and in many cases the words can be adapted to any known metrical form only by liberal emendation. That any one should have deliberately com posed such a poem seems quite incredible, and it is far more likely that some eleventh century narrator constructed a poem about the death of Hamther and Sorli by piecing together various fragments, and possibly adding a number of Malahattr stanzas of his own.

It has been argued, and with apparently sound logic, that our extant Hamthesmol originated in Greenland, along with the Atlamol. In any case, it can hardly have been put together before the latter part of the eleventh century, although the "old" Hamthesmol undoubtedly long antedates this period. Many editors have attempted to pick out the parts of the extant poem which were borrowed from this older lay, but the condition of the text is such that it is by no means clear even what stanzas are in Fornyrthislag and what in Malahattr. Many editors, likewise, indicate gaps and omissions, but it seems doubtful whether the extant Hamthesmol ever had a really consecutive quality, its component fragments having apparently been strung together with little regard for continuity. The notes indicate some of the more important editorial suggestions, but make no attempt to cover all of them, and the metrical form of the translation is often based on mere guesswork as to the character of the original lines and stanzas. Despite the chaotic state of the text, however, the underlying narrative is reasonably clear, and the story can be followed with no great difficulty.

[p. 546]

__________________

1. Great the evils | once that grew,
 With the dawning sad | of the sorrow of elves;
 In early mom | awake for men
 The evils that grief | to each shall bring.

2. Not now, nor yet | of yesterday was it,
 Long the time | that since hath lapsed,
 So that little there is | that is half as old,
 Since Guthrun, daughter | of Gjuki, whetted
 Her sons so young | to Svanhild's vengeance.

3. "The sister ye had | was Svanhild called,
 And her did Jormunrek | trample with horses,
 White and black | on the battle-way,
 Gray, road-wonted, | the steeds of the Goths.

4. "Little the kings | of the folk are ye like,
 For now ye are living | alone of my race.

 [1. This stanza looks like a later interpolation from a totally unrelated source. Sorrow of elves: the sun; cf. Alvissmol, 16 and note.

2. Some editors regard lines 1-2 as interpolated, while others question line 3. Guthrun, etc.: regarding the marriage of Jonak and Guthrun (daughter of Gjuki, sister of Gunnar and Hogni, and widow first of Sigurth and then of Atli), and the sons of this marriage, Hamther and Sorli (but not Erp), cf. Guthrunarhvot, introductory prose and note.

3. Svanhild and Jormunrek: regarding the manner in which Jormunrek (Ermanarich) married Svanhild, daughter of Sigurth and Guthrun, and afterwards had her trodden to death by horses, cf. Guthrunarhvot, introductory note. Lines 3-4 are identical with lines 5-6 of Guthrunarhvot, 2.

4. These two lines may be all that is left of a four-line stanza. [fp. 567] The manuscript and many editions combine them with stanza 5, while a few place them after stanza 5 as a separate stanza, reversing the order of the two lines. Kings of the folk: Guthrun's brothers, Gunnar and Hogni, slain by Atli.]

 [p. 547]

5. "Lonely am I | as the forest aspen,
 Of kindred bare | as the fir of its boughs,
 My joys are all lost | as the leaves of the tree
 When the scather of twigs | from the warm day turns."

6. Then Hamther spake forth, | the high of heart:
 "Small praise didst thou, Guthrun, | to Hogni's deed give
 When they wakened thy Sigurth | from out of his sleep,
 Thou didst sit on the bed | while his slayers laughed.

7. "Thy bed-covers white | with blood were red
 From his wounds, and with gore | of thy husband were wet;

 [5. Cf. note on stanza 4; the manuscript does not indicate line i as beginning a stanza. Scather of twigs: poetic circumlocution for the wind (cf. Skaldskaparmal, chapter 27), though some editors think the phrase here means the sun. Some editors assume a more or less extensive gap between stanzas 5 and 6.

6. Lines 1-3 are nearly identical with lines 1-3 of Guthrunarhvot, 4. On the death of Sigurth cf. Sigurtharkvitha en skamma, 21-24, and Brot, concluding prose. The word thy in line 3 is omitted in the original.

7. Lines 1-2 are nearly identical with lines 4-5 of Guthrunarhvot, 4. The manuscript, followed by many editions, indicates line 3 and not line 1 as beginning a stanza.]

 [p. 548]

So Sigurth was slain, | by his corpse didst thou sit,
 And of gladness didst think not: | 'twas Gunnar's doing.

8. "Thou wouldst strike at Atli | by the slaying of Erp
 And the killing of Eitil; | thine own grief was worse;
 So should each one wield | the wound-biting sword
 That another it slays | but smites not himself."

9. Then did Sorli speak out, | for wise was he ever:
 "With my mother I never | a quarrel will make;
 Full little in speaking | methinks ye both lack;
 What askest thou, Guthrun, | that will give thee no tears?

10. "For thy brothers dost weep, | and thy boys so sweet,
 Thy kinsmen in birth | on the battlefield slain;
 Now, Guthrun, as; well | for us both shalt thou weep,
 We sit doomed on our steeds, | and far hence shall we die."

 [8. Some editors regard this stanza as interpolated. Erp and Eitil: regarding Guthrun's slaying of her sons by Atli, cf. Atlamol, 72-75. The Erp here referred to is not to be confused with the Erp, son of Jonak, who appears in stanza 13. The whole of stanza 8 is in doubtful shape, and many emendations have been suggested.

10. Some editors assign this speech to Hamther. Brothers: Gunnar and Hogni. Boys: Erp and Eitil.]

 [p. 549]

11. Then the fame-glad one-- | on the steps she was--
 The slender-fingered, | spake with her son:
 "Ye shall danger have | if counsel ye heed not;
 By two heroes alone | shall two hundred of Goths
 Be bound or be slain | in the lofty-walled burg."

12. From the courtyard they fared, | and fury they breathed;
 The youths swiftly went | o'er the mountain wet,
 On their Hunnish steeds, | death's vengeance to have.

13. On the way they found | the man so wise;

 [11. In the manuscript this stanza follows stanza 21, and some editors take the word here rendered "fame-glad one" (hroyrgoy) to be a proper name (Jormunrek's mother or his concubine). The Volsungasaga, however, indicates that Guthrun at this point "had so fashioned their war-gear that iron would not bite into it, and she bade them to have nought to do with stones or other heavy things, and told them that it would be ill for them if they did not do as she said." The substance of this counsel may well have been conveyed in a passage lost after line 3, though the manuscript indicates no gap. It is by being stoned that Hamther and Sorli are killed (stanza 26). On the other hand, the second part of line 3 may possibly mean "if silent ye are not," in which case the advice relates to Hamther's speech to Jormunrek and Sorli's reproach to him thereupon (stanzas 25 and 27). Steps: the word in the original is doubtful. Line 3 is thoroughly obscure. Some editors make a separate stanza of lines 3-5, while others question line 5.

12. Many editors assume the loss of a line after line 1. In several editions lines 2-3 are placed after line 2 of stanza 18. Hunnish: the word meant little more than "German"; cf. Guthrunarhvot, 3 and note.]

 [p. 550]

.    .    .    .    .        .    .    .    .    .
 "What help from the weakling | brown may we have?"

14. So answered them | their half-brother then:
 "So well may I | my kinsmen aid
 As help one foot | from the other has."

15. "How may afoot | its fellow aid,
 Or a flesh-grown hand | another help?"

16. Then Erp spake forth, | his words were few,
 As haughty he sat | on his horse's back:

 [13. In the manuscript these two lines follow stanza 16; some editors insert them in place of lines 2-3 of stanza 11. The manuscript indicates no gap. The man so wise: Erp, here represented as a son of Jonak but not of Guthrun, and hence a half-brother of Hamther and Sorli. There is nothing further to indicate whether or not he was born out of wedlock, as intimated in stanza 16. Some editors assign line 3 to Hamther, and some to Sorli.

14. The stanza is obviously defective. Many editors add Erp's name in line 1, and insert between lines 2 and 1 a line based on stanza 15 and the Volsungasaga paraphrase: "As a flesh grown hand | another helps." In the Volsungasaga, after Erp's death, Hamther stumbles and saves himself from falling with his hand, whereupon he says: "Erp spake truly; I had fallen had I not braced myself with my hand." Soon thereafter Sorli has a like experience, one foot slipping but the other saving him from a fall. "Then they said that they had done ill to Erp, their brother."

15. Many editions attach these two lines to stanza 14, while a few assume the loss of two lines.

16. In the manuscript this stanza stands between stanzas 12 and 13. Some editors make line 4 a part of Erp's speech.]

 [p. 551]

"To the timid 'tis ill | the way to tell."
 A bastard they | the bold one called.

17. From their sheaths they drew | their shining swords,
 Their blades, to the giantess | joy to give;
 By a third they lessened | the might that was theirs,
 The fighter young | to earth they felled.

18. Their cloaks they shook, | their swords they sheathed,
 The high-born men | wrapped their mantles close.

19. On their road they fared | and an ill way found,
 And their sister's son | on a tree they saw,
 On the wind-cold wolf-tree | west of the hall,
 And cranes'-bait crawled; | none would care to linger.

 [17. The manuscript does not indicate line 1 as beginning a stanza. The giantess: presumably the reference is to Hel, goddess of the dead, but the phrase is doubtful.

18. In the manuscript these two lines are followed by stanza 19 with no indication of a break. Some editions insert here lines 2-3 of stanza 12, while others assume the loss of two or more lines.

19. Cf. note on stanza 18. Ill way: very likely the road leading through the gate of Jormunrek's town at which Svanhild was trampled to death. Sister's son: many editors change the text to read "stepson," for the reference is certainly to Randver, son of Jormunrek, hanged by his father on Bikki's advice (cf. Guthrunarhvot, introductory note). Wolf-tree: the gallows, the wolf being symbolical of outlaws. Cranes'-bait: presumably either snakes or worms, but the passage is doubtful.]

 [p. 552]

20. In the hall was din, | the men drank deep,
 And the horses' hoofs | could no one hear,
 Till the warrior hardy | sounded his horn.

21. Men came and the tale | to Jormunrek told
 How warriors helmed | without they beheld:
 "Take counsel wise, | for brave ones are come,
 Of mighty men | thou the sister didst murder."

22. Then Jormunrek laughed, | his hand laid on his beard,
 His arms, for with wine | he was warlike, he called for;
 He shook his brown locks, | on his white shield he looked,
 And raised high the cup | of gold in his hand.

23. "Happy, methinks, | were I to behold
 Hamther and Sorli | here in my hall;

 [20. Many editors assume the loss of a line after line 3. The warrior: presumably a warder or watchman, but the reference may be to Hamther himself.

21. The word here rendered men (line 1) is missing in the original, involving a metrical error, and various words have been suggested.

22. Line 2 in the original is thoroughly obscure; some editors directly reverse the meaning here indicated by giving the line a negative force, while others completely alter the phrase rendered "his arms he called for" into one meaning "he stroked his cheeks."

23. Gjuki's heirs: the original has "the well-born of Gjuki," and some editors have changed the proper name to Guthrun, but the phrase apparently refers to Hamther and Sorli as Gjuki's grandsons. In the manuscript this stanza is followed by stanza 11, [fp. 553] and such editors as have retained this arrangement have had to resort to varied and complex explanations to account for it.]

 [p. 553]

The men would I bind | with strings of bows,
 And Gjuki's heirs | on the gallows hang."

24. In the hall was clamor, | the cups were shattered,
 Men stood in blood | from the breasts of the Goths,

25. Then did Hamther speak forth, | the haughty of heart:
 "Thou soughtest, Jormunrek, | us to see,
 Sons of one mother | seeking thy dwelling;
 Thou seest thy hands, | thy feet thou beholdest,
 Jormunrek, flung | in the fire so hot."

26. Then roared the king, | of the race of the gods,
 Bold in his armor, | as roars a bear:
 "Stone ye the men | that steel will bite not,
 Sword nor spear, | the sons of Jonak."

 [24. Editors have made various efforts to reconstruct a four line stanza out of these two lines, in some cases with the help of lines borrowed from the puzzling stanza 11 (cf. note on stanza 23). Line 2 in the original is doubtful.

25, Some editors mark line 1 as an interpolation. The manuscript marks line 4 as beginning a new stanza. As in the story told by Jordanes, Hamther and Sorli succeed in wounding Jormunrek (here they cut off his hands and feet), but do not kill him. 26. The manuscript marks line 3, and not line I, as beginning a stanza. Of the race of the gods: the reference here is apparently to Jormunrek, but in the Volsungasaga the advice to kill Hamther and Sorli with stones, since iron will not wound them (cf. note on stanza 11), Comes from Othin, who enters the hall as an old man with one eye.]

 [p. 554]

 Sorli spake:
 27. "Ill didst win, brother, | when the bag thou didst open,
 Oft from that bag | came baleful counsel;
 Heart hast thou, Hamther, | if knowledge thou hadst!
 A man without wisdom | is lacking in much."

 Hamther spake:
 28. "His head were now off | if Erp were living,
 The brother so keen | whom we killed on our road,
 The warrior noble,-- | 'twas the Norns that drove me
 The hero to slay | who in fight should be holy.

29. "In fashion of wolves | it befits us not
 Amongst ourselves to strive,

 [27. in the manuscript this stanza is introduced by the same line as stanza 25: "Then did Hamther speak forth, the haughty of heart," but the speaker in this case must be Sorli and not Hamther. Some editors, however, give lines 1-2 to Hamther and lines 3-4 to Sorli. Bag: i.e., Hamther's mouth; cf. note on stanza 11. The manuscript indicates line 3 as beginning a new stanza.

28. Most editors regard stanzas 28-30 as a speech by Hamther, but the manuscript does not indicate the speaker, and some editors assign one or two of the stanzas to Sorli. Lines 1-2 are quoted in the Volsungasaga. The manuscript does not indicate line I as beginning a stanza. Erp: Hamther means that while the two brothers had succeeded only in wounding Jormunrek, Erp, if he had been with them, would have killed him. Lines 3-4 may be a later interpolation. Norns: the fates; the word used in the original means the goddesses of ill fortune.]

 [p. 555]

Like the hounds of the Norns, | that nourished were
 In greed mid wastes so grim.

30. "We have greatly fought, | o'er the Goths do we stand
 By our blades laid low, | like eagles on branches;
 Great our fame though we die | today or tomorrow;
 None outlives the night | when the Norris have spoken."

31. Then Sorli beside | the gable sank,
 And Hamther fell | at the back of the house.

This is called the old ballad of Hamther.

 [29. This is almost certainly an interpolated Ljothahattr stanza, though some editors have tried to expand it into the Fornyrthislag form. Hounds of the Norns: wolves.

30, Some editors assume a gap after this stanza.

31. Apparently a fragment of a stanza from the "old" Hamthesmol to which the annotator's concluding prose note refers. Some editors assume the loss of two lines after line 2.

 Prose. Regarding the "old" Hamthesmol, cf. Guthrunarhvot, introductory note.]

 
     
The Poetic Edda, by Henry Adams Bellows, [1936], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 556] [p. 557]

 

PRONOUNCING INDEX OF PROPER NAMES

 

Introductory Note

The pronunciations indicated in the following index are in many cases, at best, mere approximations, and in some cases the pronunciation of the Old Norse is itself more or less conjectural. For the sake of clarity it has seemed advisable to keep the number of phonetic symbols as small as possible, even though the result is occasional failure to distinguish between closely related sounds. In every in stance the object has been to provide the reader with a clearly comprehensible and approximately correct pronunciation, for which reason, particularly in such matters as division of syllables, etymology has frequently been disregarded for the sake of phonetic clearness. For example, when a root syllable ends in a long (double) consonant, the division has arbitrarily been made so as to indicate the sounding of both elements (e. g., Am-ma, not Amm-a).

As many proper names occur in the notes but not in the text, and as frequently the more important incidents connected with the names are outlined in notes which would not be indicated by textual references alone, the page numbers include all appearances of proper names in the notes as well as in the text.

The following general rules govern the application of the phonetic symbols used in the index, and also indicate the approximate pronunciation of the unmarked vowels and consonants.

VOWELS. The vowels are pronounced approximately as follows:

  a -- as in "alone"  o -- as in "on" 
  a -- as in "father"  o -- as in "old" 
  e -- as in "men"  o -- as in German "offnen" 
  e -- as a in "fate"   o -- as in German "schon" 
  i -- as in "is"   o -- as aw in "law" 
  i -- as in "machine"  u -- as ou in "would" 
  

 

[p. 558]

  u -- as ou in "wound"  ei -- as ey in "they" 
  y -- as i in "is" *  ey -- as in "they" 
  y -- as ee in "free" *  au -- as ou in "out" 
  ae -- as e in "men"  ai -- as i in "fine" 
   ae -- as a in "fate"    
  

[* Both with a slight sound of German u.]

 

No attempt has been made to differentiate between the short open "o" and the short closed "o," which for speakers of English closely resemble one another.

CONSONANTS. The consonants are pronounced approximately as in English, with the following special points to be noted:

 G is always hard, as in "get," never soft, as in "gem;" following "n" it has the same sound as in "sing."

 J is pronounced as y in "young."

 Th following a vowel is soft, as in "with;" at the beginning of a word or following a consonant it is hard, as in "thin."

The long (doubled) consonants should be pronounced as in Italian, both elements being distinctly sounded; e. g., "Am-ma."

 S is always hard, as in "so," "this," never soft, as in "as."

 H enters into combinations with various following consonants; with "v" the sound is approximately that of wh in "what"; with "l" "r" and "n" it produces sounds which have no exact English equivalents, but which can be approximated by pronouncing the consonants with a marked initial breathing.

ACCENTS. The accented syllable in each name is indicated by the acute accent ('). In many names, however, and particularly in compounds, there is both a primary and a secondary, accent, and where this is the case the primary, stress is indicated by a double acute accent ('') and the secondary one by a single acute accent ('). To avoid possible confusion with the long vowel marks used in Old Norse texts, the accents are placed, not over the vowels, but after the accented syllables.

[p. 559]

 

PRONOUNCING INDEX

Aeg'-ir, the sea-god, 102, 132, 139-141, 150-154, 156-158, 161, 172, 199, 280, 299. 300, 314, 324, 359.
 Aek'-in, a river, 95.
 Af'-i, Grandfather, 204, 207.
 Ag'-nar, a warrior, 390, 444, 445.
 Ag'-nar, brother of Geirroth, 85, 86.
 Ag'-nar, son of Geirroth, 84, 87, 88, 106.
 Ai, a dwarf, 6, 8.
 Ai, Great-Grandfather, 204.
 Alf, a dwarf, 8.
 Alf, husband of Hjordis, 335, 336, 359, 375, 454.
 Alf, slayer of Helgi, 286, 288, 289, 331.
 Alf, son of Dag, 223, 454.
 Alf, son of Hring, 306.
 Alf, son of Hunding, 295, 316, 317.
 Alf, son of Ulf, 222.
 Alf'-heim, home of the elves, 3, 88, 186.
 Alf'-hild, wife of Hjorvarth, 272, 273.
 Alf'-roth-ul, the sun, 81.
 Al'-gron, an island, 127.
 Al'-i, a warrior, 222.
 Alm'-veig, wife of Halfdan, 222.
 A'-lof, daughter of Franmar, 273, 275, 276.
 Al'-svith, a giant, 62.
 Al'-svith, a horse, 99, 100, 394.
 Al'-thjof, a dwarf, 6.
 Al'-vald-i, a giant, 128.
 Al'-vis, a dwarf, 183-193.
 Al''-viss-mol, the Ballad of Alvis, 68, 109, 183-194, 252, 283, 546.
 Am, son of Dag, 223.
 Am'-bott, daughter of Thraell, 207.
 Am'-ma, Grandmother, 204, 207, 208.
 An, a dwarf, 6.
 And'-hrim-nir, a cook, 92.
 And''-var-a-naut', a ring, 114, 361, 448.
 And'-var-i, a dwarf, 8, 114, 260, 343, 357-361, 417, 426, 448, 493.
 An'-gan-tyr, a berserker, 225.
 An'-gan-tyr, a warrior, 218, 220, 232.
 Ang'-eyj-a, mother of Heimdall, 229.
 Angr'-both-a, a giantess, 17, 21, 146, 196, 230, 231.
 Arf'-i, son of Jarl, 214.
 Ar''-in-nef'-ja, daughter of Thraell, 207.
 Arn'-grim, father of the berserkers, 225.

[p. 560]

Ar'-vak, a horse, 99, 100, 394.
 As''-a-thor', Thor, 135.
 As'-garth, home of the gods, 3. 11, 12, 141, 179, 186.
 Ask, Ash, 8.
 As'-laug, daughter of Brynhild, 353, 404, 429.
 As'-mund, a giant (?), 104.
 Ath'-al, son of Jarl, 214.
 At'-la, mother of Heimdall, 229.
 At''-la-kvith'-a, the Lay of Atli, 165, 255, 306, 421, 448, 463, 476, 480-501, 515, 520, 522, 530, 541.
 At''-la-mol', the Ballad of Atli, 448, 449, 463, 480-482, 485, 487, 491, 494, 498-535, 538, 540, 545, 548.
 At'-li, Attila, 8, 121, 290, 339, 346, 361, 406, 418, 419, 422, 430-432, 436-438, 447-451, 456-459, 461-466, 468-470, 472-478, 480-485, 487-489, 491-502, 504, 506, 507, 513, 514, 516-520, 522-538, 541, 546-548.
 At'-li, son of Hring, 306.
 At'-li, son of Ithmund, 271, 273-276, 278-281, 283, 284.
 At'-rith, Othin, 104.
 Aur'-both-a, a giantess, 109, 228.
 Aur'-both-a, Mengloth's handmaid, 249.
 Aur'-gelm-ir, Ymir, 76.
 Aur'-vang, a dwarf, 7.
 Austr'-i, a dwarf, 6.
 Auth, mother of Harald Battle-Tooth, 227.
 Auth'-a, sister of Agnar, 390, 444, 445.
 Auth'-i, son of Halfdan the Old, 221, 495.

Baldr, a god, 1, 2, 14-16, 22, 25, 82, 83, 90, 91, 114, 161, 172, 195-199, 218, 227, 228, 236, 245, 360.
 Baldrs Draurnar, Baldr's Dreams, 15, 19, 114, 174, 178, 195-200, 236.
 Bal'-eyg, Othin, 103.
 Bar'-i, a dwarf, 247.
 Barn, son of Jarl, 214.
 Bar'-ri, a berserker, 225.
 Bar'-ri, a forest, ixg, 120.
 Beit'-i, Atli's steward, 520.
 Bekk'-hild, sister of Brynhild, 345, 346.
 Bel'-i, a giant, 22, 110, 112.
 Ber'-a, Kostbera, 449, 510, 511, 517.
 Ber'-gel-mir, a giant, 76, 78.
 Best'-la, Othin's mother, 4, 61, 160.
 Beyl'-a, servant of Freyr, 152, 153, 169.
 Bif'-lind-i, Othin, 104.
 Bif'-rost, the rainbow bridge, 22, 90, 96, 102, 136, 329, 376.
 Bi'-fur, a dwarf, 6.
 Bik'-ki, follower of Jormunrek, 439, 487, 488, 538, 551.
 Bil'-eyg, Othin, 103.

[p. 561]

Bil'-ling, a giant (?), 28, 46, 48.
 Bil'-rost, the rainbow bridge, 102, 376.
 Bil'-skirn-ir, Thor's dwelling, 88, 93.
 Bjort, Mengloth's handmaid, 249.
 Blain, Ymir (?), 6.
 Bleik, Mengloth's handmaid, 249.
 Blind, follower of Hunding, 312.
 Blith, Mengloth's handmaid, 249.
 Bod'-di, son of Karl, 209.
 Bo'-fur, a dwarf, 6.
 Bolm, an island, 225.
 Bol'-thorn, Othin's grandfather, 4, 61.
 Bol'-verk, Othin, 50, 52, 103.
 Bom'-bur, a dwarf, 6.
 Bond'-i, son of Karl, 209.
 Borg'-ar, brother of Borghild (?), 334.
 Borg'-hild, mother of Helgi, 270, 291, 293, 310, 333-335.
 Borg'-ny, daughter of Heithrek, 469-473, 479.
 Both'-vild, daughter of Nithuth, 254, 258, 260, 261, 263, 265-268.
 Brag'-a-lund, a forest, 314.
 Brag'-i, a god, 102, 152, 155-158, 228, 314, 394.
 Brag'-i, brother of Sigrun, 318, 319.
 Brag'-i Bod'-da-son, a skald, 102.
 Bra'-lund, birthplace of Helgi, 291, 292, 310.
 Bram'-i, a berserker, 225.
 Brand'-ey, an island, 297.
 Bratt'-skegg, son of Karl, 209.
 Bra'-voll, a field, 303.
 Breith, son of Karl, 209.
 Breith'-a-blik, Baldr's home, 90.
 Brim'-ir, a giant, 6, 16, 17, 394.
 Brim'-ir, a sword, 102.
 Bris'-ings, the dwarfs, 159, 177-179, 236.
 Brodd, follower of Hrolf, 224.
 Brot af Sig''-urth-ar-kvith'-u, Fragment of a Sigurth Lay, 155, 370, 402-412, 420, 421, 427-429, 448, 450-452, 486, 493, 515, 539, 542, 547.
 Brun''-a-vag'-ar, a harbor, 313, 314.
 Bruth, daughter of Karl, 210.
 Bryn'-hild, wife of Gunnar, 14, 226, 234, 270, 296, 339, 344-347, 349-353, 362, 370, 371, 383-388, 391, 396, 397, 400, 403-408, 412, 417-419, 421-425, 427, 429-438, 442-448, 457, 459, 460, 469, 470, 474-476, 481, 484, 511, 516, 518, 532, 537, 543.
 Bu'-i, a berserker, 225.
 Bu'-i, son of Karl, 209.
 Bund''-in-skeg'-gi, son of Karl, 209.

[p. 562]

Bur, father of Othin, 4, 160, 228.
 Bur, son of Jarl, 214.
 Buth'-Ii, father of Atli, 296, 339, 344, 346, 347, 371, 385, 388, 405, 406, 408, 417-419, 425, 429, 430, 432, 437, 441, 443, 459, 466, 474, 485, 487, 488, 498, 512, 518, 521, 525, 530, 532.
 Buth'-lungs, descendants of Buthli, 498.
 Bygg'-vir, Freyr's servant, 152, 153, 165, 166, 169.
 By'-leist (or By'-leipt), brother of Loki, 22, 230.

Dag, a god (Day), 66, 75, 192
 Dag, brother of Sigrun, 310, 318, 319, 323, 324, 331.
 Dag, husband of Thora, 223, 454.
 Dain, a dwarf, 6, 220.
 Dain, a hart, 98.
 Dain, an elf, 62.
 Dan, a king, 216.
 Dan'-a, daughter of Danp, 216.
 Danp, a king, 216, 484.
 Del'-ling, father of Day, 66, 75, 247.
 Digr'-ald-i, son of Thraell, 206.
 Dog'-ling, Delling, 75.
 Dog'-lings, descendants of Dag, 223.
 Dolg'-thras-ir, a dwarf, 7.
 Dor'-i, a dwarf, 8, 247.
 Drap Nifl'-ung-a, the Slaying of the Niflungs, 408, 438, 447-449, 461, 472, 477, 481, 482, 485, 489, 494, 501, 539, 543.
 Draup'-nir, a dwarf, 7.
 Draup'-nir, a ring, 114, 360.
 Dreng, son of Karl, 209.
 Drott, son of Thraell, 206.
 Drumb, son of Thraell, 206.
 Drumb'-a, daughter of Thraell, 207.
 Duf, a dwarf, 8.
 Dun'-eyr, a hart, 98.
 Dur'-in, a dwarf, 6.
 Dval'-in, a dwarf, 6, 7, 62, 188, 375.
 Dval'-in, a hart, 98.
 Dyr'-a-thror, a hart, 98.

Ed'-da, Great-Grandmother, 204, 205.
 Egg'-ther, the giants' watchman, 18.
 Eg'-il, brother of Volund, 254-257, 265, 267.
 Eg'-il, father of Thjalfi (?), 141.
 Eg''-ils-sag'-a, the Saga of Egil, 139.
 Eik''-in-skjald'-i, a dwarf, 7, 8.
 Eik''-in-tjas'-na, daughter of Thraell, 207.
 Eik'-thyrn-ir, a hart, 94.
 Eir, Mengloth's handmaid, 248, 249.
 Eist'-la, mother of Heimdall, 229.
 Eit'-il, son of Atli, 44.8, 461,

[p. 563]

482, 495-498, 525, 540, 541, 548.
 Eld'-hrim-nir, a kettle, 92.
 Eld'-ir, Aegir's servant, 153, 154.
 El''-i-vag'-ar, the Milky Way (?), 76, 140.
 Emb'-la, Elm, 8.
 Ern'-a, Wife of Jarl, 213, 214.
 Erp, son of Atli, 448, 461, 482, 495-498, 525, 540, 541, 548.
 Erp, son of Jonak, 361, 439, 538, 540, 546, 548, 550, 554.
 Ey'-fur-a, mother of the berserkers, 225.
 Eyj'-olf, son of Hunding, 295, 316, 317.
 Ey'-lim-i, father of Hjordis, 226, 270, 295, 335, 336, 340, 341, 363, 365.
 Ey'-lim-i, father of Svava, 277, 284, 285, 287, 335.
 Ey'-moth, Atli's emissary, 456, 457.
 Ey'-mund, king of Holmgarth, 222.
 Eyr'-gjaf-a, mother of Heimdall, 229.

Faf'-nir, brother of Regin, 226, 260, 273, 339, 345, 357, 359, 361-365, 369-383, 385, 412, 421, 431, 445, 448, 475, 476, 484.
 Faf''-nis-mol', the Ballad of Fafnir, 6, 7, 125, 151, 188, 215, 226, 273, 343, 344, 356, 357, 365, 369-388, 390, 402, 411, 417, 445, 450, 474, 476, 509.
 Fal'-hofn-ir, a horse, 96.
 Far'-baut-i, father of Loki, 157, 168.
 Farm'-a-tyr, Othin, 104.
 Fath'-ir, Father, 204, 210.
 Feim'-a, daughter of Karl, 210.
 Feng, Othin, 366.
 Fen'-ja, a giantess, 436.
 Fenr'-ir, a wolf, 17-23, 81-83, 91, 93, 100, 140, 146, 152, 164, 165, 170, 196, 303.
 Fen'-sal-ir, Frigg's hall, 15.
 Fil'-i, a dwarf, 7.
 Fim'-a-feng, Aegir's servant, 152, 153.
 Fim'-bul-thul, a river, 95.
 Fith, a dwarf, 8.
 Fit'-jung, Earth, 43, 44.
 Fjal'-ar, a cock, 18, 19, 243.
 Fjal'-ar, a dwarf, 8.
 Fjal'-ar, Suttung (?), 32.
 Fjal'-ar, Utgartha-Loki, 130.
 Fjol'-kald, Svifidag's grandfather, 240.
 Fjol'-nir, Othin, 103, 366.
 Fjol''-svinns-mol' the Ballad of Fjolsvith, 234, 239-251.
 Fjol'-svith, Mengloth's watchman, 234, 239-250.
 Fjol'-svith, Othin, 103.
 Fjol'-var, a giant (?), 127.
 Fjon, an island, 455.
 Fjorg'-yn, Jorth, 23, 24; 136.

[p. 564]

Fjorg'-yn, Othin, 24, 160.
 Fjorm, a river, 95.
 Fjorn'-ir, Gunnar's cupbearer, 486.
 Fjors'-ungs, the fishes (?), 321.
 Fjosn'-ir, son of Thraell, 206.
 Fjot'-ur-lund, a forest, 323.
 Fljoth, daughter of Karl, 210.
 Folk'-vang, Freyja's home, 90, 175.
 For'-set-i, a god, 91, 228.
 Fost''-broeth-ra-sag'-a, the Saga of the Foster-Brothers, 46.
 Fra Dauth'-a Sinf'-jotl-a, Of Sinfjotli's Death, 270, 293, 295, 302, 332-337, 340, 342, 356, 357, 359, 365, 368, 374, 386, 388, 421, 454, 455.
 Fraeg, a dwarf, 7.
 Fran'-ang, a waterfall, 172, 173.
 Fran'-mar, Sigrlin's foster father, 273, 275.
 Frar, a dwarf, 7.
 Frath'-mar, son of Dag, 223.
 Frek'-a-stein, a battlefield, 287, 288, 304, 307, 318, 319, 322.
 Frek'-i, a Wolf, 92, 295.
 Frek'-i, son of Dag, 223.
 Frey'-ja, a goddess, 10-12, 22, 90, 91, 102, 108, 128, 152, 157-159, 161-163, 175-177, 180, 181, 217-220, 231-233, 236, 472.
 Freyr, a god, 10, 22, 88, 91, 101, 107-110, 112-115, 117, 119, 120, 152, 161-166, 169, 175, 220, 228, 284, 308, 428.
 Fri'-aut, daughter of Hildigun, 222, 223.
 Frigg, a goddess, 14, 15, 22, 68, 29, 86, 89, 91, 151, 152, 157-161, 182, 196, 236, 248, 472.
 Frith, Mengloth's handmaid, 249.
 Frost'-i, a dwarf, 8.
 Froth'-i, a Danish king, 294, 295, 436.
 Froth'-i, father of Hledis, 222.
 Froth'-i, father of Kari (?), 224.
 Ful'-la, Frigg's handmaid, 86.
 Ful'-nir, son of Thrall, 206.
 Fund'-in, a dwarf, 7.

Gagn'-rath, Othin, 68, 70-72.
 Gand'-alf, a dwarf, 7.
 Gang, brother of Thjazi, 128.
 Gang'-ler-i, King Gylfi, 94.
 Gang'-ler-i, Othin, 103.
 Garm, a hound, 19, 21, 24, 102, 140, 196.
 Gast'-ropn-ir, Mengloth's dwelling, 242.
 Gaut, Othin, 105.
 Gef'-jun, a goddess, 157-159.
 Geir'-mund, kinsman of Atli, 478.
 Geir'-on-ul, a Valkyrie, 99.
 Geir'-roth, a king, 84-87, 104-106.
 Geir'-skog-ul, a Valkyrie, 14.
 Geir'-vim-ul, a river, 95.

[p. 565]

Geit'-ir, Gripir's servant, 340-342.
 Ger'-i, a hound, 244.
 Ger'-i, a wolf, 92, 295.
 Gerth, daughter of Gymir, 109, 111-115, 119, 120, 152, 165, 228.
 Gif, a hound, 244.
 Gim'-le, a mountain, 26.
 Gin'-nar, a dwarf, 8.
 Gin''-nung-a-gap', Yawning Gap, 4, 77.
 Gip'-ul, a river, 95.
 Gisl, a horse, 96.
 Gjaf'-laug, Gjuki's sister, 413.
 Gjal''-lar-horn', Heimdall's horn, 12, 20.
 Gjol, a river, 95.
 Gjolp, mother of Heimdall, 229.
 Gjuk'-i, father of Gunnar, 226, 343, 344, 348, 352-354, 362, 383, 403, 406, 407, 410, 411, 413, 415-418, 421-423, 426, 429, 444, 446-448, 451, 452, 459, 462, 466, 470, 476, 477, 480, 482, 499, 500, 509, 516, 517, 529, 535, 541, 542, 546, 552, 553.
 Gjuk'-i, son of Hogni, 449.
 Gjuk'-ungs, Gjuki's sons, 344, 383, 388, 403, 408, 421, 426, 431, 446, 448, 449, 451, 456, 457, 476, 477, 483, 484, 500, 501.
 Glap'-svith, Othin, 103.
 Glas'-ir, a forest, 274.
 Glath, a horse, 96.
 Glaths'-heim, Othin's dwelling, 89.
 Glaum, Atli's horse, 493.
 Glaum'-vor, wife of Gunnar, 448, 500, 502, 507, 508, 510, 511.
 Gleip'-nir, a chain, 17.
 Gler, a horse, 96.
 Glit'-nir, Forseti's dwelling, 91.
 Glo'-in, a dwarf, 7.
 Gnip''-a-hel'-lir, a cave, 19, 21, 24.
 Gnip'-a-lund, a forest, 300, 301, 303, 306.
 Gnit'-a-heith, Fafnir's mountain, 343, 365, 371, 484.
 Go'-in, a serpent, 98.
 Gol, a Valkyrie, 99.
 Gol''-lin-kamb'-i, a cock, 19, 243, 329.
 Goll'-nir, a giant (?), 303.
 Goll'-rond, daughter of Gjuki, 414-416, 418.
 Goll'-topp, a horse, 96, 97.
 Goll'-veig, a Wane, 10.
 Gom'-ul, a river, 95.
 Gond'-lir, Othin, 104
 Gond'-ul, a Valkyrie, 14.
 Gop'-ul, a river, 95.
 Gorm (the Old), King of Denmark, 201, 202.
 Goth'-mund, son of Granmar, 290, 300-305, 309, 316-318, 321, 322, 332.
 Got'-thorm, slayer of Sigurth,

[p. 566]

226, 350, 354, 361, 405, 410, 426-428, 453, 533.
 Gra'-bak, a serpent, 98.
 Graf'-vit-nir, a serpent, 98.
 Graf'-vol-luth, a serpent, 98.
 Gram, Sigurth's sword, 351, 365, 378, 427, 428.
 Gran'-i, Sigurth's horse, 259, 260, 303, 342, 344, 350, 358, 359, 385, 395, 403, 406, 417, 431, 432, 445, 446, 452, 476.
 Gran'-mar, father of Hothbrodd, 291, 296, 300, 304, 308, 316-322, 332.
 Greip, mother of Heimdall, 229.
 Gret'-tir, a hero, 64.
 Gret''-tis-sag'-a, the Saga of Grettir, 129.
 Grim, follower of Hrolf, 224.
 Grim, Othin, 103.
 Grim'-hild, wife of Gjuki, 226, 349, 350, 354, 403, 405, 436, 448, 455-457, 459-461, 474, 519, 524, 526.
 Grim'-nir, Othin, 84, 86, 87, 103, 104.
 Grim''-nis-mol, the Ballad of Grimnir, 4, 5, 9, 12, 14, 17-20, 62, 68, 75, 84-108, 122, 130, 136, 138, 139, 152, 175, 179, 180, 196, 203, 221, 230, 234, 237, 253, 302, 303, 323, 329, 366, 376, 378, 384, 394, 472, 487, 494.
 Grip'-ir, Sigurth's uncle, 337, 340-355.
 Grip''-is-spo', Gripir's Prophecy, 14, 87, 226, 336-359, 365, 371, 383, 386, 388, 403, 404, 406, 409, 412, 417, 418, 421, 422, 429, 440-442, 446, 447, 450, 451, 456, 469, 481, 484, 499, 518, 536.
 Gro'-a, mother of Svipdag, 234-236, 238.
 Groth, a river, 95.
 Grot''-ta-songr', the Song of Grotti, 436.
 Grot'-ti, a mill, 436.
 Gro''-u-galdr', Groa's Spell, 234-239.
 Gull'-fax-i, a horse, 126.
 Gull''-in-tan'-ni, Heimdall, 97.
 Gung'-nir, a spear, 101, 395.
 Gun'-nar, brother of Borghild (?), 334.
 Gun'-nar, follower of Hrolf, 224.
 Gun'-nar, son of Gjuki, 8, 226, 339, 343, 349-354, 361, 383, 403-405, 407-409, 414, 417-419, 421-424, 426, 427, 429-434, 436-38, 442, 447-449, 453, 456, 457, 459-461, 467, 469, 470, 473-479, 482-486, 488-494, 497-500, 502, 507-509, 513, 517-519, 521, 522, 532, 533, 539, 541, 543, 546-548.
 Gunn'-loth, daughter of Suttung, 28, 32, 50-52.
 Gunn'-thor-in, a river, 95.
 Gunn'-thro, a river, 95.

[p. 567]

Gust, Andvari (?), 357, 361.
 Guth, a Valkyrie, 14, 314.
 Guth'-run, wife of Sigurth, 226, 339, 343, 344, 349, 352-354, 383, 388, 403-407, 410-417, 419, 421-424, 428, 429, 433, 436-439, 442, 446-451, 453, 455-457, 459-466, 468, 470, 477, 480, 482, 485, 493-501, 513, 515, 516, 518, 519, 522-544, 546-550, 552.
 Guth''-run-ar-hvot', Guthrun's Inciting, 226, 410, 411, 439, 447, 450, 497, 535-547, 549, 551, 555.
 Guth''-run-ar-kvith'-a I (en-Fyrst'-a), the First Lay of Guthrun, 4, 293, 325, 402, 409, 411-420, 422, 423, 426, 429, 430, 450, 452-454, 475, 479.
 Guth''-run-ar-kvith'-a II (On'-nur, en Forn'-a), the Second (Old) Lay of Guthrun, 230, 255, 325, 407, 410-412, 416, 419, 450-465, 467, 476, 493, 495, 496, 501, 505.
 Guth''-run-ar-kvith'-a III (Thrith'-ja), the Third Lay of Guthrun, 450, 451, 465-469, 517.
 Gylf''-a-gin'-ning, the Deceiving of Gylfi, 120, 228, 229, 231, 248, 370.
 Gyl'-lir, a horse, 96.
 Gym'-ir, Aegir, 151.
 Gym'-ir, a giant, 109, 111, 112, 114, 165, 228.
 Gyrth, son of Dag, 223.

Had'-ding, a Danish king, 311, 458.
 Had''-ding-ja-skat'-i, Haddings'-Hero (Helgi), 311, 330, 331.
 Had'-dings, berserkers, 225.
 Haem'-ing, son of Hunding, 311.
 Hag'-al, Helgi's foster-father, 310-312.
 Hak'-i, son of Hvethna, 227.
 Hal, son of Karl, 209.
 Half, King of Horthaland, 222, 223.
 Half'-dan, father of Kara, 316, 330.
 Half'-dan (the Old), a Danish king, 221-225, 227, 269, 307, 308, 364, 454.
 Halfs'-sag-a, the Saga of Half, 222, 223.
 Ham'-al, son of Hagal, 311, 314.
 Ham'-ther, son of Jonak, 361, 439, 4471 536-541, 545-550, 552-555.
 Ham''-thes-mol', the Ballad of Hamther, 226, 410, 439, 447, 450, 488, 536-540, 545-555.
 Ha'-mund, son of Sigmund, 293, 334.
 Han'-nar, a dwarf, 7.
 Har, Othin, 94, 103.

[p. 568]

Har'-ald (Battle-Tooth), son of Hrorek, 227.
 Har'-ald (Blue-Tooth), King of Denmark, 201, 202.
 Har'-barth, Othin, 104, 121, 122, 125-137.
 Har''-barths-ljoth', the Poem of Harbarth, 12, 24, 104, 121-140, 142, 143, 152, 167, 168, 170, 171, 174, 175, 185, 195, 228, 314, 394, 443, 478, 480.
 Hat'-a-fjord, a fjord, 278.
 Hat'-i, a giant, 278, 280, 281.
 Hat'-i, a wolf, 18, 100.
 Haug'-spor-i, a dwarf, 7.
 Heer'-fath-er, Othin, 13, 14, 69, 92, 94, 218, 390.
 Heim'-dall, a god, 3, 12, 18, 20, 90, 97, 115, 166, 167, 178, 202, 203, 213, 228-230.
 Heim'-ir, Brynhild's foster-father, 345-348, 350, 351, 353, 403, 404, 445.
 Heith, daughter of Hrimnir, 228.
 Heith, Gollweg (?), 10.
 Heith'-draup-nir, Mimir (?), 393, 394.
 Heith'-rek, father of Borgny, 470.
 Heith'-run, a goat, 94, 232.
 Hel, goddess of the dead, 16, 17, 19, 20, 22, 93, 95, 97, 115, 118, 146, 196, 231, 237, 245, 377, 441-443, 518, 551.
 Hel'-blind-i, Othin, 103.
 Helg''-a-kvith'-a Hjor''-varths-son'-ar, the Lay of Helgi the Son of Hjorvarth, 14, 189, 269-290, 292, 293, 295, 298, 300, 302, 304, 309, 313, 318, 332, 358, 359, 371, 506.
 Helg''-a-kvith'-a Hund''-ings ban'-a I (en Fyr'-ri), the First Lay of Helgi Hundingsbane, 14, 160, 215, 221, 273, 276, 281, 287, 290-308, 310, 311, 313, 316-319, 321, 322, 328, 358, 364-366, 428, 524.
 Helg''-a-kvith'-a Hund''-ings ban'-a II (On'-nur), the Second Lay of Helgi Hundingsbane, 95, 272, 288, 289, 294, 296, 298, 306, 309-331, 366, 418, 434, 466, 543.
 Helg'-i (Had''-ding-ja-skat'-i), Helgi the Haddings-Hero, 311, 330, 331.
 Helg'-i, Hialmgunnar (?), 344, 345.
 Helg'-i, son of Hjorvarth, 269-272, 276-289, 310, 311, 330, 331, 335.
 Helg'-i, son of Sigmund, 221, 269, 270, 276, 289-301, 304, 306-336, 339, 340, 357, 358, 364-366, 368, 371, 446.
 Hel'-reith Bryn'-hild-ar, Brynhild's Hell-Ride, 129, 255, 345, 346, 353, 387, 388, 390, 442-447, 450, 511.
 Hept''-i-fil'-i, a dwarf, 7.
 Her'-borg, queen of the Huns, 411, 413, 414.

[p. 569]

Her'-fjot-ur, a Valkyrie, 99.
 Her'-jan, Othin, 14, 103, 416.
 Herk'-ja, Atli's servant, 465, 466, 468.
 Her'-moth, son of Othin, 218.
 Hers'-ir, father of Erna, 213.
 Her'-teit, Othin, 103.
 Her''-var-ar-sag'-a, the Saga of Hervor, 366, 484.
 Her'-varth, a berserker, 225.
 Her'-varth, son of Hunding, 316, 317.
 Her'-vor, a swan-maiden, 254-256, 259.
 Heth'-in, brother of Helgi, 271-273, 284-286, 288, 289.
 Heth'-ins-ey, an island, 297.
 Hild, a Valkyrie, 14, 99.
 Hild, Brynhild, 444, 511.
 Hild, mother of King Half, 223, 224.
 Hild-i-gun, daughter of Saekonung, 222, 223.
 Hild''-i-svin'-i, a boar, 220.
 Hild-olf, a warrior, 124.
 Him'-in-bjorg, Heimdall's dwelling, 90.
 Him''-in-vang'-ar, Heaven's Field, 293.
 Hind-ar-fjoll, Brynhild's mountain, 383, 384, 388, 445.
 Hjal'-li, Atli's cook, 491, 492, 520, 521.
 Hjalm'-ar, a warrior, 225.
 Hjalm'-ber-i, Othin, 103.
 Hjalm'-gun-nar, a Gothic king, 345, 390, 445.
 Hjalp'-rek, father of Alf, 335, 336, 358, 359, 365, 369, 454.
 Hjor'-dis, mother of Sigurth, 226, 270, 277, 293, 333, 335, 336, 340, 341, 368, 374, 454.
 Hjor'-leif, father of King Half, 223.
 Hjor'-leif, followier of Helgi, 298.
 Hjor'-varth, a berserker, 225.
 Hjor'-varth, father of Helgi, 269-274, 276-278, 284, 287, 289, 331.
 Hjor'-varth, father of Hvethna, 227.
 Hjor'-varth, son of Hunding, 273, 295, 316, 317, 368.
 Hlath'-guth, a swan-maiden, 254-256.
 Hle'-barth, a giant, 128.
 Hle'-bjorg, a mountain, 319, 320.
 Hle'-dis, mother of Ottar, 222.
 Hler, Aegir, 132, 152.
 Hles'-ey, an island, 132, 139, 314, 478.
 Hle-vang, a dwarf, 7.
 Hlif, Mengloth's handmaid, 248.
 Hlif-thras-a, Mengloth's handmaid, 248.
 Hlin, Frigg, 22.
 Hlith'-skjolf, Othin's seat, 86, 88, 107, 108, 430, 487.
 Hlokk, a Valkyrie, 99.
 Hlor'-rith-i, Thor, 135, 140, 

[p. 570]

143, 147, 149, 169, 176, 178, 182.
 Hloth'-varth, follower of Helgi, 280.
 Hloth'-ver, a Frankish king, 459.
 Hloth'-ver, father of Htrvor, 254-256, 259.
 Hloth'-yn, Jorth, 23.
 Hlym'-dal-ir, Brynhild's home, 444.
 Hnifl'-ung, son of Hogni, 498, 515, 529.
 Hnifl'-ungs, the people of Gjuki (Nibelungs), 291, 305.
 Hnik'-ar, Othin, 103, 357, 366, 367.
 Hnik'-uth, Othin, 103, 104.
 Ho'-alf, a Danish king, 437, 454.
 Ho'-alf, King Half of Horthaland, 223, 224.
 Ho'-brok, a hawk, 102.
 Hodd'-mim-ir, Mimir, 80.
 Hodd'-rof-nir, Mimir (?), 393, 394.
 Hog'-ni, brother of Sigar, 312, 313.
 Hog'-ni, father of Sigrun, 296, 306, 308, 312, 313, 316-319, 323, 328, 329.
 Hog'-ni, son of Gjuki, 226, 343, 350, 354, 361, 404-406, 421, 425-427, 429, 431, 434, 447-449, 453, 456, 457, 459-461, 467, 469, 472, 476, 477, 482, 484-487, 490-93, 498-500, 502-506, 509, 511, 512, 514, 515, 517-521, 523, 529-533, 539, 541, 543, 546-548.
 Hok'-on, father of Thora, 419, 454, 455.
 Hol, a river, 95.
 Holm'-garth, Russia, 222.
 Holth, son of Karl, 209,
 Hon'-ir, a god, 8, 20, 25, 162, 358, 359, 493.
 Hor, a dwarf, 7.
 Hor, Othin, 10, 51-53, 60, 103.
 Horn; a river, 237.
 Horn'-bor-i, a dwarf, 7.
 Horth'-a-land, Half's kingdom, 222, 223.
 Horv'-ir, follower of Hrolf, 224.
 Hos'-vir, son of Thraell, 206.
 Hoth, slayer of Baldr, 15, 25, 161, 198, 228.
 Hoth'-brodd, son of Granmar, 269, 270, 291, 296, 297, 301, 304-306, 309, 316, 317, 319, 321, 322.
 Ho'-tun, Helgi's home, 293, 298.
 Hov''-a-mol'- the Ballad of the High One, 4, 28-68, 71, 75, 112, 117, 130, 188, 193, 205, 215, 236, 237, 247, 357, 367, 368, 379, 387, 393, 397.
 Ho'-varth, son of Hunding, 295.
 Hrae'-svelg, an eagle, 21, 78, 115.
 Hran'-i, a berserker, 225.

[p. 571]

Hrauth'-ung, ancestor of Hjordis, 226.
 Hrauth'-ung, father of Geirroth, 85.
 Hreim, son of Thrall, 206.
 Hreith'-mar, father of Regin, 79, 357-359, 361-363.
 Hrim'-fax-i, a horse, 72.
 Hrim'-gerth, a giantess, 189, 271, 278-283.
 Hrim''-gerth-a-mol', the Ballad of Hrimgerth, 271, 278-284.
 Hrim'-grim-nir, a giant, 118.
 Hrim'-nir, a giant, 115, 228.
 Hring, a warrior, 306, 307.
 Hring'-stath-ir, Ringsted, 293, 308.
 Hring'-stoth, Ringsted (?), 293.
 Hrist, a Valkyrie, 99.
 Hrith, a river, 95, 237.
 Hro'-ar, brother of Borghild (?), 334.
 Hrolf (the Old), King of Gautland, 224.
 Hrol'-laug, a warrior, 319, 320.
 Hro'-mund, a warrior, 331.
 Hro'-mund-ar Sag'-a Greips'-son-ar, the Saga of Hromund Greipsion, 311, 331.
 Hron, a river, 95, 237.
 Hropt, Othin, 25, 166, 393.
 Hropt'-a-tyr, Othin, 66, 105.
 Hro'-rek, King of Denmark, 227.
 Hross'-thjof, son of Hrimnir, 228.
 Hroth, a giant, 142.
 Hroth'-mar, lover of Sigrlin, 275, 276, 278, 286.
 Hroth'-vit-nir, Fenrir, 100, 164.
 Hrot'-ti, a sword, 385.
 Hrung'-nir, a giant, 125, 126, 143, 171, 172, 394.
 Hrym, a giant, 21.
 Hug'-in, a raven, 92.
 Hum'-lung, son of Hjorvarth, 272, 273.
 Hund'-ing, enemy of Sigmund, 269, 270, 273, 294, 295, 307, 309-311, 313, 315, 316, 326, 335, 336, 342, 343, 357, 358, 365, 368, 369.
 Hund'-land, Hunding's kingdom, 294, 310, 311.
 Hver'-gel-mir, a spring, 94.
 Hveth'-na, mother of Haki, 227.
 Hym'-ir, a giant, 77, 138-150, 163.
 Hym''-is-kvith'-a, the Lay of Hymir, 21, 77, 116, 122, 138-152, 163, 170, 174, 179, 180, 182, 183, 391.
 Hym'-ling, son of Hjorvarth, 273.
 Hynd'-la, a giantess, 217-220, 222, 231-233.
 Hynd''-lu-ljoth', the Poem of Hyndla, 115, 132, 154, 167, 203, 217-233, 273, 292, 307, 314, 350, 427, 454, 457.

If'-ing, a river, 72, 131.
 Im, son of Vafthruthnir, 70.

[p. 572]

Imth, a giant, 304.
 Imth, mother of Heimdall, 229.
 Ing'-un, sister of Njorth (?), 165.
 Ing'-un-ar = Freyr, Freyr, 165.
 In'-stein, father of Ottar, 220, 222, 224.
 Ir'-i, a dwarf, 247.
 Is'-Olf, son of Olmoth, 224.
 Is'-ung, a warrior, 297.
 Ith'-a-voll, meeting-place of the gods, 5, 24.
 Ith'-i, brother of Thjazi, 128.
 Ith'-mund, follower of Hjorvarth, 273, 274.
 Ith'-un, a goddess, 102, 113, 128, 152, 157, 158, 175.
 I'-vald-i, a dwarf, 101.
 I'-var, King of Sweden, 227.

Jafn'-hor, Othin, 103, 104.
 Jalk, Othin, 104, 105.
 Jar'-i, a dwarf, 7, 247.
 Jar'-iz-leif, Atli's emissary, 456, 457.
 Jar'-iz-skar, Atli's emissary, 456, 457.
 Jarl, son of Rig, 212-215.
 Jarn'-sax-a, a giantess, 125.
 Jarn'-sax-a, mother of Heimdall, 229.
 Jof'-ur-rnar, son of Dag, 223.
 Jon-ak, father of Hamther, 439, 447, 536, 538, 542, 546, 548, 550, 553.
 Jor'-mun-rek, Ermanarich, 225, 226, 339, 407, 437, 439, 447, 451, 538-540, 546, 549, 551-554.
 Jorth, Earth, 12, 23, 24, 123, 136, 170, 174, 175, 389.
 Joth, son of Jarl, 214.
 Jot'-un-heim, the world of the giants, 3, 5, 6, 21, 107, 111, 128, 179-181, 186.

Kar'-a, daughter of Ha1fdan, 272, 310, 311, 314, 316, 330, 331, 345.
 Kar'-i, ancestor of Ketil, 224.
 Karl, son of Rig, 208, 209.
 Kar''-u-1joth', the Poem of Kara, 272, 311, 314, 315, 331.
 Kef'-sir, son of Thraell, 206.
 Ker'-laug, a river, 96.
 Ket'-il Horth'-a = Kar'-i, husband of Hildigun, 223, 224
 Kil'-i, a dwarf, 7.
 Kjal'-ar, Othin, 104.
 Kjar, father of Olrun, 254-256, 485.
 Kleg'-gi, son of Thraell, 206.
 Klur, son of Thraell, 206.
 Klypp, father of Ketil, 223.
 Kne'-froth, Atli's messenger, 448, 482, 483, 502.
 Kolg'-a, daughter of Aegir, 299.
 Kon, son of Rig, 201, 209, 210, 214, 215, 236, 256, 306.
 Kormt, a river, 96.
 Kost'-ber-a, wife of Hogni, 449, 500, 502-506, 510.

[p. 573]

Kumb'-a, daughter of Thraell, 207.
 Kund, son of Jarl, 214.

Lae'-gjarn, Loki, 245.
 Lae'-rith, Yggdrasil, 94.
 Laev'-a-tein, a sword, 245.
 Lauf'-ey, mother of Loki, 9, 157, 168, 177-179.
 Leg'-gjald-i, son of Thraell, 206.
 Leipt, a river, 95, 323.
 Leir'-brim-ir, Ymir (?), 242.
 Lett'-fet-i, a horse, 96.
 Lif, mother of the new race, 80.
 Lif-thras-ir, father of the new race, 80.
 Lim'-a-fjord, a fjord, 501, 510.
 Lit, a dwarf, 7.
 Ljoth'-a-tal, the List of Charms, 28, 44, 60, 63, 236.
 Lodd''-faf-nir, a singer, 28, 52-59, 67.
 Lodd''-faf-nis-mol', the Ballad of Loddfafnir, 28, 67, 387, 397.
 Lof'-ar, a dwarf, 7, 8.
 Lofn'-heith, daughter of Hreithmar, 363.
 Log'-a-fjoll, a mountain, 294, 295, 316, 317.
 Lok''-a-sen'-na, Loki's Wrangling, 4, 16, 26, 102, 107, 130, 134, 139, 151-175, 177, 178, 180, 184, 196, 218, 228, 232, 236, 256, 306.
 Lok'-i, a god, 1, 8, 9, 11, 15-17, 21, 22, 25, 101, 102, 128, 130, 134, 146, 149-173, 175-179, 196, 198, 200, 228, 230-232, 245-247, 303, 357-362, 417, 493.
 Lon'-i, a dwarf, 7.
 Lopt, Loki, 154, 231, 245.
 Loth'-in, a giant, 282.
 Loth'-ur, Loki, 8, 9, 154.
 Lut, son of Thraell, 206.
 Lyf'-ja-berg, a mountain, 248, 251.
 Lyng'-heith, daughter of Hreithmar, 363, 364.
 Lyng'-vi, son of Hunding, 336, 368, 369.
 Lyr, Mengloth's hall, 247.

Mag'-ni, son of Thor, 82, 125, 135.
 Man'-i, Moon, 74, 75, 99.
 Meil'-i, brother of Thor, 125.
 Meln'-ir, a horse, 306.
 Men'-gloth, beloved of Svipdag, 234-236, 238, 239, 241, 248-251, 350, 388, 441.
 Men'-ja, a giantess, 436.
 Mim (or Mim'-ir), a water-spirit, 12, 13, 20, 61, 81, 242, 393, 394.
 Mim'-a-meith, Yggdrasil, 242, 243.
 Mim'-ir, brother of Regin, 359.
 Mist, a Valkyrie, 99, 305.

[p. 574]

Mith'-garth, the world of men, 3, 4, 92, 100, 101, 129, 186, 221, 223.
 Mith''-garths-orm', a serpent, 17, 21, 23, 24, 122, 139, 145, 146, 170, 196, 230.
 Mith'-vit-nir, a giant, 104.
 Mjoll'-nir, Thor's hammer, 82, 126, 149, 169-171, 174, 181.
 Mjoth'-vit-nir, a dwarf, 6, 7.
 Mog, son of Jarl, 214.
 Mog'-thras-ir, a giant (?), 82.
 Mo'-in, a serpent, 98.
 Mo''-ins-heim'-ar, a battlefield, 304, 322.
 Morn'-a-land, an eastern country, 470.
 Moth'-i, son of Thor, 82, 148.
 Moth'-ir, mother of Jarl, 204, 210-212.
 Mot'-sog-nir, a dwarf, 6.
 Mund''-il-fer'-i, father of Sol, 5, 74, 99.
 Mun'-in, a raven, 92.
 Mu'-spell, father of the fire-dwellers, 22, 165.
 Mu'-spells-heim, home of the fire-dwellers, 3, 21, 73, 100.
 Myln'-ir, a horse, 306.
 Myrk'-heirn, Myrkwood (Atli's land), 498.
 Myrk'-wood, a forest in Atli's land, 476, 483, 484, 487, 498.
 Myrk'-wood, a forest in Hothbrodd's land, 306.
 Myrk'-wood, a forest in Muspellsheim, 165.
 Myrk'-wood, a forest in Nithuth's land, 255, 256.

Nab'-bi, a dwarf, 220.
 Nagl'-far, a ship, 21.
 Nain, a dwarf, 6.
 Nal, Laufey, 168.
 Nal'-i, a dwarf, 7.
 Nan'-na, daughter of Nokkvi, 224.
 Nan'-na, wife of Baldr, 91.
 Nar, a dwarf, 6.
 Narf'-i, Nor, 75, 192.
 Narf'-i, son of Loki, 16, 167, 172, 173.
 Na'-strond, Corpse-Strand, 17.
 Nep, father of Nanna, 91.
 Ner'-i, a giant (?), 292.
 Nifl'-heirn, the world of the dead, 3, 94.
 Nifl'-hel, land of the dead, 80, 196.
 Nifl'-ungs, the people of Gjuki (Nibelungs), 408, 447, 448, 486, 487, 489, 492, 493, 515, 517, 541.
 Nip'-ing, a dwarf, 6.
 Nith, son of Jarl, 214.
 Nith'-a-fjoll, a mountain, 16, 26, 27.
 Nith''-a-vel'-lir, home of the dwarfs, 3, 16.
 Nith'-hogg, a dragon, 17, 26, 27, 97-99.
 Nith'-i, a dwarf, 6.
 Nith'-jung, son of Jarl, 214.

[p. 575]

Nith'-uth, king of the Njars, 253-255, 257-268.
 Njals'-sag-a, the Saga of Njal, 399.
 Njars, the people of Nithuth, 254, 257, 259, 265, 268.
 Njorth, a Wane, 9, 10, 78, 79, 90, 91, 101, 107, 108, 119, 120, 128, 152, 161-163, 165, 167, 175, 179, 180, 228.
 No'-a-tun, home of Njorth, 90, 91, 108, 179, 180.
 Nokk'-vi, father of Nanna, 224.
 Non, a river, 95.
 Nor (or Norv'-i), father of Not, 75, 192.
 Nor'-i, a dwarf, 6.
 Norn''-a-gests-thattr', the Story of Nornagest, 336, 356, 364, 369, 442, 444, 445.
 North'-ri, a dwarf, 6.
 Not, a river, 95.
 Not, Night, 66, 75, 192, 389.
 Ny'-i, a dwarf, 6.
 Nyr, a dwarf, 7.
 Ny'-rath, a dwarf, 7.
 Nyt, a river, 95.

Odd'-run, sister of Atli, 420, 438, 448, 449, 469-474, 476, 478, 479.
 Odd''-run-ar-gratr', the Lament of Oddrun, 132, 420, 438, 447, 449, 450, 469-479, 483, 494, 522, 532.
 Ofn'-ir, a serpent, 98.
 Ofn'-ir, Othin, 105.
 O'-in, father of Andvari, 360.
 Okk''-vin-kalf'-a, daughter of Thraell, 207.
 O'-kol-nir, a volcano (?), 16.
 Ol'-moth, father of Isolf, 224.
 Ol'-run, a swan-maiden, 254-257, 485.
 Om'-i, Othin, 104.
 On'-ar, a dwarf, 6.
 Or'-i, a dwarf, 8, 247.
 Ork'-ning, brother of Kostbera, 449, 509, 510, 517.
 Ormt, a river, 96.
 Orv'-and-il, husband of Groa, 234.
 Orv'-ar = Odd, a warrior, 225.
 Orv'-ar = Odds'-sag-a, the Saga of Orvar-Odd, 225.
 Orv'-a-sund, a bay, 298.
 Osk'-i, Othin, 104.
 O'-skop-nir, an island, 376.
 Os'-olf, son of Olmoth, 224.
 Oth, husband of Freyja, 11, 12, 161, 220, 232.
 Oth'-in, chief of the gods, 1, 3, 4, 8-15, 19-26, 28, 32, 45, 48-53, 60-63, 66, 68-84, 86, 88, 89, 91, 92, 94, 97, 98, 101-106, 108, 114, 117, 121, 122, 125, 126, 129, 131, 133, 134, 136, 139-41, 145, 149, 151, 152, 155, 157-160, 166, 167, 170, 174, 179, 182, 185, 195-200, 202, 203, 213, 218, 219, 221, 226, 228-231, 236, 274, 293-295, 302, 308, 319, 323-327, 330, 332, 335, 339, 342,

[p. 576]

357-359, 361, 365; 366, 371, 372, 384, 390, 393-395, 416, 428, 445, 474, 483, 487, 493, 494, 553.
 Oth'-lings, a mythical race, 221, 223, 226.
 Oth'-ror-ir, a goblet, 51, 61.
 Otr, brother of Regin, 358, 359, 362.
 Ot'-tar, a warrior, 217-227, 231-233.

Raev'-il, a sea-king, 366.
 Rag'-nar Loth'-brok, a Danish king, 366.
 Rand'-grith, a Valkyrie, 99.
 Rand'-ver, son of Jormunrek, 439, 538, 551.
 Rand'-ver, son of Rathbarth, 227.
 Ran'-i, Othin, 236.
 Rat'-a-tosk, a squirrel, 97.
 Rath'-barth, a Russian king, 227.
 Rath'-grith, a Valkyrie, 99.
 Raths'-ey, an island, 124.
 Rath'-svith, a dwarf, 7.
 Rat'-i, a gimlet, 50.
 Reg'-in, a dwarf, 7, 359.
 Reg'-in, son of Hreithmar, 7, 343, 356-359, 361-366, 369-372, 377-383, 403.
 Reg'-in-leif, a Valkyrie, 99.
 Reg''-ins-mol', the Ballad of Regin, 7, 8, 114, 151, 270, 295, 308, 333, 336, 342, 343, 356-371, 376, 378, 384, 386, 387, 402, 411, 426, 428, 448, 450, 493, 538.
 Reif'-nir, a berserker, 225.
 Rig, Heimdall (?), 3, 201-204, 207, 208, 210-212, 215, 216.
 Rigs'-thul-a, the Song of Rig, 3, 90, 167, 183, 201-216, 230, 428, 484.
 Rin, a river, 95.
 Rind, mother of Vali, 198, 236.
 Rin'-nand-i, a river, 95.
 Rist'-il, daughter of Karl, 210.
 Rith'-il, a sword, 380.
 Rog'-a-land, Norway, 281.
 Rog'-heim, Home of Battle, 289.
 Ron, wife of Aegir, 280, 300, 359.
 Rosk'-va, sister of Thjalfi, 141.
 Roth'-uls-fjoll, a mountain, 289.
 Roth'-uls-voll, a field, 276.
 Ruth, a river, 237.

Sae'-far-i, father of Ulf, 222.
 Sae'-hrim-nir, a boar, 92.
 Saek'-in, a river, 95.
 Sae'-kon-ung, father of Hildigun, 223.
 Sae'-morn, a river, 275.
 Sae'-reith, wife of Hjorvarth, 272, 273.
 Sae'-var-stath, an island, 261, 262.
 Sag'-a, a goddess, 89, 302.
 Sal'-gof-nir, a cock, 329.
 Sams'-ey, an island, 160.
 Sann'-get-al, Othin, 105.
 Sath, Othin, 103.

[p. 577]

Sax'-i, a southern king, 467.
 Segg, son of Karl, 209.
 Sess'-rym-nir, Freyja's hall, 91, 175.
 Sev'-a-fjoll, Sigrun's home, 319, 323, 325, 327-329.
 Sif, Thor's wife, 88, 101, 134, 140, 143, 148, 151, 157, 168, 180, 184.
 Sig'-ar, a Danish king, 293.
 Sig'-ar, brother of Hogni, 312, 313.
 Sig'-ar, father of Siggeir, 455.
 Sig'-ar, Helgi's messenger, 287, 288.
 Sig'-ars-holm, an island, 277.
 Sig'-ars-voll, a battlefield, 277, 287, 293.
 Sig'-fath-er, Othin, 23, 103, 104, 170.
 Sig'-geir, husband of Signy, 302, 303, 332, 455.
 Sig'-mund, son of Sigurth, 407, 424, 428, 429, 456, 460.
 Sig'-mund, son of Volsung, 218, 219, 226, 270, 276, 290-295, 301, 302, 307, 310, 311, 315, 317, 318, 330-336, 341, 364-366, 368, 369, 373, 374, 388, 389, 432, 455.
 Sig'-ny, sister of Sigmund, 270, 290, 293, 302, 332, 333, 455.
 Sigr'-drif-a, Brynhild, 296, 384-386, 388, 390, 391, 403.
 Sigr''-drif-u-mol', the Ballad of the Victory-Bringer, 4, 99, 100, 119, 151, 293, 339, 344, 356, 357, 370, 381, 384-403, 411, 442, 444, 445, 450, 470, 472.
 Sigr'-lin, wife of Hjorvarth, 271-276, 287.
 Sig'-run, wife of Helgi, 14, 269, 270, 289, 296, 299, 300, 306, 307, 309-316, 318-320, 323, 325-330, 339, 345.
 Sig'-trygg, a king, 222.
 Sig'-tyr, Othin, 494.
 Sig'-urth, son of Sigmund, 8, 226, 234, 260, 269, 270, 273, 277, 293, 295, 296, 303, 308, 333, 335-359, 361-380, 382-389, 391, 395, 396, 400, 402-407, 409-412, 414-433, 435, 437, 439-442, 445-448, 450-457, 460, 465, 469, 475, 476, 481, 484, 490, 493, 513, 518, 523, 532-534, 536-544, 546 548.
 Sig''-urth-a-kvith'-a en Skam'-ma, the Short Lay of Sigurth, 93, 241, 308, 407, 410, 416-441, 443, 448-450, 453, 459, 470, 475, 488, 493, 534, 538, 539, 543, 547.
 Sig'-urth Ring, son of Randver, 227.
 Sig'-yn, wife of Loki, 16, 167, 172, 173.
 Silf'-rin-topp, a horse, 96.
 Sind'-ri, a dwarf, 16.
 Sin'-flot-li, son of Sigmund, 270, 290, 293, 300-304, 307, 309, 318, 321, 322, 332-335

[p. 578]

Sin'-ir, a horse, 96.
 Sin'-mor-a, a giantess, 243, 245-247.
 Sin'-rjoth, wife of Hjorvarth, 272, 273.
 Sith, a river, 95.
 Sith'-gran-i, Othin, 185.
 Sith'-hott, Othin, 103.
 Sith'-skegg, Othin, 103.
 Skaf'-ith, a dwarf, 8.
 Skald''-skap-ar-mal, the Treatise on Poetics, 189, 192, 221, 274, 359, 370, 538, 547.
 Skat'-a-lund, a forest, 445.
 Skath'-i, a goddess, 90, 108, 128, 152, 157, 167, 168, 172, 180, 228.
 Skegg'-jold, a Valkyrie, 99.
 Skeith'-brim-ir, a horse, 96.
 Skek'-kil, father of Skurhild, 224.
 Skelf'-ir, a king, 221.
 Skilf'-ing, Othin, 105, 221.
 Skilf'-ings, descendants of Skelfir, 221, 223.
 Skin'-fax-i, a horse, 71, 96.
 Skirf'-ir, a dwarf, 8.
 Skirn'-ir, Freyr's servant, 107-115, 119, 120, 152.
 Skirn''-is-mol', the Ballad of Skirnir, 21, 22, 78, 86, 88, 101, 107-121, 126, 149, 152, 162, 163, 165, 174, 175, 193, 218, 228, 282, 360.
 Skith'-blath-nir, a ship, 101, 102.
 Skjold, a Danish king, 221.
 Skjold''-ung-a-sag'-a, the Saga of the Skjoldungs, 216.
 Skjold'-ungs, descendants of Skjold, 221-223.
 Skog'-ul, a Valkyrie, 14, 99.
 Skoll, a wolf, 18, 81, 93, 100.
 Skor'-u-strond, home of Varin, 281.
 Skrym'-ir, a giant, 122, 130, 170, 171.
 Skuld, a Norn, 9.
 Skuld, a Valkyrie, 14.
 Skur'-hild, daughter of Skekkil, 224.
 Slag'-fith, brother of Volund, 254-257.
 Sleip'-nir, Othin's horse, 97, 102, 126, 160, 196, 230, 342, 394.
 Slith, a river, 16, 95.
 Smith, son of Karl, 209.
 Snae'-fjoll, a mountain, 293.
 Snaev'-ar, son of Hogni, 449, 487, 509, 517.
 Snor, wife of Karl, 209.
 Snot, daughter of Karl, 210.
 Sogn, a bay, 305.
 Sog'-u-nes, a cape, 302.
 Sokk'-mim-ir, a giant, 104.
 Sokk'-va-bekk, Saga's dwelling, 88, 89.
 Sol, Sun, 74, 75, 79.
 Sol'-ar, son of Hogni, 449, 487, 509, 517.
 Sol'-bjart, father of Svipdag, 250.
 Sol'-blind-i, a dwarf, 241.

[p. 579]

So1'-fjoll, a mountain, 293.
 Sol'-heim-ar, Hothbrodd's home, 304.
 Sorl'-i, son of Jonak, 361, 439, 536, 538, 540, 545, 546, 548-550, 552-555.
 Spar'-ins-heith, Sparin's Heath, 306.
 Spor'-vit-nir, a horse, 306.
 Sprak'-ki, daughter of Karl, 210.
 Sprund, daughter of Karl, 210.
 Stafns'-nes, a cape, 298.
 Stark'-ath, son of Granmar. 316, 319, 320.
 Stor'-verk, father of Starkath, 320.
 Strond, a river, 95.
 Styr'-kleif-ar, a battlefield, 319, 320.
 Sun, son of Jarl, 214.
 Surt, a giant, 18, 20-22, 73, 82, 110, 165, 245, 376.
 Suth'-ri, a dwarf, 6.
 Sut'-tung, a giant, 37, 50-52, 117, 187, 193.
 Svaf'-nir, a king, 273-275, 278.
 Svaf'-nir, a serpent, 98.
 Svaf'-nir, Othin, 105.
 Svafr'-thor-in, Mengloth's grandfather, 241.
 Sval'-in, a shield, 100, 394.
 Svan, father of Saefari, 222.
 Svan'-hild, daughter of Sigurth, 226, 339, 407, 437, 439, 447, 448, 537, 538, 540-542, 546, 551.
 Svan'-ni, daughter of Karl, 210.
 Svar'-ang, a giant, 131.
 Svar'-in, a hill, 300, 316, 317.
 Svar'-ri, daughter of Karl, 210.
 Svart''-alf-a-heim', the world of the dark elves, 3, 187.
 Svart'-hofth-i, a magician, 229.
 Svath''-il-far'-i, a stallion, 102, 159, 160, 196, 230.
 Svav'-a, daughter of Eylimi, 14, 270, 271, 276-278, 282, 284, 285, 287-289, 311, 313, 335, 339, 345.
 Svav'-a, wife of Saekonung, 223.
 Svav'-a-land, Svatnir's country, 273, 275, 276, 278.
 Svegg'-juth, a horse, 304, 305.
 Svein, son of Jarl, 214.
 Sver''-ris-sag'-a, the Saga of Sverrir, 370.
 Svip'-al, Othin, 103.
 Svip'-dag, son of Solbjart, 234, 236, 238-250.
 Svip''-dags-mol', the Ballad of Svipdag, 60, 81, 154, 234-251, 350, 388, 441, 472.
 Svip'-uth, a horse, 304, 305.
 Svith'-rir, Othin, 104.
 Svith'-ur, Othin, 104.
 Svi'-ur, a dwarf, 7.
 Svol, a river, 95.
 Svos'-uth, father of Summer, 75.
 Sylg, a river, 95.

[p. 580]

Thakk'-rath, Nithuth's thrall, 268.
 Thegn, son of Karl, 209.
 Thekk, a dwarf, 7.
 Thekk, Othin, 103.
 Thir, wife of Thraell, 206.
 Thith''-reks-sag'-a, the Saga of Theoderich, 252, 254, 262, 265, 267, 268, 359, 410, 426, 530.
 Thjalf'-i, Thor's servant, 126, 127, 133, 141, 149.
 Thjaz'-i, a giant, 89, 90, 129, 152, 167, 168, 175, 229.
 Thjoth'-mar, father of Thjothrek, 466, 467.
 Thjoth'-num-a, a river, 95.
 Thjoth'-rek, Theoderich, 451, 465-467, 517.
 Thjoth'-ror-ir, a dwarf, 66.
 Thjoth'-var-a, Mengloth's handmaid, 248.
 Thjoth'-vit-nir, Skoll, 93.
 Thol, a river, 95.
 Tholl'-ey, an island, 282.
 Thor, a god, 12, 23, 24, 82, 83, 88, 93, 94, 96, 121-149, 151, 152, 168-171, 174, 176, 178-180, 182-193, 219, 228, 234, 303, 394.
 Thor'-a, daughter of Hokon, 419, 454, 455.
 Thor'-a, wife of Dag, 222, 454.
 Thor'-in, a dwarf, 7.
 Thor'-ir, follower of Hrolf, 224.
 Thors'-nes, a cape, 303.
 Thraell, son of Rig, 205, 206.
 Thrain, a dwarf, 7.
 Thrith'-i, Othin, 103.
 Thror, a dwarf, 7.
 Thror, Othin, 104.
 Thruth, a Valkyrie, 99.
 Thruth, daughter of Thor, 184
 Thruth'-gel-mir, a giant, 76, 77.
 Thruth'-heim, Thor's home, 88.
 Thrym, a giant, 174, 176, 177, 179-182.
 Thrym'-gjol, a gate, 241.
 Thrym'-heim, Thjazi's home, 89, 90.
 Thryms'-kvith-a, the Lay of Thrym, 12, 82, 107, 122, 128, 129, 143, 159, 166, 169, 174-183, 185, 195, 210, 252, 274, 471.
 Thund, a river, 93.
 Thund, Othin, 63, 105.
 Thuth, Othin, 103.
 Thyn, a river, 95.
 Tind, a berserker, 225.
 Tot''-rug-hyp'-ja, daughter of Thraell, 207.
 Tron''-u-bein'-a, daughter of Thraell, 207.
 Tron'-u-eyr, Crane-Strand, 298.
 Tveg'-gi, Othin, 25.
 Tyr, a god, 18, 140-143, 147-149, 152, 163, 164, 228, 391.
 Tyrf'-ing, a berserker, 225.

[p. 581]

Ulf, follower of Hrolf, 224.
 Ulf, son of Sefari, 222.
 Ulf'-dal-ir, Volund's home, 254, 255, 257, 259.
 Ulf'-run, mother of Heimdall, 229.
 Ulf'-sjar, a lake, 254, 255.
 Ull, a god, 88, 100, 228, 494.
 Un''-a-vag'-ar, a harbor, 300.
 Un'-i, a dwarf, 247.
 Urth, a Norn, 9, 52, 96, 236, 250,251.
 Ut'-garth-a = Lok'-i, a giant, 122, 130.
 Uth, daughter of Aegir, 323, 466.
 Uth, Othin, 103.

Vaf'-thruth-nir, a giant, 68-83.
 Vaf''-thruth-nis-mol', the Ballad of Vafthruthnir, 4, 5, 21, 68-84, 99, 100, 115, 116, 131, 141, 149, 152, 174, 183, 192, 242, 247, 360, 368, 375, 376, 378.
 Vak, Othin, 105.
 Val'-a-skjolf, Othin's home, 88.
 Val'-bjorg, Grimhild's land, 461.
 Vald'-ar, a Danish king, 456, 457.
 Val'-fath-er, Othin, 3, 12, 104.
 Val'-grind, a gate, 93.
 Val'-hall, Othin's hall, 3, 14, 15, 25, 79, 88, 89, 92-94, 218, 220, 232, 325, 326, 441, 474, 480, 483.
 Val'-i, a god, 15, 82, 198, 227, 228, 236.
 Val'-i, son of Loki, 16, 167, 172, 173.
 Val'-land, Slaughter-Land, 129, 136, 254, 255, 443.
 Val'-tam, father of Vegtam, 197.
 Vam, a river, 165.
 Van'-a-heim, home of the Wanes, 3, 187.
 Vand'-ils-ve, a shrine, 324.
 Van'-ir, the Wanes, 1, 10.
 Var, a dwarf, 247.
 Var'-in, a Norwegian king (?), 281, 302.
 Var'-ins-fjord, a bay, 298, 299.
 Var'-kald, father of Findkald, 240.
 Vath'-gel-mir, a river, 360.
 Ve, brother of Othin, 4, 26, 160.
 Veg'-dras-il, a dwarf, 247.
 Veg'-svin, a river, 95.
 Veg'-tam, Othin, 195, 197, 199
 Veg''-tams-kvith'-a, the Lay of Vegtam, 195.
 Vel''-ents-sag'-a, the Saga of Velent, 252.
 Ver'-a-tyr, Othin, 87, 88.
 Ver'-land, Land of Men, 136.
 Verth'-and-i, a Norn, 9.
 Vestr'-i, a dwarf, 6.
 Vestr'-sal-ir, Rind's home, 198.
 Vethr'-fol-nir, a hawk, 97.
 Ve'-ur, Thor, 142, 144, 145
 Vif, daughter of Karl, 210.

[p. 582]

Vig'-blaer, Helgi's horse, 325.
 Vig'-dal-ir, Battle-Dale, 324, 325.
 Vigg, a dwarf, 7.
 Vig'-rith, a field, 73, 376.
 Vil'-i, brother of Othin, 4, 26, 160.
 Vil'-meith, a dwarf (?), 229.
 Vil'-mund, lover of Borgny, 469-472.
 Vin, a river, 95.
 Vin'-bjorg, Grimbild's land, 461.
 Vind'-alf, a dwarf, 7.
 Vind'-heim, Wind-Home, 25, 26.
 Vind'-kald, Svipdag, 240.
 Vind'-ljon-i, Vindsval, 75.
 Vind'-sval, father of Winter, 75.
 Ving'-i, Atli's messenger, 448, 482, 501, 502, 510, 512-514, 517.
 Ving'-nir, Thor, 82, 135, 174.
 Ving'-skorn-ir, a horse, 384.
 Ving'-thor, Thor, 135, 174, 185, 186.
 Vin'-o, a river, 95.
 Virf'-ir, a dwarf, 8.
 Vit, a dwarf, 7.
 Vith, a river, 95.
 Vith'-ar, a god, 23, 82, 93, 91, 152, 155, 156, 164, 170, 228.
 Vith'-ga, son of Volund, 268.
 Vith'-i, Vithar's land, 91.
 Vith'-of-nir, a cock, 243, 245, 246.
 Vith'-olf, a dwarf (?), 229.
 Vith'-rir, Othin, 160, 295.
 Vith'-ur, Othin, 104.
 Vof'-uth, Othin, 105.
 Vols'-ung, father of Sigmund, 218, 219, 226, 270, 293, 302, 307, 310, 332-334, 366, 421.
 Vols''-ung-a-sag'-a, the Saga of the Volsungs, 218, 226, 270, 276, 297, 299, 301, 332-334, 336, 340, 342, 345, 349, 350, 352, 353, 356, 361, 365, 366, 368, 370, 371, 373, 375, 377-379, 381, 383, 386, 391, 395, 396, 399, 400, 402, 403, 405, 407, 410-412, 418, 419, 425, 427, 433, 438, 440, 448, 450, 453, 455-458, 465, 469, 477, 478, 480, 486; 487, 500, 506, 508, 512-514, 518-522, 525-530, 532, 534, 537, 538, 543, 549, 550, 553, 554.
 Vols'-ungs, descendants of Volsung, 269-272, 290-292, 306-311, 318, 319, 332, 333, 339, 421, 422, 425, 428.
 Vo1'-und, a smith, 252-262, 24 268, 527.
 Vo1''-und-ar-kvith'-a, the Lay of Volund, 129, 252-268, 296, 303, 319, 437, 443, 444, 471, 485, 493, 527.
 Vol''-u-spo', the Wise-Woman's Prophecy, 1-28, 52, 61, 62, 68, 69, 73-75, 77, 78, 80-83, 89-91, 93, 95-97, 99-102,

[p. 583]

108, 110, 112-115, 129, 136, 140, 145, 146, 152, 154, 156, 160-164, 166, 170, 172-174, 176, 178, 179, 186, 188, 195, 196, 198, 200, 203, 217, 218, 220, 223, 227-232, 236, 242, 243, 245, 247, 254, 276, 291, 293, 296, 314, 319, 359, 360, 375, 393, 394, 416, 444, 508, 542.
 Von, a river, 95.
 Vond, a river, 95.
 Vor, a goddess, 181.

Y'-dal-ir, Ull's home, 88.
 Ygg, Othin, 70, 105, 140, 384.
 Ygg'-dras-il, the world-ash, 1, 3, 4, 9, 12, 17, 20, 27, 60, 62, 81, 94, 96-98, 102, 242, 243.
 Ylf'-ings, a Danish race, 221, 291, 292, 301, 305, 307, 311, 313-315, 329.
 Ylg, a river, 95.
 Ym'-ir, a giant, 4, 6, 17, 74, 76, 77, 100, 229, 242.
 Yng (or Yng'-vi), son of Halfdan the Old, 221, 307, 308, 364, 365.
 Yng''-ling-a-sag'-a, the Saga of the Ynglings, 160, 163.
 Yng'-lings, descendants of Yng, 221, 223, 307.
 Yng'-vi, a dwarf, 8.
 Yng'-vi, son of Hring, 306.
 Yng'-vi, Ynq, 221, 307, 308, 364, 365.
 Ys'-ja, daughter of Thraell, 207.

  


===== BOOK: pol.txt =====


    
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE TALMUD

  

SELECTIONS

  

FROM

  

THE CONTENTS OF THAT ANCIENT BOOK, ITS COMMENTARIES, TEACHINGS, POETRY, AND LEGENDS.

  

ALSO,

  

Brief Sketches of the Men who made and commented upon it.

  

TRANSLATED FROM THE ORIGINAL

  

BY

  

H. POLANO,

  

PROFESSOR OF THE HEBREW LANGUAGE, AND AUTHOR OF "THE HEBREW SPELLER."

  

PHILADELPHIA:

  

LEARY'S BOOK STORE,

  

NINTH STREET, BELOW MARKET.

  

[1876]

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, September, 2005, by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the United States because it was published prior to 1923.

Click to enlarge
Title Page

Click to enlarge
Verso

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. v]

  

PREFACE.

THE object of the following pages is to give to the student and general reader a fair idea of the contents of the Talmud.

Some time since the translator was asked how it was that no English translation of the Talmud was in existence, and being convinced that many would be interested in its contents, he resolved upon the book which he now presents to the public. It is merely a collection of specimens, and makes no pretensions to any more advanced standing. The only object has been to give in plain, easy language, a correct idea of the scope, and as general an idea as possible of the varied sections of the ancient and wonderful work.

A portion of the introduction is taken from the preface to the Mishna of Maimonides; the chronology is from the "Seder Haddoroth" (Order of Historical Ages), and the sketches of the Rabbis of the Talmud are taken from various hints afforded by the book itself, joined with opinions of the translator. The sketches of Maimonides, Rashi, and Rabbi Amnon of Metz, are translated from the "Seder Haddoroth," while the incidents, parables, legends, lectures, and aphorisms, all directly from the Talmud, are placed in order thought suitable by the translator, and not as they regularly occur. The portion devoted to the Holy Days is from a work entitled "Menorath Hammaore" (The Lamp of the Light), the greater part of which is originally from the Talmud.

The translator believes that a perusal of his work will

[p. vi]

not only aid in informing the reader of what the Talmud is, but excite an interest in the same, which will make this book, and others of a similar character following it, of interest and demand.

It is probable that some errors and mistakes may be discovered, despite the care bestowed upon the pages of this book; for these the translator craves the reader's kind indulgence. The work has been to him a labour of love, and his satisfaction therewith would be incomplete, lacking such kindness. In the spelling of the proper names, he has taken advantage of a translator's arbitrary powers, and given that English version which he deems nearest to the proper pronunciation of the originals.

He desires to thank the friend who aided in the revision of the manuscript and pages, for many a correction and kind suggestion; and in the sincere hope and desire that his effort may tend to promote a knowledge of God's Holy Word, he leaves his cause with the indulgent reader.

 

TAMUZ, 5636

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. vii]

CONTENTS.

  

INTRODUCTION.

           

       PAGE

     
      INTRODUCTION

        

     
      NATURE AND   SCOPE OF THE TALMUD

       <page 1>

     
      CHRONOLOGICAL   TABLE OF ITS COMPILATION

       <page 10>

     
       

PART FIRST.

        

     
      BIBLICAL HISTORY.

        

     
      
   CHAPTER I.

        

     
      FROM CAIN AND   ABEL TO THE DESTRUCTION OF BABEL'S TOWER

        

     
      Death of Abel--Enoch--Kenan--Lemech--Death   of Cain--Enoch, his righteousness--Death of Adam--Enoch's ascent to   Heaven--Methusaleh--Lemech--Noah--The Flood--Nimrod--The Building of the   Tower--Confusion of Language.

        

     
      
   CHAPTER II.

        

     
      FROM THE BIRTH OF   ABRAHAM TO THE DESTRUCTION OF SODOM AND GOMORRAH

       <page 30>

     
      Therach--Birth   of Abram his son--His early peril--His knowledge of God and studies with   Noah--His return to his father's house--He destroys his father's

        

     
      [p. viii]

        

     
      idols--His deliverance   from Ur Chaldee--Death of Charan   his brother--Abram settles in Canaan--His parting with Lot--Sodom--The   wickedness of its inhabitants--Legends of their wrongdoings--Destruction of   the City.

        

     
      
   CHAPTER III.

        

     
      FROM THE BIRTH   OF ISAAC TO THE WARS OF SHECHEM

       <page 50>

     
      Birth of   Isaac--Dismissal of Hagar and Ishmael--Abram's visits to Ishmael--"A   good nail"--Sacrifice of Isaac--His deliverance--Death of Sarah--Birth   of Esau and Jacob--Death of Abraham--Esau sells his birthright--Jacob's flight--His   reception by Laban--Meeting of Esau and Jacob--Jacob settles in   Shechem--Dinah and the son of Chamor--The vengeance of Jacob's sons--The   threatening Emorites--Death of Rachel.

        

     
      
   CHAPTER IV.

        

     
      FROM JOSEPH'S YOUTH   TO HIS ELEVATION OVER EGYPT

       <page 72>

     
      The Master of   Dreams--Joseph sold by his brethren--He is taken to Egypt--The grief of   Jacob--Zelicha, the wife of Potiphar--The unjust accusation--Joseph in   prison--The Chief Butler--Death of Isaac--Division of his property--Pharaoh's   dreams--Failure of the wise men--Joseph interprets the dreams--His elevation   to the office of Viceroy.

        

     
      
   CHAPTER V.

        

     
      JOSEPH'S   GREATNESS AND JACOB'S ENTRY INTO EGYPT

       <page 92>

     
      Marriage of Joseph--The   famine--Joseph's brethren journey to Egypt--They are brought before the   Viceroy--The money in the sacks--Benjamin goes down to Egypt--The silver   cup--Joseph and Judah--Joseph makes himself known--Jacob journeys to meet his   son.

        

     
      [p. ix]

        

     
      
   CHAPTER VI.

        

     
      DEATH OF   JACOB--DELIVERANCE FROM EGYPT

       <page 113>

     
      Death of   Jacob--His burial--Esau's interference--Esau killed by Hushim, the son of   Dan--Death of Pharaoh--Joseph's death--Death of Jacob's sons--The new   king--Pithom and Raamses--The proclamation of Death--Birth of   Moses--His adoption by Pharaoh's daughter--His flight to Ethiopia--He travels   to Midian, and marries Ziporah, the daughter of Reuel--He is sent to   Pharaoh--The Plagues--Deliverance of the Israelites--The passage of the Red   Sea.

        

     
       

PART SECOND.

        

     
      
   SPECIMENS OF BIBLICAL COMMENTARIES.

        

     
       I. The   Deliverance from Egypt

       <page 142>

     
      II. The Ten   Plagues

       <page 155>

     
           Blood--Frogs--Lice--The   Multitude of Beasts--Pestilence--Boils--Hail--Locusts--Darkness--The Slaying   of the First Born.

        

     
      III. The Death   of Moses

       <page 163>

     
      IV. The Book of   Esther

       <page 166>

     
       V. King   Solomon, the Wise

       <page 192>

     
       

PART THIRD.

        

     
      
   THE RABBIS--THEIR TEACHINGS AND INCIDENTS IN THEIR LIVES.

        

     
      Rabbi Judah,   the "Chief"

       <page 205>

     
      Simon, the   Righteous

       <page 209>

     
      Rabbi Ishmael,   the High Priest

       <page 213>

     
      Rabbi Meir

       <page 215>

     
      Hillel Hannasi

       <page 220>

     
      Tashi

       <page 222>

     
      Maimonides

       <page 224>

     
      Rabbi Amnon, of   Metz

       <page 227>

     
      [p. x]

        

     
      
   TEACHINGS OF THE RABBIS

        

     
      Benevolence

       <page 231>

     
      Meekness

       <page 237>

     
      The Fear of God

       <page 238>

     
      Honour to   Parents

       <page 241>

     
      The Law and its   Study

       <page 245>

     
      Prayer

       <page 253>

     
      The Sabbath

       <page 257>

     
      Rewards and   Punishments

       <page 260>

     
      Trades

       <page 262>

     
      Death

       <page 263>

     
      Funeral Sermon   over a Dead Rabbi

       <page 264>

     
      
   INCIDENTS IN THE LIVES OF THE RABBIS.

        

     
      Rabbi Akiba

       <page 266>

     
      Elishah ben   Abuyah

       <page 273>

     
      Rabbi Simon

       <page 276>

     
      Rabbi Judah:   Soul and Body equally answerable to God

       <page 217>

     
      Rabbi Joshua:   God's Knowledge of the Future

       <page 299>

     
      Rabbi Gamliel:   A Wife for a Rib

       <page 279>

     
      Rabbi Joshua:   Why Woman was made from the rib of Man

       <page 280>

     
      Rabbi Simon ben   Jochai: Why the Manna fell daily

       <page 280>

     
      Rabbi Eleazer:   The Way of Life

       <page 281>

     
      Rabbi Johanan,   son of Zakai: The Highwayman and the Sneak Thief

       <page 281>

     
      Rabbi Nachman:   The Blessing of Rabbi Yitzchak

       <page 282>

     
      Gebiah ben   Pesisah

       <page 283>

     
      A Wise King

       <page 284>

     
       

PART FOURTH.

        

     
      
   PROVERBS AND SAVINGS OF THE RABBIS, LEGENDS, &c.

        

     
      Sayings of the   Rabbis

       <page 286>

     
      The Desert   Island

       <page 299>

     
      The Emperor and   the Aged Man

       <page 302>

     
      Proving a Claim

       <page 304>

     
      [p. xi]

        

     
      A Payment with   Interest

       <page 306>

     
      The Weasel and   the Well

       <page 303>

     
      The Lawful Heir

       <page 309>

     
      Nothing in the   World without a Use

       <page 310>

     
      The Reward of   Faith

       <page 312>

     
      Abtinoss and   Garmah

       <page 312>

     
      Trust in God

       <page 313>

     
      The Bride and   Bridegroom

       <page 316>

     
      Truth

       <page 317>

     
      The Destruction   of Bithar

       <page 313>

     
      The Destruction   of Jerusalem

       <page 319>

     
      Second   Destruction of Jerusalem

       <page 322>

     
      Hannah and her   Seven Sons

       <page 324>

     
       

PART FIFTH.

        

     
      
   CIVIL AND CRIMINAL LAW--THE HOLY DAYS.

        

     
      Sketch of Civil   and Criminal Codes

       <page 329>

     
      Passover

       <page 332>

     
      Pentecost, or   Feast of Weeks

       <page 333>

     
      New Year, or   Day of Memorial

       <page 335>

     
      The Day of   Atonement

       <page 341>

     
      Succoth, or   Feast of Tabernacles

       <page 349>

     
      Hannuckah

       <page 356>

     
      Purim

       <page 358>

     
    

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

INTRODUCTION.

  

THE TALMUD,

  

ITS NATURE AND SCOPE, WITH A CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE OF ITS COMPILATION.

THE "Talmud" is a collection of early Biblical discussions, with the comments of generations of teachers who devoted their lives to the study of the Scriptures. It is an encyclopaedia of law, civil and penal, human and divine. It is more, however, than a mere book of laws. It records the thoughts, rather than the events, of a thousand years of the national life of the Jewish people; all their oral traditions, carefully gathered and preserved with a love devout in its trust and simplicity. Accepted as a standard study, it became endeared to the people, who, as they were forbidden to add to or diminish from the law of Moses, would not suffer this work of their Rabbis to be tampered with in any manner. As it was originally compiled it has been transmitted to us. It is a literary wilderness. At the first view, everything style, method, and language, seems tangled and confused. The student, however, will soon observe two motives or currents in the work; at times harmonious, at times diverse. One displaying the logical mind, which compares, investigates, developes, and instructs; the other, imaginative and poetical. The first is called "Halachah" (Rule), and finds a vast field in the Levitical and ceremonial laws; the other

[p. 2]

takes possession of the ethical and historical portions of Holy Writ. It is called "Hagadah," or Legend, not so much in our present acceptance of the term, as in the wider sense of a saying without positive authority, an allegory, a parable, a tale.

The Talmud is divided into two parts, Mishna and Gemarah. They are the continued works of successive Rabbis, chiefs or principals of the colleges in which they devoted their lives to study. Most of the redacteurs of the Mishna were dead, however, long before the Gemarah was commenced. The time consumed in the completion of the entire Talmud is stated to have been three hundred and eleven years. In its present form it consists of twelve folio volumes, containing the precepts of the Pentateuch with extended commentaries upon them; amplified Biblical incidents; occurrences affecting the religious life of those who prepared it; philosophical treatises; stories, traditions, and parables. It was called the oral or unwritten law, in contradistinction to the Pentateuch, which remained under all circumstances, the immutable code, the divinely given constitution, the written law.

The guardianship of the laws and traditions was vested in the chiefs of the colleges, known as "Scribes," "Men of the Great Synod," "Princes and Fathers of the House of Judgment." They instructed the people, preached in the synagogues, and taught in the schools. Nothing was allowed to seriously interrupt their duties. Palestine was ruled by various dynasties; the masters were martyred; the academies were destroyed; to study the law was made a crime against the state; yet the chain of living tradition remained intact. The dying masters appointed their successors, and for one academy destroyed, three new ones sprang up in another quarter.

[p. 3]

These masters were superior men, mentally and physically, and the scope of their learning was almost unlimited. To be eligible to the position, they were required to be men of well-balanced mind, neither too young nor too old, that their judgment might be neither hasty nor enfeebled. They were required to be thorough linguists, to be masters of the sciences of mathematics, botany, and natural history, and familiar with the arts as well as the sciences.

The highest rank in the estimation of the people belonged to these Chachamim, wise men. Many of them were humble tradesmen, yet they were considered greater than priest or noble. Idleness was particularly abhorred by them, and piety and learning were considered deserving of their full meed of homage only when joined to active, bodily work,

Among the common sayings of the time, we find these:

"It is well to add a trade to your studies if you would remain free from sin."

"The tradesman at his work is the equal of the most learned doctor."

"He who derives his livelihood from the labour of his hands is as great as he who fears God."

The laws, traditions, and ordinances, during many hundred years, grew to such immense proportions, that some better method of their preservation than their scattered and chiefly unwritten form, became a necessity. Three different attempts were made to reduce them into system and order. The third alone was successful.

The progress of these laws, &c., from their revelation and conception till their final rest in the Talmud, is thus traced in the writings of Maimonides.

During the last forty years of the life of Moses, the Lord gave to him six hundred and thirteen precepts, including the Decalogue, with full explanation of their meaning and intent,

[p. 4]

that he might be able to properly instruct the people. The manner in which Moses imparted these precepts to the chosen race is thus recorded in the treatise Erubim. First, he called his brother Aaron into his tent and spoke to him alone, all the words which God had commanded; the sons of Aaron were then admitted and the same words repeated to them; the seventy elders of the people were then called before Moses, and from his lips received the commandments and ordinances of their God, and then any of the people who so desired were allowed to enter the tent, and to them Moses spoke again the same words. Thus Aaron heard these precepts four times, his sons thrice, the elders twice, and the people once, from the lips of Moses. After this first course of instruction, the prophet retired and Aaron repeated the precepts; then his sons spoke the words which they had heard; the elders reiterated them, and thus were the commands delivered to Moses, impressed upon the minds of the people, who were authorised in turn to teach one another. The precepts themselves were written on rolls of parchment, but the explanations thereof became the basis of the oral law, the foundation and substance of the Talmud. These six hundred and thirteen precepts were given between the years 2448 and 2488 (1312 and 1272 B. C. E.).

"And it came to pass in the fortieth year, in the eleventh month, on the first day of the month," that Moses called all the people together and said unto them, "My last days on earth are drawing nigh. If there be any among you who have forgotten the precepts of the Lord which I have taught to you, speak now and I will repeat them; or if there be any one among you to whom the law is not clear, and who desires an explanation of any point, behold I am here to answer his questions."

[p. 5]

Thus, on the first day of Shebat (February), Moses began to repeat and explain the law and its traditions, as it is written: "On this side of the Jordan, in the land of Moab, Moses began to explain this law, saying" (Deut. 1: 5).

On the seventh day of Adar (March) he concluded this labour. He wrote thirteen copies of the Pentateuch upon parchment. He gave one copy into the keeping of each of the tribes, and the thirteenth he placed in the hands of the Levites, saying, "Take this book of the law and put it at the side of the ark."

At noon, "on this self-same day," the Lord said to Moses: "Go up to the Mount Nebo." The earthly pilgrimage of the great prophet was completed, the rest of Heaven and the smile of God was his for evermore, and upon his friend and servant Joshua devolved the duty to teach and to observe.

Joshua was born in the year 2406. He was eighty-two years of age when he became the leader of the people, and he died in the year 2516. After his death, the elders, chief among whom were Caleb and Pinechas, undertook the duty of preserving a general knowledge of the oral laws. They lived about seventeen years after Joshua's death, and then the charge descended to the judges and the prophets. First of these was Eli, the High Priest. He became judge in 2830, the same year in which Samuel was born, and he died in 2870, one year after Samuel had succeeded to his office. Samuel judged the people eleven years, yielding up his spirit whence it came upon the 28th of Iyar (May), 2882. The sacred guardianship fell then to David the son of Jesse, from him it descended to Achiyah the Shelomite, and from him to the pure Elijah. In the year 3047 Elijah ascended to Heaven, and, with his mantle, his duties devolved upon Elisha, his pupil. Then Yehoyada, Zecheriah, Hosea,

[p. 6]

[paragraph continues] Isaiah, Micah, and Joel were the successive guardians of the law and its growing "fences" and traditions. Nahum, Zephaniah, Jeremiah, and Baruch, the son of Neriah, succeeded these, and in the year 3413 the duty devolved upon Ezra, high priest, scribe, and prophet. Ezra was a member of the great senate, composed of one hundred and twenty members, which introduced a regular order of prayers for divine service. (Previously the people had composed their own prayers--words from their hearts, appropriate to their circumstances and conditions. They had but three set prayers, portions of the Pentateuch, recited from the moment of its existence, viz.: "Hear, O Israel" (Deut. 6: 4-10) "And it shall come to pass" (Deut. 11: 13-22); and "The Lord spoke to Moses, saying" (Numb. 20: 31 to end).

After the death of Ezra, the guardianship fell successively upon Antigonus of Socho, Jose, the son of Joazur of Serada, Jose, the son of Jochanan of Jerusalem, Judah, the son of Tabai, Shemiah, Abtalyon, and then to Hillel, the great teacher and sage in Israel. Hillel was chief of the college, and among his pupils was Shamai, a learned man, but of hasty temper and fond of argument. He seceded from Hillel's college and organised another one over which he presided. The controversies between the two were long, sharp, and exhaustive.

Hillel was called the Hillel of Babel, having been born in that place. At the age of forty years he journeyed to Jerusalem, in order that he might study with Shemiah and Abtalyon. He pursued his studies for forty years, and was chief of the college for forty years, dying when he was one hundred and twenty years old. He was a very meek man, and the many dissensions at the college of Hillel, which form a not insignificant portion of the Biblical commentaries, owe their existence to the polemical disposition of

[p. 7]

his friend Shamai. To Hillel the necessity of arranging, simplifying, and committing to writing the great bulk of oral law and tradition seemed first to present itself in full force. He commenced the work in the year 3728; but, though he succeeded in arranging and condensing some six hundred sections into six volumes, he died while the work was still far from completion.

The generations which followed Hillel and Shamai were even more disposed to controversies than had been their predecessors, and for a century nothing was added to Hillel's work. The guardianship of the traditions fell to his son Simon, then to Simon's son, Gamliel. Rabbi Shimnon, the son of Gamliel, was the thirty-fourth teacher into whose especial charge they were given, and from him they descended to Rabbi Judah, the successful redacteur, commonly called, by reason of his great eminence, "Rabbi."

Rabbi Judah was a man of immense learning, of a progressive mind, and thoroughly versed in the sciences of his day. The Emperor Antoninus conceived for him a respect and affection which resulted in many marks of favour and distinction. Through his influence with the Roman ruler he was enabled to do much towards the benefit of his race. His great desire was to create among the people a love for the study of the law, and a familiarity with its beauties and its moral and religious code. He saw that a complete knowledge of the law was limited to a comparatively few, who were dispersed through many countries, and he feared it might in time be entirely forgotten if the interest in its study was allowed to decrease as it had for some time been diminishing. With the aid of the sages and pupils of his college he set diligently to work, and collecting the rules, explanations, and traditions extant since the death of

[p. 8]

[paragraph continues] Moses, he inscribed them into six volumes, which he called the Mishna, or "Second Law." In the year 3978, one hundred and fifty years after the destruction of the second temple, the redaction was completed. Many of the laws were already obsolete, even on their first publication. Rome had long before substituted her own penal code for that belonging to the Jewish nationality; the minute injunctions regulating the sacrifices and the temple services had but an ideal value, and many of the other laws applied particularly to Palestine, where but comparatively few of the people remained. Yet the whole was received in Palestine and Babylonia, not merely as a record of the past, but as a holy work, an infallible text-book, a record of laws that, with the restoration of the commonwealth, would come into practice as in time past. All Israel gave thanks for the completion of this great undertaking.

The six sections into which the Mishna was divided may be indexed as follows:

SECTION I., Seeds: The Agrarian Laws. Tithes and Donations to Priests, Levites, and the Poor. The Sabbatical Year. Prohibited Mixtures in Plants, Animals, and Garments.

SECTION II., Feasts: Sabbaths, Festivals, and Fast Days; the Ceremonies Ordained, and the Sacrifices to be offered on them. Special chapters are given to the Passover, the New Year's Feast, the Day of Atonement, Succoth, and Purim.

SECTION III., Woman: Betrothal, Marriage, and Divorce. Vows and Obligations.

SECTION IV., Damages: This section includes the major portion of the Civil and Criminal Law. Ordinary Money Transactions. Idolatry. Witnesses. Legal Punishments, and "Sentences of the Fathers."

[p. 9]

SECTION V., Sacred Things: Sacrifices. First Born Children. Measurements and Details of the Temple and its Utensils.

SECTION VI., Purification: Levitical and Hygienic Laws. Impure persons and things, and the methods for their purification.

Among the Rabbis who assisted Rabbi Judah were his sons, Rabbi Simon and Rabbi Gamliel.

The Mishna being formed into a code, became in its turn what the Scriptures had been to it--a basis of development and discussion. After the death of Rabbi Judah, his successors, Rab and Samuel, began explanations of its principles. These were continued in a second generation by Rabbi Judah bar Ezekiel, principal of the college at Nehardea, and Rabbi Hunah, principal of the college at Sura. The latter died in 4056, and until the sixth generation, 4127, the oral commentaries upon the Mishna, now known as the Gemarah, were continued.

Rab Ashi inaugurated the collection of these commentaries, and it is said that from the days of Rabbi Judah the Chief, never was the study of the law so prevalent as during the life of this latter Rabbi. He died in 4180, before he had completed his undertaking; and his successors, Mar and Meremar, the latter being his son, were the last of the generations of the "Rabbis of the Talmud."

The Talmud is without doubt the most reliable record of Jewish law and tradition, yet its popularity is due more to the force of circumstances than to its general acceptance at the time of its redaction. During the bitter persecution of the Jews in Persia the schools were closed, and oral instruction being in a great measure interfered with, the book obtained a hold and authority which its authors never intended. This applies, of course, to its legal portions; the

[p. 10]

legendary portion, the Haggadah, was poetry, imaginative fancy. But though the Rabbis themselves considered the latter of secondary importance, and explained its character, the majority of the people clung to it, and regarded the Talmud as a complete whole, worthy of their reverence.

Condensed Chronological Table.

        2448.

       Promulgation of   the Decalogue.

     
      2488.

       Death of Moses.

     
      2516.

       Death of   Joshua.

     
      2830.

       Oral laws   transmitted to various elders.

     
      2871.

       Samuel, Judge   of Israel.

     
      2884.

       David, King of   Israel.

     
       

       Achiyah the   Shelomite, guardian of the law.

     
      2962.

       Guardianship   transferred to Elijah.

     
      3047.

       Elisha   succeeded his teacher.

     
       

       Yehoyadah, high   priest.

     
      3067.

       Zechariah, the son   of Yehoyadah, the next custodian of the law, killed in the Temple by order of   Joash.

     
      3110.

       Guardianship   transferred to Amos, his successor.

     
      3140.

       To Isaiah the   son of Amoz.

     
      3160.

       To Micah the   Morashtite.

     
      3190.

       To Joel the son   of Pethuel.

     
      3240.

       To Nahum the   Elkoshite.

     
      3254.

       To Habakuk the   prophet.

     
      3280.

       To Zephaniah.

     
      3321.

       To Jeremiah.

     
      3332.

       To Ezekiel and   Baruch, son of Neriya.

     
      3413.

       To Ezra, chief of   the great synod of 120 members, including among its number Haggai, Malachi,   Daniel, Chananyah, Michael, Azaryah, Nehemiah, Mordecai, and Zerubabel.

     
       

       [p. 11]

     
      3448.

       To Simon   "the Just," also a member of the synod, the first of the sages of   the Mishna.

     
      3460.

       To Antigonus of   Socho.

     
      3500.

       To Jose ben   Joezer of Zeredah, and Jose ben Jochanan of Jerusalem.

     
      3560.

       To Joshua ben   Parachiah and Nitai the Arbelite.

     
      3621.

       To Judah, the   son of Tabbai, and Simon, the son of Shatach.

     
      3722.

       To Shemayah,   Abtalyon, and other teachers in the college.

     
      3728.

       Charge received   by Hillel.

     
      3768.

       Intrusted to   his son Simon, and to R. Jochanan ben Zakkai. During their time the   "Common Era" commenced.

     
      3809.

       Rabbi Gamliel succeeded   R. Simon,--eighteen years before the destruction of the Temple.

     
      3810.

       Charge   descended to Rabbi Simon the second, who died a martyr.

     
      3840.

       To Rabbi   Gamliel the second,--twelve years after the destruction of the Temple.

     
      3881.

       To Rabbi Simon   the third.

     
      3948 to 3978.

       Rabbi Judah, Hannasee (the chief) edited the to Mishna, the text of the   "Talmud," putting the traditions and enlargements on the precepts   into writing for the first time.

     
      3979.

       Rab and Samuel succeeded   R. Judah, and began the commentaries on the Mishna in their college at Babel.

     
      4056.

       R. Huna, the   successor of Samuel, became principal of the college at Sura.

     
      4060.

       Rabbah, the son   of Nachamuni, chief Rabbi.

     
      4111.

       Death of Rabbah,   who died the same day Rab Ashi the redacteur   of the Gemarah was born.

     
       

       [p. 12]

     
      4028.

       Rabbi Jochanan   edited the Jerusalem Talmud.

     
      4127.

       Rabbi Ashi   became principal of the college, and commenced his labours on the Gemarah.

     
      4180.

       Death of Rab   Ashi before the completion of his undertaking.

     
      4253.

       The work   completed as it now is, by Mar, and Meremar, the son of Rah Ashi, and their   associates.

     
  

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 13]

  

PART FIRST.

  

BIBLICAL HISTORY

  

CHAPTER I.

  

FROM CAIN AND ABEL TO THE DESTRUCTION OF BABEL'S TOWER.

AND Adam knew Eve his wife, and she conceived and bore him two sons and three daughters.

The first-born she called "Cain," saying, "I have gotten a man from the Lord."

Her second son she called "Abel," saying, "With nothing we come into the world, and with nothing will we be taken from it"

When the lads grew up, their father gave to each of them a possession in the land. Cain became a tiller of the soil, and Abel a shepherd.

And after a time it came to pass that the lads each brought an offering to the Lord. Cain brought from the fruit of the ground, and Abel brought from the firstlings of his flock. But while Abel selected the finest and best-conditioned animals, Cain offered fruit of an inferior quality, the poorest which the earth offered. Therefore Cain's offering was unheeded, while the fire of acceptance fell from heaven, consuming the gracious gift which his brother had presented to his Maker. Thus a feeling of jealousy found birth in Cain's heart, and he resolved, when a good opportunity should offer, to slay his brother.

[p. 14]

This time came upon an occasion when Cain was ploughing his fields. Abel, leading his flocks to pasture, crossed the ground which his brother was tilling.

In a wrathful spirit, Cain approached Abel, saying, "Wherefore comest thou with thy flocks to dwell in and to feed upon the land which belongs to me?"

And Abel answered:

"Wherefore eatest thou of the flesh of my sheep? Wherefore clothe thyself in garments fashioned from their wool? Pay me for the flesh which thou hast eaten, for the garments in which thou art clothed, for they are mine, even as this ground is thine; then will I go out of it, aye, and fly through the air, so that I may not touch it."

Then said Cain to his brother:

"Behold, thou art in my power. If I should see fit to slay thee now, to-day, who would avenge thy death?"

"God, who has placed us upon this earth," replied Abel. "He is the judge who rewardeth the pious man according to his deeds, and the wicked according to his wickedness. Thou canst not slay me and hide from Him the action. He will surely punish thee, aye, even for the evil words which thou hast spoken to me but now."

This answer increased Cain's wrathful feelings, and, raising the implement of his labour which he was holding in his hand, he struck his brother suddenly therewith, and killed him.

Thus was the blood of Abel spilled by Cain his brother, and the blood ran along the ground, even to the place where Abel's flocks were staying.

And it came to pass, after this rash action, that Cain grieved and wept bitterly. Then, arising, he dug a hole in the ground, and buried therein his brother's body from the light of day.

[p. 15]

And after this, the Lord appeared to Cain, and said to him:

"Where is Abel, thy brother, who was With thee?"

And Cain replied unto the Lord:

"I know not! Am I my brother's keeper?"

Then said the Lord:

"What hast thou done! Thy brother's blood cries to me from the ground. Thou thinkest I know not of thy action, of the crime which thou hast committed, which thou wouldst now deny. Cursed be thou from the ground which oped to swallow up thy brother's blood. No longer shall it give its strength to thee and answer to thy efforts; no longer shall it give thee aught but thorns. A fugitive and wanderer shalt thou henceforth be upon the earth."

And Cain went forth a wanderer from the presence of his Maker, forth to the land on the east of Eden.

Now, after this time, when God began to give Cain rest, his wife conceived and bore a son. And Cain called his son "Enoch," because God had at last given him rest upon the earth. And he began to build a city, and this, too, he called "Enoch," for the same reason, because he was no longer a fugitive and a wanderer as before.

 

Now, when Adam was one hundred and thirty years old, he begat another son, whom he called "Seth."

And Seth lived one hundred and five years, and begat "Enosh."

Then the people increased and grew many upon the face of the earth. And they polluted their souls by sin and rebellion against the Lord. Their wickedness and their transgressions increased day by day. They forgot the Eternal who had formed them and given them the earth as a possession. They made images of copper and iron,

[p. 16]

of wood and of stone, to which they prostrated themselves in worship.

During the entire lifetime of Enosh the people continued thus unrighteous.

Therefore God's wrath was kindled against them, and he caused the river Gichon to overflow, and destroy and consume them. But though one-third of the earth was thus destroyed, the remaining people did not repent; they continued in their evil ways, displeasing in the eyes of the Lord.

During this time there was neither sowing nor reaping. There was a grievous famine in the land, for when the people became corrupt, the land was also corrupted, and, instead of fruit for man's sustenance, it brought forth thorns and thistles.

 

And Enosh lived ninety years, and begat "Kenan."

Kenan was a wise man who understood all things, and when he grew to be forty years of age, he ruled over the whole human race. Being an intelligent man, he instructed the people, and imparted to them his wisdom and understanding. He foresaw that the people would be punished for their continued wickedness, and he prophesied concerning the future and the flood which God would bring upon the earth, and he wrote down his prophecies on stone tablets, and deposited them in the Treasury.

When Kenan was seventy years old he begat children, three sons and two daughters. These two daughters became the wives of Lemech, the son of Methushael, the fifth of the generations of Cain. Ada, his first wife, bore him a son, whom she called "Jabal," and another son, whom she called "Jubal;" but Zillah, her sister, was barren for many years.

[p. 17]

But it came to pass, even in her old age, that Zillah became the mother of a son, whom she called "Tubal-Cain," saying, "After I have grown old, Almighty God has granted me a son." Then Zillah conceived again, and bore a daughter, whom she called "Naama," which signifies joy and pleasure in old age.

Now as Lemech grew old, his eyes grew very dim, and finally all sight was taken from them, and Tubal-Cain, his son, led him by the hand when he walked abroad.

And it came to pass, when Tubal-Cain was still quite young, that he led his father into the fields to hunt, and he said to his father:

"Lo, yonder is a beast of prey, shoot thy arrow in that direction."

Lemech did as his son had spoken, and the arrow struck Cain, who was walking afar off, and killed him. Thus was Cain's blood shed even as he had shed the blood of Abel his brother.

Now when Lemech and his son drew near and saw that instead of a beast of prey they had killed their progenitor Cain, Lemech trembled exceedingly and clapped his hands heavily together in surprise, grief, and fright. Being blind, he saw not his son, and struck the lad's head between his hands, killing him instantly. When his wives discovered what their husband had done they upbraided and despised him. And he spoke to them, saying:

"Ada and Zillah, listen to my voice! Oh, wives of Lemech, give ear unto my speech! I have slain a man to my hurt, a child to my wounding, but not in cruelty or with design. Ye know that I am old and hoary, that my eyes are sightless; accidentally I did this thing to my own wounding and my own hurt."

Then his wives became reconciled to their husband,

[p. 18]

according to the advice of Adam, their father, but they bore no more children.

 

"Mehalalel begat Jared, and Jared begat Enoch, and Enoch begat Methusaleh."

And Enoch served the Lord and walked with him, despising the wicked ones about him, and cleaving with knowledge and understanding to the ways of the Most High.

Enoch did not mix with the people, but lived alone as a hermit for many years.

And it came to pass as he was praying in his apartment an angel of the Lord called to him from heaven, saying, "Enoch, Enoch," and he answered, "Here am I."

Then said the angel:

"Arise, go forth from thy solitude and walk among the people of the land. Teach to them the way they should go, and instruct them in the actions they should perform." And Enoch did as the Lord commanded him.

He walked among the people and taught them the ways of the Creator, assembling them together and addressing them in earnestness and truth. And he charged his followers to proclaim in all places where men dwelt

"Who is he that desires to know the ways of the Lord and to do righteously? Let him seek Enoch." And Enoch reigned over the human race and the people obeyed him, and while Enoch was among them they served God. And princes and rulers came to listen to his words of wisdom and to make obeisance before him. And he made peace through all the land.

And Enoch reigned over the human race for three hundred and fifty-three years. In justice and righteousness he ruled, and peace blessed the land during all this period.

[p. 19]

Methusaleh was the son of Enoch, and Lemech was the son of Methusaleh. Adam died, nine hundred and thirty years old, when Lemech was sixty-five years of age. He was buried with great honours by Seth, Enoch, and Methusaleh, His body was placed in a cave, which according to some authorities was the cave of Machpelah. From this time, the time of Adam's burial, it has been the custom to perform funeral obsequies over the dead.

Adam died because he had eaten of the fruit of the tree of knowledge, and through his sin must all his descendants likewise die, even as the Lord has spoken.

The year in which Adam died was the two hundred and fifty-third year of the reign of Enoch.

And it came to pass about this time that Enoch again felt a longing for solitude take possession of him, and he again withdrew from frequent communion with his people. He did not separate himself from them altogether; for three days he remained alone, and on the fourth he appeared to exhort and instruct them. But when a few years had passed he increased the periods of his withdrawal from the world, and separating himself from the people for six days, he preached to them upon the seventh. And after this he appeared before the people but one time in a year, and though they were desirous of seeing him and hearkening to his voice, save at this one time, they were unable to behold him.

And Enoch became so holy that the people feared him and dared not approach when he appeared before them, for the glory of heaven rested on his face. Yet when he spoke they assembled and listened to his words, and learning from his knowledge, they bowed before him, and cried aloud, "Long live the King!"

And it came to pass when the inhabitants of the world

[p. 20]

had learned from Enoch the ways of the Lord, an angel called to him from heaven, saying:

"Ascend, Enoch, ascend to heaven, and reign over the children of God in heaven as thou hast reigned over the children of men on earth."

Then Enoch assembled the people and said to them, "I have been summoned to heaven, but I know not the day I shall ascend. Therefore let me teach you ere I go, reiterating the lessons which you have heard from my lips."

And Enoch made peace and harmony among the people, and pointed out to them the path to everlasting life. And his followers proclaimed aloud wherever men dwelt, "Who is he that wishes to live and to know the ways of the Lord? Let him seek Enoch and learn, ere he is taken from us and earth."

So Enoch taught the people and united them in peace and harmony.

Then Enoch mounted his horse and rode away, and a multitude of people followed him a day's journey.

And it came to pass on the second day that Enoch spoke to those who followed him, saying:

"Return to your tents! Wherefore follow me? Return, lest death overtake ye."

A number of the followers returned at these words, but others continued to journey with him; and every day he spoke to them, saying:

"Return, lest death overtake ye."

And on the sixth day there were still some who followed after him, and they said, "Where thou goest will we go; as the Lord liveth naught but death shall separate us;" so when Enoch saw that they were thus determined he spoke to them no more.

[p. 21]

Those who went back on the sixth day knew how many they had left following, but of those whom they left on the sixth day not one returned.

And on the seventh day Enoch ascended to heaven in a whirlwind, with chariot and horses of fire.

And it came to pass after Enoch had gone up to heaven that the people started out to search for those men who had followed after him. And on the spot where they had left them they found deep snow and ice. They cut through the ice and they found there the dead bodies of the men for whom they were searching, but Enoch they did not find. Therefore is this the meaning of the words of Scripture, "And Enoch walked with God; and he was not" (he was not where search was made), "for God had taken him" (Gen. 5: 24).

And Enoch ascended to heaven when Lemech the son of Methusaleh was one hundred and thirteen years old.

 

And it came to pass after Enoch had ascended to heaven that the people appointed Methusaleh, his son, king over them. And Methusaleh lived in the way of righteousness which his father had taught him, and he continued to instruct the people in morality and goodness even as Enoch had done before him. But in the latter part of his reign the people grew regardless of his teachings. They disregarded the personal rights of one another, and rebelled against the commands of God.

And the wrath of the Lord was again kindled against them, and the earth brought forth thorns and thistles instead of its fruit for sustenance, yet they repented not, nor turned from their evil deeds. Therefore did God resolve to destroy them entirely from the face of the earth.

Now when Lemech, the son of Methusaleh, was one

[p. 22]

hundred and eighty-six years old, Seth, the son of Adam, died and was buried.

And about this time Lemech took to himself Ashmua, the daughter of Elishua, the son of Enoch, for a wife, and he begat a son and called him Noah.

Noah grew up in righteousness and followed zealously in the ways of truth which Methusaleh taught him; but the others of the people practised wickedness towards God and deceit towards one another.

Then said God:

"The whole earth is corrupt. I will destroy this man whom I have created, the fowls of the heaven and the beasts of the earth, for the wickedness of man proves him undeserving of life, and I repent that I have made him."

But the Lord stayed his wrath until every man who walked in His ways was dead, before He brought to pass the evil which He had spoken, so that his faithful servants might not see the punishment of their fellow-man.

But Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord; and God selected Noah and his family from all the people of the earth, to keep them alive through the destruction which He designed.

And it came to pass in the eighty-fourth year of Noah's life that Enosh, the son of Seth, died at the age of nine hundred and five years. And when Noah was one hundred and seventy, Kenan died nine hundred and ten years old. And Mehalel died at the age of eight hundred and ninety-five years, when Noah was two hundred and thirty years of age; and when Noah was three hundred and sixty, Jared died at the age of nine hundred and sixty-two years. And also those people who fulfilled the words of the Lord died in those days before He showed them the evil which He had decreed.

[p. 23]

And it came to pass in the four hundred and eightieth year of the life of Noah, that the only righteous ones left in that generation were Methusaleh, and Noah with his family.

Then the word of the Lord came to Methusaleh and Noah, saying:

"Go forth, proclaim to all mankind, 'Thus saith the Lord: Turn from your evil inclinations, abandon your unrighteous ways, then may God forgive and spare you on the face of the earth. For thus saith the Eternal, one hundred and twenty years will I give ye to repent; if ye forsake your evil ways, then will I forsake my intentions of destruction.'"

And Noah and Methusaleh went forth and spoke these words of the Lord to the people. Every day, from morning until night, they addressed the people, but the people heeded not their words.

 

Noah was a righteous man in his generation, and the Lord chose Noah's seed to be spread over the whole earth. Then said God to Noah:

"Take thyself a wife, and beget children, for I have seen thee to be a righteous man before me; only thyself, thy wife, and thy sons, shall live on earth of all this generation."

And Noah did as God commanded him, and took to wife Naamah, the daughter of Enoch; and Noah was four hundred and ninety-eight years old when he married Naamah. And Naamah conceived and bore a son, whom she called "Japhet," saying, "God has enlarged us through the land." And she bore a second son, and called him "Ham." And she bore a third son, and called him "Shem," saying, "God has given me a great name on earth." And Noah was five hundred and two years old when she bore to him his third son, Shem.

[p. 24]

And the lads grew up and walked in the way of God, as they were taught by Noah and by Methusaleh. And in these days died Lemech, the father of Noah. He was not as righteous either as his father or his son. He was seven hundred and seventy-seven years old when he died.

And again the Lord spoke to Methusaleh and Noah, saying:

"Once more call mankind to repentance; call once again, ere my punishment falls upon the people."

But the people listened not, and the words of warning were unheeded.

Then the Lord said unto Noah:

"The end of all flesh cometh before me, because of its evil ways; behold, I will destroy the people with the earth. But thou, take for thyself gopher wood, and build for thee an ark. In this manner build it: Three hundred cubits in length, fifty cubits in breadth, and thirty cubits in height; make a door in its side, and to a cubit finish it above."

In the five hundred and ninety-fifth year of his age Noah commenced building this ark, and he completed it in his six hundredth year, and during the time of its building his three sons married the three daughters of Methusaleh.

And it came to pass, also, during this time, that Methusaleh, the son of Enoch, died at the age of nine hundred and sixty-nine years.

After his death the Lord spoke to Noah, saying:

"Go thou with all thy household into the ark, and, behold, I will gather to thee all the beasts and fowls, and they will surround the ark.

"Then place thyself in the doorway of the ark, and the beasts and fowls will place themselves opposite to thee. Those that lie down before thee let thy sons lead into the ark, and those that remain standing thou shalt abandon."

[p. 25]

As the Lord had spoken so happened it. The animals assembled in a great multitude opposite the ark. Those which lay down were led into the ark, and the others were abandoned.

And at the end of seven days the thunder and lightnings of the heavens frighted all the earth. The glory of the sun was darkened, the heavy rain fell, and the fury of the storm exceeded all that man had heard of or imagined.

And the people came to the ark and clung to it, and cried to Noah for help, but he answered them:

"For a hundred and twenty years I entreated ye to follow my words; alas, 'tis now too late."

For forty days and forty nights the rain fell, and with such violence that even those in the ark were in trouble and agony of mind, for they feared their vessel would not be able to withstand its might.

Each animal in the ark, according to its nature, uttered its cry of fear, of rage, of helplessness, and the noise was loud and terrible.

Then Noah addressed the Eternal in prayer:

"O Lord, I beseech Thee, save us now! Without strength to face this great calamity, we come to Thee. The rivers of water terrify us, and death plays in waves about us. Lift up Thy countenance upon us, O Lord! Be gracious to us. Redeem us, our God; deliver us, and save us!"

And God heard the voice of Noah, and remembered him.

 

"And God caused a wind to pass over the earth, and the waters were assuaged, . . . . and the ark rested in the seventh month . . . . upon the mountain of Ararat."

And Noah opened the window of the ark, and again called to God, saying

[p. 26]

"O Lord, God of heaven and of earth, release our souls from confinement, bring us out from the prison in which we live; verily our hearts are weary with sighing."

And God answered Noah, saying:

"At the close of the year thou and thy family may go forth out of the ark."

And it came to pass in the second month, on the seven-and-twentieth day of the month, the earth was perfectly dry. Yet Noah and his family still tarried in the ark, and they did not leave it until God called to them and said, "Go out of the ark."

All the people and living things then departed from the vessel in which their lives had been preserved.

Noah and his children served the Lord all the days of their lives, and God blessed them. And the human race increased rapidly after the flood, and the names of the generations are written in the Bible.

Cush, the son of Ham and grandson of Noah, married in his old age a young wife, and begat a son whom he called "Nimrod," because in those days the people were beginning to rebel again against the Lord's command, and Nimrod signifies rebellion.

Now Nimrod grew up, and his father loved him exceedingly, because he was the child of his old age. And there was a certain coat of skins which God had made for Adam. When Adam died this coat became the possession of Enoch; from him it descended to Methusaleh, his son; Methusaleh gave it to Noah, who took it with him into the ark. And when the people left the ark Ham stole this coat, and hid it from his brothers, giving it secretly thereafter to Cush, his son. Cush kept it hidden for many years, until out of his great love he gave it to Nimrod, the child of his old age. When Nimrod was twenty years of age he put on this coat, and it

[p. 27]

gave him strength and might; might as a hunter in the fields, and might as a warrior in the subjection of his enemies and opponents. And his wars and undertakings prospered until he became king over all the earth.

Behold, to this day his power is a proverb among men, and he who instructs the youthful arm in the wielding of weapons, and the youthful mind in the secrets of the chase, wishes his pupils "even as Nimrod, who was a mighty hunter in the land, and prosperous in his wars."

When Nimrod was forty years old his brethren, the sons of Ham, quarrelled with the sons of Japhet. And Nimrod assembled the tribe of Cush, and went forth to battle with the sons of Japhet. And he addressed his army, saying:

"Be not dismayed, and banish fear from your hearts. Our enemies shall surely be your booty, and ye shall do with them as ye please."

Nimrod was victorious, and the opposing armies became his subjects. And when he and his soldiers returned home rejoicing the people gathered around and made him king, and placed a crown upon his head. And he appointed counsellors, judges, chiefs, generals, and captains. He established a national government, and he made Therach, the son of Nahor, his chief officer.

When Nimrod had thus established his power he decided to build a city, a walled town, which should be the capital of his country. And he selected a certain plain and built a large city thereon, and called it Shinar. And Nimrod dwelt in Shinar in safety, and gradually became ruler over all the world; and at that time all the people of the earth were of one language and of one speech.

Nimrod in his prosperity did not regard the Lord. He made gods of wood and stone, and the people copied after his doings. His son Mordon served idols also, from which

[p. 28]

we have, even to this day, the proverb, "From the wicked, wickedness comes forth."

 

And it came to pass about this time that the officers of Nimrod and the descendants of Phut, Mitzrayim, Cush, and Canaan took counsel together, and they said to one another:

"Let us build a city and also in its midst a tall tower for a stronghold, a tower the top of which shall reach even to the heavens. Then shall we truly make for ourselves a great and mighty name, before which all our enemies shall tremble. None will then be able to harm us, and no wars may disperse our ranks."

And they spoke these words to the king, and he approved of their design.

Therefore these families gathered together and selected a suitable spot for their city and its tower on a plain towards the east, in the land of Shinar.

And while they were building rebellion budded in their hearts, rebellion against God, and they imagined that they could scale the heavens and war with him.

They divided into three parties; the first party said:

"We will ascend to heaven and place there our gods, and worship them."

The second party said:

"We will pour into the heavens of the Lord and match our strength with His."

And the third party said:

"Yea, we will smite Him with arrow and with spear."

And God watched their evil enterprise, and knew their thoughts, yet they builded on. If one of the stones which they had raised to its height fell, they were sad at heart, and even wept; yet when any of their brethren fell from the

[p. 29]

building and were killed, none took account of the life thus lost.

Thus they continued for a space of years, till God said, "We will confuse their language." Then the people forgot their language, and they spoke to one another in a strange tongue.

And they quarrelled and fought on account of the many misunderstandings occasioned by this confusion of language, and many were destroyed in these quarrels, till at last they were compelled to cease building.

According to their deserts did God punish the three rebellious parties. Those who had said, "We will place our gods in the heavens," were changed in appearance, and became like apes; those who had said, "We will smite Him with arrows," killed one another through misunderstandings; and those who had said, "Let us try our strength with His," were scattered over the face of the earth.

The tower was exceedingly tall. The third part of it sunk down into the ground, a second third was burned down, but the remaining third was standing until the time of the destruction of Babylon.

Thus were the people dispersed over the globe, and divided into nations.

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 30]

  

CHAPTER II.

  

FROM THE BIRTH OF ABRAM TO THE DESTRUCTION OF SODOM AND GOMORRAH.

THERACH, the son of Nahor, was the chief officer of King Nimrod, and a great favourite with his royal master; and when his wife Amtheta, the daughter of Karnebo, bore him a son, she called the child Ab-ram, meaning "Great father;" and Therach was seventy years old when his son Abram was born.

Now it came to pass on the night of Abram's birth that Therach entertained a number of his friends, including the wise men and magicians of Nimrod the king. They passed the night in revelry and merriment, and when they went forth from the house of their host morn was dawning. Lifting their eyes heavenward, they beheld a large and brilliant star rise before them in the east, and swallow up or consume four stars from the four corners of the heavens. The magicians wondered much at this occurrence, and they said one to the other:

"Verily, this is an omen connected with the newly-born child of Therach. When he grows up he will be fruitful and increase' greatly in power and excellence, and his descendants will destroy this kingdom and possess its lands."

And they went home and pondered over the matter, and when they met in the house of assembly, they said:

"Behold, we had better inform the king of the wonderful occurrence which greeted our sight. Should it come to his knowledge indirectly, he will be wroth with us for keeping

[p. 31]

it from him; he may even slay us for our neglect. Let us go to him at once that we may be free from blame in the matter."

Entering into the presence of the king, his wise men saluted him, saying, "O king, live for ever!"

And the chief of the wise men then related to the king the phenomenon which they had witnessed, and the interpretation or meaning which they assigned to it. Concluding the relation, he added:

"And now, if it be pleasing to the king, we would advise him to pay the value of this child unto his father and destroy him while in his infancy, lest in the days to come, through him and his descendants, we and our children be utterly destroyed."

The king listened attentively to the words of his servants and approved of their advice. He sent a messenger for Therach, and when the latter appeared before him he told him all that the wise men had related, and said:

"Now, therefore, give up the child, that we may slay him before misfortune falls upon us, and in payment we will fill thy coffers with silver and with gold!"

Then answered Therach:

"I have listened to the words of my lord, and all that he wishes I will do; yet first I beg, let me tell the king of a request made to me but yesterday, and ask his advice thereon."

"It is well," replied Nimrod; "speak."

"Yesterday," said Therach, "Ayon, the son of Morad, came to my house desiring to purchase from me the beautiful steed, which thou, oh king, didst graciously present to me. 'Sell me the horse,' said Ayon, 'and I will pay thee his full value and likewise fill thy stables with straw and provender.' And I answered him that I did not feel at

[p. 32]

liberty to so dispose of the king's gift without the king's approval; and now, oh king! I ask thee for advice." Angrily the king answered:

"And thou wouldst think of selling my gift, of parting with that noble steed for gold and silver, straw and provender! Art thou in such need of these things that thou wouldst barter for them the horse which I have given thee, a steed unequalled in the land?"

Then Therach bowed before the king, and said, "And if such is thy feeling in regard to this horse, how canst thou ask me to give up my child? Gold and silver cannot pay me for the gift of my king, neither can gold or silver replace for me my child?"

This application of his advice was exceedingly disagreeable to the king, and his feeling was so plainly pictured on his countenance that Therach quickly added:

"All my possessions are my king's, even my child, without money and without price."

"No," said the king, "for money will I buy him."

"Pardon, my lord," returned Therach, "give me three days for consideration, and I will speak of this matter with the mother of the boy."

Nimrod granted this request, and Therach departed from his presence.

At the end of the three days the king sent a message to Therach, commanding him to send the child or be himself destroyed with all his family.

When Therach received this message, realising that the king was determined in his purpose, he took the child of one of his slaves, a child born on the day of Abram's birth, and sent it to King Nimrod, receiving the money for it and declaring it to be his child.

The king himself slew the child, and Therach hid his wife,

[p. 33]

[paragraph continues] Abram, and the child's nurse in a lonely cave, sending them food secretly every week. And Abram remained in this cave until he was ten years old.

At the end of ten years Nimrod and his officers had forgotten all about Abram and the episode of his birth, and Abram came forth from the cave and was sent to live with Noah and his son Shem to learn from them the ways of the Lord; and he lived there thirty-nine years.

During these years Charan, the son of Therach, the elder brother of Abram, married, and his wife bore him a son whom he called "Lot;" she bore him also two daughters, one of whom he called Milcah and the other Sarai. At the time of Sarai's birth, Abram was about forty-two years of age.

From his earliest childhood Abram was a lover of the Lord. God had granted him a wise heart ready to comprehend and understand the majesty of the Eternal, and able to despise the vanity of idolatry.

When quite a child, beholding the brilliant splendour of the noonday sun and the reflected glory which it cast upon all objects around, he said, "Surely this brilliant light must be a god, to him will I render worship." And he worshipped the sun and prayed to it. But as the day lengthened the sun's brightness faded, the radiance which it last upon the earth was lost in the lowering clouds of night, and as the twilight deepened the youth ceased his supplications, saying, "No, this cannot be a god. Where then can I find the Creator, He who made the heavens and the earth?" He looked towards the west, the south, the north, and to the east. The sun disappeared from his view, nature became enveloped in the pall of a past day. Then the moon rose, and when Abram saw it shining in the heavens surrounded by its myriads of stars, he said, "Perhaps these

[p. 34]

are the gods who have created all things," and he uttered prayers to them. But when the morning dawned and the stars paled, and the moon faded into silvery whiteness and was lost in the returning glory of the sun, Abram knew God, and said, "There is a higher power, a Supreme Being, and these luminaries are but His servants, the work of His hands." From that day, even until the day of his death, Abram knew the Lord and walked in all His ways.

While Abram, the son of Therach, added daily to his wisdom and knowledge in the house of Noah, none knowing aught of his whereabouts, the subjects of King Nimrod, who then reigned in Babel, continued in their evil ways, despite of the warnings which they had received of the destruction of the wicked. And the servants of Nimrod called him Amraphel. Merdon, the son of Nimrod, was more unrighteous than his father, and even Therach, who still remained chief officer to the king, became a worshipper of idols. In his house he had twelve large images of wood and stone, a separate god for each month in the year, and to these he prayed and made obeisance.

When Abram was fifty years of age he left the house of his instructor, Noah, and returned to Therach, his father. He beheld the twelve idols occupying the places of honour in his father's house, and his soul waxed full with wrath, and he uttered a vow, saying:

"By the life of the Lord, if these images remain here three days longer, may the God who created me make me even such as they."

And Abram sought his father when he was surrounded by his officers, and he spoke to him, saying:

"Father, tell me, I pray, where I may find the God who created the heavens and the earth, thee, me, and all the people in the world."

[p. 35]

And Therach answered:

"My son, the creator of all things is here with us in the house."

Then said Abram:

"Show him to me, my father."

And Therach led Abram into an inner apartment, and pointing to the twelve large idols and the many smaller ones around, he said:

"These are the gods who created the heavens and the earth, thee, me, and all the people of the world."

Abram then sought his mother, saying:

"My mother, behold, my father has shown to me the gods who have created the earth and all that it contains, therefore, prepare for me, I pray thee, a kid for a sacrifice, that the gods of my father may partake of the same and receive it favourably."

Abram's mother did as her son had requested her, and Abram placed the food which she prepared before the idols, but none stretched forth a hand to eat.

Then Abram jested, and said, "Perchance 'tis not exactly to their taste, or mayhap the quantity appears stinted. I will prepare a larger offering, and strive to make it still more savoury."

Next day Abram requested his mother to prepare two kids and with her greatest skill, and placing them before the idols he watched with the same result as on the previous day.

Then Abram exclaimed:

"Woe to my father and to this evil generation; woe to those who incline their hearts to vanity and worship senseless images without the power to smell or eat, to see or hear. Mouths they have, but sounds they cannot utter; eyes they have, but lack all power to see; they have ears

[p. 36]

that cannot hear, hands that cannot move, and feet that cannot walk. Senseless as they are the men who wrought them, senseless all who trust in them and bow before them."

And seizing an iron implement, he destroyed and broke with it all the images save one, into the hands of which he placed the iron which he had used.

The noise of this proceeding reached the ears of Therach, who hurried to the apartment, where he found the broken idols and the food which Abram had placed before them. In wrath and indignation he cried out unto his son, saying:

"What is this that thou hast done unto my gods?" And Abram answered:

"I brought them savoury food, and behold they all grasped for it with eagerness at the same time, all save the largest one, who, annoyed and displeased with their greed, seized that iron which he holds and destroyed them."

"False are thy words," answered Therach in anger. "Had these images the breath of life, that they could move and act as thou hast spoken? Did I not fashion them with my own hands? How, then, could the larger destroy the smaller ones?"

"Then why serve senseless, powerless gods?" replied Abram, "gods who can neither help thee in thy need nor hear thy supplications? Evil is it of thee and those who unite with thee to serve images of stone and wood, forgetting the Lord God who made the heaven and the earth and all that is therein. Ye bring guilt upon your souls, the same guilt for which your ancestors were punished by the waters of the flood. Cease, oh, my father, to serve such gods, lest evil fall upon thy soul and the souls of all thy family."

[p. 37]

And seizing the iron from the hands of the remaining idol, he destroyed that also, before his father's eyes.

When Therach witnessed this deed of his son, he hastened before King Nimrod and denounced Abram, saying, "A son born to me fifty years ago has acted so and so,--let him be brought before thee, I pray, for judgment."

When Abram was summoned before the king, Nimrod said to him:

"What is this that thou hast done unto thy father's gods?"

And Abram answered the king in the same words that he had spoken to his father. And when Nimrod replied:

"The large god had no strength nor power to do this thing," Abram continued, saying:

"Then wherefore serve him? Why cause thy subjects to follow in thy vain ways? Rather serve the great Lord of the world who has power to do all things; who has the power to kill, the power to keep alive. Woe to thee, thou man of foolish heart. Turn from thy evil ways, serve Him in whose hands is thy life and the lives of all thy people, or die in reproach, thou and all who follow thee."

The king commanded his officers to seize Abram and lead him to confinement, and he remained in prison ten days. During this time Nimrod convened his council, and thus addressed his princes and his officers:

"Ye have heard of the deeds of Abram, the son of Therach. He has treated me with disrespect and shown no dread of my power. Behold, he is in prison; therefore speak and tell me what punishment should be inflicted on this man, who has acted so audaciously before me."

And the counsellors replied:

"He who acts disrespectfully to the king should meet

[p. 38]

death upon the gallows; this man has done more; he is guilty of sacrilege, he has insulted our gods; therefore he should be burned to death. If it be pleasing to the king let a furnace be heated, day and night, and then let this Abram be cast therein."

This advice pleased the king, and he commanded such measures to be taken forthwith.

And when the furnace was heated to a great and consuming heat, all the officers assembled, and the people, both great and small, to witness the carrying out of the king's orders. The women, carrying their children with them, ascended to the roofs of their houses, and the men gathered in great numbers; but all stood afar off, for none dared approach the great heat to look into the furnace.

And it came to pass, when Abram was brought out from prison and the wise men and magicians beheld him, that they cried aloud unto Nimrod:

"Oh, king, we know this man! This is none other than the child, at whose birth, fifty years ago, one large star consumed four other stars. His father has mocked thee and played thee false in sending another child in his stead, to be slain according to thy will."

When the king heard these words he grew fiercely angry, and ordered Therach to be immediately brought before him. And he said to Therach:

"Thou hast heard what these magicians have asserted. Tell me, now, have they spoken truly?"

And Therach, observing the great anger of the king, answered truly:

"It is as these wise men have spoken. I had compassion upon my child, and sent thee in his stead the child of one of my slaves."

[p. 39]

"Who advised thee to this? Speak truly, and thou shalt live?" demanded Nimrod.

The king's manner terrified Therach, and he answered quickly, not knowing what he said, and altogether without foundation:

"Charan, my other son, advised me to the thing."

Now Charan was a man without strength of mind in faith, and undecided as to whether the idols of his father or the God of Abram deserved his worship. When Abram was cast in prison, Charan said in his heart, "Now will I see what God is powerful. If Abram prevails I will profess his faith, and if he perishes I will follow the leading of the king."

When Therach thus accused his son, Nimrod answered:

"Then Charan must suffer with Abram, and both thy sons be cast into the furnace."

And both Abram and Charan were brought before the king, and in the presence of all the inhabitants their robes were removed from them, their hands and feet were bound, and they were cast into the flaming furnace.

Now the heat of the fire was so great that the twelve men who cast them therein were consumed by it, yet God had compassion upon his servant Abram, and though the ropes which bound him were burned from off his limbs, he walked upright through the fire, unharmed. But Charan, his brother, whose heart was not the Lord's, met instantaneous death in the flames. And the servants of the king called out to their master:

"Behold, Abram walks unhurt through the flames, the ropes with which we bound him are consumed, yet he is uninjured."

The king refused to believe so wonderful a thing, and

[p. 40]

sent trusted officers to look into the furnace, and when they corroborated the words of their inferiors the king was lost in amazement, and commanded his officers to take Abram out of the fire. They were not able, however, to execute his order, for the forks of flame blazed in their faces and they fled from the great heat.

And the king reproached them, saying ironically:

"Haste ye,--take Abram out, else he may die!"

But their second attempt was fruitless as the first, and in it eight men were burned to death.

Then the king called to Abram, saying:

"Servant of the God of Heaven, come forth from the fire and stand before me."

And Abram walked out of the fire and the furnace and stood before the king. And when the king saw that not even a hair of Abram's head was singed by the flame, he expressed wonder and amazement.

"The God of Heaven, in whom I trust," said Abram, "and in whose hand are all things, hath delivered me from the flames."

And the princes of the king bowed before Abram, but he said to them:

"Bow not to me, but to the great God of the Universe, who hath created you. Serve Him and walk in His ways; He is powerful to deliver and to save from death."

The king, too, looked on Abram with awe, and made him many valuable presents, and parted from him in peace.

And it came to pass after this that Nahor and Abram took to themselves wives; the name of Nahor's wife was Milcah, and the name of Abram's wife Sarai, or Yiska. They were both the daughters of Charan, the brother of their husbands.

About two years after Abram's deliverance from death by

[p. 41]

fire, King Nimrod dreamed. And behold, in this dream, he was standing with his army in a valley, opposite to a great furnace, in which a fire blazed; and a man, resembling Abram, came forth from the furnace and stood before the king, holding in his hand a drawn sword. And the man approached Nimrod with this sword uplifted, and Nimrod turned and fled. Then, as the king fled, the man threw after him an egg, and a huge river of water flowed forth from this egg, engulfing the king and all his army, and all were drowned save the king with three men. As they fled, the king turned to look at the companions who had been saved with him, and behold they were men of tall stature and commanding appearance, and attired in royal apparel. And the river disappeared and only an egg remained. And further in his dream, King Nimrod beheld a bird issue forth from this egg, and the bird flew upon his head and pecked out his eyes. Then the king awoke in great terror, and lo, his heart was beating rapidly and his blood was feverish.

In the morning the king sent for his wise men, and relating to them his dream, he demanded its interpretation. And one of the wise men, whose name was Anuki, answered, saying:

"Behold, this dream foreshadows the evil which Abram and his descendants will cause the king in time to come. It foretells the day when they will rise and smite our lord the king with all his hosts, and there will none be saved except the king, with three other kings who will battle on his side. And the river and the bird, these that came forth from the egg, lo, they but typify the descendants of this man, who will work much evil to our nation and our people in after days.

"This is the interpretation of the dream, its only meaning. And well thou knowest, oh, any lord the king, that many

[p. 42]

years ago thy wise men beheld this very thing, and yet to thy own misfortune thou hast still allowed this man to live. While he walks on earth thy kingdom remains imperilled."

The words of Anuki made a deep impression on the king, and he sent secret emissaries to take Abram's life. The king's design, however, was frustrated by Eleazer, a slave of Abram's, whom Nimrod had presented to him. He learned of the king's intention, and warned his master, saying:

"Arise, get thee quickly hence, that thou mayest escape destruction."

And he told Abram of the king's dream, and the interpretation which the wise men had given to it.

So Abram hastened to the house of Noah, and remained there hiding while the servants of the king searched his own home and the surrounding country in vain, and he remained a longer time, even until the people had forgotten him.

And it came to pass during this period of concealment that Therach, who was still a favourite with the king, came in secret to visit his son. And Abram spoke to him, saying:

"Come, let us all journey to another land; let us go to Canaan. Thou knowest that the king seeks my life, and even though he honours and exalts thee, yet wealth and power amount to naught in the hour of death and trouble. Journey with me, oh, my father; abandon the vanity which thou pursuest; let us live in safety, worshipping the great God who created us in happiness and peace."

And Noah and his son Shem added their entreaties to those of Abram, till Therach consented to do as they wished. And Therach with Abram his son, and Lot his son's son, and Sarai his daughter-in-law, and all his family, went forth from Ur Chaldee, from the city of Babel to the land of Charan, and there they tarried.

[p. 43]

And the country around them was pleasant and fertile, and there was ample space for the men and the cattle they had with them. And the people of Charan respected and honoured them, and God blessed them and looked with favour on their household.

And it came to pass after Abram had dwelt in Charan about three years, that the Lord appeared to him, and said:

"I am the Lord who brought thee safely through the fire of the Chaldeans, and delivered thee from the strength of thy enemies. If thou wilt hearken earnestly to my words and follow diligently my commands, I will make thy seed even as the stars of the heaven, and those who hate shall likewise fear thee. My blessing shall rest upon thee and my favour on thy doings. Now, arise, take Sarai thy wife, and those who belong to thee, and all thy possessions, and journey to Canaan and dwell there, and I will be thy God and bless thee."

And Abram journeyed with his family to Canaan in obedience to the Lord's command. And he was fifty-five years old when he left Charan.

When Abram had pitched his tent in Canaan, among the inhabitants of the land, God again appeared to him, and said:

"This is the land which I have given as a permanent possession to thee and thy descendants. For the generations to spring from thee shall be numerous as the stars in heaven, and the countries which I have shown thee shall be their heritage on earth."

Then Abram built an altar to God, and called it by the name of the Lord. And he continued to dwell in Canaan, and when he had lived there about three years Noah died at the age of nine hundred and fifty years.

[p. 44]

After this Abram returned to Charan to visit his father and mother, and he remained with them in Charan for five years. During this time he endeavoured to spread a knowledge of the Eternal, and he succeeded in gaining among the Charanites many followers of the one God.

And the Lord appeared to him in Charan, saying:

"Arise and return to the land of Canaan, thou and thy wife and all born in thy house, and all the souls which thou hast made in Charan. To thee have I given the land from the river of Egypt even unto the great river, the river Euphrates."

And Abram did as the Lord commanded, and Lot, the son of his brother, went with him out of Charan to the land of Canaan.

Now Lot possessed large herds of cattle, for God had prospered him in his undertakings. And it happened that the herdsmen of Lot and the herdsmen of Abram quarrelled and disputed in regard to rights of pasturage and water, and they strove one with the other. Therefore Abram said to Lot:

"Thou hast done wrong, and through thy herdsmen thou wilt cause me to be hated by our neighbours. Thy shepherds have pastured their flocks on lands which belong to others, and I must bear the reproach therefor. Thou knowest that I am but a stranger and sojourner in this land, and thou shouldst bid thy servants to be heedful."

Despite the frequent rebukes of Abram, however, the herdsmen of Lot continued to quarrel with Abram's men, and to trespass upon the pastures of their neighbours. At last Abram spoke earnestly, saying:

"Let there be no strife between us, for we are near relations, yet we must separate. Go thou whither thou pleasest, choose thy dwelling-place where thou wilt, thou

[p. 45]

and thy cattle and all thy possessions, but bide no longer with me. If thou art in danger I will haste to aid thee, and in all things will I be with thee, but separate thyself from me I pray."

And Lot lifted up his eyes and looked upon the land opposite the river Jordan. He saw rich plains and fertile fields, a country pleasant for man, and with wide pastures for flocks, rich in water and gratifying to the sight. And Lot was much pleased with the country, and journeyed thither even to Sodom, departing in peace from Abram with his flocks and all his possessions. And Abram remained and dwelt in the groves of Mamre, near to Hebron.

 

"The men of Sodom were wicked, and sinners before the Lord exceedingly."

Now, in these days Sodom and four other cities were inhabited by men of evil actions, who provoked the anger and indignation of the Most High. They planted in the valley a beautiful garden many miles in extent, a place adorned with fruits and flowers, and objects pleasing to the sight and intoxicating to the senses. Thither the people flocked four times a year with music and with dancing, indulging in all sorts of excesses and acts of idolatrous worship, with none to utter a word of warning or rebuke.

In their daily life they were both cruel and treacherous, oppressing the stranger and taking advantage of all persons thrown in contact with them. If a trader entered their city they would seize his goods either with violence or through trickery, and if he remonstrated they but mocked him and drove him from the place.

It happened once that a man from Elam, journeying to a place beyond Sodom, reached this latter city even as the

[p. 46]

sun was setting. He had with him an ass bearing a valuable saddle to which some rare and precious merchandise was attached. Unable to find a lodging for himself and stabling for the animal, he resolved to pass the night in the streets of Sodom, and journey on in the morning. A certain citizen of Sodom, named Hidud, chanced to observe this stranger, and being cunning and treacherous, he accosted him, saying:

"Whence comest thou, and whither art thou travelling?"

"I am journeying from Hebron," replied the stranger; "my destination is beyond this place; but lo, the sun has set; I can obtain no lodging, and so I remain here in the streets. I have bread and water for myself and straw and provender for my beast, so I need not be under obligation to anybody."

"Nay, this is wrong," returned Hidud, "come pass the night with me, thy lodging shall cost thee naught, and I will attend also to the wants of thy animal."

Hidud led the stranger to his house. He removed the valuable saddle from the ass, and the merchandise which was attached to it he also removed, placing them in the closet in his house, then he gave the ass provender and set meat and drink before the stranger, who partook of the meal, and lodged that night with him.

In the morning the stranger rose up early intending to pursue his journey, but Hidud said to him, "Take first thy morning meal, then go thy way."

After the man had eaten he rose to go on his way, but Hidud stopped him, saying, "It is late in the day, remain I pray thee, bide with me yet this day and then depart."

The stranger remained in Hidud's house until the following morning, and then, declining another pressing invitation to remain one day more, he prepared for his departure.

Then said Hidud's wife:

[p. 47]

"This man has lived with us two days and paid us naught."

But Hidud answered:

"Keep thy peace."

He then brought forth the stranger's ass, and bade him "fare thee well."

"Hold," said the stranger, "my saddle, the spread of many colours, and the strings attached to it, together with my merchandise, where are they?"

"What!" exclaimed Hidud.

"I gave thee," returned the stranger, "a beautiful spread with strings attached to it; thou hast hidden it in thy house."

"Ah!" said Hidud pleasantly, "I will interpret thy dream. That thou hast dreamed of strings, signifies that thy days will be prolonged even as strings may be stretched from end to end; that thou hast dreamed of a spread of many colours signifieth that thou wilt one day possess a garden rich in flowers and luscious fruits."

The stranger answered:

"No, my lord, I dreamed not; I gave to thee a spread of many colours with strings attached, and thou hast hidden it in thy house."

And Hidud said:

"And I have interpreted thy dream; I have told thee its meaning, 'tis useless to repeat it. For the interpretation of a dream people generally pay me four pieces of silver, but as for thee, behold I will ask of thee only three."

The stranger was very angry at this outrageous conduct, and he accused Hidud in the court of Sodom of stealing his goods. Then when each man told his story, the judge said:

"Hidud speaks the truth; he is an interpreter of dreams; he is well known as such."

[p. 48]

And Hidud said to the stranger:

"And as thou art such a liar, thou must even pay me the full price, four pieces of silver, as well as for the four meals eaten in my house."

"Willingly will I pay thee for thy meals," replied the other, "if thou wilt but return my saddle and my goods."

Then the two men wrangled with angry words, and they were driven forth from the court-house, and the men in the streets joined on Hidud's side, and they fought the stranger and thrust him forth from the city, robbed of all his possessions.

When a poor man entered the city of Sodom the people would give him money in order to save a reputation for charity, but they made an agreement among themselves that no one should either give or sell him food, or allow him to depart from the city. The man would consequently die of starvation, and the people would then regain the money they had given him. They would even rob the body of the rags which covered it, and bury it naked in the wilderness.

Upon one occasion Sarai sent her servant Eleazer to Sodom to inquire concerning the welfare of Lot and his family. As he entered the city, Eleazer observed a Sodomite fighting with a stranger whom he had defrauded, and who, running to Eleazer, implored him for assistance.

"What art thou doing to this poor man?" said Eleazer to the Sodomite; "shame upon thee to act in this manner towards a stranger in your midst!"

And the Sodomite replied:

"Is he thy brother? What is our quarrel to thee?" and picking up a stone, he struck Eleazer with it on the forehead, causing his blood to flow freely in the street. When the Sodomite saw the blood, he caught hold of Eleazer, crying

[p. 49]

"Pay me my fee as a leech; see, I have freed thee of this impure blood; pay me quickly, for such is our law."

"What!" exclaimed Eleazer, "thou hast wounded me and I am to pay thee for it!"

This Eleazer refused to do, and the Sodomite had him brought into the court, and there before the judge reiterated his demand for a fee.

"Thou must pay the man his fee," said the judge, addressing Eleazer; "he has let thy blood, and such is our law."

Eleazer paid the money, and then lifting up the stone he struck the judge heavily with it, and the blood spurted out in a strong stream.

"There!" exclaimed Eleazer, "follow thy law and pay my fee to this man; I want not the money," and he left the court-house.

At another time a certain poor man entered Sodom, and as everybody refused to give him food, he was very nearly starved to death when Lot's daughter chanced to meet him. For many days she supported him, carrying him bread whenever she went to draw water for her father. The people of the city, seeing the poor man still living, wondered greatly as to how he managed to support life without food, and three men constituted themselves a committee to watch his goings and his doings. They saw Lot's daughter giving aim bread, and seizing her they carried her before the fudges, who condemned her to death by burning, and this punishment was inflicted on her.

Another maiden, who assisted a poor stranger, was smeared with honey, and left to be stung to death by bees.

For such acts were Sodom and her sister cities destroyed by fire from Heaven, and only Lot and his family spared through God's love for his servant Abram.

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 50]

  

CHAPTER III.

  

FROM THE BIRTH OF ISAAC TO THE WARS OF SHECHEM.

"AND the Lord visited Sarah and she bore a son unto Abraham in his old age."

When Isaac was born Abraham prepared a great feast in his honour, and invited thereto all the chiefs and men of birth and position who were his neighbours, such as Abimelech and the captains of his armies. Therach, Abraham's father, and Nahor, his brother, journeyed also from Charan to join in the festivities, and Shem with Eber, his son, were likewise of the party. They were all hearty in their congratulations, and Abraham's heart was full with gladness.

Ishmael, the son of Hagar and Abraham, was very fond of hunting and field sports. He carried his bow with him at all times, and upon one occasion, when Isaac was about five years of age, Ishmael aimed his arrow at the child, crying, "Now I am going to shoot thee." Sarah witnessed this action, and fearing for the life of her son, and disliking the child of her handmaid, she made many complaints to Abraham of the boy's doings, and urged him to dismiss both Hagar and Ishmael froth his tent, and send them to live at some other place.

For some time Ishmael lived with his mother in the wilderness of Paran, always indulging in his great passion for hunting; then they journeyed to Egypt, where Ishmael married, and where four sons and a daughter were born to him. But soon he returned to his favourite home in the

[p. 51]

wilderness, building there tents for himself, his people and his family, for God had blessed him, and he was the master of large flocks and herds.

And it came to pass after many years that Abraham, yielding to a longing which had always possessed him, determined to visit his son, and informing Sarah of his intention he started off alone upon a camel.

He reached Ishmael's dwelling-place about noontime, and found that his son was away from home, hunting. He was rudely treated by Ishmael's wife, who did not know him, and who refused him the bread and water which he asked for. Therefore he said to her, "When thy husband returns say thus to him, describing my appearance, An old man from the land of the Philistines came to our door during thy absence, and he said to me, when thy husband returns, tell him to remove the nail which he has driven in his tent and to replace it with one more worthy," with which words Abraham rode away.

When Ishmael returned home his wife related to him the occurrence, describing the man and repeating his words, and Ishmael knew that his father had visited him and been treated with disrespect. For which cause Ishmael divorced his wife, and married a maiden from the land of Canaan.

Some three years after this Abraham again visited his son's tent, and again his son was away from home; but his wife was pleasant and hospitable, and begged the stranger, whom she did not know, to alight from his camel, and she set before him bread and meat. Therefore he said to her, "When thy husband returns, describe to him my appearance, and say, 'This old man came to thee from the land of the Philistines, and this message he left for thee: the nail which thou hast driven in thy tent is good and worthy,

[p. 52]

see that it is properly esteemed;" and blessing Ishmael and his family, Abraham returned to his home.

When Ishmael returned he was much pleased to hear his father's message, and he thanked God for a good and worthy wife, and after a time he and his family visited Abraham, and remained with him in the land of the Philistines for many days.

When Abraham had dwelt here for six-and-twenty years, he removed with all his family and possessions to Bear Sheba, near Hebron. Here he planted a grove and built large houses, which he kept always open for the poor and needy. Those who were hungry entered freely and partook of food according to their desire, and those who were needy were liberally supplied with the necessaries of life. When any of the grateful ones would seek to Abraham to thank him for his benevolence he replied to them:

"Address thy thanks to God. To the Eternal, who created all things, all that we receive belongs; through His bounty we are fed and clothed."

To feed the hungry, to clothe the naked, to speak kindly to the unfortunate, to act justly towards all mankind, and to be ever grateful to the Eternal, formed the articles of the creed according to which Abraham fashioned his life.

 

And the word of the Lord came unto Abraham, saying, "Take now thy son whom thou lovest, and offer him for a burnt-offering upon one of the mountains which I will tell thee of."

When this command was delivered to Abraham, chief among the many griefs and anxieties which oppressed his mind, was the necessity of separating Isaac from his mother. He could not tell her of his intention, and yet the lad was

[p. 53]

always with her. Finally he proceeded to Sarah's tent, and seating himself beside her, he said:

"Thy son is growing to manhood, and he has not yet learned the service of heaven. To-morrow I will take him with me to learn the ways of the Lord, with Shem and Eber."

And Sarah replied:

"Go, my lord, and do as thou hast spoken; but do not take the lad too great a distance, and keep him not a long time from my presence."

And Abraham said:

"Pray to God for the happiness of thy son, for my happiness, and for thy own."

During that night Sarah was much troubled on account of the approaching separation from Isaac; she was unable to sleep, and when her husband and the lads who accompanied him appeared early in the morning, ready to start upon their journey, she pressed Isaac to her bosom, and weeping bitterly she sobbed:

"Oh, my son, my son! how can I allow thee to wander from me; my only child, my pride, my hope." Then turning to Abraham she said:

"Watch carefully the lad, for he is young and tender; let him not travel in the heat, nor journey so as to weary his frame."

She clothed Isaac in his richest garments, and she and her maidens accompanied him on his way till Abraham bid them depart and return unto their homes.

Abraham and Isaac journeyed on with the two lads, who were Ishmael, Abraham's son, and Eleazer, the steward of his house.

As they journeyed Ishmael spoke to Eleazer, saying:

"My father intends to sacrifice his son Isaac for a burnt

[p. 54]

offering; therefore, I will be his heir, for am I not his first-born son?"

"Nay," answered Eleazer, "thy father drove thee forth that thou shouldst not inherit his possessions; to me, his faithful servant, will all his wealth descend."

As they proceeded on their way Isaac addressed his father, saying:

"Behold, my father, here is the fire and the wood, but where is the lamb for the sacrifice?"

And Abraham answered:

"Our God hath chosen thee, my son; thee, a creature without blemish, as an acceptable burnt-offering to His glory in place of the lamb."

And then said Isaac:

"To the will of the living God in thankfulness I bow."

"My son," said Abraham, "is there any secret evil in thy heart, or any wrong upon thy mind; if so, dell me freely, my son, keep naught from me in this great hour."

And Isaac answered:

"By the life of God, my father, I know no evil, I am conscious of no regret. Blessed be the Lord who has desired me this day."

This answer of his son was very gratifying to the father's heart, and they continued on in silence, until they reached the spot which God had selected.

Then Abraham built an altar to the Lord, and his son handed him the stones and assisted him in the work.

They who trust in God are ever strengthened, and though their eyes were wet with tears their hearts were firm, confiding in their God.

When the altar was built Abraham laid the wood upon it in order, and then he bound his son Isaac upon the wood.

[p. 55]

And Isaac spoke to his father, saying:

"My father, bind me well, in order that I may not, by struggling, profane the sacrifice; be firm, my father, and sharpen well the knife. Tell my mother that her joy is gone; the son she bore at ninety years surrendered to the flame. When I am consumed, take with thee of the ashes left, and say to Sarah, This is thy Isaac, who to God was offered."

When Abraham heard these words he wept bitterly, but Isaac continued with a firm voice:

"Now quickly, father, do the will of God." And he stretched his neck to meet the knife which rested in his father's hand.

 

"And Abraham went and took the ram, and offered him up for a burnt-offering in the stead of his son."

Abraham sprinkled the ram's blood upon the altar, saying:

"May this blood be considered even as the blood of my son, offered as a sacrifice before the Lord."

And so through the entire sacrificial service Abraham prayed:

"May this be received even as the blood of my son, offered as a burnt-offering before the Lord."

While Abraham and Isaac were away upon this mission an old man approached Sarah, near her tent, and said to her:

"Knowest thou that Abraham has offered up thy Isaac as a sacrifice before the Lord. Aye, despite his struggles and his cries, thy son has been made a victim to the knife."

Then Sarah uttered a heart-rending cry, and throwing herself upon the ground she sobbed bitterly:

[p. 56]

"My son, my son, would that I had perished this day for thee. Thee, whom I have raised and nourished, my life and all my love was thine. Now is my pride and gladness turned to mourning, for the fire has consumed my joy. Take comfort, oh, my heart! the lives of all God carries in the hollow of his hand. Blessed are they who follow Thy commands, for Thou art righteous, and Thy words are truth; therefore, oh Lord, though mine eyes weep bitter tears, my heart is glad."

Then Sarah rose and journeyed from Bear Sheba to Hebron, and she inquired upon the road concerning her husband and her son, but she was unable to ascertain their whereabouts.

Returning to her tents she was met by the same old man who had before addressed her, and thus he spoke:

"Verily I did inform thee falsely, for Isaac, thy son, lives."

Sarah's heart was stronger for grief than joy. These tidings and the revulsion in her feelings killed her; she died and was gathered to her people.

And when Abraham and Isaac returned and found the dead body of Sarah, they lifted up their voices in bitter lamentation, and all their servants joined with Abraham and Isaac in grief for the departed.

 

Now Isaac was fifty-nine years of age, and his wife Rebecca was barren, and Isaac prayed unto the Lord to visit his wife even as he had visited Sarah, his mother, saying:

"Oh Lord, God of heaven and of earth, thou fittest both with thy goodness and mercy. From the house of his father, and from his kindred's home, thou didst bring my father to this place, promising to increase his seed,

[p. 57]

even as the stars of the heavens, and to give to them this land as a heritage and possession. Fulfil, oh God, these words which thou hast spoken. To thee, oh God, we look in hope and pray for children, for those whom thou hast promised us. Oh, my God, to thee I look, in hope."

And God hearkened to the prayer of Isaac, and his wife bore him two sons, twins. The one, the first, she called "Esau," and the other "Jacob."

And Esau was fond of outdoor life, while Jacob stayed at home learning from Abraham, his grandfather, the ways and teachings of the Lord.

When the lads were about fifteen years old, Abraham died at the age of one hundred and seventy-one years. And when the inhabitants of Canaan learned of his decease they, with all its kings and princes, hastened to do honour to his remains, and all his relatives, who lived in Charan, and the sons of his concubines, came also to the funeral. And Isaac and Ishmael buried him in the cave of Machpelah, and all who knew him mourned for him a year.

Very few men like Abraham has the sun looked upon. From his youth he served his Maker and walked upright before Him, and from his birth even unto the moment of his death his God was with him. He spoke of God's goodness to all with whom he came in contact; he built a grove for travellers and opened his doors in wide and generous hospitality to the needy, the weary, and all who passed his way. For Abraham's sake the Lord looked kindly on the people of the earth, and after his death God blessed Isaac, his son, and prospered him greatly.

And the sons of Isaac grew in strength and years. Esau was a man of evil thoughts, of quick passions, and a lover of outdoor life, Jacob was a shepherd, an intelligent and

[p. 58]

domestic man, following in the path which Abraham had pointed out to him.

And it came to pass that Esau went hunting in the field upon a certain day, when Nimrod, too, was engaged in the same pursuit. Both being mighty hunters a rivalry existed between the two, a deadly jealousy. Esau happened to see Nimrod when all his attendants, save two men, had left him. Esau concealed himself, and when Nimrod passed the place where he was hiding pointed his arrow, pulled the cord, and shot Nimrod through the heart. Then rushing from his concealment, Esau engaged in a deadly struggle with Nimrod's two attendants, and overcame and killed them both. Then stripping from Nimrod's shoulders the wonderful coat, before mentioned, which God had made for Adam, Esau hastened home, reaching his father's tent weary, hungry, tired, and faint. Then Esau said to Jacob, his brother:

"Give me of yonder red pottage,--let me eat of it, I pray, for I am faint."

And Jacob said:

"Sell me this day thy right of first born."

And Esau thought in his heart, "They will surely avenge upon me the death of Nimrod," and he answered:

"Behold, I am going to die. What can the right of first born profit me?"

So Jacob bought from Esau his right of first born, and also a burial plot for himself in the cave of Machpelah.

Then Jacob gave Esau bread and pottage of lentils, and Esau eat and drank and went his way.

For money did Jacob purchase these rights, and after the bargain was concluded, he gave his brother the food he had asked for.

The body of Nimrod was found and brought to Babel

[p. 59]

and buried there, And Nimrod lived two hundred and fifteen years, and was killed by a descendant of Abraham, even as he had foreseen in his dream.

 

When Jacob received the blessing which was intended for Esau, Isaac was very old, and Esau said:

"My father will soon die, and then I will take vengeance on Jacob for this wrong which he has done me." This threat was repeated to Rebecca, who called Jacob and bade him flee to Charan, to her brother Laban, to tarry there until his brother's fury had abated.

Then Isaac sent messengers after Jacob, with a repetition of his blessing and this charge: "Take not a wife from the daughters of Canaan, for thus has said my father Abraham, in the word of the Lord, the word which has promised this land to our seed if we obey the Lord and observe faithfully his commands. Arise, go to Charan, to the house of Bethuel, thy mother's father, and take heed that thou forgettest not the Lord thy God and all His ways. Turn neither to the right nor to the left after the vanities of the people among whom thou goest. The Almighty will give thee grace in the eyes of the men of the land, and thou shalt take a wife there according to thy desire, that God may grant thee the blessing of Abraham, and make thee fruitful and multiply thee until thou becomest an assembly in the land. That He may bring thee back to this land with children, gladness, and prosperity."

Jacob obeyed his father and journeyed on towards Mesopotamia. He was seventy-seven years of age when he started forth from Bear Sheba.

When Jacob had departed from his father's house, Esau called to him his son Eliphas, and said to him in secrecy, "Go follow after Jacob with thy bow in thy hand, lie in

[p. 60]

wait for him, slay him upon the mountains, take for thy own what treasure he has with him, and then return to me."

Eliphas was then but thirteen years of age, yet he was remarkably swift of foot and understood well the handling of the bow. He obeyed his father, and taking some men with him, followed after Jacob and overtook him on the borders of Canaan.

When Jacob saw Eliphas coming after him he halted and awaited his approach, thinking that his nephew carried some message from home. When Eliphas came near he drew his sword. Jacob inquired the reason of his pursuit, and the lad answered, "Thus and thus has my father commanded me, and I dare not disobey his orders."

When Jacob learned Esau's intention, and saw that the lad seemed determined to do as he had been bidden, he turned to him and the men with him, and said:

"Take all that I have, all that my father and my mother gave into my hands, but spare my life. Your kindness will be accounted to you as righteousness."

The Lord gave Jacob favour in their eyes, and they allowed him to proceed unharmed on his journey. His gold and silver, however, everything of value that he had taken with him from his father's house, Eliphas and his comrades seized and carried to Esau. Esau was strongly displeased because they had listened to Jacob's pleadings, and the treasure which they had seized he added to his own store.

Jacob proceeded on his journey towards Charan. When he reached the Mount of Moriah he tarried there and slept that night. And the Lord appeared to him and said, "I am the Lord, the God of Abraham and Isaac, thy father The ground whereon thou liest will I give to thy children and behold I will be with thee, therefore fear not. I will

[p. 61]

guard thee wheresoever thou goest, and I will increase thy seed as the stars of the heaven. I will disperse thy enemies before thee; they will fight against thee, but they will not prevail. With gladness and great wealth will I bring thee back to thy father's land."

Jacob awoke from his sleep enchanted with the remembrance of the beautiful and encouraging vision which had blessed his slumbers. He called the place Beth El.

When Jacob arrived in Charan he told his uncle Laban how Eliphas, the son of Esau, had despoiled him, and bursting into tears, proclaimed himself a beggar.

"Then," said Laban, "surely thou art my bone and my flesh. I will take care of thee even though thou art penniless."

 

After Laban's fruitless pursuit after Jacob when he left with his wives, children, and chattels, and God had said to the son of Bethuel, "Take heed to thee, speak with Jacob neither good nor evil," he sent, after parting with his son-in-law, messengers to Esau, charged to deliver these words:

"We come from Laban, thy relative, thy mother's brother, and in his words we say, 'Knowest thou what Jacob, thy brother, has done to me? Faint and needy he came to me, and I received him into my house with honours and affection. I gave him my daughters for wives, and the handmaids of my daughters did I also give him. God blessed him for my sake, and he accumulated much wealth. He begat children and acquired men-servants and maid-servants, sheep, oxen, and cattle of all kinds, a great multitude, and likewise silver and gold. With all this he left me, fled secretly with all his possessions towards the land of Canaan, his father's home. He denied me even the privilege of kissing my daughters; as captives he led them with him, and worse

[p. 62]

than all, my gods he stole. By the brook of Jabak I left him with all his substance, and if thou desirest to pursue him, there will he be found. Go, then, and do with him what is pleasing to thy heart.'"

When Esau heard these words of the messengers of Laban, all the wrong which Jacob had done him freshened in his memory, and his anger and hate against his brother burned once more fiercely in his heart. He gathered together his sons and servants, and all the family of Seer, a company of four hundred men, and at their head he set out to meet Jacob and to smite him.

After the messengers of Laban left Esau, they journeyed to Canaan, and there informed Rebecca of her son Esau's preparations and his intention to waylay and punish Jacob. Rebecca immediately sent seventy-two of Isaac's men to assist her favourite child. They met him at the brook Jabak, and when he saw them he said, "Surely here is help from heaven," and he called the place Machanayim.

Jacob recognised his father's servitors, and asked after the wellbeing of his parents, to which the messengers responded, "They live in peace, and farther we bring this message from thy mother. 'I have heard, my son, that Esau, thy brother, intends to meet thee on the road with the men of Seer. Therefore, I pray thee, heed my words. When thou shalt see him, be not rash nor headstrong, but greet him humbly and with a gracious present from the abundance with which God hath blessed thee. When he addresses thee, answer meekly, kindly, and thus will his wrath be turned from thee. Remember, he is thy elder brother, and to him is thy respect and honour due.'"

Jacob wept at these words of his mother, but he obeyed her request. He sent messengers to meet Esau on the road, and to offer him such words as his mother had directed.

[p. 63]

[paragraph continues] These messengers met Esau and his company, and spoke as Jacob had commanded them, but Esau answered with pride:

"Nay, nay, the truth I have heard. I know how Jacob treated Laban; how he repaid the kindness of the relative who gave him wives and substance; how he fled, taking the children of Laban with him, as though they had been captives of the sword. Not Laban only has he wronged; twice he supplanted me. Therefore I come to meet him, and the vengeance for which I have waited twenty years shall now be mine."

When these words were carried to Jacob he was sorely distressed. Earthly help seemed unavailable; with a full heart he cast himself before the Lord and prayed earnestly for deliverance from the trouble which threatened him and all his people.

Then he divided his people and his flocks into two companies. One detachment he placed under the command of Eleazer of Damascus, the servant of Abraham, with his sons, and the other under Elinus, the son of Eleazer, and his sons. And thus he commanded them:

"Travel apart, so that if one company shall perchance be smitten, the other may escape."

Then, when he met Esau, he bowed to the ground before him seven times, and God gave him grace in his brother's eyes. Esau's hate died away, and natural affection gaining the mastery, he raised Jacob from the ground and embraced and kissed him.

 

Jacob encamped with all his family before the city of Shechem, and purchased a lot of land for a dwelling from the sons of Chamor for the sum of fifty shekels.

Here he made his home, and lived in peace and safety for about eighteen months.

[p. 64]

Then the inhabitants of Shechem made a great feast, an occasion of joyousness, dancing, singing, and merriment of all kinds, and all the daughters of the land joined in the general revelry. And it came to pass that Rachel and Leah, the wives of Jacob, and Dinah, his daughter, felt a great desire to witness this scene of enjoyment, and together they repaired to the place where the festivities were held. All the nobles of the city were present, and Shechem, the son of the king, was also one of the participants.

He happened to see Dinah, and was immediately attracted by her great beauty and modest appearance. He inquired as to who she was, and learned that she was the daughter of Jacob the Hebrew, who had lately settled in his father's land. His passion grew very strong, and taking advantage of an opportunity he carried the frightened girl forcibly to his house.

Rachel and Leah hurried home and informed Jacob of the occurrence. He immediately sent twelve servants to the house of Shechem to demand the girl, but they were insolently met by the prince's retainers and driven back to Jacob. He said nothing, but waited quietly until his sons should return to their home.

Shechem, in the meantime, sent a messenger to his father, requesting him to visit Jacob and demand Dinah as a wife for him. The king was much displeased with the affair, and seeking his son, he said, "Canst thou not find a wife among the daughters of our land? Why shouldst thou desire this Hebrew damsel, a stranger among thy race?"

Shechem replied to his father, "She is pleasing in my eyes," and he impressed his father so completely with his love for the maiden that the king at length consented to seek the patriarch, Jacob, and gain his consent to the marriage.

[p. 65]

Now when the sons of Jacob returned home, and learned of the occurrence and the violence with which their only sister had been treated, their hearts burned with indignation.

"The penalty for this crime is death," they exclaimed; our sister has been sinned against with the sin which God warned Noah and his children to shun if they desired life. Death shall be the punishment of this violator of our home, death at our hands, to him, his family, and the whole city."

While the sons of Jacob were thus speaking, Chamor, the father of Shechem, entered into their presence, and addressed Jacob:

"My son Shechem desires thy daughter for a wife; give her to him, I pray thee, and thy people may intermarry with the daughters of our land. Our country is large, and it is all before thee to trade therein, or do soever as thou pleasest, if thou wilt but consent to the wishes of my son."

As Chamor concluded, his son, Shechem, entered, and continued his father's propositions:

"Let me find grace in your eyes," he said to the men before him. "Give me the damsel for a wife, and whatever dowry you may demand shall be cheerfully given."

Simeon and Levi, desiring time to perfect a plan for inflicting punishment for the wrong done their sister, replied to Shechem and his father with a cunning tongue:

"What thou hast said to us we will consider. Our sister is in thy hands. Give us time, however, to consult with our grandfather, Isaac; he is wise, and knows well what should be done in a case like this; according to his welds we will act."

Shechem acquiesced in this arrangement, and withdrew, with his father, from Jacob's house.

When they had departed the sons of Jacob reiterated their determination to put the man of violence to death, and

[p. 66]

with him the men of the city who had encouraged him in the act.

"Listen," said Simeon, "to my advice. We will say to these men, 'Our God hath enjoined upon us the act of circumcision, and we cannot give our daughters and sisters to those who have not entered into this covenant. Become like us, and then we may freely intermarry; if not, we will take our sister and go from among you;' then when they are weak and suffering we will fall upon them, and all their males shall die by the sword."

This advice was pleasing to his brethren, and when Shechem and Chamor came again to them for their decision, they proclaimed this as the counsel of Isaac, saying that their grandfather had decided that for them to give their sister to an uncircumcised man would be a reproach to them for ever.

Shechem and his father then gathered the people at the gates of the city, and made known to them the proposition of the Israelites, counselling them to accept the same.

All the citizens seemed willing to do the pleasure of their king save Hadkam, the son of Pered, the father of Chamor, and his six brothers. They scorned Jacob and his sons, and defended the mothers of their city who refused to allow their children to undergo the operation.

"Shame to you that you should consider such a thing," said they. "Are not the daughters of the Canaanites good enough for wives, that you wish to wed the daughters of this Hebrew, this stranger among you? Beware of this rash act, which your fathers never enjoined upon you; the undertaking cannot be prosperous. What answer can you make to your brethren, the Canaanites, when they demand your reason for this folly? And how will you appear in the eyes of your brethren, the children of Ham, when 'tis said, 'For

[p. 67]

a Hebrew woman did Shechem, his father, and all the inhabitants of his city, commit an abomination?' Whither will ye flee? Where will ye be able to hide your shame? We will not bend beneath this yoke, which you take so willingly upon you; we will gather our brethren, and we will smite you, aye to death."

Chamor and Shechem began to regret their impulsive proceeding, but they answered:

"Think not that we did this because we love the Hebrews; no, merely to blind their eyes, and obtain their daughter. Wait but till we have recovered from the operation, and they and all that is theirs shall be ours, to use according to our pleasure."

Dinah overheard the discussion, and she sent a hand-maiden to her father's house to inform him and her brethren of the designs of Shechem.

"By the life of the Lord, the God of the universe," swore Simeon and Levi, "to-morrow will we fall upon this people, and not a remnant shall escape our just anger."

They carried out their intention, and coming suddenly upon the people next day, while they were suffering from the effects of their doing, the sons of Jacob slew Chamor, Shechem, and all the inhabitants of the city, and carried their sister Dinah to her home.

When Jacob realised the result of their rashness he was grieved, angered, and alarmed.

"What is this that you have done to me!" he exclaimed. "In this country I thought I had found rest, and now when the relatives of these people learn what you have done they will fall upon me and destroy me and my house."

But his sons answered:

"All this lies at the door of Shechem. Wouldst thou

[p. 68]

have us hold our peace and suffer quietly this immoral conduct and cruel wrong!"

The number of men killed by the Hebrews was forty-seven. The women they took for slaves.

And it came to pass when Simeon and Levi left the city of Shechem that two men, who had been in hiding, hastened to the city of Thapnah and told to its king and its inhabitants all that the sons of Jacob had wrought in Shechem. The king refused to believe that ten men could thus overcome a city, and he sent messengers to ascertain whether the report was true. "Even in the time of Nimrod, when men were mighty," said he, "such a thing would have been impossible." When his messengers returned, however, and reported that in all Shechem they found but weeping women, he gathered his men together, and said:

"Prepare yourselves to go and fight these Hebrews. We will do to them even as they have done to our brethren of Shechem."

But his princes answered his words, and said:

"With our people alone we cannot prevail over these Hebrews. Ten men destroyed a city, and not one man was able to stand up against them. Let us send to the kings around us for help, and then perchance we may be able to cope with them."

This advice seemed reasonable to the king, and he sent to the kings of the Emorites who dwelt around him, informing them of the action of Jacob's sons, and begging their assistance in dealing out punishment for the same.

The Emorites answered his appeal, and gathered together about ten thousand men, who started out to fight the children of Jacob.

Jacob was greatly terrified at this, and again upbraided his sons for their rashness.

[p. 69]

Then Judah spoke to his father, and said:

"Did we act without cause, Simeon, Levi, and the rest of us? Cruelly they wronged our sister, violating the chastity of our house, and transgressing the command of our God. For this reason did the Lord deliver the city into our hands Wherefore fear? Why grieve, and find displeasure in thy heart against thy sons? The same God who gave the men of Shechem into our hands will deliver to us also these Emorites who come against us. Keep thy peace, oh our father! fear not, but pray to the Lord our God that he may protect us and deliver our enemies into our power."

Then Judah summoned his servants and bade them go and discover what men, and how many, were marching against them. Then he addressed Simeon and Levi, and said to them:

"Prepare yourselves, and act like heroes. The Lord our God is with us. Gird on each man his sword and his bow; trusting in heaven, we will fight these Emorites and find deliverance."

The sons of Jacob and their servants and the servants of Isaac, who lived in Hebron, then prepared themselves for battle; and Isaac, the head of their house, prayed to God for their success in these words:

"Oh Lord God, thou didst speak unto my father and make a promise to him, saying, 'I will increase thy seed as the stars in heaven.' To me hast Thou reiterated this promise; and now, behold, the strength of Canaan comes to wrestle with my son. Oh Lord God of the universe, turn the purpose of these kings; let the dread of my children fall upon them and humble their pride. Even that they withdraw and return to their homes without shedding blood. Deliver my children and their servants

[p. 70]

from the strength of these kings, for in Thy hand is the might, the power, and the strength."

Jacob also uttered a solemn prayer to the same effect.

When the Emorites drew near to Jacob's sons and their hosts, the kings and princes met to consult before beginning the attack, for their hearts were not thoroughly rid of the fear which the prowess of the Hebrews had cast upon them. The Lord answered the prayers of Isaac and Jacob, and this dread and fear augmented, and at last found vent in these words from one of their number, words which the others echoed in their hearts:

"We are acting foolishly in attempting to fight these Hebrews; we are marching to our deaths. Ten men overcame the inhabitants of Shechem, and now these same ten men with all their servants stand before us. Their God delights in them, and they live under His especial protection. None of the gods of other nations are able to perform such wonders as their God has wrought in behalf of this, his favourite people. Did not Nimrod endeavour to destroy their progenitor Abraham, and did not their God deliver him even from a furnace of fire? Did not this same Abraham defeat four kings who had carried off his relative Lot, who lived in Sodom? Their God is powerful, He delights in them, and He will give them the victory over us. This same Jacob He delivered from Esau and four hundred men. Could ten men have destroyed a city without assistance from heaven? Were we a hundred times greater in number than we are we should meet but with defeat, for we do not fight against them, but against their God. Let us turn back and attack them not."

One by one the kings of the Emorites withdrew and journeyed homeward without disturbing Jacob. The Hebrews remained in position awaiting the attack until

[p. 71]

evening, but when the Emorites came not they returned unto their homes. Then the Lord appeared to Jacob, saying, "Arise, go up to Beth El, and dwell there, and raise there an altar to the God who hath delivered thee and thy children from trouble." And Jacob and his sons journeyed to Beth El according to the commands of God.

Jacob was then ninety-and-nine years of age. He had lived at Beth El formerly called Luz, for about six months when the nurse of Rebecca, Deborah, died, and Jacob buried her under an oak tree at Beth El. Rebecca, the daughter of Bethuel, his mother, died also about this time, and was buried in the cave of Machpelah. When Jacob was one hundred years old the Lord appeared to him and called him "Israel." He then journeyed with his family to Hebron, to live with Isaac, his father. While on this journey his wife, Rachel, died, at the age of forty-five years. And Jacob and his family lived with Isaac in the land of Canaan, as the Lord had commanded Abraham, their father.

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 72]

  

CHAPTER IV.

  

FROM JOSEPH'S YOUTH TO HIS ELEVATION OVER EGYPT.

JOSEPH, the son of Jacob and Rachel, did not take part in the war of Shechem: he was but a lad, too young to associate with his brothers. Yet he experienced a desire to emulate their greatness, and he felt that his fame would yet be superior to theirs. His father loved him tenderly as the son of his old age, and as a token of this love he made him a handsome coat, a garment of many colours. This especial mark of distinction increased Joseph's natural feeling of superiority, and as he found fault with his brothers' doings and carried tales to his father he soon gained their enmity; they could not even speak to him in a peaceable manner.

When Joseph was seventeen years of age he dreamed his well-known dream, and related it to his brethren.

"What!" they exclaimed, "do you presume to tell us that you shall reign over us?"

Joseph then related the dream to his father, who listened attentively, and in his great love kissed and blessed the lad. And when the other sons of Jacob learned of this action of their father they hated Joseph still more. But when the second dream was told them, and Joseph stated that the sun, the moon, and eleven stars bowed down to him, their anger reached a climax, and even Jacob felt himself called upon to rebuke the ambitious dreamer.

And it came to pass, on a certain day, the sons of Jacob started out to feed their father's flocks, and remained away

[p. 73]

so long a time that Jacob became troubled, for their welfare. He thought that perhaps the men of Shechem had received aid and wrought vengeance on his sons for the warfare they had brought upon that city.

So Jacob called Joseph to him; and said:

"Thy brothers started out to feed the flocks in Shechem, and they have not yet returned. Go, I pray, and seek them, and bring me back word of their well-doing."

Joseph wandered around some time in the neighbourhood of Shechem without seeing aught of his brethren, and he did not know which way to turn to seek them, when a man espied him straying aimlessly about, and asked, "Whom seekest thou?" Joseph answered, "I am looking for my brethren; knowest thou which way they have travelled?" "I do," replied the man; "I saw thy brethren, and I heard them say, 'Let us go to Dothan.'"

When Joseph's brethren saw the lad approaching them they conspired against him, and resolved to kill him.

"Behold," said Simeon, "the great master of dreams comes this way. Now let us destroy him; we can cast his body into one of the pits in the wilderness, and when our father inquires concerning him we can say that a wild beast has devoured him."

But when Reuben heard these words he said:

"No, we must not do this thing. Our father could never pardon us for such a crime. Rather cast him in one of the pits and let him perish there, but shed not his blood."

This proposition was made by Reuben with the purpose of rescuing the lad later, and returning him safely to his father.

When Joseph was cast into the pit, in accordance with this suggestion, he cried loudly to his brethren:

[p. 74]

"What are ye doing? wherefore are ye treating me thus? What have I done,--what is my sin? Have ye no fear of the Lord that ye do this thing, for am I not of your flesh and blood, the son of Jacob? Reuben, Judah, Levi, Simeon," he cried, "lift me up out of this pit,--oh, sons of Jacob, have mercy upon me! If I have sinned against you, remember the precepts of your father, of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, to have mercy on the fatherless, to give food to the hungry, drink to those who thirst, clothing to the naked; and will ye deny mercy to your own flesh and blood? If I have sinned against you, oh pardon me for the sake of our father, Jacob."

His brothers, however, moved away from the pit, that they might not hear his cries, and they sat down to partake of their usual meal. While eating they consulted as to the final disposition of their brother; they were undecided whether to leave him as he was, to kill him, or to restore him to his father.

While considering the matter they saw a party of Ishmaelites approaching, on their way down to Egypt, and Judah said to his brethren, "What would it profit us to kill our brother? Let us sell him to this party of Ishmaelites, let them carry him whither they will; perchance he may be destroyed among the people of the earth; but our hands will not have shed his blood."

The brothers agreed to this proposition, and resolved to sell Joseph to the Ishmaelites.

But it happened that while they were discussing the question, a party of Midianites on a journey were seeking for a well of water. They lighted by chance upon the pit in which Joseph was concealed, and looking in, they were astonished to meet the gaze of a bright and handsome lad. They drew Joseph up from the pit and carried him along

[p. 75]

with them. As they passed by, the sons of Jacob saw Joseph with them, and called aloud:

"Hold! Wherefore have ye done this, to steal our slave whom we cast into the pit for disobedience? Come, give him up."

"And is he your slave?" answered the Midianites; "does he serve you? Likely it is the reverse, for he is handsomer and nobler than any among ye. We found the lad in the pit, and we shall take him with us."

"Give us our slave," repeated the sons of Jacob, or peradventure we shall kill you."

The Midianites drew their weapons, and were ready to enter upon a bloody fray at once.

"Beware," said Simeon, "do ye not know that we killed a whole city? Beware, if ye give us not our slave we may treat you as we treated the city of Shechem."

Upon hearing these words the Midianites lowered their tone, and assumed a more amicable attitude.

"What do you want," they asked, "with a disobedient slave? Sell him to us; we will pay you whatever you may ask."

A bargain was at once concluded, and the sons of Jacob sold their brother Joseph to the Midianites for twenty pieces of silver, for Reuben was absent, unable to speak a word to change their purpose.

The Midianites, taking Joseph with them, journeyed on towards Gilead. As they journeyed, however, they regretted the purchase which they had made, and they said one to the other, "See, this is a lad of noble appearance; doubtless the men from whom we bought him stole him from the land of the Hebrews, and if search is made for him he may be found in our hands; this will surely be death to us."

While they were speaking in this strain, the body of

[p. 76]

[paragraph continues] Ishmaelites which the sons of Jacob had seen, approached the Midianites, and the latter hailing them, sold Joseph for the same amount they had paid for him, glad to be rid of the fear which had seized them.

The Ishmaelites placed Joseph upon one of their camels and carried him with them into Egypt. Joseph wept bitterly during this journey at the thought that each step took him farther away from his father's house, and shut the gates of hope more securely behind him. The Ishmaelites were provoked at his sighs and weeping, and treated him quite cruelly.

On their way they passed the spot where Rachel, Joseph's mother, lay buried. Joseph knew the spot, and throwing himself upon his mother's grave, he gave free vent to the anguish of his soul.

"My mother, oh my mother," he cried, "rise from thy grave and look upon thy son! He is sold for a slave, and there is no eye to pity him. Arise and look upon thy son, weep with him for his trouble and his distress! Answer me, oh my mother! Awake from thy sleep, and take up arms against my brethren for thy son! My coat they have torn from me, and they have consigned me into bondage; twice have I been sold, separated from my father, from every compassionate heart, from every pitying eye. Arise, my mother, call upon thy God! See, my mother, whom the Eternal will justify, and whom He will condemn! Wake from thy sleep, my mother, seek my father, stricken down in grief, whisper to him words of comfort and glad tidings, that his heart may live again. Arise, my mother, and look upon thy son!"

The Ishmaelites drove Joseph from his mother's grave with blows and threats. Then Joseph spoke to them: "Let me find grace in your eyes," said he; "take me

[p. 77]

home, I pray you, to my father's house, and he will make all of you rich."

But they laughed, and answered him:

"Art thou not a slave? Who is thy father? Lo, thou hast been twice sold; thou art a slave, and a disobedient slave; hadst thou been worthy thou wouldst not have been twice sold."

Joseph wept, and pined, and grew sick; and his masters said:

"Behold, the boy will die upon our hands, and the money which we have paid for him will be lost to us. He wishes to go home to his father's house; let us carry him thither, and 'tis likely we shall receive the money that we paid for him."

But others answered, "No, the distance is too great; should we turn back now, we shall be kept but so much longer from our own homes. Let us take the lad to Egypt; we will be able to sell him there, and for a large price."

This advice met with the approval of the majority of the party, and they carried Joseph into Egypt.

Now when the sons of Jacob had sold their brother their consciences smote them, and they wished to repurchase him; but on account of the second sale they were unable to find him. While they were seeking for him Reuben returned to the pit in which Joseph had been placed, designing to release him. He stood at the edge of the pit, but he heard no sound. Then he called aloud, "Joseph, Joseph!" but still there came no answer--all was still. Reuben became greatly terrified; he thought that Joseph had died of fright, and he descended into the pit, hoping that the body might not be beyond resuscitation. When he found the pit empty he rent his garments and cried aloud,

[p. 78]

[paragraph continues] "How can I return to my father! How look upon his face and Joseph dead!"

He then hurried after his brethren, and found them consulting as to the manner in which they should inform their father of Joseph's loss. Reuben upbraided his brethren, and said to them, "Evil has been your behaviour; our father's old age you bring in sorrow to the grave."

The brothers agreed to keep the fact of Joseph's fate a secret, and acting upon the advice of Issachar, they took Joseph's coat, tore it in several places, and killing a kid dipped the garment in its blood, and then trampled it in the dust. Then they sent the coat to their father by the hands of Naphtali, and these words they charged him to deliver with the coat:

"Behold, we gathered our herds together and proceeded upon the read to Sheehan, and this coat we found by the way, in the wilderness, torn, smeared with blood, and trampled in the dust. Examine it, we pray thee, and see whether or not it be the coat of thy son."

Jacob immediately recognised Joseph's coat, and fell with his face to the ground. He remained motionless for a long time, and then he arose and wept aloud, crying, "It is my son's coat."

Towards evening he sent for his sons, and the messenger found them with their clothing rent and dust upon their heads.

When they reached home the bitter lamentation of their father touched their hearts, and it was with self-accusing consciences that they denied having seen Joseph and repeated their story of the finding of the coat.

Jacob gave himself up to the abandonment of grief, and lay with his face to the ground. Judah raised his father's head and wiped the tears from his father's eyes, but Jacob

[p. 79]

refused to be comforted. "Some wild beast has devoured Joseph," he said, "I shall never see him more;" and he mourned for Joseph many years.

The Ishmaelites carried Joseph down to Egypt, and when they came near to the place they met four men, the descendants of Medan, the son of Abraham and Ketura, and they said to them:

"Do you not wish to purchase this slave from us?"

The men saw that Joseph was a handsome and likely lad, and they bought him from the Ishmaelites for nine shekels, and carried him into Egypt.

Then these Medanites said, "Behold, Potiphar, the officer of Pharaoh, captain of the guard, desires to buy a slave, a trusty, active youth, to superintend his household. Let us see whether we can sell this lad to him."

The Medanites carried Joseph before Potiphar, and the latter was very favourably impressed with his bearing and appearance.

"What is his price?" he inquired.

"Four pieces of silver," replied the Medanites.

"I will buy him," said Potiphar, "provided you bring before me the man from whom you purchased him. He does not look like a slave, and I fear he has been stolen from his country and his home."

The Medanites then hutted up the Ishmaelites from whom they had bought Joseph, and Potiphar, satisfied with their account of the manner in which they had obtained possession of the lad, paid the four pieces of silver, and purchased Joseph for his slave.

Joseph found grace in the eyes of Potiphar, and was placed over the house of the latter, and over all his possessions. And the Lord was with Joseph, and for his sake blessed Potiphar and all his household.

[p. 80]

At this time Joseph was about eighteen years of age, and a lad of such beautiful appearance that his equal could not be found in the land of Egypt. Being obliged, in the pursuance of his duties, to enter freely all parts of his master's house, he attracted the attention of Zelicha, Potiphar's wife. She was fascinated by his manners and handsome form and face, and declared to him day by day her passion, praying for a return upon his part of the favour with which she regarded him. Joseph refused to listen to her, and endeavoured to rid himself of her attentions. When she praised his beauty, and said, "Thou art fairer than all the rest of the world," he replied, "The same One who created me created also all mankind." When she admired his fine eyes, he replied, "What can they avail me; they will not move or sparkle in the grave."

When Zelicha found that Joseph could not be induced by fair words to desecrate his master's house, she tried threats of death and loss of freedom in case of further obstinacy; but Joseph replied to them, "The God who hath created man, looseneth the fetters of those who are bound, and He will deliver me from thy chastisement."

Her female friends who called to see her also admired Joseph, and lauded his beauty. On one occasion when fruit was set before the visitors, one of them, paring the same, cut her fingers, and knew nothing of the accident till her attention was called to the blood upon her garments, for her eyes were fixed on Joseph, and her mind was filled with thoughts of his appearance.

Thus time passed on, and though Zelicha still entreated, Joseph remained cold to her allurements.

And it came to pass at the time of the overflowing of the Nile, that all the inhabitants of Egypt left their houses, the king, the princes, and all the people, to see the overflow

[p. 81]

and make a holiday in its honour. And with the rest of the people the family of Potiphar went also, all save Joseph, who remained to protect his master's goods, and Zelicha, who remained to be alone with Joseph.

She attired herself in her richest garments, and was more ardent than ever in her appeals to Joseph, so that to escape them he turned and fled abruptly from her presence. As he did so she caught his garment to stay him, but it sundered, and a portion remained in her hand. As she looked upon it, and became conscious of how she had been shamed, a deep feeling of hate entered her heart, and she was also terrified lest the affair might now become known to her husband. She quickly replaced her elegant clothing with her ordinary wear, and calling a lad she sent him to summon home the men of the house. When they arrived she met them with loud wailing, and related to them a story of Joseph's presumption, crediting him with the entreaties and protestations which she had herself made, and adding to them a charge of violence. "I caught hold of his garment," she said, "and cried with a loud voice; he became frightened and fled, leaving this portion of his cloth in my hand."

The men repeated these charges to Potiphar, who returned to his house in a great rage against Joseph, and commanded at once that the lad should be whipped severely. During the infliction of this punishment Joseph cried aloud, raising his hands to Heaven, "Thou knowest, oh God," said he, "that I am innocent of all these things; wherefore, shall I die through falsehood!"

Potiphar carried Joseph before the judges, and made an accusation against him, saying, "Thus and thus has the slave done." The judges then addressed Joseph, and he gave his version of the story, saying, "Not so; but thus

[p. 82]

and thus did it occur." The judges then ordered that the rent garment should be brought to them, and upon an examination of the same they pronounced Joseph "not guilty." But still they sent him to prison, that the character of the wife of one as high in the state as Potiphar might not suffer.

For twelve long years Joseph was confined in prison, and during this time Zelicha visited him, offering to restore him to honour and liberty if he would but do her will. Yet steadfastly he refused, till finally she abandoned the attempt. And while Joseph was thus in custody, deprived of his freedom, his father Jacob, in Canaan, mourned for him as a father mourns for a beloved child torn from him by death.

 

It came to pass about this time that Pharaoh gave a feast to his officers and princes, and the chief butler and the chief baker waited upon the guests. The princes found stone grits in the bread, and one of them discovered a fly in his wine. Pharaoh was very angry at this, and condemned the two officials to prison, where they remained a whole year.

Then a son, his first child, was born to Pharaoh, and there was great rejoicing in the land. When the infant was three days old Pharaoh ordered a grand banquet, and released the chief butler that he might attend to the same. But the butler forgot his promise to Joseph to remember him in the return to prosperity which he had predicted, and for two years longer the prison was his home.

 

At this time Isaac, the son of Abraham, was still living in the land of Canaan; he was one hundred and eight years old. Esau, his son, was living then in Edom. When Esau learned that his father had grown very feeble, and that his

[p. 83]

last days on earth were approaching, he and his entire family journeyed to Canaan, to his father's house. Jacob and his sons, from Hebron, also journeyed thither, Jacob still mourning for the lost Joseph.

And Isaac said to Jacob, "Bring near to me thy children, in order that I may bless them," and Jacob placed his eleven sons and one daughter by his father's side.

Isaac laid his hands upon the heads of Jacob's children and embraced them each in turn, and he said to them:

"The God of your fathers will bless you, and will increase your seed as the stars of the heaven."

Isaac also blessed the children of Esau, saying:

"The dread of you shall be upon your enemies; your God will fill their hearts with fear."

Then Isaac called them all together, children and grandchildren, and thus addressed them, speaking especially to Jacob:

"The Lord, the God of the Universe, spoke unto me saying: 'Unto thy seed will I give this land to possess it, it thy children will keep my statutes and my ways; and I will establish the oath which I have sworn unto thy father Abraham.' And now, my son, teach thy children, and thy children's children, to fear the Lord and traverse the path which is pleasing in his eyes; for if thou wilt diligently follow His statutes, He will keep with you the covenant which He made with Abraham, and He will look with favour on you and your seed for ever."

Then Isaac died, and Jacob and Esau wept together for their father's demise. They carried his body to the cave of Machpelah, which is in Hebron, and all the kings of Canaan followed with the mourners in the funeral train of Isaac. He was buried with great reverence, even as though he had been a king; his children mourned for him twelve

[p. 84]

months, and the kings of Canaan lamented sorely for thirty days.

Isaac bequeathed his cattle and all his possessions to his two sons.

Esau said then to Jacob, "Behold, this which our father has left us must be divided into two portions, then I will select my share."

Jacob divided all his father's possessions into two portions in the presence of Esau and his sons, and then addressing his brother, said:

"Take unto thyself both these portions which thou seest before thee. Behold, the God of Heaven and Earth spoke unto our ancestors, Abraham and Isaac, saying, 'Unto thy seed will I give this land as an everlasting possession.' Now, all that our father left is before thee; if thou desirest the promised possession, the land of Canaan, take it, and this other wealth shall be mine; or if thou desirest these two portions, be it as it is pleasing in thy eyes, and the land of Canaan shall be the share for me and mine."

Before Esau replied and made his choice, he sought Nebaioth, the son of Ishmael, who was in that country, and asked his advice as to the selection.

Nebaioth answered:

"Behold the Canaanites are now living in the land in peace and safety; at present it is theirs; let Jacob believe that he may inherit it some day; take thou the substance, the personal wealth of thy father."

Esau followed this advice, and taking the personal substance, he gave Jacob for his portion the land of Canaan from the river of Egypt unto the great river, the river Euphrates, also the cave of Machpelah, in Hebron, which Abraham purchased from Ephron for a burying-place. Jacob took it as a burying-place for himself and his seed

[p. 85]

forever. Jacob drew up a deed and recorded all the particulars of the contract, which was duly witnessed and sealed. The following is the expression of the same:

"The land of Canaan and all the cities which it contains,--the Hittites, the Hivites, the Jebusites, the Amorites, the Perizites, and all the seven nations, from the river of Egypt to the river Euphrates; the city of Hebron, which is Kiriath arbah, and the cave which is in it. All this hath Jacob bought with money from his brother Esau, as a possession to him and an inheritance to his sons and their descendants forever."

Jacob put this deed in an earthen vessel, that it might be kept safely, and gave the same as a charge to his children.

Esau took what his father had left and parted from his brother Jacob, as it is written:

"And Esau took his wives, and his sons, and his daughters, and all the persons of his house, and his cattle and his beasts, and all his substance which he had got in the land of Canaan, and went into another country from the face of his brother Jacob" (Gen. 37: 6). He went with all his possessions to the land of Seir, and never returned to Canaan, which became an inheritance unto Israel for everlasting.

 

Then Pharaoh, the king, issued a proclamation throughout the whole land of Egypt to the wise men thereof. And he called upon all the wise men to seek his presence and listen to the dreams which troubled him.

"He who can properly interpret to me the meaning of these visions, shall have his dearest wishes granted as they issue from his lips; but he who is able to read dreams and neglects my bidding, shall surely be put to death.'

Then the wise men, and the soothsayers, and the

[p. 86]

magicians of the land of Egypt, came and stood before the king.

And the king related to them his dream, and though many interpreted no two agreed as to its meaning. They contradicted one another, and they served but to confuse the king. Many were the interpretations. "The seven fat cows," said one, "are seven kings who will arise over Egypt from royal families, and the seven lean cows are seven princes who will arise from them, and in the end of days destroy the seven kings. The seven rank ears are seven great princes of this land who shall in a coming time of war fall into the power of seven princes, now weak and in no wise to be feared."

"The seven fat cows," said another, "are seven queens whom thou shalt marry in the coming days, and the seven lean cows declare that these queens shall die during thy life, oh king! The seven rank ears and the seven lean ears are fourteen children whom thou shalt beget, and they will fight among themselves, and the seven weaker ones shall conquer their stronger brethren."

But the king was not satisfied with these interpretations. His mind was still unquiet, for the Lord had ordained that Joseph was to be released from his prison and elevated to a princely position therefore did Pharaoh remain unsatisfied with the words of his wise men.

And the king was wroth, and he dismissed the wise men from his presence; and all the wise men and the soothsayers and magicians of Egypt went out from the presence of their king in shame and confusion. And the king commanded in his wrath that all these men should be put to death.

When the chief butler heard this he sought the presence of the king, and in deep obeisance before him spoke as follows:

[p. 87]

"Oh king, live forever! May thy greatness, oh king, increase forever through the land. Lo, thou wast wroth with thy servant, and thou didst place him in confinement. For a year was I imprisoned, I and the chief baker. And with us in our dungeon was a Hebrew servant who belonged to the captain of the guard. His name was Joseph, and his master growing wroth with him, had placed him in prison, where he served the captain of the guard, and he served us also.

"And it came to pass when we had been in the prison for a year we dreamed, each, a dream, and the Hebrew slave interpreted for each of us his dream. And lo, as he interpreted our dreams so was the reality. As he spoke so did it come to pass.

"Therefore, my lord king, I pray thee, do not kill the wise men of Egypt for naught. Behold, this slave is still in the prison. If it be pleasing in the eyes of the king let him be sent for. Let him listen to the dreams which trouble the mind of the king, and he will be able to solve them correctly."

The king listened to the words of the chief butler, and he ordered that Joseph should be brought before him. But he commanded his officers to be careful not to frighten the lad, lest through fear he should be unable to interpret correctly.

And the servants of the king brought Joseph forth from his dungeon, and shaved him and clothed him in new garments, and carried him before the king. The king was seated upon his throne, and the glare and glitter of the jewels which ornamented the throne dazzled and astonished the eyes of Joseph.

Now the throne of the king was reached by seven steps and it was the custom of Egypt for a prince or noble who

[p. 88]

held audience with the king, to ascend to the sixth step; but when an inferior or a private citizen of the land was called into his presence, the king descended to the third step and from there spoke with him. So when Joseph came into the presence of the king he bowed to the ground at the foot of the throne, and the king descended to the third step and spoke to him.

And he said:

"Behold, I have dreamed a dream, and among all the wise men and magicians of the land there is not one able to read for me its meaning. I have heard that thou art far-sighted and blest with the gift of divination, and I have sent for thee to solve my dream."

And Joseph answered:

"Oh king, the power is not with me; but God will answer and give Pharaoh peace."

And Joseph found favour in the eyes of the king, and he told to him his dream. And the spirit of God was upon Joseph, and the king inclined his ears and heart to the words of Joseph.

And Joseph said to Pharaoh:

"Let not the king think that his dreams are two and distinct; they have but a single portent, and what the Lord intends doing upon the earth He has shown to Pharaoh in a vision. Let me advise thee, oh king, how thou mayest preserve thy life and the lives of all the inhabitants of thy land from the grievous evils of the famine which is soon to drain and dry up its fruitfulness and its plenty. Let the king appoint a man wise and discreet, a man well versed in the laws of the country, and let him appoint other officers under him to go out through all the length and breadth of the land to gather food during the years of plenty and store it carefully away for future use, that the land may not die

[p. 89]

in the years of famine which will follow. And let the king command the people of the land, that they shall each and every one gather and store up in the years of plenty of the produce of the fields, to provide for their wants when the ground shall be barren and the fields unproductive."

And the king answered, "How knowest thou that thou hast read the dream aright?"

And Joseph said, "Lo, this shall be a sign that my words are true. A son shall be born to the king, and upon the day of his birth, thy first-born son, who is now two years old, shall die."

And when Joseph finished speaking these words, he bowed low before the king and departed from his presence.

The occurrence which Joseph predicted came to pass. The queen bore a son, and upon the day when it was told to the king he rejoiced greatly. But as the messenger of glad tidings retired, the servants of the king found his first-born son dead, and there was a great crying and wailing in the palace of the king.

And when Pharaoh inquired as to the cause of this great cry he was informed of his loss, and remembering the words of Joseph he acknowledged them as true.

After these things the king sent and gathered together all his princes, officers, and men of rank, and when they came before him, he said, "You have seen and heard all the words of this Hebrew, and you know that as he spoke so has the thing occurred; therefore must we believe that his solution of my dream was the correct one, and that his words of advice were of good weight and consideration. We must take measures of protection against the famine which is surely to come upon us. Therefore search, I pray you, over all Egypt for a man with wisdom and knowledge

[p. 90]

in his heart, that we may appoint him governor over the land."

And they answered the king, "The advice of this Hebrew was very good; behold, the country is in the hands of the king to do with it what is pleasing in his eyes; but the Hebrew has proved himself wise and skilful, why should our lord the king not select and appoint him as governor over the land."

"Yea, surely," said the king, "if God has made these things known to the Hebrew, then there is none among us as wise and discreet as he is, What you have suggested is in accordance with my own thoughts; we will appoint the Hebrew our governor, and through his wisdom shall our country be saved the pangs of want."

And Pharaoh sent for Joseph and said to him, "Thou didst advise me to appoint a wise and discreet man to deliver the land from the anguish of famine. Surely, there can be none more discreet than thyself to whom God has made known all these things. Thy name shall no more be Joseph, but 'Zaphenath-Paaneeth' (Revealer of hidden things) shalt thou hereafter be called among men.

"Thou shalt be second to me only, and according to thy words shall the land of Egypt be ruled; only upon the throne shall I be greater than thyself."

Then the king removed his ring from his finger and placed it upon the hand of Joseph. And he dressed Joseph in royal apparel, and placed a crown upon his head and a chain of gold about his neck. And Pharaoh commanded that Joseph should ride in his second chariot throughout the land of Egypt. And the people followed him with music, and a large concourse accompanied him upon his journey.

Five thousand soldiers with drawn swords in their hands,

[p. 91]

swords glittering in the sunlight, preceded him, and twenty thousand soldiers followed. And the people of the land, men, women, and children gazed upon the pageant from windows and from house-tops, and the beauty of Joseph pleased all eyes.

And flowers were strewn in his path when he walked, and the air was made sweet with perfume, and the savoury odour of balms and spices, And proclamations were placed in prominent places declaring the authority of Joseph, and threatening death to those who failed to pay him homage; for he was considered as dishonouring his king who failed to honour the man made second in the kingdom. The people bowed down and shouted, "Long live the king and his viceroy!" And Joseph, seated in his chariot, lifted his eyes to Heaven, and exclaimed in the fulness of his heart:

"He raiseth the poor from the dust; from the dunghill He lifteth up the needy. Oh Lord of Hosts, happy is the man who trusteth in thee!

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 92]

  

CHAPTER V.

  

JOSEPH'S GREATNESS AND JACOB'S ENTRY INTO EGYPT.

AND it came to pass after this, that Joseph saw Osnath, the daughter of Potipharah, a pearl among the beauties of the land, and he loved her and she became his wife. And Joseph was but thirty years old when he was elevated to his honourable and trustworthy position. He built for himself a palace, elegant and complete in its details and surroundings, so elaborate that three years' time was required for its completion. And the Lord was with Joseph, and increased his wisdom and understanding, and blessed him with manners so affable and deserving that he quickly won the love and favour of all the inhabitants of the country.

And during seven years, as Joseph had foretold, the Lord increased the produce of Egypt sevenfold. And Joseph appointed officers to gather up the plenty. They built huge storehouses and heaped up corn during the seven years of plenty, till the amount stored grew so great that no man could number it. And Joseph and his officers were watchful and diligent that their stores of grain should not suffer from moth or mould. The people of the land, too, stored up their surplus crop, but they were not as careful and watchful as was Joseph and his assistants.

And the wife of Joseph bore him two sons, Manassah and Ephraim, and their father taught them diligently the way of truth; they listened to his words and departed not from the paths of pleasantness either to the right hand or to the left.

[p. 93]

[paragraph continues] They grew up bright and intelligent lads, and, were honoured among the people as were the children of the king.

But the seven years of plenty drew to an end, and the fields became barren and the trees gave forth no fruit, and the famine which Joseph had predicted threw its gloomy shadow and threatening presence over the once fruitful land.

And when the people opened their storehouses, they found to their sorrow that the moth and mould had taken advantage of their neglect. And they cried aloud to Pharaoh, "Give us food;--let us not die of hunger before thee, we and our children; give to us, we pray thee, from the plenty of thy storehouses."

And Pharaoh answered, "Why cry ye unto me, oh careless people? did Joseph not tell ye of the famine which has come upon us? Why did ye not hearken to his voice, and obey his commands to be frugal and painstaking?"

"By thy life, our lord," replied the people, "as Joseph spoke, so did we, and gathered in our corn during the years of plenty, but lo, when the pangs of hunger and the barrenness of the land bid us open our granaries, the moth had destroyed the provisions which we had garnered."

The king became alarmed lest all their precaution should prove unavailing against the famine's blight, and he bade the people to go to Joseph. "Obey his commands and rebel not against his words."

And the people repeated to Joseph the cry for food they had addressed to Pharaoh.

When Joseph heard the words of the people and learned the result of their want of care, he opened the storehouses of the king and sold food unto the hungry people.

And the famine grew sore in the land of Egypt and spread through Canaan and the land of the Philistines, and to the other side of the Jordan. And when the inhabitants

[p. 94]

of these countries heard that corn could be obtained in Egypt, they came all of them into that country to buy, so that Joseph was obliged to appoint many officers to sell corn to the large multitude of people.

And Joseph's thoughts reverted to his father's home, and he knew that his brothers would be obliged to come to Egypt to purchase food, for the famine was very grievous in their neighbourhood. Therefore he gave orders that no man desiring corn should send his servant to purchase it, but the head of each family should personally appear as a purchaser; either the father of a family or his sons. He proclaimed also as the order of the king and his viceroy, that no man should be allowed to purchase corn in Egypt to sell it again in other countries, but only such as he required for the support of his immediate family; neither should any purchaser be allowed to buy more corn than one animal could carry.

And he put guards at all the gates of Egypt, and every man who passed through the gates was obliged to record his name and the name of his father in a book, which was brought by the guards every night for Joseph's inspection.

Thus did Joseph design to ascertain when his brothers came to buy food; and all the commands which he had given were faithfully executed.

Now, when the patriarch Jacob learned that food could be purchased in Egypt, he bade his sons proceed thither and obtain a stock of provisions, for the famine was growing very severe, and he feared that his family would suffer from its pangs. Jacob instructed his sons to enter the city by different gates, so that no objection should be made to the amount of their purchases, and as he commanded so they did.

Thus did the sons of Jacob go down to Egypt, and while

[p. 95]

upon the way they thought of their brother Joseph, and their hearts chid them for their cruelty towards him, and they said one to the other:

"Behold, we know that Joseph was carried down to Egypt; now when we come to the city let us seek for him, perchance we may discover his whereabouts, and then we will redeem him from his master."

And so did Jacob's ten sons travel to Egypt. Benjamin was not with them, for his father feared that mischief might befall him as it did the other son of Rachel, and he kept him at home by his side.

By ten different gates did the ten sons of the patriarch enter into the land of Egypt, and the guards at the gates took down their names, which were sent with the other names to Joseph at the close of the day. When Joseph read the names he commanded that all the storehouses save one should be closed, and he ordered further, that every purchaser at this storehouse should be required to give his name; and mentioning the names of his brethren, he said, "If these men come before ye, see that ye seize them, every one."

When the sons of Jacob had entered the city they met together, and before buying their corn they resolved to make a thorough search for their brother. They visited all places of public resort, and the houses of divination, but though they continued their search for three days, it proved unavailing.

Now when three days had passed, and his brothers had not put in an appearance at the storehouse, Joseph wondered at their delay, and he sent sixteen of his servants to search for them quietly through the city. They were found among the Egyptian players, and brought straightway before the viceroy.

[p. 96]

Joseph was seated upon his throne dressed in his royal apparel, with his officers around him, when his brothers bowed to the ground before him. They wondered exceedingly at the magnificence, the handsome appearance and the majestic presence of the powerful man before them, but they did not recognise in him their brother.

And Joseph spoke to them, saying, "Whence came ye?"

"From the land of Canaan," they answered, "and to buy food, for to! the famine is sore in the land; and thy servants learning that corn might be purchased in Egypt, have journeyed hither to provide for their support and the support of their families."

But Joseph said, "Nay, ye are spies, else why did ye enter the city by ten different gates?"

They answered, "We are true men; thy servants have never been spies. Thy servants are brothers, the sons of one father, and by his command did we enter the city separately, for coming together he feared our appearance might attract unfavourable attention."

But Joseph repeated, "Ye are spies; to spy out the nakedness of our land have ye come. Behold, every man who comer to buy corn, makes his purchase and departs; but ye, lo, three days have ye been in the city, in public places and among the players; it is as I have spoken, ye are spies."

"God forbid!" they exclaimed; "our lord misjudges us. We are altogether twelve brothers, the sons of Jacob, in the land of Canaan; Jacob, the son of Isaac, and grandson of Abraham the Hebrew. Behold, our youngest brother is with his father, we ten are here, and the other brother, alas, he is not with us, we know not where he is. We thought perchance he might be in your land, therefore have we searched all public places these three days."

[p. 97]

"And what should the son of Jacob be doing in the public places?" asked Joseph.

"We heard," they answered, "that the Ishmaelites had sold him in Egypt, and being of very handsome appearance we thought it likely he might have been sold in one of the play-houses, therefore we went there hoping to find and to redeem him."

"Suppose you had found him," said Joseph, "and his master had asked for him an enormous amount of money; were you prepared to comply with extraordinary demands?"

The brothers answered in the affirmative, and Joseph continued:

"Suppose again that you should find him and his master should refuse to sell or deliver him to you under any circumstances, what would you do in such a case?"

"In such a case," they answered, "if neither prayers nor money should prove of avail, we would rescue our brother by violence: aye, even the death of his master, and flee with him to our father's house."

"It is as I have said," retorted Joseph; "ye are spies; lo, with evil designs upon the inhabitants of our city ye have come. We have heard and know indeed how ye killed all the males of Shechem in the land of Canaan on your sister's account, and now ye would treat the men of Egypt in the same way for the sake of a brother. But yet we will give ye an opportunity to prove yourselves true men. Send one of your number to your father's house to bring hither the youngest brother of whom you have spoken. If ye will do this, I shall know that you have spoken truly. Take three days to consider."

And in obedience to Joseph's commands his brothers were held in ward for three days.

After this time the brothers concluded to leave one of

[p. 98]

their number as a hostage, while the others returned to Canaan to bring Benjamin down to Egypt. So Menasseh, the son of Joseph, chose Simeon as the hostage, and he was kept in ward.

Ere his brothers departed, Joseph spoke to them once more.

"Take heed," said he, "that ye forget not my commands. If ye bring this brother to me, I shall consider ye true men, and ye shall be free to traffic in the land; neither will I do harm to your brother; he shall be at liberty to return with ye to your father's house, in peace."

And they bowed down to the ground and departed from Egypt. As they proceeded upon their homeward journey, they stopped at an inn to feed their asses, and Levi opened his sack to provide the corn for the meal. And lo, when he opened the sack, his money which he had paid for the corn was lying on the top. And he was exceedingly afraid, and he told the thing to his brethren, and they, too, were filled with alarm. And when every man found his money returned they cried aloud:

"What is this that God has done to us? Has the Lord withdrawn from us the mercy which He showed to our ancestors, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, that He has given us into the hands of Egypt's prince to mock us and make merry with us?"

But Judah said, "It is just! Are we not guilty and sinful before the Lord? We sold our brother, our flesh. Why should we now complain that the favour God has lavished on our ancestors is denied to us?"

"Did I not warn ye, 'sin not against the child?'" said Reuben, "and ye would not hearken to my words. His blood is upon us,--why do ye say, therefore, 'Where is the kindness which the Lord promised unto our fathers?' Verily we have forfeited His protection."

[p. 99]

When Jacob's sons approached their home, and the patriarch came forth to meet them, he quickly missed the face of Simeon, and he asked, "Where is Simeon, your brother?"

Then the brothers told their father all that had happened to them in Egypt, and Jacob said to them:

"What is this that ye have done to me? Your brother Joseph I sent to ye to inquire of your welfare, and his face I looked upon no more,--his bloody garments ye brought me, saying, 'Lo, the wild beasts of the forest have destroyed thy son.' Simeon I sent with ye to purchase food, and ye tell me that he is imprisoned in a cruel land; and now Benjamin ye wish to take also,--for Joseph and for Benjamin ye would bring my grey hairs in sorrow to the grave. No, my son shall not go with ye."

And Reuben said, "The lives of my two sons I place in your hands; if we do not bring back Benjamin safely to thee, their lives shall prove the forfeit."

But Jacob said, "Neither shall ye return again to Egypt; stay here, for my son shall not go with ye, to die as did his brother."

And Judah said to his brothers, "Urge him no more at present. Let us wait until these provisions have been consumed, and when cruel want and hunger press us he will consent to what we ask."

And it came to pass when the provisions were gone, that the sons of his children gathered around Jacob and cried to him, "Oh, give us bread."

And the heart of Jacob was torn with anguish at the cry, and summoning his sons, he said to them, "Hear ye not the voices of your children crying for food? 'Give us bread,' they cried to me, and I--I have none to give them. Get ye down to Egypt, I pray ye, and buy us a little food."

[p. 100]

Then Judah answered, and said to his father, "If thou wilt send Benjamin with us, we will go,--otherwise we cannot. The king of Egypt is a mighty potentate; we dare not trifle with him. Should we return to Egypt, and our youngest brother be not with us, lo, he would destroy us all. Our father, we cannot disobey this king; greater even is he than Abimelech, the Philistine. Thou hast not seen, as we have, his throne, his palace, his myriads of officers; thou hast not witnessed, as have we, his wisdom, knowledge, and understanding. God has blessed him with unequalled gifts; greater is he than all on earth beside. Our names he told us; what had happened to us in our youth; he inquired of thee, saying, 'Is your father yet alive? Are all things well with him?' Thou hast not heard, as we have, of his power; over his people he is supreme; upon his word they go out, and upon his word they come in; his word governs, and the voice of his master, Pharaoh, is not required. Oh, my father, send the lad,--we cannot go without him if thou refusest, we must see our children die with hunger."

And Jacob said, in his sorrow:

"Why did ye tell the man ye had a brother? Oh, evil, evil is this thing which ye have done!"

"Give the boy into my hands," said Judah, "and let us go down to Egypt and buy the corn. If I do not return him safely to thee, a sinner against my father shall I be considered all my days. Our children weep before thee, and we have naught to stay their cries; have mercy on them, send our brother with us. Hast thou not often told us of the mercy which our God has promised to thee? Lo, He will protect thy son and return him to thee safely. Pray unto the Lord for our sakes, entreat Him to give us grace and favour in the eyes of Egypt's Prince. Lo, had we not

[p. 101]

tarried thus long, we should have now been back with food; yea, back twice to thee, and with thy son in safety." And Jacob answered:

"The Lord God give you grace in the eyes of the king and officers of Egypt. In Him will I put my trust. Arise, go unto the man, take with ye gifts, the best the land affords; the Lord will be with ye, and ye shall bring back to me your brothers, Benjamin and Simeon."

Then the sons of Jacob went down again to Egypt. And they took Benjamin with them, and they took, also, presents and twofold money.

"Take heed of the lad," were Jacob's parting words; "separate not from him either in Egypt or upon the road;" and when they had gone, he sought the presence of the Almighty in prayer:

"Oh, Lord, God of heaven and of earth, remember, I beseech Thee, the covenant which Thou didst make with our father Abraham; remember, I beseech Thee, the merit of Isaac, my father, and for their sakes show kindness unto my sons. Do not deliver them into the hands of Egypt's king for evil; redeem them, I pray Thee, and bring them back safely with their two brothers."

And the wives of Jacob's sons, and his grandchildren, they, too, lifted their eyes and hearts to Heaven, and cried:

"Deliver, oh Lord, our fathers from the hands of Egypt's king."

Jacob also addressed the following letter, to be delivered by his sons into the hands of Joseph:

"From thy servant, Jacob, the son of Isaac, the son o! Abraham the Hebrew.

"The prince of God unto the mighty and wise kin; Zaphenath-Paaneah, the king of Egypt, peace.

[p. 102]

"My lord, the king, knows well that the famine is sore in the land of Canaan; therefore I sent my sons to thee to buy food for our sustenance. I charged them not to enter the city by the same gate, lest coming together they might attract the attention of the inhabitants. And, lo, their obedience to my orders has caused them to he accused by thee as spies. Oh, my lord, could not an intelligent man, such as thou art, read truth upon the faces of my sons? Much have I heard of thy wisdom and the understanding which thou didst display in the interpretation of Pharaoh's dreams, in foretelling this grievous famine,--how, then, was it possible that thou shouldst suspect my sons?

"Behold, I am surrounded with children; I am very old, and my eyes wax dim; tearful have they been for twenty years in lamenting the loss of my son Joseph, and now I have sent to thee his brother Benjamin as thou didst command; I pray thee, oh, my lord, to be good to him, and return him to me with his brothers. The strength of God has ever been with us; He has listened to our prayers, and He has never forsaken us; protect thou my son who is coming unto thee, and God will look favourably upon thee and upon thy kingdom. Send him home again with his brothers, and Simeon also send with them in peace."

This letter was entrusted into Judah's hands.

Thus the sons of Jacob went down again to Egypt with Benjamin and with the presents, and they stood before Joseph. And Joseph released Simeon from prison, and restored him to his brethren. And Simeon told them of the kind treatment which he had received since their departure.

"I was not bound," said he, "or treated as a prisoner, but I was taken to the governor's own house, and received there as a guest."

[p. 103]

Then Judah took Benjamin and brought him before Joseph, and they prostrated themselves to the ground.

And the brothers gave Joseph the presents which their father had sent to him. And Joseph asked them whether all went well with their children and with their old father, and they answered, "It is well with all of us."

Then Judah delivered his father's letter to Joseph, and the latter recognised his father's hand, and his feelings grew too strong for him; the recollections of his youth overpowered him, and retiring into a side apartment he wept bitterly.

Returning to the presence of his brother, Joseph's eyes rested upon Benjamin, his mother's son, and he asked, "Is this your youngest brother of whom ye told me?" And when Benjamin drew near, Joseph laid his hand upon his brother's head, and said, "God be gracious unto thee, my son."

Then restraining his feelings, he ordered his officers to prepare the dining-tables.

Then when the meal was ready Joseph took into his hand a cup,--a cup of solid silver, set with precious stones, and holding it in his hand in the presence of his brothers, Joseph said, "I know by this cup that Reuben is the first born of your father, therefore shall he sit first, and Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar, and Zebulun shall follow him in this order, according to their ages; the rest shall follow these according to their ages." And he said further, "I know that your youngest brother has no mother, neither have I a mother, therefore will we two sit together."

And the men marvelled much at the words of Joseph, as they ate and drank with Joseph upon that day.

Joseph placed two portions of food before his brother Benjamin, and when his sons, Ephraim and Menasseh, saw this they too gave their portions to Benjamin, and Osnath,

[p. 104]

[paragraph continues] Joseph's wife, gave also hers. Thus Benjamin had five portions.

And Joseph brought wine to the board, and bade his brethren drink and be glad, but they refused, saying, "We have not partaken of wine since we lost our brother." Joseph pressed them, however, and forced them to drink and be merry with him. And he said to Benjamin, "Hast thou children?" And Benjamin answered, "Thy servant has ten sons, and I call them by names reminding me of the brother whom I have never seen."

In the morning Joseph dismissed his brethren, and bade them return to their father in peace. But when they had departed he called his servants, and ordered them to pursue after, overtake them, and bring them back.

And when the servants of Joseph overtook them, and said to them:

"Why have ye done this thing to steal our master's cup?" the brothers of Joseph were indignant, and they answered, "If ye find the cup in the possession of any one of us, lo, he shall die, and we, his brethren, shall be your master's slaves;" but when the cup was found where Joseph had ordered it to be put, in Benjamin's sack, they returned, grieving and crestfallen, to the presence of Joseph.

The viceroy was seated upon his throne, and his officers of state were gathered about him when his brethren entered, and speaking roughly to them, he said:

"What evil deed is this which ye have wrought? Why did ye take my silver cup? Is it because you could not find that brother you spoke of in the country that you stole the cup instead? Answer and tell me why have ye done this thing?"

And Judah spoke, saying, "What shall we say unto my lord? What shall we speak, for how shall we justify ourselves?

[p. 105]

[paragraph continues] God hath found out the iniquity of thy servants, and sent this calamity upon us."

Then Joseph arose, and grasping hold of Benjamin he led him to another room, and pushing him therein closed the door upon him. He then told the others to return to their homes in peace, saying, "I will keep the one in whose possession the cup was found; return ye in peace."

Then Judah approached Joseph, and said:

"Let not thy anger, I pray thee, burn against thy servant, but let thy servant speak before thee;" and Joseph answered, "Speak."

Then Judah continued:

"From the commencement, from the moment we set foot in Egypt, thou hast mocked us. We have been accused as spies; we have been forced to bring our brother Benjamin hither with us; and now, still at this moment, thou art using us for thy sport. Let the king now hearken to my words, and heed them, and allow our brother to return to his father with us, lest we destroy thee, aye, and all thy officers who are stationed about thee. Thou knowest what two brothers of us did to the city of Shechem for a sister's sake; take heed that they work not the same revenge for their brother Benjamin. Lo, I am stronger and more powerful than both of them; give over thy idle trifling with us, lest I strike thee with thy guard. Knowest thou not the punishment which God ordained upon Pharaoh when he acted wickedly towards Sarai, our great grandmother? Even to this day the people of thy land do tell about it! Beware, therefore, lest He punish thee too for thy wickedness in taking our brother Benjamin from his father. God will not forget the covenant which He made with Abraham, to protect his seed and chastise their enemies; therefore listen, oh, my lord, to the words which I am speaking. Let our brother

[p. 106]

return to his father, lest I carry my words into effect; beware, you cannot prevail over me."

Then Joseph answered and said:

"Why indulge in this vain self-glorying? Art proud of thy strength? Lo! one word to my officers, and they would destroy thee in a moment with thy brethren."

"By God's life," exclaimed Judah, "if I draw I will commence with thee and end with Pharaoh."

"Thy strength is not equal to thy boast," returned Joseph; "I myself am stronger than thou art; if thou shouldst draw thy sword I would sheathe it in thine own body; aye, with thine own sword would I put thy brothers and thyself to death."

And Judah replied:

"Oh, my lord, God is a witness between us that I seek not to fight; give us our brother and let us go in peace."

"By the life of Pharaoh," answered Joseph, "if all the kings of Canaan should come and second your demand, I would not surrender your brother. Go your way, the rest of ye unto your father, but Benjamin shall be my servant. He stole my cup and his liberty is forfeit to me."

"What profit is the name of king to such as thou?" retorted Judah. "A king's household contains much gold and silver in vessels and utensils, and lo, thou speakest much about a poor silver cup, which thou thyself hast placed in our brother's sack. God forbid that a descendant of Abraham should steal from thee, or from any other king, prince, or whatever he may be. Be silent now about this for thine own sake, lest it become known abroad and people say, 'Lo, for a trifling silver cup the great viceroy of Egypt fought with men and took one of them for a servant;' for thine own sake, say no more."

But Joseph merely repeated what he had said:

[p. 107]

"Go ye, and leave your brother with me; the law makes him my servant; get ye gone, and take the cup with ye."

"Never," exclaimed Judah; "we would not forsake our brother for a thousand cups, or for any sum of money which thou couldst name."

Then Joseph replied quickly:

"But you did forsake and abandon your brother; aye, and sold him for twenty silver pieces."

"Give us our brother," reiterated Judah. "God is my witness I desire no quarrel with thee; let us depart without a brawl. What, oh, what can we say to our father if we return without the lad? his grief would kill him; and we, what could we say?"

"Say to him," said Joseph, that the rope followeth the bucket." [*1]

"Woe, woe unto the king who speaks a false judgment," cried Judah.

"Say naught of false judgments," replied Joseph, "did ye not speak untruths unto your father, saying, 'A wild beast has devoured Joseph?' Did ye not sell him to the Midianites for twenty pieces? Say naught; be dumb in shame."

"Now does the fire of Shechem burn within me," thundered Judah; "thyself and thy country shall perish in the fierce flame of my wrath."

In the meantime, during this scene, Joseph had despatched Menasseh, his son, to order troops to his palace, and now they came at full speed, armed and equipped at short notice. Five hundred mounted soldiers, two thousand on foot, and four hundred reserve guard of veterans. With

[p. 108]

cries and shouts they surrounded the sons of Jacob, who were exceedingly terrified and trembled for their lives. Then Joseph said to Judah:

"Tell me, I pray, why thou alone of all thy company didst fight so zealously for the lad?"

And Judah answered:

"Know that I became a surety with our father for the lad's safe return. 'If he comes not back with us,' I said, 'Lo, I shall be considered as sinning before thee all my days.' Oh, my lord, let me find grace in thy eyes; let me but take the lad home to his father, and I will return to take his place as thy servant. See, I am stronger and older than he is, let me be thy servant instead of Benjamin."

"Upon one condition," replied Joseph, "the lad may go with you. Bring before me his brother, his mother's son of whom you have spoken, and I will take him in place of Benjamin. You did not become a surety for him to your father, therefore let me have him, and the brother for whom you did become a surety shall return home with you."

Then Simeon drew near and answered:

"Did we not tell my lord, when first we came before him, that this lost brother we could not find? Wherefore will my lord speak such idle words? We know not, alas, whether this brother be alive or dead."

"Suppose, then," said Joseph, "that I should call him before me, will ye then give him to me in place of Benjamin?" And raising his voice he called aloud, "Joseph! Joseph! Appear Joseph, and sit before thy brethren."

The sons of Jacob wondered much at these words, and their blood grew chill as they looked around in fear and amazement to see from whence their brother was to appear.

And Joseph said to them:

[p. 109]

"Why do ye look around? Your brother is before you. I am Joseph whom ye sold to Egypt. But nay, be not alarmed, ye were but instruments, and to save life did God send me hither."

And the men were much frightened, and Judah especially was terrified at the startling words. Benjamin, who was in the inner court, heard them, and hurrying before Joseph, he threw himself upon the latter's breast, and kissing him, they wept together. The other brothers too were much affected, and the people about wondered, and the report of the occurrence reached Pharaoh's palace.

Pharaoh was pleased with the news, and sent a deputation of his officers to welcome Joseph's brethren, and to bid them, in his name, to bring their families and their household goods and make their homes in Egypt.

And Joseph clad his brethren in new and elegant garments, and made them many generous presents, and gave to each of them three hundred pieces of silver; and then he took them before Pharaoh and introduced them to the king.

And when Pharaoh saw what goodly men the sons of Jacob were he was much pleased and very gracious towards them.

And when it became time for them to return to Canaan, Joseph procured eleven of Pharaoh's chariots and added to them his own, for their accommodation. And he sent rich presents to his father, and garments and presents to the children of his brothers and sister, and to his brothers' wives. And he accompanied his brethren upon their journey to the boundaries of Egypt, and parting with them, he said:

"Do not, my brethren, quarrel on the way. This thing was wrought through God's wisdom; ye were but the instruments

[p. 110]

to save from famine and hunger a vast multitude." He also commanded them to be careful in imparting the great news they carried to their father, lest speaking suddenly it might have a bad effect upon so old a man. And the sons of Jacob returned unto the land of Canaan in gladness with happy hearts.

And it came to pass when they drew near to Canaan that they said one to the other, "How shall we break this news unto our father? We cannot tell him suddenly that Joseph is still alive."

But it chanced when they reached Beer-Shebah that Serach, the daughter of Asher, came to meet her father and her uncles. And Serach was a sweet singer, and she played upon the harp.

So they said unto her, "Take thy harp, and go and sit before our father and play to him, and as thou playest, sing; sing of his son Joseph, and let him know in this manner that Joseph lives."

And the maiden did as she was bid, and sitting before her grandfather, she sang to him a song, wherein she repeated seven times these words:

"Lo, Joseph is not dead; he lives,
 My uncle rules o'er Egypt's land."

And Jacob was pleased with her singing and playing; happiness seemed to find birth in his heart at her sweet voice, and he smiled upon the maiden and blessed her. And while he was talking to her his sons arrived with their horses and chariots, and Jacob arose and met them at the door, and they said to him, "We have joyful tidings for our father. Joseph, our brother, is still alive, and he is ruler over all the land of Egypt."

But Jacob remained cool and unaffected, for he did not believe their words, until he saw the presents which Joseph

[p. 111]

had sent, and all the signs of his greatness; then his eyes brightened and gladness sparkled in their depths, and he said:

"Enough, my son lives; I will go and see him before I die."

And the inhabitants of Beer-Shebah and the surrounding countries heard the news, and came and congratulated Jacob, and he made a great feast for them. And he said, "I will go down to Egypt and see my son, and then will I return to Canaan, as the Lord has spoken to Abraham, giving this land unto his seed."

And the word of the Lord came to Jacob, saying, "Go down to Egypt; be not afraid, for I am with thee, and will make of thee a great nation."

And Jacob commanded his sons and their families to prepare to go down with him to Egypt, as the Lord had spoken, and they arose and started upon the way. And Jacob sent Judah in advance, to announce his coming and to select a place for his residence.

And when Joseph learned that his father was upon the way he gathered together his friends and officers, and soldiers of the realm, and they attired themselves in rich garments and gold and silver ornaments, and the troops were armed with all the implements of war, and they gathered together and formed a great company to meet Jacob upon the way and escort him to Egypt. Music and gladness filled the land, and all the people, the women and the children, assembled upon the house-tops to view the magnificent display.

Joseph was dressed in royal robes, with the crown of state upon his head; and when he came within fifty cubits of his father's company, he descended from his chariot and walked to meet his father. And when the nobles and

[p. 112]

princes saw this they, too, descended from their steeds and chariots and walked with him.

And when Jacob saw all this great procession he wondered exceedingly, and he was much pleased thereat, and turning to Judah he asked, "Who is the man who marcheth at the head of this great array in royal robes?" and Judah answered, "That is thy son." And when Joseph drew nigh to his father he bowed down before him, and his officers also bowed low to Jacob.

And Jacob ran towards his son and fell upon his neck and kissed him, and they wept. And Joseph greeted his brethren with affection.

And Jacob said to Joseph, "Now let me die. I have seen thy face; my eyes have beheld thee living and in great honour."

And the great company escorted Jacob and his family to Egypt, and there Joseph gave to his relatives the best of the land, even Goshen.

And Joseph lived in the land and governed it wisely. And the two sons of Joseph were great favourites with their grandfather, and were ever in his house. And Jacob taught them the ways of the Lord, and pointed out to them the path of happiness and peace in His service.

And Jacob and his family lived in Goshen, and had possession of the land and multiplied therein exceedingly.

Footnotes

^107:1 Meaning that Joseph was the rope and Benjamin the bucket.

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 113]

  

CHAPTER VI.

  

DEATH OF JACOB AND HIS SONS--MOSES--THE DELIVERANCE FROM EGYPT.

JACOB lived in the land of Egypt for seventeen years, and all the years of his life were one hundred and forty-seven.

And Jacob grew very sick, and being old and feeble, he sent for his son Joseph, and said to him:

"Behold, I am going to die. Listen, my son. The God of your fathers will surely visit you in the days to come, and carry back His people, as He has sworn, to the land which He has given to you and your descendants. Do not bury me in Egypt, but in the cave of Machpelah, in Hebron, in the land of Canaan, next to my parents."

Jacob made his sons swear to bury him as he had requested, and he said to them:

"Serve the Lord your God, and He will deliver ye from all trouble, even as He delivered your fathers." He bade them call all their children before him, and he blessed them and their fathers also, according to the blessings which are recorded in Holy Writ.

And Jacob said unto Judah:

"Thou, my son, art stronger than all thy brethren, and from thy loins will kings arise. Teach thy children how they may protect themselves from enemies and evil-doers." Then turning to his children, he said:

"Thus shall ye carry me, after my death, to my resting place in the cave of Machpelah. Ye, my sons, and not your children, shall bear me. Judah, Issachar, and Zebulun shall

[p. 114]

carry the eastward corner of my bier; Reuben, Simeon, and Gad shall carry at the south; Ephraim, Menasseh, and Benjamin at the western end; and Dan, Asher, and Naphtali to the north.

"Levi shall not carry or help to carry my bier, for his descendants will bear the ark of God's covenant through Israel's host; neither shall Joseph assist in carrying, for he is a king; his sons shall take his place, and walk beside his brother Benjamin. As I have spoken do; diminish not from my words.

"And it shall come to pass, if ye do as I have commanded, that God will visit ye with happiness and give peace to your children after ye.

"And now, my sons, honour one another, and live peacefully, family and family, together. Teach your children to love God, and observe His commandments, in order that their days may be prolonged, for God will guard those who do justly and walk in righteousness through all His ways."

And the sons of Jacob responded, "All that you have commanded us, our father, we will do. May God be with us."

And Jacob answered:

"The Lord will be with ye if ye depart not from His ways to the right hand or to the left. Behold. I know that great troubles will come upon ye, upon your children, and your children's children in this land of Egypt in the days to come. But serve God, and He will prove your salvation. He will bring ye out of Egypt, aye, back to the land of your fathers, to inherit it, and dwell therein in safety."

And when Jacob had finished these words he drew his feet into the bed, and was gathered unto his fathers.

And when Joseph saw that his father was dead he fell

[p. 115]

upon the cold face, and wept bitterly, and cried aloud in anguish, "My father; oh, my father!"

And the family of Jacob, his sons, and their wives and children rent their garments and clothed themselves in sackcloth and ashes, and mourned for the patriarch. And the Egyptians who knew Jacob mourned for him also.

Then Joseph commanded the physicians to embalm his father's body, and he, with all his family and relatives and Egyptian friends, lamented for seventy days.

After these days of mourning Joseph approached Pharaoh the king, and said to him, "Let me go up, I pray thee, to bury my father; I will then return;" and Pharaoh answered, "Go in peace and bury thy father."

And Joseph arose and prepared with his brethren to carry their father's body to Canaan, as he had commanded them.

And Pharaoh issued a proclamation requesting the citizens of Egypt to honour Joseph by participating in Jacob's funeral, and showing the last marks of respect to him. And the citizens, in large numbers, acquiesced in the wishes of the king.

And there went up with Joseph and his brethren all the servants of Pharaoh and the elders of his house, and the elders of the land of Egypt, and the princes and noblemen, and all attached to Joseph's household.

And the sons of Jacob carried the bier on which rested their father's remains, as he had commanded. them, and there rested upon the bier a sceptre and a crown of gold.

And the troops of Egypt followed Jacob's body, infantry and cavalry, and the body-guard of Pharaoh, and Joseph's body-guard also.

And it came to pass, when the funeral train reached the threshing-floor of Atad, beyond the Jordan, they rested there, and mourned with great lamentation.

[p. 116]

And when the kings of Canaan heard that the funeral cortege of Jacob was approaching, they started forth to meet the same, to express their grief and love for the departed patriarch.

And Esau, Jacob's brother, came also with his sons and the men of his belonging, and then the funeral proceeded to Hebron, to the cave of Machpelah.

But when they reached the cave, lo, Esau and his sons, and his followers, approached Joseph and his brethren, saying:

"Jacob shall not be buried here; this cave is ours and our father's."

Then Joseph and his brethren were very wroth, and Joseph said to Esau:

"What is this which thou hast spoken? Did not my father, Jacob, buy from thee, after the death of Isaac, all thy possessions in the land of Canaan, aye, five-and-twenty years ago, for a large sum of money, that it might be an inheritance to his children for ever? Why speakest thou in this manner?"

And Esau answered:

"I sold naught to Jacob."

"We have the deeds," returned Joseph, "and thine own signature shall prove that the truth is on our side."

"Bring me the deeds then," said Esau, "and all that I have written will I do."

Then Joseph called to him his brother Naphtali, who was more swift of foot than the roebuck, and so light of step that he could run over the tassel-topped corn and it would bend not beneath his tread.

And Joseph said to Naphtali:

"Get quickly to Egypt and bring to me the deeds for the

[p. 117]

cave, also the deed whereby Esau sold his birthright to our father; get thee quickly, and return in haste."

And when Esau learned that Naphtali had departed upon this errand he stopped further proceeding in the funeral rites, and Joseph and his brethren guarded their father's body and the burial cave.

With the next day a fight began between the two factions; Esau and his retainers on the one side, and Joseph, the Hebrews, and those who had followed the funeral train from Egypt, on the other.

Now among this latter party was Hushim, the son of Dan. He was dumb, and was placed to keep watch over the coffin containing the remains of his grandfather. Though not in the conflict, he noticed that something unusual was occurring, and asking by signs of those who came near him why the dead was not buried, he learned of Esau's interference, and the stoppage of the rites.

It came to pass, when he fully understood this, that his anger was roused, and hurrying into the midst of the combat, he singled out Esau, and struck his head from his shoulders with one blow. Then the children of Jacob prevailed over their opponents. Of Esau's company forty men were killed, while the other party suffered no loss. So with the death of Esau the fears expressed by Rebecca when Esau intended to kill Jacob, "Why should I be deprived of both of you in one day?" (Gen. 32: 45), seemed to be verified.

Then Jacob was buried in the cave of Machpelah, and the sons of Esau witnessed the interment. For seven days Joseph and his brethren remained in their houses, mourning and attending not to their usual avocations; and after this, though they discharged their daily duties, they mourned for twelve months, and since that time such has been the custom of the Jews on the death of a near relative.

[p. 118]

The defeated children of Esau fled with Eliphas, the son of Esau, carrying Esau's body with them. His head was buried in Hebron, where he fell, but his body they buried at the mount of Se'ir.

And it came to pass in the thirty-second year after the children of Israel had gone down into Egypt, that Pharaoh the friend of Joseph died. Joseph was then seventy-one years of age. Before his death, Pharaoh commanded his son who succeeded him, to obey Joseph in all things, and the same instructions he left in writing. This pleased the people of Egypt, for they loved Joseph and trusted implicitly in him. Thus while this Pharaoh reigned over Egypt the country was governed by Joseph's advice and counsel. The Lord was with him, and all his undertakings proved successful. His wisdom seemed to grow greater daily, and all Egypt delighted in showing him honour and respect. For eighty years Joseph ruled Egypt, and his brothers dwelt in Goshen in safety and were fruitful and multiplied exceedingly; and they served the Lord in the manner which their father Jacob had taught them.

Joseph lived in Egypt ninety-three years, being as a prince of the country eighty years of that time; and then the days drew nigh when he felt the hand of death approaching. He sent for his brothers and all their children, and they drew around his bed.

"Behold," said he, "I am going to die, but God will surely visit ye and bring ye out from this land into the land which he hath sworn unto your fathers to give unto ye. And now when the Eternal thus visits ye and leads ye out from Egypt, take my bones away from here with ye."

Joseph made the children of Israel swear, for themselves and their descendants, to carry with them his bones when they should go up out of Egypt.

[p. 119]

And Joseph died at the age of one hundred and ten years, in the seventy-first year after the children of Israel had entered Egypt, and his body was embalmed and afterwards laid in the ground near the banks of the river Nile. And all Egypt wept for Joseph seventy days, and his brethren mourned for him seven days as they did for Jacob his father.

Then Pharaoh took the dominion in his own hands, and governed the people wisely and in good faith.

In the same year Zebulun, the son of Jacob, died at the age of one hundred and fourteen years; and five years later Simeon died, aged one hundred and twenty years. Four years after this Reuben died, aged one hundred and twenty-five years; and Dan died the next year one hundred and twenty-four years old. Issachar died a year later, aged one hundred and twenty-two; and Asher followed him aged one hundred and twenty-three. Gad departed the next year, one hundred and twenty-five years old; and Judah the year following at the age of one hundred and twenty-nine years. Naphtali lived one year later, and died at the age of a hundred and thirty-two years; and Levi died the year after, one hundred and thirty-seven years of age, living to a greater age than that reached by any of his brethren.

After the death of Joseph and his brothers, the Egyptians began to afflict the Israelities, and they embittered their lives from that day even until the day when they went up out of the land. They deprived them of the fruitful land which Joseph had given them, and of the houses which they had built, and the homes they had made for themselves. The hand of the Egyptians grew constantly heavier upon the people till their lives became a burden to them.

In the hundred and second year after Israel went down to Egypt. Pharaoh the king and that whole generation of

[p. 120]

people had died out, and a new king and a new people who knew not Joseph held possession of the land.

Young Pharaoh was forty-nine years of age when he was crowned, and as is customary upon the assumption of authority by a new ruler, his ministers came before him to tell of the doings and progress of his kingdom. And these spoke to him, saying:

"Behold these people, the children of Israel, are greater and mightier than we. Advise us, we pray, that we may destroy them gradually, lest they so increase in the land as to prove a snare and a stumbling-block to us. Perchance if war comes upon us they may add their strength to the ranks of our enemies and drive us out of our own country."

The king answered:

"This is my advice, and I bid ye heed it well. The fortresses, Pithom and Ra'amses, are not strong enough for their purpose of protection, they should be rebuilt and with greater care. Let us deal subtly. Issue a proclamation in my name, saying:

"'A decree of Pharaoh, king of Egypt. Every dutiful citizen is requested to join in the rebuilding and strengthening of the fortresses Pithom and Ra'amses, that we may be prepared for enemies in time of war. Every citizen is called upon to obey this behest, and each day he shall receive from the treasury, wages for the work which he has done.'

"Then at the outset, ye, too, must go to work, and it shall come to pass when the Israelites come and join ye, that ye shall pay them, as we promise, each day their wages. Gradually ye and the other Egyptians may stay away from the work, until the Israelites are prosecuting it alone; then appoint Egyptian taskmasters over them; and, finally, when they come to ye one day for what they have earned, inform them that henceforth they must labour without payment. If

[p. 121]

they refuse or rebel, be ready, and compel them to submit by force. Obey my words in every particular, and happiness to ye will be the result. Our country will be strengthened and the hard labour will reduce the numerical strength of this people."

This advice pleased the Egyptians greatly, and they followed it implicitly. The proclamation was issued, and all the Israelites, with the exception of the children of Levi, obeyed the orders. Many Egyptians took part in the work also, and daily received their wages, but they were gradually dismissed, until in about three months' time the Israelites were working alone. Then the taskmasters, who had been appointed over them, withheld from them their wages, and when they refused to work, compelled them by force to resume their labour.

Thus all the children of Israel, with the exception of those of the tribe of Levi, who saw the snare of the Egyptians, and who having refused to work for wages could not now be compelled to labour without payment, were kept steadily at this work, strengthening all the strongholds of Egypt, making bricks and labouring in the fields, until the Lord remembered them and delivered them from the land.

But the heavier the burden laid upon the Israelites, the more rapidly they appeared to increase in numbers. And in the hundred and twenty-fifth year after the sons of Jacob had entered Egypt, the inhabitants of the land saw that what they had intended by their oppression had failed; that Israel still increased. The elders and wise men therefore appeared again before the king, and said:

"O king, live for ever! According to the advice which thou didst give us concerning this people Israel, have we done, and yet it has proved unavailing. The more we have oppressed them, the greater has been their increase, and

[p. 122]

now the land of Goshen is filled with them. To thy wisdom we, with all thy people, look for advice which shall reduce the number of these people."

The king answered:

"Let me hear from some of ye; give ye advice as to what can be done to them."

Then answered Job, from a country in the land of Uz, one of the king's counsellors, and said:

"If it be pleasing to the king, I will venture to speak. The advice which the king did give us concerning this people was good, and the course which we have pursued in its carrying out we will still continue, and the advice which I give now, with permission of the king, is but in addition to the same. Behold, we have been fearing for many years that a war may come upon us; we have been also fearing that the Israelites may so increase in the land and spread throughout it as to drive us from our own country. Now, if it please the king, let a royal order be issued, and let it be written among the laws of Egypt, that it may never be changed. Let this order decree the shedding of the life-blood of every male born to these Hebrews. If we follow this advice and destroy every male, we can have no cause to fear treason from this people in the future."

This advice met with the approbation of the king, his counsellors and wise men, and the king did as Job had recommended. A proclamation was issued throughout the land, dooming every male born to the Hebrews to immediate destruction.

There lived in the land of Egypt a man named Amram; he was the son of Kehath, the Son of Levi, the son of Jacob. This man married Yochebed, the daughter of Levi, his father's sister. And the woman bore a daughter, whom she called Mir'yam, for this was in the days when the Egyptians

[p. 123]

embittered the life of the Hebrews. Afterwards she bore a son, and called him Aaron.

And it came to pass in the one hundred and thirtieth year after Israel had entered Egypt, that Pharaoh, the king of the land, dreamed that he was sitting on his throne, and raising his eyes, saw before him an old man holding in his hand a pair of large balances. The old man hung the balances, and taking all the elders of Egypt, her princes and officers, he bound them together and placed them on one of the balances; on the other he placed a lamb, and lo, to the wonder of the dreaming man, the lamb weighed heavier than all the mighty men of Egypt.

Pharaoh awoke, and sending for his officers, he related to them this dream, which caused them both fear and amazement. Now among the magicians of Egypt there was one whom the king considered especially wise, Bil'am, the son of Be'or. For him the king sent, and desired an explanation of the vision. "A great evil will befall Egypt in the latter days," replied Bil'am, the son of Be'or. "A son will be born in Israel who will destroy Egypt, kill its inhabitants, and carry his people out from among them. Now, oh lord and king, give heed to this matter, and destroy the power of the children of Israel and their future welfare, before this misfortune to Egypt buds."

"What can we do?" inquired Pharaoh; "we have tried many plans without success."

Bil'am answered, "Send for thy two nearest counsellors, and we will consult together."

And Pharaoh sent for Re'uel, the Midianite, and Job, his counsellors, and they appeared before him accordingly. Then said the king, "Ye have all heard my dream and its interpretation; now give me your advice; how may this people Israel be conquered ere this threatened evil falls upon us?"

[p. 124]

Re'uel, the Midianite, answered and said:

"Oh king, live for ever! If it be pleasing in thy eyes, oh king, cease to afflict this people. They are the chosen of God from the olden days, and never have they been oppressed with impunity. Pharaoh of old was punished for Sarah's sake, as was also Abimelech the Philistine, for the same cause. Jacob was delivered from the toils both of Esau, his brother, and his uncle, Laban. Thy great-grandfather exalted their great-grandfather, Joseph, because he recognised the wisdom which God had implanted in him, and which saved the people of the land from starvation. Therefore, oh king, remove thy yoke from them and let them go hence to Canaan, the land of the sojournings of their forefathers."

These words of Re'uel, the Midianite, angered Pharaoh, and he sent him in shame from his presence. Re'uel went out from Egypt that day unto his own country, carrying with him the staff of Joseph.

The king then said to Job, his counsellor:

"What is thy opinion concerning these Hebrews?" And Job answered:

"Are not all the inhabitants of Egypt in the hands of the king? Whatever may be most pleasing in thy eyes, that do."

Then spoke Bi'lam, and said:

"None of the means proposed for the subduing of the Hebrews will prove successful. Fire cannot prevail over them, for Abraham was delivered from its power; the sword will fail, for Isaac was delivered from its edge, and a ram killed in his stead; they cannot be exterminated by rigorous labour, for Jacob worked day and night for Laban, and yet prospered. Listen, oh king, to the advice which I shall give thee. By this means only wilt thou be able to

[p. 125]

prevail over them. Command that all the male children born to these Hebrews be cast into the river, for none of their ancestors ever escaped from the death in the water." [*1]

This advice pleased Pharaoh, and his princes and the king did according to the words of Bi'lam. A proclamation was issued, and Pharaoh sent his officers through the land of Goshen where the Israelites dwelt, to see that all the male children were cast into the river on their birth, while the female infants were kept alive.

It came to pass about this time that Miriam, the daughter of Amram, the sister of Aaron, prophesied and said, "A second son will be born to my father and mother, and he will deliver the Israelites from the Egyptian power."

A second son was born to them according to her words, and when his mother saw he was a goodly child of handsome appearance, she hid him for three months in her inner chamber.

Now in those days strict search was made in the houses of the Hebrews for male infants, and many means were used to ascertain the places where their parents concealed them. Egyptian women carried infants into the houses in Goshen, and making these babies cry, the hidden infants would cry also, thus discovering their place of hiding. The women would then report to Pharaoh, and officers would seize the babe which parents had vainly endeavoured to save.

And it came to pass after Yochebed had succeeded in

[p. 126]

keeping her son concealed for three months, the fact of his birth became known in the above manner, and his mother taking the child quickly, before the officers arrived, hid him in a box made of bulrushes, and concealed the same carefully in the flax which grew along the Nile. She sent Miriam, her daughter, to watch the box from a distance, and observe what might happen to it.

And the day was hot and sultry, and the air oppressive, and many of the people came to find relief from the exhausting heat in the cooling waters of the Nile. Bathia, the daughter of Pharaoh, came with this purpose attended by her maidens, and entering the water she chanced to see the box of bulrushes, and pitying the infant she rescued him from death.

Many were the names given to the infant thus miraculously preserved. Bathia called him "Moses," saying, "I have drawn him from out the water;" his father called him "Heber," because he was reunited to his family; his mother called him "Yekuthiel," "for," said she, "I hoped in God," his sister called him "Yarad," saying, "I went down to the river to watch him;" Aaron, his brother, called him "Abigedore," for God had repaired the breach in the house of Jacob, and the Egyptians ceased from that time to cast the infants into the water; his grandfather called him "Abi Socho," saying, "for three months he was hidden," and the children of Israel called him, "Shemaiah Ben Nethanel," because in his day God heard their groaning and delivered them from their oppressors.

Moses became even as a son to Bathia, the daughter of Pharaoh, as a child belonging rightly to the palace of the king.

 

Now it came to pass when Pharaoh saw that the advice

[p. 127]

of Bi'lam did not prove effective, but that the Israelites, on the contrary, seemed to increase and multiply even more rapidly than before, he laid additional labour upon them, and issued orders that if any man failed in accomplishing his full daily task, his children should be walled up alive in the building in which he worked. This order continued in effect for many years.

 

About this time, when Moses was three years old, Pharaoh sitting at his banquet table, with his queen upon his right, Bathia at his left, and his two sons, with Bi'lam and the princes of his realm about him, took Moses upon his lap. The child stretched forth his hand, and taking the royal crown from Pharaoh's head placed it upon his own.

In this action the king and the people around him imagined they saw a meaning, and Pharaoh asked:

"How shall this Hebrew boy be punished?"

Then said Bi'lam, the son of Be'or, the magician, "Think not, because the child is young, that he did this thing thoughtlessly. Remember, oh king, the dream which thy servant read for thee; the dream of the balances. The spirit of understanding is already implanted in this child, and to himself he takes thy kingdom. Such, my lord, hath ever been the way of his people, to trample down those who have dealt kindly with them, to deceitfully usurp the power of those who have reared and protected them. Abraham, their ancestor, deceived Pharaoh, saying of Sarah, his wife, 'She is my sister;' Isaac, his son, did the same thing; Jacob obtained surreptitiously the blessing which rightfully belonged to his brother; he travelled to Mesopotamia, married the daughters of his uncle, and fled with them secretly, taking large flocks and herds and immense possessions; the sons of Jacob sold their brother Joseph

[p. 128]

into slavery; he was afterwards exalted by thy ancestor and made second in Egypt, and when a famine came upon the land, he brought hither his father with all his family to feed upon its substance, while the Egyptians sold themselves for food; and now, my lord, this child arises to imitate their actions. He mocks thee, oh king, thy elders and thy princes. Therefore, let his blood be spilled; for the future welfare of Egypt let this thing be done."

The king replied to the words of Bi'lam:

"We will call our judges together, and if they deem the child deserving of death he shall be executed."

When the judges and wise men assembled according to the order of the king, Jithro, the priest of Midian, came with them. The king related the child's action and the advice which Bi'lam had given him, requesting their opinions on the same.

Then said Jithro, desirous to preserve the child's life:

"If it be pleasing to the king, let two plates be placed before the child, one containing fire, the other gold. If the child stretches forth his hand to grasp the gold, we will know him to be an understanding being, and consider that he acted towards thee knowingly, deserving death. But if he grasps the fire, let his life be spared."

This advice met with the king's approval, and two plates, one containing gold, the other fire, were placed before the infant Moses. The child put forth his hand, and grasping the fire put it to his mouth, burning his tongue, and becoming thereafter "heavy of mouth and heavy of tongue," as mentioned in the Bible. Through this childish action the life of Moses was saved.

Moses grew up, a handsome lad, in the palace of the king; he dressed royally, was honoured by the people, and seemed in all things of royal lineage.

[p. 129]

He visited the land of Goshen daily, observing the rigour with which his brethren were treated, and inquiring of them why they laboured and were so oppressed, he learned of all the things which had happened before his birth; all things concerning the children of Israel and all things concerning himself. Learning of Bi'lam's desire to have him destroyed in his infancy, he expressed enmity towards the son of Be'or, who fearing his power and his favour with the king's daughter, fled to Ethiopia.

Moses urged the king of Egypt to grant the men of Goshen one day of rest from their labour, in each week, and the king acceded to his request. [*1]

And the Lord was with Moses, and his fame extended through all the land.

When he was about eighteen years old, Moses visited his father and mother in Goshen; and going also where his brethren were working he saw an Egyptian smiting a Hebrew, and he killed the Egyptian and fled from Egypt, as the occurrence is related in the Bible.

It came to pass in those days that the Assyrians rebelled against Kikanus, the king of Ethiopia, to whom they were under tribute. Kikanus, appointing Bi'lam, the son of Be'or, who had fled from Egypt, to be his representative in his absence, marched forth with a large army and subdued the Assyrians, and imposed heavy taxes upon them.

Bi'lam, the son of Be'or, was unfaithful to his trust, and usurping the power he was delegated to protect, he induced the people of Ethiopia to appoint him their king in place of the absent Kikanus. He strengthened the walls of the capital, built huge fortresses, and dug ditches and pits between

[p. 130]

the city and the river Gichon, which compassed all the land of Ethiopia.

When King Kikanus returned with his army, he was amazed to witness the preparations for defence which had been made during his absence, and he thought that the people had feared an attack from the kings of Canaan while he was away, and had prudently made ready for it. But when the gates of the city were closed against him, and he called in vain to have them opened, he joined battle with the adherents of Bi'lam. For nine years the war between Kikanus and Bi'lam continued, with severe losses to the former.

When Moses fled from Egypt he joined the army of Kikanus, and soon became a great favourite with the king and with all his companions.

And Kikanus became sick and died, and his soldiers buried him opposite the city, rearing a monument over his remains, and inscribing upon it the memorable deeds of his life. Then they said to one another, "What shall we do? For nine years we have been absent from our homes; if we attack the city it is likely we shall be again repulsed, and if we remain here, the kings of Edom, hearing that our leader is dead, will fall upon us and leave none alive. We had best appoint another king in the stead of Kikanus."

So the army appointed Moses to be their king and leader, in the hundred and fifty-seventh year after Israel went down into Egypt.

And Moses found favour in the eyes of the Lord, and he inspired his soldiers with courage by his voice and his example. He attacked the fortresses in mass, with the blowing of trumpets and great enthusiasm, and the city was delivered into his hands; eleven hundred of his opponents being slain in the battle.

[p. 131]

But Bi'lam, the son of Be'or, escaped and fled back to Egypt, becoming one of the magicians mentioned in the Scriptures.

And the Ethiopians placed Moses upon their throne and set the crown of state upon his head, and they gave him the widow of Kikanus for a wife. Moses remembered, however, the teachings of his fathers--how Abraham made his servant swear that he would not bring a daughter of the Canaanites to be the wife of Isaac, and how Isaac had said to his son Jacob, "Thou shalt not take a wife from the daughters of the Canaanites, neither shalt thou intermarry with the descendants of Ham;" therefore the widow of Kikanus was a wife to Moses in name only.

When Moses was made king of Ethiopia the Assyrians again rebelled, but Moses subdued them and placed them under yearly tribute to the Ethiopian dynasty.

 

Now, it happened in the hundred and eightieth year after Israel had gone down into Egypt, that there arose thirty thousand men of the tribe of Ephraim, and formed themselves into companies. And they said:

"The time, mentioned by the Lord to Abraham at the covenant of the pieces (Gen. 15: 13), has arrived; we will go up out of Egypt." And trusting in their own might these men left Egypt.

They did not take any provisions with them, save what was necessary for a day's journey; they took naught but gold and silver, saying, "We shall be able to buy food of the Philistines."

As they travelled towards Gath, they met a party of shepherds and said to them, "Sell us your flocks, for we are hungry."

But the shepherds replied:

[p. 132]

"The flocks are ours, and we will not sell them to you."

Then the men of Ephraim seized upon the flocks by force, and the shepherds made a great outcry, which reached the ears of the inhabitants of Gath, who assembled to ascertain its cause. And when the Gathites learned how their brethren had been treated, they armed themselves and marched forth to battle with the wrongdoers; and many fell from both parties. On the second day the men of Gath sent messengers to the cities of the Philistines, saying:

"Come and help us smite these Ephraimites, who have come up from Egypt, seized our flocks, and battled with us for no cause."

And the Philistines marched forth, about forty thousand strong, and they smote the Ephraimites, who were suffering from weariness and hunger, and there escaped from the death dealt out to Ephraim, only ten men.

Thus were the men of Ephraim punished for going up out of Egypt before the time appointed by the Lord.

The bodies of those who fell remained unburied in the valley of Gath, and their bones were the same bones which rose up, endowed with life, in the time of Ezekiel, as his prophecies record.

The ten who escaped returned to Egypt and related to the children of Israel what had occurred to them.

During this time Moses was reigning in Ethiopia in justice and righteousness. But the queen of Ethiopia, Adonith, who was a wife to Moses in name only, said to the people, "Why should this stranger continue to rule over you? Would it not be more just to place the son of Kikanus upon his father's throne, for he is one of you?"

The people, however, would not vex Moses, whom they loved, by such a proposition; but Moses voluntarily resigned the power which they had given him, and departed from

[p. 133]

their land. And the people of Ethiopia made him many rich presents, and dismissed him with great honours.

Moses being still fearful of returning to Egypt, travelled towards Midian, and sat there to rest by a well of water. And it came to pass that the seven daughters of Re'uel (or Jithro) came to this well to water their flocks. The shepherds of Midian drove them away, designing to keep them waiting until their own flocks had been watered, but Moses interfered in their behalf, and they returned home early to tell their father what had occurred. Re'uel then sent for Moses, and the latter related to him all that had happened them since his flight from Egypt. And Moses lived with Re'uel, and he looked with favour upon Ziporah, the daughter of his host, and married her.

 

During this time the Lord smote Pharaoh, king of Egypt, with leprosy. The disease was exceedingly grievous, and the king suffered inexpressible agony. And the taskmasters who were placed over the Israelites complained to the king that the latter were neglecting their work and becoming lazy.

"They are taking advantage of my sickness," exclaimed the king, and ordering his chariot, he prepared to ride out himself to upbraid the workmen, and to see that they did not shirk their labour.

And it happened as he rode through a narrow pass his horses lost their footing, the chariot was overturned, the king was thrown into the road, and the wheels of the chariot passed over him. The tender flesh was torn from his body, and the bones, which had grown brittle with his disease, broke. His servants laid him upon a bier and carried him to his palace; but when they laid him upon his bed the king knew that his time to die had come. And his wife and his

[p. 134]

princes assembled, weeping, around his bed, and Pharaoh wept with them; and his officers requested him to name his successor.

Now Pharaoh had two sons and three daughters. The eldest son was a man of foolish habits and excitable disposition, while the second, who was intelligent and versed in the sciences of his country, was yet a man of wicked imagination, disfigured, and a dwarf. Yet the king, taking into consideration his superior intelligence, named his second son to reign after him.

For three years Pharaoh suffered intense agony, then he died, and was buried in the place of the kings; but he was not embalmed, for his body was in too diseased a state to admit of manipulation.

In the two hundred and sixth year after Israel entered Egypt, this Pharaoh ascended the throne of the land. And he made the burden on the children of Israel heavy and oppressive; he would not continue to allow them the day of rest granted in his father's time, but made idleness during his father's sickness his excuse for depriving them of it.

And the children of Israel sighed in their heavy bondage, and cried unto the Lord. And God heard their voices, and remembered his covenant with Abraham, with Isaac, and with Jacob.

Now while Moses was living with Re'uel, the Midianite, he noticed a staff in the latter's garden, and he took it, to be a walking-stick in his hand. And this was the same staff, the staff of Joseph, which Re'uel carried away with him when he fled from Egypt. This same staff Adam carried with him out of Eden. Noah inherited it, and gave it afterwards to Shem, his son, It passed through the hands of Shem's descendants until it came into the possession of

[p. 135]

[paragraph continues] Abraham. When Abraham left all his  goods to Isaac this staff was numbered with them, and when Jacob fled from his brother's anger into Mesopotamia, he carried this staff in his hand, and while residing in Egypt he gave it to Joseph, his son.

 

And it came to pass at the end of two years that the Lord again sent Moses unto Pharaoh to bring out the children of Israel from his land. And Moses spoke to Pharaoh all the words which the Lord had commanded, but Pharaoh would not hearken to them. Therefore the strength of God was wielded against the Egyptians, and He smote Pharaoh and his officers, and his people, with grievous plagues.

Through the hands of Aaron God changed the waters of Egypt into blood. They who drew water from a matting stream, looked into their vessels, and lo, their water was red blood; they who sought to drink and slake their thirst, but filled their mouths with blood, and they who used water in preparing bread, found blood mixed with the dough upon their kneading troughs.

Then the rivers brought forth frogs, and they entered into the houses of the Egyptians, into their feel and into their beds.

And still the Lord's arm was stretched forth in anger over Egypt, and He smote the land with the grievous plague of lice; lice on man and beast, on king and queen, and all the people of the land.

Then God sent against Egypt the wild beasts of the forest. And they entered the inhabited cities and destroyed men and cattle, and made great havoc in the land. And serpents, and scorpions, and all manner of reptiles, with mice. weasels, and all manner of vermin and flies, and

[p. 136]

hornets, and all manner of insects filled the land of Egypt and fed upon it.

Then God sent a pestilence among the cattle; all but a tenth part of the cattle of the Egyptians died in one night; but the cattle belonging to the Israelites in Goshen were not affected; they lost not a single animal.

Then the bodies of the Egyptians became sore and full of boils, and noxious, and their flesh was greatly inflamed. Yet still the anger of God burned against them and His hand was still raised in wrath.

And God sent a hailstorm which destroyed the vines and trees, and green herbs and growing plants, and the people who ventured out of their houses, and the unsheltered cattle, were killed by the falling stones. Then great swarms of locusts filled the land, destroying all that the hail had spared.

And after this darkness covered all the land, and for three days and three nights the people could not see even their hands before them.

And during this period of darkness God smote those of the Israelites who were rebellious of heart, and who were not desirous of obeying his commands. In the darkness did God do this that the Egyptians might not rejoice thereat.

And after this God commanded Moses and Aaron to prepare the Passover sacrifice, saying, "I will pass over the land of Egypt and slay the first born, both of man and beast." The children of Israel did as they had been commanded, and it came to pass at midnight that the Lord passed over the land and smote the first born of Egypt both of man and beast.

Then there was a great and grievous cry through all the land, for there was not a house without its dead; and

[p. 137]

[paragraph continues] Pharaoh and his people rose up in alarm and consuming grief.

And Bathia, the daughter of Pharaoh, went forth to seek Moses and Aaron, and she found them in their dwelling singing praises to the Lord. And Bathia addressed Moses, saying:

"Lo, I have nourished thee in my arms and loved thee in my heart even from thy infancy, and how hast thou rewarded my care and affection! Upon me, upon my people, and upon my father's house, thou hast brought calamity and affliction."

"Have any of the plagues troubled thee?" inquired Moses; "if so, tell me, I pray." And Bathia answered, "No." "Thou art also," continued Moses, "the first born of thy mother, and yet thou art here alive and well before me. Be comforted, not the slightest harm shall come to thee."

And Bathia answered:

"Such comfort cannot profit me, when I see this great misfortune bearing down the king my brother, his servants, and his house."

"They would not hearken to the voice of God," answered Moses, "and therefore is this punishment meted to them."

Then Pharaoh appeared before Moses and Aaron, and he cried to them:

"Arise, take thy brethren, their flocks and herds, and all they have; leave naught behind; go, but entreat the Lord for me."

And the Egyptians sent the children of Israel forth with great wealth, flocks, and herds, and precious things, even as the Lord had promised Abraham in his vision of the "covenant between the pieces."

The children of  did not leave Egypt that night, for

[p. 138]

they said, "We are not men of secret ways, to hurry off at midnight." They waited until morning, obtaining gold and silver vessels from their late oppressors.

Moses took with him the bones of Joseph, and the others of the people carried up with them also the bones of Jacob's other sons.

And the children of Israel journeyed from Raamses to Succoth. Two hundred and ten years after their entrance into Egypt, the Israelites departed therefrom, six hundred thousand men, with wives and children.

For three days after the departure of the Israelites, the Egyptians were occupied in burying their dead, and after this they began to talk together, saying, "Moses and Aaron said to Pharaoh, 'We desire to go a three days' journey into the wilderness, to sacrifice unto the Lord our God;' now let us rise up early and follow after them. If they return to Egypt we shall know them for faithful men, but if they do not intend returning, we will bring them back by force."

A great host of the Egyptians followed after the Israelites, and came up with them while they were encamped before Pi Hachiroth, observing the festival of the Lord.

And the Egyptians called out to them:

"Ye have been gone from Egypt five days, and ye promised to return in three; do ye not intend to come back?"

Then Moses and Aaron answered, saying:

"The Lord hath commanded us to keep on our way, even to the land flowing with milk and honey, which He swore unto our ancestors to give to us."

When the Egyptians saw that the Israelites had determined to be independent of them, they arrayed themselves to fight against their fleeing servitors. But God strengthened

[p. 139]

the hearts of His people, and the princes, of E<<n pt fled before them back to their land.

And when Pharaoh learned what had happened to them, and how many of them had been slain, he exclaimed:

"We have acted foolishly in allowing these slaves to leave us. We shall miss their services in the manufacture of bricks, and in building up our fortresses. When our tributaries hear of this tiling, they will rebel against us, unless we take severe measures with these Israelites, for they will say, 'If slaves can successfully rebel against them, how much easier will it be for princes and rulers like ourselves to cast their yoke from off our necks.'"

Therefore Pharaoh assembled his wise men, his magicians, and his elders, and taking counsel together they resolved to pursue and recapture their bondsmen.

And Pharaoh issued a proclamation calling upon every fighting man to hold himself in readiness for the march, and the hosts of Egypt assembled accordingly.

Then Pharaoh opened his treasury and gave presents to every man according to his rank, and he spoke to them in urbane and gracious tones, saying:

"Behold, in wars, the soldier gains the spoil, but it belongs unto his king, such is the law; but in this instance I will divide equally with you.

"The law requires the soldier to advance in battle, even in the front of the conflict, but on this occasion I will lead and ye shall follow me. The law commands the king's servants to prepare his chariot, but see, this day I will pre pare it myself."

The words of Pharaoh pleased the soldiers, and they cheerfully armed themselves with swords and spears, with bows and arrows.

And the Israelites were encamped by the Red Sea, and

[p. 140]

lifting up their eyes they beheld the Egyptians marching upon their rear. And their hearts became filled with terror, for the waters were before them and their enemies behind, and they cried aloud unto the Lord.

And there was great division of opinion among them. Those who differed divided themselves into four parties, and Moses replied to each of them in a suitable manner.

The first party, composed of the tribes of Reuben, Simeon, and Issachar, wished to throw themselves into the sea, for they could see no hope of escape. But Moses said to them:

"Fear not; stand firm and see the salvation of the Lord that He will do for ye this day."

The tribes of Zebulun, Naphtali, and Benjamin favoured a return to Egypt. To them Moses said:

"As ye have seen the Egyptians this day, ye shall not see them again any more for ever."

The tribes of Judah and Joseph desired to meet the Egyptians and to fight with them. But Moses said:

"Keep your position; the Lord will fight for ye, and ye shall hold your peace."

The fourth party, the tribes of Levi, Gad, and Asher, counselled a sudden attack, a surprise, upon the Egyptians, thinking that it would confuse and weaken them, and to these Moses said:

"Move not; fear nothing; only call upon the Lord to deliver ye out of their hands."

And it came to pass after Moses had spoken these words that he rose up in the midst of the people, and he prayed unto the Lord, saying:

"I beseech thee, oh Lord God of the universe, to save this people which thou hast brought forth from Egypt. Let

[p. 141]

not the Egyptians triumph, and say vauntingly, 'Our hand is strong.'"

And the Lord said to Moses:

"Wherefore cry unto me? Speak unto the children of Israel and bid them to go forward."

And Moses stretched forth his rod over the sea as God commanded and the waters were divided.

And the children of Israel passed through the Red Sea dryshod, and when they had passed through, the waters returned as before. And the waters closed over the Egyptians, and not one was saved of all their hosts.

Then sang Moses and the children of Israel unto the Lord in tones of gladness

"I will sing unto the Lord, for gloriously hath He triumphed.
 The horse and the rider He hath cast into the sea."

 

Footnotes

^125:1 The three counsellors of Pharaoh were dealt with by God according to their merits. Jithro (Re'uel), who desired to release and relieve them, was saved from destruction, and converted to Judaism; Job received the punishment mentioned in the book to which his name is given; and "Bi'lam, the son of Be'or, they killed him with the sword" (Num. 31 8).

^129:1 Moses said: "If you compel them to labour steadily their strength will fail them; for your own benefit and profit allow them at east one day in the week for rest and a renewal of strength."

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 142]

  

PART SECOND.

  

SPECIMENS OF BIBLICAL COMMENTARIES.

  

I.

  

THE DELIVERANCE FROM EGYPT.

"Moses fled from the face of Pharaoh and tarried in the land of Midian, and sat down by a well."

THREE of the prominent Biblical characters met their wives for the first time by wells of water--namely, Isaac, Jacob, and Moses.

In regard to Isaac we find, "And Isaac came from the road at the well of Chai roi" (Gen. 13), in addition to which Eleazer, his father's messenger, met Rebecca by the well. Jacob met Rachel by the well, and Moses met the daughters of Jithro when they came to water their father's flocks.

The Lord hates idolatry. Why then did Moses seek the house of an idolater?

The Rabbis say that Jithro had seen the error of his ways and resigned his position as priest to the idols of Midian before Moses came to him. For this reason the people held aloof from him and his family, holding no intercourse with them, and for this reason the shepherds refused to work for him, and his daughters were obliged to water and attend to his flocks.

[p. 143]

"His eyes see, His eyebrow searches the sons of man," says the Psalmist.

"Although His divinity is of heaven," said Rabbi Janaai, "His eyes look upon earth. Even as the king who built high tower in his orchard and dwelt therein. To his labourers he said, 'Look to my orchard that you keep it in good condition, the walks clean, and the trees carefully attended that they may bring forth good fruit. He among ye who is faithful shall receive a just reward, and he who neglects my charge shall meet the punishment he deserves!' The world, vast and immense, is the orchard of the great King of kings, and he has placed man therein to keep his laws and statutes, and to preserve the sweet savour of obedience. They who are faithful will be rewarded, while they who neglect their trust will be dealt with according to their deeds. Therefore the Psalmist says, 'His eyes see, His eyebrow searches the sons of man."

He searches the righteous. How? By judging of the manner in which they attend to the flocks entrusted to their charge.

David, the son of Jesse, He tried in this manner. Before the lambs David set tender grass for food; to the old sheep he gave soft herbs and tender grass, while to the young sheep, able to chew well, he gave the old grass; feeding each according to its wants and strength. Therefore the Lord said, "David, who is able to care for the wants of the flocks entrusted to him, will be able to rule properly over my flock, the people of Israel," even as it is written, "After the young flock He brought Him to rule over Jacob His people."

So did the Lord try Moses. While keeping the flock of his father-in-law in the wilderness a lamb left the flock and

[p. 144]

ran away. The merciful shepherd pursued it, and found it quenching its thirst at a spring by the roadside. "Poor lamb," said Moses, "I did not know that thou vast thirsty;" and after the lamb had finished drinking, he took it up tenderly in his arms and carried it back to the flock. Then said God, "Moses, merciful Moses, if thy love and care is so great for an animal, how much greater will it be, exerted for thy fellow-being! thou shalt lead my people Israel."

Why did the Lord appear to Moses in a thorn bush? Because the thorn bush is lowly among trees, and Israel was then lowly among the nations of the earth. Roses, the most beautiful of the flowers, grow with thorns, so among Israel both righteous and unrighteous men were numbered. He who thrusts his hand into thorns may do so without hurt, but he cannot draw it forth again without being torn by the brambles. So was it with Israel. When Jacob entered Egypt it was with peace, none noticed, to disturb him; but when his children went out from the land, it was with signs, miracles, and war. And lest Moses might chance to think that the rigour of the Egyptians had already destroyed Israel, God appeared in a burning bush that was not consumed, to typify the state and future of Israel, complete and perfect, despite the fire of persecution.

"And God said, I have greatly seen the affliction of my people who are in Egypt."

When Hagar was dismissed by Abraham, and when her son cried to her for water in the wilderness, she appealed to Heaven, saying, "Merciful Father, thou didst promise me, 'I will multiply thy seed;' and now, behold my son must die of thirst!"

Upon this the angels asked, "What ails thee, Hagar?" &c.

[p. 145]

According to Rabbi Simon, the angels opposed the assistance rendered Ishmael, saying, "If he is saved today he will bring evil upon thy children Israel in the future." Then said God, "How has his conduct been to-day?" And when the angels answered, "Innocent and correct," God continued, "He shall be judged to-day only in relation to his actions of to-day."

So was it with the Israelites in Egypt. The Lord knew what their future conduct would be. He said, "I have seen greatly;" not simply "I have seen," but "I have seen greatly;" which means more than limited view or mere observation.

The Lord said to Moses, "Thou seest one thing, but I see two. That the children of Israel will receive the Decalogue upon Mount Sinai is known to thee; but I foresee the event which will follow, the making of the molten calf. Yet still I judge them but by their present conduct. I have heard their cry, and though I know that they will murmur against me in the wilderness, nevertheless will I redeem them. I said to Jacob their progenitor, 'I will go down with thee to Egypt, and I will also surely bring thee up again.' Now I am going to bring my children up as I have promised them, and lead them to the land which I gave unto their fathers. Their cry has reached me, and the last days of their bondage are drawing nigh. Go therefore . . . that thou mayest bring forth my people, the children of Israel, out of Egypt. Thou art the one appointed co redeem them."

And Moses answered:

"When Jacob went down into Egypt didst Thou not say to him, 'I will go down with thee to Egypt, and I myself will surely bring thee up again?' And now Thou sayest, 'Go thou.' How can I bring them up? How protect

[p. 146]

them from the summer's heat and the cold of winter? How can I support an army of six hundred thousand men, with many women and little ones, and some among them who are invalids and crippled, requiring extra care and special food?"

"The unleavened bread which they will carry with them will be sufficient for them all for thirty days," replied the Lord.

Then Moses said:

"When they shall say to me, 'What is His name?' how shall I answer them?"

And God replied:

"I have many names. I am called 'God Almighty' (El-Shaddai), 'The Lord of Hosts' (Adonai Zebaoth), 'God' (Elohimn). When I judge the wicked I am called 'The Lord of Hosts,' and when I rebuke the sinner I am called 'God Almighty.' When I show mercy to my people I am called 'Eternal' (Jehovah)."

Then God said to Moses, "I will be that I will be; this is my name for ever."

God meant by this, "I will be with them in this bondage, and I will be with them in their future captivity."

Then said Moses:

"Why should I mention future captivity to them while they are suffering under their present bondage?"

And God replied:

"Thou hast spoken well; say naught of their future troubles."

"And Moses answered and said, 'But behold they will not believe me.'"

Moses was wrong in making this response, for God had already said, "They will hearken to thy voice."

So God said

[p. 147]

"What hast thou in thy hand?"

This was a rebuke, meaning that by the staff which he carried in his hand he deserved punishment for doubting. Why did Moses's staff become a serpent? Because he implied falsehood to the Lord, even as did the serpent in Eden.

A heathen chief said to Rabbi Josah, "My gods are greater than thy gods."

"Why?" asked the sage.

"Because," replied the heathen, "when your God appeared in the thorn bush Moses hid his face, but when he saw the serpent, which is my god, he fled before it."

And Rabbi Josah answered:

"When our God appears we cannot flee from him; He is in the heaven and on earth, on sea and dry land; but if a man flies from thy god, the serpent, a few steps deliver him."

What significance has the serpent in respect to the redemption of Israel? Pharaoh is compared to the serpent, as it is written (Ezekiel 28), "The great serpent." Even as the bite of a serpent to man was the bondage of Pharaoh to Israel.

The Lord said to Moses, "Pharaoh is now as a serpent; thou shalt smite him with thy staff and he shall become powerless as wood. Even as a staff is useless for aggression without man's assistance, motive power, so shall Pharaoh cease to be aggressive." Therefore He said, "Put forth thy hand and grasp it by the tail."

Why was Moses commanded to put his hand into his bosom when it was made white with leprosy? Because slander and falsehood are generally spoken in secret, even as the bosom is hidden.

[p. 148]

How did this change to leprosy illustrate the redemption of Israel?

Even as a leper defiles the clean, so did the Egyptian contact defile the Israelites, and as the leprous hand was restored to its purity, so did God design to purify His people.

In the first two miracles which the Lord displayed to Moses the objects regained their original appearance; but in the third, the change from water to blood, the former did not recover its original qualities. So God fore-shadowed that Moses would not be pardoned for his sin at Meribah.

Each time when Moses's death is mentioned in the Scriptures, the cause of his death before entering the holy land, his disobedience at Meribah is mentioned. Why is this?

Two men were once punished by the civil authorities; one had committed a crime, the other but a slight misdemeanour. The latter requested that the cause of his punishment might be made public, that people might not confound his misdemeanour with the greater crime.

So was it with Moses. God decreed that he should die in the wilderness, and He also decreed that all that generation (save Joshua and Caleb) should also perish. Therefore that Moses might not be classed with hem, as rebellious against the Lord, the special cause for his punishment s mentioned in connexion with his death.

"Moses said to the Lord, Pardon, O Lord! I am not a man of words."

Seven days did the Lord repeat His command to Moses, and still Moses hesitated to obey. "I am not a man of words to-day"--that is one day--"yesterday"--two days

[p. 14p]

"also"--three--"the day before"--four--"also''--five--"nor since"--six. "Thou hast spoken"--seven.

Then God said:

"Even if thou be not a man of words, fear not; have I not created all the mouths which speak? can I not make those who speak dumb, and put words into the mouths of those who are dumb at my pleasure? It is my pleasure that thou shouldst speak to Pharaoh."

And Moses made answer, saying:

"They are the descendants of Abraham those whom thou wouldst redeem. Which is the nearer to a man, his brother's son, or his son's son? To  Lot, his brother's son, Thou didst send angels; and now to redeem his own children, six hundred thousand strong, besides the women and the young, Thou wouldst send me. To Hagar Thou didst send five angels when she fled from Sarah, her mistress; but to sixty thousand of the children of Sarah Thou wouldst send but me."

The Rabbis tell us that Moses was not reluctant to accept this mission through fear or a dread of labour, or a disinclination to obey God, but because he thought it should rightly belong to Aaron, his elder brother. Yet God was displeased with Moses, and, therefore, He gave the priesthood which He had designed for him, to Aaron, in saying:

"Is there not Aaron thy brother, the Levite?"

When God said "thy brother," the word "Levite" was implied, because Moses being a Levite, his brother must necessarily have been the same; but this was God's meaning:

"I thought to make thee my priest, and continue thy brother, the Levite; but for thy reluctance in obeying my wishes, he shall be the priest and thou the Levite."

[p. 150]

"And the lord said to Aaron, 'Go to meet Moses.'"

"Oh that some one would make thee as my brother," is one of the beautiful expressions of Solomon's song.

What kind of a brother? Not as was Cain to Abel, for "Cain rose up against his brother Abel and slew him." Not as Ishmael to Isaac, for Ishmael hated Isaac; neither as Esau, for "Esau hated Jacob." Not as the brothers of Joseph, for "they could not speak peaceably to him;" but even such a brother as Aaron to Moses, as it is written, "And he (Aaron) went and met him (Moses) by the mount of God, and kissed him" (Ex. 4: 27).

"And after that Moses and Aaron went in."

Where were the elders? We find it written, "Thou and the elders of Israel shall come."

The elders started out, but dropped off gradually, through fear; therefore, after this, it is always written simply, "Moses and Aaron went in."

 

"Thus hath said the Everlasting One," &c.

According to Rabbi Chiyah, it happened at this time that all the neighbouring kings were calling upon Pharaoh to pay their homage to him and bring him presents; and each of the princes brought with him his god. Moses and Aaron stood at the palace gates, and the guard thinking they too were tributaries, bade them enter. Pharaoh looked at them, and seeing them to be strangers he imagined that they also brought him presents, and he wondered why they did not salute him as the others did. He spoke and asked them, "What is your desire?" And they answered, "Thus saith the Lord, let my people go," &c.

And Pharaoh said in angry pride:

[p. 151]

"Who is this Lord that I am to obey,--at whose voice I am to let Israel go? He has never made me an offering or appeared before me; I know him not, nor will I let Israel go."

Then he continued:

"Lo, I will consult my records and see if I find there the name of your God. Here I find the names of all the gods; the gods of Amon, the gods of Moab, the gods of Zedin, but the name of your God I cannot find."

And Moses answered:

"Our God is a living God."

And Pharaoh said to him:

"Is he young or old? What is his age; how many cities has he captured; how many countries has he conquered; how long has been his reign?"

Then said Moses:

"His power fills the universe. He was before the world saw light, He will be, when the world exists no more. He formed thee; with His spirit thou breathest."

And Pharaoh further asked, "What are his deeds?" To which the messengers of God replied:

"The voice of the Lord breaketh in pieces the cedars; He stretched out the heavens, He laid the foundation of the earth, rending the mountains and breaking into stones the rocks. His bow is of fire, His arrows are of flame. He formed the mountains and the hills, covered the fields with green, bringing forth fruits and herbs. He removeth kings, and kings He exalteth."

"Ye come to me with falsehoods," returned Pharaoh "ye tell me that your God is the Lord of the world; know then that Egypt is mine, and I have created the great river Nile which floweth in its boundaries."

[p. 152]

("Mine is my stream, and I have made it for myself." Ezekiel 19: 3).

Then Pharaoh asked of his magicians, "Have ye ever heard of their God?" And the magicians answered, "We have heard of him. He is the son of wise men, the son of a king of olden time."

"Thou askest now, 'Who is the Lord?' said Moses. "The time will come when thou wilt say, 'The Lord is righteous.' Thou sayest now, 'I know not your Lord.' The time cometh when thou wilt say, 'I have sinned against your Lord.'"

 

"And they met Moses and Aaron . . . 'to put a sword in their hands to slay us.'"

"Yea," said the overburdened children of Israel to Moses and Aaron, "we are like a lamb which the wolf has carried from its flock, the shepherd strives to take it from him, but between the two the lamb is pulled to pieces; between ye and Pharaoh will we all be killed."

"Then Moses said to the Lord, 'O Lord, wherefore hast Thou let so much evil come upon this people?'"

The Lord had already informed Moses that He would harden Pharaoh's heart, and that he would refuse to let Israel go; therefore God now replied to him, "Thou wilt see now what I am going to do to Pharaoh, but thou wilt not see what I shall do to the three kingdoms of Canaan.''

"And I appeared to Abraham," &c.

The Lord said to Moses:

"Woe, woe, that the righteous are no more; I mourn fop the patriarchs. I revealed myself to Abraham, to Isaac, said to Jacob as God Almighty, but not by the name 'Eternal,' as I have done to thee, yet they never murmured

[p. 153]

either at my commands or at my works. I said to Abraham, 'Arise, walk through the land, its length and breadth, for I will give it to thee;' and when his wife died and he wanted but a grave for her, he was obliged to buy it with money, yet he slid not murmur and reproach me, saying, 'Thou didst promise to give me all this land, and now I am obliged to sue for and purchase but a very small portion.' I said to Isaac, 'Sojourn in this land, for unto thee and thy seed will I give all these countries;' and when he wanted a little water he could get none, for the herdsmen of Gerar did strive with his herdsmen to prevent their digging a well; still Isaac raised not his voice against me. I said to Jacob, 'The ground whereon thou liest, to thee will I give it;' and when he wished to pitch there his tent he was obliged to pay a hundred kessitah, yet he did not murmur against the Lord, or even ask of me my name, as thou hast done."

"And the lord spake unto Moses and Aaron, and gave them a charge unto the children of Israel, and unto Pharaoh, the king of Egypt."

A king had a fine and elegant orchard in which he planted trees, both fruitful and unfruitful His servants said to him, "What benefit is there in the planting of barren trees?" And he replied to them, "Fruitful trees and those which bear not, are equally useful; where could we procure wood for our houses, our ships, and our utensils, if we did not have these sturdy trees which bear no fruit?"

Even as the righteous glorify the Lord in their happiness so does the punishment of the wicked glorify the Lord when they proclaim, "Justly have we been punished."

When Aaron performed the miracles with his staff, Pharaoh laughed, and made light of them, saying:

"It is customary for merchants to carry their wares to

[p. 154]

places wanting them,--why shouldst thou come with such tricks to a country full of magicians as Egypt is?"

He sent for some small children, and even they changed their rods into serpents.

"But Aaron's staff swallowed up their staves."

The swallowing of their staves was not the only miracle, but that Aaron's staff did not grow larger in size thereafter, added to the wonder.

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 155]

  

Chapter II

  

THE TEN PLAGUES.

"Thus hath said the Lord, 'By this thou shalt know that I am the lord; behold I will smile . . . . the waters of the river, and they shall be turned to blood.'"

When a human being designs to injure another, or to take vengeance on an enemy, he comes upon him suddenly and without warning. Not so, however, does God act. He warned Pharaoh of every plague which He brought upon Egypt, in order to give him the opportunity for repentance.

Why were the waters first smitten? Because the Egyptians worshipped the river Nile, and the Lord said, "I will first smite the god and then its nation," according to the proverb, "I will first smite the gods, then the priests will be terrified."

Blood.

Why did the Lord punish the Egyptians with blood? Because they shed the blood of innocent infants, therefore was the water of their rivers turned to blood.

"And the Lord said unto Moses, say to Aaron, Take thy staff and stretch out thy hand over the waters of Egypt."

Why could not Moses himself smite the river?

Because the waters had protected and guarded him when he slumbered, a helpless infant, in the ark of bulrushes, and the wise sayings teach us, "Into the well wherefrom thou drawest water thou shouldst cast no stones."

[p. 156]

Frogs.

We are apt to think the frog superfluous, not requisite in the economy of the universe. Not so,--every living thing has its purpose, and the frogs became an instrument in Pharaoh's punishment. The river Nile brought forth frogs in abundance, but they strayed not from its banks. Then God said, "Thou sayest, 'the river is mine,'--verily I will show thee that even thy house is not thy own; the frogs shall enter into it, even into thy kneading trough, they will sit in thy dough and consume it."

The frogs caused the Egyptians morn annoyance than that occasioned by the mere pecuniary loss which they carried with them, for they were very noisy; therefore it is written, "Moses cried (i.e., spoke with a loud voice) to the Lord, on account of the frogs."

Lice.

"Say to Aaron . . . and smite the dust of the earth."

Why did not Moses himself smite the dust?

Because Moses hid in the dust the body of the Egyptian whom he found smiting a Hebrew, and the dust concealed his action. Therefore were the plagues involving the water and the dust wrought through Aaron.

Why were the Egyptians afflicted with this plague?

Because they had forced the Israelites to sweep the streets and to work in mortar, dust, and bricks. Therefore was the dust of the streets turned to lice. The magicians were unable to produce the lice, because they could not imitate articles smaller than a barleycorn; therefore they said, "This is the finger of God."

The Multitude of Beasts.

"Rise up early," &c.

[p. 157]

God said to Moses, "This man persists in his obstinacy, despite the plagues already brought upon him; therefore say to him that the next will be more dreadful than the others all combined; bid him let Israel go."

The beasts swarmed first into the house of Pharaoh, because he was the first to oppress Israel, and then into the houses of his servants, because they followed in his lead.

Why were these beasts brought upon the Egyptians? Because they had forced the Israelites to endanger their lives by hunting wild beasts.

We find that the frogs died in the land of Egypt, but that the beasts were removed. Why this difference? Because the frogs were worthless, but the Egyptians might have profited from the furs of the wild beasts.

Pestilence.

Why was this plague brought upon them?

To show that the plagues were directed only against the Egyptians, for as the Bible tells us, "There had not died of the cattle of the Israelites even one." Even cattle belonging to a Hebrew and in the possession of an Egyptian was saved, as was also the cattle owned in shares by an Egyptian and an Israelite.

Boils.

Why did He bring boils upon them?

Because they had compelled the Israelites to clean their houses and courts, thus making their blood impure, and producing boils.

Why were the magicians unable to stand before Moses on account of the inflammation?

Because they had advised that every son born to Israel should be cast into the river.

[p. 158]

"The Lord hardened," &'c.

When the Lord saw that the five plagues already brought upon Pharaoh did not cause his repentance, he said, "Even should he wish to repent hereafter, I will harden his heart that he may receive the full measure of his punishment."

Hail.

"Behold, then will I let rain about this time to to-morrow," &c.

Moses made a mark upon the wall of Pharaoh's house, saying, "When the sun shall shine to-morrow upon this spot there will be hail, therefore bring in thy cattle," &c.

Again, the compassion of God is displayed to us. Even in his anger He was still mercifully inclined towards the wicked people and their cattle. He intended the plague of hail to destroy vegetation, not life; therefore He warned the people to keep themselves and their flocks under shelter.

"The lord said . . . Stretch out thy hand towards the heaven," &c.

Although "the heavens are the heavens of the Lord," yet "the earth hath He given to the children of men" (Psalm 120: 16).

An emperor, ruling Rome and Syria, might issue a decree forbidding Romans to visit Syria, and Syrians to visit Rome. So God in creating the world pronounced the heavens "the heavens of the Lord," the residence of godly beings.

"But the earth hath He given to the children of men;" the earth must be the scene of their sojournings. Yet, "whatsoever the Lord willeth hath He done, in the heavens and on the earth; in the seas and in all the deeps" (Psalm 135:16).

He descended upon the earth at Mount Sinai; at the

[p. 159]

time of the creation He said, "Let the waters gather together in one place," and when it pleased Him so to do, He made the sea dry land, even as it is written, "And the children of Israel walked upon dry land in the midst of the sea."

In the same manner God gave Moses permission to rule over the heavens, to stretch his hands towards them, and bring down a hailstorm over the land of Egypt.

Why were they punished with hail?

Because they had compelled the Israelites to plough their fields, sow their grain, care for their trees, and to perform all the menial labour incidental to the cultivation of the soil. Therefore God sent this hailstorm to destroy the products of the ground, that the Egyptians might reap no profit from the enforced labour of His people. When God saw that they disregarded His warning, and neglected to put their cattle under shelter, He caused the cattle to die from the effects of the storm.

The hailstones were very large, each of them being about the size of an infant's head; and as they touched the ground they burst into flame.

Locusts.

Why did God bring the locusts into Egypt?

The Israelites had sowed the fields with grain, and the locusts were brought to destroy all that had escaped the hail.

This plague was so grievous as to wring from Pharaoh the acknowledgment, "I have sinned against the Lord your God that I did not let Israel go." "And against you" (Moses and Aaron), "that I have driven you out of my house."

[p. 160]

Darkness.

"But for all the children of Israel there was light in their dwellings."

Why, is it not written, "There was light in the land of Goshen?"

Because, wherever the Israelites were, there was light for them; but to an Egyptian, even in the same room with an Israelite, all was impenetrable darkness.

The Slaying of the First-Born.

"Thou shalt not see my face any more."

Such were the words of Pharaoh, when Moses appeared before him, to warn him for the last time of the doom awaiting him should he still oppose the exodus of Israel. Moses answered:

"Thou hast spoken well. Nevermore will I come to thee, but thou wilt come to me, and thy servants and thyself will entreat me, bending, to depart from thy country, and then will I go."

Some of the Egyptians, fearing Moses's prophecy, slept that night in the houses of the Israelites. But the death-stroke found them, and the Israelite awakening, found an Egyptian's corpse beside him.

Great was the distress in Egypt. Pharaoh called to Moses and Aaron, and said, "Arise!" They replied, "What would Pharaoh with us? Has he come to us?" "Arise!" he cried, "arise and go."

The Israelites went forth from Egypt on the eve of the fifteenth of Nissan; on this same night, many years later, the army of Sennacherib, encamped before Jerusalem, was slain by the Lord. King Hezekiah, and the inhabitants of the besieged city, celebrated the feast of Passover according

[p. 161]

to the command of God, and sang praises and hallelujahs to His Holy Name.

But Hezekiah was heavy at heart, and he said:

"To-morrow the city may be taken." Yet, lo, when they arose in the morning, the Lord had again passed over for His people, and the invading army lay dead in its camp.

Before inflicting the last plague, God warned Pharaoh, as it is written, "I will smite all the first-born of Egypt."

Had God wished to make this the first, instead of the last of the plagues, He could have done so; but He desired to increase the severity with the number of the plagues, and accordingly the lightest he sent first.

"The Lord will pass through the land of Egypt and smite all the first-born."

A certain king sent his son to a distant country, the people of which received him with great honours, and conferred distinction upon him, finally making him their ruler. When his father heard this, he said:

"What honour shall I do them in return? I will call that country after the name of my son."

After some time had elapsed, he again received news from the distant land; its people had taken away the honours conferred upon his son, and made him a slave He therefore went to war with them and delivered his son.

Joseph went down to Egypt and was made governor. Great respect was also paid to Jacob, for whose death "the Egyptians mourned seventy days."

For this God named Egypt after the garden of Eden, as it is written, "As the garden of the Lord is the land of Egypt." When, however, the Israelites were oppressed and reduced to slavery, God made war upon Egypt, through the medium of the ten plagues, and through the last delivered his "son," Israel, from bondage.

[p. 162]

During the night, while the Hebrews sang praises to God, Pharaoh came to the place where Moses and Aaron dwelt, and he cried, "Arise, get thee out," &c. Then the people scattered themselves among the Egyptians, borrowing vessels of gold and silver. But Moses sought the sepulchre of Joseph, and carried forth his bones, according to the charge transmitted to him.

"And it came to pass at the end of four hundred and thirty years," &c.

These years are counted from the time that God appeared to Abraham in the vision known as "The Covenant of the Pieces," and told him that his seed should be "strangers in a land not theirs." They lived in Egypt, however, only two hundred and ten years. Upon the same month and day, as they had entered Egypt, they left it. On that date Joseph was released from prison, and in subsequent years it witnessed the performance of many wonders in behalf of God's people.

In King Hezekiah's time Jerusalem was delivered from Sennacherib; during the Babylonian captivity, Shedrach, Meshach, and Abednego were delivered from the fire of furnace, and Daniel came forth unharmed from the lion's den.

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 163]

  

III.

  

THE DEATH OF MOSES.

"The Lord said to Moses, Behold, thy days approach that thou must die."

The death of Moses is alluded to, in the Bible, ten times.

"Thy days approach that thou must die." (Deut. 31: 14.)

"And thou shalt die on the mount." (Deut. 33: 50.)

"For I am going to die."

"For I know that after my death." (Deut. 31: 29.)

"And how much more after my death." (Deut. 31: 27.)

". . . Blessed the children of Israel before his death." (Deut. 33: 1.)

"And Moses was one hundred and twenty years old when he died." (Deut. 34: 7.)

"And it came to pass after the death of Moses." (Josh. I: 1.)

"Moses, my servant, is dead." (Josh. 1: 2.)

Moses himself thought that he had committed but a slight offence, which would be pardoned; for ten times had Israel tempted God's wrath and been forgiven through his intercession, as it is written, "And the Lord said, I have pardoned according to thy word." But when he became convinced that he would not be pardoned, he made the following supplication:

"Sovereign of the Universe, my trouble and my exertion

[p. 164]

for Israel's sake is revealed and known before Thee. How I have laboured to cause Thy people to know Thee, and to believe in Thy holy Name and practise Thy holy law, has come before Thee. O Lord, as I had shared their troubles and their distress, I hoped to share their happiness. Behold now the time has come when their trials will cease, when they will enter into the land of promised bliss, and Thou sayest to me, 'Thou shalt not pass over this Jordan.' Oh, Eternal, great and just, if Thou wilt not allow me to enter into this goodly land, permit me at least to live on here in this world."

Then God answered Moses, saying:

"If thou wilt not die in this world, how canst thou live in the world to come?"

But Moses continued:

"If Thou wilt not permit me to pass over this Jordan, let me live as the beasts of the field; they eat of the herbs and drink of the waters, and live and see the world; let my life be even as theirs."

And God answered:

"Let it suffice thee; do not continue to speak unto me any more on this matter." (Deut. 3: 26.)

Yet again Moses prayed:

"Let me live even as the fowls; they gather their food in the morning and in the evening they return unto their nests,--let my life be even as theirs."

And again God said:

"Let it suffice thee; do not continue to speak to me any more on this matter."

Then Moses, convinced that his death was determined on, proclaimed:

"He is the Rock; His work is perfect and His ways are just; the God of truth, just and upright is He."

[p. 165]

"And Moses died there in the land of Moab, according to the word of the Lord."

Holy Writ testifies to the righteousness of Moses, "And there arose not a prophet since in Israel like unto Moses, whom the Lord knew face to face."

The heavens wept and exclaimed, "The pious one hath departed, there is none upright among men."

When Joshua searched for his friend and teacher and failed to find him, he wept bitterly and cried, "Help me, O Lord! for the pious have ceased to be."

The angels proclaimed, "He executed the justice of the Lord;" and Israel added, "And His judgments with Israel." And together they exclaimed:

"He shall come in peace; they shall rest in their beds every one walking in his uprightness."

Blessed be the memory of the just.

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 166]

  

IV.

  

THE BOOK OF ESTHER.

AND it came to pass when Nebuchadnezzar died, that his son, Evil-Merodach, claimed the kingdom. But the people refused to anoint him as ruler, and they said to him:

"Behold, once before was thy father removed from the vicinity of human beings and compelled to eat herbs and grass like the beasts of the field for seven years. And lo, we deemed him dead and appointed princes in his stead to rule over us, and when he returned he put these princes to death. How can we now make you king? It may be with your father as it was m former days, he may yet return."

Now when the people spoke thus to Evil-Merodach, he went to his father's tomb and removed from the same the corpse of the king. He fastened an iron chain about its feet, and dragged his father's body through the streets of the capital, to prove to the people that he was indeed dead. As it is written in Isaiah:

"But thou, thou art cast out of thy grave like a discarded offshoot." (Isaiah 14: 19.)

Then the people of the country proclaimed Evil-Merodach king.

And Daniel said to the king:

"Thy father, Nebuchadnezzar, never opened the door of his prisons" (meaning when he once incarcerated a person it was for life), "as it is written, 'never opened the prison-house of his prisoners.' (Isaiah 14: 17.) Now when the

[p. 167]

[paragraph continues] Israelites were adjudged guilty by God of the many sins which they committed, behold thy father came up and laid the land of Israel desolate. He destroyed our holy temple, and our people he sent captives and exiles to Babel. Among them was Yehoyachim the king of Judah. For thirty-two years he has lain in prison because he neglected to follow the will of God. Now, I pray thee, let him be released. Oh, be not stiff-necked. Remember the punishment of thy father when he became proud and blasphemed, and said, 'There is no king or ruler but myself only,' as it is written, 'I will ascend above the height of the clouds; I will be equal to the Most High.'" (Isaiah 14: 14.)

Then Evil-Merodach listened to the words of Daniel and performed the will of God. He released Yehoyachim, the king of the tribe of Judah, and he opened the doors to the other prisoners and gave them liberty.

And He anointed Yehoyachim, and dressed him in royal garments; "and he ate bread before him continually all the days of his life." (Kings 25: 29.)

And from Evil-Merodach the kingdom descended to Darius of Media, and Ahasuerus, of Persia, was the son of Darius of Media.

From the house of this same Ahasuerus was banished Vashti, the daughter of Evil-Merodach, the son of Nebuchadnezzar. For her iniquity was she banished, for she compelled the Jewish women to labour upon their holy Sabbath.

This same Ahasuerus commanded that the wine of one hundred and twenty-seven provinces should be furnished on his banquet table, that the men of one hundred and twenty-seven provinces might drink, each man of the wine of his own country, of his own province, that he might not consume strange and hurtful drink.

[p. 168]

This same Ahasuerus was a foolish king. "My queen shall be sent away," he ordered; "but my decree must never be abolished."

In the time of this same Ahasuerus the people of Israel were sold,--aye, without money; as it is written: "For naught were ye sold." (Isaiah 52: 3.)

And in the time of this same Ahasuerus the words written in the Pentateuch came to pass: "In the morning shall ye say, 'Would that it were evening,' and in the evening, 'Would that the morning were nigh.'" (Deut. 28: 67.)

This was the same Ahasuerus who once dismissed his wife for the sake of his friend, and again killed his friend for the sake of his wife. He sent away Vashti, his wife, in accordance with the advice of Memuchan his friend, and he killed his friend Haman, for the sake of Esther, his wife.

And it came to pass in the days of this Ahasuerus that he desired to sit upon the throne of Solomon. The magnificent throne of Solomon which had been carried from Jerusalem to Egypt by Sheshak the king of Egypt. From his hands it passed to Sennacherib the king of Assyria; from him was it returned to Hezekiah, and again carried away by Pharaoh Nechoh of Egypt. Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babel, wrenched it from the possession of Pharaoh, and when Cyrus, the king of Media,. conquered the land of Persia, the throne was brought to Shushan and passed into the possession of Ahasuerus.

But he had a new throne made for himself. He sent artisans to Alexandria, and they were two years making for him his throne. "In the third year of his reign, the king Ahasuerus sat upon his own throne, and Solomon's throne was not used any more."

"There was a certain Jew in Shushan, the capital, whose name was Mordecai."

[p. 169]

Why was Mordecai called a Jew? He was not of the tribe of Judah, but a descendant of Benjamin? He was called a Jew because he feared the Lord as all Jews should do.

Mordecai was a descendant of Shimi, whose life King David spared when he had incurred the penalty of death for reviling his ruler. For David foresaw the miracle which should be wrought through the instrumentality of Mordecai in years then hidden in the future.

And Mordecai brought up his cousin Hadassah or Esther. She was called Hadassah (meaning "myrtle") because of her sweet disposition and kindly acts, which were compared to the fragrant perfume and ever fresh beauty of the myrtle. In many instances the righteous are compared to the myrtle, as in Isaiah (55: 13), "In place of the thorn the fir tree shall spring forth, and the nettle shall give place to the myrtle."

This sentence is thus construed:

Instead of Haman, the thorn, the fir tree, Mordecai shall spring forth; and in place of Vashti, compared to a nettle, Esther, the myrtle, shall share the Persian throne.

Her name, Esther, was also well chosen; from the Greek, Estarah, a bright star. Her pious deeds ceased only with her life, and her beauty was equalled only by her spiritual qualities.

Shortly before Esther's birth her father died, and her mother followed him when the babe drew her first breath. Then Mordecai, her father's nephew, adopted her, and brought her up as his child.

After the king had married Esther he was anxious to learn her descent, and asked her, "Where are thy kindred? Behold, I have prepared a banquet, bid them attend."

And Esther answered him

[p. 170]

"Thou art a wise king, and surely thou knowest that my parents are dead; do not sadden me, I pray, my lord, by such inquiries."

'Twas then that the king released the people from the payment of the year's taxes, and gave presents "according to his ability" to all his nobles, declaring that it was done in "Esther's honour."

He imagined that through this the fame of the proceeding and Esther's name would become known throughout the nations, and he might learn thereby of her people.

When this plan failed he called all the beautiful virgins of his provinces together again, thinking that jealousy might induce Esther to tell him of her predecessors, but without avail. Esther mentioned not her people.

"In those days, when Mordecai was sitting in the king's gate, .Bigthana and Theresh became wroth," &c.

Rabbi Johanan said: "God has made servants wroth against their lords for the accomplishment of justice, and He has also made masters wroth with their servants for the same purpose." The latter instance is to be found in the history of Joseph, as it is written, "There was with us in the prison a Hebrew lad," and the former instance is that of Bigthana and Theresh, the chamberlains of the king.

"And the thing became known to Mordecai."

The two officers spoke in a strange language; they thought that Mordecai could not understand them. But Mordecai had been a member of the Sanhedrim; he was a learned man, and what they said was well understood by him.

One officer said to the other:

"Since the king married Esther we have had neither rest nor peace; the coming and the going makes life wearisome it would be better for us if we should remove him from the world."

[p. 171]

The other acquiesced with him, but said:

"How is it to be done? I am on guard; I cannot leave."

But the first speaker said:

"Go, and I will attend to both thy guard and mine."

Therefore it is written, "And the thing was inquired info and found true;" that is, one of the guards was found absent from his post.

"After these events." What events?

After God had created the remedy before the infliction of the wound; after Mordecai had saved the king's life before the orders for the destruction of his people were promulgated.

After these events the king advanced Haman, the son of Hamdatha, the Agagite, to an illustrious position in the kingdom. He was raised, however, but to be destroyed. His destiny was like to that of the hog in the parable of the horse, the colt, and the hog.

A certain man possessed a horse, a colt, and a hog. For the two former he measured out daily a certain amount of food; so much was their allowance, no more, no less; the hog, however, was allowed to eat according to his own pleasure. Said the colt to the horse, "How is this? Is it just? We work for our food while the hog is a useless animal; surely we should have as much to eat as is given him."

"Wait," answered the horse, "and you will soon see, in the downfall of the hog, the reason."

With the coming of the autumn the hog was killed.

"See," said the horse, "they did not give the hog so much to eat for his own benefit, but in order to fatten him for the killing."

Haman was a direct descendant of Esau. His father,

[p. 172]

[paragraph continues] Hamdatha, was the son of Sararch, he of Kuzah, Iphlotas, Joseph, Josim, Pedome, Made, Belaakan, Intimrom, Haridom, Shegar, Negar, Parmashtah, Vayzathah, Agag, Sumki, Amalek, and lastly Eliphaz, the first-born of Esau.

"Why transgressest thou the king's commands?"

The servants of the king's gate said to Mordecai:

"Why wilt thou refuse to bow before Haman, transgressing thus the wishes of the king? Do we not bow before him?"

"Ye are foolish," answered Mordecai, "aye, wanting in reason. Listen to me. Shall a mortal, who must return to dust, be glorified? Shall I bow down before one born of woman, whose days are short? When he is small he cries and weeps as a child; when he grows older sorrow and sighing are his portion; his days are full of wrath and anger, and at the end he returns to dust. Shall I bow to one like to him? No, I prostrate myself before the Eternal God, who lives for ever. He who dwells in Heaven and bears the world in the hollow of His hand. His word changes sunlight to darkness, His command illumines the deepest gloom. His wisdom made the world, He placed the boundaries of the mighty sea; the waters are His, the sweet and the salt; to the struggling waves he says, 'Be still, thus far shalt thou come, no further, that the earth may remain dry for my people.' To Him the great Creator and Ruler of the Universe, and to no other will I bow."

Haman was wroth against Mordecai, and said to him:

"Why art thou so stiff-necked? Did not thy forefather bow down to mine?"

"How?" replied Mordecai; "which of my ancestors bowed before forefather of thine?"

Then Haman answered:

[p. 173]

"Jacob, thy forefather, bowed down to Esau, his brother, who was my forefather."

"Not so," answered Mordecai, "for I am descended from Benjamin, and when Jacob bowed to Esau, Benjamin was not yet born. Benjamin never bowed until his descendants prostrated themselves in the holy temple, when the divinity of God rested within its sacred portals, and all Israel united with him. I will not bow before the wicked Haman."

"In the first month, that is, in the month Nissan (April), they cast the lot before Haman." He cast the lot "from day to day." At first he selected the first day of the week as the one for the destruction of the Jews; but then he said, "No; light was created upon that day, which is to their merit. On the second day the heavens were created; also to their merit. On the third day, the Garden of Eden, with all the herbs and trees; on the fourth the sun, moon, stars, and all the hosts of Heaven, also a merit to them. On the fifth day the fowls of the Heaven were created, and among them the pigeon, which the Jews have used for a sacrifice, so that will not answer for their extermination. On the sixth day Adam and Eve were created, and on the seventh day is their Sabbath, the covenant between them and their God."

He then took his chances with the months. In the month of Nissan (April) they were released from the servitude of Egypt, and many miracles were performed in their favour. In the month of Iyar (May) the manna first descended from Heaven, and in that month, too, five calamities were to happen. During the month of Sivan they received the ten commandments, and hold their feast of weeks. Neither of these months would do. The next cast was the Month Tamuz (July). But in that month the walls of

[p. 174]

[paragraph continues] Jerusalem were destroyed, and Haman, thinking that might prove sufficient punishment for any of their sins in that month, passed it by and cast again. The next lot fell on Ab (August). But in that month the last of the generations doomed to wander through the wilderness forty years had perished. The time of their punishment had expired, and in that same month Moses had spoken with God, and prayed to Him, "Show me Thy Glory." This was too great a month to the Israelites to allow its selection for their extermination.

The next month was Elul (September). 'Twas in this month that Moses ascended for the third time the mount of God, to receive the second tables of stone. Also, during this month, the walls of Jerusalem were completed, as it is written in Nehemiah 6: 15: "And so was the wall finished on the twenty-and-fifth day of the month Elul."

Tishri (October) would not be favourable to his purpose, because the Day of Atonement, when all Israel would be devout in prayer, occurs within it. Neither would the following month, Heshvan, suit his designs, because it was in this month that the waters of the flood were set loose upon the world and Noah and his family saved. During Kislev (December) the foundation of the Temple was laid. In Thebet (January) Nebuchadnezzar besieged Jerusalem, also a sufficient punishment for that period, And also, during this month, the eleven tribes made peace with Benjamin. Neither was Shebat (February) a month displaying any guilty action deserving of God's wrath on the part of His people. When he came to the month of Adar, however, he said, "Lo, I have thee now, even as the fish of the sea" (the sign of the month's planet being two fish). In this month the lawgiver, Moses, died, and Haman thought it would prove unlucky for Israel. He forgot, however, that

[p. 175]

[paragraph continues] Moses was also born in Adar, on the seventh, day of the month.

"Then said Haman unto King Ahasuerus:

"There is a people scattered throughout thy provinces, yet separate and distinct from the nation among which they dwell. They will not intermingle or associate with us. They will not marry with the daughters of our land, neither will they allow our sons to wed their daughters. They do not aid in building up the state, for they have many holy days on which they are idle and refuse to traffic. The first hour of each day they devote to their prayer, 'Hear, O Israel, the Lord is One.' The second hour they also sing praises, and much time they waste in prayers and graces. Each seventh day they make a Sabbath, and pass the time in their synagogues reading from their Pentateuch and their prophets; aye, and in cursing thee, the king. They enter their children into a covenant of the flesh when they are but eight days old, that they may remain a peculiar people for ever. In the month of Nissan they hold a feast, which they call the Passover, when they remove all leaven from their houses, and they say, 'As we remove the leaven from our houses, so may the wicked king be removed from our midst.' They have many fasts and feasts, upon all of which they curse the king, and pray for thy death and the downfall of thy kingdom. Lo, there arose once a king, Nebuchadnezzar, who destroyed their temple, despoiled their great city, Jerusalem, and sent the inhabitants thereof into exile. Still their pride and stubborn spirit remained unbroken. Know, also, that their fathers went down into Egypt, seventy men, and when they went up from thence they numbered full six hundred thousand, in addition to their women and little ones. Among this nation there are men, large dealers they buy and they sell, but they

[p. 176]

execute not the laws of the king and the realm. What profit, then, is it to have such a people scattered through thy provinces?

"Now, if it be pleasing in the eyes of the king, let a decree be published to destroy and exterminate them from our midst."

And Ahasuerus answered:

"We are not able to do this thing. Their God has not deserted them, and they have prevailed over people greater and stronger than ourselves. We cannot accept thy advice in this matter."

Still Haman persisted from time to time to pour complaints against the Jews in the ears of the king, and to urge their complete destruction. Finally Ahasuerus said, "As thou hast troubled me so much about this thing I will call together my officers, counsellors, and wise men, and ask their opinion."

When these sages were called before him the king put the question to them, and asked:

"Now what is your advice, shall this nation be destroyed or not?"

And the wise men answered unanimously, and said:

"Should Israel be stricken from existence the world itself would no longer be; for through the merit of Israel and the law given to them the world exists. Are the people not called near to God (relatives)? 'Unto the children of Israel, a people near to Him.' Not alone this, they are also called children of the Lord, as it is written, 'Ye are the children of the Lord your God' (Dent. 14: r). Who can escape that raises a hand against his children? Pharaoh was punished for his conduct towards them; how shall we escape?"

Then Haman arose and replied to these words:

[p. 177]

"The God who caused the death of Pharaoh and his hosts has grown old and feeble; his power leas departed from him. Did not Nebuchednezzar destroy his temple and send his people into exile? Why did he not prevent that if he was all-powerful?"

By such arguments as these Haman altered the opinions and advice of the sages, and the letters ordering the massacre which he desired were prepared according to his command.

When Mordecai ascertained what had been done he rent his garments, clothed himself in sackcloth, and sat in ashes. He wept in his anguish, and said, "Woe, woe to us for this severe decree. Not even a half of our people shall be saved, nor a third part nor a fourth, but the whole body must be rooted out; woe, woe to us!"

Then when the Israelites beheld Mordecai's grief and heard his words, they assembled together, a great multitude of people, and Mordecai addressed them as follows:

"Ye people of Israel, ye chosen ones of our Father in Heaven, know ye not what has happened? Have ye heard naught of the decree against us, that Haman and the king have ordered our destruction from the face of the earth? We have no friendly influence on which to depend, no prophets to pray for us, no city of refuge. We are a flock without a shepherd; we are as a ship at sea without a pilot, as orphans without a father, aye, as sucklings who have lost their mother."

Then they carried the ark in which the scrolls of the law were deposited, into the streets of Shushan, and draped the same in mourning colours. And Mordecai opened the scrolls and read the passage in Deuteronomy (4: 30), "When thou art in tribulation, and all these things have overtaken thee, in the latter end of days, then wilt thou return to the

[p. 178]

[paragraph continues] Lord thy God, and be obedient unto His voice. For a merciful God is the Lord thy God."

"People of the house of Israel," said Mordecai, "let us follow the example of the men of Nineveh, at the time when Jonah, the son of Amitai, was sent to proclaim the overthrow of their capital. The king rose from his throne, changed his royal robes for sackcloth and ashes, and caused a fast to be proclaimed. Neither man nor beast, neither herds nor flocks, tasted of food or drank of water. 'God saw their works that they turned from their evil ways, and God bethought Himself of the evil which He had spoken that He would do them and He did it not' (Jonah 3: 7). Let us likewise proclaim a penitential fast; these men were saved, and they were heathens; we are the sons of Abraham, and it behooves us more especially to repent our evil ways and trust to the forgiveness of a merciful God Turn ye, turn ye from your unrighteous paths, oh house of Israel, wherefore will ye die!"

And when he had finished speaking these words, Mordecai went out into the city and cried with a loud and bitter cry.

The house of Israel was filled with dread at the edict of the king. Sorrow crossed the threshold of each Jewish home; a spirit of anguish filled every habitation.

A certain man called on a Persian friend and entreated him to use his influence to save his life and the lives of his family. "I, my wife, and my children will be your slaves," said he, "only save our lives."

The Persian answered:

"How can I do so? The decree stares that any Persian harbouring a Jew shall be put to death with him."

The Israelite departed with a broken spirit. "How truly," said he, "have the words of the Bible been fulfilled?

[p. 179]

[paragraph continues] 'Ye will offer yourselves for sale unto your enemies, for bondmen and bondwomen, without any one to buy ye.'" (Deut. 28: 68.)

Each day the people marked the passage of time, by saying, "Thus many days more have the Jews to live," and so was another Biblical passage verified.

"And thy life shall hang in doubt before thee . . . . In the morning thou wilt say, Who would but grant that it were only evening! And at evening thou wilt say, Who would but grant that it were only morning! From the dread of thy heart which thou wilt experience, and from the sight of thy eyes which thou wilt see." (Deut. 28: 66-67.) And with each day the morning increased and hope seemed still more vain.

If we lose a relation or a dear friend, our grief is at first intense, but with each day it loses its poignancy until we are consoled and comforted. How different was it in the case of the condemned Jews; each day the wailing grew stronger, for each day but brought them nearer to the hour of their destruction.

The act of Ahasuerus in intrusting his ring to Haman, was productive of more repentant feelings in the people of Israel than had been the words of their forty-eight prophets.

The prophets had cautioned Israel against serving idols, and urged upon them the necessity of atonement, and yet their words had been unheeded; but with the transmission of the king's ring to Haman's possession, the great call for repentance made itself immediately heard.

But Haman was to receive his punishment. There is a saying of the Rabbis, "If a stone falls upon a pitcher, the pitcher breaks; if the pitcher falls upon the stone, the pitcher also breaks." Be it as it may, it is bad for the pitcher, and bad similarly for the enemies of Israel; for

[p. 180]

even when Israel strays from righteousness, the instruments of their chastisement are also punished, as in the instances of Nebuchadnezzar, Titus, Haman, &c.

"Then came the maidens of Esther with her chamberlains, and told it to her (the grief of Mordecai) . . . And she called Hathach and gave him a charge for Mordecai to know what this was, and why this was . . . And Mordecai told him all that had happened unto him."

Meaning, a dream, which Mordecai had dreamt in the second year of the reign of King Ahasuerus, he now recollected and told to Hathach. "An earthquake shook the world, and darkness and great storms frightened the inhabitants. Two monsters were engaged in deadly conflict, and the noise of the struggle caused the nations to quake with fear. In the midst of the nations was a small weak people, and the other nations wished to blot it from the world. A great distress oppressed this few people and they cried aloud to God for succour and protection. Then a small spring arose, even between the two monsters that were battling, and it increased in size until it seemed to become as wide and boundless as the sea, even as though it would engulf the world. Then the sun broke forth in brightness o'er the earth, and the weak nation, blessed with peace, dwelt safely, though the ruins of many greater nations were spread about it."

This dream he had previously related to Esther, and now through her messenger, he sent the queen this word:

"Behold, thou wilt recollect the dream which I related to thee in thy youth. Arise, pray to God and beseech from Him mercy; then go before the king and speak bravely for the cause of thy people and thy kindred." And further he sent to Esther these words:

"'Imagine not in thy soul,' and say not 'the king has selected me for his queen; and. therefore I need not pray

[p. 181]

for mercy to Israel.' Into exile thou wert carried as well as the rest of thy people, and the decree which destroys one, destroys all. Do not imagine that thou alone canst escape, of all the Jews. For the sin of thy great grandfather Saul do we now suffer. If he had obeyed the words of Samuel, the wicked Haman had not descended from him who was of the family of Amalek. If Saul had slain Agag, the son of Hamadatha had not bought us for ten thousand silver talents; the Lord would not have delivered Israel into the hands of the wicked. Yet Moses prayed to the Lord for Israel, and Joshua discomforted Amalek; so arise thou, and pray before thy Father in heaven, and he who did execute justice on Amalek will now do the same to his wicked seed. From three oppressors of Israel does Haman draw his life-blood. First, Amalek, who was the first to fight against Israel, and who was defeated by Joshua. Next, Sisera, who laid a hand of iron upon our ancestors and met his punishment through a woman, Ja'el. Lastly, Goliath, who defied the camp of Israel and was laid low by the son of Jesse. Therefore, let not thy prayers cease, for God has ever listened to the breathings of a contrite heart, and for the sake of our ancestors He will show us favour. They were delivered from their enemies when all seemed hopeless. Pray, therefore, and imagine not that thou alone, of all thy people, shall be able to find safety."

On the day when Mordecai ordered his brethren to fast and humble themselves before God, he uttered the following supplication:

"Our God and God of our fathers, seated on Thy throne of grace! Oh Lord of the universe, Thou knowest that not through the promptings of a proud heart did I refuse to bow before Haman. Thee only I fear, and I am jealous of the glory of Thy presence; I could not give to flesh and

[p. 182]

blood Thy honour--to the creature that which belongs to the Creator alone. Oh God, deliver us from his hand, and let his feet become entangled in the net which he has spread for us. Let the world know, oh our Redeemer, that Thou hast not forgotten the promise which supports and strengthens us in our dispersion. 'And yet for all that, though they be in the land of their enemies, will I not cast them away, neither will I loath them to destroy them utterly, to break my covenant with them, for I am the Lord their God.'"

When Esther received the message of Mordecai, she too ordered a fast, and replaced her royal apparel with the sackcloth and ashes of mourning; and bowing her face before the Lord, she uttered this heartfelt prayer:

"God of Israel, from the beginning of time Thou hast reigned; the world and all it contains Thy power has created; to Thee, Thy handmaid calls for help! I am alone, oh God, without father and mother. Even as a poor woman, who begs from door to door, do I come before Thee for mercy, from window to window in the house of Ahasuerus. [*1] From Thee alone can help and salvation flow. Oh, Father of the fatherless! stand upon the right hand of the orphan, I beseech Thee; give her mercy and favour in the eyes of Ahasuerus, that he may be moved to grant her petition for the lives of her people. 'May the words of my mouth and the meditations of my heart be acceptable before Thee, oh Lord, my Rock and my Redeemer. Amen!'"

"And it came to pass on the third day."

[p. 183]

After Esther had fasted three days, on the third day of her fast she arose from the ashes on which she had reposed, removed her garments of sackcloth, arrayed herself in her gorgeous robes of state, wearing her richest ornaments of gold of Ophir and precious stones, and prepared to enter the presence of the king. First, however, in voice broken by sobs and strong emotion, she again in privacy addressed the Most High.

"Before Thee, oh God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, before Thee, oh God of Benjamin, my ancestor, I pray. Before Thee I pray, ere I appeal unto my husband, Ahasuerus, the king, to supplicate for Thy people, Israel, whom Thou didst separate from other nations, to whom Thou gayest Thy holy law. Thy chosen people, oh God, who praise Thee three times daily, saying, 'Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of Hosts; the whole earth is full of His glory.' As Thou didst save Chananyah, Mishael, and Azaryah from the raging furnace, and Daniel from the jaws of the lions, so save us now from the enemies who lie in wait for our destruction. Give me grace, I pray Thee, in the eyes of my lord, the king. Through our sins, oh Lord, are we condemned; yea all of us in whom the blood of Abraham quickens; yet surely the children should not suffer for the father's sin! If we have provoked Thy wrath, why should tender hearts and innocent babes be with us condemned to death? Oh remember the merit of Abraham to our salvation. Ten times didst Thou tempt him and he remained faithful before Thee. Protect the children of Thy beloved friends, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; banish from about them the evil with which Haman has encircled them." And Esther wept bitterly, and her tongue refused to utter the words which rose to her lips. "I go now," she said in her heart, "unto the king; oh let Thy angels of mercy precede

[p. 184]

my footsteps; let the favour of Abraham go before me, and the merit of Isaac support my trembling frame; let the kindness of Jacob be in my mouth, and the purity of Joseph upon my tongue. As Thou didst listen to the voice of Jonah when he called upon Thee, so listen now to me. Oh God, whose eye seest the inmost recesses of the heart, remember the merit of the pious ones who served Thee faithfully, and for their sakes allow not my petition to be rejected. Amen."

And Esther took with her two of her waiting maids and entered the court of the king. On the arm of one she leaned, while the other followed bearing her train, that the golden fabric might not sweep along the ground. She concealed her grief in her heart, and her face was bright and her appearance happy.

It happened, when the king saw Esther standing in the court, that he was very wroth to think that she had overstepped both law and custom. Esther glanced up, and reading his anger in his eyes, became greatly terrified, and leaned heavily upon the handmaid who supported her. God saw her failing motion, and, pitying the distress of the orphan, he gave her grace before the king. The anger vanished from his eyes, and rising from his seat, he advanced to Esther and embraced and kissed her. With his arm about her neck he looked into her eyes, and seeing there her fear, he said, "What wilt thou, Queen Esther? Why art thou alarmed? Our laws are not meant for thee; thou art my friend; wherefore didst thou not speak when thy eyes looked upon me?"

And Esther answered:

"Because, my lord, when first I looked upon thee, thy glory and thy honour terrified me."

*        *        *        *        *

[p. 185]

Esther had three objects in inviting Haman to her banquet with the king.

First. She did not wish Haman to think that she knew of his guilt, or was conspiring against him, which he might suspect if he discovered that Hatach carried messages between herself and Mordecai.

Secondly. She desired, in pursuance of her plan, to make the king jealous of Haman. Naturally he would ask himself why she had invited only Haman, thus singling him from, and honouring him above, the other princes.

Thirdly. That Israel might not be too sure of her efforts and so depend upon her altogether. Rather to let them find additional reasons for relying solely on the Lord.

"Then said unto him Zeresh, his wife, with all her friends, 'Let them make a gallows,'" &c.

"Thou canst never prevail against Mordecai by means which have already been brought to bear against his people," said Zeresh to Haman. "Thou canst not kill him with a knife or sword, for Isaac was delivered from the same; neither canst thou drown him, for Moses and the people of Israel walked safely through the sea. Fire will not burn him, for with Chananyah and his comrades it failed; wild beasts will not tear him, for Daniel was rescued from the lions' fangs; neither will a dungeon contain him, for Joseph walked to honour through a prison's gates. Even if we deprive him of sight we can not prevail against him, for Samson was made blind, and yet destroyed thousands of the Philistines. There is but one way left us; we must hang him."

It was in accordance with this advice that Haman built the gallows fifty cubits high. After he had erected this dread instrument of death, he sought the presence of Mordecai, to gloat over his coming triumph. He found the

[p. 186]

[paragraph continues] Jew in the college, with his pupils gathered around him. Their loins were girded with sackcloth, and they wept at the words which their teacher was addressing to them.

"To-morrow," said Haman, "I will first destroy these children, and I will then hang Mordecai on the gallows I have prepared."

He remained in the school and saw the mothers of the pupils bring them their meals; but they all refused to eat, saying, "By the life of our teacher, Mordecai, we will neither eat nor drink; fasting will we die."

"In that night sleep fled from the king."

Ahasuerus imagined that Haman was a lover of Esther, because he alone, of all the princes, was invited to her banquet. When he slumbered he dreamed that he saw Haman with a sword in his hand, attempting his life, and awakening in fright, he was unable again to sleep. So he arose and called to Shimshi, his scribe, who was a relative of Haman, and bade him open the book of the chronicles of events which happened during the reigns of the kings of Persia and Media, and read to him from the same. The first page at which Shimshi opened the book contained the record of Mordecai's discovery and disclosure of the treason of Bigthana and Theresh, the king's chamberlains. The scribe did not wish to read this, and was about turning to another portion, when the king saw the action, and commanded him to read from the page which was first spread before him.

"Haman, therefore, said to the king, 'For the man whom the king desireth to honour let them bring a royal apparel,'" &c.

When the king heard this advice his suspicions seemed to him as facts. "He wishes to put on my royal apparel," thought Ahasuerus, "and to place my crown upon his head; then he will destroy me and reign in my stead."

[p. 187]

Then said the king to Haman, "Bring from my state wardrobe the garment of purple from Ethiopia, the garment set with precious stones, to each of the four corners of which a golden chain is attached; bring also the ornaments which I wore on the day of my coronation, my hat of Ethiopian manufacture, and my royal cloak, embroidered with pearls from Africa. Go, then, to my stables, and take from thence the best steed which I possess; array Mordecai, the Jew, in the garments, and place him upon the horse."

And Haman answered, "There are many Jews in Shushan who are called Mordecai; which one is to have the honour?"

"Do all this that thou hast spoken," replied the king, "to Mordecai, the Jew, who lives by the king's gates; he who hath spoken well to the king and saved his life."

When Haman heard these words the blood seemed to congeal in his heart; his face grew blanched, his eyes became dim, and his mouth as though paralysed; with great effort he said:

"Oh king, how--how--can I tell which Mordecai thou meanest?"

"I have but just said," returned the king; "he who dwells at my gates."

"But he hates me," exclaims Haman, "me and my ancestors; do not force me to do him this honour, and I will pay ten thousand silver talents into thy treasury."

The king answered:

"Though I should give that ten thousand talents to Mordecai, aye, and give him also thy house to rule over it, yet this honour which thou hast spoken shouldst thou also do to him."

"My ten sons shall run before thy chariot," pleaded Haman; "they shall be thy slaves, if thou wilt but forego this order "

[p. 188]

The king answered:

"Though thou, and thy wife, and thy ten sons should be slaves to Mordecai, yet this honour should be also his." But Haman still entreated:

"Lo, Mordecai is but a common subject of the king, appoint him ruler of a city, a province, or a street--let that be the honour paid him."

And again the king replied:

"Though I should appoint him ruler over al my provinces, though I should cause him to command all who owe me obedience on sea and land, still this honour, too, which thou hast spoken, should be done him. Surely he who has spoken to the advantage of his king, he who has preserved the life of his king, deserves all that should belong to the one whom the king most delights to honour."

"But the letters," continued Haman; "the letters which have been sent to all thy provinces, condemning him and his people to death.'

"Peace, peace," exclaimed the king; "though they should be recalled, Mordecai should still be honoured as thou hast spoken. Say no more, Haman; as thou hast spoken, do quickly; leave out nothing of all that thou hast said."

When Haman saw that all appeal was useless, he obeyed the king's orders with a heavy heart. With the garments and the richly caparisoned steed he sought Mordecai, and said, "Arise, oh Mordecai the righteous, descendant of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, arise from thy sackcloth and ashes; lo, they have prevailed more than my talents of silver, and thy God has bestowed mercy upon thee. Arise, Mordecai, throw off thy sackcloth and ashes and don these royal garments."

Then Mordecai answered, "Oh, wicked Haman! the

[p. 189]

time cometh when thou shalt eat wormwood and drink gall, oh son of Amalek."

"Come," returned Haman, "dress and mount the steed; the orders of the king must be obeyed."

Haman anointed Mordecai with sweet perfumes; arrayed him in royal robes, and mounted him upon the king's horse, according to his words and the commands of Ahasuerus. Then a procession was formed. Seventeen thousand soldiers were detailed as escort and divided into two bodies; one preceded and the other followed Mordecai, who was thus in the centre on a horse led by Haman. As they marched through the streets of Shushan the soldiers shouted, "Thus shall be done to the man whom the king desireth to honour."

When the Jews beheld this great procession, and Mordecai honoured in the midst of it, they followed after; and in return to the shouts of the troops they called out loudly, "Thus shall be done to the man who serves the King who created heaven and earth, and whom he desireth to honour." When Esther saw her kinsman thus arrayed, she thanked the Lord and praised Him.

"With the Psalmist I may say," she exclaimed, "'He raiseth up out of the dust the poor, from the dunghill he lifteth up the needy.' (Ps. 113: 7.) 'That he may set him with princes, even with the princes of His people.'"

Mordecai also praised the Lord, and said:

"'Thou hast changed my mourning into dancing for me, Thou hast loosened my sackcloth and girded me with joy; I will extol Thee, oh Lord, for Thou hast lifted me up, and hast not suffered my enemies to rejoice over me.'" (Ibid. 30: 12.)

Four distinct services did Haman render Mordecai. First, he was his hairdresser, for he shaved and anointed

[p. 190]

him. Secondly, he was his valet, for he attended him in the bath. Thirdly, he was his footman, for he led the horse Mordecai rode. Fourthly, he was his trumpeter, for he proclaimed before him: "Thus shall be done to the man whom the king desireth to honour."

"And Haman related to Zeresh his wife," &c.

Haman received but little comfort from his friends. "Thou wilt surely fall," said his wife; "for those who endeavoured to burn Chananyah, Mishael, and Azaryah in the fiery furnace, were themselves consumed in the flames; take heed, for thou wilt surely fall before this Jew."

When the servants of the king saw that Haman was losing prestige, they too turned against him. Charbonyah told the king that Haman had designs against his royal person. "If thou believest not me," said the sycophant, "send to his house and there wilt thou find a gallows fifty cubits high for Mordecai, because he spoke well of thee and saved thy life."

The king said to Mordecai, "Go bring thy enemy Haman and hang him upon the gallows; do to him whatever is pleasing to thee."

Haman appealed to Mordecai and begged to be put to death by the sword, but Mordecai hearkened not to his words.

"Who digs a pit for another deserves to fall therein himself,' said he; "he who rolls a stone against another must not complain if it turn back and crush himself."

The following is the letter sent under the king's seal to counteract the decree issued against the Jews:

"To the noblemen, princes, and inhabitants of all our provinces, peace. Our government cannot prosper unless its people are united; let this find you all living in fraternal harmony. Let all the people of our provinces trade together

[p. 191]

as one nation; let them have compassion and charity towards all nations and creeds, and honour all peaceful kingdoms of the earth. They who would deceive the king by evil reports concerning any people in our midst, and endeavour to obtain permission to exterminate peaceful, law-abiding persons, deserve death, and should meet with it. Let such as they perish, and the remainder live in harmony, forming a bond of peace never to be broken; aye, of triple thickness, that it may never grow weak. Let no insult be offered to any people.

"Esther is pious, worthy, and our queen, and Mordecai is the wisest of his age; he is without fault, he and his people. Through the advice of Haman, the son of Hamdatha, was our former decree issued, which now is declared null and void. And further we decree that the Jews may arise and protect themselves, aye, and take vengeance on such as raise a bloody hand against them.

"He who created Heaven and Earth has put these words in our heart and in our mouth, and thus we utter and decree them according to the laws of Persia and Media."

Footnotes

^182:1 It was the ancient custom of the Jews to stand by a window and look upon the sky when praying. We find the fact thus recorded in Daniel (6: 11): "He had open windows in his upper chamber in the direction of Jerusalem."

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 192]

  

V.

  

KING SOLOMON, THE WISE.

"Seest thou a man that is diligent in his work? Before kings may he place himself; let him not place himself before obscure men." (Prov. 22: 29.)

In this verse Solomon alludes to himself. He built the holy temple in seven years, while he occupied fourteen years in erecting his palace. Not because his palace was more elegant or more elaborate in its workmanship than was the temple, but because he was diligent in his work to finish God's house, while his own house could await time and opportunity.

Four cases of comparative righteousness between fathers and children may be noted:

First. A righteous man begets a righteous son.

Second. A wicked man begets a wicked son.

Third. A wicked man begets a righteous son.

Fourth. A righteous man begets a wicked son.

To each of these cases we may find a Biblical allusion; to each of them we may apply a parable and a proverb.

In reference to the righteous father and the righteous son, we find the following verse (Psalm 45: 17): "Instead of thy fathers shall be thy children." And we may apply the parable of the good fig tree which brought forth luscious fruit.

In reference to the wicked father and the wicked son we have in Numbers 32: 14: "And now behold, ye are risen up in your fathers' stead, a new race of sinful men."

[p. 193]

Ancient is the proverb, "From the wicked proceedeth wickedness;" and applicable, the parable of the serpent bringing forth an asp.

In the third case, the wicked father begets a righteous son, as it is written, "Instead of the thorn shall come up the fir tree." And to this can we apply the parable of the rose budding on the bramble bush.

Lastly, a righteous man has a wicked son, as it is written, "Instead of wheat, thorns come forth." (Job 21: 40.) And we have also the parable of the attractive peach tree which brought forth bitter fruit.

Solomon was a king, the son of a king; the wise son of a wise father; a righteous man's righteous child. All the incidents in David's life, all his characteristics were paralleled in the life of Solomon.

David reigned for forty years, as it is written, "And the days that David governed Israel were forty years."

Of Solomon it is written, "And Solomon reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel forty years." David expressed himself by "words," as it is written, "And these are the last words of David."

Solomon likewise expressed himself by "words."

"The words of Koheleth the son of David." (Eccles. 1: 1.)

David said, "All is vanity;" as it is written, "For vanity only do all men make a noise." (Psalm 39: 7.)

Solomon expressed himself with the same word, "vanity."

"Vanity of vanities, saith Koheleth." (Eccles. 1: 2.)

David wrote books, viz.: the five books of Psalms; and Solomon wrote three books: Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and the Song of Solomon.

David composed songs: "And David spoke unto the Lord the words of this song." (Samuel 22: I.)

[p. 194]

Solomon also composed a song: "The song of songs, which is Solomon's."

He was the wise king alluded to in Proverbs 16: 23, "The heart of the wise maketh his mouth intelligent, and upon his lips increaseth information." Meaning that the heart of the wise is full of knowledge and understanding; but this is shown to the world through the words of his mouth. And, by uttering with his lips the thoughts of his mind (or heart) he increases the information of the people. If a man possessing brilliant diamonds and precious stones, keeps his jewels concealed, no one is aware of their value; but if he allows them to be seen, their worth becomes known, and the pleasure of ownership is enhanced.

Applying this comparison to the case of Solomon, while his wisdom was locked up in his own breast it was of value to no one; but when he had given to the world his three books, men became acquainted with his great abilities. "The words of his lips increased the information of his people," and so great was his reputation that any one in doubt concerning the meaning of a Biblical passage sought the king for an interpretation.

Not only in sacred lore did he raise the standard of education. He had mastered and taught the sciences of Natural Philosophy, Physiology, Botany, Agriculture, Mathematics in all its branches, Astronomy, Chemistry, and in fact all useful studies. He also taught Rhetoric and the rules of Poesy. In alliterative and alphabetical versification he was an adept.

"And in addition to this that Koheleth was wise, he continually taught the people knowledge."

If what others said interested the people, how much more readily did they listen to Solomon; with how much more ease did they comprehend him!

[p. 195]

We may illustrate his method of teaching by the following comparison. There was a basket without ears, filled with fine fruit, but the owner was unable to get it to his home on account of the difficulty in carrying it, until a wise man, seeing the predicament, attached handles to the basket, when it could be carried with great ease.

So did Solomon remove difficulties from the path of the student.

Rabbi Huna further illustrated this same thing. "There was once," he said, "a well of most pure and excellent water; but the well was so deep that the people were not able to reach the water, until a man of wisdom taking a bucket attached to it one rope after another until the whole was long enough to reach to the water. So was it with Solomon's teachings. The Bible is a well of truth, but its teachings are too deep for the understanding of some. Solomon, however, introduced parables and proverbs suited to the comprehension of all, through which means a knowledge of the law became readily obtainable."

Rabbi Simon, the son of Chalafta, related the following parable: "A certain king had an officer to whom he was much attached, and whom he took great delight in honouring. One day he said to this favourite, 'Come, express a wish, anything that I can give thee shall be thine.' Then this officer thought, 'If I ask the king for gold or silver or precious stones, he will give what I ask; even though I desire higher honour and more exalted station he will grant it, yet I will ask him for his daughter, for if he grants that, all the rest will be included.'"

When the Lord appeared to Solomon in Gibon, and said to him in a dream, "What shall I give to thee?" Solomon reflected, "If I ask for gold, silver, or jewels, the Lord will give them to me; I will ask, however, for wisdom; if that

[p. 196]

is granted me, all other good things are included." Therefore, he replied, "Give to thy servant an understanding heart."

Then said the Lord:

"Because thou hast asked for wisdom, and requested not wealth or dominion over thy enemies; by thy life, wisdom and knowledge shall be thine, and through them thou shalt obtain wealth and power."

"And Solomon awoke, and behold it was a dream." He wandered into the fields, and he heard the voices of the animals; the ass brayed, the lion roared, the dog barked, the rooster crowed, and behold he understood what they said, one to the other.

An ox, even after being killed and dressed, may be made to stand, provided the sinews are uncut; but if they are severed, cords are required to hold the body together. While Solomon remained free from sin his prayers were granted him for his own sake, but when he departed from the righteous way, the Lord said to him, "For the sake of David, my servant, I will not take the kingdom from thee in thy lifetime."

Solomon said, "Vanity of vanities; vanity, even as a shadow." A shadow of what nature? The shadow of a tower or a tree remains the shadow for awhile, and then is lost, but the shadow of a bird flieth away, and there is neither bird nor shadow. David said, "Our days are as a passing shadow," and Rabbi Huna said, "Our days pass quickly from us, even as the shadow of a flying bird."

With the word vanity, Solomon expresses seven stages of a man's life.

The infant he compares to a king; riding in his little coach, and being kissed, admired, and praised by all. The child of three or four years he compares to a pig, fond of

[p. 197]

the dirt and soiling itself with its food. The child of ten is fond of dress; the youth adorns himself and seeks a wife; the married man is bold as the dog in seeking a livelihood for himself and family; and the old man he likens to an ape.

"God gave wisdom to Solomon."

When Solomon was about building the temple, he applied to the king of Egypt for men to aid him in the work. Pharaoh, consulting his astrologers, selected those men who were to die within the year. When they arrived at Jerusalem the wise king sent them back at once. With each man he sent a shroud, and directed them to say to their master, "If Egypt is too poor to supply shrouds for her dead, and for that purpose sends them to me, behold here they are, the men and the shrouds together; take them and bury thy dead."

He was wiser than all other men, wiser even than Adam, who gave names to all the animals of the world, and even to himself, saying, "From the dust of the ground I was formed, and therefore shall my name be Adam." Rabbi Tanchum said, "Where is thy wisdom and thy understanding, oh king Solomon? Thy words not only contradict themselves, but also the words of David, thy father. He said, 'Not the dead can praise the Lord' (Psalm 115: 17), and thou didst say, 'Thereupon praised I the dead that are already dead, more than the living who are still alive.' (Eccles. 4 2.) And thou didst also say, 'For a living dog fareth better than a dead lion.'" (Ibid. 9: 4.)

These seeming contradictions, however, may be readily explained. David said, "Not the dead can praise the Lord," meaning that we should study God's law during life, as after its cessation 'twould be impossible. Solomon said, "Thereupon praised I the dead that are already

[p. 198]

dead." When the children of Israel sinned in the wilderness, Moses prayed for them for their own sakes, and his prayer was unanswered; but when he said, "Remember Abraham, and Isaac, and Israel, Thy servants," he met with a prompt reply. Therefore did not Solomon speak well in saying, "Praise the dead that are already dead?" Take another instance. A king may decree laws, but many of his subjects may disregard them. Sometimes these laws, even if earnestly observed during the life of the one who made them, may be repealed or become obsolete after his death. Moses, however, made many stringent laws, which have been observed through all generations. Therefore, Solomon said well, "Thereupon will I praise the dead."

Rabbi Judah, in the name of Rab, further explained this verse. He said, "What is the meaning of the following passage? 'Show me a token for good, that they who hate me may see it and be ashamed.' (Psalm 76:17.) David said to God, after his sin with Bathsheba (Samuel 2), 'Sovereign of the Universe, pardon me for my sin.' The Lord answered, 'I will pardon thee.' Then said David, 'Show me the token in my lifetime,' but God said, 'Not in thy lifetime, but in the lifetime of Solomon, thy son, will I show it.' Thus, when Solomon dedicated the temple, though he prayed with fervent devotion, he was not answered until he said, 'O Lord God, turn not away from the face of thy anointed. Remember the pious deeds of David, thy servant.' (2 Chron. 6:42.) Then he was speedily answered, for in the next verse we read, 'And when Solomon had made an end of praying, a fire came down from Heaven and consumed the burnt offering and the sacrifices, and the glory of the Lord filled the house.' Then were the enemies of David put to shame, for all Israel knew that God had pardoned David for his sin. Did

[p. 199]

not Solomon say well then, 'Thereupon praised I the dead?' For this reason, further on in the chapter we read, 'And on the three-and-twentieth day of the seventh month he dismissed the people unto their tents, joyful and glad of heart, because of the good that the Lord had done for David, and for Solomon, and for Israel, His people."

Solomon said, "For a living dog fareth better than a dead lion."

Expounding this verse, Rabbi Judah said, in the name of Rab, "What is the meaning of the verse, 'Let me know, O Lord, my end, and the measure of my days, what it is; I wish to know when I shall cease to be.' (Psalm 39: 5.)

"David said to God, 'Let me know, O Lord, my end.' God answered, 'I have decreed that for each one his end must be veiled in the future.' Then David said, 'What is the measure of my days?' Again God replied, 'No man may know the measure of his days.' 'I wish to know when I shall cease to be,' continued David; and God answered, 'Thou wilt die on a Sabbath.'

"'Let me die the day after,' entreated David, but the Lord answered, 'No; then the kingdom will be Solomon's, and one reign may not take away from another reign even so much as a hair's breadth.' 'Then let me die the day before,' exclaimed David, 'for a day in Thy courts is better than a thousand elsewhere,' and God said, 'One day spent by thee in studying my law is more acceptable than the thousand burnt offerings thy son Solomon will sacrifice.'

"It was David's custom to pass every Sabbath in the study of the Bible and its precepts, and he was thus engaged upon the Sabbath which was to be his last. Back of the king's palace there was an orchard, and David, hearing a noise therein, walked thither to ascertain its cause. On entering the orchard he fell to the ground, dead.

[p. 200]

"The noise in the orchard had been caused by the barking of the king's dogs, who had not that day received their food. Solomon sent a message to the Rabbinical College, saying, 'My father lies dead in his orchard; is it allowable to remove his body on the Sabbath? The dogs of my father are entreating for their food; is it proper to cut meat for them to-day?' This answer was returned by the college: 'Thy father's body should not be removed to-day, but give meat to the dogs.' Therefore said Solomon, 'A living dog fareth better than a dead lion,' justly comparing the son of Jesse to that king of beasts."

Solomon was the chosen of the Lord, who called him, through the mouth of Nathan, the prophet, Yedidiah (the beloved one). He was called Solomon (peace), because in his days peace reigned, as it is written, "And Judah and Israel dwelt in safety." (Kings 5:5.) He was called Ithiel (God with me) because God was his support.

And when Solomon sat upon the throne of his father David, all the nations of the earth feared him; all the people of the earth listened anxiously for his words of wisdom.

Afterwards he had a throne made especially for himself by Hiram, the son of a widow of Tyre. It was covered with gold of Ophir, set with all kinds of precious and valuable stones. The seat of the throne was approached by six broad steps. The right side of the first step was guarded by an ox made of pure gold, and the left side by a lion of the same metal. On the right of the second step stood a bear also of gold, and upon the left a lamb, symbolical of enemies dwelling in peace together. On the right of the third step was placed a golden camel, and on the left an eagle. On the right of the fourth step there was also an eagle with outspread wings, and on the left a bird of prey,

[p. 201]

all of the same precious metal. On the fifth step to the right a golden cat crouching in position; on the left a chicken. On the right of the sixth step a hawk was fashioned, and on the left side a pigeon, and upon the top of the step a pigeon clutched a hawk in her talons. These animals were designed to typify the time when those of adverse natures shall unite in harmony, as it is written in Isaiah (11: 6), "And the wolf shall then dwell with the sheep."

Over the throne was hung a chandelier of gold with seven branches; it was ornamented with roses, knobs, bowls, and tongs; and on the seven branches the names of the seven patriarchs, Adam, Noah, Shem, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and Job, were engraven.

On the second row of the branches of the chandelier were engraven the names of the seven pious ones of the world, Levi, Kehath, Amram, Moses, Aaron, Eldad, and Madad. Above all this hung a golden churn filled with pure olive oil, and on this was engraven the names of Eli, the High Priest, and his two sons, Hophni and Phineas, and on the other side the names of the two sons of Aaron, Nadab and Abihu.

On the right hand of the throne two chairs were placed, one for the High Priest, and the other for the Vice-High Priest, and upon the left side, from the top to the ground, seventy-one chairs were stationed as seats for the members of the Sanhedrim.

The throne was made upon wheels, that it could be moved easily wherever the king might desire it to be.

The Lord gave Solomon the power of understanding the nature and properties of the herbs of the field and the trees of the forest, as it is written, "And he spoke concerning the trees, from the cedar tree that is upon the Lebanon even unto the hyssop that springeth out of the wall. He spoke

[p. 202]

also concerning the beasts, and concerning the fowls, and concerning the creeping things, and concerning the fishes." (1 Kings 5: 13.)

It is said that Solomon ruled the whole world, and this verse is quoted as proof of the assertion, "And Solomon was ruling over all the kingdoms, which brought presents, and served Solomon all the days of his life." (1 Kings 5: 1.)

All the kingdoms congratulated Solomon as the worthy successor of his father, David, whose fame was great among the nations; all save one, the kingdom of Sheba, the capital of which was called Kitore.

To this kingdom Solomon sent a letter:

"From me, King Solomon, peace to thee and to thy government. Let it be known to thee that the Almighty God has made me to reign over the whole world, the kingdoms of the North, the South, the East, and the West. Lo, they have come to me with their congratulations, all save thee alone.

"Come thou also, I pray thee, and submit to my authority, and much honour shall be done thee; but if thou refusest, behold, I shall by force compel thy acknowledgment.

"To thee, Queen Sheba, is addressed this letter in peace from me, King Solomon, the son of David."

Now when Queen Sheba received this letter, she sent in haste for her elders and counsellors to ask their advice as to the nature of her reply.

They spoke but lightly of the message and the one who sent it, but the queen did not regard their words. She sent a vessel, carrying many presents of different metals, minerals, and precious stones, to Solomon. It was after a voyage of two years' time that these presents arrived at Jerusalem, and in a letter intrusted to the captain the queen said. "After

[p. 203]

thou hast received the message then I myself will come to thee." And in two years after this time Queen Sheba arrived at Jerusalem.

When Solomon heard that the queen was coming he sent Benayahu, the son of Yehoyadah, the general of his army, to meet her. When the queen saw him she thought he was the king, and she alighted from her carriage.

Then Benayahu asked, "Why alightest thou from thy carriage?" And she answered, "Art thou not his majesty, the king?"

"No," replied Benayahu, "I am but one of his officers."

Then the queen turned back and said to her ladies in attendance, "If this is but one of the officers, and he is so noble and imposing in appearance, how great must be his superior, the king."

And Benayahu, the son of Yehoyadah, conducted Queen Sheba to the palace of the king.

Solomon prepared to receive his visitor in an apartment laid and lined with glass, and the queen at first was so deceived by the appearance that she imagined the king to be sitting in water.

And when the queen had tested Solomon's wisdom, [*1] and witnessed his magnificence, she said:

"I believed not what I heard, but now I have come, and my eyes have seen it all; behold, the half has not been told to me. Happy are thy servants who stand before thee continually to listen to thy words of wisdom. Blessed be the Lord thy God, who hath placed thee on a throne to rule righteously and in justice."

When other kingdoms heard the words of the queen of

[p. 204]

[paragraph continues] Sheba they feared Solomon exceedingly, and he became greater than all the other kings of the earth in wisdom and in wealth.

Solomon was born in the year 2912 A.M., and reigned over Israel forty years. Four hundred and thirty-three years elapsed between the date of Solomon's reign and that of the temple's destruction.

Footnotes

^203:1 By means of riddles as related in the Bible.

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 205]

  

PART THIRD.

  

THE RABBIS, THEIR TEACHINGS AND INCIDENTS IN THEIR LIVES.

  

I.

Rabbi Judah, the "Chief."

RABBI JUDAH, the holy, sometimes called, by reason of his eminence, simply "Rabbi," received his education in the different colleges and from the various sources of learning open to the student in his early days. He was a man of immense wealth, and when he reached the dignity of chief or patriarch, he expended a great portion of his riches in the assistance and for the benefit of the poor. His authority among his contemporaries was superior to that allowed any of his predecessors. He commanded both their love and respect, and it is said that no man, since the time of Moses, combined such advanced learning with authority and dignity equal to his. He was, too, like Moses, truly modest and careful to avoid all pomp and display of power.

He had his chair placed near the entrance of his lecture-room, to spare his hearers the necessity of rising while he passed among them, an honour exacted by the other chiefs. Through his influence with Antoninus, his people were permitted to study the law publicly and were granted many privileges previously denied them, and immunity from many persecutions under which they had previously suffered. It

[p. 206]

was while he occupied his high position in favour and affluence, that he collected the opinions and debates of pre-ceding Rabbis, now forming the Mishna.

The emperor once sent a valuable diamond to Rabbi Judah, requesting a token of friendship in return. The Rabbi sent him a Mezuzah. [*1]

"My friend," said the emperor, "this gift of thine is of small value, compared to the rich offering which I despatched to thee."

"There is a difference between my gift and thine," returned the Rabbi. "That which thou gavest to me I must watch and guard lest it be stolen from me; but this which I send will watch and guard over thee, even as it is written, 'When thou walkest it will lead thee, and when thou liest down it will watch over thee.'"

Rabbi Judah desired to wed the widow of Rabbi Eleazer, and he sent a messenger to her charged with his proposals. The answer which she returned thereto was this:

"Shall a vessel once used for holy purposes be now used for those less sacred?" Implying that Rabbi Eleazer, the son of Simon, had been a greater man than was Rabbi Judah. Her answer was of the same import as the proverb, "Shall the shepherd hang his work vessels where the master of the house hung his ornaments?"

On receiving this answer Rabbi Judah sent another message to her.

"You are right," said he; "your husband was a more learned scholar than am I, but in good deeds I am at least his equal."

[p. 207]

The widow replied:

"Still we differ; I know not that my husband was more learned than Rabbi Judah, but he was his superior in righteousness."

But was Rabbi Eleazer the superior of Rabbi Judah in learning?

It was the custom in the colleges for the teachers and learned Rabbis to sit upon elevated chairs while the pupils were seated on benches, near the floor. When Rabbi Simon, the son of Gamliel, Rabbi Joshua, the son of Korcha, and other celebrated Rabbis were occupying the chairs, Rabbi Eleazer, the son of Simon, and Rabbi Judah were sitting near the floor. Rabbi Simon, son of Gamliel, the father of Rabbi Judah, desiring that some mark of distinction should be paid to his son, induced the teachers to elevate him to one of the chairs. This was done; and then Rabbi Joshua spoke, saying, "He who hath a father to speak for him may live; but he who hath none, may do the best he can, and die."

On hearing this the Rabbis elevated Rabbi Eleazer, the son of Rabbi Simon, also, but Rabbi Eleazer felt himself slighted and neglected, because the above words were spoken previous to his elevation, and said, "Is Rabbi Judah better than I?"

Never after did he feel friendly towards Rabbi Judah. Previously he had assisted the latter in preparing questions to be laid before the college, but now he made light of Judah's inquiries, saying, "They are not worthy of being considered."

This treatment was very trying to the feelings of Rabbi Judah, and he complained to his father of the insults to which he was subjected.

"Be not displeased, my son," replied the latter, "nor

[p. 208]

take umbrage at the words of Eleazer. Behold, he is a lion, and the son of a lion (a most learned man, and the son of a most learned man), whilst thou art a lion, but the son of a fox (a learned man thyself; but not possessing a learned father), therefore he is thy superior."

This is probably the reason why Rabbi Judah has said, "The world has seen three meek men,--my father, the sons of Bethera, and Jonathan, the son of Saul."

The sons of Bethera vacated their positions as chiefs of the college in favour of Hillel, pronouncing him a man of superior learning, therefore their meekness. Jonathan, the son of Saul, said to David, "Thou shalt reign over Israel, and I shall be a second to thee," therefore his meekness; and Rabbi Simon, the son of Gamliel, because he called himself a fox.

Rabbi Judah suffered greatly from bodily pain for thirteen years previous to his death, and when he felt his end on earth approaching he called his children to him and spoke to them as follows:

"Obey the voice of your mother, oh, my children, and remember the teachings of the Most High. Keep a light burning in my room, and let Joseph, the Ophnite, and Simon, the Ephraimite, faithful servants to me in my life, attend me also in my death. And now, my children, let me see the sages of Israel once more."

When the sages entered, according to his request, he said:

"Let no orations or eulogies be made for me in the cities. Open my college, and continue your holy duties thirty days after my death. Although my son Simon is a man of wisdom and understanding, yet I desire that my son Gamliel shall be my successor. Chaninah, the son of Chamah, shall sit in the second seat, next to the chief. I weep that I may study God's law no more."

[p. 209]

Then he raised his two hands towards heaven, and said:

"Oh, Lord God of the universe, Thou knowest whether I have worked faithfully with these hands for Thy glory, to obtain a knowledge of Thy law. May it be acceptable to Thee, oh, Sovereign of the universe, that I may rest in peace."

On the day of the Rabbi's death the Rabbins proclaimed a fast, and a day of prayer, for their beloved chief. They also forbid any announcement of his death to interrupt their devotion, and they continued praying until a signal was thrown from the Rabbi's house; they all experienced a shock, as though a heavy missile had struck them, and ceased praying.

Rabbi Judah was buried on the eve of Sabbath; with him died the meekness among the people, and the fear of God.

It is said that the Rabbi had a servant who was richer than the emperor. He acquired his wealth from the sale of the litter from the Rabbi's stables, which gives some idea of the number of animals Rabbi Judah possessed.

Footnotes

^206:1 A strip of parchment inscribed with verses from the Pentateuch (Deut. 6: 4-10, and Deut. 11: 13-22), so arranged as to be placed upon the door-posts of a house in compliance with the scriptural injunction.

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

Simon, the Righteous.

Simon was performing the functions of High Priest during the triumphal career of Alexander, about the year 3000. The sons of Judah found no cause to oppose this warrior, and when, after his first victories over the Persian army, he came to Syria on his way to Egypt, they joined with the kingdoms which paid him homage.

Simon the Righteous, as representative of the nation, proceeded to the seacoast to greet the conqueror, attired in his priestly robes, and attended by a number of priests and nobles in the full dignity of their costumes.

Alexander at once approached the High Priest and

[p. 210]

greeted him warmly; and when his officers expressed their astonishment at this mark of condescension, he told them that the form and feature of this same priest, clad in the same robes he now wore, had appeared to him in a dream and promised him success in arms.

Alexander was conducted through the Temple by Simon. On entering, he said, "Blessed be the Lord of this house." He was charmed with the beauty of the structure, and expressed a desire to have a statue of himself erected as a remembrance, between the porch and the altar. Simon informed him that it was not allowable to erect any statue or image within the Temple walls, but promised that, as a remembrance, the males born among his people that year should be called Alexander. That is the manner in which the Rabbis Alexander obtained their names.

Alexander continued well-disposed towards the High Priest, and through his intercessions granted the Jews religious freedom and release from all tributary burden during the Sabbatic year; and the Jews entered Alexander's army, and assisted in his conquests.

This state of affairs lasted unfortunately only until the death of Alexander. In the quarrels among his generals, which followed and continued for two decades, the Jewish people suffered much. The armies of Antigonus and his son Demetrius destroyed the fertile fields, gave wings to blessed peace, and filled the inhabitants of Judea with horror and dismay.

'Twas on the Sabbath that Jerusalem was taken by storm. The mighty walls, impenetrable strongholds since the days of Nehemiah, were again breached and broken, and the city laid open to her enemies.

These occurrences Simon lived to see, and his trust in God as well as his love for his people were sorely tried.

[p. 211]

[paragraph continues] Yet he did not waver in his faith. He fortified the Temple, repaired its damaged places, and raised the foundation of the five courts. He enlarged the water reservoir in the Temple to provide against a scarcity during siege times, and ever after that the Temple was well supplied with water; a matter of note considering the climate and the soil of Jerusalem.

Neither did Simon neglect the spiritual interests of his people. He did not lead them to believe that their strength and safety depended only upon earthly means. He remembered well the teachings of his predecessors, "Upon three things does the salvation of Israel depend: on the observance of the law, upon reconciliation with God by means of grace furnished by the Temple worship, and upon deeds of benevolence."

The many wars and disturbances which agitated the period of his life were productive of much and varied evil, and the extremely pious sought, as in the days of the prophets, to withdraw from the world and consecrate themselves to God by Nazarean vows.

Simon did not approve of this, and protested against it in many ways. He made an exception, however, in one case, that of a young and handsome shepherd, whom he found to be really sincere in his desire. When the latter came to him, desiring to become a Nazeer, the High Priest questioned him:

"Why," he asked, "why do you, so young and handsome, with flowing, silken ringlets, why do you wish to hide so much beauty and destroy so much which is pleasant to the eye?"

"Because," replied the youth, "my flowing ringlets have almost enticed me to sin from mere vanity. I saw the reflection of my face in a clear stream, and a proneness to

[p. 212]

self-deification seemed taking such hold of me, that I desire now at once to consecrate my hair unto the Lord, through the Nazarean vow." [*1]

Simon kissed the young shepherd, and said to him:

"Would to God there were in Israel many Nazareans like to thee."

Simon is renowned for his familiarity with the law, for his services as president and member of the great Senate, and for the efficient manner in which he strengthened the religious fervour of the people and participated in all their doings and institutions.

He officiated as High Priest for forty years, and himself announced the approach of his death on completing the services on the Day of Atonement. On entering the Holy of Holies upon this sacred day, he had been used to perceive, every year, an apparition in white garments, which attended all his actions in the performance of his office. On this particular day he failed to see it, and considered this fact a harbinger of his death. He died seven days after the holy day.

Posterity honoured him as the most holy among men, and it has been asserted that during his life visible tokens of God's favour never ceased.

His grandchildren, however, deserted Judaism entirely, and set the example for those actions which brought upon Israel the troublous times of Antiochus Epiphanes.

It was shortly after Simon's death, and in view of the degeneracy of the people, that the pious resolved that only the priests should use the holy name of God. The four letters of the sacred name were substituted for the name itself, and the latter was only uttered by the priests when

[p. 213]

they concluded the daily sacrificial service, and pronounced a blessing on the people, and by the High Priest on the Day of Atonement.

Footnotes

^212:1 The law concerning this may be found in Numbers 6.

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

Rabbi Ishmael, the High Priest.

Rabbi Ishmael was one of the most prominent and excellent among the fathers of the Talmudical literature. His doctrines are pure, his ideas sublime, and his explanations clear and concise. He died a martyr to Roman persecution, and this end has set the seal of truth and conviction on all the actions and sayings of his life.

There is an historical immortality, as well as a spiritual immortality; Rabbi Ishmael has attained the former, and he was a firm believer in the latter. They who imagine the doctrine of immortality to be an outgrowth of man's vanity, claiming for himself an imaginary preference above other creatures; they who believe it an ancient fiction, without which no courts of law would be able to check the natural proneness of man towards evil doing, could never rise to the courage and sublimity of martyrdom. To Ishmael, common observation as well as innate principles proved the truth of his belief.

First, no atom of matter, in the whole vastness of the universe, is lost; how, then, can man's soul, which comprises the whole world in one idea, be lost?

Secondly, in all nature death is but a transformation; with the soul it is the portal to a new and higher realm.

Thirdly, our thoughts and feelings, emanating from the soul, are not of an earthly nature.

Rabbi Ishmael also advocated with energy the doctrine of man's free agency.

"When a man enters upon the path of truth and justice," said he, "God helps him forward, but when he chooses the

[p. 214]

way of sin, God says, 'I gave thee reason and free will, go thy way,' even as the trader will wait upon the customer who purchases a good and pleasant article, while to one who desires pitch or sulphur he says, 'Go, wait upon thyself.'"

Many ask, "Why does God permit so much corruption and evil?" Rabbi Ishmael answers, "Not God, but ye, yourselves, are the creators and supporters of moral evils. When a field is covered by weeds, shall a farmer complain to God? No; let him blame himself for his carelessness and neglect. Noble, indeed, is the feeling of the man who reflects that his virtue is his own work, and truely woful is the profligate who cannot but know that his guilt is his alone. 'To the pure help cometh from on high,' was the sentence which cheered our pious forefathers, and which should encourage us."

His definition of sin, too, is far beyond and above the confused ideas of many theologians.

"Sin is an obstruction in the heart; an inability to feel and comprehend all that is noble, true, and great, and to take part in the good." If man is to be freed from sin, his mind and heart must be opened to the influence of enlightenment. The power of the passions must be subdued, and all prejudice, selfishness, and self complacency be removed.

For those who entertain the erroneous opinion that Judaism proclaims God as unforgiving and rancorous, nothing further should be necessary than to enumerate the Rabbi's classification of the effects of the Day of Atonement.

"He who violates an affirmative commandment, and repents, is forgiven immediately.

"He who does that thing which is forbidden, and repents, is forgiven on the Day of Atonement.

[p. 215]

"He who commits a sin punishable by extirpation, or the death penalty, may be forgiven through suffering, but nothing save death may atone for the one who profanes the name of God."

What is a profanation of the name of God? According to Rab, he who borrows and does not repay commits that sin. Rabbi Abaya says, "A man who acts so that God's name is not honoured in his mouth."

And Rabbi Jochanan says, "The man who has abased his character."

Why should a violation of the affirmative commandments be so easily expiated, as is generally believed, since they are so important? The Rabbi says that sin committed against man is more grievous in the eyes of God than that committed against Himself.

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

Rabbi Meir.

"All that God made was very good."

Rabbi Simon, the son of Eleazer, uses the words "very good" in reference to sleep. "Man sleeps," says he, "and in a few hours he gains renewed strength." Rabbi Samuel, son of Nachman, said, "The incentive leading man towards women is 'very good,' for thereby households are organised and families are formed." Rabbi Hammuna was of the opinion that no more forcible meaning could be given to the words "very good" than in applying them to the ills of life, which, said he, "more than doctrines and reasonings keep men temperate and dependent on a Higher Power." Rabbi Simon, the son of Abba, applied the words "very good" to retaliation; and Rabbi Simon, the son of Lakish, to political government; but the teaching of Rabbi Meir was, that the death of man is "very good."

Judaism aims not to separate, but to unite mankind,

[p. 216]

and this was one of the great principles of Rabbi Meir's life.

Concerning the passage, "Man shall observe the law and live in it," he said, "Holy Writ says not Israelites, not Levites, not priests, but men; therefore the Gentile who observes the law stands on a level with the High Priest."

"Walk before every man in modesty and humility," he said further. "Not only before your co-religionists, but before every man."

Rabbi Meir was a great allegorist; it is said that he knew three hundred allegories relating to the fox alone. Of these hut three fragments remain to us.

"A fox said to a bear, 'Come, let us go into this kitchen; they are making preparations for the Sabbath, and we shall he able to find food.' The bear followed the fox, but being bulky he was captured and punished. Angry thereat he designed to tear the fox to pieces, under the pretence that the forefathers of the fox had once stolen his food; wherein occurs the first saying, 'The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the  teeth are set on edge.'

"' Nay,' said the fox, 'come with me, my good friend; let us not quarrel; I will lead thee to another place where we shall surely find food.' The fox then led the bear to a fountain, where two buckets were fastened together by a rope, like balances. It was night, and the fox pointed to the moon reflected in the water, saying, 'Here is a fine cheese; let us descend and partake of it with an appetite.' The fox entered his pail first, but being too light to balance the weight of the bear he took with him a stone. As soon as the bear had gotten into the other pail, however, the fox threw this stone away, and consequently he rose, while the bear descended to the bottom."

Here he applies his second saying, "The righteous is

[p. 217]

delivered out of trouble, and the wicked cometh in his stead." Each man must suffer for his own sins, and for his own guilt alone. He who follows the luminary of the night, sensuality, must perish, while the righteous one, though carrying a stone (sin), will throw it away betimes, and be delivered from death.

The libertine Elishah, the son of Abuyah, generally called Acher, a most learned man, was one of Rabbi Meir's teachers, and they frequently conversed on Biblical passages.

The people were not pleased that Rabbi Meir should so associate, and they called him therefore Acherim, a word composed of the letters of Meir and Acher. But Rabbi Meir referred them to the proverb, "Incline thy ears to listen to the words of the sages, but direct thy heart to what my thought is."

Rabbi Meir ate the date and threw away the seeds; he found a pomegranate, and partaking of the fruit, he rejected the rind. His generation did not comprehend him.

Acher upon one occasion said to Rabbi Meir, "Why is the law compared to gold and glass?"

"Because," replied Rabbi Meir, "it is as hard to acquire as gold is hard in substance, and forgotten with as much ease as glass is broken."

"No," returned the other, in the name of Rabbi Akiba, "the reason is this: when gold and glass are broken they may be melted and worked over into new shapes. So is it with the student of the law, though he may commit many faulty actions there is still hope and help for him."

Rabbi Meir always favoured benevolence, and a care of self as well as of others. "He only is truly rich," he asserted, "who enjoys his wealth."

The passage in Malachi 26: "Many he withheld from

[p. 218]

iniquity," he interpreted as referring to Aaron, the first high priest, who was so respected that the mere mention of his name, or the thought of how he might regard a certain action were he present, prevented many from falling into sin.

A heathen once said to Rabbi Meir, "Does it seem credible that God, whose majesty you assert fills the universe, should have spoken from between the two staves in the ark of the sanctuary?"

In answer Rabbi Meir held up before the heathen a large and a small looking-glass, in each of which the inquirer beheld his image.

"Now," said the Rabbi, "in each mirror your body is reduced to correspond with the size of the glass,--should the same thing be impossible to God? The world is his large looking glass, the sanctuary his small one."

In regard to instruction, Rabbi Meir always said, "Teach your pupils concisely?" he also said, "Let your supplications be brief;" and his exhortation to parents was, "Teach thy son an honest handicraft."

His favourite maxim was, "Be resolved to know my ways; be attentive at the doors of the law, and guard the law in thy heart. Before thy eyes be the fear of me; protect thy mouth from sinning; cleanse and sanctify thyself from all guilt and iniquity, and God will be with thee."

From the sentence, "Be attentive at the doors of the law," Rabbi Meir declared that every scholar should have at least three teachers, and that the word "doors" possesses a peculiar idea or meaning. For instance, a person in passing the door of the house in which he passed his honeymoon, or the door of a hall of justice in which he has been convicted or acquitted, or the door of a house in which he has sinned, what different thoughts, feelings, and recollections will be awakened in him. With equal strength should the

[p. 219]

circumstances under which he studied the law be impressed upon his mind. The Israelites are called the "children of God," and Rabbi Meir never ceased to present this filial relation in its true light, filling to the brim the goblet of family happiness, and displaying it to the eyes of the people. "Jeremiah calls us 'foolish children,'" said he; "in Deuteronomy we are called 'children lacking faith;' but under all circumstances we remain 'the children of God.'"

Rabbi Meir's wife was good and pious as her husband.

There dwelt in his neighbourhood some co-religionists who were followers of Greek customs, who annoyed the Rabbi very much. In his vexation he would have prayed to God to destroy them, but said Beruryah, his wife:

"Be mindful of the teachings of thy faith. Pray not that sinners may perish, but that the sin itself may disappear and no opportunity for its practice remain."

During the Rabbi's absence from home two of his sons died. Their mother, hiding her grief, awaited the father's return, and then said to him:

"My husband, some time since two jewels of inestimable value were placed with me for safe keeping. He who left them with me called for them to-day, and I delivered them into his hands?"

"That is right," said the Rabbi, approvingly. "We must always return cheerfully and faithfully all that is placed in our care."

Shortly after this the Rabbi asked for his sons, and the mother, taking him by the hand, led him gently to the chamber of death. Meir gazed upon his sons, and realising the truth, wept bitterly.

"Weep not, beloved husband," said his noble wife; "didst thou not say to me we must return cheerfully when 'tis called for, all that has been placed in our care? God

[p. 220]

gave us these jewels; He left them with us for a time, and we gloried in their possession; but now that He calls for His own, we should not repine."

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

Hillel Hannasi.

Hillel, "the chief of Israel," was the descendant of a renowned family; his father was of the tribe of Benjamin, while his mother was a lineal descendant of King David. He lived about a hundred years before the destruction of the second temple, and was called Hillel the Babylonian, having been born in Babel.

He was forty years of age before he left his native city to commence his studies of the law; he continued studying under Shemaiah and Abtalyon for forty years, and from then until his death, forty years after, he was chief of the college.

During the period of his life as a student, Hillel was often cramped for means to pursue his studies. There is a generally accepted legend, to the effect that upon one occasion, when he lacked the fee demanded by the porter for entrance to the college, he climbed up upon the window-sill, hoping to hear the lectures through the panes. It chanced to be snowing, and the student became so intensely interested that he was quite covered with the snow without being aware of it, and became insensible through the cold. The attention of those inside was called to his state by the early darkening of the room, and by them he was carried in and restored to consciousness.

Hillel's elevation to the presidency of the college occurred in a remarkable manner. The eve of the Passover fell upon the Sabbath. The two chief Rabbis of Jerusalem were the sons of Bethera, and they were asked to decide whether it would be right and lawful to prepare the paschal lamb upon

[p. 221]

the Sabbath. They were unable to decide the point, when it was mentioned to them that a man of Babel, who had studied under two renowned teachers, Shemaiah and Abtalyon, was then in the place, and might be able to aid their decision. Hillel was appealed to, and he met the question with such wisdom and clearness that the sons of Bethera exclaimed, "Thou art more worthy and competent to fill the office than we are," and through their means Hillel was elected chief of the college in the year 3728 A.M. Hillel was a man of very mild disposition, but he soon found in Shamai a rival of high and hasty temper. Shamai founded a college, which was called Beth Shamai, and between that institution and the Beth Hillel the controversies were sharp and prolonged, though in the great majority of the cases Hillel and his disciples had by far the best of the arguments.

Hillel's students numbered eighty; the most noted of whom was Jonathan, the son of Uziel.

Upon one occasion an unbeliever approached Shamai and mockingly requested the Rabbi to teach to him the tenets and principles of Judaism in the space of time he could stand on one foot. Shamai, in great wrath, bade him begone, and the man then applied to Hillel, who said:

"Do not unto others what you would not have others do to you. This is the whole law; the rest, merely commentaries upon it."

Many silly students were fond of asking plaguing questions.

"How many laws are there?" asked one of these.

"Two," replied Hillel, "the oral and the written law."

"In the latter I believe," said the student; "but why should I believe the other?"

Hillel then wrote the Hebrew alphabet upon a card, and pointing to the first letter, he asked;

[p. 222]

"What letter is that?"

"Aleph," replied the student.

"Good," said Hillel; "now the next," pointing to it.

"Beth."

"Good again; but how knowest thou that this is an 'aleph' and this a 'beth?'"

"Because we have learned so from our teachers and our ancestors."

"Well," said Hillel, "as thou acceptest this in good faith, so accept the law."

As an evidence of Hillel's practical mind and his thorough appreciation of the demands and wants of his day, the following enactment is of interest.

According to the Biblical laws, all debts were to be remitted in the Sabbatical year; as it is written: "At the end of every seven years shalt thou make a release; . . . the loan which he hath lent to his neighbour," &c. (Deut. 15: 1-2). This measure, intended to adjust the inequalities of fortune, and well qualified for its purpose under some circumstances, was in the Herodian age the cause of much trouble. The wealthy man was loth to loan his money to those most in need of it, fearing to lose it by the provisions of this law. To remedy this evil, Hillel, without directly abrogating the statute of limitation, ordained that the creditor might make a duly signed deposition before the Sabbatical year, reserving the right to collect his outstanding debts at any time that he might think proper. This enactment was beneficial alike to rich and poor, and became a law with the approval of the elders.

Hillel died about the year 3764.

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

Rashi.

Rabbenu Shelomo Yitzchaki (Our teacher, Solomon the

[p. 223]

son of Isaac), generally known as Rashi, from the initial letters of his name, was born about the year 1040 in Troyes, France. As a lad, his progress was remarkable; he mastered the most abstruse studies without difficulty, obtaining, in addition to his great proficiency in philology, philosophy, medicine, astronomy, and civil law, a complete mastery over the wide range of Scriptural and Talmudical lore.

He commenced his commentaries upon the Scriptures very early in life, completing the work, it is said, in his thirty-third year. Before giving it to the public, however, he travelled for seven years, visiting the academies of Italy, Greece, Germany, Palestine, and Egypt, storing up for the benefit of coming ages all that an observant eye, a gifted mind, and a diligent scholar could glean.

Upon his return to France, Rashi published his commentaries on the Bible, a book which has never been superseded, and which is now frequently published in connexion with the Hebrew Bible, and he supplemented the same, shortly after, with a commentary upon twenty-three of the treatises of the Talmud.

Many of his works were never published; but among those given to the world is a book of medicine, and a poem, "The Unity of God."

He died at the age of seventy-five years, leaving three daughters, one of whom became the mother of Samuel den Meier, who edited and added to the works of his grandfather.

His eminence, his piety, and his learning became traditional with succeeding generations, and he became the hero of many legends of that nature, which minds in those early days were so ready to grasp and embellish.

It is said that his monarch sent for him upon one occasion, and said to him:

[p. 224]

"I have prepared a hundred thousand chariots and two hundred ships; I desire to capture Jerusalem. My soldiers and officers are superior in skill and courage to those now in possession; what thinkest thou of my prospects for success?"

"Thou wilt capture Jerusalem," returned Rashi; "thou wilt reign over it three days, and thou wilt return to this city with three horses and as many men thereon."

"Take heed then that there be not four horses," exclaimed the monarch, angered at this prediction, "for if I return with even one more than thou hast said, I will give thy flesh to the fowls of the air."

The war lasted for four years. The monarch returned with but four horsemen left of all his army, and as they passed through the gates of the city a stone fell, killing one horse and its rider instantly. This brought to mind the words of Rashi; but when the king sought for him, he found that during his absence the old man had gone the way of all flesh.

It is claimed that the chair which Rashi used in the college is still in existence.

Rashi was also called Jarchi, derived from the name of the city in which he lived, "Lunel." Jerach being the Hebrew, as lune is the French for moon.

In the words of the Talmud, "A righteous man never dies," and, "Happy the man that hath found wisdom, and he that hath acquired understanding."

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

Maimonides.

Moses Maimonides, one of the greatest of Jewish commentators, and a descendant of Rabbi Judah, the compiler of the Mishna, was born in the city of Cordova, Spain, March 30th, 1135. His father was somewhat advanced in

[p. 225]

life when he married, and it is said that he entered into the conjugal state through having dreamed several successive times that he was wedded to the daughter of a butcher in his neighbourhood; the lady whom he did actually marry.

Moses was the only child of this lady, who died shortly after his birth. His father lamented her demise for about a year, and then married again, several children being the result of this second union.

Moses displayed no love for study in his youth; a fact which grieved his father much. All efforts to induce him to become more studious failed; his brothers called him "the butcher's boy," as a term of reproach for his dulness; and finally, in anger, his father drove him from his home.

While travelling, entirely friendless, Moses fell in with a learned Rabbi, and admired his wisdom and knowledge so much that he resolved to study zealously and emulate such attainments.

Many years after this a new preacher was announced to lecture in the synagogue, at Cordova, upon a designated Sabbath. Numerous rumours of his wonderful learning and eloquence were rife, and all were anxious to hear him. In matter, delivery, earnestness, and effect, the sermon excelled all that the people had before listened to, and to the amazement of Maimonides the elder, and his sons, they recognised in the man all were eager to honour, their outcast relative.

The first commentary of Maimonides is upon the Mishna, and it concludes with these words:

"I, Moses, the son of Maymon, commenced this commentary when twenty-three years of age. I have finished it at the age of thirty in the land of Egypt."

Maimonides fled from Spain to Cairo, in Egypt, from fanaticism and persecution. There he studied the Greek

[p. 226]

and Chaldaic languages, becoming master of both after seven years' attention. His fame spread through the country. His scientific standing and his general knowledge were universally recognised, and his books were not only valued by his brethren in faith, but by all the cultured and enlightened of his day.

It is said that the king of Egypt appointed him as one of his staff of physicians. The enlightened men of the kingdom were divided into seven grades, each grade occupying a corresponding position near the throne of the king on state occasions. The monarch considered Maimonides so much superior to the others that he made for him a special position. This, Moses, a modest man, declined. The other physicians, however, were jealous of his high standing, and being unable to injure him openly, they endeavoured to accomplish his ruin in a secret manner.

The king was taken very sick, and Maimonides attended him. Taking advantage of this, the physicians put poison in the draught which Moses had prepared for him, and then informed the king that the latter designed his death. To prove their words, they gave some of the mixture to a dog, and the animal died.

The king was grieved and surprised, and Maimonides, struck dumb with amazement, was unable to say a word.

"Death is the penalty for one who attempts to assassinate his ruler," said the king. "Choose now the mode of thy punishment."

Moses asked for three days for consideration, which the king granted. During this time he prepared a certain mixture, and instructed his pupils to have it ready and apply it according to his directions, when he should be brought home senseless. He then appeared before the king, and desired to have his veins opened. The vital artery was

[p. 227]

missed, as he had anticipated, and the result was as he had foreseen. After his recovery, he fled from Egypt, taking refuge in a cave, where he wrote his "Yad Hazakah" (the "Strong Hand"), consisting of fourteen divisions, typified by the word Yad, which also means fourteen.

Maimonides simplified the Talmudical rules and traditions, making them clear to the comprehension of all. He was the author of an exhaustive work, entitled, "Mishne Torah," the "Second Law," which was eagerly copied and extensively disseminated. He also wrote many philosophical treatises levelled against atheism, and designed to prove that God produced the world from naught, and at the age of fifty gave to the world his great work, Moreh Nebuchim (Guide of the Perplexed), to which Rabbi Judah Charizi added an appendix.

Maimonides died at the age of seventy years, and his remains were interred at Cairo, Egypt. Both Jews and Gentiles mourned his loss. The lamentation in Jerusalem was intense, a fast was declared, the synagogues were opened, and a portion of the law (Levit. 25: 12 to end), and the fifth chapter of Samuel 1, were made parts of the service of the day.

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

Rabbi Ammon, of Metz.

During the reign of one of the bishops in Metz, there lived a Jew in that city, who was called Rabbi Amnon. He was of illustrious family, of great personal merit, rich and respected by the Bishop and the people. The Bishop frequently pressed him to abjure Judaism and embrace Christianity, but without the slightest avail. It happened, however, upon a certain day, being more closely pressed than usual, and somewhat anxious to be rid of the Bishop's importunities, he said hastily, "I will consider the subject, and give thee an answer in three days."

[p. 228]

As soon as he had left the Bishop's presence, however, his heart smote him, and an unquiet conscience blamed him for admitting, even in this manner, a doubt of the true faith. He reached home overwhelmed with grief; meat was set before him, but he refused to eat; and when his friends visited him and ascertained the cause of his low spirits, he refused their proffered consolation, saying, "I shall go down mourning to the grave for these words." On the third day, while he was still lamenting his imprudent concession, the Bishop sent for him, but he refused to answer the call.

Having refused several of the Bishop's messengers, they were finally ordered to seize him, and bring him by force before the prelate.

"Amnon," said the Bishop, "why didst thou not come to nee, according to thy promise, to inform me of thy decision in regard to my request?"

"Let me," answered Amnon, "pronounce my own doom for this neglect. Let my tongue, which uttered those hasty, doubting words, be cut out; a lie I uttered, for I never intended to consider the proposition."

"Nay," said the Bishop, "I will not cut out thy tongue, but thy feet which refused to cone to me, shall be cut off, and the other parts of thy obstinate body shall be also punished and tormented."

Under the Bishop's eye and order, the toes and thumbs of Rabbi Amnon were then cut off, and after having been severely tortured, he was sent home in a carriage, his mangled members beside him.

Rabbi Amnon bore all this with the greatest resignation, firmly hoping and trusting that this earthly torment would plead his pardon with God.

His life after this was of course to be measured only by

[p. 229]

days. The Feast of the New Year came .round, while he was living, and he desired to be carried to the synagogue. He was conveyed to the house of God, and during the service he requested to be allowed to utter a prayer. The words, which proved to be his last, were as follows:

"I will declare the mighty holiness of this day, for it is awful and tremendous. Thy kingdom is exalted thereon; Thy throne is established in mercy, and upon it Thou dost rest in truth. Thou art the Judge, who chastiseth, and from Thee naught may be concealed. Thou bearest witness, writest, sealest, recordest, and rememberest all things, aye, those which we imagine long buried in the past. The Book of Records thou openest; the great shophar (cornet) is sounded; even the angels are terrified, and they cry aloud, 'The Day of Judgment dawns upon us,' for in judgment they, the angels, are not faultless.

"All who have entered the world pass before Thee, Even as the shepherd causes the flock he numbers to pass under his crook, so Thou, oh Lord, causest every living soul to pass before Thee. Thou numberest, Thou visitest; appointing the limitations of every creature, Thy judgment and Thy sentence.

"On the New Year it is written, on the Day of Atonement it is sealed. Aye, all Thy decrees are recorded. Who is to live and who to die. The names of those to meet death by fire, by water, or by the sword; through hunger, through thirst, and with the pestilence. All is recorded. Those who are to have tranquillity, those who are to be disturbed. Those who are to be troubled, those who are to be blessed with repose. Those who are to be prosperous, those for whom affliction is in store. Those who are to become rich, who poor; who exalted, who cast down; but penitence, prayer, and charity, oh Lord, may avert all evil decrees."

[p. 230]

When he had finished this declaration, in which he designed to acknowledge his sin and the justice of his punishment, Rabbi Amnon expired, dying fitly in God's house, among the assembled sons of Israel.

May the  of Rabbi Amnon be a precious remembrance in Israel, and may we endeavour to emulate the same. Amen.

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 231]

  

II.

  

TEACHINGS OF THE RABBIS.

Benevolence.

ACCORDING to a proverb of the fathers, benevolence is one of the pillars upon which the world rests. "The world," said they, "is sustained by virtue of three things,--the law, divine worship, and active benevolence." The Pentateuch commences and ends with an act of benevolence, as it is written, "And the Lord God made unto Adam and to his wife coats of skin, and clothed them" (Genesis 3: 20); and also, "And He (God) buried him" (Deut. 34: 6). To do a person a favour, is to act beneficently towards him without any hope or desire of return, and may be practised in two cases,--to oblige a person to whom we are not under obligation, and to accommodate or oblige a person, with more trouble to ourselves and more gain to him than he deserves. The mercy which is mentioned in the Bible is that which is given freely and without desert upon the part of one to whom it is granted; for instance, the benevolence of God is called mercy, because we are in debt to God, and He owes us nothing. Charity is also a species of benevolence, but it can only be applied to the poor and needy; while benevolence itself is both for poor and rich, high and lowly. We may even act benevolently towards the dead, attending to the last rites; this is called mercy and truth. If we oblige a fellow-man, it is possible that he may, in the course of time, repay the same; but benevolence to the dead is the very truth of mercy it cannot be returned. In three

[p. 232]

instances is benevolence superior to charity. Charity near be practised by means of money; benevolence with or without money. Charity is for the poor alone; benevolence either for the poor or for the rich. Charity we can display but to the living; benevolence to the living or the dead.

"After the Lord your God ye shall walk." How is it possible for us to walk after God? By following his attributes and examples. The Lord clothed the naked, as it is written, "The Lord God made to Adam and his wife coats of skin and clothed them." So we must do the same. The Lord visited the sick. "The Lord appeared to him in the grove of Mamre" (which was immediately after the circumcision). So we must do the same. The Lord comforteth the mourner. "It came to pass after the death of Abraham, God blessed his son Isaac." So we must do the same. The Lord buried the dead, as it is written, "He (God) buried him." So must we do the same. To attend to the dead, follow to its last resting-place the dust of our fellows, is an act of benevolence both to the living and the dead; the spirit departed and the mourners.

Rabbi Judah said, "If a person weeps and mourns excessively for a lost relative, his grief becomes a murmur against the will of God, and he may soon be obliged to weep for another death." We should justify the decree of God, and exclaim with Job, "The Lord gave and the Lord hath taken; blessed be the name of the Lord."

Hospitality is another attribute of benevolence. It is said of Abraham, "And he planted an orchard." This was not an orchard as we understand the word, but an inn. Abraham opened his house to passing travellers, and entertained them in a hospitable manner. When his guests thanked him for his attention, Abraham replied, "Do not thank me, for I am not the owner of this place; thank

[p. 233]

[paragraph continues] God, who created heaven and earth." In this manner he made the name of God known among the heathens. Therefore he gave us an example of hospitality which we should follow, as it is written in the proverbs of the fathers, "Let thy house be open wide as a refuge, and let the poor be cordially received within thy walls." When they enter thy house, receive them with a friendly glance, and set immediately before them thy bread and salt. Perhaps the poor man may be hungry, and yet hesitate to ask for food. Even though there may be much to trouble thee, thou must hide thy feelings from thy guests; comfort them if they need kindly words, but lay not thine own troubles before them. Remember how kindly Abraham acted towards the three angels whom he thought were men; how hospitably he treated them, saying, "My lords, if I have found grace in your eyes, do not pass away from your servant," &c. (Gen. 18: 3.) Be always friendly to thy guests, then when thou shalt call upon the Lord He will answer thee.

God knows whether the hearts which seek Him offer Him all of which they are capable. During the existence of the Temple, the Lord received with equal favour the meat offering of a handful of flour and the sacrifice of a bull. So now, the offering of the poor is just as acceptable as the utmost which the rich man can afford, if their hearts are equally with the Lord.

It was said of Rabbi Tarphon, that though a very wealthy man, he was not charitable according to his means. One time Rabbi Akiba said to him, "Shall I invest some money for thee in real estate, in a manner which will be very profitable?" Rabbi Tarphon answered in the affirmative, and brought to Rabbi Akiba four thousand denars in gold, to be so applied. Rabbi Akiba immediately distributed the same among the poor. Some time after this Rabbi

[p. 234]

[paragraph continues] Tarphon met Rabbi Akiba, and asked him where the real estate which he had bought for him was situated. Akiba led his friend to the college, and showed him a little boy, who recited for them the 112th psalm. When he reached the ninth verse, "He distributeth, he giveth to the needy, his righteousness endureth for ever:"

"There," said Akiba, "thy property is with David, the king of Israel, who said, 'he distributeth, he giveth to the needy.'"

"And wherefore hast thou done this?" asked Tarphon.

"Knowest thou not," answered Rabbi Akiba, "how Nakdimon, the son of Guryon, was punished because he gave not according to his means?"

"Well," returned the other, "why didst thou not tell me this; could I not have distributed my means without thy aid?"

"Nay," said Akiba, "it is a greater virtue to cause another to give than to give one's self."

From this we may learn that he who is not charitable according to his means will be punished.

Rabbi Jochanan, the son of Lakkai, was once riding outside of Jerusalem, and his pupils had followed him. They saw a poor woman collecting the grain which dropped from the mouths and troughs of some feeding cattle, belonging to Arabs. When she saw the Rabbi, she addressed him in these brief words, "Oh Rabbi, assist me." He replied, "My daughter, whose daughter art thou?"

"I am the daughter of Nakdimon, the son of Guryon," she answered.

"Why, what has become of thy father's money?" asked the Rabbi; "the amount which thou didst receive as a dowry on thy wedding day?"

[p. 235]

"Ah," she replied, "is there not a saying in Jerusalem, 'The salt was wanting to the money?'" [*1]

"And thy husband's money," continued the Rabbi; "what of that?"

"That followed the other," she answered; "I have lost them both."

The Rabbi turned to his scholars and said:

"I remember, when I signed her marriage contract, her father gave her as a dowry one million golden denars, and her husband was wealthy in addition thereto."

The Rabbi sympathised with the woman, helped her, and wept for her.

"Happy are ye, oh sons of Israel," he said; "as long as ye perform the will of God naught can conquer ye; but if ye fail to fulfil His wishes, even the cattle are superior to ye."

He who does not practise charity commits a sin. This is proven in the life of Nachum.

Nachum, whatever occurred to him, was in the habit of saying, "This too is for the best." In his old age he became blind; both of his hands and both of his legs were amputated, and the trunk of his body was covered with a sore inflammation. His scholars said to him, "If thou art a righteous man, why art thou so sorely afflicted?"

"All this," he answered, "I brought upon myself. Once was travelling to the house of my father-in-law, and I had with me thirty asses laden with provisions and all manner of precious articles. A man by the wayside called to me, 'Oh, Rabbi, assist me.' I told him to wait until I unloaded

[p. 236]

my asses. When that time arrived and I had removed their burdens from my beasts, I found to my sorrow that the poor man had fallen and expired. I threw myself upon his body and wept bitterly. 'Let these eyes, which had no pity on thee, be blind,' I said; 'these hands that delayed to assist thee, let them be cut off, and also these feet, which did not run to aid thee.' And yet I was not satisfied until I prayed that my whole body might be stricken with a sore inflammation. Rabbi Akiba said to me, 'Woe to me that I find thee in this state!' But I replied, 'Happy to thee that thou meetest me in this state, for through this I hope that my iniquity may be forgiven, and all my righteous deeds still remain recorded to gain me a reward of life eternal in the future world.'"

 

Rabbi Janay upon seeing a man bestowing alms in a public place, said, "Thou hadst better not have given at all, than to have bestowed alms so openly and put the poor man to shame.

"One should rather be thrown into a fiery furnace than be the means of bringing another to public shame."

The Rabbis particularly insist that we are not to confine the exercise of charity to our own people, for the law of Moses inculcates kindness and hospitality towards the stranger within our gates. Even the animals are especially remembered in his most merciful code.

Rabbi Juda said, "No one should sit down to his own meals, until seeing that all the animals dependent upon his care are provided for."

Rabbi Jochanan has said that it is as pleasing in God's sight if we are kind and hospitable to strangers, as if we rise up early to study His law; because the former is in fact putting His law into practice. He also said, "He who

[p. 237]

is active in kindnesses towards his fellows, is forgiven his sins."

Both this Rabbi and Abba say it is better to lend to the poor than to give to them, for it prevents them from feeling ashamed of their poverty, and is really a more charitable manner of aiding them. The Rabbis have always taught that kindness is more than the mere almsgiving of charity, for it includes pleasant words with the more substantial help.

Footnotes

^235:1 Salt is used to preserve meat; without salt the meat rots. Charity is to money even as salt is to meat.

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

Meekness.

We find in the Bible many instances of the pleasure which meekness and humility in the creature affords the Great Creator. The noblest of our ancestors were those who were free from self-pride.

Abraham, the pure in heart, knew well he was but dust of the earth; and when the sons of Heth addressed him as the "prince of God," he bowed down before them.

Moses and Aaron, the leaders of Israel, exclaimed, "What are we!" And Moses in place of being jealous on hearing that two of his followers were prophesying in the camp, said humbly, "Would that all the Lord's people were prophets." (Numb. 11: 29.)

When David dedicated to God's service the costly material he had gathered for the Temple, he meekly said, "Only of Thine own have we given Thee." (Ps. 37: 11.)

From the Great Eternal, Himself, we learn humility. He chose Mount Sinai from which to give His commandments: 'twas not the highest of the mountains. He called to Moses not from a lofty tree but from a lowly bush. When he spoke to Elijah, he allowed the wind to roar, the earth to tremble, and the fire to flash forth; but for His medium He chose "the still small voice,"

[p. 238]

Rabbi Hunnah said, "He who is proud in heart is as sinful as the idolater."

Rabbi Abira said, "He who is proud shall be humbled."

Heskaiah said, "The prayers of a proud hard-hearted man are never heard."

Rabbi Ashi said, "He who hardens his heart with pride, softens his brains with the same."

Rabbi Joshua said, "Meekness is better than sacrifice;" for is it not written, "The sacrifices of God are a broken heart--a broken contrite spirit, Thou, oh Lord, will not despise."

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

The Fear of God.

The son of Rabbi Hunnah said, "He who possesses a knowledge of God's law, without the fear of Him, is as one who has been intrusted with the inner keys of a treasury, but from whom the outer ones are withheld."

Rabbi Alexander said, "He who possesses worldly wisdom and fears not the Lord, is as one who designs building a house and completes only the door, for as David wrote in Psalm 111th, 'The beginning of wisdom is the fear of the Lord."

When Rabbi Jochanan was ill, his pupils visited him and asked him for a blessing. With his dying voice the Rabbi said, "I pray that you may fear God as you fear man." "What!" exclaimed his pupils, "should we not fear God more than man?"

"I should be well content," answered the sage, if your actions proved that you feared Him as much. When you do wrong you first make sure that no human eyes see you; show the same fear of God, who sees everywhere, and everything, at all times."

Abba says we can show our fear of God in our intercourse

[p. 239]

with one another. "Speak pleasantly and kindly to every one;" he says, "trying to pacify anger, seeking peace, and pursuing it with your brethren and with all the world, and by this means you will gain that 'favour and good understanding in the sight of God and man,' which Solomon so highly prized." (Prov. 3: 9.)

Rabbi Jochanan had heard Rabbi Simon, son of Jochay, illustrate by a parable that passage of Isaiah which reads as follows: "I, the Lord, love uprightness; but hate robbery (converted) into burnt-offering."

A king having imported certain goods upon which he laid a duty, bade his officers, as they passed the custom-house, to stop and pay the usual tariff.

Greatly astonished, his attendants addressed him thus: "Sire! all that is collected belongs to your majesty; why then give what must be eventually paid into thy treasury?"

"Because," answered the monarch, "I wish travellers to learn from the action I now order you to perform, how abhorrent dishonesty is in my eyes."

Even so is it regarding the dealings of the Almighty with us, pilgrims on earth. Though all we possess belongs to Him, yet He adds to it continually, in order to increase our temporal enjoyment. Should any one imagine, therefore, that to defraud man in order to present to God, what is solely His own, might be allowable, he would be rebuked by the teachings of Holy Writ, for the just God condemns the act, and calls it hateful.

From this we may then infer, for instance, that palm-branches, stolen in order to perform therewith the prescribed rites at the Feast of Tabernacles, are unfit for use by reason of the unlawful manner in which they were obtained.

Rabbi Eleazer said: "He who is guided by righteousness and justice in all his doings, may justly be asserted to have

[p. 240]

copied God in His unbounded beneficence. For of Him (blessed be His name) we read, 'He loveth righteousness and justice;' that is, 'The earth is filled with the loving kindness of God.'" Might we think that to follow such a course is an easy task? No! The virtue of beneficence can be gained only by great efforts. Will it be difficult, however, for him that has the fear of God constantly before his eyes to acquire this attribute? No; he will easily attain it, whose every act is done in the fear of the Lord.

"A crown of grace is the hoary head; on the way of righteousness can it be found."

So taught Solomon in his Proverbs. Hence various Rabbis, who had attained an advanced age, were questioned by their pupils as to the probable cause that had secured them that mark of divine favour. Rabbi Nechumah answered that, in regard to himself, God had taken  of three principles by which he had endeavoured to guide his conduct.

First, he had never striven to exalt his own standing by lowering that of his neighbour. This was agreeable to the example set by Rabbi Hunna, for the latter, while bearing on his shoulders a heavy spade, was met by Rabbi Choana Ben Chanilai, who, considering the burden derogatory to the dignity of so great a man, insisted upon relieving him of the implement and carrying it himself. But Rabbi Hunna refused, saying, "Were this your habitual calling I might permit it, but I certainly shall not permit another to perform an office which, if clone by myself, may be looked upon by some as menial."

Secondly, he had never gone to his night's rest with a heart harbouring ill-will against his fellow-man, conformably with the practice of Mar Zutra, who, before sleeping, offered

[p. 241]

this prayer: "O Lord! forgive all those who have done me injury."

Thirdly, he was not penurious, following the example of the righteous Job, of whom the sages relate that he declined to receive the change due him after making a purchase.

Another Rabbi, bearing also the name of Nechumah, replied to Rabbi Akiba, that he believed himself to have been blessed with long life because, in his official capacity, he had invariably set his face against accepting presents, mindful of what Solomon wrote, "He that hateth gifts will live." Another of his merits he conceived to be that of never resenting an offence; mindful of the words of Rabba, "He who is indulgent towards others' faults, will be mercifully dealt with by the Supreme Judge."

Rabbi Zera said that the merit of having reached an extreme age was in his case due, under Providence, to his conduct through life. He governed his household with mildness and forbearance. He refrained from advancing an opinion before his superiors in wisdom. He avoided rehearsing the word of God in places not entirely free from uncleanliness. He wore the phylacteries all day, that he might be reminded of his religious duties. He did not make the college where sacred knowledge is taught, a place of convenience, as, for instance, to sleep there, either occasionally or habitually. He never rejoiced over the downfall of a fellow-mortal, nor would he designate another by a name objectionable to the party personally, or to the family of which he was a member.

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

Honour thy Parents.

The Bible makes man's parents equally deserving, with the Most High, of his honour and reverence. "Honour thy

[p. 242]

father and thy mother," is one of the precepts of the Decalogue, and it is also written, "Honour God from thy wealth." "Fear thy father and mother," and "The Lord thy God shalt thou fear," are also divine inculcations, while the penalty for the blasphemous child, who sins against either his earthly parents or the great Father of the Universe, is the same, even as it is written, "Who curses his father and his mother shall be put to death," and "Every man who blasphemes God shall carry his death."

"Three friends," said the Rabbis, "has man." God, his father, and his mother. "He who honours his parents," says God, "honours me, even as though I lived among them."

Rabbi Judah said, "Known and revealed are the ways of man. A mother coaxes a child with kind words and gentle ways, gaining honour and affection; therefore, the Bible says, 'Honour thy father,' before 'honour thy mother.' But in regard to fearing, as the father is the preceptor of the child, teaching it the law, the Bible says, 'Every man shall fear his mother,' before the word 'father.'"

Rabbi Ulah was once asked, "How extended should be this honour due to parents?"

He replied:

"Listen, and I will tell ye how thoroughly it was observed by a heathen, Damah, the son of Nethina. He was a diamond merchant, and the sages desired to purchase from him a jewel for the ephod of the high priest. When they reached his house, they found that the key of the safe in which the diamond was kept was in the possession of Damah's father, who was sleeping. The son absolutely refused to wake his father, to obtain the key, even when the sages in their impatience offered him a much larger sum for the jewel than he had demanded. And further, when his father

[p. 243]

awoke, and he delivered the diamond to the purchasers, and they offered him the larger sum which they had named, he took from it his first price, returning the balance to them, with the words, 'I will not profit by the honour of my father.'"

Man cannot always judge of man, and in the respect paid to parents by their children, earthly eyes cannot always see the truth. For instance, a child may feed his parents on dainties, and yet deserve the punishment of a disrespectful son; while another may send his father to labour, and yet deserve reward. How may this be?

A certain man placed dainty food before his father, and bade him eat thereof. When the father had finished his meal, he said:

"My son, thou hast prepared for me a most delicious meal. Wherefrom didst thou obtain these delicacies?" And the son replied, insultingly:

"Eat as the dogs do, old man, without asking questions."

That son inherited the punishment of disrespect.

A certain man, a miller, had a father living with him, at the time when all people not working for themselves were obliged to labour a certain number of days for the government. When it came near the time when this service would be required of the old man, his son said to him, "Go thou and labour for me in the mill, and I will go and work for the government."

He said this because they who laboured for the government were beaten if their work proved unsatisfactory, and he thought "it is better for me to run the chance of being beaten than to allow my father to risk it." Therefore, he deserved the reward of the son who "honours his father."

Rabbi Chiyah asserted that God preferred honour shown to parents, to that displayed towards Himself. "It is

[p. 244]

written," said he, "'Honour the Lord from thy wealth.' How? Through charity, good deeds, putting the mezuzah upon thy doorposts, making a tabernacle for thyself during Succoth, &c.; all this if thou art able. If thou art poor the omission is not counted a sin or a neglect. But it is written, 'Honour thy father and thy mother,' and the duty is demanded alike of rich and poor; aye, even shouldst thou be obliged to beg for them from door to door."

Rabbi Abahu said, "Abini, my son, hath obeyed this precept even as it should be observed."

Abini had five children, but he would not allow any of them to open the door for their grandfather, or attend to his wants when he himself was at home. Even as he desired them in their lives to honour him, so he paid respect to his father. Upon one occasion his father asked him for a glass of water. While he was procuring it the old man fell asleep, and Abini, re-entering the room, stood by his father's side with the glass in his hand until the latter awoke.

"What is fear?" and "What is honour?" ask the Rabbis.

Fear thy mother and thy father, by sitting not in their seats and standing not in their places; by paying strict attention to their words and interrupting not their speech. Be doubly careful not to criticise or judge their arguments or controversies.

Honour thy father and thy mother, by attending to their wants; giving them to eat and to drink; put their raiment upon them, and tie their shoes if they are not able to perform these services for themselves.

Rabbi Eleazer was asked how far honour towards parents should be extended, and he replied: "Cast all thy wealth into the sea; but trouble not thy father and thy mother."

Simon, the son of Jochai, said: "As the reward to those

[p. 245]

who honour their parents is great, so is the punishment equally great for those who neglect the precept."

Each precept of the Bible states what the reward for its observance will be, and with this one we are told, "In order that thy days may be prolonged, and in order that it may go well with thee."

That thy days may be prolonged, not only in this world, but also in the world to come.

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

The Law and its Study.

"The Lord created me as the beginning of his way" (Prov. 8: 22). This means that God created the law before he created the world. Many sages have made their lives as black as the raven, that is, cruel to themselves as the raven is to her children, by means of continual study, day and night.

Rabbi Johanan said, "It is best to study by night, when all is quiet; as it is written, 'Shout forth praises in the night.'"

Reshbi Lakish said, "Study by day and by night; as it is written, 'Thou shalt meditate therein day and night.'"

Rabbi Chonan, of Zepora, said, "The study of the law may be compared to a huge heap of dust that is to be cleared away. The foolish man says, 'It is impossible that I should be able to remove this immense heap, I will not attempt it;' but the wise man says, 'I will remove a little to-day, some more to-morrow, and more the day after, and thus in time I shall have removed it all.'

"It is the same with studying the law. The indolent pupil says, 'It is impossible for me to study the Bible. Just think of it, fifty chapters in Genesis; sixty-six in Isaiah, one hundred and fifty Psalms, &c. I cannot do it but the industrious student says, 'I will study six

[p. 246]

chapters every day, and so in time I shall acquire the whole.'"

In Proverbs 24: 7, we find this sentence: "Wisdom is too high for a fool."

"Rabbi Jochanan illustrates this verse with an apple depending from the ceiling. The foolish man says, 'I cannot reach the fruit, it is too high;' but the wise man says, 'It may be readily obtained by placing one step upon another until thy arm is brought within reach of it.' The foolish man says, 'Only a wise man can study the entire law;' but the wise man replies, 'It is not incumbent upon thee to acquire the whole.'"

Rabbi Levi illustrates this by a parable.

A man once hired two servants to fill a basket with water, One of them said, "Why should I continue this useless labour? I put the water in one side and it immediately leaks out of the other; what profit is it?"

The other workman, who was wise, replied, "We have the profit of the reward which we receive for our labour."

It is the same in studying the law. One man says, "What does it profit me to study the law when I must ever continue it or else forget what I have learned." But the other man replies, "God will reward us for the will which we display even though we do forget."

Rabbi Ze-irah has said that even a single letter in the law which we might deem of no importance, if wanting, would neutralise the whole law. In Deuteronomy 22: 17, we read, "Neither shall he take to himself many wives, that his heart may turn away." Solomon transgressed this precept, and it is said by Rabbi Simon that the angels took note of his ill-doing and addressed the Deity: "Sovereign of the world, Solomon has made Thy law even as a law liable to change and diminution. Three precepts he has disregarded,

[p. 247]

namely, 'He shall not acquire for himself many horses;' 'neither shall he take to himself many wives;' 'nor shall he acquire to himself too much silver and gold.'" Then the Lord replied, "Solomon will perish from the earth; aye, and a hundred Solomons after him, and yet the smallest letter of the law shall not be dispensed with."

 

The Rabbis have often applied in a figurative sense, various passages of Holy Writ, among others the opening verse of the 55th chapter of Isaiah. "Ho, every one of ye that thirsteth, come ye to the water, and he, too, that hath no money; come ye, buy and eat; yea, come, buy without money and without price, wine and milk."

The three liquids which men are thus urged to procure are considered by the sages of Israel as typical of the law.

One Rabbi asked, "Why is the word of God compared to water?"

To this question the following answer was returned: "As water runs down from an eminence (the mountains), and rests in a low place (the sea), so the law, emanating from Heaven, can remain in the possession of those only who are humble in spirit."

Another Rabbi inquired, "Wherefore has the Word of God been likened to wine and milk?" The reply made was, "As these fluids cannot he preserved in golden vessels, but only in those of earthenware, so those minds will be the best receptacles of learning which are found in homely bodies."

Thus, for instance, Rabbi Joshua ben Chaninah, who was very homely in appearance, possessed great wisdom and erudition; and one of his favourite sayings was, that "though many have exhibited a vast amount of knowledge, notwithstanding their personal attractions, yet had they

[p. 248]

been less handsome, their acquirements might have beet more extensive."

There is another reason for comparing the Word of God to the last-mentioned liquids, namely, that they demand watching, lest they be spilled or spoiled, and in the same manner our acquaintance with the Bible and the traditions requires constant cultivation, else it will be lost.

 

The precepts are compared to a lamp; the law of God to a light. The lamp gives light only so long as it contains oil. So he who observes the precepts receives his reward while performing them. The law, however, is a light perpetual; it is a protection for ever to the one who studies it, as it is written:

"When thou walkest, it (the law) will guide thee; when thou liest down, it will watch over thee; and when thou awakenest, it will converse with thee."

When thou walkest, it will guide thee--in this world; when thou liest down, it will watch over thee--in the grave; when thou awakenest, it will converse with thee--in the life to come.

A traveller upon his journey passed through the forest upon a dark and gloomy night. He journeyed in dread; he feared the robbers who infested the route he was traversing; he feared that he might slip and fall into some unseen ditch or pitfall on the way, and he feared, too, the wild beasts, which he knew were about him. By chance he discovered a pine torch, and lighted it, and its gleams afforded him great relief. He no longer feared brambles or pitfalls, for he could see his way before him. But the dread of robbers and wild beasts was still upon him, nor left him till the morning's dawn, the coming of the sun. Still he was uncertain of his way, until he emerged from the forest,

[p. 249]

and reached the cross-roads, when peace returned unto his heart.

The darkness in which the man walked was the lack of religious knowledge. The torch he discovered typifies God's precepts, which aided him on the way until he obtained the blessed sunlight, compared to God's holy word, the Bible. Still, while man is in the forest (the world), he is not entirely at peace; his heart is weak, and he may lose the right path; but when he reaches the cross-roads (death), then may we proclaim him truly righteous, and exclaim:

"A good name is more fragrant than rich perfume, and the day of death is better than the day of one's birth."

 

Rabbi Jochanan, the son of Broka, and Rabbi Eleazer, the son of Chismah, visited their teacher, Rabbi Josah, and he said to them:

"What is the news at the college; what is going on?" "Nay," they answered, "we are thy scholars; it is for thee to speak, for us to listen."

"Nevertheless," replied Rabbi Josah, "no day passes without some occurrence of note at the college. Who lectured to-day?"

"Rabbi Eleazer, the son of Azaryah."

"And what was his subject?"

"He chose this verse from Deuteronomy," replied the scholar:

"'Assemble the people together, the men, the women, and the children;' and thus he expounded it:

"'The men came to learn, the women to listen; but wherefore the children? In order that those who brought them might receive a reward for training their children in the fear of the Lord.'

"He also expounded the verse from Ecclesiastes;

[p. 250]

"'The words of the wise are like goads, and like nails fastened (are the words of) the men of the assemblies, which are given by one shepherd.'

"'Why is the law of God compared to a goad?' he said. 'Because the goad causes the ox to draw the furrow straight, and the straight furrow brings forth a plenty of good food for the life of man. So does the law of God keep man's heart straight, that it may produce good food to provide for the life eternal. But lest thou shouldst say, "The goad is movable, so therefore must the law be," it is also written, "as nails," and likewise, as "nails fastened," lest thou shouldst argue that nails pounded into wood diminish from sight with each stroke, and that therefore by this comparison God's law would be liable to diminution also. No; as a nail fastened or planted, as a tree is planted to bring forth fruit and multiply.

"'The men of assemblies are those who gather in numbers to study the law. Frequently controversies arise among them, and thou mightest say, "With so many differing opinions how can I settle to a study of the law?" Thy answer is written in the words which are given by one shepherd. From one God have all the laws proceeded. Therefore make thy ears as a sieve, and incline thy heart to possess all these words.'"

Then said Rabbi Josah, "Happy the generation which Rabbi Eleazer teaches."

 

The sages of the academy in Jabnah expressed their regard for all human beings, learned and unlearned, in this manner:

"I am a creature of God and so is my neighbour. He may prefer to labour in the country; I prefer a calling in the city. I rise early for my personal benefit; he rises early

[p. 251]

to advance his own interests. As he does not seek to sup plant me, I should be careful to do naught to injure his business. Shall I imagine that I am nearer to God because my profession advances the cause of learning and his does not? No. Whether we accomplish much good or little good, the Almighty will reward us in accordance with our righteous intentions."

Abaygeh offered the following as his best advice:

". . . Let him be also affable and disposed to foster kindly feelings between all people; by so doing he will gain for himself the love both of the Creator and His creatures."

Rabba always said that the possession of wisdom and a knowledge of the law necessarily lead to penitence and good deeds. "For," said he, "it would be useless to acquire great learning and the mastery of Biblical and traditional law and act irreverently towards one's parents, or towards those superior on account of age or more extensive learning."

"The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom; a good understanding have all those who do God's commands."

Rabba said, "Holy Writ does not tell us that to study God's commands shows a good understanding, but to do them. We must learn, however, before we can be able to perform; and he who acts contrary through life to the teachings of the Most High had better never have been born."

 

"The wise man is in his smallest actions great: the fool is in his greatest actions small."

A pupil once inquired of his teacher, "What is real wisdom?" The teacher replied, "To judge liberally, to think purely, and to love thy neighbour." Another teacher answered, "The greatest wisdom is to know thyself."

[p. 252]

"Beware of conceit and pride of learning; learn thy tongue to utter, 'I do not know.'"

If a man devotes himself to study, and becomes learned, to the delight and gratification of his teachers, and yet is modest in conversation with less intelligent people, honest in his dealings, truthful in his daily walks, the people say, "Happy is the father who allowed him to study God's law; happy the teachers who instructed him in the ways of truth; how beautiful are his ways; how meritorious his deeds! Of such an one the Bible says, 'He said to me, Thou art my servant; oh, Israel, through thee am I glorified.'"

But when a man devotes himself to study, and becomes learned, yet is disdainful with those less educated than himself, and is not particular in his dealings with his fellows, then the people say of him, "Woe to the father who allowed him to study God's law; woe to those who instructed him; how censurable is his conduct; how loathsome are his ways! 'Tis of such an one the Bible says, 'And from his country the people of the Lord departed.'"

 

When souls stand at the judgment-seat of God, the poor, the rich, and the wicked each are severally asked what excuse they can offer for not having studied the law. If the poor man pleads his poverty he is reminded of Hillel. Though Hillel's earnings were small he gave half each day to gain admittance to the college.

When the rich man is questioned, and answers that the care of his fortune occupied his time, he is told that Rabbi Eleazer possessed a thousand forests and a thousand ships, and yet abandoned all the luxuries of wealth, and journeyed from town to town searching and expounding the law.

When the wicked man pleads temptation as an excuse for his evil course, he is asked if he has been more tempted

[p. 253]

than Joseph, more cruelly tried than he was, with good or evil fortune.

Yet though we are commanded to study God's law, we are not to make of it a burden; neither are we to neglect for the sake of study any other duty or reasonable recreation. "Why," once asked a pupil, "is 'thy shalt gather in thy corn in its season' a Scriptural command? Would not the people gather their corn when ripe as a matter of course? The command is superfluous."

"Not so," replied the Rabbis "the corn might belong to a man who for the sake of study would neglect work, Work is holy and honourable in God's sight, and He would not have men fail to perform their daily duties even for the study of His law."

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

Prayer.

Bless God for the good as well as for the evil. When you hear of a death say, "Blessed is the righteous Judge."

Prayer is Israel's only weapon, a weapon inherited from its fathers, a weapon proved in a thousand battles. Even when the gates of prayer are shut in heaven, those of tears are open.

We read (Ex. 17: 11) that in the contest with Amalek, when Moses lifted up his arms Israel prevailed. Did Moses's hands affect the war, to make it or to break it? No; but while the ones of Israel look upward with humble heart to the Great Father in Heaven, no evil can prevail against them.

"And Moses made a serpent of brass and put it upon a pole; and it came to pass that if a serpent had bitten any man, when he beheld the serpent of brass he lived" (Numb. 21: 9).

Had the brazen serpent the power of killing or of giving

[p. 254]

life? No; but while Israel looks upward to the Great Father in Heaven, He will grant life.

"Has God pleasure in the meat and blood of sacrifices?" ask the prophets.

No. He has not so much ordained as permitted them. "It is for yourselves," He says; "not for me, that ye offer."

A king had a son whom he daily discovered carousing with dissolute companions, eating and drinking.

"Eat at my table," said the king; "eat and drink, my son, even as pleaseth thee; but let it be at my table, and not with dissolute companions."

The people loved sacrificing, and they made offerings to strange gods; therefore, God said to them: "If ye will sacrifice, bring your offerings at least to me."

Scripture ordains that the Hebrew slave who loves his bondage shall have his ears pierced against the doorpost. Why?

Because that ear heard from Sinai's heights these words: "They are my servants; they shall not be sold as bondsmen." My servants, and not my servant's servants; therefore, pierce the ear of the one who loves his bondage and rejects the freedom offered him.

He who sacrifices a whole offering shall be rewarded for a whole offering; he who offers a burnt-offering shall have the reward of a burnt-offering; but he who offers humility to God and man shall receive as great a reward as though he had offered all the sacrifices in the world.

 

The God of Abraham will help the one who appoints a certain place to pray to the Lord.

Rabbi Henah said, "When such a man dies they will say of him, 'A pious man, a meek man, hath died; he followed the example of our father Abraham'"

[p. 255]

How do we know that Abraham appointed a certain place to pray?

"Abraham rose early in the morning and went to the place where he stood before the Lord."

Rabbi Chelboh said, "We should not hurry when we leave a place of worship."

"This," said Abayyeh, "is in reference to leaving a place of worship; but we should certainly hasten on our way thither, as it is written, 'Let us know and hasten to serve the Lord.'"

Rabbi Zabid said, "When I used to see the Rabbis hurrying to a lecture in their desire to obtain good seats, I thought to myself, 'they are violating the Sabbath.' When, however, I heard Rabbi Tarphon say, 'One should always hasten to perform a commandment even on the Sabbath,' as it is written, 'They shall follow after the Lord when He roareth like a lion,' I hurried also, in order to be early in attendance."

That place wherein we can best pray to God is His house; as it is written:

"To listen to the praises and prayers which Thy servant prays before Thee." Alluding to the service in the house of God.

Said Rabin, the son of Ada, "Whence do we derive the tradition, that when ten men are praying in the house of God the Divine Presence rests among them?

"It is written, 'God stands in the assembly of the mighty.' That an assembly or congregation consists of not less than ten, we learn from God's words to Moses in regard to the spies who were sent out to view the land of Canaan. 'How long,' said he, 'shall indulgence be given to this evil congregation?' Now the spies numbered twelve men; but Joshua and Caleb being true and

[p. 256]

faithful, there remained but ten to form the 'evil congregation.'"

"Whence do we derive the tradition that when even one studies the law, the Divine Presence rests with him?"

"It is written, 'In every place where I shall permit my name to be mentioned, I will come unto thee and I will bless thee.'"

 

Four Biblical characters offered up their prayers in a careless, unthinking manner; three of them God prospered; the other met with sorrow. They were, Eleazer, the servant of Abraham; Caleb, the son of Ye Phunneh; Saul, the son of Kish; and Jephtah the Giladite.

Eleazer prayed, "Let it come to pass that the maiden to whom I shall say, 'Let down thy pitcher, I pray thee, that I may drink;' and she shall say, 'Drink, and to thy camels also will I give drink;' shall be the one Thou hast appointed for Thy servant Isaac."

Suppose a slave had appeared and answered all the requirement which Eleazer proposed, would Abraham and Isaac have been satisfied? But God prospered his mission, and "Rebecca came out."

Caleb said, "He that will smite Kiryath-sepher, and capture it, to whom will I give 'Achsah, my daughter, for wife" (Judges I: 12).

Would he have given his daughter to a slave or a heathen?

But God prospered him, and "Othniel, the son of Kenaz, Caleb's younger brother, conquered it, and he gave him 'Achsah, his daughter, for wife."

Saul said, "And it shall be that the man who killeth him (Goliath) will the king enrich with great riches, and his daughter will he give him" (1 Samuel 17).

[p. 257]

He ran the same risk as Caleb, and God was good to him also; and David, the son of Jesse, accomplished that for which he had prayed.

Jephtah expressed himself thus: "If thou wilt indeed deliver the children of Amon into my hand, then shall it be that whatsoever cometh forth out of the doors of my house to meet me when I return in peace from the children of Amon, shall belong to the Lord, and I will offer it up for a burnt-offering" (Judges 11: 31).

Supposing an ass, or a dog, or a cat, had first met him upon his return, would he have sacrificed it for a burnt-offering? God did not prosper this risk, and the Bible says, "And Jephtah came to Mizpah unto his house, and behold his daughter came out to meet him."

Said Rabbi Simon ben Jochai, "The requests of three persons were granted before they had finished their prayers--Eleazer, Moses, and Solomon.

"In regard to Eleazer we learn, 'And before he had yet finished speaking that, behold Rebecca came out.'

"In regard to Moses, we find, 'And it came to pass when he had made an end of speaking all these words, that the ground that was under them was cloven asunder, and the earth opened her mouth and swallowed them.'" (Korach and his company.)

"In regard to Solomon, we find, 'And just when Solomon had made an end of praying, a fire came down," &c.

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

The Sabbath.

Rabbi Jochanan said, in the name of Rabbi Joseh, "To those who delight in the Sabbath shall God give inheritance without end. As it is written, 'Then shalt thou find delight in the Lord,' &c. 'And I will cause thee to enjoy the

[p. 258]

inheritance of Jacob, thy father.' Not as it was promised to Abraham, 'Arise and walk through the land to its length and breadth.' Not as it was promised to Isaac, 'I will give thee all that this land contains;' but as it was promised to Jacob, 'And thou shalt spread abroad, to the West, and to the East, to the North, and to the South.'"

Rabbi Jehudah said that if the Israelites had strictly observed the first Sabbath, after the command to sanctify the seventh day had been given, they would have been spared captivity; as it is written, "And it came to pass on the seventh day, that there went out some of the people to gather (the Mannah), but they found nothing." And in the next chapter we find, "Then came Amalek, and fought with Israel in Rephidim."

The following is one of the many tales designed to show that the observance of the Sabbath is rewarded:

One Joseph, a Jew, who honoured the Sabbath, had a very rich neighbour, who was a firm believer in astrology. He was told by one of the professional astrologers that his wealth would become Joseph's. He therefore sold his estate, and bought with the proceeds a large diamond, which he sewed in his turban, saying, "Joseph can never obtain this." It so happened, however, that while standing one day upon the deck of a ship in which he was crossing the sea, a heavy wind arose and carried the turban from his head. A fish swallowed the diamond, and being caught and exposed for sale in the market, was purchased by Joseph to supply his table on the Sabbath eve. Of course, upon opening it he discovered the diamond.

Rabbi Ishmael, the son of Joshua, was asked, "How did the rich people of the land of Israel become so wealthy?" He answered, "They gave their tithes in due season, as it is written, 'Thou shalt give tithes, in order that thou mayest

[p. 259]

become rich." "But," answered his questioner, "tithes were given to the Levites, only while the holy temple existed. What merit did they possess while they dwelt in Babel, that they became wealthy there also?" "Because," replied the Rabbi, "they honoured the Holy Law by expounding it." "But in other countries, where they did not expound the Law, how did they deserve wealth?" "By honouring the Sabbath," was the answer.

Rabbi Achiya, the son of Abah, said, "I sojourned once in Ludik, and was entertained by a certain wealthy man on the Sabbath day. The table was spread with a sumptuous repast, and the dishes were of silver and gold. Before making a blessing over the meal the master of the house said, 'Unto the Lord belongeth the earth, with all that it contains.' After the blessing he said, 'The heavens are the heavens of the Lord, but the earth hath He given to the children of men.' I said to my host, 'I trust you will excuse me, my dear sir, if I take the liberty of asking you how you have merited this prosperity?' He answered, 'I was formerly a butcher, and I always selected the finest cattle to be killed for the Sabbath, in order that the people might have the best meat on that day. To this, I believe firmly, I owe my prosperity.' I replied, 'Blessed be the Lord, that He hath given thee all this.'"

The Governor Turnusrupis once asked Rabbi Akiba, "What is this day you call the Sabbath more than any other day?" The Rabbi responded, "What art thou more than any other person?" "I am superior to others," he replied, "because the emperor has appointed me governor over them."

Then said Akiba, "The Lord our God, who is greater than your emperor, has appointed the Sabbath day to be holier that the other days."

[p. 260]

Beautiful is the legend of the Sabbath eve.

When man leaves the synagogue for his home an angel of good and an angel of evil accompany him. If he finds the table spread in his house, the Sabbath lamps lighted, and his wife and children in festive garments ready to bless the holy day of rest, then the good angel says:

"May the next Sabbath and all thy Sabbaths be like this. Peace unto this dwelling, peace;" and the angel of evil is forced to say, "Amen!"

But if the house is not ready, if no preparations have been made to greet the Sabbath, if no heart within the dwelling has sung, "Come, my beloved, to meet the bride; the presence of the Sabbath let us receive;" then the angel of evil speaks and says:

"May all thy Sabbaths be like this;'' and the weeping angel of goodness, responds, "Amen!"

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

Rewards and Punishments.

Samson sinned against the Lord through his eyes, as it is written, "I have seen a woman of the daughters of the Philistines. . . . This one take for me, for she pleaseth in my eyes" (Judges 14: 3). Therefore through his eyes was he punished, as it is written, "And the Philistines seized him, and put out his eyes."

Abshalom was proud of his hair. "And like Abshalom there was no man as handsome in all Israel, so that he was greatly praised; from the sole of his foot up to the crown of his head there was no blemish on him. And when he shaved off the hair of his head, and it was at the end of every year that he shaved it off, because it was too heavy do him so that he had to shave it off, he weighed the hair of his head at two hundred shekels by the king's weight," Therefore by his hair was he hanged.

[p. 261]

Miriam waited for Moses one hour (when. he was in the box of bulrushes). Therefore the Israelites waited for Miriam seven days, when she became leprous. "And the people did not set forward until Miriam was brought in again."

Joseph buried his father. "And Joseph went up to bury his father." There was none greater among the children of Israel than Joseph. Moses excelled him afterwards, however; therefore we find, "And Moses took the bones of Joseph with him." But the world has seen none greater than Moses, therefore 'tis written, "And He (God) buried him in the valley."

 

When trouble and sorrow become the portion of Israel, and the fainthearted separate from their people, two angels lay their hands upon the head of him who withdraws, saying, "This one shall not see the comfort of the congregation."

When trouble comes to the congregation it is not right for a man to say, "I will go home; I will eat and drink; and things shall be peaceful to me;" 'tis of such a one that the holy book speaks, saying, "And behold these is gladness and joy; slaying of oxen, and killing of sheep; eating of flesh, and drinking of wine. 'Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we must die.' And it was revealed in my ears by the Lord of Hosts; surely the iniquity shall not be forgiven ye until ye die" (Isaiah 22: 13).

Our teacher, Moses, always bore his share in the troubles of the congregation, as it is written, "They took a stone and put it under him" (Exodus 17: 12). Could they not have given him a chair or a cushion? But then he said, "Since the Israelites are in trouble (during the war with Amalek) lo, I will bear my part with them, for he who bears his

[p. 262]

portion of the burden will live to enjoy the hour of consolation. Woe to the one who thinks, 'Ah, well, I will neglect my duty; who can know whether I bear my part or not;' even the stones of his house, aye, the limbs of the trees, shall testify against him, as it is written, 'For the stones will cry from the wall, and the limbs of the trees will testify."'

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

Trades.

Rabbi Meir said, "When a man teaches his son a trade, he should pray to the Possessor of the world, the Dispenser of wealth and poverty; for in every trade and pursuit of life both the rich and the poor are to be found. It is folly for one to say, 'This is a bad trade, it will not afford me a living;' because he will find many well to do in the same occupation. Neither should a successful man boast and say, 'This is a great trade, a glorious art, it has made me wealthy because many working in the same line as himself have found but poverty. Let all remember that everything is through the infinite mercy and wisdom of God."

Rabbi Simon, the son of Eleazer, said, "Hast thou ever noted the fowls of the air and beasts of the field how easily their maintenance is provided for them; and yet they were only created to serve me. Now should not I find a livelihood with even less trouble, for I was made to serve my fellow-creatures? But, alas! I sinned against my Creator, therefore am I punished with poverty and obliged to labour."

Rabbi Judah said, "Most mule-drivers are cruel. They beat their poor beasts unmercifully. Most camel-drivers are upright. They travel through deserts and dangerous places, and have time for meditation and thoughts of God. The majority of seamen are religious. Their daily peril makes them so. The best doctors are deserving of punishment.

[p. 263]

[paragraph continues] In the pursuit of knowledge they experiment on their patients, and often with fatal results. The best of butchers deserve to be rated with the Amalekites, they are accustomed to blood and cruelty; as it is written of the Amalekites, 'How he met thee by the way and smote the hindmost of thee, and that were feeble behind thee, when thou vast faint and weary.'"

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

Death.

Man is born with his hands clenched; he dies with his hands wide open. Entering life he desires to grasp everything; leaving the world, all that he possessed has slipped away.

Even as a fox is man; as a fox which seeing a fine vineyard lusted after its grapes. But the palings were placed at narrow distances, and the fox was too bulky to creep between them. For three days he fasted, and when he had grown thin he entered into the vineyard. He feasted upon the grapes, forgetful of the morrow, of all things but his enjoyment; and lo, he had again grown stout and was unable to leave the scene of his feast. So for three days more he fasted, and when he had again grown thin, he passed through the palings and stood outside the vineyard, meagre as when he entered.

So with man; poor and naked he enters the world, poor and naked does he leave.

Very expressive is the legend, one of many woven around the name of Alexander.

He wandered to the gates of Paradise and knocked for entrance,

"Who knocks?" demanded the guardian angel.

"Alexander."

Who is Alexander?"

[p. 264]

"Alexander--the Alexander--Alexander the Great--the conqueror of the world."

"We know him not," replied the angel; "this is the Lord's gate, only the righteous enter here."

Alexander begged for something to prove that he had reached the gates of Paradise, and a small piece of a skull was given to him. He showed it to his wise men, who placed it in one scale of a balance. Alexander poured gold and silver into the other scale, but the small bone weighed heavier; he poured in more, adding his crown jewels, his diadem; but still the bone outweighed them all. Then one of the wise men, taking a grain of dust from the ground placed that upon the bone, and lo, the scale flew up.

The bone was that which surrounds the eye of man; the eye of man which naught can satisfy save the dust which covers it in the grave.

 

When the righteous dies 'tis earth that meets with loss. The jewel will ever be a jewel, but it has passed from the possession of its former owner. Well may the loser weep.

Life is a passing shadow, say the Scriptures. The shadow of a tower or a tree; the shadow which prevails for a time? No; even as the shadow of a bird in its flight, it passeth from our sight, and neither bird nor shadow remains.

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

Funeral Sermon over a dead Rabbi.

"My lover goes down into his garden, to the beds of spices, to wander about in the garden and pluck roses" (Song of Songs).

The world is the garden of my lover, and he my lover is the King of kings. Like a bed of fragrant spices is Israel, the sweet savour of piety ascends on high, the perfume of

[p. 265]

learning lingers on the passing breeze, and the, bed of beauty is fenced round by gentle peace. The plants flourish and put forth leaves, leaves giving grateful shelter to those who suffer from the heats and disappointment of life, and my lover seeking the most beautiful blossom, plucks the roses, the students of the law, whose belief is their delight.

When the devouring flames seize upon the cedar, shall not the lowly hyssop fear and tremble? When anglers draw the great leviathan from his mighty deeps, what hope have the fish of the shallow pond? When the fishing-line is dropped into the dashing torrent, can they feel secure, the waters of the purling brook?

Mourn for those who are left; mourn not for the one taken by God from earth. He has entered into the eternal rest, while we are bowed with sorrow.

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 266]

  

III.

  

INCIDENTS IN THE LIVES OF THE RABBIS.

Rabbi Akiba.

IT is man's duty to thank God for the occurrence of evil even as for the occurrence of good, as it is written, "And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy might."

"With all thy heart." With thy propensities towards good and towards evil.

"With all thy soul." Even though he should demand thy life.

"With all thy might." All thy personal possessions. No matter what measure be meted to thee, for good and for evil, be sincerely thankful.

Rabbi Akiba was once travelling through the country, and he had with him an ass, a rooster, and a lamp.

At nightfall he reached a village where he sought shelter for the night without success.

"All that God does is done well," said the Rabbi, and proceeding towards the forest he resolved to pass the night there. He lit his lamp, but the wind extinguished it. "All that God does is done well," he said. The ass and the rooster were devoured by wild beasts; yet still he said no more than "All that God dues is well done."

Next day he learned that a troop of the enemy's soldiers had passed through the forest that night. If the ass had brayed, if the rooster had crowed, or if the soldiers had

[p. 267]

seen his light he would surely had met with death, therefore he said again, "All that God does is done well."

 

It happened once when Rabbi Gamliel, Rabbi Eleazer, the son of Azaria, Rabbi Judah, and Rabbi Akiba were walking together, they heard the shouts and laughter and joyous tones of a multitude of people at a distance. Four of the Rabbis wept; but Akiba laughed aloud.

"Akiba," said the others to him, "wherefore laugh? These heathens who worship idols live in peace, and are merry, while our holy city lies in ruins; weep, do not laugh." '

"For that very reason I laugh, and am glad," answered Rabbi Akiba. "If God allows these who transgress His will to live happily on earth, how infinitely great must be the happiness which He has stored up in the world to come for those who observe His commands."

Upon another occasion these same Rabbis went up to Jerusalem. Whey they reached Mount Zophim and saw the desolation about them they rent their garments, and when they reached the spot where the Temple had stood and saw a fox run out from the very site of the holy of holies four of them wept bitterly; but again Rabbi Akiba appeared merry. His comrades again rebuked him for this, to them, unseemly state of feeling.

"Ye ask me why I am merry," said he; "come now, tell me why ye weep?"

'Because the Bible tells us that a stranger (one not descended from Aaron) who approaches the holy of holies shall be put to death, and now behold the foxes make of it a dwelling-place. Why should we not weep?"

"Ye weep," returned Akiba, "from the very reason which causes my heart to be glad. Is it not written, 'And testify

[p. 268]

to me, ye faithful witnesses, Uriah, the priest, and Zachariah, the son of Berachiahu?' Now what hath Uriah to do with Zachariah? Uriah lived during the existence of the first Temple, and Zachariah during the second. Know ye not that the prophecy of Uriah is compared to the prophecy of Zachariah. From Uriah's prophecy we find, 'Therefore for your sake Zion will be ploughed as is a field, and Jerusalem will be a desolation, and the mount of Zion shall be as a forest;' and in Zachariah we find, 'They will sit, the old men and women, in the streets of Jerusalem?' Before the prophecy of Uriah was accomplished I might have doubted the truth of Zachariah's comforting words; but now that one has been accomplished, I feel assured that the promises to Zachariah will also come to pass, therefore am I glad."

"Thy words comfort us, Akiba," answered his companions. "May God ever provide us comfort."

Still another time, when Rabbi Eleazer was very sick and his friends and scholars were weeping for him, Rabbi Akiba appeared happy, and asked them why they wept. "Because," they replied, "our beloved Rabbi is lying between life and death." "Weep not, on the contrary be glad therefor," he answered. "If his wine did not grow sour, if his flag was not stricken down, I might think that on earth he received the reward of his righteousness; but now that I see my teacher suffering for what evil he may have committed in this world, I rejoice. He hath taught us that the most righteous among us commits some sin, therefore in the world to come he will have peace."

 

While Rabbi Eleazer was sick, the four elders, Rabbi Tarphon, Rabbi Joshua, Rabbi Eleazer, the son of Azoria and Rabbi Akiba, called upon him.

"Thou art better to Israel than the raindrops to earth,

[p. 269]

or the raindrops are for this world only, whilst thou, my teacher, have helped the ripening of fruit for this world and the next," said Rabbi Tarphon.

"Thou art better to Israel than the sun, for the sun is for this world alone; thou hast given light for this world and the next," said Rabbi Joshua.

Then spoke Rabbi Eleazer, the son of Azoria:

"Thou art better to Israel," said he, "than father and mother to man. They bring him into the world, but thou, my teacher, showest him the way into the world of immortality."

Then said Rabbi Akiba:

"It is well that man should be afflicted, for his distresses atone for his sins."

"Does the Bible make such an assertion, Akiba?" asked his teacher.

"Yes," answered Akiba. "'Twelve years old was Manassah when he became king, and fifty-and-five years did he reign in Jerusalem, and he did what was evil in the eyes of the Lord' (Kings). Now, how was this? Did Hezekiah teach the law to the whole world and not to his son Manassah? Assuredly not; but Manassah paid no attention to his precepts, and neglected the word of God until he was afflicted with bodily pain, as it is written (Chron. 33: 10), 'And the Lord spoke to Manassah and to his people, but they listened not, wherefore the Lord brought over them the captains of the armies belonging to the king of Assyria, and they took Manassah prisoner with chains, and bound him with fetters, and led him off to Babylon; and when he was in distress he besought the Lord his God, and humbled himself greatly before the God of his fathers. And he prayed to Him, and He permitted Himself to be entreated by him and heard his supplication, and brought

[p. 270]

him back to Jerusalem unto his kingdom. Then did Manassah feel conscious that the Lord is indeed the (true) God.'

"Now, what did the king of Assyria to Manassah? He placed him in a copper barrel and had a fire kindled beneath it, and while enduring great torture of his body, Manassah was further tortured in his mind. 'Shall I call upon the Almighty?' he thought. 'Alas! His anger burns against me. To call upon my idols is to call in vain,--alas, alas, what hope remains to me!'

"He prayed to the greatest of his idols, and waited in vain for a reply. He called to the lesser gods, and remained unanswered. Then with trembling heart he addressed the great Eternal.

"'O Eternal! God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and their descendants, the heavens and the earth are the works of Thy hand. Thou didst give to the sea a shore, controlling with a word the power of the mighty deep. Thou art merciful as Thou art great, and Thou hast promised to accept the repentance of those who return to Thee with upright hearts. As numerous are my sins as the sands which cover the seashore. I have done evil before Thee, committing abominations in Thy presence and acting wickedly. Bound with fetters I come before Thee, and on my knees I entreat Thee, in the name of Thy great attributes of mercy, to compassionate my suffering and my distress. Pardon me, oh Lord, forgive me. Do not utterly destroy me because of my transgressions. Let not my punishment eternally continue. Though I am unworthy of Thy goodness, O Lord, yet save me in Thy mercy. Henceforth will I praise Thy name all the days of my life, for all Thy creatures delight in praising Thee, and unto Thee is the greatness and the goodness for ever and ever, Selah!"

[p. 271]

"God heard this prayer, even as it is written, 'And He permitted Himself to be entreated by him, and brought him back to Jerusalem unto his kingdom.'"

"From which we may learn," continued Akiba, "that affliction is an atonement for sin."

 

Said Rabbi Eleazer, the great, "It is commanded 'thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy soul and with all that is loved by thee.'

"Does not 'with all thy soul' include 'with all that is loved by thee?'

"Some people love themselves more than they love their money; to them 'tis said, 'with all thy soul;' while for those who love their money more than themselves the commandment reads, 'with all that is loved by thee.'"

But Rabbi Akiba always expounded the words, "with all thy soul," to mean "even though thy life be demanded of thee."

When the decree was issued forbidding the Israelites to study the law, what did Rabbi Akiba?

He installed many congregations secretly, and in secret lectured before them.

Then Papus, the son of Juda, said to him:

"Art not afraid, Akiba? Thy doings may be discovered, and thou wilt be punished for disobeying the decree."

"Listen, and I will relate to thee a parable," answered Akiba. "A fox, walking by the river side, noticed the fishes therein swimming and swimming to and fro, never ceasing; so he said to them, 'Why are ye hurrying, what do ye fear?'

"'The nets of the angler,' they replied.

"'Come, then,' said the fox, 'and live with me on dry land.'

[p. 272]

"But the fishes laughed.

"'And art thou called the wisest of the beasts?' they exclaimed; 'verily thou art the most foolish. If we are in danger even in our element, how much greater would be our risk in leaving it.'

"It is the same with us. We are told of the law that it is 'our life and the prolongation of our days.' This is it when things are peaceful with us; how much greater is our need of it then in times like these?"

It is said that it was but shortly after this when Rabbi Akiba was imprisoned for teaching the law, and in the prison in which he was incarcerated he found Papus, who had been condemned for some other offence.

Rabbi Akiba said to him:

"Papus, what brought thee here?"

And Papus replied:

"Joy, joy, to thee, that thou art imprisoned for studying God's law; but woe, woe is mine that I am here through vanity."

When Rabbi Akiba was led forth to execution, it was just at the time of the morning service.

"'Hear, oh Israel! the Lord our God, the Lord is one,'" he exclaimed in a loud and firm voice.

The torturers tore his flesh with pointed cards, yet still he repeated, "The Lord is one."

"Always did I say," he continued, "that 'with all thy soul,' meant even though life should be demanded of thee, and I wondered whether I should ever be able to so observe it. Now see, to-day, I do so; 'the Lord is one.'"

With these words he died.

Happy art thou, Rabbi Akiba, that thy soul went out in purity for the happiness of all futurity is thine.

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 273]

Elishah ben Abuyah.

Elishah ben Abuyah, a most learned man, became in after-life an apostate. Rabbi Meir had been one of his pupils, and he never failed in the great love which he bore for his teacher.

It happened upon one occasion when Rabbi Meir was lecturing in the college, that some students entered and said to him:

"Thy teacher, Elishah, is riding by on horseback on this holy Sabbath day."

Rabbi Meir left the college, and overtaking Elishah walked along by his horse's side. The latter saluted him, and asked:

"What passage of Scripture hast thou been expounding?"

"From the book of Job," replied Rabbi Meir. "'The Lord blessed the latter days of Job more than the beginning.'"

"And how didst thou explain the verse?" said Elishah.

"That the Lord increased his wealth twofold."

"But thy teacher, Akiba, said not so," returned Elishah.

"He said that the Lord blessed the latter days of Job with twofold of penitence and good deeds."

"How," inquired Rabbi Meir, "wouldst thou explain the verse, 'Better is the end of a thing than the beginning thereof.' If a man buys merchandise in his youth and meets with losses, is it likely that he will recover his substance in old age? Or, if a person studies God's law in his youth and forgets it, is it probable that it will return to his memory in his latter days?"

"Thy teacher, Akiba, said not so," replied Elishah; "he explained the verse, 'Better is the end of a thing when the beginning was good My own life proves the soundness of

[p. 274]

this explanation. On the day when I was admitted into the covenant of Abraham, my father made a great feast. Some of his visitors sang, some of them danced, but the Rabbis conversed upon God's wisdom and His laws. This latter pleased my father, Abuyah, and he said, 'When my son grows up ye shall teach him and he shall become like ye; he did not cause me to study for God's sake but only to make his name famous through me.' Therefore, in my latter days have I become wicked and an apostate; and now, return home."

"And wherefore?"

"Because, on the Sabbath day, thou art allowed to go so far and no farther, and I have reckoned the distance thou hast travelled with me by the footsteps of my horse."

"If thou art so wise," said Rabbi Meir, "as to reckon the distance I may travel by the footsteps of thy horse, and so particular for my sake, why not return to God and repent of thy apostacy?"

Elishah answered:

"It is not in my power. I rode upon horseback once on the Day of Atonement; yea, when it fell upon the Sabbath, and when I passed the synagogue I heard a voice crying, 'Return, oh backsliding children, return to me and I will return to ye; except Elishah, the son of Abuyah, he knew his Master and yet rebelled against Him.'"

What caused such a learned man as Elishah to turn to evil ways?

It is reported that once while studying the law in the vale of Genusan, he saw a man climbing a tree. The man found a bird's-nest in the tree, and taking the mother with the young ones he still departed in peace. He saw another man who finding a bird's-nest followed the Bible's command and took the young only, allowing the mother to fly away; and

[p. 275]

yet a serpent stung him as he descended and he died. "Now," thought he, "where is the Bible's truth and promises? Is it not written, 'And the young thou mayest take to thyself, but the mother thou shalt surely let go, that it may he well with thee and that thou mayest live many days.' Now, where is the long life to this man who followed the precept, while the one who transgressed it is unhurt?"

He had not heard how Rabbi Akiba expounded this verse, that the days would be long in the future world where all is happiness.

There is also another reason given as the cause for Elishah's backsliding and apostacy.

During the fearful period of religious persecution, the learned Rabbi Judah, whose life had been passed in the study of the law and the practice of God's precepts, was delivered into the power of the cruel torturer. His tongue was placed in a dog's mouth and the dog bit it off.

So Elishah said, "If a tongue which uttered naught but truth be so used, and a learned, wise man be so treated, of what use is it to avoid having a lying tongue and being ignorant. Lo, if these things are allowed, there is surely no reward for the righteous, and no resurrection for the dead."

When Elishah waxed old he was taken sick, and Rabbi Meir, learning of the illness of his aged teacher, called upon him.

"Oh return, return unto thy God," entreated Rabbi Meir.

"What!" exclaimed Elishah, "return! and could He receive my penitence, the penitence of an apostate who has so rebelled against Him?"

"Is it not written," said Meir, "'Thou turnest man to contrition?' (Psalm 90: 3). No matter how the soul of man may be crushed, he can still turn to his God and find relief."

[p. 276]

Elishah listened to these words, wept bitterly and died. Not many years after his death his daughters came, poverty stricken, asking relief from the colleges. "Remember," said they, "the merit of our father's learning, not his conduct."

The colleges listened to the appeal and supported the daughters of Elishah.

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

Rabbi Simon.

Rabbi Judah, Rabbi Joseh, and Rabbi Simon were conversing one day, when Judah ben Gerim entered the apartment and sat down with the three. Rabbi Judah was speaking in a complimentary strain of the Gentiles (Romans). "See," said he, "how they have improved their cities, how beautiful they have made them, and how much they have done for the comfort and convenience of the citizens; bath-houses, bridges, fine broad streets, surely much credit is due them."

"Nay," answered Rabbi Simon, "all that they have done has been from a selfish motive. The bridges bring them in a revenue, for all who use them are taxed; the bath-houses are for their personal adornment--'tis all selfishness, not patriotism."

Judah ben Gerim repeated these remarks to his friends, and finally they reached the ears of the emperor. He would not allow them to pass unnoticed. He ordered that Judah, who had spoken well of the nation, should be advanced in honour; that Joseh, who had remained silent instead of seconding the assertions, should be banished to Zipore; and that Simon, who had disputed the compliment, should be put to death.

The latter with his son fled and concealed himself in the college when this at became known to him. For some

[p. 277]

time he remained there comparatively safe, his wife bringing his meals daily. But when the officers were directed to make diligent search he became afraid, lest through the indiscretion of his wife his place of concealment might be discovered.

"The mind of woman is weak and unsteady," said he, "perhaps they may question and confuse her, and thus may death come upon me."

So leaving the city, Simon and his son took refuge in a lonely cave. Near its mouth some fruit trees grew, supplying them with food, and a spring of pure water bubbled from rocks in the immediate vicinity. For thirteen years Rabbi Simon lived here, until the emperor died and his decrees were repealed. He then returned to the city.

When Rabbi Phineas, his son-in-law, heard of his return, he called upon him at once, and noticing an apparent neglect in the mental and physical condition of his relative, he exclaimed, "Woe, woe! that I meet thee in so sad a condition!"

But Rabbi Simon answered:

"Not so; happy is it that thou findest me in this condition, for thou findest me no less righteous than before. God has preserved me, and my faith in Him, and thus hereafter shall I explain the verse of Scripture, 'And Jacob came perfect.' Perfect in his physical condition, perfect in his temporal condition, and perfect in his knowledge of God."

______________

Antoninus, in conversing with Rabbi Judah, said to him:

"In the future world, when the soul comes before the Almighty Creator for judgment, may it not find a plea of excuse for worldly wickedness in saying, 'Lo, the sin is the body's; I am now free from the body; the sins were not mine?'"

[p. 278]

Rabbi Judah answered, "Let me relate to thee a parable. A king had an orchard of fine figs, which he prized most highly. That the fruit might not be stolen or abused, he paced two watchers in the orchard, and that they themselves might not he tempted to partake of the fruit, he chose one of them a blind man, and the other one lame. But lo, when they were in the orchard, the lame man said to his companion, 'I see very fine figs; they are luscious and tempting; carry me to the tree, that we may both partake of them."

"So the blind man carried the lame man, and they ate of the figs.

"When the king entered the orchard he noticed at once that his finest figs were missing, and he asked the watchers what had become of them.

"The blind man answered:

'I know not. I could not steal them; I am blind; I cannot even see them.'

"And the lame man answered:

"'Neither could I steal them; I could not approach the tree.'

"But the king was wise, and he answered:

'Lo, the blind carried the lame,' and he punished them accordingly.

"So is it with us. The world is the orchard in which the Eternal King has placed us, to keep watch and ward, to till its soil and care for its fruit. But the soul and body are the man; if one violates the precepts so does the other, and after death the soul may not say, 'It is the fault of the body to which I was tied that I committed sins;' no, God will do as did the owner of the orchard, as it is written:

'He shall call from the heaven above, and to the earth to judge his people' (Psalms).

[p. 279]

"He shall call from the 'heaven above,' which is the soul, and to the 'earth below,' which is the body, mixing with the dust from whence it sprung."

______________

A heathen said to Rabbi Joshua, "Thou believest that God knows the future?"

"Yes," replied the Rabbi.

"Then," said the questioner, "wherefore is it written, 'The Lord said, I will destroy everything which I have made, because it repenteth me that I have made them?' Did not the Lord foresee that man would become corrupt?"

Then said Rabbi Joshua, "Hast thou children?"

"Yes," was the answer.

"When a child was born, what didst thou?"

"I made a great rejoicing."

"What cause hadst thou to rejoice? Dost thou not know that they must die?"

"Yes, that is true; but in the time of enjoyment I do not think of the future."

"So was it with God," said Rabbi Joshua. "He knew that men would sin; still that knowledge did not prevent the execution of his beneficent purpose to create them."

______________

One of the emperors said to Rabon Gamliel:

"Your God is a thief, as it is written, 'And the Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam, and he slept. And He took a rib from Adam.'"

The Rabbi's daughter said, "Let me answer this aspersion. Last night robbers broke into my room, and stole therefrom a silver vessel: but they left a golden one in its stead."

The emperor replied, "I wish that such thieves would come every night."

[p. 280]

Thus was it with Adam; God took a rib from him, but placed a woman instead of it.

______________

Rabbi Joshua, of Saknin, said in the name of Rabbi Levi, "The Lord considered from what part of the man he should form woman; not from the head, lest she should be proud; not from the eyes, lest she should wish to see everything; not from the mouth, lest she might be talkative; nor from the ear, lest she should wish to hear everything; nor from the heart, lest she should be jealous; nor from the hand, lest she should wish to find out everything; nor from the feet, in order that she might not be a wanderer; only from the most hidden place, that is covered even when a man is naked--namely, the rib."

______________

The scholars of Rabbi Simon ben Jochai once asked him:

"Why did not the Lord give to Israel enough manna to suffice them for a year, at one time, instead of meting it out daily?"

The Rabbi replied:

"I will answer ye with a parable. There was once a king who had a son to whom he gave a certain yearly allowance, paying the entire sum for his year's support on one appointed day. It soon happened that this day on which the allowance was due, was the only day in the year when the father saw his son. So the king changed his plan, and gave his son each day his maintenance for that day only, and then the son visited his father with the return of each day's sun.

"So was it with Israel; each father of a family, dependent upon the manna provided each day by God's bounty, for his support and the support of his family, naturally had his mind devoted to the Great Giver and Sustainer of life"

______________

[p. 281]

When Rabbi Eleazer was sick his scholars visited him, and said, "Rabbi, teach us the way of life, that we may inherit eternity."

The Rabbi answered, "Give honour to your comrades. Know to whom you pray. Restrain your children from frivolous conversation, and place them among the learned men, in order that they may acquire wisdom. So may you merit life in the future world."

When Rabbi Jochanan was sick his scholars also called upon him. When he beheld them he burst into tears.

"Rabbi!" they exclaimed, "Light of Israel! The chief pillar! Why weep?"

The Rabbi answered, "Were I to be brought before a king of flesh and blood, who is here to-day and to-morrow in the grave; who may be angry with me, but not for ever; who may imprison me, but not for ever; who may kill me, but only for this world; whom I may sometimes bribe; even then I would fear. But now, I am to appear before the King of kings, the Most Holy One, blessed be He, who lives through all eternity. If He is wroth, it is for ever; if He imprisons me, it is for ever; if He slays me, it is for the future world; and I can bribe Him neither with words nor money. Not only this, two paths are before me, one leading to punishment, the other to reward, and I know not which one I must travel. Should I not weep?"

______________

The scholars of Rabbi Johanan, the son of Zakai, asked of their teacher this question:

"Wherefore is it, that according to the law, the punishment of a highwayman is not as severe as the punishment of a sneak thief? According to the Mosaic law, if a man steals an ox or a sheep, and kills it or sells it, he is required to restore five oxen for the one ox, and four sheep for the

[p. 282]

one sheep (Exodus 21: 37); but for the highwayman we find, 'When he hath sinned and is conscious of his guilt, he shall restore that he hath taken violently away; he shall restore it and its principal, and the fifth part thereof he shall add thereto.' Therefore, he who commits a highway robbery pays as punishment one-fifth of the same, while a sneak thief is obliged to return five oxen for one ox, and four sheep for one sheep. Wherefore is this?"

"Because," replied the teacher, "the highway robber treats the servant as the master. He takes away violently in the presence of the servant, the despoiled man, and the master--God. But the sneak thief imagines that God's eye is not upon him; He acts secretly, thinking, as the Psalmist says, 'The Lord doth not see, neither will the God of Jacob regard it' (Ps. 94: 5). Listen to a parable. Two men made a feast. One invited all the inhabitants of the city, and omitted inviting the king. The other invited neither the king nor his subjects. Which one deserves condemnation? Certainly the one who invited the subjects and not the king. The people of the earth are God's subjects. The sneak thief fears their eyes, yet he does not honour the eye of the king, the eye of God, which watches all his actions."

Rabbi Meir says, "This law teaches us how God regards industry. If a person steals an ox he must return five in its place, because while the animal was in his unlawful possession it could not work for its rightful owner. A lamb, however, does no labour, and is not profitable that way; therefore he is only obliged to replace it fourfold."

______________

Rabbi Nachman dined with his teacher, Rabbi Yitzchak, and, upon departing after the meal, he said, "Teacher, bless me!"

[p. 283]

"Listen," replied Rabbi Yitzchak. "A traveller was once journeying through the desert, and when weary, hungry, and thirsty, he happened upon an oasis, where grew a fruitful tree, wide-branched, and at the foot of which there gushed a spring of clear, cool water.

"The stranger ate of the luscious fruit, enjoying and resting in the grateful shade, and quenching his thirst in the sparkling water which bubbled merrily at his feet.

"When about to resume his journey, he addressed the tree and spoke as follows:

"'Oh, gracious tree, with what words can I bless thee, and what good can I wish thee? I cannot wish thee good fruit, for it is already thine; the blessing of water is also thine, and the gracious shade thrown by thy beauteous branches the Eternal has already granted thee, for my good and the good of those who travel by this way. Let me pray to God, then, that all thy offspring may be goodly as thyself.'

"So it is with thee, my pupil. How shall I bless thee? Thou art perfect in the law, eminent in the land, respected, and blessed with means. May God grant that all thy off spring may prove goodly as thyself."

______________

A wise man, say the Rabbis, was Gebiah ben Pesisah. When the children of Canaan accused the Israelites of stealing their land, saying, "The land of Canaan is ours, as it is written, 'The land of Canaan and its boundaries belong to the Canaanites,'" and demanded restitution, Gebiah offered to argue the case before the ruler.

Said Gebiah to the Africans, "Ye bring your proof from the Pentateuch, and by the Pentateuch will I refute it, 'Cursed be Canaan; a servant of servants shall he be unto his brethren' (Gen. 9: 25). To whom does the property of

[p. 284]

a slave belong? To his master. Even though the land belonged to ye, through your servitude it became Israel's." "Answer him," said the ruler.

The accusers asked for three days' time to prepare their reply, but at the end of the three days they had vanished.

Then came the Egyptians, saying, "'God gave the Israelites favour in the eyes of the Egyptians, and they lent them gold and silver.' Now return us the gold and silver which our ancestors lent ye."

Again Gebiah appeared for the sages of Israel.

"Four hundred and thirty years," said he, "did the children of Israel dwell in Egypt. Come, now, pay us the wages of six hundred thousand men who worked for ye foe naught, and we will return the gold and silver."

Then came the children of Ishmael and Ketura, before Alexander of Mukdon, saying, "The land of Canaan is ours, as it is written, 'These are the generations of Ishmael, the son of Abraham;' even as it is written, 'These are the generations of Isaac, the son of Abraham.' One son is equal to the other; come, give us our share."

Again Gebiah appeared as counsel for the sages.

From the Pentateuch, which is your proof, will I confound ye," said he. "Is it not written, 'Abraham gave all that he had to Isaac, but unto the sons of the concubines that Abraham had, Abraham gave gifts.' The man who gives his children their inheritance during his life does not design to give it to them again after his death. To Isaac Abraham left all that he had; to his other children he gave gifts, and sent them away."

______________

Truly a good man, say the Rabbis, was King Munmaz, a descendant of the Hashmonites. During a period of famine

[p. 285]

he gave to the poor the contents of his treasury and the treasury of his father.

His relatives upbraided him for his liberality. "What thy father saved," they exclaimed, "thou hast thrown away."

Then answered Munmaz:

"My father laid up treasure here on earth; I gather it in the heavens above. 'The truth comes forth from the earth, but beneficence looks down from heaven.' My father hoarded it where hands might have been stretched forth for it; I have placed it beyond the reach of human hands. 'Thy throne is established in justice and beneficence.' For my father it produced no fruit, but for me it is bringing forth many fold. 'Say to the righteous it is good; the fruit of their labour they may eat.' My father saved money; I saved life. 'The fruit of the righteous is the tree of life. Who saves lives is a wise man.' My father saved for others; I save for myself; my father saved for this world, but I save for the next. 'Thy beneficence will go before thee; the glory of the Lord will gather thee.'

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 286]

  

PART FOURTH.

  

PROVERBS AND SAYINGS OF THE RABBIS, LEGENDS, &c.

______________

WOE to the children banished from their father's table.

A handful of food will not satisfy the lion, neither can a pit be filled again with its own dust.

Pray to God for mercy until the last shovelful of earth is cast upon thy grave.

Cease not to pray even when the knife is laid upon thy neck.

Open not thy mouth to speak evil.

To be patient is sometimes better than to have much wealth.

The horse fed too liberally with oats becomes unruly.

Happy the pupil whose teacher approves his words.

When the cucumbers are young we may tell whether they will become good for food.

Do not to others what you would not have others do to you.

The ass complains of the cold even in July (Tamuz). First learn and then teach.

Few are they who see their own faults.

A single light answers as well for a hundred men as for one.

Victuals prepared by many cooks will be neither hot nor cold.

[p. 287]

The world is a wedding.

Youth is a wreath of roses.

A myrtle even in the desert remains a myrtle.

Teach thy tongue to say, "I do not know."

The house which opens not to the poor will open to the physician.

The birds of the air despise a miser.

Hospitality is an expression of Divine worship.

Thy friend has a friend, and thy friend's friend has s friend; be discreet.

Do not place a blemish on thine own flesh.

Attend no auctions if thou hast no money.

Rather skin a carcass for pay, in the public streets, than lie idly dependent on charity.

Deal with those who are fortunate.

What is intended for thy neighbour will never be thine.

The weakness of thy walls invites the burglar.

The place honours not the man, 'tis the man who gives honour to the place.

The humblest man is ruler in his own house.

If the fox is king bow before him.

If a word spoken in its time is worth one piece of money, silence in its time is worth two.

Tobias committed the sins and his neighbour received the punishment.

Poverty sits as gracefully upon some people as a red saddle upon a white horse.

Drain not the waters of thy well while other people may desire them.

The doctor who prescribes gratuitously gives a worthless prescription.

The rose grows among thorns.

[p. 288]

The wine belongs to the master, but the waiter receives the thanks.

He who mixes with unclean things becomes unclean himself; he whose associations are pure becomes more holy with each day.

No man is impatient with his creditors.

Make but one sale, and thou art called a merchant.

Mention not a blemish which is thy own, in detraction of thy neighbour.

If certain goods sell not in one city, try another place.

He who reads the letter should execute the message.

A vessel used for holy purposes should not be put to uses less sacred.

Ornament thyself first, then magnify others.

Two pieces of coin in one bag make more noise than a hundred.

Man sees the mote in his neighbour's eye, but knows not of the beam in his own.

The rivalry of scholars advances science.

If thou tellest thy secret to three persons, ten know of it.

When love is intense both find room enough upon one board of the bench; afterwards they may find themselves cramped in a space of sixty cubits.

When wine enters the head the secret flies out.

When a liar speaks the truth he finds his punishment in the general disbelief.

The camel desired horns, and his ears were taken from him.

Sorrow for those who disappear never to be found.

The officer of the king is also a recipient of honours.

He who studies cannot follow a commercial life; neither can the merchant devote his time to study.

There is no occasion to light thy lamp at noontide,

[p. 289]

Let the fruit pray for the welfare of the leaf.

Meat without salt is fit only for the dogs.

Trust not thyself until the day of thy death.

Woe to the country which hath lost its leader; woe to the ship when its captain is no more.

He who increaseth his flesh but multiplieth food for the worms.

The day is short, the labour great, and the workman slothful.

Be yielding to thy superior; be affable towards the young; be friendly with all mankind.

Silence is the fence round wisdom.

Without law, civilisation perishes.

Every man will surely have his hour.

Rather be the tail among lions than the head among foxes.

Into the well which supplies thee with water cast no stones.

Many a colt's skin is fashioned to the saddle which its mother bears.

Truth is heavy, therefore few care to carry it.

Say little and do much.

He who multiplieth words will likely come to sin.

Sacrifice thy will for others, that they may be disposed to sacrifice their wills for thee.

Study to-day, delay not.

Look not upon thy prayers as on a task; let thy supplications be sincere.

He who is loved by man is loved by God.

Honour the sons of the poor; they give to science its splendour.

Do not live near a pious fool.

A small coin in a large jar makes a great noise.

[p. 290]

Use thy noble vase to-day; to-morrow it may break.

The cat and the rat make peace over a carcass.

He who walks each day over his estate finds a coin daily.

The dog follows thee for the crumbs in thy pocket.

The soldiers fight, and the kings are heroes.

When the ox is down many are the butchers.

Descend a step in choosing thy wife; ascend a step in choosing thy friend.

Beat the gods and their priests will tremble.

The sun will set without thy assistance.

Hold no man responsible for his utterances in times of grief.

One man eats, another says grace.

He who curbs his wrath merits forgiveness for his sins.

Commit a sin twice and it will not seem to thee a crime.

While our love was strong we lay on the edge of a sword, now a couch sixty yards wide is too narrow for us.

Study is more meritorious than sacrifice.

Jerusalem was destroyed because the instruction of the young was neglected.

The world is saved by the breath of school children.

Even to rebuild the Temple, the schools must not be closed.

Blessed is the son who has studied with his father, and blessed the father who has instructed his son.

Avoid wrath and thou wilt avoid sin; avoid intemperance and thou wilt not provoke Providence.

When others gather, do thou disperse; when others disperse, gather.

When thou art the only purchaser, then buy; when other buyers are present, be thou nobody.

The foolish man knows not an insult, neither does a dead man feel the cutting of a knife.

[p. 291]

The cock and the owl both await daylight. "The light," says the cock," brings me delight; but what in the world art thou waiting for?"

The thief who finds no opportunity to steal, considers himself an honest man.

A Galilean said, "When the shepherd is angry with his flock, he appoints for its leader a blind bellwether."

Though it is not incumbent upon thee to complete the work, thou must not therefore cease from pursuing it. If the work is great, great will be thy reward, and thy Master is faithful in His payments.

There are three crowns: of the law, the priesthood, and the kingship; but the crown of a good name is greater than them all.

Who gains wisdom? He who is willing to receive instruction from all sources. Who is the mighty man? He who subdueth his temper. Who is rich? He who is content with his lot. Who is deserving of honour? He who honoureth mankind.

Despise no man and deem nothing impossible; every man hath his hour and every thing its place.

Iron breaks stone; fire melts iron; water extinguishes fire; the clouds consume water; the storm dispels clouds; an withstands the storm; fear conquers man; wine banishes fear; sleep overcomes wine, and death is the master of sleep; but "charity," says Solomon, "saves even from death."

How canst thou escape sin? Think of three things: whence thou comest, whither thou goest, and before whom thou must appear. The scoffer, the liar, the hypocrite, and the slanderer can have no share in the future world of bliss. To slander is to commit murder.

[p. 292]

Repent the day before thy death. [*1]

Ten measures of wisdom came into the world; the law of Israel received nine measures, and the balance of the world one. Ten measures of beauty came into the world; Jerusalem received nine measures, and the rest of the world one.

Rabbi Simon said:

"The world stands on three pillars: law, worship, and charity."

Rabbi Ada said:

"When he who attends the synagogue regularly is prevented from being present, God asks for him."

Rabbi Simon, the son of Joshua, said:

"His enemies will humble themselves before the one who builds a place of worship."

Rabbi Lakish said:

"He who is able to attend synagogue, and "neglects to do so, is a bad neighbour."

Rabbi Jose said:

"One need not stand upon a high place to pray, for it is written, 'Out of the depths have I called unto Thee, oh Lord'" (Ps. 30: 1). The same Rabbi prohibits moving about or talking during the progress of prayers, enlarging on Solomon's advice, "Keep thy foot when thou goest into the house of the Lord, and be more ready to hear than to offer the sacrifice of fools" (Feel. 5: 1).

Rabbi Chia, the son of Abba, said:

[p. 293]

"To pray loudly is not a necessity of devotion; when we pray we must direct our hearts towards heaven."

When our ancestors in the wilderness were saved from death by gazing upon the brazen serpent, it was not the serpent which killed or preserved. It was the trustful appeal to the Father in heaven.

Say the Rabbis, "Praise the Lord for the evil as for the good;" and David is given as an example when he said, "I had met with distress and sorrow, I then called on the name of the Lord" (Ps. 116).

Rabbi Ashi said:

"Charity is greater than all."

Rabbi Eliazar said:

"Who gives charity in secret is greater than Moses."

He finds authority for this saying in the words of Moses (Deut. 9: 19), "For I was afraid of the anger," and the words of Solomon (Prov. 21: 14), which he presents as an answer, "A gift given in secret pacifieth anger."

Rabbi Joshua said:

"A miser is as wicked as an idolater."

Rabbi Eliazar said:

"Charity is more than sacrifices."

Rabbi Jochanan said:

"He who gives (charity) becomes rich," or as it is written, "A beneficent soul will be abundantly gratified."

One day a philosopher inquired of Rabbi Akiba, "If your God loves the poor, why does He not support them?"

"God allows the poor to be with us ever," responded Akiba, "that the opportunities for doing good may never fail."

"But," returned the philosopher, "how do you know that this virtue of charity pleases God? If a master punishes his

[p. 294]

slaves by depriving them of food and clothing, does he feel pleased when others feed and clothe them?"

"But suppose, on the other hand," said the Rabbi, "that the children of a tender father, children whom he could no longer justly assist, had fallen into poverty, would he be displeased if kind souls pitied and aided them? We are not the slaves of a hard master. God calls us His children, and Himself we call our Father."

Rabbah said:

"When one stands at the judgment-seat of God these questions are asked:

"'Hast thou been honest in all thy dealings?'

"'Hast thou set aside a portion of thy time for the study of the law?'

"'Hast thou observed the first commandment?'

"'Hast thou, in trouble, still hoped and believed in God?'

"'Hast thou spoken wisely?'"

 

"All the blessings of a household come through the wife, therefore should her husband honour her."

Rab said:

"Men should be careful lest they cause women to weep, for God counts their tears.

"In cases of charity, where both men and women claim relief, the latter should be first assisted. If there should not be enough for both, the men should cheerfully relinquish their claims.

"A woman's death is felt by nobody as by her husband.

"Tears are shed on God's altar for the one who forsakes his first love.

"He who loves his wife as himself, and honours her more than himself, will train his children properly; he will

[p. 295]

meet, too, the fulfilment of the verse, 'And thou shalt know that there is peace in thy tent, and thou wilt look over thy habitation and shall miss nothing'" (Job 5: 24).

Rabbi Jose said:

"I never call my wife 'wife,' but 'home,' for she, indeed, makes my home.

"He who  a knowledge of God, and a knowledge of man, will not easily commit sin.

"The Bible was given us to establish peace.

"He who wrongs his fellow-man, even in so small a coin as a penny, is as wicked as if he should take life.

"He who raises his hand against his fellow in passion is a sinner.

"Be not the friend of one who wears the cloak of a saint to cover the deformities of a fool."

Rabbi Simon said:

"One who gives way to passion is as bad as an idolater.

"Hospitality is as great a virtue as studying the law."

"Never put thyself in the way of temptation," advised Rabbi Judah; "even David could not resist it."

Rabbi Tyra, on being asked by his pupils to tell them the secret which had gained him a happy, peaceful old age, replied, "I have never cherished anger with my family; I have never envied those greater than myself, and I have never rejoiced in the downfall of any one."

"Unhappy is he who mistakes the branch for the tree, the shadow for the substance.

"Thy yesterday is thy past; thy to-day thy future; thy to-morrow is a secret.

"The best preacher is the heart; the best teacher is time; the best book is the world; the best friend is God.

"Life is but a loan to man; death is the creditor who will one day claim it.

[p. 296]

"Understand a man by his own deeds and words. The impressions of others lead to false judgment."

Rabbi Jacob said:

"He through whose agency another has been falsely punished stands outside of heaven's gates."

Rabbi Isaac said:

"The sins of the bad-tempered are greater than his merits."

Rabbi Lakish said:

"The man who sins is foolish as well as wicked."

Rabbi Samuel said:

"The good actions which we perform in this world take form and meet us in the world to come.

"Better to bear a false accusation in silence, than by speaking to bring the guilty to public shame.

"He who can feel ashamed will not readily do wrong.

"There is a great difference between one who can feel ashamed before his own soul and one who is only ashamed before his fellow-man."

Rabbi Akiba said:

"God's covenant with us included work; for the command, 'Six days shalt thou work and the seventh shalt thou rest,' made the 'rest' conditional upon the 'work.'"

Rabbi Simon said, on the same subject:

"God first told Adam to dress the Garden of Eden, and to keep it (Gen. 2: 15), and then permitted him to eat of the fruit of his labour."

Rabbi Tarphon said:

"God did not dwell in the midst of Israel till they had worked to deserve His presence, for he commanded, 'They shall make me a sanctuary, and then I will dwell in the midst of them.'"

[p. 297]

When Jerusalem was in the hands of the Romans, one of their philosophers asked of the Rabbis:

"If your God dislikes idolatry, why does He not destroy the idols and so put temptation out of the way?"

The wise men answered:

"Would you have the sun and the moon destroyed because of the foolish ones who worship them? To change the course of nature to punish sinners, would bring suffering to the innocent also."

In Ecclesiastes 9: 14, we find this verse:

"There was a little city and the men therein were few, and there came against it a great king, and built around it great works of siege; but there was found in it a poor wise man, and he delivered the city by his wisdom."

The sages interpret this verse most beautifully. The "little city" is man, and the "few men" are his different qualities. The "king" who besieged it is evil inclination, and the "great bulwarks" he built around it are "evil deeds." The "poor wise man" who saved the city is the "good actions" which the poorest may readily perform.

Rabbi Judah said:

"He who refuses to teach a precept to his pupil is guilty of theft, just as one who steals from the inheritance of his father; as it is written, 'The law which Moses commanded us is the inheritance of the congregation of Jacob.' (lieut.) But if he teaches him, what is his reward?"

Raba says, "He will obtain the blessing of Joseph."

Rabbi Eleazer said:

"That house where the law is not studied by night should be destroyed.

"The wealthy man who aids not the scholar desirous of studying God's law will not prosper,

[p. 298]

"He who changes his word, saying one thing and doing another, is even as he who serveth idols."

Rabbi Chamah, the son of Papa, said:

"He who eats or drinks and blesses not the Lord, is even as he who stealeth, for it is said, 'The heavens are the heavens of the Lord, and the earth hath He given to the children of men.'"

Rabbi Simon, the son of Lakish, said:

"They who perform one precept in this world will find it recorded for their benefit in the world to come; as it is written, 'Thy righteousness will go before thee, the glory of the Lord will gather thee in.' And the same will be the case, in contrast, with those who sin. For the Bible says, 'Which I commanded thee this day to do them,' to 'do them,' the precepts, to-day, though the reward is not promised to-day; but in the future, ordinances obeyed, will testify in thy favour, for 'thy righteousness will go before thee.'"

The Rabbis pronounced those the "friends of God," who being offended thought not of revenge; who practised good through love for God, and who were cheerful under suffering and difficulties. Of such Isaiah wrote, "They shall shine forth like the sun at noonday."

Love thy wife as thyself; honour her more than thyself. He who lives unmarried, lives without joy. If thy wife is small, bend down to her and whisper in her ear. He who sees his wife die, has, as it were, been present at the destruction of the sanctuary itself. The children of a man who marries for money will prove a curse to him.

He who has more learning than good deeds is like a tree with many branches but weak roots; the first great storm will throw it to the ground. He whose good works are

[p. 299]

greater than his knowledge is like a tree with fewer branches but with strong and spreading roots, a tree which all the winds of heaven cannot uproot.

 

Better is the curse of the righteous man than the blessing of the wicked. Better the curse of Achia, the Shelonite, than the blessing of Bil'am, the son of Beor. Thus did Achia curse the Israelites, "And the Lord will smite Israel as the reed is shaken in the water" (Kings 14: 15). The reed bends but it breaks not, for it groweth by the water, and its roots are strong. Thus did Bil'am bless Israel, "As cedar trees beside the waters." Cedars do not grow beside the waters; their roots are weak, and when strong winds blow they break in pieces.

Footnotes

^292:1 The Rabbi who said, "Repent the day before thy death," was asked by his disciples how they could follow his advice, as man was unable to tell upon what day his death would occur. He answered, "Consider every day thy last; be ever ready with penitence and good deeds."

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

The Desert Island.

A very wealthy man, who was of a kind, benevolent disposition, desired to make his slave happy. He gave him, therefore, his freedom, and presented him with a shipload of merchandise.

"Go," said he, "sail to different countries, dispose of these goods, and that which thou mayest receive for them shall be thy own."

The slave sailed away upon the broad ocean, but before he had been long upon his voyage a storm overtook him; his ship was driven on a rock and went to pieces; all on board were lost, all save this slave, who swam to an island shore near by. Sad, despondent, with naught in the world, he traversed this island, until he approached a large and beautiful city; and many people approached him joyously, shouting, "Welcome! welcome! Long live the king!" They brought a rich carriage, and placing him therein, escorted him to a magnificent palace, where many servants

[p. 300]

gathered about him, clothing him in royal garments, addressing him as their sovereign, and expressing their obedience to his will.

The slave was amazed and dazzled, believing that he was dreaming, and all that he saw, heard, and experienced was mere passing fantasy. Becoming convinced of the reality of his condition, he said to some men about him for whom he experienced a friendly feeling

"How is this? I cannot understand it. That you should thus elevate and honour a man whom you know not, a poor, naked wanderer, whom you have never seen before, making him your ruler, causes me more wonder than I can readily express."

"Sire," they replied, "this island is inhabited by spirits. Long since they prayed to God to send them yearly a son of man to reign over them, and He has answered their prayers. Yearly he sends them a son of man, whom they receive with honour and elevate to the throne; but his dignity and power ends with the year. With its close his royal garments are taken from him, he is placed on board a ship and carried to a vast and desolate island, where, unless he has previously been wise and prepared for this day, he will find neither friend nor subject, and be obliged to pass a weary, lonely, miserable life. Then a new king is selected here, and so year follows year. The kings who preceded thee were careless and indifferent, enjoying their power to the full, and thinking not of the day when it should end. Be wiser thou; let our words find rest within thy heart."

The newly-made king listened attentively to all this, and felt grieved that he should have lost even the time he had already missed for making preparations for his loss of power,

[p. 301]

He addressed the wise man who had spoken, saying, "Advise me, oh, spirit of wisdom, how I may prepare for the days which will come upon me in the future."

"Naked thou earnest to us and naked thou wilt be sent to the desolate island of which I have told thee," replied the other. "At present thou art king, and may do as pleaseth thee; therefore send workmen to this island; let them build houses, till the ground, and beautify the surroundings. The barren soil will be changed into fruitful fields, people will journey there to live, and thou wilt have established a new kingdom for thyself, with subjects to welcome thee in gladness when thou shalt have lost thy power here. The year is short, the work is long; therefore be earnest and energetic."

The king followed this advice. He sent workmen and materials to the desolate island, and before the close of his temporary power it had become a blooming, pleasant, and attractive spot. The rulers who had preceded him had anticipated the day of their power's close with dread, or smothered all thought of it in revelry; but he looked forward to it as a day of joy, when he should enter upon a career of permanent peace and happiness.

The day came; the freed slave, who had been made king, was deprived of his authority; with his power he lost his royal garments; naked he was placed upon a ship, and its sails set for the desolate isle.

When he approached its shores, however, the people whom he had sent there came to meet him with music, song, and great joy. They made him a prince among then, and he lived with them ever after in pleasantness and peace.

The wealthy man of kindly disposition is God, and the slave to whom He gave freedom is the soul which He,

[p. 302]

gives to man. The island at which the slave arrives is the world; naked and weeping he appears to his parents, who are the inhabitants that greet him warmly and make him their king. The friends who tell him of the ways of the country are his "good inclinations." The year of his reign is his span of life, and the desolate island is the future world, which he must beautify by good deeds, "the workmen and material," or else live lonely and desolate for ever.

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

The Emperor and the Aged Man.

The Emperor Adrian, passing through the streets of Tiberias, noticed a very old man planting a fig tree, and pausing, said to him:

"Wherefore plant that tree? If thou didst labour in thy youth, thou shouldst now have a store for thy old age, and surely of the fruit of this tree thou canst not hope to eat."

The old man answered:

"In my youth I worked, and I still work. With God's good pleasure I may e'en partake of the fruit of this tree I plant. I am in His hands."

"Tell me thy age," said the emperor.

"I have lived for a hundred years."

"A hundred years old, and still expect to eat from the fruit of this tree?"

"If such be God's pleasure," replied the old man; "if not, I will leave it for my son, as my father left the fruit of his labour for me."

"Well," said the emperor, "if thou dost live until the figs from this tree are ripe, I pray thee let me know of it."

The aged man lived to partake of that very fruit, and

[p. 303]

remembering the emperor's words, he resolved to visit him So, taking a small basket, he filled it with the choicest figs from the tree, and proceeded on his errand. Telling the palace guard his purpose, he was admitted to the sovereign's presence.

"Well," asked the emperor, "what is thy wish?" The old man replied:

"Lo, I am the old man to whom thou didst say, on the day thou sawest him planting a fig tree, 'If thou livest to eat of its fruit, I pray thee let me know;' and behold I have come and brought thee of the fruit, that thou mayest partake of it likewise."

The emperor was very much pleased, and emptying the man's basket of its figs, he ordered it to be filled with gold coins.

When the old man had departed, the courtiers said to the emperor:

"Why didst thou so honour this old Jew?"

"The Lord hath honoured him, and why not I?" replied the emperor.

Now next door to this old man there lived a woman, who, when she heard of her neighbour's good fortune, desired her husband to try his luck in the same quarter. She filled for him an immense basket with figs, and bidding him put it on his shoulder, said, "Now carry it to the emperor; he loves figs and will fill thy basket with golden coin."

When her husband approached the gates of the palace, he told his errand to the guards, saying, "I brought these figs to the emperor; empty my basket I pray, and fill  up again with gold."

When this was told to the emperor, he ordered the old man to stand in the hallway of the palace, and all who

[p. 304]

passed pelted him with his figs. He returned home wounded and crestfallen to his disappointed wife.

"Never mind, thou hast one consolation," said she; "had they been cocoanuts instead of figs thou mightest have suffered harder raps."

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

Proving a Claim.

A citizen of Jerusalem travelling through the country was taken very sick at an inn. Feeling that he would not recover, he sent for the landlord and said to him, "I am going the way of all flesh. If after my death any party should come from Jerusalem and claim my effects, do not deliver them until he shall prove to thee by three wise acts that he is entitled to them; for I charged my son before starting upon my way, that if death befell me he would be obliged to prove his wisdom before obtaining my possessions."

The man died and was buried according to Jewish rites, and his death was made public that his heirs might appear. When his son learned of his father's decease he started from Jerusalem for the place where he had died. Near the gates of the city he met a man who had a load of wood for sale. This he purchased and ordered it to be delivered at the inn towards which he was travelling. The man from whom he bought it went at once to the inn, and said, "Here is the wood."

"What wood?" returned the proprietor; "I ordered no wood."

"No," answered the woodcutter, "but the man who follows me did; I will enter and wait for him."

Thus the son had provided for himself a welcome whey he should reach the inn, which was his first wise act.

The landlord said to him, "Who art thou?"

[p. 305]

"The son of the merchant who died in thy house," he replied.

They prepared for him a dinner, and placed upon the table five pigeons and a chicken. The master of the house, his wife, two sons, and two daughters sat with him at the table.

"Serve the food," said the landlord.

"Nay," answered the young man; "thy art master, it is thy privilege."

"I desire thee to do this thing; thou art my guest, the merchant's son; pray help the food."

The young man thus entreated divided one pigeon between the sons, another between the two daughters, gave the third to the man and his wife, and kept the other two for himself. This was his second wise act.

The landlord looked somewhat perplexed at this mode of distribution, but said nothing.

Then the merchant's son divided the chicken. He gave to the landlord and his wife the head, to the two sons the legs, to the two daughters the wings, and took the body for himself. This was his third wise act.

The landlord said:

"Is this the way they do things in thy country? I noticed the manner in which thou didst apportion the pigeons, but said nothing; but the chicken, my dear sir! I must really ask thee thy meaning."

Then the young man answered:

"I told thee that it was not my place to serve the food, nevertheless when thou didst insist I did the best I could, and I think I have succeeded. Thyself, thy wife, and one pigeon make three; thy two sons and one pigeon make three; thy two daughters and one pigeon make three; and myself and two pigeons make three also, therefore is it fairly

[p. 306]

done. As regards the chicken, I gave to thee and thy wife the head, because ye are the heads of the family; I gave to each of thy sons a leg, because they are the pillars of the family, preserving always the family name; I gave to each of thy daughters a wing, because in the natural course of events they will marry, take wing, and fly away from the home-nest. I took the body of the chicken because it looks like a ship, and in a ship I came here and in a ship I hope to return. I am the son of the merchant who died in thy house; give me the property of my dead father."

"Take it and go," said the landlord. And giving him his father's possessions the young man departed in peace.

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

A Payment with Interest.

A certain man, a native of Athina (a city near Jerusalem), visited the city of Jerusalem, and after leaving it, ridiculed the place and its inhabitants. The Jerusalemites were very wroth at being made the subjects of his sport, and they induced one of their citizens to travel to Athina, to induce the man to return to Jerusalem, which would give them an opportunity to punish his insolence.

The citizen thus commissioned reached Athina, and very shortly fell in with the man whom he had come to meet. Walking through the streets together one day, the man from Jerusalem said, "See, the string of my shoe is broken; take me, I pray, to the shoemaker."

The shoemaker repaired the string, and the man paid him a coin more in value than the worth of the shoes.

Next day, when walking with the same man, he broke the string of his other shoe, and going to the shoemaker, he paid him the same large sum for repairing that.

"Why," said the man of Athina, "shoes must be very

[p. 307]

dear in Jerusalem, when thou payest such a price but for repairing a string."

"Yes," answered the other; "they bring nine ducats, and even in the cheapest times from seven to eight."

"Then it would be a profitable employment for me to take shoes from my city and sell them in thine."

"Yes, indeed; and if thou wilt but let me know of thy corning I will put thee in the way of customers."

So the man of Athina, who had made merry over the Jerusalemites, bought a large stock of shoes and set out for Jerusalem, informing his friend of his coming. The latter started to meet him, and greeting him before he came to the gates of the city, said to him:

"Before a stranger may enter and sell goods in Jerusalem, he must shave his head and blacken his face. Art thou ready to do this?"

"And why not," replied the other, "as long as I have a prospect of large profits; why should I falter or hesitate at so slight a thing as that?"

So the stranger, shaving the hair from his head and blackening his face (by which all Jerusalem knew him as the man who had ridiculed the city), took up his place in the market, with his wares spread before him.

Buyers paused before his stall, and asked him:

"How much for the shoes?"

"Ten ducats a pair," he answered; "or I may sell for nine; but certainly for not less than eight."

This caused a great laugh and uproar in the market, and the stranger was driven from it in derision and his shoes thrown after him.

Seeking the Jerusalemite who had deceived him, he said

"Why hast thou so treated me? did I so to thee in Athina?"

[p. 308]

"Let this be a lesson to thee," answered the Jerusalemite. "I do not think thou wilt be so ready to make sport of us in the future."

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

The Weasel and the Well.

A young man, upon his journeys through the country, fell in with a young woman, and they became mutually attached. When the young man was obliged to leave the neighbour-hood of the damsel's residence, they met to say "good-by." During the parting they pledged a mutual faith, and each promised to wait until, in the course of time, they might be able to marry. "Who will be the witness of our betrothal?" said the young man. Just then they saw a weasel run past them and disappear in the wood. "See," he continued, "this weasel and this well of water by which we are standing shall be the witnesses of our betrothal;" and so they parted. Years passed, the maiden remained true, but the youth married. A son was born to him, and grew up the delight of his parents. One day while the child was playing he became tired, and lying upon the ground fell asleep. A weasel bit him in the neck, and he bled to death. The parents were consumed with grief by this calamity, and it was not until another son was given them that they forgot their sorrow. But when this second child was able to walk alone it wandered without the house, and bending over the well, looking at its shadow in the water, lost its balance and was drowned. Then the father recollected his perjured vow, and his witnesses, the weasel and the well. He told his wife of the circumstance, and she agreed to a divorce. He then sought the maiden to whom he had promised marriage, and found her still awaiting his return. He told her how, through God's agency, he had been punished for his wrongdoing, after which they married and lived in peace.

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 309]

The Lawful Heir.

A wise Israelite, dwelling some distance from Jerusalem, sent his son to the Holy City to complete his education. During his son's absence the father was taken ill, and feeling that death was upon him he made a will, leaving all his property to one of his slaves, on condition that he should allow the son to select any one article which pleased him for an inheritance.

As soon as his master died, the slave, elated with his good fortune, hastened to Jerusalem, informed his late master's son of what had taken place, and showed him the will.

The young man was surprised and grieved at the intelligence, and after the allotted time of mourning had expired, he began to seriously consider his situation. He went to his teacher, explained the circumstances to him, read him his father's will, and expressed himself bitterly on account of the disappointment of his reasonable hopes and expectations. He could think of nothing that he had done to offend his father, and was loud in his complaints of in-justice.

"Stop," said his teacher; "thy father was a man of wisdom and a loving relative. This will is a living monument to his good sense and far-sightedness. May his son prove as wise in his day."

"What!" exclaimed the young man. "I see no wisdom in his bestowal of his property upon a slave; no affection in this slight upon his only son."

"Listen," returned the teacher. "By his action thy father hath but secured thy inheritance to thee, if thou art wise enough to avail thyself of his understanding. Thus thought he when he felt the hand of death approaching, 'My son is

[p. 310]

away; when I am dead he will not be here to take charge of my affairs; my slaves will plunder my estate, and to gain time will even conceal my death from my son, and deprive me of the sweet savour of mourning.' To prevent these things he bequeathed his property to his slave, well knowing that the slave, believing in his apparent right, would give thee speedy information and take care of the effects, even as he has done."

"Well, well, and how does this benefit me?" impatiently interrupted the pupil.

"Ah!" replied the teacher, "wisdom I see rests not with the young. Dost thou not know that what a slave possesses belongs but to his master? Has not thy father left thee the right to select one article of all his property for thy on? Choose the slave as thy portion, and by possessing him thou wilt recover all that was thy father's. Such was his wise and loving intention."

The young man did as he was advised, and gave the slave his freedom afterwards. But ever after he was wont to exclaim:

"Wisdom resides with the aged, and understanding in length of days."

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

Nothing in the World without its Use.

David, King of Israel, was once lying upon his couch and many thoughts were passing through his mind.

"Of what use in this world is the spider?" thought he; "it but increases the dust and dirt of the world, making places unsightly and causing great annoyance."

Then he thought of an insane man:

"How unfortunate is such a being. I know that all things are ordained by God with reason and purpose, yet

[p. 311]

this is beyond my comprehension; why should men be born idiots, or grow insane?"

Then the mosquitoes annoyed him, and the king thought:

"What can the mosquito be good for? why was it created in the world? It but disturbs our comfort, and the world profits not by its existence."

Yet King David lived to discover that these very insects, and the very condition of life, the being of which he deplored, were ordained even to his own benefit.

When he fled from before Saul, David was captured in the land of the Philistines by the brothers of Goliath, who carried him before the king of Gath, and it was only by pretending idiocy that he escaped death, the king deeming it impossible that such a man could be the kingly David; as it is written, "And he disguised his reason before their eyes, and played the madman in their hands, and scribbled on the doors of the gate, and let his spittle run down upon his beard" (Sam. 12-16).

Upon another occasion David hid himself in the cave of Adullam, and after he had entered the cave it chanced that a spicier spun a web over the opening thereto. His pursuers passed that way, but thinking that no one could have entered the cave protected by the spider's web without destroying it, they continued on their way.

The mosquito also was of service to David when he entered the camp of Saul to secure the latter's weapon. While stooping near Abner, the sleeping man moved and placed his leg upon David's body. If he moved, he would awake Abner and meet with death, if he remained in that position morning would dawn and bring him death; he knew not what to do, when a mosquito alighted upon Abner's leg; he moved it quickly, and David escaped.

Therefore sang David:

[p. 312]

"All my bones shall say, O Lord, who is like unto Thee."

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

The Reward of Faith.

The Israelites were commanded to visit Jerusalem on three festivals. It happened upon one occasion that there was a scarcity of water in the city. One of the people called upon a certain nobleman who was the owner of three wells, and asked him for the use of the water which they contained, promising that they should be refilled by a stated date, and contracting in default of this to pay a certain large amount in silver as forfeit. The day came, there had been no rain, and the three wells were dry. In the morning the owner of the wells sent for the promised money. Nakdemon, the son of Gurion, the man who had undertaken this burden for his people's sake, replied, "The day is but begun; there is yet time."

He entered the Temple and prayed that God might send rain and save him all his fortune which he had ventured. His prayer was answered. The clouds gathered and the rain fell. As he passed out of the Temple with a grateful heart, he was met by his creditor, who said:

"True, the rain has refilled my wells, but it is dark; the day has gone, and according to our agreement thou must still pay me the promised sum."

Once more Nakdemon prayed, and lo, the clouds lifted and the sinking sun smiled brightly on the spot where the men stood, showing that the sunlight of day was still there, though the rain-clouds had temporarily obscured its gleams.

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

Abtinoss and Garmah.

There was a certain family, the family of Abtinoss, the members of which were learned in the art of preparing the

[p. 313]

incense used in the service. Their knowledge they refused to impart to others, and the directors of the Temple, fearing that the art might die with them, discharged them from the service, and brought other parties from Alexandria, in Egypt, to prepare the sweet perfume. These latter were unable to afford satisfaction, however, and the directors were obliged to give the service back into the hands of the family of Abtinoss, who on their part refused to accept it again, unless the remuneration for their services was doubled. When asked why they so persistently refused to impart their skill to others, they replied that they feared they might teach some unworthy persons, who would afterwards use their knowledge in an idolatrous worship. The members of this family were very particular not to use perfume of any kind themselves, lest the people should imagine that they put the sweet spices used in the manufacture of the incense to a baser use.

An exactly similar case to the above occurred with the family of Garmah, which had the monopoly of the knowledge of preparing the show-bread used in the services of the Temple.

It was in reference to these cases that the son of Azai said, "In thy name they shall call thee, and in thy city they shall cause thee to live, and from thy own they will give thee," meaning that trustful persons should not fear that others might steal their occupations; "for in thy name they will call thee," as with the families of Abtinoss and Garmah; "and from thy own they will give thee," meaning that what a man earns is his own, and cannot be taken away.

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

Trust in God.

Rabbi Jochanan, the son of Levi, fasted and prayed to the Lord that he might be permitted to gaze on the angel

[p. 314]

[paragraph continues] Elijah, he who had ascended alive to heaven. God granted his prayer, and in the semblance of a man Elijah appeared before him.

"Let me journey with thee in thy travels through the world," prayed the Rabbi to Elijah; "let me observe thy doings, and gain in wisdom and understanding."

"Nay," answered Elijah; "my actions thou couldst not understand; my doings would trouble thee, being beyond thy comprehension."

But still the Rabbi entreated:

"I will neither trouble nor question thee," he said; "only let me accompany thee on thy way."

"Come, then," said Elijah; "but let thy tongue be mute. With thy first question, thy first expression of astonishment, we must part company."

So the two journeyed through the world together. They approached the house of a poor man, whose only treasure and means of support was a cow. As they came near, the man and his wife hastened to meet them, begged them to enter their cot, and eat and drink of the best they could afford, and to pass the night under their roof. This they did, receiving every attention from their poor but hospitable host and hostess. In the morning Elijah rose up early and prayed to God, and when he had finished his prayer, behold the cow belonging to the poor people dropped dead. Then the travellers continued on their journey.

Much was Rabbi Jochanan perplexed. "Not only did we neglect to pay them for their hospitality and generous services, but his cow we have killed;" and he said to Elijah, "Why didst thou kill the cow of this good man, who-----"

"Peace," interrupted Elijah; "hear, see, and be silent! If I answer thy questions we must part."

And they continued on their way together.

[p. 315]

Towards evening they arrived at a large and imposing mansion, the residence of a haughty and wealthy man. They were coldly received; a piece of bread and a glass of water were placed before them, but the master of the house did not welcome or speak to them, and they remained there during the night unnoticed. In the morning Elijah remarked that a wall of the house required repairing, and sending for a carpenter, he himself paid the money for the repair, as a return, he said, for the hospitality they had received.

Again was Rabbi Jochanan filled with wonder, but he said naught, and they proceeded on their journey.

As the shades of night were falling they entered a city which contained a large and imposing synagogue. As it was the time of the evening service they entered and were much pleased with the rich adornments, the velvet cushions, and gilded carvings of the interior. After the completion of the service, Elijah arose and called out aloud, "Who is here willing to feed and lodge two poor men this night?" none answered, and no respect was shown to the travelling strangers. In the morning, however, Elijah re-entered the synagogue, and shaking its members by the hands, he said, "I hope that you may all become presidents."

Next evening the two entered another city, when the Shamas (sexton) of the synagogue, came to meet them, and notifying the members of his congregation of the coming of two strangers, the best hotel of the place was opened to them, and all vied in showing them attention and honour.

In the morning, on parting with them, Elijah said, "May the Lord appoint over you but one president."

Jochanan could resist his curiosity no longer. "Tell me," said he to Elijah, "tell me the meaning of all these actions which I have witnessed. To those who have treated

[p. 316]

us coldly thou hast uttered good wishes; to those who have been gracious to us thou hast made no suitable return. Even though we must part, I pray thee explain to me the meaning of thy acts."

"Listen," said Elijah, "and learn to trust in God, even though thou canst not understand His ways. We first entered the house of the poor man, who treated us so kindly. Know that it had been decreed that on that very day his wife should die. I prayed unto the Lord that the cow might prove a redemption for her; God granted my prayers, and the woman was preserved unto her husband. The rich man, whom next we called up, treated us coldly, and I repaired his wall. I repaired it without a new foundation, without digging to the old one. Had he repaired it himself he would have dug, and thus discovered a treasure which lies there buried, but which is now for ever lost to him. To the members of the synagogue who were inhospitable I said, 'May you all be presidents,' and where many rule there can be no peace; but to the others I said, 'May you have but one president;' with one leader no misunderstanding may arise. Now, if thou seest the wicked prospering, be not envious; if thou seest the righteous in poverty and trouble, be not provoked or doubtful of God's justice. The Lord is righteous, His judgments all are true; His eyes note all mankind, and none can say, 'What dost thou?'"

With these words Elijah disappeared, and Jochanan was left alone.

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

The Bride and Bridegroom.

There was once a man who pledged his dearest faith to a maiden, beautiful and true. For a time all passed pleasantly, and the maiden lived in happiness. But then the man was called from her side, he left her; long she waited,

[p. 317]

but he did not return. Friends pitied her and rivals mocked her; tauntingly they pointed at her, and said, "He has left thee; he will never come back." The maiden sought her chamber, and read in secret the letters which her lever had written to her, the letters in which he promised to be ever faithful, ever true. Weeping she read them, but they brought comfort to her heart; she dried her eyes and doubted not.

A joyous day dawned for her; the man she loved returned, and when he learned that others had doubted and asked her how she had preserved her faith, she showed his letters to him, declaring her eternal trust.

Israel, in misery and captivity, was mocked by the nations; her hopes of redemption were made a laughing-stock; her sages scoffed at; her holy men derided. Into her synagogues, into her schools went Israel; she read the letters which her God had written, and believed in the holy promises which they contained.

God will in time redeem her; and when He says:

"How could you alone be faithful of all the mocking nations?"

She will point to the law and answer:

"Had not Thy law been my delight, I should long since have perished in my affliction" (Psalm 119).

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

Truth.

When God was about to create man the angels gathered about him. Some of them opening their lips exclaimed, "Create, oh God, a being who shall praise Thee from earth even as we in heaven sing Thy glory."

But others said:

"Hear us, Almighty King, create no more! The glorious

[p. 318]

harmony of the heavens which Thou hast sent to earth will be by man disturbed, destroyed."

Then silence fell upon the contesting hosts as the Angel of Mercy appeared before the throne of grace on bended knees.

Sweet was the voice which said entreatingly:

"Oh, Father, create Thou man; make him Thine own noble image. With heavenly pity will I fill his heart, with sympathy towards every living thing impress his being; through him will they find cause to praise Thee."

Then the Angel of Mercy ceased, and the Angel of Peace with tearful eyes spoke thus:

"O God, create him not! Thy peace he will disturb, the flow of blood will follow sure his coming. Confusion, horror, war, will blot the earth, and Thou wilt no longer find a pleasant place among Thy. works on earth."

Then spoke in stern tones the Angel of Justice:

"And Thou wilt judge him, God; he shall be subject to my sway."

The Angel of Truth approached, saying:

"Cease! Oh God of truth, with man Thou sendest falsehood to the earth."

Then all were silent, and out of the deep quietness the Divine words came:

"Thou, oh Truth, shalt go to earth with him, and yet remain a denizen of heaven; 'twixt heaven and earth to float, connecting link between the two."

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

The Destruction of Bithar.

It was customary in Bithar when a child was born for the parents to plant a young cedar tree, to grow up with the infant. It happened upon one occasion when the daughter of the emperor was riding through the city, that her chariot

[p. 319]

broke down, and her attendants pulled up a young cedar tree to use in repairing it. The man who had planted the tree, seeing this, attacked the servants and beat them severely. This action incensed the emperor, who immediately despatched an army of eighty thousand men against the city. These captured it and killed the inhabitants, men, women and children. The rivers ran red with blood, and 'tis said that the ground was rich and prolific to the farmers for seven years, from the bodies of those who perished, said to be four hundred thousand Israelites.

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

The Destruction of Jerusalem.

When the guilt of the Israelites grew too great for the forbearance of the Most High, and they refused to listen to the words and warnings of Jeremiah, the prophet left Jerusalem and travelled to the land of Benjamin. While he was in the holy city, and prayed for mercy on it, it was spared; but while he sojourned in the land of Benjamin, Nebuchadnezzar laid waste the land of Israel, plundered the holy Temple, robbed it of its ornaments, and gave it a prey to the devouring flames. By the hands of Nebuzaradan did Nebuchadnezzar send (while he himself remained in Riblah) to destroy Jerusalem.

Before he ordered the expedition he endeavoured by means of signs, in accordance with the superstition of his age, to ascertain the result of the attempt. He shot an arrow from his bow, pointing to the west, and the arrow turned towards Jerusalem. Then he shot again, pointing towards the east, and the arrow sped towards Jerusalem. Then he shot once more, desiring to know in which direction lay the guilty city which should be blotted from the world, and for the third time his arrow pointed towards Jerusalem.

[p. 320]

When the city had been captured, he marched with his princes and officers into the Temple, and called out mockingly to the God of Israel, "And art thou the great God before whom the world trembles, and we here in thy city and thy Temple!"

On one of the walls he found the mark of an arrow's head, as though somebody had been killed or hit near by, and he asked, "Who was killed here?"

"Zachariah, the son of Yehoyadah, the high priest, answered the people; "he rebuked us incessantly on account of our transgressions, and we tired of his words, and put him to death."

The followers of Nebuchadnezzar massacred the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the priests and the people, old and young, women, and children who were attending school, even babies in the cradle. The feast of blood at last shocked even the leader of the hostile heathens, who ordered a stay of this wholesale murder. He then removed all the vessels of gold and silver from the Temple, and sent them by his ships, to Babel, after which he set the Temple on fire.

The high priest donned his robe and ephod, and saying, "Now that the Temple is destroyed, no priest is needed to officiate," threw himself into the flames and was consumed. When the other priests who were still alive witnessed this action, they took their harps and musical instruments and followed the example of the high priest. Those of the people whom the soldiers had not killed were bound in iron chains, burdened with the spoils of the victors, and carried into captivity. Jeremiah the prophet returned to Jerusalem and accompanied his unfortunate brethren, who went out almost naked. When they reached a place called Bet Kuro, Jeremiah obtained better clothing for them. And he spoke to Nebuchadnezzar and the Chaldeans, and said, "Think

[p. 321]

not that of your own strength you were able to overcome the people chosen of the Lord; 'tis their iniquities which have condemned them to this sorrow."

Thus the people journeyed on with crying and moaning until they reached the rivers of Babylon. Then Nebuchadnezzar said to them, "Sing, ye people,--play for me,--sing the songs ye were wont to sing before your great Lord in Jerusalem."

In answer to this command, the Levites hung their harps upon the willow trees near the banks of the river, as it is written, "Upon the willows in her midst had we hung up our harps" (Ps. 137: 2). Then they said, "If we had but performed the will of God and sung His praises devoutly, we should not have been delivered into thy hands. Now, how can we sing before thee the prayers and hymns that belong only to the One Eternal God?" as it is said, "How should we sing the song of the Lord on the soil of the stranger?" (Ibid. 4).

Then said the officers of the captors, "These men are men of death; they refuse to obey the order of the king; let them die."

But forth stepped Pelatya, the son of Yehoyadah, and thus he addressed Nebuchadnezzar:

"Behold, if a flock is delivered into the hands of a shepherd, and a wolf steals a lamb from the flock, tell me, who is responsible to the owner of the lost animal?"

"Surely the shepherd," replied Nebuchadnezzar.

"Then listen to thine own words," replied Pelatya. "God has given Israel into thy hands; to Him art thou responsible for those who are slain."

The king ordered the chains to be removed from the captives, and they were not put to death.

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 322]

Second Destruction of Jerusalem.

Through Kamtzah and Bar Kamtzah was Jerusalem destroyed; and thus it happened.

A certain man made a feast; he was a friend of Kamtzah, but Bar Kamtzah he hated. He sent a messenger to Kamtzah with an invitation to his banquet, but this messenger making a mistake, delivered the invitation to his master's enemy, Bar Kamtzah.

Bar Kamtzah accepted the invitation, and was on hand at the appointed time, but when the host saw his enemy enter his house, he ordered him to leave at once.

"Nay," said Bar Kamtzah, "now that I am here, do not so insult me as to send me forth. I will pay thee for all that I may eat and drink."

"I want not thy money," returned the other, "neither do I desire thy presence; get thee gone at once."

But Bar Kamtzah persisted.

"I will pay the entire expense of thy feast," he said; "do not let me be degraded in the eyes of thy guests."

The host was determined, and Bar Kamtzah withdrew from the banquet-room in anger.

"Many Rabbis were present," said he in his heart, "and not one of them interfered in my behalf, therefore this insult which they saw put upon me must have pleased them."

So Bar Kamtzah spoke treacherously of the Jews unto the king, saying, "The Jews have rebelled against thee."

"How can I know this?" inquired the king.

"Send a sacrifice to their Temple and it will be rejected," replied Bar Kamtzah.

The ruler then sent a well-conditioned calf to be sacrificed for him in the Temple, but through the machinations of Bar

[p. 323]

[paragraph continues] Kamtzah the messenger inflicted a blemish upon it, and, of course, not being fit for the sacrifice (Lev. 22:21) it was not accepted.

Through this cause was Caesar sent to capture Jerusalem, and for two years he besieged the city. Four wealthy citizens of Jerusalem had stored up enough food to last the inhabitants a much longer time than this, but the people being anxious to fight with the Romans, destroyed the storehouses and brought dire famine upon the city.

A certain noble lady, Miriam, the daughter of Baythus, sent her servant to purchase some flour for household use. The servant found that all the flour had been sold, but there was still some meal which he might have purchased. Hurrying home, however, to learn his mistress's wishes in regard to this, he discovered on his return that this too had been sold, and he could obtain nothing save some coarse barley meal. Not wishing to purchase this without orders he returned home again, but when he returned to the storehouse to secure the barley meal, that was gone also. Then his mistress started out herself to purchase food, but she could find nothing. Suffering from the pangs of hunger she picked from the street the skin of a fig and ate it; this sickened her and she died. But previous to her death she cast all her gold and silver into the street, saying, "What use is this wealth to me when I can obtain no food for it?' Thus were the words of Ezekiel fulfilled:

"Their silver shall they cast into the streets."

After the destruction of the storehouses, Rabbi Jochanan in walking through the city saw the populace boiling straw in water and drinking of the same for sustenance. "Ah, woe is me for this calamity!" he exclaimed; "how can such a people strive against a mighty host?" He applied to Ben Batiach, his nephew, one of the chiefs of the city, for

[p. 324]

permission to leave Jerusalem. But Ben Batiach replied, "It may not be; no living body may leave the city." "Take me out then as a corpse," entreated Jochanan. Ben Batiach assented to this, and Jochanan was placed in a coffin and carried through the gates of the city; Rabbi Eleazer, Rabbi Joshua, and Ben Batiach acting as pall-bearers. The coffin was placed in a cave, and after they had all returned to their homes Jochanan arose from the coffin and made his way to the enemy's camp. He obtained from the commander permission to establish an academy in Jabna with Rabbon Gamliel as the principal.

Titus soon captured the city, killed many of the people, and sent the others into exile. He entered the Temple, even in the Most Holy, and cut down the veil which separated it from the less sacred precincts. He seized the holy vessels, and sent them to Rome.

From this history of Kamtzah and Bar Kamtzah we should learn to be careful of offending our neighbours, when in so slight a cause such great results may originate. Our Rabbis have said that he who causes his neighbour to blush through an insult, should be compared to the one who sheds blood.

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

Hannah and her Seven Sons.

During the terrible times which followed the fall of the Holy City, Hannah and her seven sons were cast into prison.

According to their ages they were brought before the tyrant conqueror, and commanded to pay homage to him and his gods.

"God forbid," exclaimed the eldest lad, "that I should bow to thy image. Our commandments say to us, 'I am the Lord thy God;' to no other will I bow."

[p. 325]

He was immediately led out to execution, and the same demand made of his brother, the second son.

"My brother bowed not," he answered, "and no more will I."

"Wherefore not?" asked the tyrant.

"Because," replied the lad, "the second commandment of the Decalogue tells us, 'Thou shalt have no other God but me.'"

His death followed immediately his brave words.

"My religion teaches me, 'Thou shalt worship no other God'" (Ex. 34: 14), said the third son, "and I welcome the fate accorded to my brothers rather than bow to thee or thy images."

The same homage was demanded of the fourth son, but brave and faithful as his brethren, he replied, "'He that sacrificeth unto any God save unto the Lord only'" (Ex. 22: 19), and was slain pitilessly.

"'Hear, O Israel! the Lord our God, the Lord is One,'" exclaimed the fifth lad, yielding up his young life with the watchword of Israel's hosts.

"Why art thou so obstinate?" was asked of the sixth brother, when he, too, was brought before the tyrant and scorned the propositions made him.

"'The Lord thy God is in the midst of thee, a mighty and terrible God'" (Deut. 7: 21), he said; and died for the principles he proclaimed.

Then the seventh and youngest boy was brought before the murderer of his relatives, who addressed him kindly, saying:

"My son, come bow before my gods."

And the child answered:

"God forbid! Our holy religion teaches us 'Know therefore this day, and reflect in thy heart that the Lord he

[p. 326]

is God, in the heavens above and on the earth beneath there is none else' (Deut. 4: 39). Never will we exchange our God for any other, neither will He exchange us for any other nation, for as it is written, 'Thou hast this day acknowledged the Lord' (Deut. 26: 17), so is it also written, 'And the Lord hath acknowledged thee this day, that thou art unto him a peculiar people!'"

Still the tyrant spoke smoothly, and with kind words.

"Thou art young," he said; "thou hast seen but little of the pleasures and joys of life, not as much as has fallen to the portion of thy brethren. Do as I wish thee and thy future shall be bright and happy."

"The Lord will reign for ever and ever," said the lad; "thy nation and thy kingdom will be destroyed; thou art here to-day, to-morrow in the grave; to day elevated, to-morrow lowly; but the most Holy One endures for ever."

"See," continued the other, "thy brothers lie slain before thee; their fate will be thine if thou refusest to do as I desire. See, I will cast my ring to the ground, stoop thou and pick it up; that I will consider allegiance to my gods."

"Thinkest thou that I fear thy threats?" returned the unterrified lad; "why should I fear a human being more than the great God, the King of kings?"

"Where and what is thy God?" asked the oppressor. "Is there a God in the world?"

"Can there be a world without a Creator?" replied the youth. "Of thy gods 'tis said, 'mouths they have, but speak not.' Of our God the Psalmist says, 'By the word of the Lord were the heavens made.' Thy gods have 'eyes but see not,' but 'the eyes of the Lord run to and fro in the whole earth!' Thy gods have 'ears but hear not,' but of our God 'tis written, The Lord hearkened and heard.' Of thy gods 'tis said, 'a nose they have but smell not,'

[p. 327]

while our God 'smelled the sweet savour.' 'Hands have thy gods but they touch not,' while our God says, 'My hand hath also founded the earth.' Of thy gods 'tis written, 'feet they have but walk not,' while Zachariah tells us of our God, 'His feet will stand that day upon the mount of Olives.'"

Then said the cruel one:

"If thy God hath all these attributes, why does He not deliver thee from my power?"

The lad replied:

"He delivered Chananyah and his companions from the power of Nebuchadnezzar, but they were righteous men, and Nebuchadnezzar was a king deserving of seeing a miracle performed, but for me, alas, I am not worthy of redemption, neither art thou worthy of a demonstration of God's power."

"Let the lad be slain as were his brothers," commanded the tyrant.

Then spoke Hannah, the mother of the boys:

"Give me my child," she cried, "oh, cruel king, let me fold him in my arms ere thou destroyest his innocent young life."

She threw her arms around the lad, clasping him tightly to her bosom, and pressing her lips to his. "Take my life," she cried; "kill me first before my child."

"Nay," he answered, scoffingly, "I cannot do it, for thy own laws forbid; 'Whether it be ox or sheep ye shall not kill it and its young in one day'" (Lev. 28).

"Oh, woe to thee," replied the mother, "thou who art so particular to regard the laws." Then pressing her boy to her heart, "Go, my dear one," she said, "say to Abraham that my sacrifice hath exceeded his. He built one altar whereon to sacrifice Isaac; thy mother hath built seven

[p. 328]

altars and sacrificed seven Isaacs in one day. He was but tempted; thy mother hath performed."

After the execution of her last son, Hannah became insane, and threw herself from her house-top. Where she fell, she expired.

Happy are ye, ye seven sons of Hannah; your portion in the future world was waiting for you. In faithfulness ye served your God, and with her children shall your mother rejoice for ever in the eternal world.

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 329]

  

PART FIFTH.

  

CIVIL AND CRIMINAL LAW--THE HOLY DAYS.

"WHEN do justice and goodwill meet? When the contending parties can be made to peaceably agree."

To accomplish this end was the great aim of the ancient Jewish laws, but a marked distinction was made between the civil and criminal branches. In the former cases, arguments could be made before, and decisions rendered by, either the general magistracy or special judges chosen by the contending parties, and many were the fences erected about the judges to keep them within the lines of strict equity, such as the following:

"He who unjustly transfers one man's goods to another shall answer to God for it with his own soul."

"When the judge sits in judgment on his fellow-man he should feel as though a sword was pointed at his heart."

"Woe to the judge who, knowing the unrighteousness of a decision, endeavours to make the witnesses responsible for the same. From him will God require an account;"

"When the parties stand before thee look upon both as guilty; but when they are dismissed let them both be innocent, for the fiat has gone forth."

The judge was not allowed to hear anything of a case, save in the presence of all the parties concerned; and he was particularly enjoined to be without bias caused by a difference in the standing or wealth of the parties,; either in

[p. 330]

favour of the poor against the rich, or of the rich against the poor.

The witnesses in a case were almost as closely scrutinised as the case itself; and they were at once incompetent if they had any personal interest in the suit. If a plaintiff asked for more than he was legally entitled to in the hope of more readily obtaining his due he lost his suit.

While three judges could form a tribunal for the settling of civil cases, that for the judgment of criminal suits was composed of twenty-three judges, and while in the former case a majority of one in the jury, either acquitted or condemned, in the latter a majority of one acquitted, but a majority of two was required to condemn.

The witnesses in criminal suits were thus admonished on being brought into court:

"Perchance you intend to speak from rumour, being the witness of another witness, to tell that which you have heard from a trustworthy man, or perchance you may not be aware that we shall try you with close questions and searching words. Know then, that trials wherein the life of man hangs in the scale, are not like trials concerning worldly goods. With money may money be redeemed, but in trials like this not only the blood of the one unjustly condemned, but that of his seed and his seed's seed, until the end of time, will lay heavy on the soul of the false witness. Adam was created alone one man, and he who destroys a single life will be held as accountable as if he had destroyed a world. Therefore search well thy words. But say not, on the other hand, 'What have I to do with all this?' Remember the words of Holy Writ, 'If a witness hath seen or known, if he do not utter, he shall bear his iniquity;' and remember further, 'In the destruction of the wicked there is joy.'"

The punishments were inflicted in the most humane

[p. 331]

manner, and the entire code is the perfection of justice tempered by mercy in its truest and highest sense.

No matter how numerous the crimes of an offender might be, one punishment covered them all. A fine could not accompany any other punishment, and in cases of flagellation, the number of strokes was limited in the most extreme cases to thirty-nine.

The judges in capital cases were required to fast all day on the days when they pronounced judgments, and even after the sentence the case was again considered by the highest court before it was carried into effect.

The place of execution was located a considerable distance from the court, and on his progress thereto the prisoner was stopped several times, and asked whether he could think of anything not said which might influence the judges in his favour. He had the privilege of returning to the court as often as he pleased with new pleas, and a herald preceded him, crying aloud, "This man is being led to execution, this is his crime . . . these are the witnesses against him . . . if any one knows aught in his favour let them come forth now and speak the words."

Before his execution he was urged to confess. "Confess thy sins," said the officers; "every one who confesses has part in the world to come." If he offered no confession he was requested to repeat the words, "May my death be a redemption for all my sins."

Capital punishment, however, was of such rare occurrence as to be practically abrogated. In fact, many of the judges declared openly for its abolition, and a court which had pronounced one sentence of death in seven years was called "the court of murderers."

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 332]

Passover.

The feast of unleavened bread, or "Passover," begins upon the evening of the 14th day of Nissan (April), and was instituted in commemoration of our ancestors' redemption from Egypt, a memorial for ever. During its continuance we are strictly forbidden the use of any leavened thing.

Moses said to the Israelites in the name of the Lord:

"Draw out and take for yourselves a lamb," &c.

By the observance of this precept they would deserve well of God and He would redeem them, for when He spoke they were "naked and bare" of good deeds and meritorious acts.

"Draw out and take for yourselves a lamb."

Draw yourselves away from the idols which ye are worshipping with the Egyptians, the calves and lambs of stone and metal, and with one of the same animals through which ye sin, prepare to fulfil the commandments of your God.

The planet sign of the month Nissan is a lamb therefore, that the Egyptians might not think that through the powers of the lamb they had thrown off the yoke of slavery, God commanded His people to take a Iamb and eat it.

They were commanded to roast it whole and to break no bone of it, so that the Egyptians might know that it was indeed a lamb which they had consumed.

The Lord said to Moses, "Tell the children of Israel that they shall borrow of the Egyptians gold and silver vessels," in order that it might not be afterwards said, "The words 'they will make them serve, and they will afflict them,' were fulfilled: but the words 'they shall go out with great substance,' did not come to pass."

[p. 333]

When Moses told the Israelites that they, should go up out of Egypt with great substance, they answered, "Would that we could go even empty-handed," like to the servant confined in prison.

"To-morrow," said the jailer to him, "I will release thee from prison, and give thee much money."

"Let me go to-day, and give me nothing," replied the prisoner.

On the seventh day of the Passover the children of Israel passed through the Red Sea on dry land.

A man was once travelling along the road and his son preceded him on the way. A robber appeared in the path, and the man put his son behind him. Then lo, a wolf came after the lad, and his father lifted him up and carried him within his arms.

The sea was before the Israelites, the Egyptians were behind them, so God lifted up His child and carried it within His arms.

When Israel suffered from the hot rays of the sun God "spread the cloud for a covering;" when they were hungry He sent them bread from heaven; and when they thirsted "He brought forth floods from a rock."

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

Pentecost.

The Feast of Weeks, or "Pentecost," occurs upon the sixth day of the third month, Sivan (June). It is called the Feast of Weeks because forty-nine days, or seven weeks, duly numbered, elapse between the second day of Passover, when (during the existence of the Temple) a sheaf of green barley was offered, and this festival, when two loaves made of the first flour of the wheat harvest were "brought before the Lord." It is also the anniversary of the delivery of the commandment from Mount Sinai.

[p. 334]

Why does not the Bible particularise in this as on other occasions, and say directly, "On the sixth day of the third month was the law given?"

Because in ancient times the men called "wise" placed their faith and dependence upon the planets. They divided these into seven, apportioning one to each day of the week. Some nations selected for their greatest god the sun, other nations the moon, and so on, and prayed to them and worshipped them. They knew not that the planets moved and changed according to the course of nature, established by the Most High, a course which He might change according to His will, and into their ignorant ideas many of the Israelites had entered. Therefore, as they considered the planets as seven, God made many other things depending on that number, to show that as He made them, so had He made the planets.

The seventh day of the week He made the Sabbath; the seventh year he made the year of rest; after seven times seven years, or after seven Sabbatical years, He ordained the Jubilee, or year of release. Seven days He gave to the Passover festival, and seven days to the Feast of Tabernacles. Seven days was Jericho surrounded, and seven priests took seven trumpets and marched round its walls seven times upon the seventh day.

Therefore, after numbering seven weeks during the ripening time of the grain, the Israelites were to hold a holy convocation, to praise the One who can prevent all things, but who cannot be prevented; who can change all things, but is unchangeable.

The first day the Israelites were redeemed from slavery and superstition; the fiftieth day a law was given them for their guide through life; therefore they are commanded to number these days and remember them.

[p. 335]

The children of Ishmael, says the legend, were asked to accept the law. "What does it contain?" they asked. "Thou shalt not steal," was the answer. "How can we then accept it," they returned, "when thus was our forefather blessed, 'Thy hand shall be against every man?'"

The children of Esau were asked to accept the law, and they also inquired, "What does it contain?" "Thou shalt not kill," was the answer. "We cannot accept it, then," said they, "for thus did our father Isaac bless us, 'By the sword shalt thou live.'"

When Israel was asked to accept the law, the people answered, "We will do and obey."

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

New Year, or the Day of Memorial.

On the first day of the seventh month, Tishri (October), is the commemoration of the creation of the world. Then the cornet is blown to announce to the people that a new year has begun its course, and to warn them to examine strictly their conduct and make amends therein where amends are needed.

Would not any person of sense, knowing that he must appear before a Court of Judgment, prepare himself therefor? Either in a civil or a criminal case would he not seek for counsel? How much more, then, is it incumbent upon him to prepare for a meeting with the King of kings, before whom all things are revealed. No counsel can help him in his case; repentance, devotion, charity, these are the arguments which must plead in his favour. Therefore, a person should search his actions and repent his transgressions previous to the day of judgment. In the month of Elul (September) he should arouse himself to a consciousness of the dread justice awaiting all mankind.

This is the season when the Lord pardoned the Israelites

[p. 336]

who had worshipped the molten calf. He commanded Moses to reascend the mount for a second tablet, after he had destroyed the first. Thus say the sages, "The Lord said unto Moses in the month Elul, 'Go up unto me on the mountain,' and Moses went up and received the second tablet at the end of forty days. Before he ascended he caused the trumpet to be sounded through the camp." Since that time it is customary to sound the Shophar (cornet) in the synagogues, to give warning to the people that the day of judgment, New Year, is rapidly approaching, and with it the Day of Atonement. Therefore, propitiatory prayers are said twice every day, morning and evening, from the second day of Elul until the eve of the Day of Atonement, which period comprises the last forty days which Moses passed on Sinai, when God was reconciled to Israel and pardoned their transgressions with the molten calf.

Rabbi Eleazer said, "Abraham and Jacob were born in Tishri, and in Tishri they died. On the first of Tishri the universe was created, and during the Passover was Isaac born. On the first of Tishri (New Year), Sarah, Rachel, and Hannah, three barren women, were visited. On the first day of Tishri our ancestors discontinued their rigorous labour in Egypt. On the first of Tishri Adam was created; from his existence we count our years, that is the sixth day of the creation. On that day, too, did he eat of the forbidden fruit, therefore is the season appointed for one of penitence, for the Lord said to Adam, 'This shall be for a sign in future generations; thy descendants shall be judged upon these days, and they shall be appointed as days of pardon and forgiveness.'"

Four times in the year the Lord pronounces His decrees.

First, New Year, the first of Tishri. Then the judgments of all human beings for the coming year are ordained.

[p. 337]

Second, The first day of Passover. Then the scarcity or fulness of the crops is determined.

Third, Pentecost. Then the Lord blesses the fruit of the trees, or bids them bear not in plenty.

Fourth, The Feast of Tabernacles. Then the Lord determines whether the rain shall bless the earth in its due season or not.

Man is judged on New Year's, and the decree is made final on the Day of Atonement.

Rabbi Nathan has said that man is judged at all times.

Thus taught Rabbi Akiba. "Why does the law command the bringing of a sheaf of barley on the Passover? Because the Passover is the season of the harvest of the grain. The Lord says, 'Offer for me a sheaf of barley on Passover, that I may bless the grain which is in the field.'

"Why does the Bible say, 'Bring two loaves of the new wheat on Pentecost?' Because at Pentecost time the fruit ripens, and God says, 'Offer for me two loaves of the new wheat, in order that I may bless the fruit which is on the trees.'

"Why were we commanded to bring a drink-offering of water into the Temple on the Feast of Tabernacles? Because then is the season of rain, and the Lord says, 'Bring the drink-offering of water to me, in order that I may bless the rain of the year.'

"Why do they make the comet which they blow of a ram's horn? In order that the Lord may remember the ram which was sacrificed instead of Isaac, and allow the merits of the patriarchs to weigh in favour of their descendants, as it is written in the Decalogue, 'Showing mercy to thousands of those who love me and keep my commandments" (Ex. 20: 6).

[p. 338]

On New Year's day they recite in the synagogues the record of the binding of Isaac for the same purpose. While God has mercy upon His creatures He gives them a season for repentance, that they may not perish in their wickedness, therefore as it is written in Lamentations 3: 40, we should "search through and investigate our ways and return unto the Lord."

During the year man is apt to grow callous as to his transgressions, therefore the cornet is sounded to arouse him to the consciousness of the time which is passing so rapidly away. "Rouse thee from thy sleep," it says to him; "the hour of thy visitation approaches." The Eternal wishes not to destroy His children, merely to arouse them to repentance and good resolves.

Three classes of people are arraigned for judgment: the righteous, the wicked, and the indifferent. To the righteous the Lord awards a happy life; the wicked He condemns, and to the indifferent ones He grants a respite. From New Year's day until the Day of Atonement His judgment He holds in abeyance; if they repent truly they are classed with the righteous for a happy life, and if they remain un-touched, they are counted with the wicked.

Three sounds for the cornet are commanded in the Bible. A pure sound (T'kiah), a sound of alarm or trembling (T'ruah), and, thirdly, a pure sound again (T'kiah).

The first sound typifies man's first awakening to penitence; he must search well his heart, desert his evil ways, and purify his thoughts, as it is written, "Let the wicked forsake his ways and the man of unrighteousness his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord."

The alarm sound typifies the sorrow which a repentant man feels for his misconduct and his earnest determination to reform.

[p. 339]

The last sound is the pure sound again, which typifies a sincere resolve to keep the repentant heart incorrupt.

The Bible says to us:

"The word is very nigh unto thee, in thy mouth and in thy heart, that thou mayest do it" (Deut. 30: 14). This verse teaches us that repentance is nearer to those who believe in God and His book than fanatics would make it. Difficult penances are ordained for the sinner among them. He must fast many days, or travel barefoot through rugged ways, or sleep in the open air. But we are not required to travel to the nether end of the ocean or to climb to mountain tops, for our Holy Word says to us, "It is not in heaven, neither is it beyond the sea, but the Word is very nigh."

In three ways may we repent:

First, By words of mouth, finding birth in an honest heart.

Secondly, With our feelings, sorrow for sins committed.

Thirdly, By good deeds in the future.

Rabbi Saadiah declared that God commanded us to sound the cornet on New Year's day for ten reasons.

First, Because this day is the beginning of the creation, when God began to reign over the world, and as it is customary to sound the trumpets at the coronation of a king, we should in like manner proclaim by the sound of the cornet that the Creator is our king,--as David said, "With trumpets and the sound of the cornet, shout ye before the Lord."

Secondly, As the New Year day is the first of the ten penitential days, we sound the cornet as a proclamation to admonish all to return to God and repent. If they do not so, they at least have been informed, and cannot plead ignorance. Thus we find that earthly kings publish then

[p. 340]

decrees with such concomitant, that none may say, "We heard not this."

Thirdly, To remind us of the law given on Mount Sinai, where it is said (Exod. 19:16), "The voice of the cornet was exceeding loud." To remind us also that we should bind ourselves anew to the performance of its precepts, as did our ancestors, when they said, "All that the Lord hath said will we do and obey."

Fourthly, To remind us of the prophets, who were compared to watchmen blowing the trumpet of alarm, as we find in Ezekiel (33: 4), "Whosoever heareth the sound of the cornet and taketh not warning, and the sound cometh and taketh him away, his blood shall be upon his own head; but he that taketh warning shall save his life."

Fifthly, To remind us of the destruction of the Temple and the fearsome sound of the battle-cry of our enemies. "Because thou hast heard, oh my soul, the sound of the trumpet, the alarm of war" (Jerem. 4: 19). Therefore when we hear the sound of the cornet we should implore God to rebuild the Temple.

Sixthly, To remind us of the binding of Isaac, who willingly offered himself for immolation, in order to sanctify the Holy Name.

Seventhly, That when we hear the terrifying sound, we may, through dread, humble ourselves before the Supreme Being, for it is the nature of these martial instruments to produce a sensation of terror, as the prophet Amos observes, "Shall a trumpet be blown in a city, and the people not to be terrified?"

Eighthly, To remind us of the great and terrible Day of Judgment, on which the trumpet is to be sounded, as we find in Zeph. (1: 14-16), "The great day of the Lord is near, and hasteneth much, a day of the trumpet and of shouting."

[p. 341]

Ninthly, To remind us to pray for the time when the outcasts of Israel are to be gathered together, as promised in Isaiah (28: 13), "And it shall come to pass in that day, the great trumpet shall be sounded, and those shall come who were perishing in the land of Assyria."

Tenthly, To remind us of the resurrection of the dead, and our firm belief therein. "Yea, all ye that inhabit the world, and that dwell on the earth, when the standard is lifted upon the mountain, behold, and when the trumpet is sounded, hear!" says the prophet Isaiah.

Therefore should we set our hearts to these seasons, and fulfil the precept that the Bible commands us, as it is written:

"And the Lord commanded us to do all the statutes . . . . that it might be well with us at all times" (Deut. 11: 24).

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

The Day of Atonement.

The hearts of all who fear God should tremble with the reflection that all the deeds of the creature are known to the Creator, and will be by Him accounted to them for good or evil. God is ready at all times to acknowledge true penitence; and of repentance there are seven degrees:

First, The righteous man, who repents his misconduct as soon as he becomes aware of his sin. This is the best and most complete.

Secondly, Of the man who has for some time led a life of sin, yet who, in the vigour of his days, gives over his evil ways and conquers his wrong inclinations. As Solomon has said, "Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youthful vigour" (Eccl. 12), While in the prime of life abandon thy evil ways.

Thirdly, Of the one who was prevented by some cause from the commission of a contemplated sin, and who truly

[p. 342]

repents his evil intention. "Happy is the man who fears the Lord," said the Psalmist. The man, not the woman? Aye, all mankind. The word is used to denote strength; those who repent while still in their youth.

Fourthly, Of the one who repents when his sin is pointed out to him, and he is rebuked for the same, as in the instance of the inhabitants of Nineveh. They repented not until Jonah proclaimed to them, "Yet forty days more, and Nineveh shall be overthrown" (Jonah 3: 4). The men of Nineveh believed in God's mercy, and though the decree had been pronounced against them, yet they repented. "And God saw their work, that they had returned from their evil ways, and God bethought Himself of the evil which He had spoken that He would do to them, and He did it not." Therefore say the Rabbis, "Our brethren, neither sackcloth nor fasting will gain forgiveness for sins; but repentance of the heart and good deeds; for it is not said of the men of Nineveh, "God saw their fasting and sackcloth," but "God saw their work, that they had turned from their evil ways."

Fifthly, Of those who repent when trouble befalls them. How much nobler is this than human nature! Instance Jephtah: "Did ye not hate me . . . . and why are ye come unto me now when you are in distress?" (Judges 11: 8). But the infinite mercy of our God accepts even such repentance; as it is written, "When thou art in tribulation, and all these things have overtaken thee . . . . then wilt thou return unto the Lord thy God." Founded upon this is the proverb of the fathers, "Repentance and good deed, form a shield against punishment."

Sixthly, The repentance of age. Even when man grows old and feeble, if he repents truly, his atonement will be received. As the Psalmist says, "Thou turnest man to

[p. 343]

contrition, and sayest, 'Return, ye children of men.'" Meaning, man can return at any time or any age, "Return, ye children of men."

Say the Rabbis, "Although a man has been righteous in his youth and vigour, yet if he rebels against the will of God in his old age, the merit of his former goodness shall be lost to him, as it is written, 'When a righteous man turns away from his righteousness and doeth wrong, and dieth therefor; through his wrong which he hath done must he die' (Ezekiel 18: 26). But a man who has been wicked in his early days, and feels true sorrow and penitence in his old age, shalt not be called 'wicked' any more. This, however, is not gracious penitence when it is so long delayed."

Seventhly, Is the last degree of penitence. Of the one who is rebellious against his Creator during all the days of his life; turns to Him only when the hand of death is laid upon him.

Say the Rabbis, if a person is sick, and the hour of his decease approaches, they who are by his deathbed should say to him, "Confess thy sins to thy Creator."

They who are near the point of death should confess their shortcomings. The sick man is as the man who is before a court of justice. The latter may have advocates to defend him or laud his case, but the only advocates of the former must be penitence and good deeds. As is written in the Book of Job (33: 23), "If there be now about him one single angel as defender, one out of a thousand, to tell for man his uprightness; then is he gracious unto him, and saith, 'Release him from going down to the pit; I have found an atonement.'"

Thus we have seven different degrees of penitence, and he who neglects them all must suffer in the world to come.

[p. 344]

[paragraph continues] Therefore fulfil the duties laid upon you; repent as long as you are able to amend. As the Rabbis say, "Repent in the antechamber, that thou mayest enter the room of state."

"Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; wherefore will ye die, O house of Israel!" exclaimed the prophet Ezekiel; and what does this warning mean? without repentance ye shall die.

Penitence is thus illustrated by a parable:

There was once a great ship which had been sailing for many days upon the ocean. Before it reached its destination, a high wind arose, which drove it from its course; until, finally, becalmed close to a pleasant-appearing island, the anchor was dropped. There grew upon this island beautiful flowers and luscious fruits in "great profusion;" tall trees lent a pleasing, cooling shade to the place, which appeared to the ship's passengers most desirable and inviting. They divided themselves into five parties; the first party determined not to leave the ship, for said they, "A fair wind may arise, the anchor may be raised, and the ship sail on, leaving us behind; we will not risk the chance of missing our destination for the temporary pleasure which this island offers." The second party went on shore for a short time, enjoyed the perfume of the flowers, tasted of the fruit, and returned to the ship happy and refreshed, finding their places as they had left them; losing nothing, but rather gaining in health and good spirits by the recreation of their visit on shore. The third party also visited the island, but they stayed so long that the fair wind did arise, and hurrying back they just reached the ship as the sailors were lifting the anchor, and in the haste and confusion many lost their places, and were not as comfortable during the balance of their voyage as at the outset. They were

[p. 345]

wiser, however, than the fourth party; these latter stayed so long upon the island and tasted so deeply of its pleasures, that they allowed the ship's bell of warning to sound unheeded. Said they, "The sails are still to be set; we may enjoy ourselves a few minutes more." Again the bell sounded, and still they lingered, thinking, "The captain will not sail without us." So they remained on shore until they saw the ship moving; then in wild haste they swam after it and scrambled up the sides, but the bruises and injuries which they encountered in so doing were not healed during the remainder of the voyage. But, alas, for the fifth party. They ate and drank so deeply that they did not even hear the bell, and when the ship started they were left behind. Then the wild beasts hid in the thickets made of them a prey, and they who escaped this evil, perished from the poison of surfeit.

The "ship" is our good deeds, which bear us to our destination, heaven. The "island" typifies the pleasures of the world, which the first set of passengers refused to taste or look upon, but which when enjoyed temperately, as by the second party, make our lives pleasant, without causing us to neglect our duties. These pleasures must not be allowed, however, to gain too strong a hold upon our senses. True, we may return, as the third party, while there is yet time and but little bad effect, or even as the fourth party at the eleventh hour, saved, but with bruises and injuries which cannot be entirely healed; but we are in danger of becoming as the last party, spending a lifetime in the pursuit of vanity, forgetting the future, and perishing even of the poison concealed in the sweets which attracted us.

Who hath sorrow? Who hath woe?

He who leaves much wealth to his heirs, and takes with him to the grave a burden of sins. He who gathers wealth

[p. 346]

without justice. "He that gathereth riches and not by right (Jer. 8: 11), in the midst of his days shall he leave them." To the portals of eternity his gold and his silver cannot accompany the soul of man; good deeds and trust in God must be his directing spirits.

Although God is merciful and pardons the sins of man against Himself; he who has wronged his neighbour must gain that neighbour's forgiveness before he can claim the mercy of the Lord. "This must ye do," said Rabbi Eleazer, "that ye may be clean from all your sins before the Lord (Lev. 16: 30). The Day of Atonement may gain pardon for the sins of man against his Maker, but not for those against his fellow-man, till every wrong done is satisfied."

If a man is called upon to pardon his fellow, freely he must do it; else how can he dare, on the Day of Atonement, to ask pardon for his sins against the Eternal? It is customary on this day for a man to thoroughly cleanse himself bodily and spiritually, and to array himself in white fresh clothing, to typify the words of Isaiah, "Though your sins should be as scarlet, they shall become white as snow."

 

It happened that the mayor of a city once sent his servant to the market to purchase some fish. When he reached the place of sale he found that all the fish save one had been sold, and this one a Jewish tailor was about purchasing. Said the mayor's servant, "I will give one gold piece for it;" said the tailor, "I will give two." The mayor's messenger then expressed his willingness to pay three gold pieces for it, but the tailor claimed the fish, and said he would not lose it though he should be obliged to pay ten gold pieces for it. The mayor's servant then returned home, and in anger related the circumstance to his master.

[p. 347]

[paragraph continues] The mayor sent for his subject, and when the latter appeared before him asked:

"What is thy occupation?"

"A tailor, sir," replied the man.

"Then how canst thou afford to pay so great a price for a fish, and how dare degrade my dignity by offering for it a larger sum than that offered by my servant?"

"I fast to-morrow," replied the tailor, "and I wished the fish to eat to-day, that I might have strength to do so. I would not have lost it even for ten pieces of gold."

"What is to-morrow more than any other day?" asked the mayor.

"Why art thou more than any other man?" returned the other.

"Because the king hath appointed me to this office."

"Well," replied the tailor, "the King of kings hath appointed this day to be holier than all other days, for on this day we hope that God will pardon our transgressions."

"If this be the case thou wert right," answered the mayor, and the Israelite departed in peace.

Thus if a person's intention is to obey God, nothing can hinder its accomplishment. On this day God commanded His children to fast, but they must strengthen their bodies to obey him by eating on the day before. It is a person's duty to sanctify himself; bodily and spiritually, for the approach of this great day. He should be ready to enter at any moment into the Fearful Presence with repentance and good deeds as his companions.

A certain man had three friends. One of these he loved dearly; the second he loved also, but not as intensely as the first; but towards the third one he was quite indifferently disposed.

Now the king of the country sent an officer to this man,

[p. 348]

commanding his immediate appearance before the throne. Greatly terrified was the man at this summons. He thought that somebody had been speaking evil of him, or probably accusing him falsely before his sovereign, and being afraid to appear unaccompanied before the royal presence, he resolved to ask one of his friends to go with him. First he naturally applied to his dearest friend, but he at once declined to go, giving no reason and no excuse for his lack of friendliness. So the man applied to his second friend, who said to him:

"I will go with thee as far as the palace gates, but I will not enter with thee before the king."

In desperation the man applied to his third friend, the one whom he had neglected, but who replied to him at once:

"Fear not; I will go with thee, and I will speak in thy defence. I will not leave thee until thou art delivered from thy trouble."

The "first friend" is a man's wealth, which he must leave behind him when he dies. The "second friend" is typified by the relatives who follow him to the grave and leave him when the earth has covered his remains. The "third friend," he who entered with him into the presence of the king, is as the good deeds of a man's life, which never desert, but accompany him to plead his cause before the King of kings, who regardeth not person nor taketh bribery.

Thus taught Rabbi Eleazer:

"On this great and tearful day the angel Samal finds no blots, no sins on Israel." Thus he addresses the Most High:

"'O Sovereign Lord, upon the earth this day one nation pure and innocent exists. Even as the angels is Israel on this Atonement Day. As peace exists in heaven, so rests it now upon this people, praying to Thy Holy Name.'

[p. 349]

"God hears this testimony of His angel, and pardons all His people's sins."

But though the Almighty thus forgives our sins, we may not repeat them with impunity, for "to such a one as saith, 'I will commit a sin and repent,' there can be no forgiveness, no repentance."

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

Feast of Tabernacles.

The Feast of Tabernacles begins on the fifteenth day of the seventh month, Tishri (October), and during its continuance, seven days, the Israelites are commanded to dwell in tabernacles or booths. This is designed to keep fresh in their memory the tents which formed their homes during their forty years' sojourn in the wilderness. The symbols of the festival are branches of the palm, bound with sprigs of myrtle and willow, and a citron.

On this feast we are commanded to rejoice and be glad, for it is not the desire of God that we should always afflict ourselves as upon His precious holy day, the Day of Atonement. No; after humbling our hearts and returning to our Creator, we are enjoined to rejoice with our families and neighbours; therefore, we call this holy day the season of our rejoicing.

The Lord said, "This is not to be to you a fast as the Day of Atonement; eat, drink, be merry, and sacrifice peace-offerings thereon." The Bible says, "Seven days unto the Lord;" therefore we should in all our merriment devote a few serious thoughts to Him.

The Omnipotent King has commanded us to remove from our permanent dwellings and live for seven days in booths. This precept teaches us that man should put no trust in the magnificent structures he may have raised and adorned with ornaments of value, nor to place his confidence

[p. 350]

entirely upon human beings, even though rulers in his land; but to rely solely upon the Almighty, the One who said, "Let the universe come into being;" to Him alone is the power and the dominion. He alone will never change, or be other than He has proclaimed Himself, as it is written, "God is not a man that He should lie" (Num. 23: 19), and He alone can prove our sure protection.

The Feast of Tabernacles is held in the autumn, after the fruits of the field have been garnered in the storehouses, according to the words of the Bible, "The Feast of Tabernacles shalt thou hold for thyself seven days when thou hast gathered in the produce of thy threshing-floor and thy wine-press" (Deut. 16: 14).

At this time, when a man sees plenty around him, his heart perhaps may grow haughty, he may feel like enriching his house and furnishing it with elegance; for this reason he is commanded to leave it for a season, and dwell in booths, where his thoughts may be directed to God. That in the dwelling rudely put together, and unprotected from the rain, he may remember that through the rain sent by the Most High in its due season did the profusion of his crops result, and with this reflection appreciate the fact that all he possesses he owes to the goodness of God, and not to his own intelligence or strength.

This dwelling in booths is also to bring to mind the manner in which the Israelites lived for forty years after they left Egypt. With merely temporary walls to protect them from summer's heat and winter's cold, from wind and storm. God was with them through all their generations, and they were protected from all evil.

According to the opinion of some of the Rabbis, the Israelites did not really dwell in booths in the wilderness, but were surrounded by clouds--by seven clouds. Four

[p. 351]

clouds, one at each of the four sides; a fifth, a shadow, to protect them from the hot rays of the sun; the sixth, a pillar of fire, to give them light by night (they being able to see as clearly by night as by day); and the seventh, to precede their journeying and direct their way.

The children of Israel departed from Egypt in Nissan (April), and obtained immediately these booths, which they made use of for forty years. Thus they were in booths during the entire cycle of the year, and we could as easily commemorate this fact in the spring as in the fall, in the summer as in the winter. Why, then, has God made autumn, and neither spring nor summer, the season of observance? Because if we dwelt in booths in the summer, it would be a question whether we did so in obedience to God's behest or for our own gratification; for many people seek airy retreats during this season; but in the fall, when the trees lose their leaves, and the air grows cold and chilling, and it is the time to fix our houses for the winter, then by inhabiting these temporary residences, we display our desire to do as our Creator has bidden us.

The Feast of Tabernacles is also the Feast of Ingathering, when we should thank God for the kindness shown us, and the treasure with which He has blessed us. When the Eternal has provided man with his sustenance, in the long evenings which follow he should meditate and study his Bible, and make this indeed a "feast to the Lord," and not entirely for personal gratification.

The four species belonging to the vegetable kingdom, which we use on this festival, are designed to remind us of the four elements of nature, which work under the direction and approval of the Most High, and without which all things would cease to exist. Therefore the Bible commands us on this "feast of the Lord" to give thanks, and

[p. 352]

bring before Him these four species, each typifying one of the elements.

"Ye shall take for yourselves (Lev. 23: 40) the fruit of the tree hadar" (the citron). Its colour is high yellow and resembles fire. The second species is the palm branch (Heb. Lulab), The palm is a high tree, growing up straight in the air, and its fruit is sweet and delicious to the taste; this then represents the second element, air. The third is the bough of the myrtle, one of the lowliest of trees, growing close to the ground; its nature, cold and dry as earth, fits it to represent that element. The fourth is "the willow of the brook," which grows in perfection close beside the water, dropping its branches into the stream, and symbolising thus the last element, water.

The Bible teaches us that for each of these four elements we owe especial thanks to God.

The citron we hold in the left hand, and the other three we grasp together in the right. This we do because the citron contains in itself all that the others represent. The outside skin is yellow, fire; the inside skin is white and damp, air; the pulp is watery, water; and the seeds are dry, earth. It is taken into the left hand, because the right hand is strongest, and the citron is but one, while the other emblems are three.

These four emblems represent likewise the four principal members of the human body. The citron is shaped somewhat like a heart, without which we could not live, and with, which man should serve his fellows; the palm branch represents the spine, which is the foundation of the human frame, in front of which the heart lies; this signifies that we should serve God with our entire body. The branches of the myrtle resemble a human eye, with which man recognises the deeds of his fellows, and with which he may obtain a

[p. 353]

knowledge of the law. The leaves of the willow represent the lips, with which man may serve the Eternal and thank Him. The myrtle is mentioned in the Bible before the willow, because we arc able to see and know a thing before we can call its name with our lips; man is able to look into the Bible before he can study the same. Therefore, with these four principal parts of the human frame should we praise the Creator, as David said, "All my bones shall say, O Lord, who is like unto thee?"

The great Maimonides, in his work called "Moreh Nebuchim" (The Guide of the Perplexed), explains that God commanded the Israelites to take these four emblems during this festival to remind them that they were brought out from the wilderness, where no fruit grew, and no people lived, into a land of brooklets, waters, a land flowing with milk and honey. For this reason did God command us to hold in our hands the precious fruit of this land while singing praises to Him, the One who wrought miracles in our behalf, who feeds and supports us from the productiveness of the earth.

The four emblems are different in taste, appearance, and odour, even as the sons of men are different in conduct and habits.

The citron is a valuable fruit; it is good for food and has a most pleasant odour. It is compared to the intelligent man, who is righteous in his conduct towards God and his fellow-man. The odour of the fruit is his good deeds; its substance is his learning, on which others may feed. This is perfect among the emblems, and is, therefore, always mentioned first, and taken by itself in one hand.

The palm branch brings forth fruit, but is without odour. It is compared to those people who are learned, but who

[p. 354]

are wanting in good deeds; they who know the law, but transgress its mandates.

The myrtle is compared to those people who are naturally good, who act correctly towards God and man, but who are uneducated.

The willow of the brook has neither fruit nor odour; it is, therefore, compared to the people who have no knowledge and who perform no good deeds.

If all unite together, however, and offer supplication to the Most High, He will surely hearken to their words, and for this reason Moses said to the Israelites, "And ye shall take unto yourselves," &c.; meaning, to your own benefit, to praise the Lord during the seven days of the festival with these emblems, and to exclaim with the same "Hoshaanah" (O, save us now), and "Oh, give thanks to the Lord, for His mercy endureth for ever."

 

The Rabbis have said that he who has failed to participate in the keeping of the Tabernacle Festival in Jerusalem has failed to taste real enjoyment in his life. The first day of the feast was kept with great solemnity, and the middle days with joy and gladness in various methods of public amusement.

The Temple in Jerusalem was provided with a gallery or the women, which was called the apartment of the women, and the men sat below, as is still the custom of the synagogue. Thither all repaired. The young priests filled the lamps of the large chandeliers with oil, and lighted them all, even that the place was so bright that its reflection lighted the streets of the city. Hymns and praises were chanted by the pious ones, and the Levites praised the Lord with harps, cornets, trumpets, flutes, and other instruments of harmony. They stood upon fifteen

[p. 355]

broad steps, reaching from the lower floor to the gallery, the court of the women. And they sang fifteen psalms as they ascended, beginning with "A song of Degrees," and the large choir joined voices with them. The ancient Hillel was accustomed to address the assemblages on these occasions.

"If God's presence dwells here," he was used to say, "then are ye here, each one of you, the souls of each; but if God should be removed from your midst through disobedience then which of you could be here?" For the Lord has said, "If thou wilt come to My house, then will I come to thy house, but if thou refusest to visit My dwelling, I will also neglect to enter yours;" as it is written, "In every place where I shall permit My name to be mentioned I will come unto thee and I will bless thee" (Exod. xx. 21).

Then some of the people answered:

"Happy were the days of our youth, for they have not set to blush the days of our old age." These were men of piety.

Others answered:

"Happy is our old age, for therein have we atoned tot the sins of our youth." These were repentants.

Then joining together, both parties said:

"Happy is the one who is free from sin; but ye who have sinned, repent, return to God, and ye will be forgiven."

The festival was continued during the entire night; for when the religious exercises concluded the people gave themselves up to innocent but thorough enjoyment.

This festival was also called the "Festival of Drawing Water."

Because, during the existence of the Temple, wine was

[p. 356]

offered during the year for a burnt-offering, but on the Feast of Tabernacles they offered two drink-offerings, one of wine and one of water. Of the other they made a special festival on the second day of the Tabernacle assemblage, calling it the Feast of Drawing the Water. It was founded upon the words of the prophet:

"And ye shall draw water with joy from the fountains of salvation."

     
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

"Hannuckah," The Feast of Dedication.

This festival is observed for eight days during the ninth month Kislev (December), and commemorates the dedication of the Temple after it had been defiled by Antiochus Epiphanes, whose armies were overthrown by the valiant Maccabees, Hashmoneans.

The Most Holy One has frequently wrought wonders in behalf of his children in their hour of need, and thereby displayed His supreme power to the nations of the world. These should prevent man from growing infidel and ascribing all happiness to the course of nature. The God who created the world from naught, may change at His will the nature which He established. When the Hashmoneans gained, with the aid of God, their great victory, and restored peace and harmony to their land, their first act was to cleanse and  the Temple, which had been defiled, and on the twenty-fifth day of Kislev, in obedience to the teachings of the Rabbis, we inaugurate the "Dedication Feast" by lighting the lamps or candles prepared expressly for this occasion. The first night we light one, and then an additional one each succeeding night of its continuance. We also celebrate it by hymns of thanksgiving and hallelujahs.

This feast is foreshadowed in the Book of Numbers. When Aaron observed the offerings of the princes of each

[p. 357]

of the tribes and their great liberality, he was conscious of a feeling of regret, because he and his tribe were unable to join with them. But these words were spoken to comfort him, "Aaron, thy merit is greater than theirs, for thou lightest and fixest the holy lamps."

When were these words spoken?

When he was charged with the blessing to be found in Numbers 6: 23, as will be found in the Book of Maccabees in the Apocrypha.

The Lord said unto Moses, "Thus say unto Aaron. In the generations to come, there will be another dedication and lighting of the lamps, and through thy descendants shall the service be performed. Miracles and wonders will accompany this dedication. Fear not for the greatness of the princes of thy tribe; during the existence of the Temple thou shalt sacrifice, but the lighting of the lamps shall be for ever, and the blessing with which I have charged thee to bless the people shall also exist for ever. Through the destruction of the Temple the sacrifices will be abolished, but the lighting of the dedication of the Hashmoneans will never cease."

The Rabbis have ordained this celebration by lighting of lamps, to make God's miracle known to all coining generations, and it is our duty to light the same in the synagogues and in our homes.

Although the Lord afflicted Israel on account of iniquities, He still showed mercy, and allowed not a complete destruction, and to this festival do the Rabbis again apply the verse in Leviticus 26: 44:

"And yet for all that, though they be in the land of their enemies, will I not cast them away, neither will I loathe them to destroy them utterly, to break my covenant with them, for I am the Lord their God."

[p. 358]

And thus do the Rabbis explain the same

"Will I not cast them away." In the time of the Chaldeans I appointed Daniel and his companions to deliver them.

"Neither will I loathe them." In the time of the Assyrians I gave them Matthias, his sons and their comrades, to serve them.

"To destroy them." In the time of Haman I sent Mordecai and Esther to rescue them.

"To break my covenant with them." In the time of the Romans I appointed Rabbi Judah and his associates to work their salvation.

"For I am the Eternal, your God." In the future no nation shall rule over Israel, and the descendants of Abraham shall be restored to their independent state.

The dedication commemorated by Hannuckah occurred in the year 3632-129 B.C.E.

    
The Talmud: Selections, by H. Polano, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

Purim.

This festival, occurring on the fourteenth day of the twelfth month, Adar (March), is to commemorate the deliverance of the Hebrews from the wiles of Haman, through the God-aided means of Mordecai and Esther.

Although the Holy One threatens the Israelites, in order that they may repent of their sins, He has also tempted them, in order to increase their reward.

For instance, a father who loves his son, and desires him to improve his conduct, must punish him for his misdeeds; but it is a punishment induced by affection which he bestows.

A certain apostate once said to Rabbi Saphra:

"It is written, 'Because I know you more than all the nations of the earth, therefore I visit upon you your iniquities;'

[p. 359]

how is this? If a person has a wild horse, is it likely that he would put his dearest friend upon it, that he might be thrown and hurt?"

Rabbi Saphra answered:

"Suppose a man lends money to two persons; one of these is his friend, the other his enemy. He will allow his friend to repay him in instalments, that the discharge of the debt may not prove onerous; but from his enemy he will require the amount in full. The verse you quote will apply in the same manner, 'I love you, therefore will I visit upon you your iniquities;' meaning, 'I will punish you for them as they occur, little by little, by which means you may have quittance and happiness in the world to come.'

The action of the king in delivering his signet ring to Haman had more effect upon the Jews than the precepts and warnings of forty-eight prophets who lectured to them early and late. They clothed themselves in sackcloth, and repented truly with tears and fasting, and God had compassion upon them and destroyed Haman.

Although the reading of the Book of Esther (Megilah) on Purim is not a precept of the Pentateuch, 'tis nevertheless binding upon us and our descendants. Therefore the day is appointed as one of feasting and gladness, and interchange of presents, and also of gifts to the poor, that they too may rejoice. As in the decree of Haman, no distinction was made between rich and poor, as all alike were doomed to destruction, it is proper that all should have equal cause to feel joyful, and therefore in all generations the poor should be liberally remembered on this day.

THE END

 

 

    


===== BOOK: por.txt =====


    
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. i] [p. ii] [p. iii] [p. iv] [p. v] [p. vi]

  

The Path on the Rainbow

  

An Anthology of Songs and Chants from the Indians of North America

  

EDITED BY GEORGE W. CRONYN

  

New York: Boni and Liveright, Inc.

  

[1918]

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, May 2009. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. vii]

  

CONTENTS

          Early Moon

       Translated by Carl Sandburg

       <page xi>

     
      Introduction

       Mary Austin

       <page xiii>

     
      SONGS FROM THE EASTERN WOODLANDS

        

     
      Abanaki Songs

       Translated by John Reade

       <page 3>

     
      Vengeance Song (Micmac)

       Translated by Silas T. Rand

       <page 5>

     
      Iroquois Ritual

       Translated by Harriet Maxwell Converse

       <page 6>

     
      Fire-Fly Song (Ojibwa)

       Translated by H. H. Schoolcraft

       <page 10>

     
      Calling-One's-Own (Ojibwa)

       Translated by Charles Fenno Hoffman

       <page 10>

     
      Ojibwa War Songs

       Translated by H. H. Schoolcraft

       <page 11>

     
      Two Winnebago Songs

       Translated by Natalie Curtis Burlin

       <page 12>

     
      Sacred Mide Songs (Ojibwa)

       Translated by W. J. Hoffman

       <page 13>

     
      Songs of the Chippewa

       Translated by Frances Densmore

       <page 13>

     
      Memorial Ode (Iroquois)

       Translated by Mary Austin

       <page 26>

     
      SONGS FROM THE SOUTHEAST

        

     
      The Wallum Olum (Delaware)

       Translated by Prof. D. G. Brinton

       <page 31>

     
      Sacred Formulas of the Cherokees

       Translated by James Mooney

       <page 33>

     
      SONGS FROM THE GREAT PLAINS

        

     
      Hunting Songs (Dakota)

       Translated by Stephen Return Riggs

       <page 41>

     
      The Fashioning of the Children (Osage)

       Translated by J. Owen Dorsey

       <page 41>

     
      [p. viii]

        

        

     
      Ritual Chants of the Omaha

       Translated by Alice Fletcher

       <page 46>

     
      Songs of the Ghost-Dance Religion   (Arapaho-Cheyenne-Comanche-Paiute-Sioux-Kiowa-Caddo)

       Translated by James Mooney

       <page 51>

     
      SONGS FROM THE SOUTHWEST

        

     
      Viracocha (Ancient Inca)

       Translated by Garcilasso de la Vega

       <page 61>

     
      War Songs (Zuni)

       Translated by Matilda Coxe Stevenson

       <page 61>

     
      Invocations for Rain (Sia)

       Translated by Matilda Coxe Stevenson

       <page 62>

     
      Magpie Song (Navajo)

        

       <page 66>

     
      Songs in the Garden of the House God (Navajo)

       Translated by Washington Matthews

       <page 66>

     
      The Mountain Chant of the Navajo

       Translated by Washington Matthews

       <page 67>

     
      The Town Crier Calls at Dawn (Pueblo)

       Translated by J. W. Fewkes

       <page 81>

     
      Song of the Horse (Navajo)

       Translated by Natalie Curtis Burlin

       <page 82>

     
      Song of the Blue-Corn Dance (Zuni)

       Translated by Natalie Curtis Burlin

       <page 82>

     
      Songs of the Pima

       Translated by Frank Russell

       <page 83>

     
      Song of the Earth (Navajo)

       Translated by Natalie Curtis Burlin

       <page 118>

     
      Hunting Song (Navajo)

       Translated by Natalie Curtis Burlin

       <page 120>

     
      Song of the Rain Chant (Navajo)

       Translated by Natalie Curtis Burlin

       <page 121>

     
      Song from the Mountain Chant (Navajo)

       Translated by Natalie Curtis Burlin

       <page 122>

     
      Corn-Grinding Song (Zuni)

       Translated by Natalie Curtis Burlin

       <page 123>

     
      Korosta Katzina Song (Hopi)

       Translated by Natalie Curtis Burlin

       <page 124>

     
      He-Hea Katzina Song (Hopi)

       Translated by Natalie Curtis Burlin

       <page 125>

     
      [p. ix]

        

        

     
      SONGS FROM CALIFORNIA

        

     
      Songs of Spirits (Wintu)

       Translated by Jeremiah Curtin

       <page 129>

     
      Songs of Kumastamxo (Yuma)

       Translated by John Peabody   Harrington

       <page 130>

     
      SONGS FROM THE NORTHWEST COAST

        

     
      Prayers of the Tsimshian

       Translated by Prof. Franz Boas

       <page 135>

     
      Three Songs from the Haida

       Translated by Constance Lindsay   Skinner

       <page 136>

     
      Bear Song (Haida)

       Translated by John R. Swanton

       <page 137>

     
      Haida Cradle Songs

       Translated by John R. Swanton

       <page 138>

     
      Bilqula Death Song

       Translated by Constance Lindsay   Skinner

       <page 143>

     
      Songs of the Tlingit

       Translated by John R. Swanton

       <page 143>

     
      Spell Song (Kwakiutl)

       Translated by Prof. Franz Boas

       <page 154>

     
      Chinook Songs

       Translated by Prof. Franz Boas

       <page 154>

     
      SONGS FROM THE FAR NORTH

        

     
      Songs for the Great Feast to the Dead

       Translated by Edward W. Nelson

       <page 159>

     
      Eskimo Songs

       Translated by Prof. Franz Boas

       <page 161>

     
      Sednor and The Fulmar (Eskimo Ballad)

       Translated by Prof. Franz Boas

       <page 162>

     
      INTERPRETATIONS
   CONSTANCE LINDSAY SKINNER

        

     
      Summer Dawn

        

       <page 167>

     
      Song of the Search

        

       <page 170>

     
      Song of Whip-Plaiting

        

       <page 171>

     
      Song of the Young Mother

        

       <page 172>

     
      Song of Basket-Weaving

        

       <page 175>

     
      The Change-Song

        

       <page 176>

     
      Song of the Full Catch

        

       <page 178>

     
      Spring to the Earth-Witch

        

       <page 178>

     
      Chief Capilano Greets His Namesake at Dawn

        

       <page 180>

     
      The Wild Woman's Lullaby

        

       <page 182>

     
      Indian Lover's Hymn

        

       <page 183>

     
      [p. x]

        

        

     
      MARY AUSTIN

        

     
      The Song of the Hills (Yokut)

        

       <page 184>

     
      Neither Spirit nor Bird (Shoshone)

        

       <page 185>

     
      Prayer to the Mountain Spirit (Navajo)

        

       <page 186>

     
      Song for the Passing of Beautiful Women (Paiute)

        

       <page 187>

     
      Song of a Passionate Lover (Yokut)

        

       <page 188>

     
      The Heart's Friend (Shoshone)

        

       <page 188>

     
      A Song in Time of Depression (Paiute)

        

       <page 189>

     
      FRANK GORDON

        

     
      Along the South Star Trail

        

       <page 190>

     
      Sa-a Narai

        

       <page 193>

     
      Earth-Mother

        

       <page 196>

     
      Feast of Wolves

        

       <page 198>

     
      Lone-Dog Unto the Delawares

        

       <page 199>

     
      ALICE CORBIN HENDERSON

        

     
      Listening

        

       <page 200>

     
      Buffalo Dance

        

       <page 200>

     
      Where the Fight Was

        

       <page 201>

     
      The Wind

        

       <page 201>

     
      Courtship

        

       <page 202>

     
      Parting

        

       <page 202>

     
      PAULINE JOHNSON

        

     
      The Lost Lagoon (Tekashionweke)

        

       <page 202>

     
      The Song my Paddle Sings (Tekashionweke)

        

       <page 203>

     
      CONSTANCE LINDSAY SKINNER

        

     
      Plem-Salia-Kwi (Autumn Dawn)

        

       <page 205>

     
      SONGS FROM THE HAKO

        

     
      (A Pawnee Ceremony) Translated by   Alice Fletcher

        

       <page 213>

     
   
     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xi]

  

EARLY MOON

The baby moon, a canoe, a silver papoose canoe, sails and sails in the Indian West.

A ring of silver foxes, a mist of silver foxes, sit and sit around the Indian moon.

One yellow star for a runner, and rows of blue stars for more runners, keep a line of watchers.

O foxes, baby moon, runners, you are the panel of memory fire-white writing tonight of the Red Man's dreams.

Who squats, legs crossed, and arms folded, matching its look against the moon-face, the star-faces, of the West?

Who are the Mississippi Valley ghosts, of copper foreheads, riding wiry ponies in the night?--no bridles, love arms on the pony necks, riding in the night, a long old trail?

Why do they always come back when the silver foxes sit around the early moon, a silver papoose, in the Indian West?

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xiii]

  

INTRODUCTION

The poetic faculty is, of all man's modes, the most responsive to natural environment, the most sensitive and the truest record of his reactions to its skyey influences, its floods, forests, morning colors. It is the first to register the rise of his spirits to the stimulus of new national ideals. If this were not so there would be no such thing as nationality in art, and it is only by establishing some continuity with the earliest instances of such reaction that we can be at all sure that American poetic genius has struck its native note. Therefore it becomes appropriate and important that this collection of American Indian verse should be brought to public notice at a time when the whole instinctive movement of the American people is for a deeper footing in their native soil. It is the certificate of our adoption, that the young genius of our time should strike all unconsciously on this ancient track to the High Places.

Poetic art in America, at the time it began to be overlaid by European culture, had reached a mark close to that of the Greeks at the beginning of the Homeric era. The lyric was well developed, the epic was nascent, and the drama was still in the Satyris stage of development, a rude dance ritual about an altar or a sacrificial fire. Neither poetry nor drama were yet divorced from singing, and all art was but half-born out of the Great Mystery. Magic was sung, and songs had magic power. Both were accompanied by appropriate bodily movement, so that an Indian will say indifferently, I cannot sing that dance, or I cannot dance that song. Words, melody and movement were as much mixed as the water of a river with its own ripples and its rate of flowing. Hum a few bars of a plainsman's familiar song, and he will

[p. xiv]

say, puzzled, "It ought to be a war song," but without the words he will scarcely identify it. Words may become obsolete so that the song is untranslatable, but so long as enough of it remains to hold together the primary emotional impulse out of which it sprang, the Indian finds it worthy to be sung. He is, indeed, of the opinion that "White man's songs, they talk too much."

This partly explains why most Indian songs are songs for occasions. The rest of the explanation lies in the fact that songs have magic power. Tirawa, Wokonda, The Friend of the Soul of Man, is in everything; in the field we plant, the stone we grind with, the bear we kill. By singing, the soul of the singer is put in harmony with the essential Essence of Things. There are songs for every possible adventure of tribal life; songs for setting out on a journey, a song for the first sight of your destination, and a song to be sung by your wife for your safe return. Many of these songs occur detached from everything but the occasion from which they sprang, such as the women's grinding song, measured to the plump, plump! of the mealing stone, or the Paddle Song which follows the swift rhythm of the stroke. Others, less descriptive and retaining always something of a sacred character, occur originally as numbers in the song sequences by which are celebrated the tribal Mysteries.

Back of every Indian ceremony lies a story, the high moments of which are caught up in song, while the burden of the narrative is carried by symbolic rite and dance. The unequal social development of contemporaneous tribes affords examples from every phase of structural development from the elemental dance punctuated by singing exclamations to the Mountain Chant of the Zuni in which the weight of the story has broken down the verse variants into strong simple forms capable of being carried in a single memory. Halfway between them is the ritual sequence of the Midewan.

The practical necessity of being preserved and handed on by word of mouth only, must be constantly borne in mind in considering the development of Indian verse forms.

It operated to keep the poetry tied to its twin-born melody,

[p. xv]

which assisted memory, and was constantly at work modifying the native tendency to adjust the rhythm to every changing movement of the story. Ancient Chippeway singers kept ideographic birch bark memoranda of their songs, and wampum belts commemorated the events that gave use to them, but the songs themselves came down from their ancient sources hundreds of years in the stream of human memory shaped by its limitations.

From the Zuni Creation Cycle with its sustained narrative style to the Homeric Epic is but one poetic bound, the space between them, represented in old world literature by the Norse Sagas and the Kalevala, indicated but not filled, in America, by prose relations. It is probable that if we had anything like adequate records of the literature of vanished tribes, this pre-Homeric period would show notable examples of epic stuff. Nobody really knows how the Walam Olum or the Creek Migration Myths were recited. They embodied whole epochs of tribal history, to which the known literary remains were merely the mnemonic key, a tally of significant items. In every tribe are floating songs which appear to be fragments from a story sequence the key of which has been lost, and it is not unlikely that records like the Red Score would have owned complete, if detached, narratives of the historic events so slightly indicated, some of which may yet yield themselves to the patient researcher.

For the casual reader more interest attaches to the personal songs, the lullabies, love songs, most of all the man's own song which he makes of his great moment. This is a peculiar personal possession. No one may sing it without his permission. He may bestow it on a friend, or bequeath it to the tribe on his death, but it is also possible that he may die without having sung it to anyone but his god.

On one occasion in the high Sierras I observed my Indian packer going apart at a certain hour each day to shuffle rhythmically with his feet and croon to himself. To my inquiry he said it was a song which he had made, to be sung by himself and his wife when they were apart from one another.

[p. xvi]

It had no words; it was just a song. Wherever they were they turned each in the direction he supposed the other to be, when the sun was a bow-shot above the edge of the heavens, and sang together. This is the sort of incident which gives the true value of song in aboriginal life. It is not the words which are potent, but the states of mind evoked by singing, states which the simple savage conceived as being supernally good for him. He evoked them therefore on all his most personal occasions. Poetry is the Path on the Rainbow by which the soul climbs; it lays hold on the Friend of the Soul of Man. Such exalted states are held to be protective and curative. Medicine men sing for their patients, and, in times of war, wives gather around the Chief's woman and sing for the success of their warriors.

"Calling on Zeus by the names of Victory" as Euripides puts it.

It is this inherent power of poetry to raise the psychic plane above the accidents of being, which gives meaning to the custom of the Death Song. As he sees his moment approaching, the Indian throws himself, by some profound instinct of self-preservation, into the highest frame of mind attainable. When men in battle broke into the death song, they had committed themselves to the last desperate adventure. Dying of enfeebling sickness, their friends came and sang around them. One such I heard, the death song of a Yokut Song Maker. It was very simple:

"All my life
     I have been seeking,
     Seeking!"

[paragraph continues] What more than this have the schools taught us!

Of Indian meters there has been no competent study made. The whole problem of form is inextricably complicated with melody and movement. The necessity of making his verse conform to a dance, probably accounts for the liberal use of meaningless syllables. To our ear no specific forms seem indicated, yet that the Indians recognize a certain correspondence between

[p. xvii]

form and meaning is certain. They will readily classify songs of other tribes in unknown tongues into songs of love or war or magic. The genius of the tribal language is a determining factor. No clumsiness of translation can quite disguise the--from our point of view--superior singableness of Chippeway verse. In general, poetry of forest dwellers is more lyric than the songs of mountain and mesa. An inquiry which I once made into the psychology of the Indian sign language with a view to discovering a possible relation between it and Greek manual gesture as displayed in ancient graphic art, led to the conclusion that Indian rhythms arise rather in the centre of self-preservation than of self-consciousness. Which is only another way of saying that poetry is valued primarily by the aboriginal for the reaction it produces within himself rather than for any effect he is able to produce on others by means of it. This is true even of that class of songs which originates wholly in the desire to affect the fortunes or well being of others, songs of healing and magic formulae.

The first stage of Indian magic is the rise of the singer on his own song to a plane of power; only while he is in this plane is he able to bring the wish of his client to pass. It is a natural process of deterioration which leads to the song being thought of as having potency in itself.

Magic songs can generally be recognized by the form of affirmation in which they are cast, as in the Winnebago Love Song, which is not really a song of love, but a song to secure success in love,

Whosoe'r I look upon
     He becomes love crazed.

or the Cherokee formula to insure the constancy of the beloved, and the Micmac vengeance song

Death I make,
     Singing

[p. xviii]

Among the Navajo the magic effect is made certain by the fourfold repetition of the affirming phrase, four being a sacred number.

These are all items which have to be taken into account in interpreting American Indian poetry. It is in the very nature of primitive verse that it should require interpretation, even among the audiences for whom it is originally intended. For verse is to the Red singer but a shorthand note to his emotions, a sentence or two, a phrase out of the heart of the situation. It is the "inside song" alone which is important. Says the Medicine Man, explaining these matters, "You see Injun man singin' an' cryin' while he sing. It ain't what he singin' make him cry; iss what the song make him think, thass what he cryin' about."

This inside song may be a fleeting instant of revelation, or a very long story... as if one should try in the Zuni fashion to compress the whole Christian myth into one bitter cry,

My God! My God!
     Why hast Thou deserted me?

Hi-ihiya, naiho-o,
 It is finished,
 In beauty it is finished
     Nai-ho-o!

Whole cycles of tribal or personal experience can lie behind some such simple but absolute phrasing. It is this hidden beauty for which the interpreter must dig deep into aboriginal life.

The Ghost Dance songs included in this collection are scarcely intelligible until the reader realizes that they are supposed to be the flashes of revelation brought from the dead in dreams, foretelling the approach of a spiritual revival.

Thus it came to the Cheyenne:

I bring the whirlwind
 That you may know one another

We shall live again!

[p. xix]

To the Piaute also

Fog, fog,
 Lightning, lightning,
 Whirlwind, whirlwind.

and then

The cottonwoods are growing tall
 They are growing tall and green.

[paragraph continues] For to the Piaute from his flat Reservation on Walker River, the faint young green of the cottonwoods is the first sign of that new growth which follows after seasonal storms. Any adequate rendering of these songs would have to convey in native figures all this sense of immanent world-overturning and spiritual reestablishment in the Oneness of God and the Brotherhood of man.

(It is I who wear the Morning Star on my forehead...
 All that grows upon the earth is mine
 Says the Father.)

[paragraph continues] Thus interpreted they would rank with the prophetic utterances of the herdsman of Tekoa. It is quite possible, indeed, that in time all these ghostly songs would have been detached from their obscure authors and ascribed to the Messiah of the Ghost Dance, who would have been reckoned among the major prophets.

For such illuminating gleams that Indian poetry can throw on the genesis of inspired literature, its study would be worthwhile, even if without the renewal of our native stock of poetic forms and figures.

It is probable that the best Indian poetry has been lost to us in the stamping out of superior tribes.

This would be particularly the case in the south, where

[p. xx]

social development had reached a stage which only the pueblos and the Five Nations of western New York approached.

Miss Convers has shown us in the fragments of Iroquois ritual something of what might still be recovered from the remnants of that race, but this single example from the forgotten tribe of Tenasa, on the shore of the Missi-sippu seems to me to overleap all time and space and touch the hidden source of Greek inspiration. It is a marriage song, the faithful translation of an unliterary explorer, Greek in its mode, and in a certain tender irony of mood, but with touches to which only a full knowledge of Indian thought can give their full value, for all of which I venture to give it the isolation of its native quality.

Tiakens, thou buildest a house,
 Thou bringest a wife to live in it.

Thou art married, Tiakens, thou art married,
 Thou wilt become famous, thy children wilt name thee among
     the elders.
 Think of Tiakens as an old man!

By what name is thy bride known,
 Is she beautiful?
 Are her eyes soft as the light of the moon?
 Is she a strong woman?
 Didst thou understand her signs as she danced
     to thee?
 I know not whether thou lovest her,
     Tiakens,
 What saidst the old man, her father, when you asked for his
     pretty daughter?
 What betrothal gifts didst thou give her?

Rejoice, Tiakens, be glad, be happy,
 Build thyself a happy home.
 This is the song of its building.

[p. xxi]

[paragraph continues] The single line which identifies the song of Tiakens as intrinsically American is that one which inquires:

Didst thou understand her signs when she danced to thee? embodying as it does a very widespread aboriginal belief that in the dance and song, more than in any other medium, a maiden revealed the physical capacity and the power of sustained emotion which fitted her for marriage. Since when, and with what unhappy results, have we forgotten that creative emotion is a qualification for marriage! We do shallowly indeed when we dismiss the dance and song as mere millinery of courtship. They are the speech of the spirit identifying itself with cosmic forces. I do not know whether or not the Tenasa had the custom known on the Pacific Coast as the Dance of Marriageable Maidens, but I know that if you cut deeply into any Indian poem it yields that profound and palpitant humanism without which no literary art can endure.

Failure to realize the living background of Indian art has led to singular misinterpretation, in a class of songs common to every tribe, and almost invariably translated as love songs by the novice. These are the songs of the Mystics, Songs of Seeking. They record the unavailing search of the soul for the Absolute, for touch of that Great Mystery which is the object of the Indian's profoundest aspiration. Two such songs may be found in Frederick Burton's collection of Ojibway music, done into rather sentimental love ditties, the "Lake's Sheen" and the "Birch Bark Canoe," though their character as religious songs was so plainly marked that Mr. Burton himself commented on the singularity of Indian sweethearts forever getting themselves lost and requiring to be sought. It is well to remember before attempting the interpretation of an Indian love song, that the great Mystics have always appropriated the intimate language of the heart for the soul's quest. As will be seen from the examples which Mr. Cronyn has included in his collection, the work of interpreting our treasure of Indian verse has been but lightly begun. While some of these, notably Miss Corbin's "Across the River" leave nothing to be desired of the spirit, form and content

[p. xxii]

of the original, many others have had frankly to sacrifice one of them.

In my own interpretations I have been feeling rather for a full expression of Indian thought, than for lyrical quality.

And in any case, mine is not a singing gift. All Indian verse is either sung or chanted, but the difficulty of fitting Indian rhythms to European music is only surpassed by the difficulty of getting Indian music arranged in European notation.

The long divided Muses of poetry, music and dance must come together again for the absolute rendering. Enough cannot be said in praise of the work of Miss Fletcher, Natalie Curtis, Frank Cushing and Washington Mathews, to mention no others, for the clarity and sincerity of their literal translations. The interpreter's work is all before him. I know of no task so salutory to the poet who would, first of all, put himself in touch with the resident genius of his own land.

MARY AUSTIN

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1] [p. 2] [p. 3]

  

SONGS FROM THE EASTERN WOODLANDS

  

THE PARTED LOVERS

  

ABANAKI

I

THE MAN SINGS

My parents think they can separate me from the girl I love;
 We have vowed to love each other while we live.
 Their commands are vain: we shall see each other while the world lasts.
 Yes! let them say or do what they like; we shall see each other while the rocks stand.

THE WOMAN SINGS

Here I sit on this point, whence I can see the man that I love.
 Our people think that they can sever us; but I shall see him while the world lasts.
 Here shall I remain, in sight of the one I love.

II

THE GIRL DESERTED BY HER JEALOUS COMPANIONS SINGS

Now I am left on this lonely island to die--
 No one to hear the sound of my voice.
 Who will bury me when I die?
 Who will sing my death-song?

[p. 4]

My false friends leave me here to die alone;
 Like a wild beast, I am left on this island to die.
 I wish the wind spirit would carry my cry to my love!
 My love is swift as the deer; he would speed through the
     forest to find me.
 Now I am left on this lonely island to die.
 I wish the wind spirit would carry my cry to my love!
 My love is as swift as the deer; he would speed through the
     forest to find me;
 Now I am left on this lonely island to die.
 I wish the spirit of air would carry my breath to my love.
 My love's canoe, like sunlight, would shoot through the water
     to my side;
 But I am left on this lonely island to die, with no one to pity
     me but the little birds.
 My love is brave and strong; but, when he hears my fate, his
     heart will break.
 And I am on this lonely island to die.
 Now the night comes on, and all is silent but the owl.
 He sings a mournful song to his mate, in pity for me.
 I will try to sleep.
 I wish the night spirit to hear my song; he will tell my love of
     my fate; and when I awake, I shall see the one I love.
 I am on this lonely island to die.

III

HER LOVER SEES HER IN A DREAM AND, GOING TO SEARCH FOR HER, SINGS

Come, my beloved, let us go up that shining mountain, and
     sit together on that shining mountain; there we will watch
     the Sun go down in beauty from that shining place.
 There we will sit, till the Night Traveler arises in beauty
     about the shining mountain; we will watch him as he
     climbs to the beautiful skies.

[p. 5]

We will also watch the little Stars following their chief.
 We will also watch the Northern Lights playing their game of
     ball in their cold, glistening country.
 There we will sit, on the beautiful mountain, and listen to the
     Thunder beating his drum.
 We will see the flashes from the lit pipe of the Lightning.
 We will see the great Whirlwind race with Squall.
 There we will sit, until all creatures drowse.
 There we will hear the great Owl sing his usual song: "Go-to-
     sleep-all," and see all animals obey his call.
 There we will sit in beauty on the mountain, and watch the
     small Stars in their sleepless flight.
 They do not mind the song, "go-to-sleep-all"; neither will we
     mind it, but sit more closely together, and think of
     nothing but ourselves, on the beautiful mountain.
 Again, the "go-to-sleep-all" will be heard, and the Night
     Traveler will come closer to warn us that all are sleeping,
     except ourselves and the little Stars.
 They and their chief are coursing along, and our minds go
     with them.
 Then the Owl sleeps; no more is heard "go-to-sleep-all";
     the Lightnings flash afar; the great pipe is going out; the
     Thunder ceases beating his drum; and though our bodies
     urge us to be sleeping, we sit in beauty still upon the
     shining mountain.

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

VENGEANCE SONG

MICMAC

Death I make, singing
 Heh-yeh! heh-yeh! heh-yeh! heh-yeh!
 Bones I hack, singing
 Heh-yeh! heh-yeh! heh-yeh! heh-yeh!
 Death I make, singing!
 Heh-yeh! heh-yeh! heh-yeh! heh-yeh!

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 6]

  

IROQUOIS RITUAL OF FIRE AND DARKNESS

The members of the Ho-no-tci-no-ga Society assemble. Now the Medicine Doctor or Shaman casts the sacred tobacco on the medicine-blaze, and in a low voice he chants:

Great Spirit who puts us to sleep in darkness,
 We thank thee for the silences of darkness.
 (Singer)
 Now I ask blessing and make prayers.
 (He sprinkles sacred tobacco on the fire.
 Then he speaks to the Invisible)
 Now I give you tobacco,
 You, the great Darkness!
 (To the Thunder Spirit)
 Now we act as we offer you tobacco!
 You love it most of all offerings.
 With it you will hear us better
 And not tire of our talking
 But love us with all power
 Beyond all treasures
 Or spreading of words through the air!
 All men traveling under great heaven
 You have invited, your grandchildren and all nations;
 Oh you, maker of noise,
 You, the great Thunderer!
 Your grandchildren wish to thank you!
 All your grandchildren have asked me
 To offer this tobacco upon the mountain to you!
 (Speaking to the Great Spirit)
 You the All-maker,
 Above-all-high
 Best Friend of people!
 We ask you to help us!
 We implore your favor!
 I have spoken.

[p. 7]

The lights are extinguished, leaving the assembly in total darkness. The Watcher of the Medicine uncovers the bundles, exposing it to the air, and as he does so a faint luminous cloud hovers over the table and disappears. Now the Chanter gives the signal and the members sing:

THE CHANT OF DARKNESS

Wait here in the darkness!
 Come, all you who listen,
 Go the magic journey:
 Now the sky is empty
 Of all sun-and-star-shine;
 Come, we lose our footing.
 Night no friend of ours is;
 She has shut her eyelids.
 Moon who has forgotten
 Lets us wait in darkness!

Now the chiefs take their rattles, shaking them softly as the Chanter sings and members of the clan give the whip-poor-will cry.

THE CHANT OF INVITATION TO THE WHIP-POOR-WILL TOTEM

(Chorus)
 Thus sings the Whip-poor-will,
 Follow me, follow me!
 Thus speaks the Chief to him,
 Yes, I will follow you!
 Lo! the night darkening
 Stalks through the shadow-land;
 No light to beckon us
 Murmurs the waterfall,
 Thus sings the river-voice!
 Someone is nearing us,

[p. 8]

Creeping upon us close,
 Two fires of eyes are close
 Lighting the forest path--
 Hear how his breath blows by!
 Fol-low me, fol-low me,--
 So sings the whip-poor-will!
 Yes, I am following--
 Thus the Chief answers him.

Cries announce that the Wolf and his mate have entered the room.

Hark the trees whispering
 Bend their old bodies low,
 Not the strong North Wind's hand
 Nay, but One great and swift
 Parts them with whistling breath!
 Hark! how the thickets snap!
 Fearless the footfalls pass
 Pushing the trees apart!
 Great horns dividing them.
 (Again the Whip-poor-will chorus)

Now Buck and Doe, with cries, enter. The song continues:

How I go shivering!
 No snow is falling now,
 Where hides the sun his fire?
 Something swift-footed comes
 Roaring and warning me!
 Eyes of the night it blinds,
 Falling like heavy mist!
 Now it creeps close to me,
 Warning and beckoning
 Where the black forest looms.
 (Whip-poor-will chorus)

The Bear and his mate have come and the song goes on:

How the wind whistles now!
 No one dares race with it.
 Great trees bend low to it,
 Rivers fight back to it,

[p. 9]

Roaring and splashing it!
 Hear how its strong wings beat
 Deep in the gusty sky!
 High through the night it flies
 Whistling and screaming, still
 Hunting the prey that runs!
 (Whip-poor-will chorus)

The Hawk and its mate are announced. Then rites symbolizing the dangers of the forest tangles and swampy horrors are performed. According to the legend Eagle must dismiss the meeting. His coming, which is imitated on the small flute, announces the day. As the dawn-light penetrates the ceremonial place the last chorus is chanted of

THE EAGLE

Deep the dew-water falls
 No one comes close to me!
 Where are you, Whip-poor-will?
 Why am I waiting now
 Calling you, calling you?
 Screaming the night away
 With his great feathers spread
 Catching the darkness up
 I hear the Eagle-bird
 Pulling the blanket back
 From the east, sleeping still.
 How swift he flies, bearing the sun to the morning;
 See how he perches there on the trail of the east-sky.
 Whip-poor-will, Whip-poor-will,
 No more I follow thee!
 When night springs up again
 Will you cry, "Follow me?"

The singing ends and the matrons bring in food and distribute it to all.

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 10]

  

FIRE-FLY SONG

OJIBWA

Flitting white-fire insects!
 Wandering small-fire beasts!
 Wave little stars about my bed!
 Weave little stars into my sleep!
 Come, little dancing white-fire bug,
 Come, little flitting white-fire beast!
 Light me with your white-flame magic,
 Your little star-torch.

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

CALLING-ONE'S-OWN

OJIBWA

Awake! flower of the forest, sky-treading bird of the prairie.
 Awake! awake! wonderful fawn-eyed One.
 When you look upon me I am satisfied; as flowers that drink dew.
 The breath of your mouth is the fragrance of flowers in the morning,
 Your breath is their fragrance at evening in the moon-of-fading-leaf.
 Do not the red streams of my veins run toward you
 As forest-streams to the sun in the moon of bright nights?
 When you are beside me my heart sings; a branch it is, dancing,
 Dancing before the Wind-spirit in the moon of strawberries.
 When you frown upon me, beloved, my heart grows dark--
 A shining river the shadows of clouds darken,
 Then with your smiles comes the sun and makes to look like gold
 Furrows the cold wind drew in the water's face.
 Myself! behold me! blood of my beating heart.

[p. 11]

Earth smiles--the waters smile--even the sky-of-clouds smiles--but I,
 I lose the way of smiling when you are not near,
 Awake! awake! my beloved.

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

OJIBWA WAR SONGS

I

Hear my voice, Birds of War!
 I prepare a feast for you to feed on;
 I see you cross the enemy's lines;
 Like you I shall go.
 I wish the swiftness of your wings;
 I wish the vengeance of your claws;
 I muster my friends;
 I follow your flight.
 Ho, you young men warriors,
 Bear your angers to the place of fighting!

II

From the south they came, Birds of War--
 Hark! to their passing scream.
 I wish the body of the fiercest,
 As swift, as cruel, as strong.
 I cast my body to the chance of fighting.
 Happy I shall be to lie in that place,
 In that place where the fight was,
 Beyond the enemy's line.

III

Here on my breast have I bled!
 See--see! these are fighting-scars!
 Mountains tremble at my yell!
 I strike for life.

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 12]

  

LOVE-SONG

WINNEBAGO

Whomsoe'er look I upon
     He becomes love-crazed;
 Whomsoe'er speak I unto,
     He becomes love-crazed;
 Whomsoe'er whisper I to,
     He becomes love-crazed;
 All men who love women,
 Them I rule, them I rule,
     My friend;
 Whom I touch, whom I touch,
     He becomes love-crazed.

  

HOLY SONG

WINNEBAGO

    (Saith the Spirit,
 "Dream, oh, dream again,
 And tell of me,
         Dream thou!")

Into solitude went I
 And wisdom was revealed to me.
     (Saith the Spirit,
 "Dream, oh, dream again,
 And tell of me,
         Dream thou!")

Let the whole world hear me,
 Wise am I!
     (Now saith the Spirit,
 "Tell of me,
         Dream thou!")

[p. 13]

All was revealed to me;
 From the beginning
 Know I all, hear me!
 All was revealed to me!
     (Now saith the Spirit,
 "Tell of me,
         Dream thou!")

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

SACRED MIDE SONGS

OJIBWA

Drifting snow,
     why do I sing?

The Sun and Moon,
 Their bodies
     shine over the world
     unto me as unto you, my Mide
     friend.

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

SONGS OF THE CHIPPEWA

HEALING SONG

They are in close consultation
     with their heads together
     Wenabojo
     and his grandmother.

LOVE-CHARM

What are you saying to me?
 I am arrayed like the roses
     and beautiful as they.

[p. 14]

I AM WALKING

Toward calm and shady places
     I am walking
     on the earth.

THEY THINK ME UNWORTHY

They think me unworthy
     my Mide brethren
     but look and see
     the length of my wigwam.

THE SOUND IS FADING AWAY

The sound is fading away
 It is of five sounds
     freedom
 The sound is fading away
 It is of five sounds.

DOCTOR'S SONG

I am singing and dreaming in my poor way
     over the earth
     I who will again disembark
     upon earth.

SONG OF THE TREES

The wind
     only
     I am afraid of.

[p. 15]

SONG OF THE THUNDERS

Sometimes
     I go about pitying
     myself
     while I am carried by the wind
     across the sky.

THE APPROACH OF THE STORM

From the half
     of the sky
     that which lives there
     is coming, and makes a noise.

I AM AFRAID OF THE OWL

Very much
     also
     I
     of the owl
     am afraid
     whenever I am sitting alone
         in the wigwam.

I AM AS BRAVE AS OTHER MEN

Men who are brave and heroic
     as you esteem them to be
 Like them
     I also
     consider myself to be.

[p. 16]

MY MUSIC REACHES TO THE SKY

My music
          reaches
         to the sky.

FAREWELL TO THE WARRIORS

Come
     it is time for you to depart
 We are going on a long journey.

SONG OF THE MAN WHO WAS TO BE HUNG

The thunders will take me home,
     whenever I mind to go home,
     my friends,
     and the wind
     it will take me home, too.

FRIENDLY SONG

I

Over there
     in the sky
     they have taken pity on me.

II

The sky
     loves to hear me.

GAMING SONG

I will go home
     if I am beaten
     after more articles
     to wager.

[p. 17]

WAR SONGS

At Co'goben's
     village
     they are weeping
     the men

At Co'goben's
     village
     they are wailing
     the women.

I feel no fear
     when the Great River man
     death
     speaks of.

THE MAN WHO STAYED HOME

Although
     Jinwabe
     considers himself
     a man
     his wife
     certainly
     takes all his attention.

ARROW SONG

Scarlet
     is its head

SONG OF THE BUFFALO

Strike ye
     our land
     with curved horns

[p. 18]

SONG OF THE MINISINOWUCK

It is uncertain what will happen
     to the one from whom I fly
 It is uncertain what will happen
     to the one from whom I rise.

DRUM SONG

I make them dance
     those brave men
 those brave men 
     every one of them

SONG OF WOMAN-OF-THE-RED-SKY, WHO WENT WITH HER HUSBAND, SINGING INTO BATTLE

At that time
     if I had been a man
     truly
     a man
     I would have seized.

DEATH SONG OF NAMEBINES

The odor of death
 I discern the odor of death
     in the front of my body

THE SIOUX WOMEN GATHER UP THEIR WOUNDED

The Sioux women
     pass to and fro wailing
     as they gather up
     their wounded men
 The voice of their weeping comes back
     to us.

[p. 19]

THEY ARE PLAYING A GAME

The noise of passing feet
     on the prairie
 They are playing a game as they come
     those men.

SCALP SONG

I wonder
     if she is humiliated
     the Sioux woman
     that I cut off her head.

SONG OF REJOICING

It shall be
     that I rejoice
 O, my son
     your elder brother
     you have brought back
 O, my son
     it shall be
     that I rejoice
 O, my son.

DEATH SONG

Is there anyone who
     would weep for me?
 My wife
     would weep for me.

SONG OF THE BUTTERFLY

In the coming heat
     of the day
     I stood there.

[p. 20]

MAPLE SUGAR

Maple sugar
     is the only thing
     that satisfies me.

A SONG OF SPRING

As my eyes
     search
     the prairie
     I feel the summer in the spring.

CARRIED AROUND THE SKY

As the wind is carrying me
     around the sky.

THE SKY WILL RESOUND

It will resound finely
     the sky
     when I come making a noise.

AN OVERHANGING CLOUD

An overhanging
     cloud
     repeats my words with pleasing sound.

HEAPS OF CLOUDS

Great heaps
     of clouds
     in the direction I am looking.

[p. 21]

THE NOISE OF THE VILLAGE

Whenever I pause
     the noise
     of the village.

MIDE BURIAL SONG

Neniwa
     let us stand
     and you shall see
     my body
     as I desire.

  

LOVE SONGS

MY LOVE HAS DEPARTED

I

A loon
     I thought it was
     but it was
     my love's
     splashing oar.

II

To Sault Ste. Marie
     he has departed
 My love has gone on before me,
 Never again
     can I see him.

THE GENEROUS ONE

Why should
     I, even I

[p. 22]

be jealous
 because of that bad boy?

RECOVERY

Do not weep
 I am not going to die.

LOVE-HURT

Although he said it
     still
 I am filled with longing
 when I think of him.

GLAD-PARTING

Come
     I am going away
 I pray you
     let me go
 I will soon return
 Do not
     weep for me
 Behold
     we will be very glad
     to meet each other
     when I return
 Do not
     weep for me.

INVITATION

My sweetheart
     a long time
     I have been waiting for you

[p. 23]

to come over
     where I am.

YOU DESIRE VAINLY

You desire vainly
     that I seek you
     the reason is
     I come
     to see your younger sister.

HE IS GONE

I might grieve
 I am sad
     that he has gone
     my lover.

SONG OF AN AMBITIOUS MOTHER

I am asking for
     Bugac's
     daughter
 My big
     brass kettle
     he is giving.

NONSENSE SONG OF THE GAME OF SILENCE

(If you speak or laugh you are defeated)
 It is hanging
     in the edge of the sunshine
 It is a pig I see
     with its double (cloven) hoofs
 It is a very fat pig.
 The people who live in a hollow tree
     are fighting

[p. 24]

They are fighting bloodily
 He is rich
 He will carry a pack toward the great water.
 (The rabbit speaks)
 At the end of the point of land
 I eat the bark off the tree
 I see the track of a lynx
 I don't care, I can get away from him
 It is a jumping trail
 sep!

WORK STEADILY

Be very careful
     to work steadily
 I am afraid they will take you away from me.

I HAVE FOUND MY LOVER

Oh
     I am thinking
 Oh
     I am thinking
     I have found .
     my lover
 Oh
     I think it is so.

  

MIDE SONGS

THESE REPRESENT THE EXPRESSION OF RELIGIOUS IDEAS

I

Is it that
     which my voice resembles?

[p. 25]

Even metal
     the sounding of my voice?

II

From beneath the high hill
     my voice echoes forth.

III

The strength of metal
     has entered into my arrow point.
 A spirit
     I could kill.
 The strength of iron
     has entered into my arrow point.

IV

Beautiful as a star hanging in the sky
     is our Mide lodge.

V

I have gained such spirit-power
     that I can tame it in my hand
 It is true
     even our white shell
     I can tame it in my hand.

VI

Do not speak ill of the Mide
     my Mide brethren.
 Wherever you may be
     do not speak ill of a woman
     my Mide brethren.

VII

We may live by it always
     my Mide brethren
 It is spiritual
     the inspiration we receive.

[p. 26]

VIII

In the middle of the sea
     in the lengthy room of the sea
     there I am standing.

IX

I that hasten around
 I shoot at a man and he falls in a trance
 Then I feel with my hand
     to see if he is still alive.

X

My Mide brother
     is searched
 In his heart is found
     that which I seek to remove
     a white shell.

XI

Into thy body
     I shoot
     the spirit

XII

What is this
     I promise you?
 The skies shall be bright and clear for you
 This is what I promise you.

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

MEMORIAL ODE

Chief John Buck, hereditary Keeper of the Wampum, made and sung his ode in 1884 on the occasion of the removal of the bones of Chief Red Jacket from their original burying place to Forest

[p. 27]

Lawn Cemetery. The Great League is the League of the five Iroquois nations in Western New York.

CHANT

Now, listen, Ye who established the Great
     League,
 Now it has become old,
 Now there is nothing but wilderness.

Ye are in your graves who established it.
 Ye have taken it with you and have placed it under you,
 And there is nothing left but desert.
 There you have taken your great minds.
 That which you established, you have taken with you
 Ye have placed under your heads what ye have established,
 The Great League.

REFRAIN

Woe, Woe! Hearken ye!
     We are diminished
 Woe, woe!
     The land has become a thicket.
 Woe, woe!
     The clear places are deserted
     They are in their graves who established it.
 Woe, the Great League!
     Yet they declared it should endure.
 The Great League, Woe!
     Their work has grown old
     We are become wretched. Woe!

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 28] [p. 29] [p. 30] [p. 31]

  

SONGS FROM THE SOUTHEAST

  

FRAGMENT FROM THE WALLUM-OLUM OR CHRONICLE OF THE LENI-LENAPE [**]

DELAWARE

After the rushing waters had subsided
 The Lenape of the Turtle were close together,
 In hollow houses, living together there.
 It freezes where they abode:
 It snows where they abode:
 It storms where they abode:
 It is cold where they abode.
 At this northern place they speak favorably
 Of mild, cool lands
 With many deer and buffaloes.
 As they journeyed, some being strong,
 Some being rich, they separated
 Into house-builders and hunters:
 The hunters showed themselves at the north:
 The hunters showed themselves at the east:
 The hunters showed themselves at the south:
 The hunters showed themselves at the west.
 In that ancient country, in that northern country,
 In that Turtle country
 The best of Lenape were the Turtle-men.
 All the cabin fires of that land were disquieted
 And all said, "Let us go."

[p. 32]

To the Snake land, to the east, they went
 Going away, earnestly grieving.
 Split asunder, weak, trembling, their land burned
 They went, torn and broken, to Snake Island.
 Those from the north being free, without care
 Went forth from the land of snow in different directions.
 The fathers of the Bald Eagle and the White Wolf remain
 Along the sea, rich in fish and strength.
 Floating up stream in their canoes
 Our fathers were rich, they were in the light
 When they were at those islands.
 Head Beaver and Big Bird said:
 "Let us go to Snake Island," they said.
 All say they will go along
 To destroy all the land.
 Those of the north agreed,
 Those of the east agreed,
 Over the sea, the frozen sea,
 They went to enjoy it.
 On the wonderful slippery water,
 On the stone-hard water all went,
 On the great tidal sea, the muscle-bearing sea.
 Ten thousand at night,
 All in one night,
 To the Snake Island, to the east, at night,
 They walk and walk, all of them.
 The men from the north, the east, the south:
 The Eagle clan, the Beaver clan, the Wolf clan,
 The best men, the rich men, the head men,
 Those with wives, those with daughters, those with dogs.
 They all come, they tarry at the land of the spruce-pines:
 Those from the west come without hesitation,
 Esteeming highly their old home at the Turtle land.
 There was no rain and no corn
 So they moved further seaward.
 At the place of caves, in the Buffalo land,
 They at last had food on a pleasant plain.

Footnotes

^31:* This famous fragment, the only written (pictograph) historical record extant among the Eastern tribes, is included as an example of the Saga element in Indian literature.

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 33]

SACRED FORMULAS OF THE CHEROKEES

I

CONCERNING LIVING HUMANITY

LOVE CHARM

Hu! Listen! In Alahi yi you repose, O Terrible Woman,
 O you have drawn near to hearken.
 There in Elahiyi you are at rest, a White Woman. [**]
 No one, is ever lonely when with you.
 You are most beautiful.
 Instantly and at once you have rendered me a white man.
 No one is ever lonely when with me.
 Now you have made the path white for me.
 It shall never be dreary.
 Now you have put me into it.
 It shall never become blue.
 You have brought down to me from above the white road.
 There in mid-earth you have placed me.
 I shall stand erect upon the earth.
 No one is ever lonely when with me.
 I am very handsome.
 You have put me into the white house.
 I shall be in it as it moves about and no one with me shall ever be lonely.
 Verily, I shall never become blue.
 Instantly you have caused it to be so with me.

And now there in Elahiyi you have rendered the woman blue.
 Now you have made the path blue for her.
 Let her be completely veiled in loneliness.
 Put her into the blue road.
 And now bring her down.

[p. 34]

Place her standing upon the earth.
 Where her feet are now and wherever she may go, let loneliness leave its mark upon her.
 Let her be marked out for loneliness where she stands.

Ha! I belong to the Wolf clan, that one alone which was allotted into for you.
 No one is ever lonely with me.
 I am handsome.
 Let her put her soul in the very center of my soul, never to turn away.
 Grant that, in the midst of men she shall never think of them.
 I belong to the one clan alone which was allotted for you when the seven clans were established.

Where other men live it is lonely.
 They are very loathsome.
 The common polecat has made them so like himself that they are fit only for his company.
 They have become mere refuse.
 They are very loathsome.
 The common opossum has made them so like himself that they are fit only to be with him.
 They are very loathsome.
 Even the crow has made them so like himself that they are fit only for his company.
 They are very loathsome.
 The miserable rain-crow has made them so like himself that they are fit only for his company.

The seven clans all alike make one feel very lonely in their company.
 They are not even good looking.
 They go about clothed with mere refuse.
 They even go about covered with dung.
 But I--I was ordained to be a white man.

[p. 35]

I stand with my face toward the Sun Land.
 No one is ever lonely with me.
 I am very handsome.
 I shall certainly never become blue.
 I am covered by the everlasting white house wherever I go.
 No one is ever lonely with me.
 Your soul has come into the center of my soul, never to turn away.
 I, Gatigwan asti--I take your soul.
 Sge!

II

TO INSURE CONSTANCY

Listen! O, now you have drawn near to harken, O, Ancient One.
 This woman's soul has come to rest at the edge of your body.
 You are never to let go your hold upon it.
 It is ordained that you shall do just as you are requested to do.
 Let her never think upon any other place.
 Her soul has faded within her.
 She is bound by the black threads.

III

Listen! "Ha! Now the souls have met, never to part," you have said, O Ancient One above.
 O Black Spider, you have brought down from on high.
 You have let down your web.
 She is of the Deer clan; her name is Ayasta.
 Her soul you have wrapped up in your web.
 Listen! Ha! But now you have covered her with loneliness.

Her eyes have faded.
 Whither can her soul escape?
 Let her be sorrowing as she goes along, and not for one night alone.

[p. 36]

Let her become an aimless wanderer, whose trail may never be followed.
 O Black Spider, may you hold her soul in your web so that it shall never get through the meshes.
 What is the name of the soul?
 They two have come together.
 It is mine!

Listen! Ha! And now you have harkened,
 O Ancient Red.
 Your grandchildren have come to the edge of your body.
 You hold them yet more firmly in your grasp, never to let go your hold.
 O Ancient One, we have become as one.
 The woman has put her soul into our hands.
 We shall never let it go!
 Yu!

IV

TO DESTROY LIFE

Listen! Now I have come to step over your soul
 You are of the Wolf clan.
 Your name is A'yu'nini.
 Your spittle I have put at rest under the earth.
 I have come to cover you over with the black rock.
 I have come to cover you over with the black cloth.
 I have come to cover you over with the black slabs, never to reappear.
 Toward the black coffin of the upland in the Darkening Land your paths shall stretch out.
 So shall it be for you.
 The clay of the upland has come to cover you.
 Instantly the black clay has lodged there where it is at rest at the black houses in the Darkening Land.
 With the black coffin and with the black slabs I have come to cover you.

[p. 37]

Now your soul has faded away.
 It has become blue.
 When darkness comes your spirit shall grow less and dwindle away, never to reappear.
 Listen!

V

THOSE ABOUT TO BE SLAIN

Ha yi! Yu! Listen!
 Now instantly we have lifted up the red war club.
 Quickly his soul shall be without motion.
 There under the earth, where the black war clubs shall be moving about like ball sticks in the game, there his soul shall be, never to reappear.
 We cause it to be so.
 He shall never go and lift up the war club.
 We cause it to be so.
 There under the earth the black war club and the black fog have come together as one for their covering.
 The black fog shall never be lifted from them.
 We cause it to be so.

Footnotes

^33:* White--happy; blue--despondent. "To make lonely" or to be "lonely" was, to the Cherokees, the depth of degradation.

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 38] [p. 39] [p. 40] [p. 41]

  

SONGS FROM THE GREAT PLAINS

  

HUNTING SONGS

DAKOTA

I

Something I've killed, and I lift up my voice;
 Something I've killed, and I lift up my voice;
 The northern buffalo I've killed, and I lift up my voice;
 Something I've killed, and I lift up my voice.

II

The saddle bind:
 Children dear.
 For half a day,
 I will kill.

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE FASHIONING OF THE CHILDREN

  

OSAGE

CHANT OF THE RED EAGLE CLAN

The First of the Race
 Was saying, "Ho, younger brother! the children have no bodies.
 "We shall seek bodies for our children.
 "Ho, younger brother! you shall attend to it."
 They reached one upper world and stood.
 There they were not human beings.

[p. 42]

"Ho, younger brother! the children have no bodies," he was saying.
 "We must seek bodies for our children."
 They reached the second upper world and stood.
 There they were not human beings.
 "Ho, younger brother! the children have no bodies," he was saying.
 "We must seek bodies for our children."
 They reached the third upper world and stood.
 There they were not human beings.
 "Ho, younger brother! the children have no bodies," he was saying.
 "We must seek bodies for our children."
 They reached the fourth upper world and stood.
 There they became human beings.
 Still, the children were without (human) bodies.
 "We must continue to seek bodies for our children."
 They returned to the third upper world and stood.
 The children were really without bodies.
 "Ho, younger brother! the children have no bodies," he was saying.
 "We must continue to seek bodies for our children."
 They returned to the second upper world and stood.
 The children did not find bodies for themselves.
 "Ho, younger brother! the children have no bodies," he was saying.
 "We must make an examination awhile longer."
 They returned to the first upper world and stood.
 They came to red oak and were standing on it.
 On a very fine day they came hither and stood.
 Kaxe-wahu-sa (the Black Bear), who was then moving,
 Came directly to them and stood.
 "Ho, elder brother!" (said the Black Bear.)
 "You shall continue to burn my feet for me."
 "Ho, Kaxe-wahu-sa!" was he (the Tsicu) saying.
 Kaxe-wahu-sa went to the star Watse-tuka.
 "Ho, grandfather!" he was saying.

[p. 43]

"The children have no bodies."
 Watse-tuka replied, "Can I give the children bodies?
 "I have an everlasting road in which I must keep.
 "I am not the only mysterious one;
 "You shall attend to it awhile longer."
 Then Kaxe-wahu-sa went to the star Watse-mika.
 "Ho, grandmother!" he said;
 "The children have no bodies."
 She replied, "Can I give bodies to the children?
 "I have an everlasting road in which I must keep.
 "I am not the only mysterious one!
 "You shall attend to it awhile longer."
 Then he went to the mysterious one of day.
 "Ho, grandfather!" said he;
 "The children have no bodies."
 Said he, "Can I give the children bodies?
 "I have an everlasting road in which I must keep.
 "I am not the only mysterious one;
 "You shall attend to it awhile longer."
 Then he went to the mysterious one of night.
 "Ho, grandfather!" said he;
 "The children have no bodies, grandfather!"
 The Moon replied, "Can I give bodies to the children?
 "I have an everlasting road in which I must keep.
 "I am not the only mysterious one;
 "You shall attend to it awhile longer."
 Then he went to the Pleiades, saying,
 "Ho, grandfathers!
 "The children have no bodies."
 One of these replied, "Can I give bodies to the children!
 "I have an everlasting road in which I must keep.
 "I am not the only mysterious one;
 "You shall attend to it awhile longer."
 Then he went to the constellation called Three Deer.
 "Ho, grandfather," said he;
 "The children have no bodies."
 The latter replied, "Can I give the children bodies?

[p. 44]

"I have an everlasting road in which I must keep.
 "I am not the only mysterious one;
 "You shall attend to it awhile longer."
 Then he went to the Morning Star, saying,
 "Ho, grandfather!
 "The children have no bodies."
 The star replied, "Can I give bodies to the children?
 "I have an everlasting road in which I must keep.
 "I am not the only mysterious one;
 "You shall attend to it awhile longer."
 Then he went to the Small Star, saying,
 "Ho, grandfather!
 "The children have no bodies."
 The star replied, "Can I give bodies to the children?
 "I have an everlasting road in which I must keep.
 'I am not the only mysterious one;
 "You shall attend to it awhile longer."
 The female Red Bird, who had been moving, was sitting on her nest.
 To her he came, saying,
 "Ho, grandmother!
 "The children have no bodies."
 She replied, "I can cause your children to have (human) bodies from my own.
 "My left wing shall be a left arm for the children.
 "My right wing shall be a right arm for them.
 "My head shall be a head for them.
 "My mouth shall be a mouth for them.
 "My forehead shall be a forehead for them.
 "My neck shall be a neck for them.
 "My throat shall be a throat for them.
 "My chest shall be a chest for them.
 "My thighs shall be thighs for them.
 "My knees shall be knees for them.
 "My heels shall be their heels.
 "My toes shall be their toes.
 "My claws shall be their toenails.

[p. 45]

"You shall live forever without destruction.
 "Your children shall live as human beings.
 "The speech of children I will bestow on your children."

  

THE CHILD IS INTRODUCED TO THE COSMOS AT BIRTH

OMAHA

Ho! Ye Sun, Moon, Stars, all ye that move in the heavens,
     I bid you hear me!
 Into your midst has come a new life.
     Consent ye, I implore!
 Make its path smooth, that it may reach the brow of the first hill!
 Ho! Ye Winds, Clouds, Rain, Mist, all ye that move in the air,
     I bid you hear me!
 Into your midst has come a new life.
     Consent ye, I implore!
 Make its path smooth, that it may reach the brow of the second hill!
 Ho! Ye Hills, Valleys, Rivers, Lakes, Trees, Grasses, all ye of the earth,
     I bid you hear me!
 Into your midst has come a new life.
     Consent ye, I implore!
 Make its path smooth, that it may reach the brow of the third hill!
 Ho! Ye Birds, great and small, that fly in the air,
 Ho! Ye Animals, great and small, that dwell in the forest,
 Ho! Ye insects that creep among the grasses and burrow in the ground--
     I bid you hear me!
 Into your midst has come a new life.
     Consent ye, I implore!

[p. 46]

Make its path smooth, that it may reach the brow of the fourth hill!
 Ho! All ye of the heavens, all ye of the air, all ye of the earth:
     I bid you all to hear me!
 Into your midst has come a new life.
     Consent ye, consent ye all, I implore!
 Make its path smooth--then shall it travel beyond the four hills!

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

RITUAL CHANT AT THE PREPARATION OF THE SWEAT LODGE FOR THE SICK

OMAHA

The Stone, with the curative powers of its heat, becomes a symbol of permanency and strength.

Ho! Aged One, ecka, [**]
 At a time when there were gathered together seven persons,
 You sat in the seventh place, it is said,
 And of the Seven you alone possessed knowledge of all things,
     Aged One, ecka.
 When in their longing for protection and guidance,
 The people sought in their minds for a way,
 They beheld you sitting with assured permanency and endurance
 In the center where converged the paths,
 There, exposed to the violence of the four winds, you sat,
 Possessed with power to receive supplications,
     Aged One, ecka.
 Where is his mouth, by which there may be utterance of speech?
 Where is his heart, to which there may come knowledge and understanding?

[p. 47]

Where are his feet, whereby he may move from place to place?
 We question in wonder,
 Yet verily it is said you alone have power to receive supplications,
     Aged One, ecka.
 I have desired to go yet farther in the path of life with my little ones,
 Without pain, without sickness,
 Beyond the second, third, and fourth period of life's pathway,
     Aged One, ecka.
 O hear! This is my prayer,
 Although uttered in words poorly put together,
     Aged One, ecka.

  

RITUAL CHANT FOR THE SICK

OMAHA

He! Aged One, ecka
 Thou Rock, ecka
 Aged One, ecka
 He! I have taught these little ones
 They obey, ecka
 Aged One, ecka
 He!
 He! Unmoved from time without end, verily
 Thou sittest, ecka
 In the midst of the various paths of the coming winds
 In the midst of the winds thou sittest, ecka
 Aged One, ecka
 He! The small grasses grow about thee, ecka
 Thou sittest as though making of them thy dwelling place, ecka
 He! Verily thou sittest covered with the droppings of birds, ecka
 Thy head decked with the downy feathers of the birds, ecka

[p. 48]

Aged One, ecka
 Thou who standest next in power, ecka
 He! thou water, ecka.
 Water that hast been flowing
 From time unknown, ecka 
 He! Of you the little ones have taken
 Though thy mysteries remain unrevealed
 These little ones crave thy touch, ecka
 He! Thou that standest as one dwelling place, ecka
 Even as one dwelling place, ecka
 Ye great animals, ecka
 He! Who make for us the covering, ecka
 These little ones, thou hast said, let their thoughts reverently dwell on me, ecka
 He! Thou tent frame, ecka
 Thou standest with bent back o'er us
 With stooping shoulders, bending over us
 Verily, thou standest
 Thus my little ones shall speak of me, thou hast said
 Brushing back the hair from thy forehead, ecka
 The hair of thy head
 The grass that grows about thee
 Thy hairs are whitened, ecka
 The hairs that grow upon thy head, ecka
 O, the paths that the little ones shall take, ecka
 Whichever way they may flee from danger, ecka
 They shall escape. Their shoulders shall be bent with age as they walk
 As they walk on the well-beaten path
 Shading their brows now and again with their hands
 As they walk in their old age, ecka
 That of thy strength they shall partake, ecka
 Therefore thy little ones desire to walk closely by thy side, ecka
 Venerable One, ecka.

[p. 49]

  

RITUAL OF THE COSMIC FORCES

OMAHA

Toward the coming of the sun
 There the people of every kind gathered,
 And great animals of every kind.
 Verily all gathered together, as well as people.
 Insects also of every description,
 Verily all gathered there together,
 By what means or manner we know not.
 Verily, one alone of all these was the greatest,
 Inspiring to all minds,
 The great white rock,
 Standing and reaching as high as the heavens, enwrapped in mist,
 Verily as high as the heavens.
 Thus my little ones shall speak of me,
 As long as they shall travel in life's path, thus they shall speak of me.
 Such was the words, it has been said.
 Then next in rank
 Thou, male of the crane, stoodst with thy long beak
 And thy neck, none like to it in length,
 There with thy beak didst thou strike the earth.

This shall be the legend
 Of the people of yore, the red people,
 Thus my little ones shall speak of me.
 Then next in rank stood the male gray wolf, whose cry,
 Though uttered without effort, verily made the earth to tremble,
 Even the stable earth to tremble.
 Such shall be the legend of the people.
 Then next in rank stood Hega, the buzzard, with his red neck.
 Calmly he stood, his great wings spread, letting the heat of the sun straighten his feathers.
 Slowly he flapped his wings,

[p. 50]

Then floated away, as though without effort,
 Thus displaying a power (a gift of Wakonda) often to be spoken of by the old men in their teachings.

  

SONG OF SCORN

OMAHA

Ena! The one I wish to marry has gone to war.
 Ena! The one I hate has not gone forth but remains here.

THE GHOST-DANCE RELIGION

In 1892 the last serious Indian outbreak occurred. This was occasioned by the government's efforts to suppress the practices of a new religion which, during the two years preceding, had spread over a large part of, the west, among the Indian tribes from the Plains to the Coast, and from the Columbia to the Rio Grande. The Prophet of this new cult claimed to be the Messiah, and professed to exercise divine powers. He instituted certain dances, which his followers, in a vain attempt to overthrow the world-order magically, perverted into frenzied rites, wherein entranced, they saw visions and spoke with the dead. The Messiah concept is an ancient one in Indian mythology, antedating all Christian influence, and so desperate had become the straits of the Vanishing Race that these doctrines received wide acceptance. At length the government intervened and brought the strange worship to an end.

Mr. James Mooney investigated this interesting phenomenon and actually discovered the Seer, who proved to be an inoffensive visionary dwelling in a remote valley of the Southwest. This young man's life and theories (a full-blood, apparently untouched by Christian influence), curiously resembled those of Christ, and like the latter, he preached the doctrines of Nonresistance and the Brotherhood of Man. In this case our government played the part of Rome.

[p. 51]

These songs were sung during the dancing, and express in the image of the Whirlwind, a mystic and exalted contemplation of the approaching Great Change. Unessential repetitions have been omitted for brevity's sake.

Footnotes

^46:* Ecka--I implore.

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

SONGS OF THE GHOST-DANCE RELIGION

  

ARAPAHO

DISILLUSION

I

My children, when at first I liked the Whites,
 My children, when at first I liked the Whites,
 I gave them fruits,
 I gave them fruits.

ECSTASY

II

My children, my children,
 The wind makes the head-feathers sing--
 The wind makes the head-feathers sing.
 My children, my children.

LABORS OF THE SPIRIT

III

My children, my children,
 I take pity on those who have been taught,
 Because they push on hard,
 Says our Father.

[p. 52]

WONDER

IV

How bright is the moonlight!
 Tonight as I ride with my load of buffalo beef.

THE WHIRLWIND (POWER OF CHANGE) SPEAKS

V

I circle around
 The boundaries of earth,
 Wearing the long wing feathers as I fly.

VISION

VI

My children, my children,
 Look! the earth is about to move.
 My Father tells me so.

SPIRIT-JOY

VII

I fly around yellow,
 I fly with the wild rose on my head,
 On high--He'e'e'!

REVELATION

VIII

My children, my children,
 It is I who wear the morning star on my head;
 I show it to my children,
 Says the Father.

[p. 53]

TRAVAIL, OF SPIRIT

IX

Father, have pity on me,
 Father, have pity on me;
 I am crying for thirst;
 All is gone--I have nothing to eat.

INVOCATION

X

Father, the Morning Star!
 Father, the Morning Star!
 Look on us, we have danced until daylight,
 Take pity on us--Hi'i'i!

THE MESSIAH SPEAKS

CHEYENNE

I am coming in sight--
 I bring the Whirlwind with me--
 That you may know one another.

REINCARNATION

COMANCHE

We shall live again,
 We shall live again.
 The sun's beams are spreading out--He'e'yo'!
 The sun's yellow rays are spreading out--Ahi'ni'yo'!

SONGS OF LIFE RETURNING

PAIUTE

I

The wind stirs the willows.
 The wind stirs the grasses.

[p. 54]

II

The cottonwoods are growing tall,
 They are growing tall and verdant.

III

A slender antelope,
 A slender antelope
 He is wallowing upon the ground.

IV

Fog! Fog!
 Lightning! Lightning!
 Whirlwind! Whirlwind!

V

Whirlwind! Whirlwind!
 The snowy earth comes gliding, the snowy earth comes
     gliding.

VI

There is dust from the whirlwind,
 There is dust from the whirlwind,
 The whirlwind on the mountain.

VII

The rocks are ringing.
 The rocks are ringing,
 They are ringing in the mountains.

SONG OF THE PATH OF SOULS

VIII

The snow lies there--ro'rani!
 The snow lies there--ro'rani!
 The milky way lies there!

[p. 55]

CREATION

SIOUX

I

This is my work--Yo'yoyo'!
 All that grows upon the earth is mine--Yo'yoyo'!
 Says the Father--Yo'yoyo'!
 E'ya Yo'yoyo'!

LAMENT

II

Mother, come home; mother, come home.
 My little brother goes about always crying,
 My little brother goes about always crying.
 Mother, come home; mother come home.

COURIER CHANT

III

He! They have come back racing,
 Why, they say there is to be a buffalo hunt over here,
 Why, they say there is to be a buffalo hunt over here,
 Make arrows! Make arrows!
 Says the Father, says the Father.

THE MILLENIUM

IV

The whole world is coming,
 A nation is coming, a nation is coming,
 The Eagle has brought the message to the tribe.
 Over the whole earth they are coming;
 The buffalo are coming, the buffalo are coming,
 The Crow has brought the message to the tribe.

[p. 56]

JUDGMENT

KIOWA

The Father will descend.
 Everybody will arise.
 Stretch out your hands.
 The earth will tremble.

VISITATION

II

The spirit army is approaching,
 The whole world is moving onward.
 See! Everybody is standing watching.
 Let us all pray.

THE SECRET OF HUMANITY

III

Because I am poor,
 I pray for every living creature.

THE GOD-MAN

IV

My Father has had pity on me.
 I have eyes like my Father's,
 I have hands like my Father's,
 I have legs like my Father's,
 I have a form like my Father's.

[p. 57]

THE SPIRIT HUNTERS

V

The spirit host is advancing, they say.
 They are coming with the buffalo, they say.
 They are coming with the new earth, they say.

MYSTIC

VI

That wind, that wind
 Shakes my tipi, shakes my tipi,
 And sings a song for me,
 And sings a song for me.

EXHORTATION

CADDO

Come on, Caddo, we are all going up,
 Come on, Caddo, we are all going up
 To the great village--He'e'ye'!
 To the great village--He'e'ye'!
 With our Father above,
 With our Father above when he dwells on high--He'e'ye'!
 Where our Mother dwells--Hhe'e'ye'!
 Where our Mother dwells--Hhe'e'ye'!

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 58] [p. 59] [p. 60] [p. 61]

  

SONGS FROM THE SOUTHWEST

  

VIRACOCHA

ANCIENT INCA

Beautiful Princess
 Lo, thy brother
 Breaks thy vessel
 Now in fragments.
 From the blow comes
 Thunder, lightning,
 Strokes of lightning.
 And thou, princess,
 Take the water;
 As the rain, fall;
 As the hail, fall;
 As the snow, fall;
 Viracocha
 World-dispenser.

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

WAR SONGS

  

ZUNI

To you of the six regions
 Whose homes cover the earth
 I give shells..
 Yellow ant, blue ant, red ant, all color ant
 U--hu--we--u--hu--we-
 U--hu--we--u--hu--we.
 To you whose homes
 Are covered with mountain tops

[p. 62]

I give shells
 Yellow, blue, red, white, all color, black.
 When we meet the enemy
 A little arrow storm will arise.
 When we meet him on the road nearby
 He will never more inhale the sacred breath of day.
 I inhale the sacred breath of day.
 All come quickly,
 The enemy comes from ambush.
 A Navajo is killed,
 We inhale the sacred breath of day.

You have met the enemy.
 He will never more inhale the sacred breath of day.
 The enemy is destroyed.
 Who will be our great Bow priest?
 Who is to become a Bow priest?
 Well! who will kick the scalp?
 His younger mother, his elder sister.
 Who will wash the scalp?
 His younger father, his elder brother.
 Well!
 Good!

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

PRAYER FOR RAIN

  

SIA

White floating clouds,
 Clouds like the plains
 Come and water the earth.
 Sun embrace the earth
 That she may be fruitful.
 Moon, lion of the north,
 Bear of the west,
 Badger of the south,
 Wolf of the east,

[p. 63]

Eagle of the heavens,
 Shrew of the earth,
 Elder war hero,
 Warriors of the six mountains of the world,
 Intercede with the cloud people for us,
 That they may water the earth.
 Medicine bowl, cloud bowl, and water vase
 Give us your hearts,
 That the earth may be watered.
 I make the ancient road of meal,
 That my song may pass over it--
 The ancient road.
 White shell bead woman
 Who lives where the sun goes down,
 Mother Whirlwind,
 Father Sus'sistinnako,
 Mother Ya'ya, creator of good thoughts.
 Yellow woman of the north,
 Blue woman of the west,
 Red woman of the south,
 White woman of the east,
 Slightly yellow woman of the zenith,
 And dark woman of the nadir,
 I ask your intercession with the cloud people.

  

RAIN SONG OF THE GIANT SOCIETY

  

SIA

We, the Ancient Ones,
 Who ascended from the middle of the world below,
 Our medicine is precious,
 It is as our hearts precious to us,
 Arrow of lightning
 Come to us
 Echo.
 Spruce of the north

[p. 64]

And all your people;
 Your thoughts come to us.
 Who is it?
 White floating clouds.
 May your thoughts come to us
 And all your people,
 May their thoughts come to us.
 Who is it?
 Clouds like the plains,
 May your thoughts come to us.
 Who is it?
 Arrow of lightning,
 May your thoughts come to us.
 Who is it?
 Earth horizon
 And all your people,
 May your thoughts come to us.

  

INVOCATION TO THE U'WANNAMI

  

SIA

  

I

Come you, ascend the ladder; all come in; all sit down.
 We were poor, poor, poor, poor, poor, poor,
 When we came to this world through the poor place,
 Where the body of water dried for our passing.
 Banked up clouds cover the earth.
 All come four times with your showers,
 Descend to the base of the ladder and stand still;
 Bring your showers and great rains.
 All, all come, all ascend, all come in, all sit down.

II

I throw out to you my sacred meal that you may all. come.
 Hold your gaming-stick; throw it forward; all come.

[p. 65]

All come out and give us your showers and great rains; all come,
 That the seeds may be strong and come up, that all seed plants may come up and be. strong.
 Come you that all trees and seeds may come up and be strong.
 Come you hither; all come.

III

Cover my earth mother four times with many flowers.
 Let the heavens be covered with the banked up clouds.
 Let the earth be covered with fog; cover the earth with rains.
 Great waters, rains, cover the earth. Lightning cover the earth.
 Let thunder be heard over the earth; let thunder be heard;
 Let thunder be heard over the six regions of the earth.

IV

Rain-makers, come out from all roads that great rivers may cover the earth;
 That stones may be moved by the torrents;
 That trees may be uprooted and moved by the torrents.
 Great rain-makers, come out from all roads, carry the sands of our earth mother of the place.
 Cover the earth with her heart, that all seeds may develop,
 That my children may have all things to eat and be happy;
 That the people of the outlying villages may all laugh and be happy;
 That the growing children may all have things to eat and be happy.
 This way our great father wishes you to come.
 This way our great mother wishes you to come.
 That we may have all kinds of seeds and all things good;
 That we may inhale the sacred breath of life;
 That our fathers and our mothers may bring us happy days.
 Let our children live and be happy.
 Send us the good south winds.
 Send us your breath over the lakes that our great world may be made beautiful and our people may live.

[p. 66]

V

There, far off, my Sun Father arises, ascends the ladder, comes forth from his place.
 May all complete the road of life, may all grow old.
 May the children inhale more of the sacred breath of life.
 May all my children have corn that they may complete the road of life.
 Here sit down; here remain; we give you our best thoughts.
 Hasten over the meal road; we are jealous of you.
 We inhale the sacred breath through our prayer plumes.

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

MAGPIE SONG

  

NAVAJO

The Magpie! The Magpie! Here underneath
 In the white of his wings are the footsteps of morning.
 It dawns! It dawns!

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

SONGS IN THE GARDEN OF THE HOUSE GOD

  

NAVAJO

  

I

Truly in the East
 The white bean
 And the great corn-plant
 Are tied with the white lightning.
 Listen! rain approaches!
 The voice of the bluebird is heard.
 Truly in the East
 The white bean
 And the great squash
 Are tied with the rainbow,

[p. 67]

Listen! rain approaches!
 The voice of the bluebird is heard.

II

From the top of the great corn-plant the water gurgles, I hear it;
 Around the roots the water foams, I hear it;
 Around the roots of the plants it foams, I hear it;
 From their tops the water foams, I hear it.

III

The corn grows up. The waters of the dark clouds drop, drop.
 The rain descends. The waters from the corn leaves drop, drop.
 The rain descends. The waters from the plants drop, drop.
 The corn grows up. The waters of the dark mists drop, drop.

IV

Shall I cull this fruit of the great corn-plant?
 Shall you break it? Shall I break it?
 Shall I break it? Shall you break it?
 Shall I? Shall you?
 Shall I cull this fruit of the great squash vine?
 Shall you pick it up? Shall I pick it up?
 Shall I pick it up? Shall you pick it up?
 Shall I? Shall you?

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE MOUNTAIN CHANT OF THE NAVAJO

CHARACTER OF THE SONGS

Some songs are self-explanatory or readily understood, but the greater number cannot be comprehended without a full knowledge of the mythology and of the symbolism to which they refer; they merely hint at mythic conceptions. Many contain archaic expressions, for which the shaman can assign a meaning,

[p. 68]

but whose etymology cannot now be learned; and some embody obsolete words whose meaning is lost even to the priesthood. There are many vocables known to be meaningless and recited merely to fill out the rhythm or to give a dignified length to the song. For the same reasons a meaningless syllable. is often added or a significant syllable duplicated. Other poetical licenses are taken, such as the omission of a syllable, the change of accent, the substitution of one vowel for another. The most familiar words are often distorted beyond recognition. For these various reasons the task of noting and translating these songs is one of considerable difficulty. In order to simplify the meaning of certain chants repetitive phrases are set as refrains.

  

PRELUDE

  

INVOCATION TO DSILYI N'EYANI

Reared Within the Mountains!
 Lord of the Mountains!
 Young Man!
 Chieftain!
 I have made your sacrifice.
 I have prepared a smoke for you.
 My feet restore thou for me.
 My legs restore thou for me.
 My body restore thou for me.
 My mind restore thou for me.
 My voice restore thou for me.
 Restore all for me in beauty.
 Make beautiful all that is before me.
 Make beautiful all that is behind me.
 It is done in beauty.
 It is done in beauty.
 It is done in beauty.
 It is done in beauty. 

[p. 69]

  

FIRST SONG OF THE THUNDER

Thonah! Thonah!
 There is a voice above,
 The voice of the thunder.
 Within the dark cloud,
 Again and again it sounds,
 Thonah! Thonah!
 Thonah! Thonah!
 There is a voice below,
 The voice of the grasshopper.
 Among the plants,
 Again and again it sounds,
 Thonah! Thonah!

II

  

TWELFTH SONG OF THE THUNDER

The voice that beautifies the land!
 The voice above,
 The voice of the thunder
 Within the dark cloud
 Again and again it sounds,
 The voice that beautifies the land!
 The voice that beautifies the land!
 The voice below;
 The voice of the grasshopper
 Among the plants
 Again and again it sounds,
 The voice that beautifies the land!

III

  

FIRST SONG OF THE EXPLODING STICK

Young Woman Who Becomes a Bear set fire in the mountains

[p. 70]

In many places; as she journeyed on
 There was a line of burning mountains.
 The Otter set fire in the waters.
 In many places; as he journeyed on
 There was a line of burning waters.

IV

  

LAST SONG OF THE EXPLODING STICK

Maid Who Becomes a Bear sought the gods and found them;
 On the high mountain peaks she sought the gods and found them;
 Truly with my sacrifice she sought the gods and found them.
 Somebody doubts it, so I have heard.

V

  

FIRST DAYLIGHT SONG

The curtain of daybreak is hanging,
 The Daylight Boy (it is hanging),
 From the land of day it is hanging;
 Before him, as it dawns, it is hanging;
 Behind him, as it dawns, it is hanging.
 Before him, in beauty, it is hanging;
 Behind him, in beauty, it is hanging;
 From his voice, in beauty, it is hanging.

VI

  

LAST DAYLIGHT SONG

Lullaby, lullaby.
 It is daybreak. Lullaby.
 Now comes the Daylight Boy. Lullaby.

[p. 71]

Now it is day. Lullaby.
 Now comes the Daylight Girl. Lullaby./

VII

  

SONG OF THE PROPHET

That flowing water! That flowing water!
 My mind wanders across it.
 That broad water! That flowing water!
 My mind wanders across it.
 That old age water! That flowing water!
 My mind wanders across it.

VIII

  

SONG OF THE RISING SUN DANCE

Where the sun rises
 The Holy Young Man
 The great plumed arrow
 Has swallowed
 And withdrawn it.
 The sun
 Is satisfied.
 Where the sun sets,
 The Holy Young Woman
 The cliff rose arrow
 Has swallowed
 And withdrawn it.
 The moon
 Is satisfied.

[p. 72]

IX

  

LAST WORDS OF THE PROPHET

Farewell, my younger brother!
 From the holy places the gods come for me.
 You will never see me again; but when the showers pass and
 the thunders peal,
 "There," you will say, "is the voice of my elder brother."
 And when the harvest comes, of the beautiful birds and
 grasshoppers you will say,
 "There is the ordering of my elder brother!"

  

SONG OF BEKOTSIDI WHEN HE MADE THINGS

Both of the gods sang while they were at work, and this was the song that Bekotsidi sang to bless all that he was making. It was the first song which he sang at this work.

Now Bekotsidi, that am I.
     For them I make.
 Now child of Day Bearer am I.
     For them I make.
 Now Day Bearer's beam of blue.
     For them I make.
 Shines on my feet and your feet too.
     For them I make.
 Horses of all kinds now increase.
     For them I make.
 At my fingers' tips and yours.
     For them I make.
 Beasts of all kinds now increase.
     For them I make.
 The bluebirds now increase.
     For them I make.
 Soft goods of all kinds now increase.

[p. 73]

    For them I make.
 Now with the pollen they increase.
     For them I make.
 Increasing now, they will last forever.
     For them I make.
 In old age wandering on the trail of beauty.
     For them I make.
 To form them fair, for them I labor.
     For them I make.

  

SONGS OF DAWN BOY

I

Where my kindred dwell,
     There I wander.
 The Red Rock House,
     There I wander.
 Where dark kethawns are at the doorway,
     There I wander.
 With the pollen of dawn upon my trail,
     There I wander.
 At the yuni, the striped cotton hangs with pollen.
     There I wander.
 Going around with it.
     There I wander.
 Taking another, I depart with it.
     With it I wander.
 In the house of long life,
     There I wander.
 In the house of happiness,
     There I wander.
 Beauty before me,
     With it I wander.
 Beauty behind me,
     With it I wander.

[p. 74]

Beauty below me,
     With it I wander.
 Beauty above me,
     With it I wander.
 Beauty all around me,
     With it I wander.
 In old age traveling,
     With it I wander.
 On the beautiful trail I am,
     With it I wander.

II

In Kininaeki.
 In the house made of dawn.
 In the story made of dawn.
 On the trail of dawn.
 O, Talking God!
 His feet, my feet, restore
 His limbs, my limbs, restore.
 His body, my body, restore.
 His mind, my mind, restore.
 His voice, my voice, restore.
 His plumes, my plumes, restore.
 With beauty before him, with beauty before me.
 With beauty behind him, with beauty behind me.
 With beauty above him, with beauty below me.
 With beauty below him, with beauty below me.
 With beauty around him, with beauty around me.
 With pollen beautiful in his voice, with pollen beautiful in my voice.
 It is finished in beauty.
 It is finished in beauty.
 In the house of evening light.
 From the story made of evening light.
 On the trail of evening light.
 O, House God!
 (The rest as in I, except that lines 12 and 13 are transposed.)

[p. 75]

III

To the house of my kindred,
     There I return.
 Child of the yellow corn am I.
 To the Red Rock House,
     There I return.
 Where the blue kethawns are by the doorway,
     There I return.
 The pollen of evening light on my trail,
     There I return.
 At the yuni the haliotis shell hangs with the pollen,
 Going around,
     With it I return.
 Taking another, I walk out with it.
     With it I return.
 To the house of old age,
     Up there I return.
 To the house of happiness,
     Up there I return.
 Beauty behind me,
     With it I return.
 Beauty before me,
     With it I return.
 Beauty above me,
     With it I return.
 Beauty below me,
     With it I return.
 Beauty all around me,
     With it I return.
 Now in old age wandering,
     I return.
 Now on the trail of beauty, I am.
     There I return.

[p. 76]

  

A PRAYER

  

FOR SECOND DAY OF THE NIGHT CHANT

From the base of the east.
 From the base of the Pelado Peak.
 From the house made of mirage,
 From the story made of mirage,
 From the doorway of rainbow,
 The path out of which is the rainbow,
 The rainbow passed out with me.
 The rainbow raised up with me.
 Through the middle of broad fields,
 The rainbow returned with me.
 To where my house is visible,
 The rainbow returned with me.
 To the roof of my house,
 The rainbow returned with me.
 To the entrance of my house.
 The rainbow returned with me.
 To just within my house,
 The rainbow returned with me.
 To my fireside,
 The rainbow returned with me.
 To the center of my house,
 The rainbow returned with me.
 At the fore part of my house with the dawn,
 The Talking God sits with me.
 The House God sits with me.
 Pollen Boy sits with me.
 Grasshopper Girl sits with me.
 In beauty Estsanatlehi, my mother, for her I return.
 Beautifully my fire to me is restored.
 Beautifully my possessions are to me restored.
 Beautifully my soft goods to me are restored.
 Beautifully my hard goods to me are restored.
 Beautifully my horses to me are restored.

[p. 77]

Beautifully my sheep to me are restored.
 Beautifully my old men to me are restored.
 Beautifully my old women to me are restored.
 Beautifully my young men to me are restored.
 Beautifully my women to me are restored.
 Beautifully my children to me are restored.
 Beautifully my wife to me is restored.
 Beautifully my chiefs to me are restored.
 Beautifully my country to me is restored.
 Beautifully my fields to me are restored.
 Beautifully my house to me is restored.
 Talking God sits with me.
 House God sits with me.
 Pollen Boy sits with me.
 Grasshopper Girl sits with me.
 Beautifully white corn to me is restored.
 Beautifully yellow corn to me is restored.
 Beautifully blue corn to me is restored.
 Beautifully corn of all kinds to me is restored.
 In beauty may I walk.
 All day long may I walk.
 Through the returning seasons may I walk.
 On the trail marked with pollen may I walk.
 With grasshoppers about my feet may I walk.
 With dew about my feet may I walk.
 With beauty may I walk.
 With beauty before me, may I walk.
 With beauty behind me, may I walk.
 With beauty above me, may I walk.
 With beauty below me, may I walk.
 With beauty all around me, may I walk.
 In old age wandering on a trail of beauty, lively, may I walk.
 In old age wandering on a trail of beauty, living again, may I walk.
 It is finished in beauty.
 It is finished in beauty.

[p. 78]

  

NIGHT CHANT

  

FOR THE NINTH SONG

In Tsegihi,
 In the house made of dawn,
 In the house made of evening twilight,
 In the house made of dark cloud,
 In the house made of rain and mist, of pollen, of grasshoppers,
 Where the dark mist curtains the doorway,
 The path to which is on the rainbow,
 Where the zig-zag lightning stands high on top,
 Where the he-rain stands high on top,
 Oh, male divinity!
 With your moccasins of dark clouds, come to us,
 With your mind enveloped in dark cloud, come to us,
 With the dark thunder above you, come to us soaring,
 With the shapen cloud at your feet, come to us soaring.
 With the far darkness made of the dark cloud over your head, come to us soaring.
 With the far darkness made of the rain and the mist over your head, come to us soaring,
 With the far darkness made of the rain and the mist over your head, come to us soaring.
 With the zig-zag lightning flung out high over your head,
 With the rainbow hanging high over your head, come to us soaring.
 With the far darkness made of the dark cloud on the ends of your wings,
 With the far darkness made of the rain and the mist on the ends of your wings, come to us soaring,
 With the zig-zag lightning, with the rainbow hanging high on the ends of your wings, come to us soaring.
 With the near darkness made of dark cloud of the rain and the mist, come to us,
 With the darkness on the earth, come to us.

[p. 79]

With these I wish the foam floating on the flowing water over the roots of the great corn,
 I have made your sacrifice,
 I have prepared a smoke for you,
 My feet restore for me.
 My limbs restore, my body restore, my mind restore, my voice restore for me.
 Today, take out your spell for me,
 Today, take away your spell for me.
 Away from me you have taken it,
 Far off from me it is taken,
 Far off you have done it.

Happily I recover,
 Happily I become cool,
 My eyes regain their power, my head cools, my limbs regain their strength, I hear again.
 Happily for me the spell is taken off,
 Happily I walk; impervious to pain, I walk; light within, I walk; joyous, I walk.
 Abundant dark clouds I desire,
 An abundance of vegetation I desire,
 An abundance of pollen, abundant dew, I desire.
 Happily may fair white corn, to the ends of the earth, come with you,
 Happily may fair yellow corn, fair blue corn, fair corn of all
     kinds, plants of all kinds, goods of all kinds, jewels of all
     kinds, to the ends of the earth, come with you.
 With these before you, happily may they come with you,
 With these behind, below, above, around you, happily may they come with you,
 Thus you accomplish your tasks.

Happily the old men will regard you,
 Happily the old women will regard you,
 The young men and the young women will regard you,
 The children will regard you,

[p. 80]

The chiefs will regard you,
 Happily, as they scatter in different directions, they will regard you,
 Happily, as they approach their homes, they will regard you.

May their roads home be on the trail of peace,
 Happily may they all return.
 In beauty I walk,
 With beauty before me, I walk,
 With beauty behind me, I walk,
 With beauty above and about me, I walk,
 It is finished in beauty,
 It is finished in beauty.

  

PROTECTION SONG

  

NAVAJO

TO BE SUNG ON GOING INTO BATTLE

I

Now, Slayer of the Alien Gods, among men am I.
 Now among the alien gods with weapons of magic am I.
 Rubbed with the summits of the mountains,
 Now among the alien gods with weapons of magic am I.
 Now upon the beautiful trail of old age,
 Now among the alien gods with weapons of magic am I.

II

Now, Offspring of the Water, among men am I.
 Now among the alien gods with weapons of magic am I.
 Rubbed with the water of the summits,
 Now among the alien gods with weapons of magic am I.
 Now upon the beautiful trail of old age,
 Now among the alien gods with weapons of magic am I.

[p. 81]

III

Now, Lightning of the Thunder, among men am I.
 Now among the alien gods with weapons of magic am I.
 Rubbed with the summit of the sky,
 Now among the alien gods with weapons of magic am I.
 Now upon the beautiful trail of old age,
 Now among the alien gods with weapons of magic am I.

IV

Now, Altsodoniglehi, among men am I.
 Now among the alien gods with weapons of magic am I.
 Rubbed with the summits of the earth,
 Now among the alien gods with weapons of magic am I.
 Now upon the beautiful trail of old age,
 Now among the alien gods with weapons of magic am I.

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE TOWN CRIER CALLS AT DAWN TO ANNOUNCE THE FEAST

  

PUEBLO

All people awake, open your eyes, arise,
 Become children of light, vigorous, active, sprightly.
 Hasten clouds from the four world quarters;
 Come snow in plenty, that water may be abundant when summer comes;
 Come ice, cover the fields, that the planting may yield abundance,
 Let all hearts be glad!
 The knowing ones will assemble in four days;
 They will encircle the village dancing and singing songs...
 That moisture may come in abundance.

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 82]

  

SONG OF THE HORSE

  

NAVAJO

    How joyous his neigh!
 Lo, the Turquoise Horse of Johano-ai,
     How joyous his neigh,
 There on precious hides outspread standeth he;
     How joyous his neigh,
 There on tips of fair fresh flowers feedeth he;
     How joyous his neigh,
 There of mingled waters holy drinketh he;
     How joyous his neigh,
 There he spurneth dust of glittering grains;
     How joyous his neigh,
 There in mist of sacred pollen hidden, all hidden he;
     How joyous his neigh,
 There his offspring many grow and thrive for evermore;
     How joyous his neigh!

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

SONG OF THE BLUE-CORN DANCE

  

ZUNI

Beautiful, lo, the summer clouds,
 Beautiful, lo, the summer clouds!
 Blossoming clouds in the sky,
 Like unto shimmering flowers,
 Blossoming clouds in the sky,
 Onward, lo, they come,
 Hither, hither bound!

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 83]

  

PIMA RITUAL SONG CYCLE

  

THE FLOOD

I

ELDER BROTHER, SON OF EARTH

(Chanted by the People)
 Dazzling power has Elder Brother,
     Mastering the winds with song.
 Swiftly now we come together,
     Singing to gain control.

II

EARTH DOCTOR PROPHESIED THE FLOOD, CAUSED BY ELDER BROTHER:

Weep, my unfortunate people!
     All this you will see take place.
 Weep, my unfortunate people!
     For the waters will overwhelm the land.
 Weep, my unhappy relatives!
     You will learn all.
 Weep, my unfortunate relatives!
     You will learn all.
 The waters will overwhelm the mountains.

III

ELDER BROTHER FROM HIS OLLA SONG:

Black house! Black house! Hold me safely in;
 Black house! Black house! Hold me safely in,
     As I journey to and fro, to and fro.

[p. 84]

AS HE WAS BORNE ALONG BY THE FLOOD HE SANG:

Running water, running water, herein resounding,
     As on the clouds I am carried to the sky,
 Running water, running water, herein roaring,
     As on the clouds I am carried to the sky.

EMERGING SAFELY FROM THE OLLA HE SANG:

Here I come forth! Here I come forth!
     With magic powers I emerge.
 Here I come forth! Here I come forth!
     With magic powers I emerge.
 I stand alone! Alone!
     Who will accompany me?
 My staff and my crystal
     They shall bide with me.

IV

HOW SOUTH DOCTOR FORETOLD THE DESTRUCTION OF EARTH AND ALL ITS CREATURES:

The waters dissolve the land.
     The waters dissolve the land.
 The mighty magician tests his strength.
 The waters dissolve the mountain.
     The waters dissolve the mountain.
 Nasi foresees what is coming.

V

EARTH DOCTOR BEHELD THE RISING WATERS:

Haiya! Haiya! Flood! Flood! Hai-iya!
     See the doom awaiting them!

[p. 85]

Haiya! Haiya! Flood! Flood! Hai-iya!
     Here are my doomed people before me.

VI

SOUTH DOCTOR RAISED THE MOUNTAINS:

On the Crooked mountain I am standing,
     Trying to disperse the waters.
 On the Crooked mountain I am standing,
     Trying to disperse the waters.

AND MARKED THE LIMITS OF THE FLOOD:

On the Crooked mountain top I'm standing,
     Trying to disperse the waters.
 On the Crooked mountain top I'm standing, -
     Trying to disperse the waters.

BUT HE COULD DO NO MORE:

Powerless! Powerless!
     Powerless is my magic crystal!
 Powerless! Powerless!
     I shall become as stone.

Earth Doctor escaped destruction by shutting himself in his reed staff
 Elder Brother was saved in his olla.
     After the waters rolled back
 Elder Brother was first to appear and so became ruler of the world.
 Now Earth Doctor created all things anew.

[p. 86]

  

CREATION SONGS BY EARTH DOCTOR

I

Earth Magician shapes this world.
     Behold what he can do!
 Round and smooth he molds it.
     Behold what he can do!

II

Earth Magician makes the mountains.
     Heed what he has to say!
 He it is that makes the mesas.
     Heed what he has to say.
 Earth Magician shapes this world;
     Earth Magician makes its mountains;
 Makes all larger, larger, larger.

III

    Into the earth the Magician glances;
 Into its mountains he may see.

IV

I have made the Sun!
     I have made the Sun!
 Hurling it high
     In the four directions.
 To the East I threw it
     To run its appointed course.

V

I have made the Moon!
     I have made the Moon!
 Hurling it high
     In the four directions.
 To the East I threw it
     To run its appointed course.

[p. 87]

VI

I have made the Stars!
     I have made the Stars!
 Above the earth I threw them.
     All things above I've made
 And placed them to illumine.

  

WARS OF THE PEOPLE

I

AFTER A TIME ELDER BROTHER WENT WITH THE PEOPLE TO SLAY HA-AK, THE FEMALE MONSTER

Dazzling power has Elder Brother,
     Mastering the winds with song.
 Swiftly now we come together,
     Singing to secure control.
 Kovakova, kovakova,
     Kovakova, kovakova.
 Singing on the summit
     Of great Mo-hatuk mountain,
 Anayokuna, anayokuna, hayokuna.
 Sacred pipe of Tcu-unarsat,
     Sleep-inducing sacred pipe,
 Anayokuna, anayokuna, hayokuna.
     Ha-ak flees from her pursuers,
 But her spring and mortar stay.
 Throw a great stone!
 Throw a great stone!
     The blue owl is brightest,
 Throw a great stone!
     The blue owl is brightest,
 Throw a great stone.

[p. 88]

II

WHEN THEY HAD SLAIN HA-AK THEY WENT AGAINST THEIR ENEMIES, SINGING:

We go; we go; we go; we go.
     Happy, we leave our homes.
 We go; happily we go.
 We run; we run; we run; we run.
     Happy, we leave our land.
 With pleasure hence we hasten.

III

THUS SANG THE PEOPLE AS THEY CAME UP OUT OF THE EARTH, WHITHER THEY FLED DURING THE FLOOD:

Together we emerge with our rattles;
 Together we emerge with our rattles,
     Bright-hued feathers in our headdresses.

With our nynnyirsa we went down,
 With our nynnyirsa we went down;
     Wearing Yoku feathers in our headdresses.

This is the White Land, we arrive singing,
     Headdresses waving in the breeze.
 We have come! We have come!
     The land trembles with our dancing and singing.

    We run, we run, we run, we run,
 Happy we leave our land;
     With pleasure hence we hasten.

On these Black mountains all are singing,
     Headdresses waving, headdresses waving.

[p. 89]

We all rejoice! We all rejoice!
     Singing, dancing, the mountains trembling.

IV

WHEN THEY ATTACKED THE MEN OF MORNING-BLUE THEY SANG:

Yonder stands the doomed habitation.
     About the pueblo runs its frightened chieftain
 In yellow garment with hand-print decoration.

V

AT GILA CROSSING ELDER BROTHER SANG:

I am the magician who with the sacred pipe
     Of Tcu-unarsat increase my magic power.
 I am the magician of the downy feathers.
     With the soothing sacred pipe.
 I bring sleep upon my enemy.

VI

THEY WENT AGAINST THE ENEMY NEAR TEMPE, SINGING:

Look for him! Look for him!
     Poor distracted enemy; take him!
 Poor fear-stricken enemy; take him!

[p. 90]

VII

WHEN HE CLIMBED THE CLIFF TO ATTACK EAGLE, ELDER BROTHER SANG:

Up the cliff, steep and smooth,
     Up the cliff, steep and smooth,
 Up the cliff, steep and smooth,
     Climbs Elder Brother
 With his shining power.
     Up the cliff, steep and smooth,
 Up the cliff, steep and smooth,
     He climbs step by step.

VIII

THERE HE CONCEALED HIMSELF AS A FLY, SINGING:

Himovali! Die fly! Himovali! Die fly!
     I shall sleep! I shall sleep!
 Himovali! Let die! I am drowsy.
     I will sleep! Buzz-z.

IX

WHEN EAGLE RETURNED HIS WIFE PUT HIM TO SLEEP WITH THIS SONG:

Haya yakahai yahai mo! Haya yakahai mo!
     I am sleepy, I am sleepy.
 Haya yakahai yahai mo! I am sleepy.

[p. 91]

X

THEN THE ELDER BROTHER SLEW THE EAGLE AND RETURNING IN TRIUMPH, ELDER BROTHER CELEBRATED HIS PROWESS:

Child of the Raven! Child of the Raven!
     You of the dazzling power.
 See my magic power shining like the mirage.

  

HUNTING SONGS

  

I

At the time of the White Dawn;
     At the time of the White Dawn,
 I arose and went away.
     At Blue Nightfall I went away.

I ate the thornapple leaves
     And the leaves made me dizzy.
 I drank thornapple flowers
     And the drink made me stagger.
 The hunter, Bow-remaining,
     He overtook and killed me,
 Cut and threw my horns away.
     The hunter, Reed-remaining,
 He overtook and killed me,
     Cut and threw my feet away.

Now the flies become crazy
     And they drop with flapping wings.
 The drunken butterflies sit
     With opening and shutting wings.

[p. 92]

II

Young Hare Magician running
     Brings black-tailed deer venison.
 And young Badger Magician
     Brings the feet of black-tailed deer.

Had I neither winds or clouds?
     In the east the Yellow Ikol,
 In the west the Yellow Ikol
     Called me. I had no winds or clouds.

  

BASKET-BEATING SONGS

I

As the Sun sinks to the westward
     We begin singing the Eagle songs.
 The home of the Magician rises,
     Standing before me in the land.
 We begin singing the Eagle songs.

Earth Magician now comes hither;
     Earth Magician now comes hither.
 From the depths the songs are rising,
     And by him are here established.
 As now the land is prosperous;
     As now the land is prosperous
 Elder Brother comes from the East;
     He comes here as a child might,
 The land prospers with his coming.

It was in the western mountains
     That White-Eater Woman dwelt.
 It was in the western mountains
     That White-Eater Woman dwelt.

[p. 93]

The evening glows red in the West,
     And the birds here gather about me.
 Now I hear the screams of the Eagle.
     Haiya ha aiya haya haya ha-a!
 Now I meet and see you. Haiya ha!

II

Roll from cliff end to cliff end,
     Roll, Winds, from the steep house walls.
 Thus the growing excitement
     Gathers like the winds that blow
 From the house of Wind Magician.

In the East, my younger brothers,
     We are preceded by the bearers
 Of the sacred eagle feathers.
     In the East, my younger brothers,
 We are preceded by the bearers
     Of the sacred eagle feathers

In the distant land of Eagle,
     In the distant land of Eagle
 Sounds the harmonious rolling
     Of reverberating thunder.

Now the Swallow begins his singing;
     Now the Swallow begins his singing.
 And the women who are with me,
     The poor women begin to sing.

The Swallows meet in the standing cliffs;
     The Swallows meet in the standing cliffs.
 And the rainbows arched above me,
     There the blue rainbow arches meet.

The Black Swallows running hither;
     The Black Swallows running hither,

[p. 94]

Running hither come to lead me,
     Lead me there, lead me there.

Haiya! Far in the distant east
     Lie the clouds hidden under the mountain.
 Far in the east direction
     To the hidden clouds I come running.

We are beating the basket drums:
     We are beating the basket drums.
 I am singing, I am listening;
     From my feathers clouds are shaking.

I am circling like the Vulture,
     Staying, flying near the blue.
 I am circling like the Vulture,
     Breathing, flying near the blue.

Now the Reddish Bat rejoices
     In the songs which we are singing;
 He rejoices in the eagle down
     With which we ornament our headdress.

I ran into the swamp confused;
     There I heard the Tadpoles singing.
 I ran into the swamp confused,
     Where the bark-clothed Tadpoles sang.

In the West the Dragonfly wanders,
     Skimming the surface of the pools,
 Touching only with his tail. He skims
     With flapping and rustling wings.

Thence I run as the darkness gathers,
     Wearing cactus flowers in my hair.
 Thence I run as the darkness gathers,
     In fluttering darkness to the singing place.

[p. 95]

  

SONG OF THE RACE

Many people have gathered together,
     I am ready to start in the race,
 And the Swallow with beating wings
     Cools me in readiness for the word.

Far in the west stands the Black mountain
     Around which our racers ran at noon.
 Who is this man running with me,
     The shadow of whose hands I see?

  

SONG OF STRANGENESS

Singing to the gods in supplication;
     Singing to the gods in supplication,
 Thus my magic power is uplifted.
     My power is uplifted as I sing.

Harlots hither running come;
     Harlots hither running come,
 Holding blue flowers as they run.
     Talking in whispers they file along.

Along the crooked trail I'm going,
     Along the crooked trail going west.
 To the land of rainbows I'm going,
     Swinging my arms as I journey on.

  

NAME-SONG

The ceremonial reeds are lifted;
     The ceremonial reeds are lifted.
 Ma-akahi has killed an Apache,
     And we meet together here in war paint

[p. 96]

To collect hair trophies with their power.
     Hivayomi has taken a captive,
 And the magic of his bow dies with him.

  

PUBERTY SONG

Come, hurry forth, hurry forth.
     Already the echoing sounds
 Of darkness are heard around.

The Virgin is not sleepy,
 She is wakeful through the night.

The Saguaro lies there broken;
     And my fallen feathers rise
 O'er the top of Table Mountain.

The boy stirred the rumbling stones;
     The woman heard and could not sleep.
 And my toe nails are broken.

The branches of darkness fell,
 Cutting my feathers as I passed.

  

SONG OF THE MAGIC OF DAWN

On the top of Mohatuk
     There are many clouds standing.
 On the top of Mohatuk
     Many fog clouds are rising.
 The bitter wind blows on us;
     The bitter wind blows on us,
 As we sing with many bows.

[p. 97]

Though I am a Navitco,
     I hear you talk about me.
 I thrust my head through the sky
     And with it I run away.

Cut sticks, cut sticks, cut sticks straight.

  

FETISH SONG

We commence the fetish song;
     We commence the fetish song.
 It is difficult but I try;
     The night grows very noisy.

The fetish song arises;
     The fetish song arises.
 To it the crazed women run;
     To it the crazed women run.

Pity me! Oh, pity me!
     And strip away my disease;
 Now strip away my disease;
     Clear it away by singing.
 I'm going to the singing;
     I'm going to the singing.
 It is leading to the mountain,
     Running to Sievat mountain.

  

LIGHTNING SONG

See the destructive lightning
     Going to kill the distant tree.
 It is going, my younger brother,
     To split the distant tree.

[p. 98]

Around the mountain I carry
     My poor younger brother:
 Carry him around the mountain
     And then stand before it.

The lightning like reddish snakes
     Tries to lash and shiver the trees.
 The lightning tries to strike them,
     But it fails and they still stand.

Through the roaring darkness I run,
     Carrying my poor younger brother;
 From the top of the sky the lightning
     Shoots, and strikes nearby.

  

HORNED TOAD SONG

The East Land seems very pleasant.
     I go toward it and I see
 How pleasant it seems to be.
     I go toward the Pleasant Land.

West Land is most terrible.
     I go toward it and I see
 How terrible the Land is.
     I go toward the fearful Land.

  

GILA MONSTER SONG

Pitiable harlot though I am,
     My heart glows with the singing
 While the evening yet is young.
     My heart glows with the singing.

[p. 99]

Where the two stones were standing,
     Black Wind roared in fearful blasts,
 Driving the birds before him
     Fluttering back and forth.

On the summit of white Ngiwolik
     There the green frogs are singing.
 Lying near the blue storm clouds
     There many frogs are singing.

  

BLACK LIZARD SONG

We first sing at the Magician's;
     We first sing at the Magician's,
 The round disk of the Sun arose,
     Accompanied with its rays.

Harlots came running in a group;
     Harlots came running in a group.
 Harlots came with hikimoli,
     Flower crowns upon their heads.

Black Lizard found the trail where
     Elder Brother had been running,
 And he came out from the clouds
     With water upon his arms.

Darkness settles on the summit
     Of the great Stony Mountain.
 There circling round it settles
     On the great Stony Mountain.

The ruddy beams like spider threads
     Across the sky came streaming.
 The reddish snakes like spider's web
     To the opposite side came flaming.

[p. 100]

  

BLACK-TAILED DEER SONG

Down from the houses of magic;
     Down from the houses of magic,
 Blow the winds and from my antlers,
     And my ears they stronger gather.

Over there I ran trembling;
     Over there I ran trembling,
 For bows and arrows pursued me.
     Many bows were on my trail.

What horse is trying to catch me?
     What horse is trying to catch me?
 The horse with the star forehead
     Now slowly gains upon me.

We are sitting here together;
     We are sitting here together,.
 Singing the song of the east,
     Singing the song of the west.

  

RATTLESNAKE SONG

In the early evening,
     In the early evening
 We begin to sing many songs;
     And I join in singing many.

It was near Ka-matuk mountain
     That this Rattlesnake came forth;
 And he saw the low clouds lying
     Near the summit of the mountain.

Who is this, who is this?
     Is it not Horned Rattlesnake?

[p. 101]

Is it not Horned Rattlesnake
     Who now appears before us?

The Butterflies are singing;
     The Butterflies are singing,
 As I go past the foundations
     Below, of the ancient house.

  

BEAVER SONG

You talk about and fear me;
     You talk about and fear me.
 As like the sinuous snake
     I go upon the water.

I see that you go slowly;
     I see that you go slowly.
 Strong as the Sun among the trees,
     You leave your mark upon them.

Younger brother, I am Beaver,
     I am the quick-eared Beaver
 That gnaws the trees of the forest,
     'Tis I who overthrow them.

  

OWL SONG

Toward great Ka-matuk mountain
     I go to join the singing,
 During the glow of evening.
     I meet all the singers there.

Owl is singing in the distance,
     I hear him moving back and forth.

[p. 102]

Many harlots came here running;
     Here came running and came laughing.

Small Owl resembles Tcokot;
     The winds rise from Owl's feathers.
 With their ashy tips he starts them.
     Small Owl is like the Large Owl.

Owl makes me drink the reddish water;
     Rapidly intoxicated
 I try to walk straight toward the east,
     And find my footsteps staggering.

  

QUAIL SONG

The Gray quails were bunched together
     Coyote ran to look upon them.
 The Blue quails were bunched together;
     Coyote looked sidewise at them.

  

MOUSE SONG

Wings of birds invisible
     Are now fluttering above you.
 You stand with face uplifted
     And quietly listen there.

Our land was unfortunate;
     The floods came rolling westward,
 Then they came flowing westward,
     And I cried out much afraid.

[p. 103]

  

BEAR SONG

I am the Black Bear. Around me
     You see the light clouds extending.
 I am the Black Bear. Around me
     You see the light dew falling.

I drink the reddish liquor
     Which kills the spirit in me.
 I drink the reddish liquor
     Which kills the spirit in me.

Now the singing has commenced,
     Now the singing has commenced.
 I go with my younger brother;
     I know the songs we're singing.

  

ROADRUNNER SONG

Roadrunner with the bushy head
     Is always crying, poi! poi!
 As he runs around the house.
     Poi! poi! around the house.

Here is the lonely Roadrunner;
     Here is the lonely Roadrunner.
 He eats lizards in the morning;
     He eats solitary lizards.

Here is the red-eyed Roadrunner;
     Here is the red-eyed Roadrunner,
 Who runs about the mistletoe.
     This is the red-eyed Roadrunner.

I run and hide! I run and hide!
     Now I kill the Gray Lizard

[p. 104]

And I eat his fat body.
     I run and hide! I run and hide.

Over yonder in the mesquite
     Stands the Hawk's nest with its branches
 Which rise like kiaha frame sticks,
     Over yonder in the mesquite.

  

DOG SONG

The songs commence at nightfall,
     And the winds blow toward the north.
 The winds are blowing strongly,
     Blowing my tail toward the north.

Butterfly wings are falling;
     Butterfly wings are falling,
 Falling upon and harming;
     My suffering is greater.

See the small dogs come running;
     See the poor dogs come running.
 See the horsemen coming after;
     See the horsemen come laughing.

  

HARE SONG

Hare is jumping and singing;
     Hare is jumping and singing,
 While the wind is roaring.
     While the wind is roaring.

Hare is dancing and singing;
     Hare is dancing and singing,

[p. 105]

While the clouds are roaring,
     While the clouds are roaring.

With headdress of owl feathers;
     With headdress of owl feathers,
 He comes to my far country;
     He comes bringing hence his bow.

The Gray Mouse came at nightfall;
     The Gray Mouse came at nightfall,
 Came running in the darkness;
     Came breathing in the darkness.

I am shut in at day dawn;
     I am shut in at day dawn,
 All night I am free to run
     But am shut in at day dawn.

  

GOPHER SONG

In the reddish glow of nightfall,
     In the reddish glow of nightfall
 I return to my burrow,
     About which the flowers bloom.

With the four eagle feathers,
     With the four eagle feathers
 I stir the air. When I turn
     My magic power is crossed.

And I make hills of soft earth;
     And I make hills of soft earth.
 My breath withers all before it;
     My breath withers all before it.

[p. 106]

  

COYOTE SONG

Coyote commences singing;
     Coyote commences singing.
 The young woman hurries forth
     To hear the Coyote songs.

A hat of eagle feathers;
     A hat of eagle feathers,
 A headdress was made for me
     That made my heart grow stronger.

Coyote ran around it;
     Coyote ran around it,
 Ran into the blue water,
     Changed the color of his hair.

  

BADGER SONG

Here am I unfortunate;
     Here am I unfortunate,
 Not to know the songs to sing;
     The songs we sing at sunset.

There came a Gray Owl at sunset
     There came a Gray Owl at sunset
 Hooting softly around me,
     He brought terror to my heart.

The land lay quietly sleeping;
     The land lay quietly sleeping.
 My young stretch, crying, haya!
     Pity them digging in the dust.

You Sun out there in the west;
     You Sun out there in the west,

[p. 107]

You are now talking to me.
     You are sounding your gourd rattle.

The land is parched and burning,
     The land is parched and burning.
 Going and looking about me
     I see a narrow strip of green.

Yet I do not know surely,
     Yet I do not know surely.
 The harlot is here among us.
     I go away toward the west.

The shadow of Crooked mountain,
     The curved and pointed shadow.
 'Twas there that I heard the singing;
     Heard the songs that harmed my heart.

The light glow of evening;
     The light glow of evening
 Comes as the quails fly slowly,
     And it settles on the young.

  

BUTTERFLY SONG

The Butterfly song we now commence;
     The Butterfly song we now commence,
 Dancing on sides to and fro
     Until the dust arises.

The Butterfly Bird, the Butterfly Bird
     Commences to sing his many songs.
 I run to where the dust arises,
     Close to the walls of the house.

[p. 108]

I commence the song, I commence the song.
     I heard the singing as I ran;
 I heard the singing as I ran.
     I join with the singing.

The Cat-tail Woman commences singing;
     The Cat-tail Woman commences singing.
 I join the circling dancers,
     Striking my breast and singing.

I sail in the clouds to Table mountain;
     I sail in the clouds to Table mountain,
 And I sing with Ka-matuk mountain
     Upon which there are no clouds.

Hurry to the Dead Standing mountain;
     Hurry to the Dead Standing mountain.
 See there, my Younger Brother,
     How the winds there run their course.

At the clearing of Ma-ayal mountain;
     At the clearing of Ma-ayal mountain,
 Before the house of the Magician,
     There stands the woman laughing.

Here on the slopes of Crooked mountain;
     Here on the slopes of Crooked mountain,
 Around whose crest the foam remains,
     We have run for blue water.

  

DEMON SONG

Singing at Ka-matuk mountain;
     Singing at Ka-matuk mountain,
 I listen to their singing;
     I come running to sing with them.

[p. 109]

Evening now is falling;
     Evening now is falling,
 And demons appeared running
     To strip and expose my soul.

In a Santa Rita cave;
     In a Santa Rita cave,
 As I entered in the cave,
     I saw the breath of demons.

Here demon boys came running;
     Here demon boys came running,
 Grasping my hair they carried me,
     Brought me to a distant land.

  

RAIN SONGS

I

Hi-ihiya naiho-o! Let us begin our song,
     Let us begin, rejoicing. Hitciya yahina-a.
 Let us begin our song, let us begin rejoicing,
     Singing of the large corn. Hitciya yahina-a.
 Singing of the small corn. Hitciya yahina-a.

II

Hi-ihiya naiho-o! The darkness of evening
     Falls as we sing before the sacred amina.
 About us on all sides corn tassels are waving.
     Hitciya yahina! The white light of day dawn
 Yet finds us singing, while corn tassels are waving.
     Hitciya yahina-a! The darkness of evening
 Falls as we sing before the sacred amina.
     About us on all sides corn tassels are waving.
 Hitciya yahina! The white light of day dawn
     Yet finds us singing, while the squash leaves are waving.

[p. 110]

Hi-iya naiho-o! The earth is rumbling
     From the beating of our basket drums.
 The earth is rumbling from the beating
     Of our basket drums, everywhere humming.
 Earth is rumbling, everywhere raining.

III

Hi-ihiya naiho-o! Pluck out the feathers
     From the wing of the Eagle and turn them
 Toward the east where lie the large clouds.
     Hitciya yahina-a! Pluck out the soft down
 From the breast of the Eagle and turn it
     Toward the west where sail the small clouds.
 Hitciya yahina! Beneath the abode
     Of the rain gods it is thundering;
 Large corn is there. Hitciya yahina!
     Beneath the abode of the rain gods
 It is raining; small corn is there.

  

WAR SONGS

I

Over that black sandy land,
     Over the top came running,
 Over the top came running.
     The Apache slave was killed
 And his hide tanned for leather.

II

Here the warrior, Shining-row,
     Came and saw the night around me.
 Young Coyote made a shield house
     And he sat in it shouting,
 And that was pleasing to me.
     Young Coyote tied the darkness;

[p. 111]

The cigarettes were passed around,
     Four times when he led me there.
 The Hawk on Mahyal mountain
     Stood with me beating his wings.

III

There arose in the East Land
     One whom I met there smoking
 Flowerlike cigarettes.

Running dazed and falsely speaking
     Pitiable and faint-hearted
 I feel at Crooked mountain.

There I'm going, there I'm going.
     I have to drink the liquor
 That makes me stagger as I run.

Vulture arose from Sandy hill
     Shining upon the land around.

IV

The Gray Spider magician
     He made a square kiaha.
 He is indeed a magician.

They are shouting, they are shouting,
     Around the hill of Atci.
 The poor people there are shouting
     As the news of battle comes.

V

Now where is he, where is he,
     That he has not already come?
 Yes, I fear that he has been killed.

[p. 112]

You hung the Raven trophies
     On a pole and danced around them.

Amid the rocks of the mountain
     The women tried to hide themselves;
 But the men ran and killed them.

  

CORN SONG

Hi-ilo-o ya-a-a! He who sees everything
     Sees two stalks of corn standing;
 He's my younger brother. Hi-ilo-o ya-a-a!
     He who sees everything, sees the two squashes;
 He's my younger brother. Hi-ilo-o ya-a-a!
     On the summit of Ta-atukah sees the corn standing;
 He's my younger brother. Hi-ilo-o ya-a-a!
     On the summit of Ta-atukah sees the squash standing;
 He's my younger brother. Hi-ilo-o woiha!

Hi-ilo-o ya-a-a! Over Ta-atukam
     Rise the clouds with their loud thundering.
 Hi-ilo-o ya-a-a! Over Ta-atukam
     Rise the clouds with their loud raining.
 Hi-ilo-o ya-a-a! The Bluebird is holding
     In his talons the clouds that are thundering.
 Hi-ilo-o ya-a-a! Yellowbird is holding
     In his talons the clouds that are raining.

Hi-ilo-o ya-a-a! See Elder Brother
     Breathe out the winds that over Ta-atukam
 Drive the clouds with their loud thundering.
 Hi-ilo-o ya-a-a! See Elder Brother
     Breathe out the winds that over Ta-atukam
     The welcome storm clouds are suspending.
 Hi-ilo-o ya-a-a! In the great rain clouds
     Let me sing my song of rejoicing.

[p. 113]

  

MAGICIAN SONG

At early dawn I entered,
     Entered in the white light of day
 And my heart flamed with power
     As I entered the magic house.

In the lofty feather house
     His magic is increasing,
 And he moves very slowly
     With the power in his heart.

Elder Brother first came forth;
     Elder Brother first came forth,
 And with his shining power
     Governed over all the land.

Earth Magician became angry;
     Earth Magician became angry,
 And with his magic power
     He destroyed all the houses.

With a Black Snake I tie them;
     With a Black Snake I tie them,
 The houses with a Black Snake,
     The houses with a Black Snake.

With a White Snake I tie them;
     With a White Snake I tie them,
 The houses with a White Snake,
     The houses with a White Snake.

  

NAVITCO SONG

The chicken beans are rattling,
     They are rattling as they fall.

[p. 114]

The chicken beans are rattling,
     They are rattling as they fall.

And the stone wall arose there,
     And the stone wall arose there.
 When the gourd seed was planted
     It made its way through to grow.

  

WIND SONG

Wind now commences to sing;
     Wind now commences to sing.
 The land stretches before me,
     Before me stretches away.

Wind's house now is thundering;
     Wind's house now is thundering.
 I go roaring o'er the land,
     The land covered with thunder.

Over the windy mountains;
     Over the windy mountains,
 Came the myriad-legged wind;
     The wind came running hither.

The Black Snake Wind came to me;
     The Black Snake Wind came to me,
 Came and wrapped itself about,
     Came here running with its song.

Swiftly with a cup of water
     I came running to make you drink.
 I make you drink the water
     And turn dizzily around.

[p. 115]

Among the white cactus leaves;
     Among the white cactus leaves,
 I came running to that place;
     I came running to that place.

  

SONG OF THE VISION-MAKER

The evening glow yet lingers;
     The evening glow yet lingers,
 And I sit with my gourd rattle
     Engaged in the sacred chant.
 As I wave the eagle feathers
     We hear the magic sounding.

Puissant Night is shaking me
     Just as he did at the time
 When I was taken up in spirit
     To the great Magician's house.

Yellow Bird placed his feathers
     Where they fell on the head of the woman;
 Making of her a harlot who ran about
     With her hands clasped before her.

Bluebird drifted at the edge of the world,
     Drifted along upon the blue wind.
 White Wind went down from his dwelling
     And raised dust upon the earth.

The moonshine abides in me;
     And soon you men and women will see
 The reed that I now am blowing
     Bring the Moon down to meet me.

Haiya! The gourd is rattling;
     Haiya! The gourd is rattling.

[p. 116]

When I go to see it there
     I surely find it rattling.

It is evening, it is evening.
     And four times at evening
 Calls the white-headed Swallow
     As he plucks out his feathers.

Elder Brother cuts his reed,
     Yonder before me now he throws it,
 Stepping upon it so that the
     Clouds repeat the sound.

Gray Coyote is a dirty meddler,
     He wears a belt of snake skin.
 Gray Coyote is a dirty meddler,
     He wears a belt of snake skin.

Blue Frog-women met and carried me
     To the cloud land in the East.
 Blue Frog-women met and carried me
     To where the clouds are standing.

Gray Coyote stood in the forest,
     From his shoulders he plucked feathers
 That gave me shining power,
     Plucked wing feathers bearing power.

I entered Yainupanu mountain
     And saw Elder Brother's land
 Marked off with its square corners,
     Marked as in a rectangle.

Yellow Bird carries me to the caves,
     To the distant caves of the mountain,
 And we hear the sound of his footsteps
     As he moves upon his way.

[p. 117]

Gray Road-runner, the magician,
     As his young cried out with hunger,
 Ran about engaged in killing
     Millipeds that he carried home.

The Black Turtle now approaches us,
     Wearing and shaking his belt of night.
 The Black Turtle now approaches us,
     Wearing and shaking his belt of night.

The harlot arose and ran about,
     Beating her breast and the air.
 The harlot arose and ran about,
     Beating her breast and the air.

Understand, my younger brothers,
     That it is the Sun that gives me
 The trance vision that I see.
     The Sun gives magic power.

  

NOTE

"Tell me," I asked an Indian song-poet who had just taught me a song of his composing, "when you made your song, which came first, words or music?"

The Indian stared at me in puzzled surprise: "I made a song," he answered, "a song is words and music--all comes together."

Because Indian poems are therefore really songs, conceived as a very part of the iteration and intonation of music, I have endeavored in my translations to hold in minutest detail to the original rhythm and accent, believing that only thus can the Indian verse sing, through an alien tongue, in its true form.

NATALIE CURTIS
 Santa Fe, New Mexico, September, 1917

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 118]

  

SONG OF THE EARTH

NAVAJO

      All is beautiful,
       All is beautiful,
       All is beautiful, indeed.

Now the Mother Earth
 And the Father Sky,
     Meeting, joining one another,
     Helpmates ever, they.
       All is beautiful,
       All is beautiful,
       All is beautiful, indeed.

Sisnajinni,
 Tsodsichl,
     Meeting, joining one another,
     Helpmates ever, they.
       All is beautiful,
       All is beautiful,
       All is beautiful, indeed.

Now Doko-oslid
 And Depenitsa,
     Meeting, joining one another,
     Helpmates ever, they.
       All is beautiful,
       All is beautiful,
       All is beautiful, indeed.

And the night of darkness
 And the dawn of light,
     Meeting, joining one another,
     Helpmates ever, they.
       All is beautiful,
       All is beautiful,

[p. 119]

      All is beautiful, indeed.

Now Hastyeyalli
 And Hastyehogan,
     Meeting, joining one another,
     Helpmates ever, they.
       All is beautiful,
       All is beautiful,
       All is beautiful, indeed.

And the white corn
 And the yellow corn,
     Meeting, joining one another,
     Helpmates ever, they.
       All is beautiful,
       All is beautiful,
       All is beautiful, indeed.

And the corn-pollen
 And the Ripener,
     Meeting, joining one another,
     Helpmates ever, they.
       All is beautiful,
       All is beautiful,
       All is beautiful, indeed.

Life-that-never-passeth,
 Happiness-of-all-things,
     Meeting, joining one another,
     Helpmates ever, they.
       All is beautiful,
       All is beautiful,
       All is beautiful, indeed.

      Now all is beautiful,
       All is beautiful,
       All is beautiful, indeed.

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 120]

  

HUNTING SONG

NAVAJO

      Comes the deer to my singing,
       Comes the deer to my song,
       Comes the deer to my singing.

    He, the blackbird, he am I,
     Bird beloved of the wild deer,
       Comes the deer to my singing.

    From the Mountain Black,
     From the summit,
     Down the trail, coming, coming now,
       Comes the deer to my singing.

Through the blossoms,
     Through the flowers, coming, coming now,
       Comes the deer to my singing.

    Through the flower dew-drops,.
       Coming, coming now,
       Comes the deer to my singing.

    Through the pollen, flower pollen,
       Coming, coming now,
       Comes the deer to my singing.

    Starting with his left fore-foot,
 Stamping, turns the frightened deer,
       Comes the deer to my singing.

    Quarry mine, blessed am I
     In the luck of the chase.
       Comes the deer to my singing.

      Comes the deer to my singing,
       Comes the deer to my song,
       Comes the deer to my singing.

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 121]

  

SONG OF THE RAIN CHANT

NAVAJO

Far as man can see,
     Comes the rain,
     Comes the rain with me.

From the Rain-Mount,
 Rain-Mount far away,
     Comes the rain,
     Comes the rain with me.

O'er the corn,
 O'er the corn, tall corn,
     Comes the rain,
     Comes the rain with me.

'Mid the lightnings,
 'Mid the lightnings zigzag,
 'Mid the lightnings flashing,
     Comes the rain,
     Comes the rain with me.

'Mid the swallows,
 'Mid the swallows blue,
 Chirping glad together,
     Comes the rain,
     Comes the rain with me.

Through the pollen,
 Through the pollen blest,
 All in pollen hidden,
     Comes the rain,
     Comes the rain with me.

Far as man can see,
     Comes the rain,
     Comes the rain with me.

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 122]

  

SONG FROM THE MOUNTAIN CHANT

NAVAJO

    Thereof he telleth.

Now of the Holy Youth,
     Thereof he telleth.

Moccasins decked with black,
     Thereof he telleth.

And richly broidered dress,
     Thereof he telleth.

Arm-bands of eagle feathers,
     Thereof he telleth.

And now the rain-plumes,
     Thereof he telleth.

Now of the Male-Rain,
     Thereof he telleth.

Now of the rain-drops fallen,
     Thereof he telleth.

Now of Unending Life,
     Thereof he telleth.

Now of Unchanging Joy,
     Thereof he telleth.

    Thereof he telleth.

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 123]

  

CORN-GRINDING SONG

ZUNI

I

O, my lovely mountain,
     To' yallanne!
 O, my lovely mountain,
     To' yallanne!
     To' yallanne!
 High up in the sky,
 See Rain-makers seated,
 Hither come the rain-clouds now,
      He-ya, ha-ya, he-ya!

Behold, yonder
 All will soon be abloom
 Where the flowers spring
 Tall shall grow the youthful corn-plants.

II

Lovely! See the cloud, the cloud appear!
 Lovely! See the rain, the rain draw near!
     Who spoke?
 'Twas the little corn-ear
 High on the tip of the stalk
 Singing while it looked at me
     Talking aloft there
 "Ah, perchance the floods
     Hither moving
 Ah, may the floods come this way!"

III

Yonder, yonder the fair rainbow,
 See the rainbow brightly decked and painted!
 Now the swallow bringeth glad news to your corn,

[p. 124]

Singing, "Hitherward, hitherward, hitherward, rain,
     "Hither come!
     "Hither come!"
 Now hear the corn-plants murmur,
 "We are growing, everywhere!
 "Hi, yai! The world, how fair!"

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

KOROSTA KATZINA SONG

HOPI

    Yellow butterflies,
 Over the blossoming virgin corn,
     With pollen-painted faces
 Chase one another in brilliant throng.

    Blue butterflies,
 Over the blossoming virgin beans,
     With pollen-painted faces
 Chase one another in brilliant streams.

    Over the blossoming corn,
     Over the virgin corn
 Wild bees hum!

    Over the blossoming beans,
     Over the virgin beans
 Wild bees hum!

Over your field of growing-corn
     All day shall hang the thunder-cloud;
 Over your field of growing corn
     All day shall come the rushing rain.

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 125]

  

HE-HEA KATZINA SONG

HOPI

Corn-blossom maidens
 Here in the fields,
 Patches of beans in flower,
 Fields all abloom,
 Water shining after rain,
 Blue clouds looming above.

Now behold!
 Through bright clusters of flowers
 Yellow butterflies
 Are chasing at play,
 And through the blossoming beans
 Blue butterflies
 Are chasing at play.

[p. 126] [p. 127] [p. 128]

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 129]

  

SONGS FROM CALIFORNIA

  

SONGS OF SPIRITS

  

WINTU

I

LIGHTNING

I bear the sucker-torch to the western tree-ridge.
 Behold me! first born and greatest.

II

OLELBIS (THE CREATOR)

    I am great above.
     I tan the black cloud.

III

HAU (RED FOX)

On the stone ridge east I go.
 On the white road I, Hau, crouching go.
 I, Hau, whistle on the road of stars.

IV

POLAR STAR

The circuit of earth which you see,
 The scattering of stars in the sky which you see,
 All that is the place for my hair.

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 130]

  

SONGS OF KUMASTAMXO

YUMA

I

WHEN THE SPIRIT-WIND APPROACHED

"The Wind is wandering, is wandering;
 The Wind is wandering, is wandering."

II

WHEN HE BURNT THE UNCLEAN HOUSE

"The house will burn, will burn.
 The house will be crackling, will be crackling.
 It will blaze.
 We are going to dance.
 It is going to be lighted.
 It is going to be lighted.
 It will blaze.
 We are going to dance.
 Something bird-like is coming. [**]

Bird-like tracks will be about the place.
 We are going to light this unclean house.
 It will blaze, blaze."

III

WHEN HE MADE THE RIVER

    "This is my water, my water.
     This is my river, my river.
     We love its water. 

[p. 131]

We love its foamwood.
 It shall flow forever.
 It shall flow forever.
 When the weather grows hot, it shall rise and overflow its banks.
 It shall flow forever."

IV

AFTER HE HAD FINISHED HIS CREATING

"Into the earth I go down, go down.
 Nothing but earth will I be seeing, will I be seeing.
 I sink down into the old river-bed,
 Down into the interior."

V

WHEN HE BECAME THE EAGLE

    "I am springing, springing.
     Wing-feathers!
     Body-feathers!
     On my hands wing-feathers.
     On my body body-feathers."

[p. 132] [p. 133] [p. 134] [p. 135]

Footnotes

^130:* Where a house had been burnt seeds were scattered, for the birds to devour.

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

SONGS FROM THE NORTHWEST COAST

  

PRAYERS OF THE TSIMSHIAN TO NEXNOA

Nexnox, Nexnox!
 Chief, Chief!
     have pity upon us!
     else there will be nobody
     to smoke under you!
 Nexnox, have pity upon us!

FOR FAIR WEATHER

Nexnox, Nexnox!
 Chief, Chief!
     have pity upon us!
 Look down and see
     what those under you
     whom you made are doing!
 Pull up your foot
     and sweep off your face! [**]

FOR CALM WEATHER

Hold in your breath, Chief,
     that it may be calm.

Footnotes

^135:* "pull up your foot" means "stop the rain"; "sweep off your face" means "take away the clouds."

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 136]

  

THREE SONGS FROM THE HAIDA:
 QUEEN CHARLOTTE'S ISLAND, B.C.

LOVE SONG

Beautiful is she, this woman,
 As the mountain flower;
 But cold, cold, is she,
 Like the snowbank
 Behind which it blooms.

THE BEAR'S SONG

(Whoever can sing this song is admitted forever to the friendship of the bears)
 I have taken the woman of beauty
 For my wife;
 I have taken her from her friends.
 I hope her kinsmen will not come
 And take her away from me.
 I will be kind to her.
 Berries, berries I will give her from the hill
 And roots from the ground.
 I will do everything to please her.
 For her I made this song and for her I sing it.

SONG FOR FINE WEATHER

O good Sun,
 Look thou down upon us:
 Shine, shine on us, O Sun,
 Gather up the clouds, wet, black, under thy arms--
 That the rains may cease to fall.
 Because thy friends are all here on the beach

[p. 137]

Ready to go fishing
 Ready for the hunt.
 Therefore look kindly on us, O Good Sun!
 Give us peace within our tribe
 And with all our enemies.
 Again, again, we call
 Hear us, hear us, O Good Sun!

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

BEAR SONG

HAIDA

Chief, chief, that I am,
 Be careful how you pull your grandfather around.
 Be careful how you pull around your grandfather
 As you sit beside him.
 I am too much of a boy for you.
 Chief, chief that I am,

Chief, chief that I am,
 I am already far away.
 At the cliff, coming from my passage through the mountains,
 I, hold up my head grandly.
 Chief, chief that I am,
 I am already far away from it.
 From my blue mountain I am now far away.
 On the Island I travel, led about proudly.
 From it I am far away.
 Chief, chief that I am.

Chief, chief that I am,
 They say that I have green mountains.
 They say that I went into the creek I own which stretches its length afar.
 Chief, chief that I am.

[p. 138]

Chief, chief that I am,
 When the sun rises I start traveling about.
 Now I am lying under a deadfall.
 Chief, chief that I am.

Chief, chief that I am,
 My power is all taken away,
 My power is all taken away.
 Chief, chief that I am,
 My power is all taken away,
 Chief, chief that I am.

Chief, chief, whither did my great brother wander proudly?
 My mind shakes as I go about.
 Chief, chief.

Chief, chief,
 Tell me where he fell.
 I do not know the place.
 Chief, chief, chief.

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

HAIDA CRADLE SONGS

I

Again perhaps you expect to sit up high in your father's canoe [**]
     chief-woman, and look around upon all things
     in front of Upset-Canoe.
 Be careful, be careful, chief-woman!

[p. 139]

Again perhaps you expect to sit up high in your father's canoe,
     chief-woman, and look around the place
     whence abalones come.
 Be careful, be careful, chief-woman.

II

Perhaps you are crying and crawling
     to get your grandmother's hand
     which was hurt on a wooden tray with square sides, I hear;
     for that you are crying and crawling
     chief-woman, chief-woman,
     crying and crawling.

III

Whence have you fallen, have you fallen?
 Whence have you fallen, have you fallen?
 Did you fall, fall, fall, fall,
     from the top of a salmonberry bush?

IV

Stop crying, chief's child! Stop crying, chief's child!
 I do not expect that drums will sound again for you, chief's
     child, if it is for that you are crying and wriggling.
 Stop crying, great chief's child, a child of noble family sits
     quietly.
 Now, now, great chief's child; a child of noble family sits
     quietly.
 Stop crying, chief's child! Stop crying, chief's child!
 I do not expect that they are going to lay heavy planks for
     you again, chief's child; if it is for that you are crying and
     wriggling.
 Stop crying, great chief's child, a child of noble family sits
     quietly.
 Now, now, great chief's child; a child of noble family sits
     quietly.

[p. 140]

V

One sits here like a common person facing the woods
 Say, stop telling lies!
 Your mouth will be crooked
     you mosquito-people-trash!

VI

In your father's house, your father's house
     Cape Qona seagulls eating things
     are making cries.
 In the midst of all these things
     you are going to move
     proudly as you sit.

VII

Come, let us take it on our knees!
     Come, let us take it on our knees!
 Hand it to one another inside of its father's house,
     hand it to one another!
 Come, let us take it on our knees!
     Come, let us take it on our knees!

VIII

At that time when my child
     goes about as a youth
     vainly alone
     I shall sit around.
 His son
     making a great noise
     went by on the water.
 I wonder where he is going!
 His son
     making a great noise
     went by on the water.
 It must be to the North islands.

[p. 141]

IX

Did you make up your mind
     to fall into the cradle
     to fall into the cradle
     to fall in from the top of a spruce-tree?
     to fall in from the top of a salmonberry bush?

X

Be careful, my noble sons!
     you will grow to one another like leaves.
 Be careful, my own chief!
     Be careful, my own chief!

XI

Are you crying for this, chief?
 Are you crying for this, chief?
 Are you crying to have your sisters
     put you up higher, chief?
 Crying for your cousins to make the people
     as numerous in front of you
     as when people make seagulls cry,
     being obliged to step on them,
 For these things are you crying, chief?

XII

You came to me, you came to me, ye he  he!
 You came to me, you came to me.
 You came walking to me, calling me "mother,"
     instead of to someone else.
 To me my child, who is a chief's child,
     came walking, calling me "mother,"
 Mother of noble family,
 Mother of noble family, mother of noble family,
     mother of noble family, mother of noble family.

[p. 142]

XIII

Why does he cry softly?
 Why does he wriggle as he sits?
 He wriggles and cries for grandfather's house.

XIV

It is not now as it was in olden times.
 Even slaves are beginning to own good abalone-shells!

XV

Dogs, even,
     when they have pups
     to them give their love.
 That is why
     mine I love.

XVI

Still stands
     Skilsis town.
 Do not cry
     upon my knees!

XVII

Why is it
     your slave close by
     (even I, your mother!)
     you want something you cannot get, you say?
 You are very foolish,
     uncle reborn,
     I bore.

XVIII

My child says:
     Look around at the waves,--
 Then she fools me
     with unripe salmonberries.

[p. 143]

XIX

Behind Sea-Lion Town
     I was looking around a while;
     the future chief I found,
     just big enough to walk.
 Take care, take care, my own chief!
 Take care, my own master!

XX

Women are better than men,
     women are better than men.
 Women have more property.
 Chiefs of my family,
     where are you?

XXI

Upon his grandmother's land
     my child walks proudly.
 For that his foot is dear.
 Do not cry!

Footnotes

^138:* Chiefs' children used to be placed high up on blankets in the center of trading canoes so that they could look about. Here the baby is reminded of what she used to do in a former existence.

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

BILQULA DEATH SONG

He makes me pure
 O making pure, making pure!
 I destroy not life
 I am the life maker.

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

SONG OF QAQATCGUK

TLINGIT

The man who thought he had perished
     dreams thus about himself:
     I keep feeling
     as if I had gotten home.

[p. 144]

  

SONG OF WOMAN'S PREMONITION

Already I am going,
     I am going to die.
 I have dreamed of my son.

  

SONG OF RAVEN

That Raven must have been a great fellow.
 He went down under the sea.
 Then they pulled up his nose.
 He went through the town for his nose.
 When it was given him he started to fly out of doors.
 He flew out with it.
 Why! instead of looking like himself, he looks as if he ought
     to have a drink.
 After you have done as he has done you can wander about the
     entire world-beach.

  

CRADLE SONG FOR A GIRL

If I do not take anything to the party
     I shall be ashamed,
     I shall be ashamed.
 Little girls, listen.
 Little girls, listen.

  

CRADLE SONG

Let me shoot a small bird
     for my younger brother.
 Let me spear a small trout
     for my younger sister.

[p. 145]

  

SONG OF LITTLE-LAKE-UP-ABOVE

(When his people expected others to come with food to give them a feast)

It is before my face every day.
 And when I sleep I always think of you.
 I long much for you.
 Thinking about you comes to me
     like a sudden sickness.

  

SONG OF SORROW

(By a woman whose brothers were drowned and their bodies not recovered)

Your reef has beaten me,
     Kagwantan's children.
 But take pity on me.
 I wonder what I always attend to
     when I wake up in the morning.
 Sometime I might see my brothers.

  

COMPOSED BY SMALL-LAKE-UNDERNEATH

(About a drifting log found full of nails, out of which a house was built. Sung when a feast is about to be given for a dead man)

I always compare you to a drifting log
     with iron nails in it.
 Let my brother float in,
     in that way.
 Let him float ashore
     on a good sandy beach.
 I always compare you, my mother,
     to the sun passing behind the clouds.
 That is what makes the world dark.

[p. 146]

  

KAGWANTAN SONG FOR THE FEAST

(When a slave is to be killed)
 The words of people
     now snow me under,
     the words of worthless people.

  

SUNG BY THE WOLF FAMILIES

(Coming to a feast)
 A rich man is coming.
 Your feelings you keep silent.
 When it is ended,
     thus they always say:
     "It is all gone."

  

AT A GREAT FEAST

We are also going to be invited
     to Killisnoo.
 High-cast people
     are going to eat.

  

BY NAQUALI

I wonder what my future life
     will do to me.

[p. 147]

  

SONG OF FOR-A-TOWN SPIRIT

(About the Taqdentan, because when the latter came to Juneau to drink they did not pay any attention to the Auk people.)
 I observe how people are treated
     after they are dead,
     and therefore I drink
     before I die.
 What you did was very selfish,
     Taqdentan's children.
 But I do not blame you
     for your words.
 It is this Raven's fault.

  

BY NIGOT

What do you think I live for?
 I live to drink whiskey.
 Have pity on me,
     foam children.

  

BY TSAKAK

It is only crying about myself
     that comes to me in song.

  

BY ONE OF THE LENEDI

(About Juneau when gold was first found there)
 Do not talk any more,
     Lenedi's children.
 You are ahead
     of all the people in the world.

[p. 148]

  

AN ANGRY SONG COMPOSED BY SEXDAGWET

(Against Little Raven, a blind man of Tongas)
 Just as if a man chased him
     out on the beach
     because of someone's talking,
     Little Raven threw himself
     before my words.
 I do not feel even a little numb.
 That fellow, Little Raven,
     whose words
     they are always reporting to me,
     can not see anything.

(On the same subject)
 Little Raven,
     I hate what you keep saying,
     because you are a slave's son
     and can see nothing.
 I hate to have you talk to me
     because you have spots all over your face
     like a big sea cucumber
     and look like a slave.
 Don't you know that,
     because you can not see anything,
     you big slave's son,
     you keep picking up sand
     instead of dipping into the dish?

  

BY DEAD-SLAVE

(About a woman named Poor-orphan, who was a very poor girl, but afterward became the richest woman in Wrangell)
 I used to make fun
     of this poor little girl at Wrangell
     when she was very small.

[p. 149]

  

BY A SHAMAN OF THE KAGWANTAN NAMED KAGANK

It is only on account of Strong Drink
     that you pity me.
 Why don't you also love me?

  

BY UNDER-A-BLANKET

(About the son of Luknaxadi, whose brother was killed in compensation for the killing of her brother)

His mind is just like mine,
     Lubnaxadi's children.
 So that I am beginning to love him.
 I wonder what I always look for
     when I wake up in the morning.
 Sometime I might see my brothers.

  

BY MAN-THAT-IS-NOT-ALL-RIGHT

(About Princess Thom)
 Even from a house of Strong Drink
 men get away,
 but not from you,
 Raven woman.

  

BY AMONG-THE-BRANT

(When his wife had been taken from him)
 Like one who desires Strong Drink,
     I never sleep,
     Toqyedi's children.

[p. 150]

(On the same subject)
 My own mind is very hard to me.
 It is just as if
     I were carrying my mind around.
 What is the matter with you?

  

BY OTHER-WATER

(Over a dead man)
 My younger brother has brought me
     great joy of laughter.
 If I knew the way they go,
     I would go right to him.

  

BY JOINED-TOGETHER

(When all his friends went down the rapids at Gonaxo and were drowned)

I always look expectantly
     to see some one
     stand up in front of the town
     and in the bay.
 I always compare my brothers
     to the people the duck tribe saved.
 They went right down under the earth
     like those high-cast people.

  

BY HERE-IS-A-FEATHER

(When his brother died)
 It is as if my grandfather's house
     were turning over with me.
 Where is the person who will save me?

[p. 151]

  

BY MAN-FOR-HIMSELF

I love you from my heart,
     Tsaguedi's children.
 You are the only one
     I will die with.

  

BY CGWATC

(About an uncle who had died)
 I always think within myself
     that there is no place
     where people do not die.

  

MOURNING SONG OF SAKWET

(About her brother who was drowned)
 I am like the people
     who were killed
     by the south wind.

(On the same subject)
 Perhaps my brother went
     into the sun's trail
     so that I can never see him again.

  

PEACE-SONG AFTER A GREAT WAR

If you had died,
     Kagwantan's children,
     I would have cut off my hair for you
 I love you so much
     I would have blackened my face for you,
     Kagwantan's children.

[p. 152]

  

SONG OF A HUMMING-BIRD DEER

I am feeling very lonely away.
 I am going to my uncle's town.
 I am singing inside, my masters.
 I am crying about myself.

  

BY LQENA

(When he was the only one of his people saved and his enemies wanted to make peace with him. He danced as a deer, singing this song and at the end of it cut in two the man standing next to him)

I did this way regarding myself.
 I would not let what my conscience
     said to me, pass.
 Before his death I saw his ghost.
 At once he stabbed
     and killed Cadasiktc.

  

BY QAUCTE

(Who married a Teqoedi woman)
 After you have been drinking
     you had better stop talking
     about how well you were brought up,
 Teqoedi's children.
 What one of you thinks about it.
     when he is sober?

[p. 153]

  

LOVE SONG OF A TAGISH WOMAN

Why have I come to you
     to Dyea from far inland
     only to find
     that you have gone away?
 Here I am,
     crying for you.

  

LOVE-SONG OF SIQUET, THE DANCER

I wonder what this coming July morning
     will be like.
 My mind is very weak
     thinking that I shall be unable
     to see my sweetheart.

  

BY RAVEN-SKIN

(When his sweetheart abandoned him)
 If one had control of death
     it would be very easy
     to die with a Wolf woman.
 It would be very pleasant.

  

MOURNING-SONG OF THE KAGWANTAN

It is his own fault
     that this man of the Wolf people died.
 Do not lay the blame on anyone else.

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 154]

  

SPELL SONG

KWAKIUTL

What of olden times,
     shall I tell you of olden times
     what of olden times
     my grandchildren?
 You of olden times,
     you of olden times,
     a cloud,
     lay on the mountains.

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHINOOK SONGS

  

SONGS OF THE MAN

I

Ya, that is good!
 Ya, that is good!
 That worthless woman
     does not like me.

II

Very unhappy I was
     with my wife,
     in Victoria.
 Nobody
     said good-day to us
     in Victoria.

III

Aya, aya!
     I have seen
     Sitka your country.
 Never mind, if I die
     now soon.

[p. 155]

  

SONGS OF THE WOMAN

I

I don't care
     if you desert me.
 Many pretty boys are in the town.
 Soon I shall take another one.
 That is not hard for me!

II

Nothing shall bother my mind now.
 Don't speak to me. I wish I were dead with my sister.

III

Ya  ya,
 When you take a wife,
 Ya  ya,
 Don't become angry with me.
 I do not care.

IV

I am very glad
     when the steamboat comes here.
 I think I shall cry
     when the steamboat leaves.

V

I broke down! my dear!
 Say good-bye!
     to me now.
 Always I cry
     for I live far away.

[p. 156] [p. 157] [p. 158] [p. 159]

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

SONGS FROM THE FAR NORTH

  

SONGS FOR THE GREAT FEAST TO THE DEAD

I

For our children are gone,
     While those of our friends remain.
       Ai-ya-ya-yai.
 Come back, nephew, come back, we miss you;
       Ai-ya-ya-yai.
 Come back to us, our lost ones,
     We have presents for you.
       Ai-ya-ya-yai.
 Oh, my brother, come back to me,
       Ai-ya-ya-yai.
 Come back, my brother, I am lonely,
       Ai-ya-ya-yai.
 My brother come back and we
     Will give you a small present,
       Ai-ya-ya-yai-yae-yai, etc.
 My children, where are you?
       Ai-ya-ya-yai.
 Come back to us, our children.
     We are lonely and sad.
       Ai-ya-ya-yai.

II

Come, my brother,
 Return to us again;
 We wait for you;

[p. 160]

Come, brother, come.
       Ai-ya-ya-yai.
 Return once more.
 Our mother, come back to us.
       Ai-ya-ya-yai.
 Return, our father;
 We wait for you;
 Come back to us,
 And we, who are lonely,
 Will give you food.
       Ai-ya-ya-yai.

III

Dead ones, come here;
       A-la'-ai-ya'
 Come here, do.
     sealskins for a tent you will get,
       A-la'-ai-ya'
 Come here, do.
     reindeer skins for a bed you will get,
       A-la'-ai-ya'

IV

We will sing a song.
 We will go down the current.
 The waves will rise;
 The waves will fall.
 The dogs will growl at us.

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 161]

  

ESKIMO SONGS

  

OXAITOQ'S SONG

I walk so long thus
     inland, inland.
 I walk so long thus
     inland, inland, and inland.
 I am not loved
     inland, inland.
 I am not loved
     she is the greatest of all
     inland and inland.
 They love best
     inland, inland.
 They love best
     what I obtain
     inland and inland.
 They love best
     inland, inland.
 They love best
     the food that I bring
     inland and inland.

  

SUMMER SONG

Ajaja, it is pleasant,
     it is pleasant at last
     the great world
     when it is summer at last.
 Ajaja, it is pleasant,
     it is pleasant at last
     the great world
     when our caribous begin to come.
 Ajaja, they make great noise,

[p. 162]

    they make great noise,
     the brooks there in our country
     when it is summer.
 Ajaja, this great water
     has spread over the ice;
     I cannot walk
     to the rock across there.
 Ajaja, I feel sorry for them,
     I feel sorry for them,
     not being able to speak,
     these gulls.
 Ajaja, I feel sorry for them,
     I feel sorry for them,
     not being able to speak,
     these ravens.
 A great animal comes now;
     no one observes it;
     I keep it secret;
     the ravens do not tell.
 Food like that I cannot obtain.
     but quickly I got
     little sculpins.
 Ajaja, he has found a smooth slope,
     he has found a smooth slope,
     to burrow into,
     the bad old fox.

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

SEDNOR AND THE FULMAR

  

AN ESKIMO BALLAD

(Recitative)
 Where is she
     who would never marry?
 In a kayok to the mainland
     going away.

[p. 163]

Dost thou see, my eyes,
     dost thou see them?
 Ia, ha, ha, ha, ha!
 To a tent of ragged skins,
     he has brought her, crying;
     (the Fulmar, her husband)
 Her father with her elder brother
     in a boat coming;
     (he, seeking his daughter)
 In a boat his daughter embarked.
 Her husband, the Fulmar, cried:
     (thus the Magician!)
 The Fulmar says: "My means for transforming
     let me see them as they are;
     let me see them once more."
 Now they are taking the woman back;
     to the tent going home;
     the Fulmar followed,
     (thus the Magician!)
 Wind very strong to come near them;
     (he made, the Magician!)
     they were shipwrecked, nearly.
     (Her father fears death!)
 His daughter he pushes
     into the sea.
 To the boat on both sides--
     to the boat she clings.
     (Still followed, the Fulmar!)
 With a knife he struck her;
     whales emerged.
 Again he struck her;
     a thong seal emerged.
 Again he struck her;
     a fiord seal emerged.
     (thus the Magician!)
 Her whole body she leaned.
     (Sednor, fearing death!)

[p. 164]

With a knife into the eyes
     he stabbed her;
 He killed her.
     (Thus the Fulmar, the Magician!)
 On the shore
     her father lifted her.
 A quilt he took;
     on the beach laid her down.
 With a dog skin she was covered,
     (Sednor, the Beautiful)
 The flood-tide took her.

(Based on a literal translation.)

[p. 165] [p. 166] [p. 167]

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

INTERPRETATIONS

  

SUMMER DAWN

TEM-EYOS-KYI

    She comes--Tem-Eyos-Kwi--
 The maiden who has known love!
 Last Night Love touched her in the house of waiting.
 Love hid the seeds of life in her garments.
 In the wind of her walking they are scattered;
 All the sod will bloom with them!
 None shall be lost: because of her gladness, the gladness of love known.

Ah--hi-i! She sees the earth not as we see it--
 We who were not overtaken by Love in the house of waiting.

    Wake, women, maidens and wives!
 Greet Tem-Eyos-Kwi!
 Greet her with feet dancing,
 With songs of the heart and lips trembling to silence,
 Hands that lift their wonder to the breast
 Yet touch not the flesh.

    Wake, sons, lovers, young chiefs, hunters with arrows!
 Sharpen the darts, make strong, bend the bow;
 Keen, keen as light, and clear as the wind be your eyes!
 The women await you in secret places,
 They have hidden themselves in the leafy shelters:
 All the green leagues of the forest are ashake with invitation.

[p. 168]

The quick beating of their hearts is the whisper along the bending grass.
 The sod grows warm--O men, Summer-dawn is the spirit of the women!

They have washed their hearts with prayer,
 And their bodies with juices of cedar:
 Perfumed and dried by the wind they have come up from the shore--
 The great hosts of the women--
 Unwrapping themselves from the mists of the morning.
 They have entered the forest with the footfalls of muted music,
 With light tossing steps like the spray on long beaches.
 The swinging trees drip dew:
 With lines of sparkling rain they point the way the women
 have gone,
 Leaving all the paths to them open.

Harken! They follow Tem-Eyos-Kwi, singing:

    "Come, come, O swift and strong!
 We are the women: seek us!
 Our hearts, like little swallows, nest above the secret pools.
 Oh, say, shall not the winged dart pierce,
 And the shadow of the bended bow
 Stir the still, deep pools?
 Oh, the waters shall sparkle and leap and mingle,
 And brim at your lips, O men!
 They shall be poured out and drip upon a chief's feet;
 They shall fill the hollows of his house with children!
 Flowing in laughter and whispers and little cries
 As smoke through the smoke-hole at evening!
 Ai! ah! ai! Women! Waken the soil with freshets;
 Bear joy upward as a canoe with sails, swifter than paddles.
 O men, hunters of life,

[p. 169]

We are the harborers, the fosterers--the women:
 Seek us!"

It was the women, the harborers, the fosterers, who rose first,
 And followed Tem-Eyos-Kwi:
 They called to the men.

    The men go forth like one!
 Lightning and heat are their weapons, hurled crashing before them.
 Their hairs, spreading wide, give black wings to the sun,
 As a cloud filled with eagles blown up from the sea.
 They enter the forest with the tramp of thunder and the darkness of storm;
 And the song of the women is stilled.
 The cry of offering ascends, it passes the swooping shadows;
 There is a sigh through the forest of winds sinking--
 Then the hush.

    On the leaves is a sweet whisper of rain,
 Whispered sweetness of pangs past.
 The warm soil drinks the coolness of tears--
 Tears that are dropping melodies
 Because cunning hands and strong have shaken the living cords.
 The skies part, the black wings fold;
 The Sun-chief's canoe rides on the upper blue with furled sails:
 Tem-Eyos-Kwi, laughing, is at the paddle.
 Our village is drenched with light.
 (Ei-i! Tem-Eyos-Kwi is glad because Love has overtaken us;
 Because now we see the earth as she sees it.)
 Two by two, they come up from the forest--the men and the women.
 The women's smiles are the little sun-tipped clouds
 Floating across the face of the mountain:
 The look in their eyes is deeper than seas.

[p. 170]

High in the light the men lift their heads.
 On their clear brows is the mystic mark
 Of those from whom a great dream has gone forth.
 Firmly they hold the hands of the women,
 Who have given peace to their strength, and a meaning.
 Together, together, the race-makers enter the lodges.

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

SONG OF THE SEARCH

    I descend through the forest alone.
 Rose-flushed are the willows, stark and a-quiver,
 In the warm sudden grasp of Spring;
 Like a woman when her lover has suddenly, swiftly taken her.
 I hear the secret rustle of the little leaves,
 Waiting to be born.
 The air is a wind of love
 From the wings of eagles mating--
 O eagles, my sky is dark with your wings!
 The hills and the waters pity me,
 The pine-trees reproach me.
 The little moss whispers under my feet,
 "Son of Earth, Brother,
 Why comest thou hither alone?"

    Oh, the wolf has his mate on the mountain--
 Where art thou, Spring-daughter?
 I tremble with love as the reeds by the river,
 I burn as the dusk in the red-tented west,
 I call thee aloud as the deer calls the doe,
 I await thee as hills wait the morning,
 I desire thee as eagles the storm;
 I yearn to thy breast as night to the sea,
 I claim thee as the silence claims the stars.
 O Earth, Earth, great Earth,
 Mate of God and mother of me,

[p. 171]

Say, where is she, the Bearer of Morning,
 My Bringer of Song?
 Love in me waits to be born,
 Where is She, the woman?

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

SONG OF WHIP-PLAITING

    In the dawn I gathered cedar-boughs
 For the plaiting of thy whip.
 They were wet with sweet drops;
 They still thought of the night.
     All alone I shredded cedar-boughs,
 Green boughs in the pale light,
 Where the morning meets the sea,
 And the great mountain stops.
     Earth was very still.

    I heard no sound but the whisper of my knife,
 My black flint knife.
 It whispered among the white strands of the cedar,
 Whispered in parting the sweet cords for thy whip.
 O sweet-smelling juice of cedar--
 Life-ooze of love!
 My knife drips:
 Its whisper is the only sound in all the world!

    Finer than young sea-lions' hairs
 Are my cedar-strands:
 They are fine as little roots deep down.
 (O little roots of cedar
 Far, far under the bosom of Tsa-Kumts!--
 They have plaited her through with love.)
 Now, into my love-gift
 Closely, strongly, I will weave them--
 Little strands of pain!

[p. 172]

Since I saw thee
 Standing with thy torch in my doorway,
 Their little roots are deep in me.

    In the dawn I gathered cedar-boughs:
 Sweet, sweet was their odor,
 They were wet with tears.
 The sweetness will not leave my hands,
 No, not in salt sea-washings:
 Tears will not wash away sweetness.
 I shall have sweet hands for thy service.

    (Ah--sometimes--thou wilt be gentle?
 Little roots of pain are deep, deep in me
 Since I saw thee standing in my doorway.)

    I have quenched thy torch--
 I have plaited thy whip.
 I am thy Woman!

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

SONG OF THE YOUNG MOTHER

    M'-m'-m'-m'-n! N'-n'-n'-n'-m!
 Ai-i-he-i--ah-o-he-a-i-ne--
 Swing my chiefling fragrantly
 On the cedar-branch.
 Cedar, Cedar, tenderly
 Sway to the singing wind.
 Bright flying Wind with song in thy white throat,
 And light in thy wide sea-eyes,
 The sky's blue feathers on thy wing--
 Oh blow, blow, gently, softly, Wind,
 Rock my chiefling, Wind,
 In his little woven cradle.
 In the dusk my fingers still threaded,
 Needing no light.

[p. 173]

I remember my mother sat near me often, watching;
 Sometimes weeping. Yes, she wept;
 Yet answered not when I asked wherefor.
 In the night thou hast waked me at his side--
 Dancing, in thy dark house, to the doors that soon must open
 On thy white shining dawn-shores of life:
 And I have seen the Moon-Woman's round face
 Laughing through the smoke-hole, mocking,
 Pointing to thy empty cradle hanging.
 Ai! but her smile grew kind! She said,
 "Wait a little longer, impatient one;
 When next my round face peeps through the smoke-hole,
 I will seek him at your breast."
 Ai-i-hi! Very precious is the man-child!
 Ere it is born a woman loves it.
 How cam'st thou here, little Chiefling?
 A woman gave thee life!

    Yes--my mother wept, watching me weave for thee...
 And I have wept, too, a little.

    Strange, that pain came with love;
 I knew it not until thy father sought me.
 Yet--what woman would cast love out?

    Gladly in the dusk I waited him--
 None told me, not my mother even, of the pang.
 So my heart, joyous, sounded a song of drums,
 Beating the loud wild march for his swift-trampling feet.
 The breasts of love were as the eaves of a house,
 Jutting through the red mists and the dusk of ending day,
 Calling the hunter to enter to his rest.
 The door trembled with strange winds--
 He circled my house with the arms of strength,
 And took me with weapons...Joy?
 Ay. Yet I cried from the depths with a sudden deep cry,

[p. 174]

And in grieving earth was the torch quenched.
 ...Darkness...and his, his utterly, in that dark...
 None had told me...
 Nor that his strength would leap, rejoicing at my cry.

    At dawn--it is our custom--I went forth alone
 Into the mists that wrap the sleeping cedars
 And droop to the pale unwakened sea.
 Alone on the dawn's white rim I gathered cedar-boughs.
 My tears fell, shining among the earth's bright drops;
 For now I knew
 Why the maiden plaits a whip of cedar-fibre,
 To give into her husband's hand on her marriage-day.
 Once I asked my father--it seemed so strange
 A maid should weave and weave a rod for her own sorrow.
 He laughed and said: "It is our custom; ay, an old custom--
 I know not if it means aught now,
 Or ever did have meaning."
 My mother sat near. Ay, I have remembered that she spoke not;
 But, silently, in the shadow of his body, drooped her head.

    Ay, 'tis old, the custom,
 Old as earth is old;
 Ancient as passion,
 Pitiless as passion--
 Ay, pitiless, pitiless, the earth-way for women!
 Bitter it is, as the taste of bright sea-water,
 That he, who takes the gift, and wields our weaving of desire,
 Knows not the meaning of the gift--nor can know ever!
 Into the heedless hand of passion
 We yield our power-of-pain...
 It is the law of the earth-way.

    So it is with birth-giving.
 Aii-he! the mightier pang,
 The mightier loving!

[p. 175]

And thou and thy father, the two Strong Ones,
 Glad, glad of the woman's pain-cry!

    M'-m'-m'-m'-n--Ai-i-he-i--
 Sleepest thou, little Fatling?
 Ay, thou didst long drink at my breast--
 (But hast not drained it of love.)
 Cedar, Cedar, carefully
 Guard my little brown cone
 On thy earth-bending branch.
 M'-m'-m'-m'-n--Ai-i-he-i--
 Little life-bud on the bough!
 Sleep, sleep, thou drowsy one--
 Thou art guarded well.
 Ay, rock, rock, safely, safely, little Man-Child--
 A woman watches thee.

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

SONG OF BASKET-WEAVING

Kulasgh, Kulasgh, my mother, [**]
 I sit at thy knee
 Weaving my basket of grasses,
 Weaving for my harvest of berries when the Ripe Days come.
 Thy fingers gently touch my hair with fragrance,
 Thy mouth drips a song, for the wind has kissed it--
 (Love sings in thy mouth!)
 The soil listens and answers;
 I feel a stirring beneath me and hear buds opening,
 The river chants thy song and the clouds dance to it.
 Tonight the stars will float upon thy singing breath,
 Gleaming like slanting flocks above the sea.
 All the earth sings: and its voices are one song!

[p. 176]

I alone am silent: I alone, a maid waiting him, the Fate,
 The Stirring One, the Planter of the Harvest,
 The Basket-Filler.
 Kulasgh, Kulasgh, Mother!
 See how beautiful, how liberal, is my basket,
 How tightly woven for the waters of Love,
 How soft for the treading of children's feet,
 How strong to bear them up!
 Kulasgh, Kulasgh, Mother, remember me--
 Ere the Sunset and the Dropping Leaf!

Footnotes

^175:* Kulasgh, Cedar tree, considered the source of life by the British Columbian Coast tribes, as it supplies all their necessities, even food in fish famine.

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE CHANGE-SONG

    Death's first snows are drifting on my cheek,
 Pale are my lips
 As the kiss of Cin-Uza;
 I lie low and still.
 Near me crouch my silent kinsmen,
 They hold the breath and wait the hour of wailing;
 They have wrapped the scarlet mourning blanket
 Round the shoulders of the oldest man;
 He has taken their sorrow.
 He droops at my door
 Like a bleeding hawk where the eagles have battled.
 He is so old he feels not any grief,
 His heart is cold,
 In his ears no sound is,
 And in his eyes no light.
 Therefore have my kinsmen given him their griefs--
 Because the dawn leaps clear into their eyes,
 Because the sound of women's feet
 Rustling on the cedar mats when the torch is blown
 Calls sweetly to their ears,
 And their hearts are beating for the hunt.
 They may not bear the sorrow of my passing,
 We have known strong joys together!

[p. 177]

    I take your loves, my kinsmen,
 I leave; with you no griefs!
 Sing, my kinsmen, when ye swing me
 To the topmost branches of the cedar.
 Sweet-smelling arms of cedar, reach for me,
 Tenderly receive me,
 Hold me in the Last Caress under open sky!
 Sing, my kinsmen, when the oldest man
 Takes his lone trail through the forest.
 He will wear no mourning-blanket when he comes again tomorrow!
 He will say, "Rejoice--
 I have borne your grief afar,
 I have buried it deep,
 The place is not known."
 The wind of your singing shall rock me
 In the arms of my mother, the cedar.
 Yet there is a sweeter song, my kinsmen;
 It is the Change-Song of Supreme One.
 I hear it now,
 He chants it to my heart;
 Because pale death has crossed my threshold, and has clasped my hand.
 "Fear not," sings Supreme One;
 "I am making pure, making pure,
 I destroy not life,
 I am Life-maker!"

    The oldest man has entered the forest,
 Ah! Ah! my kinsmen are wailing;
 They saw me depart with Death
 Into the White Change.
 But I go on--and on!
 And I sing the Change-Song of Supreme One:
 Ha-eohos la no-ya ai-a me la-la
 Q' oalahag' i-h-e-e la-wo!

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 178]

  

SONG OF THE FULL CATCH

    Here's good wind, here's sweet wind,
 Here's good wind and my woman calls me!
 Straight she stands there by the pine-tree,
 Faithful waits she by the cedar,
 She will smile and reach her hands
 When she sees my thousand salmon!
 Here's good wind and my woman calls me.

    Here's clear water, here's swift water,
 Here's bright water and my woman waits me!
 She will call me from the sea's mouth--
 Sweet her pine-bed when the morning
 Lights my canoe and the river ends!
 Here's good wind, here's swift water,
 Strong as love when my woman calls me!

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

SPRING TO THE EARTH-WITCH

  

PAI-IYA TO SWI-YA KWENEWESALS

    My eyes I will not cover!
 I am Pai-iya, stepping free on the goathills behind thy village.
 Blue shadows and white mists, like flowers,
 Lie deep in thy green forests.
 Night lingers in thy hair;
 Pools of starred dusk are thine eyes.
 Thy speech is gray fog, impenetrable,
 Shrouding the port of the crimson lure--
 (The ships of the trusting one are broken.)
 Oh, flower-red is thy girdle at morning and evening!
 If it were loosened there would be a race of men,
 And thou the harbor of a thousand wondering ships.
 I have lifted dawn before me as a shield,
 Swi-ya Kwen-e-we-sals!

[p. 179]

    The Raven pecks beside thy door;
 On thy roof the Thunder-Bird claps his wings;
 Thy smile darkles across the skies.
 Thy smile is death--
 My heart is the riven sea beneath.
 If thy scarlet girdle were unknotted would it stem the sea of my wound?
 Nay! Call not me with the wind blowing through thy garments!
 I have bound the mountains to my feet,
 Swi-ya Kwen-e-we-sals!

    Last night I saw winged stars in flight
 Circling o'er thy dwelling.
 They swung at rest on the points of the shore pine--
 Torches red-spanning the bay.
 My wolves, at my call,
 In long gray troops fled up from the forest.
 They sphered in guard about me--sleeping on my shield
     poised on the four world-crags--
 As darkened silver cloud-mists wind about the moon.
 I have shepherded them into the canyon between us--
 (But my eyes I will not cover!)
 Wilt thou come, daring, among my fanged flocks,
 Swi-ya Kwen-e-we-sals?

    What is this warmth stealing to my height
 Like footsteps of a strange desire?
 Wave on wave of pink and gold breaks over the white;
 The petals open, chirring,
 As if they were feathers on the Song-bird's swelling throat.
 My wolves, with heads hanging and fangs covered, slowly moving, moving,
 Huddle in the valley like sky-shadows before rain.
 Whose steps flow and ripple over the dark moss,
 Parting the green walls of cedars,

[p. 180]

Blossoming among my mating flocks?
 Whence this unraveling of flame blown loose across the air?

    My eyes I will not cover!
 I have woven thongs of the mountain mists
 And bound me to the morning star.
 Between the cliffs of Night and Day, thou emergest!--
 Thy sod-brown bosom, the mystical craving eyes above;
 The yearning fragrance of thy closed hands,
 The wild winds between thy feet,
 And the rivers under thy girdle!
 I have cast down the great shield of the dawn!
 Come, redden its rim with me,
 Swi-ya Kwen-e-we-sals!

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHIEF CAPILANO GREETS HIS NAMESAKE AT DAWN

    White Head of Waters, White Head of Light--
 Capilano; Cla'h'ya.
 White head of the Chief to thee lifts greeting.
 I am hoar with years as thou, great Father;
 My hair hangs like the dropping ice
 Of thy highest hushed waters.
 I have lived a hundred years at thy foot,
 Singing the prayer of thanks for life:
 "O Kia-Kunae, Great Spirit One, Great Kind One,
 I praise thee for life, I serve thee with living,
 I bless thee that in kindness thou hast made the earth
 And with love covered it.
 Yea, by thy kindness, men and trees stand forth;
 Silently, to me, speak they the speech of brothers.
 For delights the little rivers come among the hills,
 Shining with the smiles of women;
 Ay, as the merry murmuring of many maidens

[p. 181]

Are the rivers; swift and tender in their coming.
 (Because thou art kind, Kunae, thou madest women.)
 It is the morn, Kunae, I pray, I praise thee."
 Ah!--how many hundred years hast thou prayed thus, Capilano?
 With thee this day, Mountain-Father, I thank Kunae for another dawn.
 I am girt with blanket and rope of cedar-fibre;
 In my ear is a ring of fine bark.
 Thou art belted with innumerable pine-trees;
 To thee they are smaller than feathers.
 The sun is the cedar-ring in thine ear,
 The long sea asleep is the spear in thy hand.
 It is still, with pale lights on the distant blade,
 Pointing at rest to islands beyond the dropping sky.
 Thou art come forth, as a hunter, to the dawn,
 Herding the antlered shadows down the forest slope.
 Their swift fleeing hoofs strike fire from the beaten sandshores of morning,
 And the black wraiths swoon upon the bright opening sea.
 With blood of his proud throat crimsoning the eastern sky
 The great Stag of the Dark in the van falls dying.

    Here was I chief ere the coming of the white man;
 Now is his village spread from this sea beyond my sight.
 His canoes are floating villages;
 They go by with a great noise and a black smoke.
 His deeds are mighty; they leap with roaring clouds and thunder-fires
 Into the blue quiet morning and the white moon-sky.

    Yet have I heard no sound mightier
 Than the sun shattering the night
 On thy stone shoulder, Capilano.
 Yet have I seen no sight more wonderful and fair

[p. 182]

Than the coming of the light,
 When Day, the silver-winged gull, down-swooping finds the sea.
 Yet have I known no thing sweeter, stronger,
 Than the smell of piney winds and blue rippling sea-water,
 And the kindness of Kunae-Kia, the living One,
 Waking the heart of the old chief
 To another dawn of life.

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE WILD WOMAN'S LULLABY

What shall I sing to thee, Babe on my back?
 Song of the Eagle that mates with the storm!
 Hi-i-ri-i-ki! Ri-eek!
 The wild gale is weeping, driven before him
 To his nest on the black lone mast of the night;
 Swinging, swinging, far out, high out, over the sea!
 Hi-i-ri-i-ki! Ri-eek!
 Thy father is Eagle-Go-High, chief of thy tribe:
 Fiercest in war, wisest in council, swiftest in hunting,
 Harshest and fondest in the tent of his woman;
 He is my mate!

What shall I sing to thee, Babe on my back!
 Song of the wind that is wanton forever!
 Fleeing forever, luring and weeping, laughing and leaping forever;
 Calling forever--calling--for the chase of swift wings,
 For the drive and the smite of wild wings,
 For the fold of strong wings,
 For the sleep in warm wings.
 OO-o-roo-o-rrr-ufffff-oo! Thy mother is Storm-Dancer, daughter of Winds.
 What art thou, Little Chiefling, babe of my heart?

[p. 183]

The star that I plucked from the mast of the night,
 When the wings of thy father outstrove me.
 Hi-i-ri-i-ki! Ri-eek!
 Eagle-Go-High, this is thy son,--
 He falls asleep, smiling,
 To the scream of thy nesting-call.
 Hi-i-ri-i-ki! Ri-i-ki! Ri-eek!

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

INDIAN LOVER'S HYMN

Sea-Song and Storm-Song
 And drums of the night,
 Drums of love's footfall beating through the dark;
 Wind of my pulse and a breaking tide,
 And my cry the one note, the one note,
 Piercing the sky like a star over thee
 O See-Gooltha maq-ha-ten-tle,
 See-Gooltha with the two high breasts!

I am come as a river between hills,
 Meeting the sea among cliffs--
 O Waters surging to Waters in the monotoned might of the war-chant,
 With the sod sounding back,
 And thy voice--! sweet to the hunter's ear
 Is the shrill arrowed hawk before the wind!
 O See-Gooltha maq-ha-ten-tle,
 Thy kiss opens the dark
 And the moon unfolds in thine eyes.

Thunders of breaking day
 Long foaming surf-lines of light
 Sweep the morning beaches,
 Blown by winds that march and sing:
 Tall winds, with hunters' feet, swift and trackless,

[p. 184]

Scattering the light from Kunae's  eyes
 And the laughter from his mouth--
 Red is love's glory on the forest
 As a slain moose.
 O See-Gooltha maq-ha-ten-tle
 I arise from thy heart,
 My lips lift, from thy kiss,
 Flame-bright wings of new desire spreading to the Sun.
 Give thy hand and leap with me o'er thy threshold to the Good Ground!
 Run with cool palm to palm pressed, breasts beating,
 Thighs by fleet thighs flashing, down the white swaying shore.
 Brown feet and crags and trampling pines,
 Tread to the sound,
 Of Sea-Song and Storm-Song
 And Drums of the Dawn!

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE SONG OF THE HILLS

FROM THE YOKUT

BEING THE SONG OF A MAN AND A WOMAN WHO MIGHT HAVE LOVED

This is the song of the Hills
 In the hour when they talk together,
 When the alpen glow dies down in the west and leaves the heavens tender;
 In the pure and shadowless hour
 When the Mountains talk together;

"Fir tree leaneth to fir,
 The wind-blown willows mingle;

[p. 185]

Clouds draw each to each, dissolve, depart, and renew one another;
 But the strong Hills hold asunder.

"Had we been less we had loved;
 We had stooped and been tender;

"But our hands are under the earth
 For the travail of her harvests,
 Upholding the rain-sleeked fields
 And the long, brown, fruitful furrow.
 Terror taketh the earth
 When the Mountains move together.

"But ever as winds of Spring
 Set the meadow grasses caressing,
 And the coo-dove's call.
 To the coo-dove's mate
 Resounds in the oak-wood valleys,
 We shall thrill with the brooding earth,
 We shall turn, touch hands, and remember,
 Had we been less, how much we had loved
 How nobly we might have been tender."

Footnotes

^184:* Kunae: Supreme One.

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

NEITHER SPIRIT NOR BIRD

SHOSHONE LOVE SONG

Neither spirit nor bird;
 That was my flute you heard
 Last night by the River.
 When you came with your wicker jar
 Where the river drags the willows,
 That was my flute you heard,
 Wacoba, Wacoba,
 Calling, Come to the willows!

[p. 186]

Neither the wind nor a bird
 Rustled the lupin blooms,
 That was my blood you heard
 Answer your garment's hem
 Whispering through the grasses;
 That was my blood you heard
 By the wild rose under the willows.

That was no beast that stirred,
 That was my heart you heard
 Pacing to and fro
 In the ambush of my desire,
 To the music my flute let fall.
 Wacoba, Wacoba,
 That was my heart you heard
 Leaping under the willows.

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

PRAYER TO THE MOUNTAIN SPIRIT

FROM THE NAVAJO

Lord of the Mountain,
 Reared within the Mountain
 Young Man, Chieftain,
 Hear a young man's prayer!
 Hear a prayer for cleanness.
 Keeper of the strong rain,
 Drumming on the mountain;
 Lord of the small rain
 That restores the earth in newness;
 Keeper of the clean rain,
 Hear a prayer for wholeness,

Young Man, Chieftain,
 Hear a prayer for fleetness.

[p. 187]

Keeper of the deer's way,
 Reared among the eagles,
 Clear my feet of slothness.
 Keeper of the paths of men,
 Hear a prayer for straightness.

Hear a prayer for courage.
 Lord of the thin peaks,
 Reared amid the thunders;
 Keeper of the headlands
 Holding up the harvest,
 Keeper of the strong rocks
 Hear a prayer for staunchness.

Young Man, Chieftain,
 Spirit of the Mountain!

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

SONG FOR THE PASSING OF BEAUTIFUL WOMEN

FROM THE PAIUTE

Go thy way in comeliness!
 Strong sun across the sod doth make
 Such quickening as thy countenance.

Pursue thy unguessed errand and pass by;
 I am more worth for what thy passing wakes,
 Great races in my loins to thee that cry!
 My blood is redder for thy loveliness.
 Prosper; be fair; pass by!

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 188]

  

SONG OF A PASSIONATE LOVER

FROM THE YOKUT

Come not near my songs,
 You who are not my lover,
 Lest from out that ambush
 Leaps my heart upon you!

When my songs are glowing
 As an almond thicket
 With the bloom upon it,
 Lies my heart in ambush
 All amid my singing;
 Come not near my songs,
 You who are not my lover!

Do not hear my songs,
 You who are not my lover,
 Over-sweet the heart is
 Where my love has bruised it,
 Breathe you not that fragrance,
 You who are not my lover!
 Do not stoop above my heart
 With its languor on you,
 Lest I should not know you
 From my own beloved,
 Lest from out my singing
 Leaps my heart upon you!

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE HEART'S FRIEND

SHOSHONE LOVE SONG

Fair is the white star of twilight,
 And the sky clearer

[p. 189]

At the day's end;
 But she is fairer, and she is dearer
 She, my heart's friend!

Fair is the white star of twilight,
 And the moon roving
 To the sky's end;
 But she is fairer, better worth loving,
 She, my heart's friend.

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

A SONG IN TIME OF DEPRESSION

FROM THE PAIUTE

Now all my singing Dreams are gone
 But none knows where they are fled
 Nor by what trail they have left me.

Return, O Dreams of my heart,
 And sing in the summer twilight,
 By the creek and the almond thicket
 And the field that is bordered with lupins!

Now is my refuge to seek
 In the hollow of friendly shoulders,
 Since the singing is stopped in my pulse
 And the earth and the sky refuse me;
 Now must I hold by the eyes of a friend
 When the high white stars are unfriendly.

Over sweet is the refuge of trusting;
 Return and sing, O my Dreams,
 In the dewy and palpitant pastures,
 Till the love of living awakes
 And the strength of the hills to uphold me.

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 190]

  

ALONG THE SOUTH STAR TRAIL: TRIBAL SONGS FROM THE SOUTHWEST

THE TOM-TOM

    Drum-beat, beat of drums,
 Pebble-rattle in the gourd,
 Pebble feet on drifting sand...
 Drum-beat, beat of drums
 I have lost the wife-made robe of bearskin...
 Take the prize--mine the loss.
 Have I lost too the courage of the black bear--
 His power, his thunder?
 Lul-la-by,
 Games' queer lullaby...
 O robe of mine!--
 O luck of mine!

    Drum-beat, beat of drums,
 Pebble-rattle in the gourd,
 Coyote feet upon the plain...
 Drum-beat, beat of drums--
 Coyotes crushed the tender ham-string and the bone...
 A bull-calf bawls, dies alone.
 Where are the herds of buffalo and the hides,
 The meat, the tepees?
 Lul-la-by,
 Man's dread lullaby...
 O home of mine!
 O life of mine!

    Drum-beat, beat of drums,
 Pebble-rattle in the gourd,
 Horse-hoof beat upon the ground...
 Drum-beat, beat of drums
 By Wounded Knee ye buried them, buried them--
 Red men's flesh, their bones...

[p. 191]

By Wounded Knee we buried them, buried them.
 The songs we sung, the dreams...
 Lul-la-by,
 The white man's lullaby...
 O race of mine!
 O brothers mine!

    Drum-beat, beat of drums,
 Pebble-rattle in the gourd,
 Pulse-beat in the fever...
 Drum-beat, beat of drums--
 Famine drank from the gourd bottle, ate the gourd;
 Left the skin, the bone.
 She walked the pathway from the east, of the departed--
 Left me forsaken, alone...
 Lul-la-by,
 Tirawa's long lullaby...
 O blood of mine!
 O child of mine!

    Drum-beat, beat of drums,
 Pebble-rattle in the gourd.
 Still feet in the grave-mound...
 Drum-beat, beat of drums--
 The gourd-rattle handle leads to the sun and life;
 Leaves clay, leaves cold.
 A purple smoke arises from bowl to float on winds;
 Leaves ashes--my ash...
 Lul-la-by,
 Death's sweet lullaby...
 O flesh of mine!
 O hands of mine!

    Drum-beat, beat of drums,
 Pebble-rattle in the gourd,
 Dream-feet in the yellow line...
 Drum-beat, beat of drums--

[p. 192]

One half the feather of Tirawa's bird is white;
 The other black--'tis night;
 Tirawa's song at night is morning star of dawn
 Where dance dreams, in light...
 Lul-la-by,
 The spirit's lullaby...
 O soul of mine!
 O breath of mine!

    Drum-beat, beat of drums,
 Pebble-rattle in the gourd,
 Calves' feet in starry plains...
 Drum-beat, beat of drums--
 A sacred herd graze on tips of fair fresh flowers
 In garden--Star of Evening's.
 A bison drinks mixed all-waters, pure
 From Spring; 'tis hers...
 Lul-la-by,
 All-Life's lullaby...
 O land of mine!
 O plains of mine!

    Drum-beat, beat of drums,
 Pebble-rattle in the gourd,
 Dance-feet 'round the sun...
 Drum-beat, beat of drums--
 By the sun see the dancing white men with the red--
 By Wounded Knee, a post!
 There they blend their songs together, brother-wise;
 Here the post, the paint...
 Lul-la-by,
 The Nation's lullaby...
 O race of mine!
 O brothers mine!

    Drum-beat, beat of drums,
 Pebble-rattle in the gourd,

[p. 193]

Child feet in the hogan...
 Drum-beat, beat of drums--
 A child has taught her little spider pet to weave
 Bead-work at my door;
 A child has taught these dimming eyes to see
 Thread-work, star-lit lodge...
 Lul-la-by,
 Love's own lullaby...
 O hogan mine!
 O hogan thine!

    Drum-beat, beat of drums,
 Pebble-rattle in the gourd,
 Soul-feet in trail of wind...
 Drum-beat, beat of drums--
 Hear the great sea-feet, beating on the flint-rock!
 Drum-beat, beat of drum--
 Hear the beat of distant feet on South Star Trail!
 Drum-beat, beat of drum--
 Ti-ra-wa!
 Earth's great Ti-ra-wa.
 O heart-beat thine!
 O drum-beat thine!

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

SA-A NARAI

So I heard it commanded,
 On the edge of the mesa,
 By the sitter on the mesa,
 In the season of falling leaves:

Count thou, my son, the lights on South Star Trail;
       Sa-a Narai
 Trust not time nor strength--they are twin liars;
       Sa-a Narai
 On track of birth-dance the mourners wail--

[p. 194]

      Sa-a Narai
 The Tribe moves on--count thou the fires.
       Sa-a Narai
 Beads, a few in falling rain; grains in desert sand;
       Sa-a Narai
 The door of night swings wide--it will not close.
       Sa-a Narai
 Still room for beads, dying hills for land;
      Sa-a Narai
 The door is open--the Soul Trail glows.
       Sa-a Narai
 I counted my sheep but not the bones;
       Sa-a Narai
 A woman vows and goes her way;
       Sa-a Narai
 Dust-wedded wealth--the desert owns--
       Sa-a Narai
 Tomorrow smiles, while sad is yesterday.
       Sa-a Narai
 Feast on wit and beauty--pendants of bone--
       Sa-a Narai
 The eye-strings tie two souls today.
       Sa-a Narai
 Fill the earthen bowl--fill jar of stone--
       Sa-a Narai
 Youth blooms fresh--spring has not gone;
       Sa-a Narai
 Winter gathers, gathers fruit of spring shower;
       Sa-a Narai
 The frost-chain shakes--a soul moves on.
       Sa-a Narai
 I saw a cripple, I saw a thief.
       Sa-a Narai
 Go, hoe your corn with shoulder-blade of deer.
       Sa-a Narai
 Where blows a wind, there stirs a leaf;

[p. 195]

      Sa-a Narai
 A bone enghosts a hoe--greed your spear.
       Sa-a Narai
 If Red Moccasin moans, who knows the way?
       Sa-a Narai
 I am ashamed before that standing within me--
       Sa-a Narai
 The spirit upward flies--it will not stay;
       Sa-a Narai
 Follow soon, thou must, the Voice within thee.
       Sa-a Narai
 Shagwakwa laughs--in black night sings--
       Sa-a Narai
 Give me my mother's bones--unto me, dreams!
       Sa-a Narai
 A puff to the gods whither blue smoke wings--
       Sa-a Narai
 Smoke now with me--soon the yellow line gleams.
       Sa-a Narai
 Eat thy mother's flesh--she is the corn:
       Sa-a Narai
 Is there a stranger who is not thy brother?
       Sa-a Narai
 The One Above sung life--lo, love was born!
       Sa-a Narai
 Hast shared the gift of thy first mother?
       Sa-a Narai
 A little puff--a little kernel--
       Sa-a Narai
 The Tribe moves on--it will not stay.
       Sa-a Narai
 A little play by the trail eternal--
       Sa-a Narai
 A little puff--lo, the South Star Way...
 So I heard it chanted.

[p. 196]

  

ON THE WAR-PATH

    Hey--ye!
 Hey!
 Hey--now go, gather, gather living arrows, gather!
 Stand ye in the white dawn--
 Crouch, spring, run!
 Hey now, plume feather, feather--eagle flying feather--
 Strike ye in the red dawn!
 Crouch, spring, run!
 Hey, now pray power of storm!
 Hey, now pray lightning's bolt!
 Hey, now pray power of flint!
 Hey, now pray weather, weather--war-like stormy weather!
 Slay ye in the yellow dawn--
 Crouch, spring, run!
 Hey, now go, gather, gather, bleeding bonnets gather--huh!

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

EARTH-MOTHER

O, ho, yo,
 O, ho, yo,
 To thee, my life,
 To thee, my wife,
 To thee, my mother--

Who are these the many-feeding?
 Heaps of horns,
 Hills of fur--
 To thee, I come to partake of food,
 My mother,
 O, ho--

So say'th the spring,
 So say'th the wing,
 So say'th my mother--

[p. 197]

Thus, it was I heard the feet beat--
 My ear down,
 On the ground--
 Yea, I put my lips to thee and drank song,
 My mother,
 O, ho--

So cries the tree,
 So cries the sea,
 So cries my mother--

There, the word was overheard,
 By the cactus
 Standing lone--
 Yea, by the cypress thou wilt teach me,
 My mother,
 O, ho--

So walks the light,
 So walks the night,
 So walks my mother--

Even unto the long black shadows,
 Goeth the frail thing,
 Evening star--
 Whither thou goeth and thy smile go I,
 My mother.
 O, ho--

So broods the dark,
 So broods the bark,
 So broods my mother--

Beneath the bark-blanket were the little men--
 The six-legged,
 Painted black and red--

[p. 198]

Unto thee will I hide me to sleep,
 My mother,
 O, ho--

To thee, O breath,
 To thee, O death,
 To thee, my mother--

I saw it, yea in a dream, I saw it--
 My soul
 Arise from sleep--
 In the morning, thou wilt call me,
 My mother.

O, ho, yo,
 O, ho, yo,
 To thee, O--
 Yo.

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

FEAST OF WOLVES

Ho, oh-o-o
 Come ye shades, shadows come
 Ho, oh-o-o
 Come ye shades, shadows come
 Come ye shades, oh-o-o, ho, oh-o-o
 Ye night ghosts and dance ye
 What--dark!
 Ho, oh-o-o
 Come ye wolves, wolf-howls come
 Ho, oh-o-o
 Come ye wolves, wolf-howls come
 Come ye wolves, oh-o-o, ho, oh-o-o
 Ye singers merry feast ye
 What--bark!
 Ho, oh-o-o

[p. 199]

Come ye crows, crow-bills come
 Ho, oh-o-o
 Come ye crows, crow-bills come
 Come ye crows, oh-o-o, ho, oh-o-o
 Ye black robes and flap ye
 What--hark!
 Ho, oh-o-o
 Come ye bones, bone-grins come
 Come ye bones, oh-o-o, ho, oh-o-o
 What--stark!

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

LONE-DOG UNTO THE DELAWARES

Brothers--Lennapi,
 Hear ye, come ye, all ye--
 By south-way, east-way, shore-land place,
 Men come,
 Boats come,
 Float fast,
 Handsome.
 Man-who-Paints, much-talker, he much-walked
 Easterly, south also,
 All-time stalked--
 Friends they, he says,
 Sun-rise men, sun-born men, east-coming;
 Great things have, wonderful, thundering
 Yea, great things, hear we, from clam-clam-sea--
 Hear ye--
 White-bird boat, great eagle, floats up streams,
 Man-carrying, house-bearing, much-fire gleams.
 Friends they,
 Say they,
 Come ye, hear ye, all ye,
 Brothers there, cousins there, Lennapi,
 Turtle men, turkey men, wolf clan,

[p. 200]

Let us running-friendly be,
 Let us brother-hearted be,
 Giver-brothers standing we,
 Men with meat, men with hides, everyman,
 Come ye, run ye, all ye.
 From Branchy-river-place,
 From Straightened-river-place,
 From Great-falls-at,
 From Shore-land-at,
 Sassafras-land.
 Many caves men,
 Riding waves men,
 All ye Wolves, Turtles, Lennapi--
 Bring your gifts, laying them
 At Clam-clam-sea.

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

LISTENING 

    The noise of passing feet
 On the prairie--
 Is it men or gods
 Who come out of the silence?

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

BUFFALO DANCE

    Strike ye our land
 With curved horns!
 Now with cries
 Bending our bodies,

[p. 201]

Breathe fire upon us;
 Now with feet
 Trampling the earth,
 Let your hoofs
 Thunder over us!
 Strike ye our land
 With curved horns!

Footnotes

^200:* Miss Frances Densmore's literal translations from the Chippewa furnished the keynotes of this and the following five songs.       A. C. H.

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

WHERE THE FIGHT WAS

    In the place where the fight was
 Across the river,
 In the place where the fight was
 Across the river:
 A heavy load for a woman
 To lift in her blanket,
 A heavy load for a woman
 To carry on her shoulder.
 In the place where the fight was
 Across the river,
 In the place where the fight was
 Across the river:
 The women go wailing
 To gather the wounded,
 The women go wailing
 To pick up the dead.

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE WIND

    The wind is carrying me round the sky;
 The wind is carrying me round the sky.
 My body is here in the valley--
 The wind is carrying me round the sky.

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 202]

  

COURTSHIP

    When I go I will give you surely
 What you will wear if you go with me;
 A blanket of red and a bright girdle,
 Two new moccasins and a silver necklace.
 When I go I will give you surely
 What you will wear if you go with me!

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

PARTING

    Now I go, do not weep, woman--
 Woman, do not weep;
 Though I go from you to die,
 We shall both lie down
 At the foot of the hill, and sleep.

    Now I go, do not weep, woman--
 Woman, do not weep;
 Earth is our mother and our tent the sky.
 Though I go from you to die,
 We shall both lie down
 At the foot of the hill, and sleep.

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE LOST LAGOON

It is dusk on the Lost Lagoon,
 And we two dreaming the dusk away,
 Beneath the drift of a twilight gray--
 Beneath the drowse of an ending day
 And the curve of a golden moon.

It is dark on the Lost Lagoon,
 And gone are the depths of haunting blue,

[p. 203]

The grouping gulls, and the old canoe,
 The singing firs, and the dusk and--you,
 And gone is the golden moon.

O lure of the Lost Lagoon--
 I dream tonight that my paddle blurs
 The purple shade where the seaweed stirs--
 I hear the call of the singing firs
 In the hush of the golden moon.

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE SONG MY PADDLE SINGS

West wind, blow from your prairie nest,
 Blow from the mountains, blow from the west.
 The sail is idle, the sailor too;
 O! wind of the west, we wait for you.
 Blow, blow!
 I have wooed you so,
 But never a favor you bestow.
 You rock your cradle the hills between,
 But scorn to notice my white lateen.

I stow the sail, unship the mast:
 I wooed you long but my wooing's past;
 My paddle will lull you into rest.
 O! drowsy wind of the drowsy west,
 Sleep, sleep,
 By your mountain steep,
 Or down where the prairie grasses sweep!
 Now fold in slumber your laggard wings,
 For soft is the song my paddle sings.

August is laughing across the sky,
 Laughing while paddle, canoe and I,
 Drift, drift,

[p. 204]

Where the hills uplift
 On either side of the current swift.
 The river rolls in its rocky bed;
 My paddle is plying its way ahead;
 Dip, dip,
 While the waters flip
 In foam as over their breast we slip.

And oh, the river runs swifter now;
 The eddies circle about my bow.
 Swirl, swirl!
 How the ripples curl
 In many a dangerous pool awhirl!

And forward far the rapids roar,
 Fretting their margin for evermore.
 Dash, dash,
 With a mighty crash,
 They seethe, and boil, and bound, and splash.

Be strong, O paddle! be brave, canoe!
 The reckless waves you must plunge into.
 Reel, reel.
 On your trembling keel,
 But never a fear my craft will feel.

We've raced the rapid, we're far ahead!
 The river slips through its silent bed.
 Sway, sway,
 As bubbles spray
 And fall in tinkling tunes away.
 And up on the hills against the sky,
 A fir tree rocking its lullaby,
 Swings, swings,
 Its emerald wings,
 Swelling the song that my paddle sings.

     
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 205]

  

PLEM-SALIA-KWI

  

AUTUMN DAWN

Plem-Salia-Kwi is the Hunter returning with plenty,
 And the Fisher from the green sea.
 His shoulders are heavy with deer's meat;
 His great canoe is slow with salmon.
 We listen to the nudge of its tall ghost-prow
 In all our landing coves.
 We hear the ground-wind of his moccasins
 Rustling the forest-floors:
 Swifter than joy they speed on the purple paths of the Fall--
 Paths stained with fruitage, oozing odors.
 He comes to us, his little brown blood-brothers by the sea:--
 Through the dark silver-blue spruces, and the massed sea-green cedars,
 Through the brown and crimson maples,
 And the cottonwoods' dropping gold;
 Through the pearl shimmer of the naked birches.
 Plem-Salia-Kwi's blanket is the white, broidered, mist;
 Its fringes are dew-bells
 That tinkle little whispers down the mountain.
 While he still slept,
 Lake-Woman, Mother of Waters, wove him his blanket:
 Wove it of the wool of the mist-herds
 Drifting down from the cloud-ranges.
 She patterned it in bead-drops, sun-colored--
 A rainbow starts in the heart of each--
 With blue ravelings from sky-patches,
 With pink shells from the beaches of morning.
 He bears the strong bent bow of the hills,
 And the swift wind-arrows scarlet-shafted with dawn:
 And the tall spear of falling light,
 October light, the mystical weapon.
 (Ah-h! Ahi! Ah-h! We sing to Kunae
 For the beauty and harvest of Plem-Salia-Kwi.)

[p. 206]

The little children,
 In laughing, leaping, running, stumbling,
 Pattering and creeping down to the beaches,
 Give thanks for the harvest of sweet, dried berries
 And the plenty of the breast.
 They go down to converse with the swallows,
 Who bathe in the small leaf-locked pools.
 Ak-hi! the shrill joy of the children,
 At the twirring and flashing of brown wings in bright water,
 And the twittering of news from all the nests of the sea-coast!

The pine-logs make a good smoke, blue, clear, sweet-smelling,
 The cooking baskets bubble with water:
 The women chant, while they heat stones for the baking,
 Concerning the large baskets of food they have cooked,
 And the racks of crimson, smoked salmon,
 And the many trays of dried berries,
 Sun-baked and jellied in long strips, packed in cool leaves.
 They behold their men coming up from the caves
 With hammers and copper, with silver and cunning shells;
 And they clatter at their ears, saying:--
 "Is not thy roof fragrant with cedar-trays of berries?
 Have I not stored thy house full?
 Hast thou not a little wayward son of thee at each of thy hands?
 Is the cradle on my back--the cradle of thy despised little daughter--empty?
 Where is another such wife?
 Speak, O thou Hunter of Life,
 That caughtest me unknowing in the pine shadows--
 Ak-hi-i! Il-ak-il-ak!--
 When I danced after Tem-Eyos-Kwi!"

The men answer not:
 But in their eyes, behind their lashes, is a little smile,
 Like light in the depths of a reedy pool.

[p. 207]

Early, ere their clattering women woke,
 They went down to the caves with their axes.
 They have digged copper and silver and brilliant shells
 From a secret store.
 Tink-tonk, tink-tonk, tink-tonk!
 Through the forest rings the song of their hammers.
 The silent men are hammering rings for their women:
 Rings, bracelets, anklets, for their women,
 Glad gifts for their women, their mates.

For the silent men have seen
 That Plem-Salia-Kwi walks not alone.
 Through all his paths She follows him--his Woman, his Mate--
 Sharing his blanket.
 She has no other garment, her breast is bare,
 She has given all to him she follows;
 So comes he with plenty!
 He tires not forever on his leagues of march,
 Because her feet are set to his foot-prints,
 And the gleam of her bare hand slants across his shoulder.
 Therefore the silent men, the Hunters and Providers of Life,
 Greet Plem-Salia-Kwi, the Harvest-Bringer, their Blood-Brother the Mated One,
 With the tink-tonk, tink-tonk, tink-tonk of bright hammers,
 Shaping gifts for their women:
 Ringing their thanksgiving song for full joys--
 Full baskets, full cradles, the full arms of sleep.

[p. 208] [p. 209] [p. 210] 

    
The Path on the Rainbow, edited by George W. Cronyn, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

SONGS FROM THE HAKO: A PAWNEE CEREMONY

  

RENDERED IN THE RHYTHMS OF THE ORIGINALS, BY ALICE FLETCHER
 WITH INTERPRETATIONS BY TAHIRUSSAWICHI, A PAWNEE

[p. 211]

PREFATORY NOTE

The position of Tahirussawichi in the Pawnee tribe is that of a man worthy of respect--one versed in a knowledge of serious things, whose life has been devoted to the acquisition and maintenance of certain sacred rites. He is esteemed as a man of truth-- one who has the favor of Tirawa. He possesses a knowledge of curative roots, and often attends the sick, using herbs as medicine. He is the keeper of certain old and sacred objects, and leads in their attendant ceremonies. His great care in observing all the details of the intricate ceremony of the Hako is well known in the tribe, and much good fortune is believed to follow his leadership in this ceremony. His title is Kurahus. This term is applied to a man of years who has been instructed in the meaning and use of sacred objects as well as their ceremonies. The word is sometimes employed as a synonym for a venerable man, one who commands respect, but throughout this paper it is used in its official sense--the leader of the ceremony.

NATURE OF THE CEREMONY

The teachings of the public ceremony were general in character. They emphasized, on the one hand, man's dependence on the supernatural for all the gifts of life, and on the other hand, his dependence on the family tie for the gifts of peace and happiness. The specific teachings were reserved for the Son. These began in the ritual to the Dawn (tenth ritual) on the morning of the second and third days, which prefigured the secret ceremonies

[p. 212]

of the fifth morning, when the bond .of the family relation was extended beyond blood kinship through the symbolic rites which recognized the common source of life in Tirawa atius.

Looking over the entire ceremony, it is interesting to note how older rites have had their share in the development of the Hako, and how the trend of thought among the native seers has borne them toward a conception of the brotherhood of man, a conception recognized as the noblest known to the human family.

This impressive ritual-drama may be compared to a medieval Miracle Play, and has exercised an influence no less profound on the tribes which have performed it. The chief persons in the drama are, the Father, the Son, the Children, and attendant Deities (the associates and representatives of Tirawa atius, the Master of Life). Mother Corn, Kawas, the Eagle, the Morning Star, the Dawn, the Day and Father Sun. The Father is chosen from the tribe which presents the great spectacle; the Son is selected by the priests from another tribe by the curious psychic process described in the Second Ritual. Unusual blessings are supposed to accrue to those who take the leading parts.

[p. 213]

  

THE HAKO: A PAWNEE CEREMONY

  

FIRST RITUAL

INVOKING THE POWERS

EXPLANATION BY THE KURAHUS, OR CHIEF PRIEST

At the creation of the world it was arranged that there should be lesser powers. Tirawa atius, the mighty power, could not come near to man, could not be seen or felt by him, therefore lesser powers were permitted. They were to mediate between man and Tirawa. The first song mentions some of these lesser powers in the order in which they come near to man, in the order of their creation.

  

INVOCATION TO THE GREAT SPIRITS

I

We heed as unto thee we call;
 Oh, send to us thy potent aid!
 Help us, Oh, holy place above!
 We heed as unto thee we call.

II

We heed as unto thee we call;
 Oh, send to us thy potent aid!
 Help us, Hotoru, giver of breath!
 We heed as unto thee we call.

[p. 214]

III

We heed as unto thee we call;
 Oh, send to us thy potent aid!
 Help us, Shakuru, father of strength!
 We heed as unto thee we call.

IV

We heed as unto thee we call;
 Oh, send to us thy potent aid!
 Help us, h'Uraru, mother of all!
 We heed as unto thee we call.

PREPARING THE FEATHERED STEM

Blue is the color of the sky, the dwelling place of Tirawahut, that great circle of the powers which watch over man. As the man paints the stick blue we sing. We ask as we sing that life be given to this symbol of the dwelling place of Tirawa. We paint the groove red because the passageway is red through which man's breath comes and goes to give him life. The sun, too, is red, and the groove represents the straight path whereon the sun shines, the path which man must travel if he would live in peace and prosper. The teachings of this ceremony make a straight path along which if a man walks he will receive help from the powers.

I

Take we now the blue paint,
 Touch with it the stem, putting on the sacred symbol,
 Emblem of the clear sky,
 Where dwell the gods, who, descending, bring us good gifts,
 Gifts of life and plenty.

II

When the man begins to paint the stick green this song is sung.

[p. 215]

Take we now the green paint,
 Touch with it the stem, the mated stem,
 Putting on the emblem, the sacred and living symbol.
 Mother earth.
 From above descending, bountiful blessings on thee,
 Mother earth.

Oh, Kawas, come, with wings outspread in sunny skies!
 Oh, Kawas, come, and bring us peace, thy gentle peace!
 Oh, Kawas, come, and give new life to us who pray!

In this ceremony the brown eagle is called Kawas. This eagle has been made holy by being sacrificed to Tirawa. Its feathers are tied upon the stem that has been painted blue to represent the sky.

This stem was the first one painted and decorated, because it is female and the leader. It represents the night, the moon, the north, and stands for kindness and helpfulness. It will take care of the people. It is the mother.

Throughout the ceremony the Kurahus carries this feathered stem.

  

SONG TO MOTHER CORN

Mother Corn knows all places and all that happens among men; therefore the corn which comes from her must lead, must direct us where to go.

I

Tirawa, harken! Mighty one,
 Above us in blue, silent sky!
 We standing wait thy bidding here.
 The Mother Corn standing waits,
 Waits to serve thee here;
 The Mother Corn stands waiting here.

[p. 216]

II

Tirawa, harken! Mighty one,
 Above us in blue, silent sky!
 We flying seek thy dwelling there.
 The Mother Corn flying goes
 Up to seek thee there;
 The Mother Corn goes flying up.

III

Tirawa, harken! Mighty one,
 Above us in blue, silent sky!
 Behold! We in thy dwelling stand.
 The Mother Corn, standing there.
 Leader she is made;
 The Mother Corn is leader made.

IV

Tirawa, harken! Mighty one,
 Above us in blue, silent sky!
 The downward path we take again.
 The Mother Corn, leading us,
 Doth thy symbol bear;
 The Mother Corn with power leads.

Mother Corn having reached the blue dome where dwells the great circle of powers, Tirawahut, and having gained what she went for, tawitshpa, authority to lead in the ceremony, she descends to earth by the four paths.

  

SECOND RITUAL

  

PREFIGURING THE JOURNEY TO THE SON

The spirit of Mother Corn leads our spirits in the search for the Son. We draw near, in the spirit, to the village where the Son

[p. 217]

dwells. The Son does not see us as we stand there; he is sleeping. We fix our minds upon Mother Corn and upon him; we think of the gifts we are to bring him when we come to him with the Hako, the gifts that the birds and the animals that attend these sacred objects will surely bestow upon him--long life, children, and plenty. Now the spirit of Mother Corn touches him. We fix our minds upon Mother Corn and upon the Son; if we are in earnest he will respond to her touch. He will not waken, he will not see her, but he will see in a dream that which her touch will bring to him, one of the birds that attend the Hako, for all the spirits of those birds are with Mother Corn and they do her bidding, and he may hear the bird call to him. Then, when he awakens, he will remember his dream, and as he thinks upon it, he will know that he has been chosen to be a Son, and that all the good things that come with the ceremony which will make him a Son are now promised to him.

  

CHANT OF THE MYSTIC JOURNEY

I

Mother Corn, Oh hear! Open our way!
 Lo! As we draw near, let our souls touch thine
 While we pray thee:
 Children give to us. Mother Corn, hear!

II

Mother Corn, Oh hear! Open our way!
 Lo! Our heads we bow, while our souls touch thine;
 Then as one mind
 Make the choice of Son. Mother Corn, hear!

III

Mother Corn, Oh hear! Open our way!
 Lo! With head erect Mother stands, and then
 Moves she through air
 On her mission bent. Mother Corn, hear!

[p. 218]

IV

Mother Corn, Oh hear! Open our way!
 Lo! Now over hills, over streams, we go
 Taking our way
 Toward the Children's land. Mother Corn, hear!

V

Mother Corn, Oh hear! Open our way!
 Lo! Our journey's end now is near, we look
 O'er the strange land,
 Seeking Children there! Mother Corn, hear!

VI

Mother Corn, Oh hear! Open our way!
 Lo! Our eyes behold where they dwell. In their
 Village we walk,
 Seeking there the Son. Mother Corn, hear!

VII

Mother Corn, Oh hear! Open our way!
 Lo! His lodge we find, through the door we pass.
 Sleeping he lies,
 Knows not we are there. Mother Corn, hear!

VIII

Mother Corn, Oh hear! Open our way!
 Lo! Now at her touch comes a dream; then a
 Bird calls, "My son!"
 While his soul responds. Mother Corn, hear!

[p. 219]

  

THIRD RITUAL

  

SENDING THE MESSENGERS

The four messengers are selected informally by the Father from among his near relatives. They are generally young men, lithe and strong of limb, and able to make a long journey quickly. The distance to be traveled varies from a few miles to a hundred or more, and as they must carry all their provisions, it becomes necessary for them to get over the ground as rapidly as possible.

The formal appointment of these messengers takes place in the lodge of the Father, in the presence of the sacred objects spread at ceremonial rest.

When the messengers arrive at the lodge of the Son, he sends for his kindred and consults with them. Only a recent death in his family or some catastrophe which has deprived him of his property will be accepted as sufficient excuse for his not receiving the Hako party. If he accepts the tobacco he will bid the messengers return to the Father and say, "I am ready." In either case he must make gifts to the messengers in recognition of the proffered honor.

THE FATHER'S MESSAGE TO THE SON

I

I bid you travel o'er the land to the Son,
 And with you take these words of mine unto him:
 "Behold! Your Father comes to you speedily."

II

We wait their journey o'er the land to the Son,
 When they will give these words of mine unto him:
 "Behold! Your Father comes to you speedily."

[p. 220]

  

FOURTH RITUAL

  

VIVIFYING THE SACRED OBJECTS

On the morning of the day the journey is to begin the Kurahus rises from his place in the lodge behind the Hako and goes outside. There he ties the sacred objects on the selected tent pole.

The rope of buffalo hair is used to tie these sacred objects to the pole, which is then set up at the entrance of the lodge. Here it stands where the wind of the dawn may breathe upon the Hako and the first rays of the sun strike the sacred objects and give them life.

SONG OF PRAISE TO MOTHER CORN

As we sing we think that Mother breathing forth life, who has come out of the past, has now started to lead us on the journey we are to take and to the fulfilment of our desire that children may be given us, that generations may not fail in the future, and that the tie may be made strong between the Father and the Son.

I

Mother with the life-giving power now comes,
 Stepping out of far distant days she comes,
 Days wherein to our fathers gave she food;
 As to them, so now unto us she gives,
 Thus she will to our children faithful be.
 Mother with the life-giving power now comes!

II

Mother with the life-giving power is here.
 Stepping out of far distant days she comes.
 Now she forward moves, leading as we walk
 Toward the future, where blessings she will give,
 Gifts for which we have prayed granting to us.
 Mother with the life-giving power is here!

[p. 221]

  

THE HAKO PARTY PRESENTED TO THE POWERS

INVOCATION TO TIRAWA

This song is addressed to Tirawa atius. He is the father of all and all things come from him. We pray in our hearts as we sing. We ask Tirawa to watch over the Kurahus, to guide his acts and to guard his words so that he may make no mistake and the ceremony may be complete. From the east the flashes of the eyes of Tirawa come darting through the air upon us and upon the sacred objects.

Look on us as here we are standing, raising our voices!
 Look on us as here we, presenting, lift now these emblems that are so holy up to thy gaze!
 Swift, a flash from out of the heavens
 Falls on us as here we are standing, looking at thee.

INVOCATION TO THE GODS

The people are now looking toward the north, the moon, the night, the mother of the day.

We ask the powers of the north, they who can see the path of life, to lead us and make us able to walk, us and our children.

To all the powers of the east, west, south, and north we have sung and have presented ourselves. As we walked, we have traced upon the earth the figure of a man. This image that we have traced is from Tirawa. It has gone around with us, and its feet are where we now stand; its feet are with our feet and will move with them as we now take four steps, bearing the sacred objects, in the presence of all the powers and begin our journey to the land of the Son.

I

Look down, West gods, look upon us! We gaze afar on your dwelling.
 Look down while here we are standing, look down upon us, ye mighty!
 Ye thunder gods, now behold us!
 Ye lightning gods, now behold us!

[p. 222]

Ye that bring life, now behold us!
 Ye that bring death, now behold us!

II

Look down, South gods, look upon us! We gaze afar on your dwelling.
 Look down while here we are standing, look down upon us, ye mighty!
 Ye daylight gods, now behold us!
 Ye sunshine gods, now behold us!
 Ye increase gods, now behold us!
 Ye plenty gods, now behold us.

III

Look down, North gods, look upon us! We gaze afar on your
     dwelling, look down upon us, ye mighty!
 Ye darkness gods, now behold us!
 Ye moonlight gods, now behold us!
 Ye that direct, now behold us!
 Ye that discern, now behold us!

  

FIFTH RITUAL

  

MOTHER CORN ASSERTS AUTHORITY

THE JOURNEY BEGINS

I

The mother leads and we follow on,
 Her devious pathway before us lies.
 She leads us as were our fathers led
 Down through the ages.

II

The mother leads us and we follow on,
 Her pathway straight, where a stage each day.

[p. 223]

We forward walk, as our fathers walked
 Down through the ages.

[paragraph continues] Mother Corn, who led our spirits over the path we are now to travel, leads us again as we walk, in our bodies, over the land.

We speak of this path as devious, not merely because we must go over hills and through valleys and wind around gulches to reach the land of the Son, but because we are thinking of the way by which, through the Hako, we can make a man who is not of our blood a Son; a way which has come down to us from our far-away ancestors like a winding path.

CROSSING THE PRAIRIE

I

Looking o'er the prairie, naught our eyes discern there,
 Wide the land stretches out before us;
 Then we cry aloud to Mother Corn: "Doth thy pathway lie here?"

II

Heeding now our crying, while our eyes she opens,
 Mother Corn moveth out before us
 On the lonely prairie, where we see straight the pathway lies there!

SONG OF OBEDIENCE

Mother Corn speaks to us and we are assured in our spirits. The next song is to enforce obedience to Mother Corn.

I

Hark! She speaks, and quickly we turn to her,
 Looking toward the west to the spot where we
 Passed 'neath the eyes of gods; and now do we heed her words:
 "Yonder is the place in the distant west
 Whence I have come out of the past to you."

[p. 224]

II

"Born of the earth and touched by the deep blue sky,
 Have I been chosen by the gods to lead.
 You are to hear my voice and follow my strict commands,
 As your fathers did in the days gone by.
 Thence come I to open your pathway here."

  

SONGS AND CEREMONIES OF THE WAY

The journey we are taking is for a sacred purpose, and as we are led by the supernatural power in Mother Corn we must address with song every object we meet, because Tirawa is in all things. Everything we come to as we travel can give us help, and send help by us to the Children.

Trees are among the lesser powers, and they are represented on the Hako which we carry, so when we see trees we must sing to them.

Trees grow along the banks of the streams; we can see them at a distance, like a long line, and we can see the river glistening in the sunlight in its length. We sing to the river, and when we come nearer and see the water and hear it rippling, then we sing to the water, the water that ripples as it runs.

SONG TO THE TREES AND STREAMS

I

Dark against the sky yonder distant line
 Lies before us. Trees we see, long the line of trees,
 Bending, swaying in the breeze.

II

Bright with flashing light yonder distant line
 Runs before us, swiftly runs, swift the river runs,
 Winding, flowing o'er the land.

[p. 225]

III

Hark. Oh, hark. A sound, yonder distant sound
 Comes to greet us, singing comes, soft the river's song,
 Rippling gently 'neath the trees.

SONG WHEN CROSSING THE STREAMS

I

Behold, upon the river's brink we stand!
 River we must cross;
 Oh, Kawas, come! To thee we call. Oh, come, and thy permission give
 Into the stream to wade and forward go.

II

Behold, the water covers now our feet!
 River we must cross;
 Oh, Kawas, hear! To thee we call. Oh, come, and thy permission give
 On through the stream to pass and forward go.

SONG TO THE WIND

I

Hither, Winds, come to us, touch where water
 O'er us flowed when we waded;
 Come, oh, Winds, come!

II

Lo! The Winds round us sweep where water
 O'er us flowed. Safe now are we,
 By the Winds safe.

[p. 226]

SONG TO THE MOUNTAINS

I

Mountains loom upon the path we take;
 Yonder peak now rises sharp and clear;
 Behold! It stands with its head uplifted,
 Thither go we, since our way lies there.

II

Mountains loom upon the path we take;
 Yonder peak now rises sharp and clear;
 Behold! We climb, drawing near its summit;
 Steeper grows the way and slow our steps.

III

Mountains loom upon the path we take;
 Yonder peak that rises sharp and clear,
 Behold us now on its head uplifted;
 Planting there our feet, we stand secure.

IV

Mountains loom upon the path we take;
 Yonder peak that rose so sharp and clear,
 Behold us now on its head uplifted;
 Resting there at last, we sing our song.

SONG TO THE MESA

I

The mesa see; its flat top like a straight line cuts across the sky;
 It blocks our path, and we must climb, the mesa climb.

II

More mesas see; their flat tops rise against the sky, they bar our path;
 We reach their base, and we must climb, the mesas climb.

[p. 227]

III

The mesas' side we now ascend, the sharp ridge pass, its flat top reach;
 There lies their base that we must take, and forward go.

IV

The mesas rise around us still, their flat tops cut across the sky:
 They block our way, yet still we climb, the mesas climb.

  

MOTHER CORN REASSERTS LEADERSHIP

THE SEARCH FOR THE CHILDREN

I

Here we give our thanks, led by Mother Corn,
 As our eyes dwell upon the borders of the land
 Where dwell the Children we are seeking.

II

Now our eyes look on people walking to.
 Soon our eyes catch the print of footsteps on the ground,
 Made by the Children we are seeking.

III

Still we travel on, led by Mother Corn.
 Now our eyes look on people walking to and fro;
 They the Children are, we are seeking.

As we move on and enter the land of the Children we sing, in the second stanza, about their footprints, the marks of their moccasins where they have walked to and fro on the ground. We may not actually see these marks, but the song represents us as seeing them; Mother Corn has seen them, and she is leading us.

When the village of the Children is in sight the following

[p. 228]

song is sung. Mother Corn speaks in the first stanza and tells us she has come again to this place. Her spirit had been here before when she came seeking the Son. To-day we have arrived with her at this her destination, and we give thanks to Mother Corn.

SONG OF THE JOURNEY'S END

I

Here is the place where I came, seeking to find the Son;
 Here have I led you again, here is our journey's end.
 Thanks we give unto the Mother Corn!
 Here is the place where she came, seeking to find the Son;
 Here she has led us again, here is our journey's end.

II

Here to this place have we come, bringing the Son our gifts,
 All of the gifts that go forth bearing the promised help.
 Thanks he'll give as he sees, Mother Corn,
 All of the gifts that we bring, bring to his village here;
 Here, where you led, Mother Corn; here, where our journey ends.

  

SIXTH RITUAL

  

THE SON'S MESSAGES RECEIVED

I

Now our eyes look on him who is here;
 He is as the Son we have sought;
 He brings again tidings from the Son:
 "Father, come to me, here I sit,
 Waiting here for thee."

II

Now our eyes look on him who is clad
 As befits the Son we have sought;

[p. 229]

He, arising, walks; follow we his steps,
 Moving slowly on toward the Son,
 Where he waiting sits.

[paragraph continues] The pack containing the clothing provided for this representative of the Son is now opened. After the messenger has finished eating he is dressed in the new clothing.

We clothe him because that is an act which marks the care of a father for his child. The garments we put upon him are fine and embroidered; these fine and carefully made garments show that we have been thinking of him, that we regard him highly and wish to do him honor.

Just before we reach the village we halt and sing the next song.

SEEKING THE SON

I

Where is he, the Son?
 Where his dwelling place that I seek?
 Which can be his lodge, where he sits
 Silent, waiting, waiting there for me?

II

Here is he, the Son,
 Here is his dwelling place that I seek;
 This is here his lodge, where he sits
 Silent, waiting, waiting here for me.

  

SEVENTH RITUAL

  

THE CONSECRATION OF THE LODGE

When the Son has dispatched his messenger to the Hako party, he with a few of his near relatives, enters the lodge set apart for

[p. 230]

the ceremony, there to await the return of his messenger and the coming of the Fathers.

He seats himself at the south side of the lodge near the door. This is the humblest place, and he takes it to show that he is not seeking his own honor. By the choice of him as the Son a very high honor has been bestowed upon him, and his appreciation of this is shown by his taking the seat of the lowliest and not assuming prominence before the people.

The Kurahus directs the chief of the Hako party to advance one step and to stand upon the threshold while the first stanza of the next song is sung.

TOUCHING AND CROSSING THE THRESHOLD

I

Sent down by powers on high,
 She bears a promise most sure;
 The Mother Corn breathes forth life,
 On threshold She stands
 Of my Son's dwelling. All's well!

II

Sent down by powers on high,
 She bears a promise most sure--
 Now Kawas, bringing new life,
 The threshold crosses
 Of my Son's dwelling. All's well!

MOTHER CORN BREATHING LIFE IS NOW WALKING IN THE LODGE

I

The Mother Corn, with breath of life,
 Now enters into my Son's lodge;
 There she walks within:
 With breath of life walks Mother Corn.
 The Mother Corn, with breath of life,

[p. 231]

Now circles she within the lodge,
 Walking round within;
 With breath of life walks Mother Corn.

KAWAS HOVERS OVERHEAD IN THE LODGE

I

Kawas, bearing new life, entereth this dwelling,
 Comes as to her own nest, on her spread pinions;
 There so gently she hovers over these her Children.

II

Kawas, bearing new life, flieth through this dwelling,
 All the lodge she cleanses, with her wings sweeping,
 Making clear the place, sweeping out the harm and danger.

  

CLOTHING THE SON AND OFFERING THE SMOKE

The lodge having been made ready as a nest within which life might be given and made secure, the Father performs his first act of recognition and responsibility. He puts upon the Son the garments he has previously prepared for the purpose. When clad in the finely embroidered clothing, the Son is told to make the offering of smoke to Tirawa atius, as a prayer for the consecration of the new-born relationship.

THE SON PRAYS TO THE GODS

I

Oh, speak to the gods list'ning above us!
 Oh, let your prayers ascend to the mighty ones on high!

II

My son obeys. His voice is now trav'ling far, speeding on;
 It goes to the list'ning gods above us;
 There will his prayer be heard by the mighty ones on high.

[p. 232]

SONG OF THE PRAYER SMOKE

I

See the smoke pass by!
 Rising high above, follows where his voice
 Sped, intent to reach
 Where the gods abide in the deep blue sky.
 See the smoke pass by!

II

See the smoke ascend!
 Now the odor mounts, follows where his voice
 Sped, intent to reach
 Where the gods abide. There the odor pleads,
 Pleads to gain us help.

  

EIGHTH RITUAL (FIRST DAY)

  

THE FATHERS FEED THE CHILDREN

Now the heralds summon the people to the lodge and they come, dressed in their best attire and bringing gifts.

IN PRAISE OF TIRAWA

Father, unto thee we cry!
 Father thou of gods and men;
 Father thou of all we hear;
 Father thou of all we see--
 Father, unto thee we cry!

INVOCATION TO THE ALL-FATHER

When the Kurahus begins to sing this song he must think what this ceremony is for and be mindful that all the powers that the heavens contain and all the powers that are felt over the earth are now coming near and bending over the Hako.

[p. 233]

All the powers that are in the heavens and all those that are upon the earth are derived from the mighty power, Tirawa atius. He is the father of all things visible and invisible. He is the father of all the people, and perpetuates the life of the tribe through the gift of children. So we sing, your father, meaning the father of all people everywhere, the father of all things that we see and hear and feel.

Father, thou above, father of the gods,
 They who can come near and touch us,
 Do thou bid them bring us help.
 Help we need. Father, hear us!

  

SONGS FOR LAYING DOWN THE FEATHERED STEMS

FIRST SONG

The feathered stems represent the eagle; the holy place, where the stems are laid to rest, represents the eagle's nest. A nest is made for the young; the making of a nest in the lodge of the Son by Kawas presages the fulfillment of the promise of children to the Son, as well as the establishment of a close bond, like that of father and son, between the members of two unrelated clans or tribes.

I

See where she comes to her little one lying so snugly and safely the nest in!
 Hark! She is calling; hear her,
 List as her nestlings make answer;
 See how she gently hovers.
 Happy our hearts as we look on her hovering over her nestlings so gently.

II

See where she comes to her little ones lying so snugly and safely the nest in!
 Hark! She is calling; hear her,

[p. 234]

List as her nestlings answer;
 See her alighting gently.
 Happy our hearts as we see her alighting there over her nestlings so gently.

SECOND SONG

I

Loud, loud the young eagles cry, cry, seeing their mother come;
 Flies she to them slantwise, flies;
 Then over the nest she hangs, there hovering, stays her flight;
 Thanks, thanks as we look we give.

II

Thanks, thanks, from our hearts we give, thanks give as we watch the bird
 As she to them slantwise flies:
 Then over her nest she drops; there, folding her wings, she rests,
 Rests safely within her nest.

  

NINTH RITUAL (FIRST NIGHT)

  

THE VISIONS ARE INVOKED

When the sun has set and it is dark and the stars are shining, then the Children gather in the lodge. Some, as they come in, will advance to the holy place and there drop a stick; this means the gift of a pony. For every such gift the Kurahus returns thanks to the giver.

After all are seated, wood is piled upon the fire, and when the flames leap high the Kurahus rises, then his assistant and the chief rise and the Hako are taken up.

The singers carrying the drum follow the Hako bearers as they move slowly around the lodge, singing the following song.

[p. 235]

I

    Holy visions!
 Hither come, we pray you, come unto us,
 Bringing with you joy;
 Come, oh, come to us, holy visions,
 Bringing with you joy.

[paragraph continues] We sing about the visions which the birds on the feathered stems are to bring to the Children.

Visions come from above, they are sent by Tirawa atius. The lesser powers come to us in visions. We receive help through the visions. All the promises which attend the Hako will be made good to us in this way.

Visions can come most readily at night; spirits travel better at that time. Now when we are met together we, the Fathers, call upon the visions to come to the Children.

II

Holy visions!
 Near are they approaching, near to us here,
 Bringing with them joy;
 Nearer still they come--holy visions--
 Bringing with them joy.

[paragraph continues] The visions have heard the call of the spirits of the birds upon the feathered stems, joined to the call of our spirits, and they are descending by the east from their dwelling place above, and are coming toward the lodge.

We sing, "They are coming," and the Children join in the song, as we pass around and wave the feathered stems.

III

Holy visions!
 Lo! Before the doorway pause they, waiting,
 Bearing gifts of joy;

[p. 236]

Pausing there they wait--holy visions--
 Bearing gifts of joy.

[paragraph continues] As we sing the visions touch and cross the threshold and then pass down the long passageway leading into the lodge. As we reach the west they have entered the lodge.

Kawas and all the birds have called these visions to bless the Children. The visions have heard, they have traveled far, they have reached the lodge, and now they have entered and are in the presence of the Children.

IV

Holy visions!
 Now they cross the threshold, gliding softly
 Toward the space within;
 Softly gliding on--holy visions--
 Toward the space within.

V

Holy visions!
 They the lodge are filling with their presence,
 Fraught with hope and peace;
 Filling all the lodge--holy visions
 Fraught with hope and peace.

[paragraph continues] The visions which attend the Hako are now touching the Children, touching them here and there and by their touch giving them dreams, which will bring them health, strength, happiness, and all good things.

VI

Holy visions!
 Now they touch the children, gently touch them,
 Giving dreams of joy;
 Gently touch each one--holy visions--
 Giving dreams of joy.

[p. 237]

[paragraph continues] As we sing, the visions are walking away; they have done what they came to do; they are now leaving the lodge, and when we reach the west the space they had filled is empty.

We pause and we think of the visions going away over the silent earth to ascend to their dwelling place.

VII

Holy visions!
 Ended now their mission, pass they outward,
 Yet they leave us joy;
 Pass they all from us--holy visions--
 Yet they leave us joy.

VIII

Holy visions!
 They, the sky ascending, reach their dwelling;
 There they rest above;
 They their dwelling reach--holy visions--
 There they rest above.

  

TENTH RITUAL

  

THE BIRTH OF DAWN

As the night draws to a close, the Kurahus orders the server to lift the skins which hang at the outer and inner doors of the long passageway of the lodge, and to go outside and watch for the first glimmer of light.

At the first indication of a change, when the air begins to stir, the server comes in with the tidings, and we rise, take up the Hako, and stand at the west, behind the holy place; there, looking toward the east, we sing this song. We sing it slowly and with reverent feeling, for it speaks of the mysterious and powerful act of Tirawa atius in the birth of Dawn.

[p. 238]

THE SUMMONS TO MOTHER CORN

I

Awake, Oh, Mother, from sleep!
 Awake! The night is far spent;
 The signs of dawn are now seen
 In east, whence cometh new life.

[paragraph continues] We call to Mother Earth, who is represented by the ear of corn. She has been asleep and resting during the night. We ask her to awake, to move, to arise, for the signs of the dawn are seen in the east and the breath of the new life is here.

Mother Earth hears the call; she moves, she awakes, she arises, she feels the breath of the new-born Dawn. The leaves and the grass stir; all things move with the breath of the new day; everywhere life is renewed.

This is very mysterious; we are speaking of something very sacred, although it happens every day.

THE AWAKENING OF MOTHER CORN

II

The Mother wakens from sleep;
 She wakes, for night is far spent;
 The signs of dawn are now seen
 In east, whence cometh new life.

[paragraph continues] The eagle soars where these powers dwell and can communicate with them. The new life of the new day is felt by these powers above as well as by Mother Earth below.

THE SUMMONS TO KAWAS, THE EAGLE

III

Awake, oh, Kawas, from sleep!
 Awake! The night is far spent;
 The signs of dawn are now seen
 In east, whence cometh new life.

[p. 239]

THE AWAKENING OF KAWAS

IV

Now Kawas wakens from sleep,
 Awakes, for night is far spent;
 The signs of dawn are now seen
 In east, whence cometh new life.

[paragraph continues] H'Kawas hears the call and awakes. Now all the powers above wake and stir, and all things below wake and stir; the breath of new life is everywhere. With the signs in the east has come this new life.

Kawas, the brown eagle, the messenger of the powers above, now stands within the lodge and speaks. The Kurahus hears his voice as she tells him what the signs in the east mean.

She tells him that Tirawa atius there moves upon Darkness, the Night, and causes her to bring forth the Dawn. It is the breath of the new-born Dawn, the child of Night and Tirawa atius, which is felt by all the powers and all things above and below and which gives them new life for the new day.

V

Then Kawas stands and speaks forth:
 "A child from Night is now born;
 Tirawa, father on high,
 On Darkness moving, brings Dawn."

VI

"I understand now, I know
 A child from Night has been born;
 Tirawa, father on high,
 On Darkness moving, brings Dawn."

THE MORNING STAR AND THE NEW-BORN DAY

We sing this song slowly with reverent feeling, for we are singing of very sacred things.

[p. 240]

The Morning Star is like a man; he is painted red all over; that is the color of life. He is clad in leggins and a robe is wrapped about him. On his head is a soft downy eagle's feather, painted red. This feather represents the soft, light cloud that is high in the heavens, and the red is the touch of a ray of the coming sun. The soft, downy feather is the symbol of breath and life.

The star comes from a great distance, too far away for us to see the place where it starts. At first we can hardly see it; we lose sight of it, it is so far off; then we see it again, for it is coming steadily toward us all the time. We watch it approach; it comes nearer and nearer; its light grows brighter and brighter.

INVOCATION TO THE MORNING STAR

I

Oh, Morning Star, for thee we watch!
 Dimly comes thy light from distant skies;
 We see thee, then lost thou art.
 Morning Star, thou bringest life to us.

II

Oh, Morning Star, thy form we see!
 Clad in shining garments dost thou come,
 Thy plume touched with rosy light.
 Morning Star, thou now art vanishing.

INVOCATION TO DAWN

III

Oh, youthful Dawn, for thee we watch!
 Dimly comes thy light from distant skies;
 We see thee, then lost art thou.
 Youthful Dawn, thou bringest life to us.

[p. 241]

IV

Oh, youthful Dawn, we see thee come!
 Brighter grows thy glowing light
 As near, nearer thou dost come.
 Youthful Dawn, thou now art vanishing.

As we sing this song the Morning Star comes still nearer and now we see him standing there in the heavens, a strong man shining brighter and brighter. The soft plume in his hair moves with the breath of the new day, and the ray of the sun touches it with color. As he stands there so bright, he is bringing us strength and new life.

As we look upon him he grows less bright, he is receding, going back to his dwelling. place whence he came. We watch him vanishing, passing out of our sight. He has left with us the gift of life which Tirawa atius sent him to bestow.

As we stand, looking through the long passageway of the lodge, watching and singing, we see the Dawn come nearer and nearer; its brightness fills the sky, the shadowy forms on the earth are becoming visible. As we watch, the Dawn, like the Morning Star, recedes. It is following the Star, going back to the place whence it came, to its birthplace.

The Day is close behind, advancing along the path of the Morning Star and, as we watch, the Dawn vanishes from our sight.

DAYLIGHT

We sing this song with loud voices, we are glad. We shout, "Daylight has come! Day is here!" The light is over the earth. As we look out through the door of the lodge we can see the trees, and all things stand out clearly in the light.

We call to the Children, we bid them awake and throw off the robes that covered their heads as they slept and let their eyes look out and behold the light of day, the day that has come, that is here.

[p. 242]

SONG OF THE JOY OF DAY

I

Day is here! Day is here, is here!
 Arise, my son, lift thine eyes. Day is here! Day is here, is here!
 Day is here! Day is here, is here!
 Look up, my son, and see the day. Day is here! Day is here, is here!
 Day is here! Day is here, is here!

II

Lo, the deer! Lo, the deer, the deer
 Comes from her covert of the night! Day is here! Day is here, is here!
 Lo, the deer! Lo, the deer, the deer!
 All creatures wake and see the light. Day is here! Day is here, is here!
 Day is here! Day is here, is here!

  

ELEVENTH RITUAL

  

CHANT TO THE SUN

On this, the second day of the ceremony, we remember our father the Sun. The sun comes directly from Tirawa atius, and whoever is touched by the first rays of the sun in the morning receives new life and strength which have been brought straight from the power above. The first rays of the sun are like a young man, they have not yet spent their force or grown old, so, to be touched by them is to receive an accession of strength.

All the time I am singing this song I remember the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, the Corn; all these were made by Tirawa atius, and I ask them to give us success and plenty; success in hunting and in war; plenty of food, of children, and of health. The Sun, the Moon, the Stars, the Corn, are powerful.

[p. 243]

We speak of the sun as Father breathing forth life (h'Aars), causing the earth to bring forth, making all things to grow. We think of the sun, which comes direct from Tirawa atius, the father of life, and his ray (hukawi) as the bearer of this life. (You have seen this ray as it comes through a little hole or crack.) While we sing, this ray enters the door of the lodge to bring strength and power to all within.

The first four verses of this chant are sung in the morning; they follow the movements of the ray. When the spot has reached the floor we stop singing and do not begin again until the afternoon, so that our song can accompany the ray as it leaves the lodge, touches the hills, and finally returns to the sun.

I

Now behold; hither comes the ray of our father Sun; it cometh
     over all the land, passeth in the lodge, us to touch, and give
     us strength.

II

Now behold, where alights the ray of our father Sun; it touches
     lightly on the rim the place above the fire, whence the
     smoke ascends on high.

III

Now behold; softly creeps the ray of our father Sun; now o'er
     the rim it creeps to us, climbs down within the lodge;
     climbing down, it comes to us.

IV

Now behold; nearer comes the ray of our father Sun; it reaches
     now the floor and moves within the open space, walking
     there, the lodge about.

[paragraph continues] Later, when the sun is sinking in the west, the land is in shadow, only on the top of the hills toward the east can the spot, the

[p. 244]

sign of the ray's touch, be seen. Then we sing the stanza as we go around the lodge the third time.

The ray of Father Sun, who breathes forth life, is standing on the edge of the hills. We remember that in the morning it had stood on the edge of the opening in the roof of the lodge over the fireplace; now it stands on the edge of the hills that, like the walls of a lodge, inclose the land where the people dwell.

V

Now behold where has passed the ray of our father Sun; around
     the lodge the ray has passed and left its blessing there,
     touching us, each one of us.

VI

Now behold; softly climbs the ray of our father Sun; it upward
     climbs, and o'er the rim it passes from the place whence
     the smoke ascends on high.

VII

Now behold on the hills the ray of our father Sun; it lingers
     there as loath to go, while all the plain is dark. Now has
     gone the ray from us.

VIII

Now behold; lost to us the ray of our father Sun; beyond our
     sight the ray has gone, returning to the place whence it
     came to bring us strength.

CHANT OF THE EAGLES

This song likens the bustle and stir of the Hako party as it comes into the village to the flapping of the wings of a flock of birds as they come to a place and alight. It refers also to the birds represented on the feathered stems--the eagle, the duck, the woodpecker, and the owl. The noise of the wings of these birds is what is meant, for they are moving with the Fathers toward the Children.

[p. 245]

THE WINGS OF THE MIGHTY

I

Hark, the sound of their wings! Mighty birds are here now
     alighting, bearing promised good.
 Hark, the, sound of their wings! Surely the Hako is coming.
     Children, forward bring your gifts.

II

Hark, the sound of their wings! Mighty birds are here now
     alighting, bearing promised good.
 Hark, the sound of their wings! See! The Hako has come. We
     children forward bring our gifts.

  

TWELFTH RITUAL (SECOND NIGHT)

  

THE RITES CAME BY A VISION

FIRST SONG

Was it, we ask, in dreams that the Fathers saw
 Clearly the Hako, wherewith I make you now
 As my son,
 My own begotten?
 Was it in dreams they learned how to make you thus
 My offspring?

Truly, in dreams it was that the Fathers saw
 Clearly the Hako, wherewith I make you now
 As my son,
 My own begotten.
 Truly, in dreams they learned how to make you thus
 My offspring.

SECOND SONG

This is the teaching, this is the word sent
 Down to us from our fathers:

[p. 246]

All of the wise words, all of the good gifts,
 Brought unto you as a Son,
 Verily, through a dream all of these things,
 All, by the east descended.
 This is the teaching, this is the word sent
 Down to us from our fathers:
 All of the wise words, all of the good gifts,
 Now brought to you as my Son,
 Verily, as of old, all of these things,
 All, by the east descended.

THIRD SONG--TO THE PLEIADES

Look as they rise, up rise
 Over the line where sky meets the earth;
 Pleiades!
 Lo! They ascending, come to guide us,
 Leading us safely, keeping us one;
 Pleiades,
 Us teach to be, like you, united.

FOURTH SONG--OF KATASHA, THE DWELLING PLACE OF THE VISIONS

I

Give heed. We tell of Katasha holy,
 Whence the dreams come down, when draweth the night time near;
 Near the gods is their dwelling,
 They who watch o'er men; all silently come they down.

II

Give heed! The bird of whom we are telling
 Sends the dreams to us, when draweth the night time near;
 Kawas, she that is sending
 Holy visions, bringing, silently bringing peace.

[p. 247]

III

Give heed! The birds of whom we are telling
 Climb with dreams to us, when draweth the night time near;
 Down the path they are climbing;
 Where the gods to men are traveling come they down.

IV

They climb, these birds; a dream each is bringing;
 Bear they dreams to us, when draweth the night time near;
 Kawas--she that is sending
 Down the birds with dreams; so faithful the Hako birds!

V

Then back they speed, the birds that were bringing
 Down the dreams that come when draweth the night time near;
 Birds and dreams are ascending
 Where the gods are dwelling, watching there over men.

VI

Now this we know in truth--where are resting
 Dreams that come to us when draweth the night time near;
 True it is that he did see them;
 In a vision saw he Katasha, where they dwell.

FIFTH SONG

I

Mother Corn! Mother Corn! We pray thee,
 Be our leader, foes entrapping!
 Trusting in thee, we wander far, yet we see no foe;
 Food is gone, hope is dead within us.

II

Then in dreams Mother Corn spoke to me:
 "I will lead you, foes entrapping!

[p. 248]

"Testing your courage, far have I let you go astray;
 "Rise, my child, follow me to vict'ry!"

SIXTH SONG

I

As I lay sleeping, as I lay dreaming,
 Out of the distance came one advancing
 One whom I ne'er had seen before, but when her voice
     addressed me, straightway I knew her--
 Lo! 'Twas our Mother, she whom we know.

II

I rose from sleeping, my dream rememb'ring
 Her words I pondered, words of our mother,
 Then I asked of each one I met, Tell me, how far may her
     shrine be? When I found it
 Sweet smoke I offered unto our Mother.

  

PART II

  

THE SACRED FEAST OF THE CORN TAKES PLACE

FIRST SONG--TO OUR FATHER SUN

Father, unto thee we cry;
 Father thou of gods and men;
 Father thou of all we hear;
 Father thou of all we see;
 Father, unto thee we cry.

SECOND SONG

Father! Thou above, father of the gods,
 They who can come near and touch us,
 Do thou bid them bring us help.
 Help we need. Father, hear us!

[p. 249]

THIRD SONG--TO OUR MOTHER EARTH

I

Behold! Our Mother Earth is lying here.
 Behold! She giveth of her fruitfulness.
 Truly, her power gives she us.
 Give thanks to Mother Earth who lieth here.

II

Behold on Mother Earth the growing fields!
 Behold the promise of her fruitfulness!
 Truly, her power gives she us.
 Give thanks to Mother Earth who lieth here.

III

Behold on Mother Earth the spreading trees!
 Behold the promise of her fruitfulness!
 Truly, her power gives she us.
 Give thanks to Mother Earth who lieth here.

IV

We see on Mother Earth the running streams;
 We see the promise of her fruitfulness.
 Truly, her power gives she us.
 Our thanks to Mother Earth who lieth here!

  

FOURTEENTH RITUAL (THIRD NIGHT)

  

INVOKING THE VISIONS OF THE ANCIENTS

I

Oh, come hither,
 Holy dreams--Our fathers knew them
 Hither come to us!
 Thanks we give unto them. They our message will hear,
 Calling them to come.

[p. 250]

II

This way come they,
 Holy dreams--Our fathers knew them--
 Come they now this way.
 Thanks we give unto them. Coming now, they draw near,
 Coming now this way.

III

They come nearer,
 Holy dreams--Our fathers knew them--
 Come they now this way.
 Thanks we give unto them. On the threshold stand they,
 Holy visions stand.

IV

Now then enter,
 Holy dreams--Our fathers knew them--
 Enter now the lodge.
 Thanks we give unto them. Enter they the lodge now,
 Enter now the lodge.

V

The Son they see,
 Holy dreams--Our fathers knew them--
 See him now within.
 Thanks we give unto them. Entered now, they see him,
 See the Son within.

VI

Now they hover,
 Holy dreams--Our fathers knew them--
 Hover us above.
 Thanks we give unto them. Pausing here above us,
 Hover they above.

[p. 251]

VII

Now depart they,
 Holy dreams--Our fathers knew them--
 Now they go away.
 Thanks we give unto them. They are passing from us,
 Going from the lodge.

VIII

Above rest they,
 Holy dreams--Our fathers knew them--
 Rest they now above.
 Thanks we give unto them. Where they rest we send thanks,
 Thanks send far above.

THE FLOCKING OF THE BIRDS

In the early spring the birds lay their eggs in their nests, in the summer they rear their young, in the fall all the young ones are grown, the nests are deserted and the birds fly in flocks over the country. One can hear the fluttering of a startled flock, the birds suddenly rise and their wings make a noise like distant thunder. Everywhere the flocks are flying. In the fall it seems as though new life were put into the people as well as into the birds; there is much activity in coming and going.

When the eggs are hatched and the young are grown, the birds flock; the promise of young has been fulfilled. In this song, which we sing toward the close of the ceremony, we are thinking of the fulfilling of the promise given by the Hako, that children will be granted to the people, so that they may be many and strong, and we sing that the great flocks are coming.

I

All around the birds in flocks are flying;
 Dipping, rising, circling, see them coming.
 See, many birds are flocking here,
 All about us now together coming.

[p. 252]

II

Yonder see the birds in flocks come flying;
 Dipping, rising, circling, see them gather.
 Loud is the sound their winging makes,
 Rushing come they on the trees alighting!

III

From the flock an eagle now comes flying;
 Dipping, rising, circling, comes she hither.
 Loud screams the eagle, flying swift.
 As an eagle flies, her nestlings seeking.

IV

It is Kawas coming, Kawas flying;
 Dipping rising, circling, she advances.
 See! Nearer comes she, nearer comes.
 Now, alighted, she her nest is making.

V

Yonder people like the birds are flocking,
 See them circling, this side, that side coming.
 Loud is the sound their moving makes,
 As together come they, onward come they.

VI

Toward the lodge where sits the Son they hasten,
 Bringing forward gifts with joyful shouting.
 Hark! Now they like the eagle scream,
 Glad of heart, as when her nest she seeth.

[p. 253]

  

FIFTEENTH RITUAL

  

SONGS FOR THE SIXTEEN CIRCUITS OF THE LODGE

The life of man depends upon the earth (h'Atira). Tirawa atius works through it. The kernel is planted within Mother Earth as she brings forth the ear of corn, even as children are begotten and born of women.

FIRST SONG

I

Look on her! She who sought far and near for a Son!
 Look on her! She who led from afar unto you!

II

Thanks we give unto her who came here for a Son.
 Thanks we give unto her who has led us to you.
 Thanks we give, Mother Corn, breathing life on us all.

SECOND SONG

I

Rev'rent our hearts turn unto the one who brings to us
 Long life and children, peace, and the gifts of strength and food.
 Rev'rent our hearts turn unto our Mother Corn!

II

Rev'rent our hearts turn unto the source whence come to us
 Long life and children, peace, and the gifts of strength and. food,
 Gifts from Tirawa, sent through our Mother Corn.

THIRD SONG

I

O'er the prairie flits in ever widening circles the shadow of a
     bird about me as I walk;

[p. 254]

Upward turn my eyes, Kawas looks upon me, she turns with
     flapping wings and far away she flies.

II

Round about a tree in ever widening circles an eagle flies,
     alertly watching o'er his nest;
 Loudly whistles he, a challenge sending far, o'er the country
     wide it echoes there defying foes.

FOURTH SONG

I

Kawas flying where her nestlings now are crying; loudly cry
     they when they hear her wings;
 Kawas flying, cry her children, as they hear her come.
 'Tis Kawas who now homeward comes!
 'Tis Kawas who now homeward comes!
 Quickly flying as she hears her young ones in the nest.

II

Kawas flying, o'er us flying, we her nestlings cry for joy as
     now we see her come
 Kawas flying! Glad our hearts as now we see her come.
 'Tis Kawas brings us good gifts! 'Tis Kawas brings us good gifts!
 Kawas brings gifts to us; we, like her nestlings, cry.

FIFTH SONG

I

Atira comes, she brings you life, she gives you joy; to her give
     thanks as she draws near.
 Now in the lodge before our eyes Atira moves;
 Look upon her who brings you life, who gives you joy. Oh,
     offer thanks to Mother Corn!

[p. 255]

II

The Hako comes within the lodge, it walks within; let us give
     thanks as it draws near.
 Now in the lodge with Mother Corn the Hako moves;
 Thanks do we give for all the joy it brings to us, the children
     here, from realms above.

SIXTH SONG

I

I know. not if the voice of man can reach to the sky;
 I know not if the mighty one will hear as I pray;
 I know not if the gifts I ask will all granted be;
 I know not if the word of old we truly can hear;
 I know not what will come to pass in our future days;
 I hope that only good will come, my children, to you.

II

I now know that the voice of man can reach to the sky;
 I now know that the mighty one has heard as I prayed;
 I now know that the gifts I asked have all granted been;
 I now know that the word of old we truly have heard;
 I now know that Tirawa harkens unto man's prayer;
 I know that only good has come, my children, to you.

  

SIXTEENTH RITUAL

  

(FIFTH DAY, DAWN)

SEEKING THE CHILD

The child referred to is usually a little son or daughter of the Son, the man who has received the Hako party. Upon this little child we are to put the signs of the promises which Mother Corn and Kawas bring, the promise of children, of increase, of long life, of plenty. The signs of these promises are put upon this little child, but they are not merely for that particular child

[p. 256]

but for its generation, that the children already born may live, grow in strength, and in their turn increase so that the family and the tribe may continue.

FIRST SONG

With the dawn will I seek, seek my child,
 Among the Children seek
 One the gods shall here make;
 My offspring, my own child.

SECOND SONG

I

Where is he, the Son?
 Where his dwelling place that I seek?
 Which can be his lodge, where he sits
 Silent, waiting, waiting there for me?

II

Here is he, the Son,
 Here his dwelling place that I seek;
 This here is his lodge where he sits
 Silent, waiting, waiting here for me.

  

SYMBOLIC INCEPTION

FIRST SONG

The ear of corn represents h'Uraru, Mother Earth who brings forth; the power which causes her to bring forth is from above, and the blue paint represents that power.

We hold the painted ear of corn toward the little child that the powers from above and from below may come near it.

Now our eyes look on him who is here;
 He is as the Son we have sought;
 He brings us again tidings of the Son:
 "Father, come to me, here I sit
 Waiting here for thee."

[p. 257]

  

SIXTEENTH RITUAL--PART II

  

SECOND SONG

While we sing the third stanza, the Kurahus touches the little child on the forehead with the ear of corn. The spirit of Mother Corn, with the power of Mother Earth, granted from above, has touched the child.

The touch means the promise of fruitfulness to the child and its generation.

I

Tirawa, harken! Mighty one
 Above us in blue, silent sky!
 We standing wait thy bidding here;
 The Mother Corn standing waits,
 Waits to serve thee here;
 The Mother Corn stands waiting here.

II

Tirawa, harken! Mighty one
 Above us in blue, silent sky!
 We touch upon thy country fair;
 The Mother Corn touches there
 Upon the border land;
 The Mother Corn is touching there.

III

Tirawa harken! Mighty one
 Above us in blue, silent sky!
 The path we reach leads up to thee;
 The Mother Corn enters there,
 Upward takes her way;
 The Mother Corn to thee ascends.

IV

Tirawa, harken! Mighty one

[p. 258]

Above us in blue, silent sky!
 Behold! We in thy dwelling stand;
 The Mother Corn, standing there,
 Leader now is made;
 The Mother Corn is leader made.

THIRD SONG

This song means that it is accomplished, that the child has been encompassed by the powers represented by the united stems. It is a promise of procreation.

I

Here stand we while upon Tirawa now we wait;
 Here Kawas stands, her mate with her is standing here;
 They both are standing, waiting, bringing gifts with them.

II

We finished are, as on Tirawa now we wait;
 The task of Kawas with her mate accomplished is,
 And all the work they came to do is finished now.

ACTION SYMBOLIZING LIFE

The child, surrounded by the creative forces, is urged to move, to arise as the first song is sung.

The four steps taken by the child represent the progress of life.

FIRST SONG

I am ready; come to me now, fearing nothing; come now to me here.
 Little one, come, come to me here; fearing nothing, come.

SECOND SONG

Stepping forward is my child, he forward steps, the four steps takes and enters into life;
 Forward stepping, four steps taking, enters into life.

[p. 259]

THIRD SONG

Here we go singing, looking on the child Borne in his father's arms, he leading us;
 Follow me singing, looking on the child.

  

SEVENTEENTH RITUAL

  

TOUCHING THE CHILD

On the preceding night water was taken from a stream; this water is now put into a bowl. Every detail of this act is symbolic. The time when the water was obtained was night, the mother of day; running water symbolizes the continuity of life, one generation following another; the bowl which holds the water resembles in its shape the dome of the sky, the abode of the powers which bestow life.

The child is touched with the water upon the head and face, an invisible outline being made, which afterward is to become distinct. The first touching with water, one of the lesser powers, is to cleanse and give strength.

FIRST SONG

I

Give heed, my child, lift your eyes, behold the one who is standing here;
 Behold, my child; waiting here to bring the gift of strength to you.
 Give heed, my child. Look! Water waits to bring to you gift of strength.

II

Give heed, my child, lift your eyes, behold the one who has brought you strength
 Behold, my child! Strength you have and finished is the task.
 Give heed, my child. Look! Water now has brought to you gift of strength.

[p. 260]

Water is for sustenance and the maintenance of health; it is
     one of the great gifts of Tirawa atius.
 The white man speaks of a heavenly Father; we say Tirawa
     atius, the Father above, but we do not think of Tirawa as
     a person. We think of Tirawa as in everything, as the
     power which has arranged and thrown down from above
     everything the man needs. What the power above, Tirawa
     atius, is like, no one knows, no one has been there.

ANOINTING THE CHILD

As we sing this song the old man makes the same lines upon the face of the child as he made with the water and the brush of grass. This is in recognition that the life which has been sustained and nourished is now consecrated to Tirawa atius, the Father above, who gives life to all things.

I

Give heed, my child, lift your eyes, behold the one who is standing here,
 Behold, my child! waiting now to fit and set you here apart.
 Give heed, my child. Look! Sacred ointment now is here come to you.

II

Give heed, my child, lift your eyes, behold the one who has holy made.
 Behold, my child! You are set apart, and finished is the task.
 Give heed, my child. Look! Sacred ointment now has set you apart.

SECOND SONG

The grass of which the brush is made is gathered during a ceremony belonging to the Rain shrine. It represents Toharu, the living covering of Mother Earth. The power which is in Toharu gives food to man and the animals so that they can live and

[p. 261]

become strong and able to perform the duties of life. This power represented by the brush of grass is now standing before the little child.

While we sing this song the old man touches the forehead of the child with the brush of grass. The power of Toharu has reached the child, has come in contact with it to impart the strength that comes from food.

I

Give heed, my child, lift your eyes, behold the one who is standing here;
 Behold, my child! waiting here to bring the gift of food to you.
 Give heed, my child. Look! Grass now waits to bring to you gift of food.

II

Give heed, my child, lift your eyes, behold the one who has brought you food.
 Behold, my child! Food you have received, and finished is the task.
 Give heed, my child. Look! Grass has now here brought you the gift of food.

  

PAINTING THE CHILD

FIRST SONG

The paint symbolizes the red clouds of the dawn, the coming of the new day, the rising sun, the vigor of life. The power of the new day, the new life, is now standing before the child.

As we sing this song the old man touches the forehead with the red paint. The vigor of life, the power of the touch of the sun, is now on the child.

I

Give heed, my child, lift your eyes, behold the one who is standing here,

[p. 262]

Behold, my child! waiting to bring the gift of life to you.
 Give heed, my child. Look! Red paint waits, the vigor of life to bring.

II

Give heed, my child, lift your eyes, behold the one who has brought you life.
 Behold, my child. Life you have received and finished is the task.
 Give heed, my child. Look. Red paint leaves the vigor of life with you.

SECOND SONG

Blue represents the sky, the place where Tirawa atius dwells, and with this blue paint we are to make upon the child a picture of the face of Tirawa atius. It is a mark of Tirawa atius' acceptance of the consecrated child and a sign of his presence. The symbol of the dwelling place of Tirawa atius stands before the child.

I

Give heed, my child, lift your eyes, behold the one who is standing here,
 Behold, my child! waiting here to make the sign of him above.
 Give heed, my child. Look! Blue paint waits to bring to you sign of him.

II

Give heed, my child, lift your eyes, behold the one who has brought the sign,
 Behold, my child! brought to you the sign. Accomplished now the task.
 Give heed, my child. Look! Blue paint now has left with you sign of him.

[p. 263]

  

PUTTING ON THE SYMBOLS

FIRST SONG

The down represents the high, light clouds (cirrus) in the blue of the sky; they are near the abode of Tirawa atius.

The down is taken from under the wings of the white eagle. The white eagle is the mate of the brown eagle, and the child is the child of Kawas, the brown eagle. The down grew close to the heart of the eagle and moved as the eagle breathed. It represents the breath and life of the white eagle, the father of the child.

While we sing this song the old man opens his hand and lets the down fall upon the hair. The soft, white clouds near the abode of Tirawa atius have dropped and covered the head of the child.

I

Give heed, my child, lift your eyes, behold the one who is standing here,
 Behold, my child! waiting here to bring the sign of clouds above.
 Give heed, my child. Look! Down of eagle waits with the sign of clouds.

II

Give heed, my child, lift your eyes, behold the one who has laid on you,
 Behold, my child! sign of fleecy clouds that near Tirawa float.
 Give heed, my child. Look! Rests on you sign of the clouds above.

[paragraph continues] We sing in the fifth stanza that it is accomplished, the head of the consecrated child now rests in the soft, white clouds which float near the dwelling place of Tirawa atius.

[p. 264]

SECOND SONG

While we sing this song, the old man ties the downy feather on the child's hair. Tirawa atius is now with the little child as the double feather waves over its head.

I

Give heed, my child, lift your eyes, behold the one who is standing here,
 Behold, my child! waiting here to bring the last, great gift to you.
 Give heed, my child. Look! Waits to bring the emblem the Father sends.

II

Give heed, my child, lift your eyes, behold the one who has left on you,
 Behold, my child! left on you Tirawa's breathing sign.
 Give heed, my child. Look! On you rests the emblem the Father sent.

[paragraph continues] Now we sing that all is accomplished. The child has been fully prepared, the sacred symbols put upon it, the powers from above have come, and Tirawa atius breathes over it.

The child is now told to look into the bowl of water and behold its face. The running water symbolizes the passing on of generations, one following another. The little child looks on the water and sees its own likeness, as it will see that likeness in its children and children's children. The face of Tirawa atius is there also, giving promise that the life of the child shall go on, as the waters flow over the land.

[p. 265]

  

EIGHTEENTH RITUAL

  

FULFILLMENT PREFIGURED

MAKING THE NEST

The circle represents a nest, and is drawn by the toe because the eagle builds its nest with its claws. Although we are imitating the bird making its nest, there is another meaning to the action; we are thinking of Tirawa making the world for the people to live in. If you go on a high hill and look around, you will see the sky touching the earth on every side, and within this circular inclosure the people live. So the circles we have made are not only nests, but they also represent the circle Tirawa atius has made for the dwelling place of all the people. The circles also stand for the kinship group, the clan, and the tribe.

The down represents the light clouds near the dwelling place of Tirawa--the dome of the sky over the dwelling place of the people--and it stands for the protection of Tirawa.

SONG

Behold where two eagles come forth!
 Now they soar high over head:
 See where one flies, watching, flies, guarding he
 His mate who has gone to her nest, dropping there;
 'Tis Kawas who brings there new life.

SYMBOLIC FULFILMENT

The child represents the young generation, the continuation of life, and when it is put in the circle, it typifies the bird laying its eggs.

SONG

Within the nest the child rests its little feet,
 Awaiting there the gift sent by gods above;
 Descending there to him comes the promised life.

[p. 266]

THANK OFFERING

An offering of sweet smoke is made to Tirawa; then all traces of the nest are obliterated, and the lodge is once more thrown open to the people.

  

NINETEENTH RITUAL

  

THE CALL TO THE CHILDREN

The purpose of the rite is recognized by the important place given to children in this part of the ceremony. The ponies presented to the Fathers are each led up by a little child; the acting out of a man's war-like deeds is to honor his child, and the little child with the black covering upon its head and the picture of Tirawa upon its face receives, with the chief, the gifts as they are presented.

In every instance the child is the tie between the two groups, the Fathers and Children.

FIRST SONG

Harken! List! We are calling you. Come! Come! Children, come!
 Come! We're ready and waiting, your Father's waiting. Come! Children, come!
 Hear us calling, calling you! Children, come!
 Children, come! Come hither!
 Harken! List as we call you, call to the Children to come.

SECOND SONG

Ready and waiting, we call you, loud we call you, loudly call;
 "Come to us, Children," call we loudly, call we long; Oh, come!
 Come! Come! Come!
 Hear us calling, calling, Children! Oh, come!
 Hear us calling, come to us here! Come!

[p. 267]

THIRD SONG

Look, where they come, see them, see them, young ones and old ones!
 Look! Here they come, this way, that way flocking together.
 Hither they come, shouting like eagles,
 Shouting come.
 Joyous, happy, gladly come they, gaily coming, coming hither.
 See where they come, flocking like birds, shouting like eagles
 As they come to the Fathers.

  

TWENTIETH RITUAL

  

BLESSING THE CHILD

When I sing this song I pray to Tirawa to come down and touch with his breath the symbol of his face and all the other symbols on the little child. I pray with all my spirit that Tirawa atius will let the child grow up and become strong and find favor in its life.

This is a very solemn act, because we believe that Tirawa atius, although not seen by us, sends down his breath as we pray, calling on him to come.

As I sing this song here with you I can not help shedding tears. I have never sung it before except as I stood looking upon the little child and praying for it in my heart. There is no little child here, but you are here writing all these things down that they may not be lost and that our children may know what their fathers believed and practiced in this ceremony. So, as I sing, I am calling to Tirawa atius to send down his breath upon you, to give you strength and long life. I am praying for you with all my spirit.

The purport of this song is hidden from the people, but this is what it means: All that I have been doing to you, little child, has been a prayer to call down the breath of Tirawa atius to give you long life and strength and to teach you that you belong to him--that you are his child and not mine.

[p. 268]

SONG

Breathe on him!
 Breathe on him!
 Life thou alone canst give to him.
 Long life, we pray, Oh Father, give unto him!

  

INCIDENTAL RITUALS

  

I--COMFORTING THE CHILD

Long ago there lived a holy man who knew all the songs and the rites of this ceremony, and to him came a vision wherein he was taught how to bring comfort to a little child when, during the ceremony, it cried and could not be pacified. In this vision he was shown what he must do to bring comfort to the little child, and he heard the songs that he must sing. The songs which he heard have been handed down through many generations.

When during the ceremony a child cries and can not be comforted, the mother, or someone sent by her, can approach the Kurahus who carries the brown-eagle stem and ask him to comfort and quiet the child. The Kurahus must comply with this request, so he rises and stands before the holy place, takes up the feathered stem and sings this song, which tells the brown eagle, Kawas, that its baby is crying.

FIRST SONG

Kawas, harken; thy baby is crying!
 It grieveth, wailing and weeping and crying so sore.
 Ah! It cries, cryeth so sorely;
 Kawas, hasten, thy little one cryeth so sore.

SECOND SONG

Father cometh, now he cometh;
 See him, little one; hark! his footsteps!

[p. 269]

With him, see! coming are the eagles,
 All are coming now to thee.

THIRD SONG

I

Look, my child, who is coming unto you;
 Look up, my little one, now your trouble goes away, away;
 Look! Above you flies one who guards you,
 Whose presence brings you joy. Now your sorrow has departed.

II

Ah, you look! See the eagles flying over you.
 From up above they come, from the clear blue sky where Father dwells;
 They to you this peace-bringing solace give.
 A happy little child now is smiling here light hearted.

II--CHANGING A MAN'S NAME

If any man of the Son's party had achieved success in war, and his achievements had been acknowledged by the people, he could request the Son to have the ceremony of changing his name performed.

This dramatic poem is in a rhythmic form impossible to reproduce in English; neither is a literal translation adequate to convey its meaning, since a single word sometimes represents a complex action, to the understanding of which a knowledge of the customs and beliefs of the tribe is essential. The terseness of expression was also intended to close the meaning to the uninitiated, keeping it sacred from the common people. Although the form of the following rhythmic rendition could not be determined as heretofore by musical phrases, the English version contains nothing which is not in the original text explained and amplified by the Kurahus.

The ritual is in three parts. The first gives a brief narration

[p. 270]

of the institution of the custom of changing the name in consequence of some new achievement. The second shows how the man was enabled to accomplish this act. It began with his lonely vigil and fast, when he cried to the powers for help. The scene then shifts to the circle of the lesser powers, who, in council, deliberate on the petition which makes its way to them and gains their consent. Then the Winds summon the messengers, and these, gathering at the lesser powers' command, are sent to earth to the man crying in lonely places, to grant his desire. This part closes with a few vivid words which set forth that only by the favor and help of the powers had the man been able to do the deed. The third deals with the man's names, the one to be discarded and the one now to be assumed.

Harken! 'Twas thus it came to pass:
     In ancient days, a Leader and his men
     Walked this wide earth, man's vast abode
     Roofed by the heavens, where dwell the gods.
     They reached a place, the spot no man can tell,
     Faced dangers dread, and vanquished them:
     Then, standing as if born anew to life
     Each warrior threw away the name
     That had been his ere yet these deeds were done.

Harken! The Leader and his men
     Made there the Vict'ry Song, and set the mark!
     Ye must o'ertake, if ye would be like them!

Harken! The Leader and his men
 Turned then toward home. Their Vict'ry Song
 Proclaimed them near; the village rose,
 Looked toward the hill, where on the top
 Stood the brave men singing their Song,
 Heralding thus the favor of the gods
 By which they had surpassed all former deeds,
 Made new their claim to be accounted men.

[p. 271]

Harken! And whence, think ye, was borne
     Unto these men courage to dare,
     Strength to endure hardship and war?
     Mark well my words, as I reveal
     How the gods help man's feebleness.
     The Leader of these warriors was a man
     Given to prayer. Oft he went forth
     Seeking a place no one could find,
     There would he stand, and lift his voice
     Fraught with desire, that he might be
     Invincible, a bulwark 'gainst all foes
     Threat'ning his tribe, causing them fear.
     Nighttime and day this cry sped on,
     Traveling far, seeking to reach
 Harken! Those places far above
 Harken! Within the circle vast
     Where sit the gods, watching o'er men.

Harken! This poor man's prayer went on,
     Speeding afar into the blue
     Heavens above, reached there the place--
 Harken! Where dwell the lesser gods--
 Harken! And great Tirawa, mightier than all!

Harken! It was because a god
     Received this prayer, considered it,
     Favored its plea, and passed it on
     To him whose place was next, in that grand ring,
     Who, in his turn received the prayer,
     Considered it, and sent it on--
 Harken! Around that circle vast--
 Harken! Where sit the gods above.

Harken! And thus it was the prayer
     Sent by this man won the consent
     Of all the gods. For each god in his place

[p. 272]

    Speaks out his thought, grants or rejects
     Man's suppliant cry, asking for help;
     But none can act until the Council grand
     Comes to accord, thinks as one mind,
     Has but one will, all must obey.
 Harken! The Council gave consent.
 Harken! And great Tirawa, mightier than all.

Harken! To make their purpose known,
     Succor and aid freely to give,
     Heralds were called, called by the Winds;
     Then in the west uprose the Clouds
     Heavy and black, ladened with storm.
     Slowly they climbed, dark'ning the skies;
     While close on every side the Thunders marched
     On their dread way, 'till all were come
     To where the gods in stately Council sat
     Waiting for them. Then, bade them go
     Back to the earth, carrying aid
     To him whose prayers had reached their circle vast.
     This mandate given, the Thunders turned toward earth,
     Taking their course slantwise the sky.

Harken! Another followed hard--
     Lightning broke forth out of the Cloud,
     Zig-zag and dart, cleaving their way
     Slantwise to earth, their goal to reach.

Harken! For these two were not all
     That hastened to proclaim the gods' behest;
     Swift on their wings, ranging the path,
     Black breasts and red, yellow, and white,
     Flying about, clearing the way
     For those who bore the message of the gods
     Granting the man courage to dare,

[p. 273]

Strength to endure, power to stand
 Invincible, a bulwark 'gainst all foes.

Harken! 'Twas thus it came to pass:
     The Leader grasped the help sent by the gods;
     Henceforth he walked steadfast and strong,
     Leading his men through dangers drear,
     Knowing that naught could strike at him
     To whom the gods had promised victory.

Attend! Once more I change his name!

Harken! Rirutskatit, it was
     We used to call him by, a name he won
     Long days ago, marking an act
     Well done by him, but now passed by.

Harken! Today all men shall say--

Harken! His act has lifted him
     Where all his tribe behold a man
     Clothed with new fame, strong in new strength,
     Gained by his deeds, blessed by the gods.
 Harken! Shakuru Warukote shall he be called.

  

CONCLUSION

  

LAST WORDS OF TAHIRUSSAWICHI

I have done what has never been done before. I have given you all the songs of this ceremony and explained them to you. I never thought that I, of all my people, should be the one to give this ancient ceremony to be preserved, and I wonder over it as I sit here.

I think over my long life with its many experiences; of the

[p. 274]

great number of Pawnees who have been with me in war, nearly all of whom have been killed in battle. I have been severely wounded many times--see this scar over my eye. I was with those who went to the Rocky Mountains to the Cheyennes, when so many soldiers were slain that their dead bodies lying there looked like a great blue blanket spread over the ground. When I think of all the people of my own tribe who have died during my lifetime and then of those in other tribes that have fallen by our hands, they are so many they make a vast cover over Mother Earth. I once walked with these prostrate forms. I did not fall but I passed on, wounded sometimes but not to death, until I am here to-day doing this thing, singing these sacred songs and telling you of these ancient rites of my people. It must be that I have been preserved for this purpose, otherwise I should be lying back there among the dead.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: pr.txt =====


    
Pagan Regeneration, by Harold R. Willoughby, [1929], at sacred-texts.com

 

PAGAN REGENERATION

 

A STUDY OF MYSTERY INITIATIONS IN THE GRAECO-ROMAN WORLD

 

BY HAROLD R. WILLOUGHBY

 

[b. 1890 d. 1962]

 

Chicago., Ill., The University of Chicago Press

 

[1929]

 

Scanned and proofed by Eliza Fegley, sacredspiral.com, June 2003. Additional formatting and proofing by J. B. Hare, sacred-texts.com. This text is in the public domain in the United States because it was not renewed in a timely fashion at the US copyright office. These files may be used for any non-commercial purpose, provided this notice of attribution is left intact.

     
Pagan Regeneration, by Harold R. Willoughby, [1929], at sacred-texts.com

 

PREFACE

IT MUST frankly be confessed that this study of mystery initiations in the Graeco-Roman world is but a prolegomenon to further research in early Christian origins. For some years the author has been fascinated by the problem of the genesis of Pauline mysticism. How did it come about that, with Judaism and primitive Christianity essentially unmystical in character, Pauline Christianity developed in a way to accentuate the mystical phases of religious experience? The writer hopes that some day circumstances will permit him to make a contribution toward the solution of this problem. In order to answer this question it is patently necessary to investigate the gentile religious milieu in which Pauline Christianity had its development.

Researches in the field of Graeco-Roman religions prove conclusively that apologists for early Christianity and even eminent classicists have been inclined to underestimate the genuineness of gentile religious interests and the extent to which religion dominated life in pagan lands when Christianity was emerging. Of the gentile cults probably the most popular in the first century, and certainly the least known and understood in the twentieth, were the so-called mystery religions. Notwithstanding the protestations of apologists there is ample evidence that in both the west and the east the mystery cults were widely disseminated and very influential before Christianity appeared on the scene. In the following pages care is taken to exhibit this evidence in relation to each of the mystery systems.

A detailed investigation of typical cult experiences further convinced the author that the central meaning of mystery initiation--the regeneration, both essential and ethical, of the individual devotee--has largely escaped the notice of even sympathetic researchers. To bring out this meaning in the terminology and thought-forms of the initiates themselves, as recorded in scattered and fragmentary remains both monumental and literary, is one of the major purposes for which these studies are published.

Additional researches in Hermetic and Philonian literature demonstrated how important this mystical type of religious experience was considered to be, not only by religio-philosophical groups but also by individual thinkers quite outside the circle of gentile cult brotherhoods. To the writer Philo's case was particularly interesting, because it illustrated the extent to which the thought and experiences of a diaspora Jew might be influenced by gentile religious practices.

An analytical investigation of the social milieu in which the mystery cults operated brought to light the fundamental character of the interests and needs met by mystery initiation. On the one hand this made intelligible the undoubted popularity of the mystery cults themselves; on the other hand it served to suggest why it was the early Christian propagandists, in order to win gentile adherents to their cult, came to place such insistent emphasis on the experience of individual regeneration.

By means of the dedicatory page the author has tried to express a gratitude and appreciation that lie too deep for words. He would also make grateful acknowledgment to Professor Shirley Jackson Case, who guided his early studies in the mystery religious, and to Professor Edgar J. Goodspeed, who gave helpful advice and encouragement. The reading of proof, the verification of references, and the preparation of the Index have been largely the work of Dr. A.D. Beittel and Mr. R.B. Brewer. Their painstaking exactness is deserving of commendation. Above all the writer would express his appreciation to a number of his own students who with patience more than Christian have endured tedious lectures about pagan mysteries.

H.R.W. Godspeed Hall The University of Chicago July 4, 1929

     
Pagan Regeneration, by Harold R. Willoughby, [1929], at sacred-texts.com

 

CONTENTS

I. PAGAN PEITY IN THE GRAECO-ROMAN WORLD
 II. THE GREATER MYSTERIES AT ELEUSIS
 III. DIONYSIAN EXCESSES
 IV. ORPHIC REFORM
 V. THE REGENERATIVE RITES OF THE GREAT MOTHER
 VI. DEATH AND REBIRTH IN MITHRAISM
 VII. ISIAC INITIATION
 VIII. THE NEW BIRTH EXPERIENCE IN HERMETICISM
 IX. THE MYSTICISM OF PHILO
 X. THE SOCIAL SIGNIFICANCE OF MYSTERY INITIATION

     
Pagan Regeneration, by Harold R. Willoughby, [1929], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER I

 

PAGAN PIETY IN THE GRAECO-ROMAN WORLD

THERE is a vague but widespread impression that the age that saw the emergence of Christianity was religiously destitute and morally decadent. The general and orthodox conviction of today is that all pagan religions current in the first century A.D. were in a bad state of degeneration. Originally they may have started with a modicum of light and revelation from above, but that original good had been corrupted by false beliefs and evil practices to such an extent that in the first century the gentile world was in a worse state than it had ever been before. People of all classes, wearied of the apparent futility of contemporary cults, were quitting them wholesale, or were giving them a merely formal adherence. In an abandon of atheism they were surrending themselves to unrestrained indulgence in immoral practices. Approximately this is still the popular impression of religious conditions in the Graeco-Roman world.

This misconception, so far as it has any basis at all in ancient sources of information, results from a piecing together of notions derived from certain readily accessible writings, pagan and Christian. On the one hand, philosophical writings in Greek and Latin record the rationalist criticism to which the polytheistic systems of the Gentiles were subjected. Furthermore, the Roman satirists of the early imperial period, superlatively skilful in the practice of their art, painted the immoralities of the upper classes in Roman society in colors that could not be forgotten. On the other hand, the later Christian apologists delighted to represent their pagan competitors in as unfavorable a light as possible. They pilloried the faults and failures of gentile religions and sought to establish the point that the inadequacies of paganism were a part of the providential preparation of the world for the outburst of true revelation in Christianity itself. This admittedly apologetic position, familiar alike in ancient and modern times, was given its classic statement in the Praeparatio Evangelica composed early in the fourth century A.D. by Eusebius of Caesarea.

Concerning the literary sources involved it is sufficient to observe, first of all, that the Greek and Roman authors cited represent the attitudes and customs of limited classes in contemporary society: the skepticism of the intellectuals and the excesses of the nouveaux riches. As to the Christian sources, they betray a frank bias both in the selection of discreditable data and in the utilization of that data to serve a polemic purpose. Because of this misuse of inadequate materials the point of view which posits a dearth of real religion in the Graeco-Roman world is itself clearly discredited.

Completely contradictory to such an estimate was the judgment of the earliest Christians concerning rival religious movements. They, who knew competition with gentile cults as a matter of vivid present experience, did not question the strength or reality of gentile loyalties to heathen systems. Not because Gentiles were irreligious but because they were so incurably and tenaciously religious, Christian propagandists actually made little headway with them at first. In face of this discouraging situation the missionaries explained their early failures as due to the infatuated devotion of Gentiles to gods who were really demons. The earliest historian of Christianity, writing at the end of the first century, represented Paul, the outstanding missionary to the Gentiles, as saying to a typical pagan audience, "Men of Athens, from every point of view I see that you are extremely religious."

During the last quarter-century the detailed researches of specialists in the field of Graeco-Roman religions have fully confirmed this ancient appreciation of pagan piety. The propagandist vigor of diaspora Judaism in seeking for proselytes from among the heathen was fully understood before the beginning of our century; but recently discovered non-literary papyri and similar unpretentious remains have revealed a not less vigorous gentile propaganda carried on by members of voluntary religious associations. That the princeps of the Roman Empire was responsible for an official revival of antique Roman religion was well known to earlier generations than our own; but only recently have students been aroused to a realization that the developing imperial cult, focused on the person of the princeps, was an expression of genuinely religious hopes and appreciations and interests on the part of the people of the empire. That Graeco-Roman philosophy came to a religious climax in Neo-Platonism has long been a matter of common knowledge; but only in our generation have serious scholars given sympathetic attention to the mystical literatures of similar systems previous to Plotinus. The net result of all this fresh investigation in new fields has been to prove that the Mediterranean world in which early Christianity emerged was indeed "extremely religious." It is perhaps not exaggeration to affirm of the first century A.D., as Francis Legge does of the six centuries from Alexander to Constantine, "there has probably been no time in the history of mankind when all classes were more given up to thoughts of religion, or when they strained more fervently after high ethical ideals" than at just this period. To this extent do the actual records of gentile religious experience in the first century belie the traditional estimate of the age.

 

I

Fundamentally the weltanschauung generally prevalent during the early imperial period was emphatically a religious view of the universe and of life. By far the majority of people in all strata of society held a supernaturalistic conception of the universe that presupposed the existence of a spirit world above and beyond the world known to ordinary sense perception. In the presence of the mystery which lies back of all human experience, even the most ordinary, there were few in the Julian or Flavian periods who were content to maintain a position of agnosticism and say, "The mystery cannot be understood: therefore it may be ignored." The more curious majority sought in one way or another to penetrate the mystery and were satisfied that it held the key to an understanding of the meaning of existence. Furthermore, so far as the ordering of the universe was concerned, the supernatural realm was conceived to be far more important than the natural world; for the ultimate forces which controlled all things were believed to be the occult spiritual powers above and not the forces of nature operative in the world below. Only a very few strenuous thinkers had attained to anything approximating the modern scientific conception of natural law, i.e., the uniform sequence of natural events apart from the ordering of a will or mind responsible for the succession. Most men in the first century tended rather to think of events as the result of the more or less capricious activities of spirits or demons who peopled the supernatural area. Some, to be sure, personalized these spiritual powers but ostracized them completely from effective human relationships. This was the Epicurean way. Others depersonalized and rationalized all supernatural power, connected it most intimately with the world of experience, and made it the very essence of things, the ordering mind of the universe itself. This was the Stoic way. Between these rival camps the masses of men continued to think of the supernatural powers as personal beings who governed the affairs of men in ways that were whimsical and freakish.

A person's attitude toward the supernatural powers and his conception of them varied considerably according to his particular circumstances in life. To many minds it seemed that experience was chiefly characterized by the element of uncertainty. Nature was sometimes hostile and sometimes kind. Business was now a success and now a failure, with no fully apparent reason for either result. A man who had such experiences, if he were skeptical of the traditional gods of paganism, was likely to hold chance responsible for the inexplicable permutations of fortune. Still others were more impressed by the orderliness of the universe. The fortunes of men might vary, but the processes of nature continued in a more or less invariable sequence over long periods of time. To them the universe seemed not conspicuously friendly, perhaps, but at least it could be depended on. Under such circumstances it was reasonable to attribute the ordering of events to a stern and inflexible Necessity, and the corresponding religious attitude was to be submissive to the rulings of Fate. In general, when one's lot in life was notably favorable and success crowned one's efforts, one could easily maintain an optimistic attitude toward the universe and regard the supernatural with equanimity. Providence was obviously kind to the prosperous man and it was his religious duty to be correspondingly grateful.

The masses of humanity in the Graeco-Roman world were not so well situated as this, and consequently they found it difficult to maintain an attitude of grateful appreciation toward the powers controlling the universe. To be sure society was more stable in the first century of the empire than in the last century of the republic; but the injustices of that social order were flagrant, the mood of the princeps was changeable, and the uncertainties of life were great. Experience seemed to indicate that on the whole the supernatural powers were more likely to be unfriendly than favorable. Accordingly, the ordinary man of that time was inclined to regard the spirits and demons of his universe with fear and blank terror even. Out of this unfortunate attitude there developed irrational beliefs and absurd practices, difficult to understand at this distance in time, but broadly intended to establish and maintain safe relationships with man's spiritual environment.

The growth of superstition in the Roman Empire during the first century A.D. was immense. All classes in society from the princeps down were infected by it to a greater or less degree. Augustus, when a thunderstorm arose, used to retire to the cellar, and Caligula by preference crawled under the bed. Nero, like Orestes, only more deservedly, was haunted by the furies of his murdered mother just as Otho, later, was tortured by the unquiet spirit of his predecessor Galba. The Flavian emperors were not less addicted to superstition. Domitian, the last of the line, had the worst experiences of them all. During the last months of his life he was in constant terror while the lightning struck, one after the other, the Roman Capitol, the Flavian temple, the imperial palace. The very men of letters, Suetonius Dio Cassius, who regale us ad nauseam with these and similar tales, confess their own credulity by the way in which they handle their narratives. Petronius and Apuleius introduce us to more superstitions of the same sort in their romances of society life in Cumae and village life in Thessaly. Almost anywhere that a test is made in contemporary Mediterranean life, the result is to disclose a fantastic assortment of grotesque superstitions.

The prevalence of superstition in the Roman world together with concomitant evils caused real concern on the part of intelligent and conscientious religionists. In the last century B.C. the enthusiastic Epicurean, Lucretius, faced the problem squarely and proposed a rigorous remedy. He identified superstition and religion, and emphasizing the disquieting character of fears inspired by supernaturalism, he unhesitatingly pronounced religion a curse on the human race. In his account of religious origins in relation to the development of human society he burst out in passionate invective:

"O unhappy race of mankind, to ascribe such doings to the gods and to add thereto bitter wrath! What groans did they then create for themselves, what wounds for us, what tears for generations to come! It is no piety to show oneself often with covered head, turning towards a stone and approaching every altar, none to fall prostrate upon the ground and to spread open the palms before shrines of the gods, none to sprinkle altars with the blood of beasts in showers and to link vow to vow; but rather to be able to survey all things with mind at peace."

To Lucretius the remedy seemed obvious: to do away altogether with contemporary supernaturalism and to substitute instead rational views of nature. Because Epicurus in his philosophy had accomplished this very thing and so freed mankind from unnecessary fears, Lucretius expressed his unbounded admiration for the achievement.

Plutarch, of Chaeronea, facing essentially the same problem in the first century A.D., took a more moderate position. He contrasted religion with superstition on the one hand and with atheism on the other. The latter he defined as insensibility to the gods, and the former he characterized as the excessive and irrational fear of the gods. In origin the two were closely related. A fundamental misconception of the gods as malignant beings gave rise to the fears of superstition, and these in turn caused the extreme reaction of atheism. Of the two the latter was certainly preferable. But for himself Plutarch preferred to choose neither. The remedy, as he saw it, was at just a happy medium between the two; and this was the position of true religion. The gods, in Plutarch's judgment, were the friends of mankind and chiefly concerned with their welfare. Hence they should be approached without dread, but with gratitude and confidence. Plutarch's own testimony was: "What we esteem the most agreeable things in human life are our holidays, temple-feasts, initiations, processions, with our public prayers and solemn devotions." In the "golden mean of true piety" Plutarch found the antidote for both the practical atheism of the Epicurean and the terrors of the superstitious. The miscellanarian of Chaeronea did not stand alone in this position, but was typical of a large number of sane, thoughtful, conservative Gentiles who were his contemporaries.

 

II

Broadly speaking, the religious situation in the Graeco-Roman world was as varied and complex and syncretistic as Mediterranean society itself was at this period. All peopIes included as citizens or provincials within the limits of the empire and all previous ages of religious experience in the Mediterranean area made some characteristic contribution to the religious life of Roman times. Prominent in the complex, and thoroughly typical of the particular races and geographical areas involved, were the survivals of the nationalistic type of religion in vogue before the Roman and Macedonian conquests. The Jahvism of the Jews is the best known of this group, and the propagandist vigor of Judaism in the early Roman Empire is unquestioned. All the world was missionary territory for the Jews. In their zeal for proselytes they "scoured land and sea to make one convert." But equally the Roman world was mission-territory to the devotees of Syrian Baals, to the priests of Egyptian gods, and to the Magi of Ahura Mazda. If the missionaries of polytheistic systems were less exclusive than the rabbis in their demands for religious loyalty, at least they were not less sincere in their devotion to their own particular cults. Outstanding among the traditional survivals and providing the standard paganism of the day was the merged Olympian-Capitoline system, the joint contribution of Greece and Rome. It has become a habit to think and speak of these cults as practically dead when Christianity came to birth. A close study of the archaeological and literary remains of first-century life, however, shows that not only were the traditional religions of Greece and Rome surviving, but they were also actually functioning with considerable vigor; perhaps not as robustly as at an earlier period, but still vitally enough to make them a noteworthy element in the Graeco-Roman situation as a whole.

A peculiarly Roman current in contemporary life was the religion of the home magnified in adaptation to the needs of the state. In its primitive development Roman piety was the cult of a household living in a rural environment and engaged in ritual practices intended to placate the powers on which the welfare of the family was chiefly dependent. The paterfamilias of the household was the high priest of the family cult, the mater was the priestess of the Penates, and the daughters who tended the hearth fire, were the ministrants of Vesta. So Rome, grown to a city-state, then to a republic, and finally to an empire, continued to maintain both the organization and the practices of the domestic religion. The pontifex maximus, the official head of the state religion, was the "father of his people," and the vestal virgins, the daughters of the state, kept the fire burning on the public hearth in the Forum. But the antique Latin religion, developed in a rural setting and essentially conservative in character, could not possibly be enlarged to meet the needs of the expanding Roman state. So the attempt was made to supplement Latin religion from the outside. The numina of primitive thought were personalized and individualized; di novensiles were imported from south Italy and Greece and the Orient, and they almost crowded out the di indigetes; Greek rites were introduced to supplement the native Roman rites, and, finally, the Olympian and Capitoline pantheons were merged, with the Hellenic elements distinctly dominant in the combination.

It is true that there was a pitiful decline of Latin religion during the last century of the republic. But that is not the end of the story. Simultaneous with the establishment of the principate by Augustus there was an official revival of state religion under his immediate direction. Just why Augustus, who was both cynical and superstitious, should be interested in doing this is still a matter for debate. The probability is that his motives were mingled. In part to cloak his actual autocracy and make the principate a safe and secure office; in part to further the fortunes of himself and his family, and to stimulate patriotism at the same time; and in part, surely, to reinculcate the old Roman type of virtue, he sought the renaissance of the primitive Latin religion. He restored decayed sanctuaries and built new temples. He revived priesthoods that had lapsed and filled colleges with men of distinction. He himself carefully observed all the required forms of religion and gave special prominence to cults associated with his own career or his family. In 17 B.C. he had the "secular games" celebrated in honor of the new order of things and appointed Horace to write the Carmen Saeculare for the occasion. This and other literature of the Augustan age, particularly the poems of Vergil, give the impression of a religious revival actually in progress. Following the chaos and excesses of the last century of the republic, the old Roman character asserted itself once more and reverted anew to the familiar religio.

It is quite probable that in all this Augustus was less a leader and more a follower of public opinion than he is usually supposed to have been. Notwithstanding the scantiness of literary records there are yet data enough to prove that the ancient Latin religion was still a considerable factor in Italian life. Originally developed to meet family needs in a rural type of society, it continued to function in country districts and in cities, even, where family life survived. The charming pictures of the actual operations of the religion of Numa in Marius the Epicurean are just as true of first-century Italy as of the age of the Antonines. They can be matched by a dozen delightful sketches in the minor poets of the Augustan age and by more serious representations in Cato's treatise on agriculture. Also in the city milieu the religious routine of family life, the offerings to Vesta and the Penates at mealtime, and the celebrations at birth, marriage, or death, continued to be observed to the very end of paganism. In the Theodosian code of the late fourth century are the following prohibitions: "Let no man in any place in any city make sacrifice or worship the Lar with burnt offering, or the genius with wine, or the Penates with perfumes--let them light no lamp, burn no incense, hang no garlands." Conscientious Romans habituated to the religious customs of family life were ready to give support to such a revival as history associates with the name of Augustus.

The cults devoted to the Olympian gods of Greece were far more widely influential over the Mediterranean area, than Roman religion ever was. Originally the various Olympians had been local divinities merely, charged with the protection of people living in a given territory. Gradually, the Hellenes came to associate together in larger political and social units, certain of the local cults acquired significance for the Greeks generally and then a society of Olympian gods was organized paralleling in its main features the social organization of the Greeks themselves. By the conquest of Alexander the Olympian cults were disseminated throughout the east and by a process of peaceful penetration they came to dominate the Capitoline pantheon in the West. The very conquests which brought disaster to other national and racial systems brought a new accession of influence to the calm Olympians. During the Hellenistic and Roman periods the gods of Greece stood out before the world as the personifications of Hellenic ideals and as departmental deities representing important interests in life.

It is only fair to recognize that among the traditional religions of the day the Olympian cults possessed certain distinct advantages not enjoyed by other systems. There was, first of all, the aesthetic monopoly they held. The most impressive public buildings in the Graeco-Roman world were consecrated as temples to them and the most beautiful statues wrought by Greek artists were their cult images. They were the inspiration of the best literature as of the finest art: the epics of Homer and Vergil, the tragedies of Aeschylus and Euripides, the Homeric Hymns and the odes of Pindar, the lyrics of Sappho, and the poems of Horace. The greatest public festivals of the time were celebrated in their honor--witness the Olympian games. Their temples were banks as well as sanctuaries, and the records of dedications and mortgages and sacred manumissions suggest the influence they had in the control of economic processes. In a variety of ways the Olympian cults dominated important phases of contemporary life.

Concerning the traditional religions generally, it may be said that the extent of their popularity and influence in the first century was dependent on their capacity to meet real social needs. There was still a demand for cults to take care of the larger group and community interests of Mediterranean peoples. This condition obtained even after the Greek city-states had lost their political identity and the native kingdoms of Anatolia had given way to Roman provincial units. The economic prosperity of cities as well as of individuals must be assured. The health of large aggregations of humanity living in restricted areas was an ever serious problem. Homes and the food supply must be protected against destruction by fire and flood and earthquake. In all such instances religion seemed to furnish the best guaranties of security. By the very circumstance of their local genesis the traditional survivals were well equipped to meet this range of community needs; and the civic pride manifested in the first century in the maintenance of particular cults attests the fact that they had functional value. The author of Acts, in a vivid scene, reflected the pride of Ephesus to be the "temple-keeper" for Artemis. and the Christian prophet of the Apocalypse, in his bitter words about "Satan's throne," rebuked the satisfaction that the Pergamenes took in the great altar of Zeus. Typically the gods of Greece continued to function as municipal saviors for cities widely scattered over the eastern half of the Mediterranean world, older local divinities frequently adopting the names and symbols of the Olympians. Altogether a greater vitality must be granted to established cults in their communal functioning than is usually allowed.

 

III

It was a characteristic Roman conviction that the primary function of religion was to serve the interests of the state and that as a guaranty of political prosperity the rites of religion were potent in the extreme. There was nothing individualistic about Roman religio. The individual had significance only as a member of a household and the household had significance only as a unit in the state. Just as the welfare of the family group was considered to be mainly conditioned by the preservation of pax with the numina, so the prosperity of the state was conceived to depend mainly on the maintenance of right relations with spiritual powers. Accordingly the Romans made their ius divinum as much a part of their civil law as the Jews did. Again and again during the centuries that saw Rome's rise to greatness and empire, the idea was emphatically expressed that her success was due to the scrupulous way in which the Romans observed their religious obligations. " 'Tis by holding yourself the servant of the gods that you rule," said Horace, addressing the typical Roman of his day. Livy composed his history and Vergil his epic to enforce the point. Equally when disaster befell the Roman state, the tragedy was attributed to the neglect of religious rites. According to the best Roman traditions political developments were, in the last analysis, determined by religious observances.

Because the Romans believed so strongly in the political efficacy of religion they made the extended effort, covering long centuries of their history, to adapt the religion of the home to the uses of the state. In this they signally failed. But in the first century A.D. the Romans were responsible for a unique religious development that temporarily seemed to meet their political needs with marked success. This was the Roman development of the oriental cult of the monarch, focused in imperial times on the person of the deified princeps.

During the century which began with Augustus and ended with Domitian, the cult of the ruler had its greatest growth and became an effective force throughout the Mediterranean world. Through the first half of the century the personal policy of the princeps himself in regard to apotheosis was marked by strange retroversions, each emperor almost invariably reversing the policy of his predecessor. With Augustus the divinization of the ruler became an established fact in the popular mind, even though it was not officially authorized in Rome and Italy. Tiberius encouraged the deification of Augustus, but was modest about claiming like honors for himself. Then Caligula became so insane in his demand for apotheosis that he incited serious race riots in the Semitic portions of his empire. Claudius, by contrast, practiced the reserve of Tiberius in the matter. By the beginning of the second century, however, the worship of the ruler was such a well-established and generally accepted phase of imperial policy that the growing Christian movement found itself seriously involved and its loyalty to the state definitely challenged because of non-participation in the cult. So important had ruler worship become in the minds of patriotic Roman citizens.

The political usefulness of the imperial cult in providing a religious sanction for the unification of the various races living within the Roman empire has not been seriously questioned either in the early Christian centuries or in our own. An exaggerated importance, however, has been assigned to this function, and the religious significance of the cult has been largely ignored. Nevertheless in the first century the primary meaning of the imperial cult was religious and only incidentally did it serve the practical purpose of a political expedient. When the student of history views the imperial cult in relation to the contemporary desire of Mediterranean peoples for peace and security and also in relation to similar quests conspicuous in the Orient from the very beginning of the historical period, he comes to a realization of what concrete and widespread cravings were met and answered by imperial religion.

The current belief in the ancient world was that the evils of present experience were too stupendous for human management. If they were to be cured, the remedy must come from beneficent spiritual powers above. Out of this fundamental conviction grew a great yearning for a heaven-sent, divinely equipped savior who could deliver men from their wretchedness. From early times this desire for a savior was associated with and found appropriate expression in the cult of the ruler. The Babylonian legend of the divine king Marduk who vanquished the monster Tiamat was a mythological reflection of this association. In the Jewish anticipation of a Messianic deliverer the idea was projected into the future. Egyptian and Assyrian and Hebrew prophets who contrasted the distressful conditions of the immediate present with the blessings certain to be realized under an ideal ruler gave iteration to the same yearning for a kingdom of God here on earth.

At the beginning of the Christian era these ancient hopes came to an impressive culmination with the reorganization of the Roman empire by Augustus. Wearied beyond expression by the continuous wars of the last hundred years and more, large numbers of people actually hoped and believed that Augustus himself would bring the iron age of strife to an end and usher in the new golden age of Saturn. In the well-known Fourth Eclogue of Vergil, in the sixth book of the Aeneid, and over and over again in the Odes of Horace, this confidence was repeated. Provincial inscriptions in honor of Augustus were keyed even higher in their expressions of appreciation and expectation. This mass of literary and epigraphic evidence cannot fairly be treated as fulsome compliment intended to flatter an egotistical prince. It is nearer the truth to regard it as a sincere expression of gratitude for real benefits. Augustus gave the world what it most needed at the time: peace and stable government. The people and especially the provincials responded by according him divine honors. So with the successors of Augustus, when the ruler was an able prince and the benefits realized were substantial, the apotheosis of the ruler was a popular expression of gratitude in religious terminology. The deified princeps was, to the Roman people, a symbol of social safety guaranteed by supernatural power.

 

IV

Genetically related to the Roman imperial cult, yet persisting in an independent line of development and meeting a distinctive range of religious needs, were the various hero cults of the Greeks. It was a typical Hellenic point of view of great social and ethical significance that humanitarian activity was one of the surest ways of attaining divinity. Deus est mortali iuvare mortalem et haec ad aeternam gloriam via, wrote the elder Pliny, probably translating Posidonius. The hero-gods of the Greeks were the personifications of this great idea. They were divine beings of the second order, less than the gods yet more than men. Usually they were thought of as descended from at least one divine parent, as having lived on earth and performed some signal service for mankind, in consequence of which they had risen to rank as demigods after death. Heracles was one of the best loved of these Greek heroes. By his twelve labors he had proved himself the friend of humanity and in the end had been welcomed to Olympus. "Heracles has passed into the number of the gods," wrote Cicero. "He would never have so passed if he had not built up that road for himself while he was among mankind." In this laborious way the mortal son of Zeus and Alcmene became the immortal husband of the Olympian Hebe. The number of similar demigods thus revered by the Greeks was legion.

This is not the place to debate the question as to which element was primary in this combination, the divinity of the god or the humanity of the hero. Were these demigods originally gods who had degenerated to the level of glorious mortals, or were they able men and women who became minor gods? Suffice it to observe that in the development of these cults believers found in divine parentage a reasonable explanation for exceptional ability and in the beneficient activity of heroes an ethical justification for their apotheosis.

It is more important to note the distinctive functioning of these demigods in comparison with other divinities during the Alexandrian and imperial eras. The great gods of Olympus and the Capitol looked out for the protection of cities and states. But even in Periclean Athens the individual was not completely submerged by the polis. As an individual he was conscious of personal needs and interests that were outside the scope of his responsibility as a citizen. He was naturally ambitious to succeed in his vocation. There were times in life when he felt acutely the need for personal guidance or for recompense from disaster. Health must be conserved. He felt that he had a right to a full share in the good things of life, and he was not adverse to having special privileges, even, not shared with his fellowmen. In the cosmopolitan environment of Hellenistic and Roman times, such personal demands became more emphatic than ever before and religion was expected to serve these special purposes. It was here that the hero cults came in to take care of the more minute personal concerns of everyday life. Because the hero-gods had been human themselves they were very sympathetic with human needs and were experienced in meeting them. In their intimate, personal functioning the demigods of antiquity resembled the Roman Catholic saints of today.

This group of religions came to prominence in the Hellenic world about the fifth century B.C. During the Hellenistic age the cult nexus had an amazing growth, and again in the early imperial period there was a pronounced revival of hero worship. Hence it is possible by studying the cults of real persons in the historic period to form a vivid impression of the actual operations of this type of religion and of the kind of interests represented by it.

In classical times when civic interests were predominant in Greek states the founders of cities and colonies, and men otherwise pre-eminent in public service, were honored by divinization. Plutarch told of an annual commemorative service for the Greeks who fell at Plataea, which was celebrated down to his own day, and Pausanias noted that the heroes of Thermopylae and Marathon were accorded a like religious reverence. Later, as political interests tended to recede somewhat, more refined, cultural interests became prominent in connection with hero worship. Literary skill and intellectual acumen were given their meed of recognition by apotheosis. By command of the Pythoness herself Pindar was awarded equal first fruits with Apollo at Delphi. Homeric cults were practiced by the litterati at Smyrna and Alexandria. Schools of philosophy adopted the custom. So scientific a thinker as Aristotle consecrated at Stagira an altar in honor of Plato. Even Epicurus made provision in his will for regular memorial services of a religious character. While the imperial cult was at its height in Roman times there was a persistence of hero cults in private practice as well. No one was more extravagant in observances of this sort during the early second century than was the Emperor Hadrian in ordering the worship of his dead favorite Antinous. Strangely, this exotic cult continued for more than a hundred years after the emperor's death. The saintly Marcus Aurelius was not only the object of the usual official apotheosis, but his own statues were given a place among the household penates in many a pious Roman home. That the ambition for apotheosis might amount to a suicidal mania in a given instance was shown by the self-immolation of Perigrinus at Olympia. There is no doubt that he was quite as eager to become an immortal as were his Cynic brothers to hail the event. Famous instances indicate that hero cults in great variety were widely popular in imperial times.

By far the most popular of the hero-gods of Greece was Asclepius, the divine patron of the healing art. His cult was concerned with such fundamental and practical matters that it could not be otherwise than of general interest. Problems of sickness and health are universal, vital, precarious. Ancient theories usually attributed disease to the wrath of a justly angry god or to infection by a malignant demon. On either theory, the cure of disease was a concern of religion and the remedy must be supplied by beneficent spiritual power. Asclepius was the hero-god who specialized in operations of this kind and his sanctuaries were the sanitoria of the Graeco-Roman world. The most famous of them was at Epidaurus on the east coast of Greece, but there were others of great repute: at Athens close under the Acropolis, at Pergamum and Smyrna in Asia Minor, on Cos and other islands of the Aegean, tnd at the imperial capitol on the Tiber island. Indeed the Asclepius cult was ubiquitous in the Roman world.

At the various Asclepeia healings were accomplished in different ways. There was a good deal of thaumaturgy involved, doubtless, but there was also much sound and scientific medical practice as well. Archaeological remains make it plain that a healthful location, a pleasing environment, a sane regimen, a variety of recreational activity, and a great confidence in the power and benevolence of the god, all contributed to the results obtained at the Asclepius sanctuaries.

So great was the gratitude of the Graeco-Roman world to this hero-god for his beneficence that there was a spontaneous movement to make him a god of the first rank and to identify him with the supreme god, Olympian Zeus himself. To quote the words of one of his enthusiastic devotees, Asclepius was "the one who leads and controls all things, the savior of the whole world, and the guardian of mortals." In art the bearded Asclepius type became canonical and there are cases in which it is difficult to determine whether the god represented was Zeus or the human son of Apollo. Thus by his healing activity the man-god won a place for himself at the very head of the Olympian pantheon. Because the benefits guaranteed by the hero-gods were concrete and generally desired, hero worship was a popular religious usage among Gentiles.

 

V

It is a curious circumstance that the very cults which were most widely and genuinely popular in the Graeco-Roman world are the least known in detail to religio-historical students today. The mystery religions of Greece and the Orient which came the nearest to satisfying the religious needs of the average man in the early imperial era are today still much of a mystery, and it is altogether likely that they will remain so. Under the circumstances it could not be otherwise; for the only people in a position to give dependable information concerning these cults were the initiates themselves, and they were pledged to absolute secrecy concerning the essential features of the mystery system. Almost without exception the vow was conscientiously observed, being enforced both within the brotherhood and from the outside with a rigor that amazes the inquisitive modern mind. The uninitiated, even, resented the illegitimate disclosure of matters supposed to be kept secret and united with the initiated to prevent such a violation of sacred things.

There are historical incidents that illustrate the reverential attitude of the ancients toward the secrets of the mysteries. Andocides, the Attic orator, and Alcibiades, the spoiled favorite of the Athenians, were both implicated in the serious charge of profaning the mysteries. The former was condemned to forfeit certain civil rights and went into exile, while the latter was recalled from the ill-fated Sicilian expedition to stand trial for his impiety. Widely traveled and well-informed Greeks like Herodotus and Pausanias might have written much about the mysteries--and in fact they did tell something. But invariably, when they were on the verge of some significant disclosure, they would stop short and follow the traditional custom of maintaining a propitious silence. "I could speak more exactly of these matters," Herodotus acknowledged regarding the Egyptian mysteries, "for I know the truth." Then he quickly added, "But I will hold my peace." In like manner, Pausanias, after conducting his reader to the very portal of the Eleusinian precinct, there left him disappointed with the unsatisfying explanation: "My dream forbade the description of the things within the wall of the sanctuary, and the uninitiated are of course not permitted to learn that which they are prevented from seeing." Lucius Apuleius, of Madaura, who detailed an extensive account of his own initiation without telling precisely what was said or done, could affirm of his narrative: "I have told you things which, although you have heard them, you cannot know the meaning." When he himself was on trial for magical practices he stoutly declared that he could not be compelled to disclose to the uninitiated what he had received under vow of secrecy. This in its bare simplicity was the typical pagan attitude toward the privacy of the mysteries. To the modern scholar it is inconvenient and annoying. At the same time it is worthy of admiration.

As a result of this ancient conspiracy of silence, the actual literary remains of the mystery cults are scanty and fragmentary in the extreme. Here and there obscure formulas are quoted; a few hymns and prayers have been preserved in part; a comic poet parodies an initiation and a devotee describes the process in figurative language; Christian propagandists denounce the mysteries wholesale as a part of the Satanic system of paganism. The other literary remains of these cults are but chance references and vague allusions from which little can be learned. When all these literary data are assembled and combined with the equally slight amount of archaeological material extant, the sum total of it all seems meager and unimpressive, particularly when compared with the great monuments of traditional paganism, literary, epigraphic, and artistic.

Although sources of information concerning the mystery cults are notably defective in quantity, yet the popularity of these religions and their widespread influence in the Roman world cannot be doubted. Indirectly this is proved by the blistering vigor of Christian denunciations leveled against the gentile religions of redemption. From Paul to Augustine the mysteries bore the brunt of the Christian polemic against paganism. The fathers of the early church knew these cults as the strongest rivals that Christianity had, and with sour eloquence they testified to the popularity of the mysteries among gentile religionists.

Very directly the scattered fragments of mystery literature--the testimony of initiates and eyewitnesses--attest the strength and quality of mystery influence. One cannot read the Odes of Pindar, devout Orphic that he was, or the prayers of a fervent Isiacist like Lucius, or the Consolatio of a serious-minded Plutarch, or the encomia of Aristides and Julian, without realizing that the mysteries were real means of grace to many a convinced and sincere pagan. These cults had their apologists; Ianmblicus, for example, and Porphyry, and Proclus. If their testimony has to be reduced somewhat in evaluation because of its apologetic character, full value must be allowed to the objective statements of disinterested witnesses like Cicero and Epictetus. Mystery literature may be defective in quantity, but it is truly impressive for its fervor and the undoubted tone of sincerity that pervades it.

A realistic impression of the extent of mystery influence in the ancient world may be secured by observing the distribution of mystery chapels and other archaeological remains. For the most part the tangible monuments of the mysteries were very unpretentious in character, and were concentrated at the centers of population. The inscriptions which glimpse the group life within gentile religious brotherhoods have been found in a majority of cases in the great seaports. Mystery chapels have been unearthed in cities all over the Roman empire. They vary all the way from great and world-famous shrines, like the Eleusinian, to small chapels in private houses. In Rome a subterranean pagan basilica was recently discovered near the Porta Maggiore; and Rome had also her temple to the Phrygian Mother crowning the Palatine itself. It is a familiar fact that the limes of the Roman Empire can be roughly sketched simply by marking the mithraea located in the frontier camps of the Roman army. And it is also a matter of common knowledge that Rome's nearest seaport, Ostia, was thickly dotted with mithraic chapels. In view of the distribution of mystery monuments and the character of mystery sources generally, we may conclude, in the words of a well-known historian, "It would not be a mere rhetorical figure if one were to designate the religious history of the Mediterranean world in the early imperial period as the age of the mysteries."

When the reason for the immense popularity of this group of religions is sought, it is found in their capacity to meet the most insistent religious demands of the age. They gave assurances to the restless, questing masses of people in the Roman empire such as neither philosophy nor ethics nor traditional religion could give. More particularly they answered to the demand of the individual man for special and unusual privileges in his religious relationships. The public performances of traditional religion, the healings accomplished by Asclepius and the oracles vouchsafed by Apollo, the omens interpreted by the augur and the charms formulated by the magician--these were more or less common property shared by all who could pay the price. But the average individual in the Roman Empire was not satisfied with these common goods. He desired unique religious privileges, made certain through personal attachment to a particular god who was especially interested in him. Dulled by the monotony and discouragements of everyday experience, he felt the need for emotional stimulation and uplift. Depressed by the injustices and defeats of life, he craved the assurance of recompense in the future. The demand for emotional stimulation and for the assurance of a happy immortality were among the most important religious needs that the mysteries aimed to satisfy.

There were other less important and more superficial reasons for the success of these cults. Their rites were exceedingly attractive. The pageantry and processionals of the public celebrations appealed to Mediterranean tastes and had no little propaganda value, while the intimate rites of the esoteric services were designed to stimulate a varied and richly emotional type of religious experience. The doctrines of the mysteries, cast in mythological forms, were to a degree satisfying to the intellect. They gave a comprehensive and intelligible explanation of the universe, and provided pictorial answers to inevitable questionings as to the how and why of things. The very antiquity of the mysteries was in their favor and there was a tendency for each cult to claim precedence on the basis of greater age. Also the secrecy and esoteric character of the gentile religions further enhanced their reputation. Finally, it should be asserted that the mystery religions, particularly in their Roman development, were readily responsive to the ethical demands of the age. In summarizing the reasons that account for the remarkable diffusion of mystery cults throughout the Roman world, Cumont concludes:

"These religions gave greater satisfaction first of all to the senses and emotions, in the second place to the intelligence, and finally and chiefly to the conscience.... They offered, in comparison with previous religions, more beauty in their ritual, more truth in their doctrines, and a superior good in their morality."

A great variety of mystery religions flourished in the Roman empire. Almost every separate geographical area east of the Adriatic developed and contributed to the mystery group a typical cult of its own. The Phrygian plateau and the plains of Thrace, where emotionalism ran high, seem to have been the great primitive centers for this type of religion. Thrace was the homeland of the Dionysian and Orphic movements, which spread broadly over Hellas and Magna Graecia in recurrent tides of religious revival. To Eleusis in Attica the world was indebted for the evolution of the Eleusinian mysteries, the very finest product of the religious genius of the Greeks. Nor should the Samothracian or Andanian mysteries be forgotten, for they were well known both to Greeks and to Romans. Anatolia gave to Rome the cult of the Great Mother of the Gods and Syria shared with the empire in devotion to a goddess who was known simply as Iasura, i.e., the Syrian goddess. Also there flourished in the east Mediterranean territory the cult of Aphrodite and Adonis, a divine pair known to Phoenicia as Ashtart and Eshmun and to Mesopotamia as Ishtar and Tammuz. On the Iranian plateau the mysteries of Mithra had their initial growth and in the Nile valley the cult of Isis and Osiris originated, each embodying characteristic phases of Persian and Egyptian culture. These were only the most famous of the Graeco-Oriental mysteries. Apart from them many an ignored local cult functioned significantly in its own day and place.

As a result of their diversity of origin, the Graeco-Oriental mysteries exhibited many differences in detail. In fundamental character, however, they were alike, and so markedly differentiated from contemporary systems as to warrant grouping them together under the common classification of mystery religions. By contrast with the established gentile cults they were purely individualistic in character, concerned not with the material welfare of a particular race or nation or city, but with the salvation of the individual soul instead. It is but a complementary statement to add that because of this individualistic emphasis the mysteries came to assume the character of cosmic religions to a degree that was impossible for other gentile systems. Furthermore, the mystery cults were outstanding as religions of redemption par excellence. The salvation they had to offer was spiritual and other-worldly. The individual could not hope to attain it as a result of his own unaided efforts. What the mysteries guaranteed was that on account of the devotee's attachment to the lord of the cult his salvation could and would be fully accomplished for him. Uniformly, the mystery deities were conceived as hero-gods of the dying and rising type, who had suffered to an exaggerated degree the ills to which flesh is heir; but in the end they had gloriously triumphed. Because of this archetypal experience of the god, the initiates might feel sure of a similar victory over the evils of human experience. "Be of good cheer, you of the mystery. Your god is saved. For us also there shall be salvation from ills." This in exact mystery terminology was the guaranty of each cult. The mysteries were also distinguished as sacramental religions wherein salvation was conditioned upon participation in a prescribed ritual. By means of initiatory rites which included ablutions and purifications the candidate was made a fit person to approach deity. Finally, in culminating rites of communion and revelation and deification, the union of divinity and humanity was experientially accomplished. But the chief distinction of the mysteries in comparison with other gentile cults was the fact that they were eschatological religions which had to do with the ultimate issue of death itself. When the imperial cult promised a kingdom of God on earth and the state religions granted,in Elysian land to the favored few, the mysteries gave to the ordinary man the prized assurance of immortality of soul in a happy hereafter.

Because of these common characteristics and the nonexclusive religious habits of the Gentiles and the eclectic tendencies of the age, it was inevitable that the mysteries should undergo a considerable degree of fusion during the Graeco-Roman period. None of the mysteries demanded an exclusive religious loyalty on the part of its adherents. Hence it was a common custom for initiates to belong to more than one religious brotherhood at the same time. Lucius Apuleius actually bankrupted himself in order to secure initiation into various secret cults, and Tatian, in his quest for truth, joined one mystery after another. Plutarch's friend Clea, to whom the treatise on Isis and Osiris was inscribed, was equally a devotee of the Delphic Dionysus and the Egyptian Isis. Among the clergy as well as the laity non-exclusive religious practices were in vogue. An Attis of the Phrygian Mother might at the same time be a Father in the Mithraic mysteries. Lucius, before his Isiac initiation, was assigned to the tutelage of a mystagogue who bore the significant name "Mithra." A more striking case of varied clerical functioning was recorded in a Latin inscription which designated one and the same man as Pater Patrum Dei Solis invicti Mithrae, Hierofanta Hecates, Dei Liberi Archiboculus, taurobolio criobolioque in aeternum renatus.

Under conditions such is these an interchange of formulas and symbols and beliefs and practices was the natural consequence. There was a theocrasia in the mystery group of religions corresponding to that accomplished between the Capitoline and Olympian systems. The likenesses of the various pairs of mystery divinities were unmistakable, the mother goddess embodying all the powers of nature and the suffering son or lover exhibiting life in action. So the Phrygians recognized their Magna Mater in the Syrian goddess and the Greeks saw Dionysus in the person of Osiris. This tendency to identify deities with one another culminated in the assertion, not infrequent in mystery documents, that a given god or goddess represented the totality of the divine nature. Picturesque rites, even, passed from one cult to another. The taurobolium, historically the great sacrament of the Magna Mater, was so conspicuously appropriated by the Mithraists that it is popularly associated with the Persian rather than with the Phrygian cult.

To a greater or less degree all the mystery religions were subject to the process of fusion, but none to a greater extent than the Orphic movement, which in Roman times largely lost its identity. In fact the process of syncretism, which was characteristic of almost every phase of Graeco-Roman thinking, cannot be studied more effectively than by investigating the development of the mysteries in Hellenistic and Roman times.

The fact of fusion among the mysteries causes peculiar problems to the modern student. This is the dilemma: either to study the various cults separately, as Loisy does, for example, or to view them en masse as a single great religious system. The latter is the method of Reitzenstein, in whose latest volume the "mystery religions" become "the Hellenistic mystery religion." The former method is apt to give a false impression of the whole religious situation in the Graeco-Roman world and to picture it as more chaotic than it actually was. On the, other hand, the synthetic study of the mysteries is apt to neglect the distinctive contribution of each to the religious life of the age and, at the same time, to attribute to a given cult phases of some other system. Under the circumstances, the most nearly exact procedure would seem to be to emphasize those fundamental aspects of the mystery type of religion which were characteristic of all the cults in common and to balance this with a detailed investigation of the idiosyncrasies of each particular cult.

For membership in each and all of the mysteries there was one absolute sine qua non--participation in special rites of initiation. Membership in national religions was an involuntary matter. The accident of birth into a given race or nation made one automatically a member of the state church. In the case of the mysteries, however, membership was a volitional matter. It was contingent, first of all, upon the individual's own personal choice and his further willingness to submit to the prescribed rites. Thus it was that mystery initiation came to be considered a matter of very great importance by many gentile religionists. Without this single prerequisite there could be no share in the religious privileges that the mysteries and the mysteries alone could guarantee.

What, more precisely, was the central meaning of mystery initiation for the individual neophyte? What difference did it make for the person who shared in the rite? What, if anything, was actually accomplished by the antique liturgy? In view of the general social situation in the Graeco-Roman world, what was the functional significance of mystery initiation in relation to contemporary social processes generally? These are fundamental questions that can be answered, if at all, only after a detailed study of actual initiation experiences in the various cults, together with an equally analytical investigation of the social milieu in which the mysteries operated.

     
Pagan Regeneration, by Harold R. Willoughby, [1929], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER II

 

THE GREATER MYSTERIES AT ELEUSIS

AMONG the cults of Greece none was more favorably known in the first century of the Christian era than the Eleusinian mysteries. Although it was more definitely localized and centralized than were the other Greek mysteries, this circumstance did not detract from either its reputation or its influence. Locally it was associated with an antique tradition that ran back to prehistoric times, and such antiquity was a valued credential for any first-century religion. The home of this cult was the town of Eleusis on the fertile Rharian plain a few miles from Athens, where in prehistoric times the cereal goddess Demeter was revered by an agricultural community. Legends of the special initiation of foreigners like Heracles and the Dioscuri recall the primitive time when membership in the cult was open to citizens of Eleusis only. With the political fusion of Eleusis and Athens, however, the local barriers were broken down and rebuilt along much extended lines. The dominant city-state of Athens adopted the cult as her own, brought it under state supervision, and entrusted the general management of the mysteries to the Archon Basileus. Inscriptions of the Periclean period attest the well-considered plan of Athens to use the mysteries as a religious support for her political hegemony. This combination of ancient Eleusinian tradition and the official patronage of the Athenian state gave dignity and prestige to the mysteries of Demeter even in the first century.

But this cult was more than merely a state religion of the usual Greek model. In the first century its appeal and its guaranties were for the individual rather than for the citizen. On the one hand not all Athenians, by any means, were members of the cult. The citizen of Athens did not automatically come under the protection of Demeter by natural birth as he found himself under the aegis of Athena. It was by special initiation alone, conceived and represented as a process of rebirth, that he could avail himself of the cult privileges. No less an Athenian than Socrates was reproached for not seeking initiation into these mysteries. The state cult of Demeter operated as a voluntary religious association in which Athenian citizens were eligible for membership; but their adherence was a matter of their own volition.

Conversely, eligibility for admission was not limited to Athenians only. When, as a result of the absorption of Eleusis by Athens, the mysteries lost their local exclusiveness, they further took on a pan-Hellenic character. The so-called Homeric Hymn to Demeter, one of the earliest and most valuable of Eleusinian documents, invites the whole Greek world to come and participate in the mysteries. Herodotus states that in his day whoever wished to do so, whether they were Athenians or other Greeks, might come to be initiated. Later, even the Hellenic limitation was removed and persons of any nationality were received, providing they understood the Greek language in which the ritual was conducted. In the time of Cicero, just before the beginning of our era, "the most distant nations were initiated into the sacred and august Eleusinia."

It is interesting to note further that women and slaves, even, were admitted to this cult. The author of the oration In Neaeram, which was once attributed to Demosthenes, states that Lysias, without any difficulty, was able to arrange for the initiation of his mistress Metanira. That slaves were admitted is suggested by a fragment from the comic poet Theophilus in which a slave speaks with gratitude of his beloved master who taught him his letters and got him initiated into the sacred mysteries. An inscription dated in the administration of Lycurgus (329-328 B.C.) further puts the question of the admission of slaves beyond doubt. It is an expense account of an Eleusinian official, and among the items included is the following: "For the initiation of two public slaves; thirty drachmae." The mysteries of Demeter, therefore, once a local cult and later a state religion, came in the end to assume an international character and to make an individualistic appeal. In its developed form, the cult received into membership not only Greeks but also "barbarians," and women and slaves as well as free men.

 

I

It is indubitable that the influence of the Eleusinian mysteries was widespread in the Graeco-Roman world. Though localized at Eleusis this cult influenced rites that were celebrated elsewhere in widely scattered centers. In Ionia, at Eleusis this cult influenced rites that were celebrated elsewhere in widely scattered centers. In Ionia, at Ephesus and Mycale, and again in the Arcadian city of Pheneus, Demeter Eleusinia was worshipped and her cult was related in local legend to the Attic foundation. Pausanias vouches for the statement that Celeae near Philius, and Megalopolis in Arcadia each had an "initiation mystery of Demeter" in which the proceedings were conducted "in imitation of those at Eleusis." According to a late inscription (third century A.D.), a mystery of Demeter flourished at Lerna in Argolis, and the hierophant in charge was the son of an Athenian priest. There are further records that Demeter Eleusinia was worshiped in Boeotia and Laconia on the Greek mainland, and in Crete and Thera among the Greek islands. At Naples, in Italy, mysteries in honor of Demeter were celebrated after the Attic manner. It is even possible that the Andanian mysteries in Messenia, which Pausanias regarded as second in dignity and prestige to the Eleusinian alone, were also related to the Attic cult. In each of these instances two possibilities are to be considered. Either the similar rites had their origin in the Eleusinian ceremonies or else both came from a common parentage. In either case it is patent that there was widespread interest in Demeter cults in the Graeco-Roman world.

Quite apart from the question of related Demeter cults, however, there is an abundance of testimonia to prove the world-wide reputation of the Eleusinian rites themselves at the beginning of the common era. Crinagoras, the Greek epigrammatist of Mytilene, writing in the time of Augustus, advised his friend by all means to go to Athens and see the mysteries, even though he traveled nowhere else. If we may credit Philostratus, his hero Apollonius of Tyana, certainly one of the most famous and respected religionists of his day, applied in person for admission to the Eleusinian mysteries. "But the hierophant was not disposed to admit him to the rites, for he said he would never initiate a wizard and charlatan, nor open the Eleusinian Mysteries to a man who dabbled in impure rites."

During the early imperial period some very famous non-Greeks showed their deep interest in the mysteries at Eleusis, among them the Emperor Augustus himself. Though normally not attracted by foreign religions, he was initiated at Eleusis in 21 B.C. Later, according to Suetonius, he gave signal proof of his reverence for the mysteries.

"He was hearing a case at Rome which involved the privileges of the priests of the Attic Ceres. When some of the mysteries of their sacred rites were to be introduced into the pleadings, he dismissed those who sat upon the bench with him as judges, as well as the bystanders, and heard the arguments upon these points himself."

Seutonius also tells us that when Nero was in Greece, "he dared not attend the Eleusinian Mysteries at the initiation of which impious and wicked persons are warned by the voice of the herald from approaching the rites." However, there were other emperors who like Augustus attained the goal which Nero failed to gain. Marcus Aurelius and Commodus were two of these illustrious mystae. The epitaph of an Eleusinian priestess mentions it as a matter of special pride that she set the crown upon their heads as they participated in the solemn rites. The fact that the first citizens of the Roman Empire sought membership in the Eleusinian cult is striking proof of its great influence.

Other significant testimony is given by the philosophers and moralists of this period. At the close of the pre-Christian era, Cicero declared it was his personal opinion that Athens had given nothing to the world more excellent or divine than the Eleusinian mysteries. At the beginning of the Christian centuries, the Stoic Epictetus spoke of the impressiveness of these mysteries in terms of genuine appreciation. Thus, at the beginning of our era, when Olympian Zeus had lost his ancient supremacy and Delphian Apollo, though reviving, was yet reduced in influence, Demeter of Eleusis still enjoyed a high reputation. The influence of her mysteries was literally world-wide during the early imperial period.

 

II

In order to understand the type of religious experience represented by this important cult, it is necessary clearly to keep in mind the main points of the Eleusinian myth which was developed to explain and justify the cult rites. These are stated with sufficient elaboration in the Homeric Hymn to Demeter, although this document does not give the myth in its fully developed form. According to the story, Persephone, daughter of Demeter, "giver of goodly crops," was stolen by Pluto and carried off to the underworld to be his bride. This was done with the knowledge and tacit approval of Zeus himself. The mother, frenzied with grief, rushed about the earth for nine days, torch in hand, abstaining from eating and drinking, and searching wildly for her lost daughter. As she rested at the "maiden well of fragrant Eleusis" she was welcomed by the daughters of Celeus, who took her to their father's house for refreshment. Here she finally broke her fast and dwelt for a time. ln her resentment against Zeus, she brought famine upon the fruitful earth so that no crops grew for men and no offerings were made to the gods. Finally, an arrangement was made with Pluto whereby Persephone was restored to her sorrowing mother. Since, however, the daughter had eaten a sweet pomegranate seed in the underworld she was forced to return there regularly for a portion of each year. Demeter, in her joy at the restoration of her lost daughter, allowed the crops to grow once more and instituted in honor of the event the Eleusinian mysteries which gave to mortals the assurance of a happy future life. Such was the myth which stood in the background of thought for one who participated in the Eleusinian rites.

The experiential basis for this story is quite clear. It was a nature myth, a vivid depiction of the action of life in the vegetable world with the changing of the seasons. Each year nature passed through the cycle of apparent death and resurrection. In winter vegetable life was dead while Demeter, the giver of life, grieved for the loss of her daughter. But with the coming of spring the life of nature revived again, for the sorrowing mother had received her daughter back with rejoicing. Through the summer the mother abundantly maintained the life of nature until autumn, when again her daughter returned to the underworld and earth became desolate once more. Thus year after year nature re-enacted the myth of Eleusis.

It was also a reflection of poignant human experiences, mirroring the joys, sorrows, and hopes of mankind in face of inevitable death. The three actors of the Eleusinian tragedy, the mater dolorosa as the protagonist, the maiden daughter is the deuteragonist, and the sinister figure of the ravisher as the mysterious third actor, these three enacted the mystery of human life and death. The god of death himself stole the beloved daughter away from the life-giver; but the divine mother would not give up her loved one, and in the end she accomplished her daughter's resurrection. Here was human experience made heroic and divine; for man has ever loved and lost, but rarely has he ceased to hope for reunion with the loved one. The Eleusinian myth told of these fundamental human experiences as well as of the life of nature.

 

III

With this mythological background in mind the Eleusinian ritual should be examined, at least in its more important features, in order to define the variety of religious experience fostered by this cult. It was an elaborate ceremonial, extending over a long period of time. The classical analysis of the Eleusinian rite divided it into four distinct stages: the katharsis, or preliminary purification, the sustasis, or preparatory rites and sacrifices, the telete, i.e., the initiation proper, and the epopteia, or highest grade of initiation. Of these various stages the first two were public, and concerning them there is a large amount of information. But the last two were very strictly private and therefore they remain for us shrouded in mystery. Unfortunately, it is these very private ceremonials that are most important for the student who is interested in the personal religious experiences of paganism. The elaborate preliminary ceremonies do not concern us in detail except as a preparation for the all-important rites which followed.

More than six months before the "great mysteries" in September the "lesser mysteries" were celebrated at Agrae, a suburb of Athens, on the banks of the Illisus. Clement of Alexandria spoke of "the minor mysteries which have some foundation of instruction and of preliminary preparation for what is to come after." This statement emphasizes what for our purpose was the most significant feature of the mysteries at Agrae--they were important as a prerequisite for the "great mysteries."

On the thirteenth of September the "great mysteries" began and they lasted over a full week. Early in the festival there was a solemn assembly in the Stoa Poicile, the main item of which was a proclamation by the hierophant. This was not a sermon but rather a warning to depart, addressed to those who for one reason or another were disqualified or unworthy of initiation. As to the content of the formal warning, Libanius states that the "leaders of the mystae" proclaimed to those seeking initiation that they must be "pure in hand and soul and of Hellenic speech." These terms are confirmed in part by a mathematician of the imperial period who compared his studies to the mysteries. "Not all who wish," he said, "have a share in the Mysteries. But there are some who are forewarned to abstain; such as those whose hands are not clean and whose speech is unintelligible." Celsus, as reported by Origen, gives two formulas of invitation, one altogether similar to those already cited and the other of a somewhat different character. He is quoted as follows:

"Those who invite people to other mysteries make proclamation thus: 'Everyone who has clean hands and intelligible speech,' others again thus: 'He who is pure from all pollution, and whose soul is conscious of no evil and who has lived well and justly.' Such is the proclamation made by those who promise purification from sins."

These quotations from late pagan writers indicate that the Athenian proclamation included not only ritualistic requirements but elements of moral scrutiny as well. One may say that over the Eleusinian shrine as over the doorway of the Rhodian temple were inscribed the words "[Those can rightfully enter] who are pure and healthy in hand and heart and who have no evil conscience in themselves."

On the day following the assembly came the cry, "To the sea, O Mystae!" and the candidates for initiation ran down to the sea, there to purify themselves in its salt waves--a lustration believed to be of greater virtue than that of fresh water. "Sea waves wash away ill sin," said Euripides. The potent effect of the cleansing by salt water was further enhanced by sprinkling with pig's blood. Each of the mystae carried with him a sucking pig which he purified by immersion in the waters of the sea. Later the pig was sacrificed and its blood sprinkled on the candidate. Tertullian, in speaking of this rite, declared, "At the Eleusinian mysteries men are baptized and they assume that the effect of this is their regeneration and the remission of the penalties due to their perjuries." This striking affirmation by a Christian writer shows that the initiates themselves applied the new birth comparison to their own experiences in Eleusinian baptism. The rite was believed to be more than cathartic, merely. Regenerative powers were credited to it which operated to make the initiate in some sense a new being. It was with this rite particularly that the Eleusinian devotees associated the idea of personal transformation.

After the preliminary rites at Athens, the purified candidates formed in solemn procession on the nineteenth of September and marched to Eleusis, there to complete the celebration of the festival. Along the Sacred Way leading from Athens there were many holy places, and since the mystae performed ritualistic observances en route the company arrived at Eleusis by torchlight late in the evening. The long march was followed by a midnight revel under the stars, a ceremony that Aristophanes described in glowing terms. This was held on the Rharian plain, and it is not improbable that it partook of the nature of a mimetic ritual. Near the great propylaea of the sacred precinct was the Well of Callichoros, where the first choral dances were organized by the women of Eleusis in honor of Demeter. Close at hand was the Unsmiling Rock, where the desolate mother sat when she first came to Eleusis. Not far away were the meadows which had seen her torchlit wanderings. It would not be strange if the mystae beginning their choral dances at the Well of Callichoros, continuing their revel by torchlight in the meadows, or resting at the Unsmiling Rock--it would not be strange if they felt that they were really sharing in the antique experiences of their goddess. Certainly in their wearied state, weakened by fasting, they would be peculiarly susceptible to such mystical emotions.

Thus the mystae were prepared for the climactic feature of the celebration which took place in the telesterion, or Hall of Initiation. This sacred place was closed to all save the initiated, and the events which occurred there were strictly private and shrouded in the densest mystery. The initiates were under pledge of secrecy not to divulge the revelation there given. Apparently, Public opinion enforced this pledge in a very remarkable manner. Once when Aeschylus was acting in one of his own tragedies the audience became suspicious that he was betraying certain secrets of the Eleusinian mysteries. They arose in real fury and attacked the author-actor, who saved his life only by fleeing to the altar of Dionysus, a refuge that the Athenian mob respected. Later, however, Aeschylus was brought to trial before the Areopagus for revealing forbidden secrets and was acquitted quite as much because of his bravery at Marathon as because of his plea of ignorance. Alcibiades, on the eve of his departure for the Sicilian expedition, was charged with "impious mockery of the goddesses Demeter and Persephone" because he had "profanely acted the sacred mysteries at a drunken meeting." Even such a garrulous historian as Herodotus, though he was "accurately acquainted with the sacred rites of Demeter" yet felt that he "must observe a discreet silence" concerning them. The secret of Eleusis was guarded all too well and as a result we know almost nil concerning the central rites of the mysteries of Demeter.

One of the incidents just mentioned, however, makes it clear that the heart of the Eleusinian ritual was in the nature of a religious drama. The accusation against Alcibiades very definitely specified actors in a mock pageant which he staged at his drunken revel. "Theodorus represented the herald, Polytion the torch-bearer, and Alcibiades the chief priest, while the rest of the party appeared is candidates for initiation and received the title of initiates." This describes the situation in the telesterion at Eleusis on the night of initiation; the priests took the part of actors in a religious drama or pageant of which the initiates were the spectators. The archaeological remains of the Hall of Initiation at Eleusis bear out this theory. It was a great square hall around the four sides of which ran stone seats eight steps high, one above the other. Here the initiates sat and watched the spectacle staged in their midst.

Of what did the dramatic action in the telesterion consist? Only hints are given; yet these are sufficient to suggest what was probably the subject matter of the mystery play. Clement of Alexandria tells us that "Deo [Demeter] and Kore became [the personages of] a mystic drama, and Eleusis with its dadouchos celebrates the wandering, the abduction, and the sorrow." Apparently the drama of the telesterion was a sort of passion play, the subject matter of which was essentially the same as that of the Homeric Hymn. It concerned the loss of the daughter, the sorrow of the mother, and the final return of the loved one from Hades. This view is further confirmed by the words which Apuleius puts into the mouth of Psyche when she appeals to Demeter "by the unspoken secrets of the mystic chests, the winged chariots of thy dragon ministers, the bridal descent of Proserpine, the torchlit wanderings to find thy daughter, and all the other mysteries which Attic Eleusis shrouds in secret." From these two references it is evident that the important parts of the great myth of Demeter were enacted as a drama before the eyes of the mystae gathered in the telesterion.

Various writers, pagan is well as Christian, furnish additional evidence on this point and emphasize certain crises in the unfolding plot of the passion drama. Apollodorus, an Athenian historian and mythographer of the second century B.C., is quoted as saying, "The hierophant is in the habit of sounding the so-called gong when Kore calls for aid." Undoubtedly this statement has reference to the Eleusinian ritual, as the mention of the hierophant proves. One can easily understand that the cry of Persephone marked a high point of interest in the course of the Eleusinian drama, and that it was accentuated by the sounding of a gong. The effect of this on the devotees can easily be imagined. It was an unexpected sound coming suddenly in the midst of a solemn ceremonial. It focused attention entirely and sharply on the immediate action. In emotional effect, it was probably not unlike the sounding of the gong during the celebration of mass. By this simple expedient, the abduction of Persephone was made a memorable part of the passion play of Eleusis.

The statement already quoted from the Alexandrian Clement concerning the actors in the Eleusinian drama makes specific reference to the grief of Demeter as constituting a part of the action. This reference is further confirmed by a quotation from a late pagan author, Proclus, who asserts, "The ceremonies of the mysteries in their secret part, transmit certain sacred lamentations of Kore, of Demeter, of the Great Goddess herself." Thus again it becomes clear that the Eleusinian passion play was not merely a pantomime, reproducing the actions and gestures of the divine personages, but that it included vocal expression as well. By recitative or chant the actors who impersonated the goddesses gave expression to the emotions of the moment. The text suggests that these chants were traditional and were characterized by the fixity of form usual in ritual. Such being the case, the sorrow of Demeter which formed a distinct episode in the Eleusinian drama was further made impressive by traditional liturgical expression.

An important but very vague reference to the secret part of the Eleusinian mysteries is found in the Panegyric oration of Isocrates. "In her wanderings after the abduction of Persephone, Demeter came into our land. She wished to give testimony of her benevolence to our ancestors in recompense for the good offices of which initiates alone are permitted to hear." What were these services with which only initiates into the Eleusinian mysteries were familiar and of which they could speak only among themselves? Obviously it could not be the welcome given to Demeter by the household of Celeus. That was known to the wide world through the Homeric Hymn. A Latin poet of the first century furnishes a possible explanation of this veiled reference in Isocrates. Addressing the goddess herself, Statius says:

"Tuque, Actaea Ceres, cursu cui semper anelo Votivam taciti quassamus lampada mystae."

Here the Latin poet speaks as an initiate himself. He is contemplating a ceremony which is not a mere spectacle but a religious rite, shared in by the devotees. In solemn silence, torch in hand, they accompanied Demeter in her breathless wanderings. Just as the priestess personified the goddess, they temporarily represented the legendary inhabitants of Eleusis who not only welcomed the goddess but also assisted her in her search. These were probably the services of which Isocrates hinted with such reserve. In the wanderings of Demeter, then, the initiates actually participated by mimetic action. They did the very things which would enable them best to share emotionally in the profound experiences of their goddess.

A quotation from a fourth-century Christian writer, Lactantius, adds confirmatory evidence here and further suggests what was probably the closing scene of the Eleusinian drama. Referring specifically to the mysteries of Demeter, Lactantius says, "With burning torches Proserpina is sought, and when she is found, the rite is closed with general thanksgiving and a waving of torches." The search was not in vain. The lost daughter was found and restored; and the initiates who had shared in the anxious wanderings of the mother now shared in her happiness at the recovery of her daughter. With joyous acclamation and the waving of torches the return of the lost daughter was hailed by the initiates. This scene of happiness, according to Lactantius, closed the drama of Eleusis.

Thus, notwithstanding the meagerness of information concerning the Eleusinian passion play, we can yet distinguish the main episodes of its action. The abduction of Persephone, the grief of her mother, the search for the lost daughter, and the reunion of the two goddesses--these were the principle scenes. The indecent actions suggested by a few Christian writers must be ruled out as vouched for only on the testimony of prejudiced and highly interested witnesses. On the other hand, the well-certified scenes, though so few in number, constitute the basis for a religious rite of impressive possibilities.

True, the actors in this passion play were few. But classical Greek tragedy at its best boasted of but three actors. And in the telesterion the protagonist was Demeter, the goddess of grain, and the deuteragonist was Persephone, the goddess of the underworld. Clad in gorgeous and traditional costumes the personages of the Eleusinian passion play must have been very impressive figures. Of scenic effect there was little or nothing. The architectural remains of the telesterion show no provision for anything like stage settings or machinery. There was not even a stage, and the properties were probably the simplest possible--torchlight and rich robes. Again the familiar effects of Greek drama may serve to account for this absence of properties. On the Greek stage all was simplicity and convention. Greek audiences, like the spectators of the Elizabethan drama, were trained to depend upon their imaginations to supply what was lacking in stage settings. So at Eleusis, the effectiveness of the passion play depended much upon the cultivated imaginations of the mystae. Moreover, by simple expedients the participation of the initiates in the action of the drama was brought about. They were not merely spectators of a pageant; they were participants in a ritual. The gong focused their attention upon the first great crisis of the drama, the abduction of the daughter. With torches they followed the mother in her frantic search and again with the waving of torches they expressed their joy at the return of her daughter. Thus, by participation in the dramatic action, as well as by active imagination, the mystae were enabled to share emotionally in the experiences of the great goddesses.

Does the plot centering around the abduction of Persephone and her restoration to her sorrowing mother mark the limits of the dramatic representation in the telesterion? Many students believe it does not. M. Foucart, for example, goes so far as to distinguish a second drama, enacted at Eleusis on the evening following the passion play just outlined. According to M. Foucart, the main features of this second mystery drama were a sacred marriage and the birth of a holy child.

The citations supporting this view are not numerous. A commentator on a passage in Plato's Gorgias says, "The Mysteries are celebrated in honor of Demeter and Kore, because the latter was abducted by Pluto and because Zeus was united with Demeter." This reference does suggest the possibility of two different Eleusinian dramas along the lines indicated. From the context, however, it is evident that the scholiast is drawing uncritically from Christian sources; hence the value of his testimony is not certain. Tertullian's question, "Why is the priestess of Ceres ravished, unless Ceres herself suffered the same sort of thing?" is a passage of doubtful reference and interpretation that can scarcely be cited in proof of a sacred marriage at Eleusis. It is most reasonable to think that Tertullian in speaking thus merely confused Demeter and Persephone. As a subsidiary bit of evidence from a pagan source, it should be noted that Lucian had his false-prophet Alexander introduce a sacred marriage into his mysteries, which were modeled in part after the Eleusinian rites. However, the clearest passage in support of the sacred marriage idea is found in the writings of Asterius, a fourth-century Christian bishop. With unpleasant insinuation, he speaks of "the underground chamber and the solemn meeting of the hierophant and the priestess, each with the other alone, when the torches are extinguished, and the vast crowd believes that its salvation depends on what goes on there."

If this passage may be taken as conclusive evidence of a sacred marriage in the Eleusinian telesterion, then it has a further significance that is noteworthy. It shows that the marriage was a representative act whereby the initiates entered into mystical communion with their deity. As such it would be a more or less realistic rite after the order of the marriage of the Basilinna at Athens with the god Dionysus, in which the city was united by proxy to the god. The point has this importance: if a sacred marriage was part of the Eleusinian ritual, then this rite assured the initiates of a more direct and immediate communion with the goddess than would otherwise be possible. Whether or not the testimony of Asterius is accepted, his insinuations deserve to be repudiated. There is no reason to assume that any part of the rites were indelicate or were regarded otherwise than with reverence by the initiates. We may be sure of this, that if there was a sacred marriage at Eleusis it was a solemn ceremonial, probably a liturgical fiction, and not an exhibition of licentiousness. Indeed, we have the positive statement of Hippolytus as to the scrupulous purity of the hierophant.

Closely connected with the question of a sacred marriage is that relative to a holy birth at Eleusis. Hippolytus, in the Naassenic sermon just cited, is almost the only authority for this episode. He says:

"The hierophant himself .... celebrating at Eleusis the great and ineffable mysteries beside a huge fire cries aloud and makes proclamation, saying: 'August Brimo has brought forth a holy son, Brimos,' that is, the strong has given birth to the strong. For august, he says, is the generation which is spiritual, or heavenly, or from above, and strong is that which is thus generated."

Such a holy birth as this would normally follow the marriage rite just discussed. What lends exceptional interest to the rite is the idea suggested unclearly in a brief word study that follows. Quoting from "those initiated into the mysteries," the name Eleusis is derived from eleusesthai (to come) "because we spiritual ones came on high." This suggests that the holy birth of the Eleusinian drama, a birth "spiritual, heavenly, and from above" was viewed as typifying the new birth of the initiate which translated him from the earthly, human sphere to the heavenly, spiritual realm. On this interpretation the rite came to be viewed as a dramatic enactment of a spiritual rebirth experienced individually by the initiates themselves.

The possibility of such a two-act drama as this at Eleusis must certainly be allowed. With lights extinguished, the initiates may have waited in breathless silence for the consummation of a sacred marriage, believing that it involved their own direct communion with the goddess. Again in a blaze of light they may have welcomed the announcement of a holy birth, believing that their own rebirth as spiritual beings was involved in the process. If so, the rites of Eleusis held out to the whole body of initiates the possibility of immediate communion with deity and complete personal transformation guaranteed by appropriate rites. The mystical communion fostered by the problematic second drama at Eleusis was even more intimate and realistic than that cultivated by the passion play.

Distinct from the dramatic part of the initiation ceremony at Eleusis was the exhibition of sacred objects. This part of the service was at least of equal importance with the passion play. The title of the hierophant was "he who displays the sacred things," and his exhibition of these objects was an act of the utmost solemnity. Only a part of them were, shown during the celebration at which the neophytes witnessed the mystic drama and attained the grade of mystae. Others were reserved for exhibition a year later at the epopteia, or final grade of initiation, when the mystae became epoptae. Thus the display of venerable objects marked the culmination of the "great mysteries" and, so far as we know, was the all-important feature of the final grade of initiation.

Just what the "sacred things" were is a question not clearly answered. It is but reasonable to suppose that they were the very objects which were solemnly escorted to Athens at the beginning of the festival and were later returned to Eleusis in the procession of the candidates on the nineteenth of September. In these processions they were treated with the highest honors and were carefully guarded from public view. Probably they included statues of the goddesses, images of great antiquity and sanctity. We know how the crude old wooden statues of the gods were venerated in other cults. Ordinarily their origin was a matter of marvel. At Athens, for example, the wooden image of Athena Polias, which was believed to have fallen from heaven during the reign of Cecrops, was inextricably bound up with the fortunes of the city. Tertullian speaks not only of a wooden statute of Athena but also of a like image of Demeter as well. Accordingly, we may infer that Eleusis had its wooden image of Demeter even as Athens had its xoanon of Athena Polias, and in all probability this was the most sacred of all the sacred objects at Eleusis. Quite certainly it was accompanied also by an image of Persephone. Within the sacred area at Eleusis, these statues were housed in the anactoron, or chapel, of Demeter which crowned the citadel. This was the holy of holies in the Eleusinian precinct and none but the hierophant might enter here. An Epicurean who had the hardihood to violate the shrine perished miserably as a result of his impiety. In this anactoron the sacred objects were carefully guarded from profanation until the time came for their exhibition.

The display of the hiera was contrived in a most impressive manner. When the door of the shrine was opened the hierophant, clad in his festival robes, came out into the full blaze of a bright light and revealed the sacred objects to the gaze of the initiates. It was an awesome spectacle. The hierophant in his priestly vestments was himself an impressive figure. Eleusinian inscriptions also suggest how effective was the lighting of this scene. One of them speaks of the "holy night, clearer than the light of the sun." Another one, a metrical inscription engraved on the base of the statue of a hierophant, exclaims: "O mystae, formerly you saw me coming from the shrine and appearing in the luminous nights." Being in an impressionable state of mind, the mystae must have felt themselves very near to divinity when objects so jealously guarded and of such sanctity were finally exposed to view. The emotional effect of the exhibition is well suggested by a passage from Plutarch. In discussing "Progress in Virtue," he used a figure of speech derived from the initiation ceremony of these mysteries. According to Plutarch, "He who once enters into philosophy and sees the great light, as when shrines are open to view, is silent and awestruck." This passage probably well describes the impression made by the spectacle at Eleusis on a company of initiates.

Of the epopteia attained a year after the telete, our knowledge is most scanty. Apparently it was in the nature of a further revelation of sacred tokens. But a single rite is known to us and this only on the authority of Hippolytus. With a fine show of sarcasm he speaks of "the Athenians initiating people at Eleusis and showing to the epoptae that great and marvellous mystery of perfect revelation, in solemn silence, a cut cornstock!" There are two points of emphasis in this passage: first, that the exhibition of a corn token formed a part of the Eleusinian mystery, and, second, that this exhibition was reserved for the epoptae. On these two points there can be little doubt. Indeed, considering the agricultural background of the Eleusinian festival, it is not only credible, but even probable that a corn token should be among the most sacred things of the Eleusinia. The solemnity of this final exhibition is emphasized by the phrase "in silence." In this case the display took place without a word of elucidation from the hierophant, whereas the year before the spectacle had been accompanied with an explanatory discourse throughout. As to the meaning of this silent exhibition, we are left entirely to conjecture. It is not unreasonable to suppose that the corn was regarded as the symbol of a birth and rebirth in man paralleling the vernal rebirth of nature. This, at least, is the explanation suggested by Farnell. To the gentile mind of the first century, however, it was not merely a matter of symbolism, but rather a conviction arising "in accordance with the naive and primitive belief in the unity of man's life with the vegetative world." In this final exhibition, therefore, the initiate would find a proof as well as an illustration of a personal rebirth like that of the grain in springtime. The emotional effect of this rite was probably not unlike that of the hieratic spectacle a year previous. But the conviction arising from it would be rather the assurance of individual rebirth to new life, instead of communion with deity.

The revelation in silence at the epopteia serves to throw into relief a third distinctive element of the Eleusinian mysteries, the discourse or verbal explanation which accompanied the ceremonial. A quaint rhetorical fragment preserved under the name of Sopatros suggests the importance of this discourse. It recounts the dream of a young man who saw the spectacle of the mysteries. Because he did not hear the words of the hierophant, however, he could not consider himself initiated. Without the priestly discourse, then, the initiation was incomplete.

It is difficult to determine precisely what the content of the discourse was. The references at hand concerning these utterances, however, make it clear that it was not,in isolated speech but rather a running commentary which served to expIain to the mystae the meaning of the tableaux and the significance of the sacred objects. In all probability the formulas used were liturgical in character, though some freedom of utterance may have been allowed the hierophant. In the course of the explanation, he probably descanted on the blessings assured by the initiation ceremonies, and he may have included moral exhortation as well. About all that can be said, therefore, concerning the sacred discourse is that it was an oral interpretation of the Eleusinian ceremonial intended to give to tableau and drama and exhibition their full meaning.

Having canvassed the drama, the spectacle, and the discourse, have we exhausted the significant elements in the Eleusinian ceremonial? Clement of Alexandria has preserved a formula that suggests the possibility of a different type of ritualistic observance. His statement is, "The password of the Eleusinian Mysteries is as follows: 'I have fasted, I have drunk the barley drink, I have taken things from the sacred chest, having tasted thereof I have placed them into the basket and again from the basket into the chest.'" There is no reason for doubting the genuineness of this password. The meaning of the first two elements in the process is fairly clear. The fasting of the mystae corresponded to that of the sorrowing goddess Demeter who "sat smileless, nor tasted meat nor drink, wasting with long desire for her deep-bosomed daughter." Likewise the drinking of the barley drink corresponded to the breaking of her fast; for the goddess had refused a cup of sweet wine, "but she had them mix meal and water with the tender herb of mint, and give it to her to drink." This mixed potion the goddess accepted. Accordingly, in drinking a similar potation the mystae shared the cup from which the great goddess drank in her sorrow. It was a direct and sympathetic participation in the experiences of the goddess, an action expressive of attained fellowship with the deity.

Just what the eating of food from the chest meant to the participant is less obvious. Like the drinking of the barley drink, it was probably a sacrament of communion, and it may have implied an even more realistic communion than was involved in the act of drinking. If, as is most likely, the sacred food consisted of cereals, then the assimilation of this food meant a direct and realistic union with Demeter, the goddess of grain. It meant an incorporation of divine substance into the human body. However the idea was arrived at, this rite clearly involved a mystical communion by the act of eating, even as the barley drink stood for mystical fellowship through the act of drinking. Already emotionally united with Demeter through participation in her passion, the initiates now became realistically one with her by the assimilation of food and drink.

 

IV

It is further important to note the effects, both imediate and ultimate, of this elaborate ceremonial upon the lives of the devotees. According to Aristotle, the mysteries did not teach rules of conduct but rather stimulated the emotions. "Aristotle is of the opinion," Synesitis affirms, "that the initiated learned nothing precisely, but that they received impressions and were put into a certain frame of mind. To use the Aristotelian formula, not mathein (to learn) but pathein (to suffer) was the reason for participation in the Eleusinian ritual; and in its immediate aspect this was exactly the effect of the celebration.

This stimulation of emotion is so frequently mentioned in Eleusinian sources that there is little danger of exaggeration at this point. Plutarch drew several striking comparisons illustrating the emotional effect of the rites of Eleusis. In his treatise on "Progress in Virtue" he compared the effect of initiation on a confused and jostling crowd of candidates to the influence of philosophy on a noisy and talkative group of students.

"Those who are initiated, come together at first with confusion and noise, and jostle one another, but when the mysteries are being performed and exhibited, they give their attention with awe and silence..... So also at the commencement of philosophy.... you will see round its doors such confusion and assurance and prating, some rudely and violently jostling their way to reputation; but he who once enters in assumes another air and is silent and awestruck, and in humility and decorum follows reason as if she were a god."

Plutarch used yet other striking similes to illustrate more specifically the emotional effect of participation in the mysteries. The joy of the initiated, he affirmed, was like that of the ostracized returning to their native land after banishment. Again he took advantage of the mingled trouble and apprehension, the peculiar hope and final joy of the initiated to describe the feelings of the soul at death. According to Plutarch:

When a man dies,he is like those who are being initiated into the mysteries. The one expression teleutan the other teleisthai correspond..... Our whole life is but a succession of wanderings, of painful courses, of long journeys by tortuous ways without outlet. At the moment of quitting it, fears, terrors, quiverings, mortal sweats, and a lethargic stupor, come over us and overwhelm us; but as soon as we are out of it pure spots and meadows receive us, with voices and dances and the solemnities of sacred words and holy sights. It is there that man, having become perfect and initiated--restored to liberty, really master of himself--celebrates crowned with myrtle the most august mysteries, and holds converse with just and pure souls.

With all this evidence it cannot be doubted that the extended ceremonial of the Eleusinia had a profound effect in stirring deeply the feelings of the mystae. They experienced the whole gamut of emotions from doubt and fear to hope and joy.

Furthermore, the Eleusinian rites were so ordered as to enable the worshiper to enact the legendarv experiences of his goddess, and feel as she had felt of old. There was, first of all, the careful mental and physical preparation, the purification of body, and the disposition of mind, which Epictetus stressed, without which, he said, the mysteries could bring no benefit. It was a long preparation beginning at Agrae six months before the initiation proper. At the opening of the greater mysteries the candidates prepared themselves for approach to divinity by fasting and lustrations. They marched in solemn procession along the Sacred Way from Athens to Eleusis, stopping at holy places redolent with memories of their goddess. After all these preliminaries, they were impressionable and psychologically prepared to share intensely in the emotional experiences of the Great Goddess. When in the passion play of the telesterion they witnessed the abduction of Persephone they were sensitive to the grief of the mother. They assisted her in her frenzied search for her lost daughter, and at the reunion of the goddesses they participated in the joy of the occasion. Like Demeter herself they broke their fast by drinking of the barley drink. As completely as possible the devotees of Demeter reproduced her experiences, shared her feelings, and thereby established a sense of mystical fellowship with their goddess. This was the great experience of their religion.

It was not, however, a mere matter of temporary emotional satisfaction to the initiates; for the rites of Eleusis gave positive assurance for the future as well. The mystical communion established by initiation was a lasting one. Sharing in the other experiences of the goddess, the mystae believed they would share also in her triumph over death. According to Farnell, it was their sense of present fellowship that led directly to this conviction concerning the future.

"These deities, the mother and the daughter and the dark god in the background, were the powers that governed the world beyond the grave: those who had won their friendship by initiation in this life would by the simple logic of faith regard themselves as certain to win blessing at their hands in the next. And this, as far as we can discern, was the ground on which flourished the Eleusinian hope."

Nothing is clearer than that the devotees of Demeter enjoyed the anticipation of a happy future life. It was not merely the vague promise of a future existence, it was the definite assurance of a blissful future that the mysteries of Eleusis offered to seekers for salvation. In classical antiquity this Eleusinian assurance was generally known and appreciated. The Homeric Hymn declared, "Happy is he among deathly men who has seen these things! But he who is uninitiated, and has no lot in them, will never have equal lot in death beneath the murky gloom." Pindar and Sophocles re-echoed the same thought. "Thrice happy they who go to the world below, having seen these mysteries; to them alone is life there, to all others is misery." Among the orators, Isocrates declared, "Those who share this initiation have sweet hopes for the end of life and for all future time." Plato also gave recognition to this conviction when he said that the mysteries taught enigmatically "that he who passes unsanctified and uninitiated into the world below will lie in a slough, but he who arrives there after initiation and purification will dwell with the gods." At the beginning of the Christian era, this was still the strong hope that the mysteries of Eleusis guaranteed. Cicero said of them, "In the mysteries we learn not only to live happily but to die with fairer hope." Thus, the mythical experiences of the Eleusinian goddesses in breaking the power of death became the basis for a definite assurance of a happy life beyond the grave. Precisely what the relationship was between the mythological experiences of the Great Goddess and the hopes of her devotees is, indeed, unclear, but that the relationship existed is certain and that the mysteries gave prized assurance of immortality is indubitable.

Not only did the experience of initiation result in a temporary emotional exaltation and a lasting guaranty of future bliss, but it eventuated also in a purification and elevation of the present life of men as well. It is true that the Eleusinian mysteries were criticized at exactly this point. Diogenes of Sinope, for example, sarcastically declared, "It will be an absurd thing if Aegesilaus and Epaminondas are to live in the mire and some miserable wretches who have been initiated are to be in the island of the blest." Undoubtedly there was reason enough for his criticism. Nevertheless, the general testimony of the ancients was on the other side of the case. Andocides, on trial for impiety before a jury of mystae, assumed that those who had been initiated would be more ready to punish the impious and save the righteous than others would be, and that sin was the more heinous in one who was consecrated to the service of the mother and daughter. At the close of one of his beautiful odes, Aristophanes had the happy initiated sing, "To us alone is there joyous light after death, who have been initiated and who lived in pious fashion as touching our duty to strangers and private people." Cicero stated as his conviction that in the mysteries we perceive the real principles of life. Even such a stern moralist as Epictetus encouraged reverence for the mysteries, recognized their benefits, and asserted that they were established by those of old for our education and the amendment of life." In face of such an imposing array of evidence, the modern student cannot avoid the conclusion that the Eleusinian mysteries did exert an elevating influence on the moral life.

Here again, the precise relationship between the Eleusinian ritual and its moral effect is exceedingly unclear. We do not know what was the basis for the Eleusinian ethic. There may have been no exhortation to the mystae to lead pure and good lives. Indeed, the immediate and conscious aim of the rites may not have been an ethical one at all. Nevertheless, it is undeniable that the mysteries of Demeter did exercise a salutary influence in the matter of practical living. Not only a temporary stimulation of the emotions, not only a positive guaranty of future happiness, but also a lasting elevation of moral standards was a result of initiation into the mysteries at Eleusis.

 

V

For the devotees of Demeter initiation into her cult marked the beginning of a new kind of life more divine than they had known before. It was virtually for them the experience of a new birth. True, the exact word palingenesia does not occur on any of the Eleusinian monuments, but Tertullian attests that the mystae applied this very figure of speech to their initiation experiences and to baptism especially. Tertullian himself did not question the applicability of the term, though as a Christian he naturally insisted on the superior validity of the Christian rite and experience. He argued thus:

"If the mere nature of water, in that it is the appropriate material for washing away, leads men to flatter themselves with a belief in the omens of purification, how much more truly will waters render that service through the authority of God, by whom all their matter has been constituted."

In other words, Christian baptism according to Tertullian was a potent agency for spiritual regeneration, while Eleusinian baptism was not, though the Christian lawyer admitted that pagan religionists claimed regenerative power for their rite.

In the Eleusinian ritual itself there was much besides baptism to suggest and realistically induce a new birth experience. The mythical background of Eleusinian thought distinctly picturized the recurrent revival of life in nature with each successive year. It represented this fact of common experience in the mythological terms of a goddess who was carried off to Hades but later returned to the upper air. The lesser mysteries, celebrated at Agrae in the springtime, were probably especially suggestive of this renewal of life in nature. The ritual of purification and the long period of fasting preliminary to the great mysteries were intended to wash away the stains of the old life so that the purified candidates might approach the two goddesses prepared for personal renewal. If a ritual marriage formed a part of the mysteries, then the initiates realized a real unio mystica with the divine, in itself a completely transforming process. If the sacred marriage was followed by a holy birth, then the idea of anew life "spiritual, heavenly, and from above," was further accentuated. With the exhibition of sacred relics the initiates were brought very close to things divine, and the most sacred of these objects, the corn token, was itself a symbol of regeneration. Furthermore, in a realistic sacrament of eating and drinking, the neophytes assimilated food charged with such divine potency that it could transmute human nature into immortal essence. Thus, by realistic union as well as by sympathetic communion, the individual neophyte came to realize a new life by means of initiation.

The type of life which was thus induced by the Eleusinian ritual has been sufficiently characterized. From a purely descriptive standpoint the new birth experience of Eleusis was temporarily a matter of the feelings--the arousal of deep emotions by participation in an ancient and well-ordered ritual. But it resulted in more than a temporary satisfaction of the emotions merely. It eventuated in an amended moral life and the ultimate assurance of future happiness. These were the permanent effects of Eleusinian regeneration.

     
Pagan Regeneration, by Harold R. Willoughby, [1929], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER III

 

DIONYSIAN EXCESSES

IN A characteristic passage in the Bacchae, Euripedes, "the Rationalist," speaks of Demeter and Dionysus as the greatest of the gods. He puts into the mouth of the aged prophet Teiresias this preachment for the instruction of the honest but irreconcilable Pentheus:

	 
		Two chiefest powers,
		 Prince, among men there are: Divine Demeter--
		 Earth is she, name her by which name you will.
		 She upon dry food nurtures mortal men;
		 Then follows Semele's son, to match her gift
		 The cluster's flowing draught he found and gave
		 To mortals, which gives rest from grief to men,
		 So that through him do men obtain good things.
		
		 This juxtaposition of Demeter and Dionysus is not at all surprising; for among the friendly rivals of the Eleusinian mysteries in Greece the most vigorous, the most distinctive, and the most widespread was the worship of Dionysus. Three centuries before Alexander made his conquest of the Orient, Dionysus had made his conquest of Greece. Coming as an immigrant from Thrace, attended by a wild crew of satyrs and maenads, he took Greece by storm, and sometime between Homer and Phidias, he won a place for himself on Olympus and the patronage of the most dignified city-states in Greece. The type of religious experience exemplified by his cult is of exceptional interest to the student of personal religion. In order to understand the Dionysian experience, however, it is necessary to know who Dionysus himself was.

 

I

Notwithstanding his elevation to Olympus, Dionysus was anything but an aristocratic sky-god. He was rather an earth-deity, a god of the peasantry. Though his father was Zeus, the sky- and rain-god, his mother was of the earth earthy. Dionysian mythology named her Semele, the daughter of Cadmus, founder of Thebes, and this name betrays her real significance as a personification of the earth (cf. Nova Zembla, "new earth"). In the Hope collection there is a vase painting representing the youthful Dionysus rising out of an earth mound--the vase-painter thus emphasizing the earth-born nature of the god.

But Semele, the god's earth-mother, was not only the fertile earth of springtime absorbing the warm showers of the sky and naturally productive; in local legend at Thebes see was represented as the thunder-smitten earth also. For Hera in her jealousy had craftily persuaded Semele to ask her lover to prove his deity by appearing in all his power and glory as god of heaven. Zeus acceded to her request appearing to her armed with all his terrors, destroyed her with his lightnings. Even as the mother was dying, however, Zeus rescued their unborn child from her tortured body.

	 
		In birth-bowers new did Zeus Cronion
		 Receive his scion;
		 For hid in a cleft of his thigh,
		 By the gold clasps knit, did he lie
		 Safe hidden from Hera's eye
		 Till the Fates' day came.
		
		 Lucian, in his usual satirical vein, made the most of his opportunity to parody this mythological theme. Thus, in popular legend the earth-born Dionysus, the son of Semele, was himself represented as a twice-born deity. He was dithyrambus, which for the Greeks meant "he who entered life by a double door." In this peculiarly artificial sense he was Dionysus, the son of Zeus, as his name suggests.

Quite naturally this son of earth and sky functioned as the personification of vegetable life. As such he was a yearly divinity, who came and went with the seasons. His experience in relation to men was characterized by recurrent theophanies and recessions as the life of nature died and revived year after year. Plutarch noted among various peoples this characteristic conception of Dionysus:

"The Phrygians think that the god is asleep in the winter and is awake in summer, and at one season they celebrate with Bacchic rites his goings to bed and at the other his risings up. And the Paphlagonians allege that in the winter he is bound down and imprisoned and in the spring he is stirred up and let loose."

In the popular phrases of his worship, Dionysus was apprehended in very concrete terms. He was, on the one side, the god of vegetation in general and the wine-god in particular. Thus he made his chief impression on the Greeks. It may be, as Miss Harrison has suggested, that in his native Thracian home he functioned as a beer-god, Sabazius or Bromius, the god of a cereal intoxicant; but certainly he came to Greece and won his signal triumph there as the wine-god. Even as the olive was constantly associated with Athena, so the vine was characteristically associated with Dionysus. Other familiar symbols of Dionysus were the grape cluster and a two-handled drinking cup. By these accessories the god may easily be identified in Greek vase paintings and on cult monuments. The various cult appellatives emphasizing this aspect of Dionysus are far too numerous to be listed. Greek literature, too, rang with the praises of the god who "made grow for men the clustered vine," but the fact is so familiar that it does not demand special citation.

What is particularly noteworthy is this, that the relation of the god to the drink was not merely that of creator to the thing created. Many times the relationship expressed was that of identification even. The god was in the wine; he was the wine, even. He was not merely the god of libation. To quote Euripides statement, he was the libation, "The god who himself is offered in libation to the other gods." In this passage the identification of the god with the wine is as absolute as the identification of Christ in Catholic thought with the consecrated wine of the mass, or, to cite an illustration from the far away religious system of the Vedas, the identification of the god Soma with the soma drink. It is not surprising, therefore, to find in Attica the festival of the theoinia or the "god wine," celebrated by those families who were believed to be the direct descendents of Dionysus' original followers, in whose vineyards grew vines which were offshoots from the vine spray that the god himself had given them. Under such circumstances the devotees of Dionysus would be sure of the presence of the very god himself in the consecrated wine made from the sacred grapes. That this realistic identification of the deity and the fruit of the vine was not merely a primitive conception is proved by the existence at Philippi in Paul's time of a religious brotherhood dedicated to Dionysus Botreus ("Dionysus the Vine Cluster").

Dionysus was the god of animal life as well as of vegetable life. As such he was variously represented in different animal forms. It was inevitable that these animal embodiments should be varied in different localities. In a goat-raising country the normal representation of the power of life and generation would be the goat. Similarly, in a cattle-raising country the embodiment of the divine power in the form of a bull was to be expected. And so we have various animal theophanies of Dionysus recorded in Greek literature. Euripides chorus of Bacchanals, for example, thus variously invoke their god in their moment of supreme anxiety:

	 
		Appear, appear, whatso thy shape or name
		 O Mountain Bull, Snake of the Hundred Heads,
		 Lion of the Burning Flame!
		 O God, Beast, Mystery, come!
		
		 Of the less frequent animal forms under which Dionysus was revered, that of the goat should especially be noted. What makes this conception of Dionysus peculiarly important is the fact that as a goat-god he was involved in the obscure beginnings of Attic tragedy, and thereafter he remained the patron deity of this highly artistic literary form (trag-odia, goat-song). Another less familiar animal embodiment of Dionysus was that of a kid. There was a common legend that Zeus, in order to save his son from the jealous wrath of Hera, transformed him into a kid. A mystic expression nebrizein, "to play the fawn," was common in the Dionysus cult. While it is an expression of doubtful import, yet it is clearly reminiscent of another primitive conception of Dionysus as a fawn.

By far the most generally accepted and most significant of the animal embodiments of the god, however, was that of a bull. There were a multitude of cult appellatives emphasizing this conception of Dionysus. He was variously addressed as the "horned child," the "horned deity," the "bull-horned," and the "bull-browed." The Argives worshiped him as "the son of a cow" or "bull-born," and the ancient Elean chant addressed him directly as a bull. "Come, hero Dionysus, come with the Graces to thy house by the shores of the sea; hasten with thy bull-foot." So ran the hymn itself, while the chorus repeated "goodly bull, goodly bull." One readily recalls, also, that the residence of the king-archon at Athens, where the sacred marriage between Dionysus and the basilinna was celebrated, was called the boukolion, or "ox stall."

With all this background of realistic thought, it is strange that we do not have a representation of the bull-Dionysus in Greek vase paintings. Plutarch, however, states that the Greeks not infrequently imaged the god in bull form in sculpture, and in classical literature this representation of the god was a stock one. Thus the Bacchae of Euripides is permeated with the conception of Dionysus as a bull-god. Of Dionysus' second birth it is said:

Then a God bull-horned Zeus bare, And with serpents entwined his hair.

When Pentheus attempted to imprison Dionysus, "a bull beside the stalls he found." And finally when the god led the king in a hypnotized state out to his doom, Pentheus seemed to see a bull going before him. In his hallucination the king exclaimed:

	 
		A bull you seem that leads on before;
		 And horns have sprouted upon your head.
		 How, were you a brute?--Truly you are a bull now!
		
		 These passages reflect perfectly the realism of primitive thought about the god. Far more than being represented by the bull, Dionysus was thought of as being actually embodied in the bull, so that the animal, like the wine, was the god.

 

II

With these primitive conceptions of Dionysus in mind, it is possible for the modern student, even, to appreciate something of the vivid, central experience of the god's devotees. Wine played a prominent part in Dionysian worship. Bacchic literature reeks with wine and rings with the joys of intoxication. The chorus in Euripides' Bacchae sings:

	 
		The cluster's flowing draught....
		 ....gives rest from grief to men
		 Woe-worn, soon as the vine's stream fills them
		 And sleep, the oblivion of our daily ills,--
		 There is none other balm for toils.
		
		 This Bacchic joy puts an end to woe.

	 
		When blent with the flute light laughters awaken,
		 And the children of care have forgotten to weep
		 Whensoever is revealed the cluster's splendour
		 In the banquet that men to the high Gods tender
		 And o'er ivy-wreathed revellers drinking deep
		 The wine bowl drops the mantle of sleep.
		
		 The truth is that sheer physical intoxication from the drinking of wine was the essence of Dionysian religion. In the service of their god the Bacchanals drank wine until they were intoxicated. There was indeed point to Plato's criticism that an immortality of drunkenness seemed to be considered the Dionysian reward of virtue. For the Bacchanals themselves, however, the experience was something more and higher than drunkenness. It was spiritual ecstasy, not mere physical intoxication. The wine they drank was for them potent with divine power--it was the god himself, and the very quintessence of divine life was resident in the juice of the grape. This the devotees of Bacchus knew as a matter of personal experience when, after drinking the wine, they felt a strange new life within themselves. That was the life and power of their god. Their enthusiasm was quite literally a matter of having the god within themselves, of being full of and completely possessed by the god. So they themselves described it in their own language (entheos, enthusiasm). They might be intoxicated; but they felt themselves possessed by the god. The drinking of wine in the service of Dionysus was for them a religious sacrament. Even Plato, who had few kind words to say for intoxication, made one exception to his usual rule that it was unfitting for a man to drink to the point of drunkenness. That one exception was "on the occasions of festivals of the god of wine." At such times drunkenness was a matter of communion with the god. So Euripides could say that he who knows the Dionysian mysteries "is pure in life, and revelling on the mountains, has the Bacchic communion in his soul."

The devotees of Dionysus had other realistic means of attaining to communion with their god. They had a sacrament of eating as well as a sacrament of drinking. This rite was the "feast of raw flesh." To be an initiate into the mysteries of Dionysus one must be able to avow

	 
		I have .... Fulfilled his red and bleeding feasts.
		
		 The victim varied. Sometimes it was a goat, as was probably the custom in Thrace. The Bacchanals of Euripides follow this practice and know

	 
		The joy of the red quick fountain
		 The blood of the hill-goat torn.
		
		 They

	 
		Quaff the goat's delicious blood,
		 A strange, a rich, a savage food.
		
		 Sometimes the victim was a fawn, and the sacred fawn-skins with which the maenads were clothed were the skins torn from these luckless animals. One of the familiar depictions of the maenads on Greek vases was to show them carrying a fawn in their arms or tearing it to pieces in frenzy. More frequently, however, the Dionysian victim was a bull. This was particularly the case in Crete where, to quote Firmicus Maternus, "the Cretans rend a living bull with their teeth, and they simulate madness of soul as they shriek through the secret places of the forest with discordant clamors."

This quotation well suggests the orgiastic character of the feast of raw flesh. The denvotees tore asunder the slain beast and devoured the dripping flesh in order to assimilate the life of the god resident in it. Raw flesh was living flesh, and haste had to be made lest the divine life within the aniinal should escape. So the feast became a wild, barbaric, frenzied affair. In the Bacchae one of the herdsmen describes to Pentheus an attack of the maenads upon the royal herd. Doubtless the description gives an adequate impression of one of the Bacchic feasts.

	 
		Down swooped they then
		 Upon our pasturing kine with swordless hand,
		 Then had you seen your mother with her hands
		 Rend a deep uddered heifer bellowing loud:
		 And others tore the calves in crimson shreds.
		 Ribs had you seen and cloven hoofs far hurled
		 This way and that, and flakes of flesh that hung
		 And dripped all blood bedabbled, 'neath the pines.
		 Bulls chafing, lowering fiercely along the horn
		 Erewhile, were tripped and hurled upon the earth
		 Dragged down by countless clutching maiden hands
		 More swiftly was the flesh that lapped their bones
		 Stripped, than you could have closed your kingly eyes.
		
		 This orgiastic rite furnished the Fathers of the early church with just the material for which they were looking to use in discrediting paganism. With genuine satisfaction they described the barbarous ceremonial in all its revolting detail. Clement of Alexandria said:

"I will not dance out your mysteries as they say Alcibiades did, but I will strip them naked, and bring them out on the open stage of life, in view of those who are spectators at the drama of truth. The Bacchi hold orgies in honor of a mad Dionysus. They celebrate a divine madness by the eating of raw flesh. The final accomplishment of their rite is the distribution of the flesh of butchered victims. They are crowned with snakes, and shriek out the name of Eva, that Eve through whom sin came into the world, and the symbol of their Bacchae orgies is the consecrated serpent."

In a similar vein, Arnobius wrote of the "feasts of raw flesh in which with feigned frenzy and loss of a sane mind you twine snakes about you, and to show yourselves full of the divinity and majesty of the god, you demolish with gory mouths the entrails of goats bleating for mercy."

The fact should not be blinked that in its primitive this rite probably involved the sacrifice of a human victim. Porphyry knew a tradition that in Chios a man was torn to pieces in the worship of Dionysus Omadius, the "Raw One." At Potniae, according to Pausanias, a priest of Dionysus was once slain by the inhabitants and a plague was sent upon them in punishment. They sought relief, and the Delphian oracle told them that a beautiful boy must be sacrificed to the deity. Immediately afterward, Dionysus let it be known that he would accept a goat as a substitute. This story records the ancient transition in cult practice from the cannibal to the animal feast. Also in the fearful fate that met Pentheus at the hands of his own mother, as recorded by Euripides, there is a late literary echo of the primitive cannibalistic ritual.

To focus attention on these savage features, however, is to miss entirely the significance of the crude ceremonial. The real meaning of the orgy was that it enabled the devotee to partake of a divine substance and so to enter into direct and realistic communion with his god. The warm blood of the slain goat was "sacred blood," according to Lactantius Placidus. The god Dionysus was believed to be resident temporarily in the animal victim. One of the most remarkable illustrations of this ritual incarnation of the god was described by Aelian. Of the people of Tenedos, he said: "In ancient days they used to keep a cow with calf, the best they had, for Dionysus, and when she calved, they tended her like a woman in childbirth. But they sacrificed the newborn calf, having put cothurni on its feet." The use of the tragic buskins symbolized the conviction that the god was temporarily incarnate in the calf--pious opinion did not doubt that. Primitive logic easily persuaded men that the easiest way to charge oneself with divine power was to eat the quivering flesh and drink the warm blood of the sacred animal. Some went farther and sought to assimilate themselves to deity by wearing the skin of the animal. The central meaning of the celebration was that it enabled the devotee to enter into direct and realistic communion with his god.

Another means of inducing the divine possession, and the usual concomitant of the sacraments of eating and drinking just described, was the vertigo of the sacred dance. In preparation for the Bacchic revel, the devotees of the god properly equipped themselves with the gear of Dionysus. Like him they carried the thyrsus, a wand tipped with a pine cone and usually entwined with ivy. In their hair serpents were twisted and over their shoulders was thrown the sacred fawn-skin. Sometimes they wore horns on their foreheads. In clothing and equipment they were as like their god as possible.

The dances in honor of Dionysus were usually held at night time by torchlight and were preceded by fasting. They were accompanied by the weird music of wind instruments and the clashing of tambourines. Mingled with this strange music were the shouts of the Bacchanals themselves as they waved their torches in the darkness, thus giving to the scene an unearthly light. The dances were wild and irregular and were characterized by a tossing of the head and a violent, whirling bodily motion. Thus, by the very movements of the dance a physical frenzy was quickly induced, quite as the "dancing dervishes" of Mohammedanism lose control of themselves in the delirium of their ritual. It was for this ecstatic experience that the Bacchae of Euripides were yearning when they sang together:

	 
		Ah, shall my white feet in the dances gleam
		 The livelong night again? Ah, shall I there
		 Float through the Bacchanal's ecstatic dream,
		 Tossing my neck in the dewy air?
		
		 Significant of the maddening experience of the sacred dance were the names applied to the female followers of Dionysus. They were the maenads or "mad ones," and the thyiads or "rushing distraught ones." These epithets were but different ways of describing the female devotees who were under the influence of and possessed by their god. A more frequent designation was the more intimate one which called the devotees after the name of the god himself. The women who shared in the frenzied rites of Bacchus were themselves called Bacchae even as the men were Bacchi. Each one, without distinction of sex, by the very experience of divine possession became a personification of the god. Their delirium, induced by purely physical means, was for them a spiritual experience, and eventuated in the conviction, deep and strong, that they had their god within themselves. Plutarch connected the Dionysian frenzy with the Bacchic custom of chewing ivy leaves during this ceremonial, and affirmed that thus "the violent spirits which caused their enthusiasm entered into them.", Dionysus was god of the ivy quite as much as god of the vine. By the realistic ritual act of chewing ivy, then, the maenads of Dionysus incorporated his spirit within themselves. Herodotus, in speaking of the initiation of the Scythian king, Scyles, cited a particular and notable instance of Dionysian possession. The historian said of the king that "the god took possession" of him so that "he was maddened by the god and played the part of Bacchus." Thus, in the frenzy of the ritualistic revel, as in the orgy of eating raw flesh and drinking wine, the Bacchanals experienced communion with their god.

Apparently, in later times, at least, a sharp distinction was drawn between those who merely indulged in the physical excitement of the Bacchic revel and those who really shared in the spiritual experiences of the cult. At least we are acquainted with a familiar proverb, quoted by Plato, to the effect that "many are the bearers of the thyrsus, but the Bacchanals are few." Unless the initiate himself was conscious of contact with the divine de did not shared in the genuine Bacchic experience.

 

III

This predominantly emotional experience, whether induced by the dizziness of dancing or the crude sacraments of wine and raw flesh, marked for the Bacchanal the beginning of a new life. In a very real sense it was a new birth for the individual who experienced it. Hitherto he had been a man merely. Now he was something more; he was man plus god, a divinized human. Certain aspects of his new divine life deserve to be noted in order to emphasize the contrast with life as it was lived at the ordinary levels of human experience.

In its temporary emotional aspect it was characterized by excessive indulgence as contrasted with the reasoned moderation that was typical of Greek life generally. For Greek self-control was one of the four cardinal virtues and "nothing in excess" was a fundamental Hellenic principle of life. The Bacchic experience, however, cut sheer across this principle. In the Bacchae, Euripides said of Dionysus, "By halves he cares not to be magnified." And Plato admitted that "madness sent by god is better the moderation of men." Such was clearly the conviction of the followers of Dionysus.

Bacchic experience also caused a break with the customs and conventions of ordinary life and a return to the freedom of nature. The devotees of Dionysus deserted their homes temporarily, wandered free on the mountains, and indulged in certain wild, primitive, half-animal passions. Euripides gave a picture of the matrons of Thebes leaving their homes, their work, their babies even, to wander and revel in the mountains. They dressed themselves in fawnskins and wound snakes around their bodies.

	 
		Some cradling fawns or wolf cubs in their arms
		 Gave to the wild things of their own white milk
		 Young mothers they, who had left their babies.
		
		 With this return to the life of nature there was mingled a recrudescence of certain very primitive impulses. There was a lust for hot blood and a certain ferocious cruelty in the tearing to pieces of hapless victims.

The Bacchic revel also caused the joy and abandon of self-forgetfulness. The Bacchanals were no longer themselves, and this very fact brought a sense of freedom from former limitations and restraints. To what ridiculous extremes this self-abandon might be carried Euripides gave illustration when he represented aged Cadmus and blind Teiresias clad in fawnskins and gamboling off to join the. Bacchic revel. The ancient founder of Thebes gleefully affirms:

	 
		I shall not weary, nor by night nor day
		 Smiting on earth the Thyrsus. We forget
		 In joy our age.
		
		 Again, in a beautiful strophe by the chorus, Euripides glimpsed in more serious and appreciative fashion the sense of freedom which characterized the Bacchanal's experience. The simile he used was appropriately that of the faun escaping nets and huntsmen:

	 
		Till sheltering arms of trees around her close
		 The twilight of the tresses of the woods;-
		 O happy ransomed one, safe hid from foes
		 Where no man tracks the forest solitudes!
		
		 Altogether, therefore, the new Bacchic life was one of joyful self-abandon, of freedom from the complexities and restraints of civilization, of return to the direct simplicities of nature.

More than all this it was a life of miraculous power; for by the very fact of divine possession the Bacchanal believed himself to have acquired the power of the god. Hence, he could heal diseases, control the forces of nature, and even prophesy. Plato reflected the popular conviction that the Bacchae could work miracles in his famous comparison of the lyric poets to the maenads. He said:

Lyric poets are not in their right minds when they are composing their beautiful strains; but when failing under the power of music and meter they are inspired and possessed; like Bacchic maidens who draw milk and honey from rivers when they are under the influence of Dionysus but not when they are in their right mind.

The Bacchae of Euripides literally teems with miracles. There

	 
		flows with milk the plain,
		 and flows with wine,
		 Flows with the wild bees' nectar dews divine.
		
		 The credulous herdsman of Pentheus tells of particular wonders wrought by the maenads:

	 
		One grasped her thyrsus staff, and smote the rock,
		 And forth upleapt a fountain's showry spray:
		 One in earth's bosom planted her reed-wand,
		 And up there through the god a wine-fount sent:
		 And whoso fain would drink white-foaming draughts
		 Scarred with their finger tips the breast of earth,
		 And milk gushed forth unstinted: dripped the while
		 Sweet streams of honey from their ivy staves.
		
		 In the battle between the Theban folk and the Bacchae, later narrated, this strange portent occurred: the javelins of the townspeople drew no blood while the wands of the maenads caused wound after wound. The same drama of Euripides also tells of the prophetic power of one who was possessed by Dionysus. Again it is Teiresias, himself a professional prophet, who thus testifies of Bacchus:

	 
		A prophet is this god, the Bacchic frenzy
		 And ecstasy are full fraught with prophecy:
		 For, in his fullness when he floods our frame
		 He makes his maddened votaries tell the future.
		
		 The life of the Bacchant was, therefore, a dynamic life in which the peculiar power of the deity operated to perform wonderful deeds through men.

Most important of all, the new Bacchic life in its emotional and dynamic aspects was viewed as but the foretaste of a happy existence in the future. The Thracians, among whom the Dionysian cult originated, seem to have early attained the belief in a blessed future life with the gods. In speaking of the Getae, a tribe of the Thracians, Herodotus affirmed, "They were the most valiant and most just of the Thracians," and then he added in explanation of these characteristics that "they believe themselves immortal; they think that they do not die, but that the dead go to join their god Zalmoxis." Pomponious Mela, a Latin geographer of the early imperial period, repeated a similar testimony concerning the Getae, only more in detail. There is considerable probability that this Zalmoxis was an indigenous Getan divinity, and was related to Sabazius, the Thracian prototype of the Greek Dionysus. Whatever may have been the relationship, it is clear that Dionysus functioned in Hellenistic cults as god of the underworld, and his devotees had the same expectation in relation to him that the ancient Getae had concerning Zalmoxis.

Being a yearly divinity Dionysus was a natural candidate for this function. His experience in nature was characterized by a constant dying and rising again. Yet it was only by proxy that Dionysus passed through these experiences; just as he was immolated by proxy in the rending of the sacred victim. The real Dionysus was the permanent spirit back of the phenomena of nature which caused the recurrent revival of life. He was a god, and immortality was one of the distinguishing characteristics of godhead. Immortality and divinity were all but interchangeable terms in primitive Greek thought.

Thus when the Bacchanals by the sacraments of eating and drinking entered into direct communion with their god, they became partakers of his immortality. In assimulating the raw flesh wherein the god was temporarily incarnate and in drinking the juice of the grape, they received into their bodies an undying substance. In life mystically united with their god, in death they could not be divided, and when the time came for them to go to the invisible world, they were sure of sharing the blessed life of their god. So the unusual emotional experiences fostered by the Dionysian rites, the intoxication of wine or of the dance, the frenzy of the orgy, the divine gift of foresight or miracle-working power--these were more than merely proofs of divine possession. They were a definite foretaste and assurance of a blessed future life. In the crude physical emotionalism of Bacchic ecstasy, therefore, the devotees of the wine-god found a new birth experience which guaranteed them a happy immortality.

 

IV

The question of the influence of the Dionysus type of experience in the Graeco-Roman world remains to be discussed. As early as the seventh century before the Christian era the state religions of the serene and placid Olympians were failing to satisfy the religious needs of great masses of the common people in Greece. In their dissatisfaction they turned to the more intimate gods of the earth who had to do with the common things of life: to Demeter, the goddess of grain, and to Dionysus, the god of the vine. These were divinities who suffered with men in their toil and who gave them joy at harvest time. The cult of Dionysus coming from the northland spread in a great wave of religious enthusiasm over Greece proper, over the island states of the Aegean, and across to the mainland of Asia Minor. At first it met with violent opposition, as the legends of Lycurgus and Pentheus prove. In those early days rarely was the god graciously received as he was, for example, by Icarus in Attica. In spite of opposition, however, the contagious enthusiasm of the wine-god spread with unusual rapidity throughout Greece. In order to restrain Bacchic excesses the city-states of Greece had no other alternative than to adopt the Cult, bring it under state patronage, and by official regulation temper its enthusiasm somewhat. At Delphi Dionysus was associated with Apollo, and there the sacred maidens went mad in the service of the two gods. In Athens he entered into civic partnership with Athena and yearly wedded the Basilinna. At Eleusis he was brought into relation with Demeter and led the march of the candidates along the Sacred Way from Athens. In Teos and Naxos he even became the paramount state deity, the "god of the city" and "protector of the most holy state."

It was as a private cult, rather than as a state religion, however, that the worship of Dionysus made its deepest impression on both Hellenic and Hellenistic life. In the private brotherhoods, the natural emotions aroused by the cult practices were allowed free play and the guaranties offered to initiates were of a very realistic order; hence the appeal of the cult was strong, particularly to the masses and to women generally. At the beginning of Aristophanes' comedy, Lysistrate, impatient with waiting, complains that if the women had been invited to the shrine of Bacchus "there would be no getting along for the crowd of timbrels." Indeed, the prominence of women in the worship of Dionysus is one of the most striking features of the cult.

Such a religion as this, which overflowed the political boundaries of states and appealed not to local interests but to certain elemental human desires and emotions, had a great opportunity in the Helenistic period. With the conquests of Alexander the eastern Mediterranean world was thrown open to Dionysian influence. It is difficult, however, to trace the independent existence and influence of Bacchic mysteries for the simple reason that they fused so readily with similar cults all over the Mediterranean area. The religion of Dionysus lived on in altered form in Orphism. In Asia Minor it merged with the cults of Attis and Sabazius. Plutarch noted the affinity between the rites and legends of Adonis and their Dionysian counterparts, while Tibullus, in one of his elegies, clearly recorded the identification of Dionysus and Osiris.

Notwithstanding this widespread syncretism, the literature of the Hellenistic and Graeco-Roman periods is full of references which show the strength and extent of peculiarly Dionysian influences. At the very beginning of the Hellenistic period stands the classical instance of the estrangement of Philip of Macedon and his queen Olympias. Plutarch was of the opinion that Bacchic orgies had much to do with this unfortunate situation. He said that Olympias was more zealous than all the rest of the women of that country in her devotion to Dionysian orgies and

"carried out these rites of possession and ecstasy in very barbarous fashion. She introduced huge tame serpents into the Bacchic assemblies, and these kept creeping out of the ivy and mystic likna and twining themselves around the thyrsi of the women and their garlands and frightening the men out of their senses."

Philip was jealous and suspicious of his queen's exclusive devotion to the Dionysus cult. In Italy, at the beginning of the second century B.C., Dionysus worship spread with such rapidity and created such a disturbance in society that the Senate, as a result of reported excesses, took strenuous measures for the suppression of the cult. The affair ended with the promulgation of rigid regulations governing the conditions under which meetings of the brotherhood might be held. The Sicilian Diodorus, writing in the Augustan age, said, "In many of the Hellenic states every other year, Bacchic bands of women collect, and it is lawful for maidens to carry the thyrsus and join in the enthusiasm; while the women forming in groups, offer sacrifices to the god, and revel, celebrating with hymns the presence of Dionysus." Plutarch, in his writing, made many references to Dionysian practices and told strange tales concerning the Bacchantes of Delphi especially. Once when the thyiades on Parnassus were overtaken by a violent snowstorm, the good people of Delphi went out to rescue them, and their coats actually crumbled to pieces they were frozen so hard. Again, during a sacred war between Phocis and Delphi, the thyiades lost their way and came to Amphissa without realizing where they were. Here they threw themselves down in the agora and fell asleep from sheer exhaustion. The women of the city guarded them so long as they were asleep, refreshed them when they awakened, and set them on their homeward way in safety. These tales are recalled in order to show the reverence with which the devotees of Dionysus were held in the first Christian century. Pliny told of the popularity of the Dionysian cult in Thrace even in his day, while Pausanias referred to the worship of the god in many widely scattered localities. Even in the later days of paganism, Firmicuss Maternus said that the Cretans still practiced their orgiastic rites in honor of Dionysus.

These are but samples of an array of evidence which might be assembled to prove the widespread influence of the Bacchic type of experience with all of its excessive emotionalism in the first-century Graeco-Roman world. People in general were thoroughly familiar with it, as contemporary literature fully proves. Accordingly, in reckoning up the satisfactions offered by pagan religions to the seekers for salvation in the day of Jesus and Paul, the emotional rebirth experience in the Dionysian cult be counted as significant.

     
Pagan Regeneration, by Harold R. Willoughby, [1929], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER IV

 

ORPHIC REFORM

HISTORICALLY the cult most nearly related to that of Dionysus was the philosophico-religious system bearing the name of Orpheus. It is not possible to pronounce with certainty whether such a man as Orpheus ever really existed or not. He may have been a purely mythical figure. If he was a real man he was a religious leader of mark and deserving of admiration: a prophet, reformer, and martyr. Whether mythical or real, Orpheus was the antitype of the flushed and maddening wine-god Dionysus. He was a sober and gentle musician who charmed savage men and beasts with his music, an exact theologian, the prophet of reform in religion, who was martyred for his efforts.

The difference between Dionysus and Orpheus was the difference between the two religious systems which bore their names. The cult of Dionysus was more simple, primitive, elemental, spontaneous, and emotional. That of Orpheus was more elaborate, developed, controlled, and intellectualistic. Still, when all is said, the two systems had much in common. Both centered in the same god, Dionysus. Both aimed at the same goal, immortality through divinity. Both sought to attain that goal by prescribed rites and ceremonies. Both made a strictly individualistic appeal and were highly developed along the lines of personal experience. But Orphism fostered an ascetic rule of life that was the exact opposite of Dionysian license, and developed an elaborate theology of a highly speculative character. In brief, Orphism represented a reformed Dionysianism, and the practices it could not or did not reform it sought to explain and justify by its mythology.

 

I

Our sources of information concerning the Orphic movement are unusually authoritative and accessible. They include chiefly a reputable group of classical writers together with a singular collection of Orphic tablets found in south Italy and Crete. The list of classical witnesses to the Orphic cult is headed by the name of Pindar. In his "Dirges," or choral lyrics intended to be chanted at funerals, he offered consolation to mourners by telling them of the Orplic promise of immortality. He further detailed the Orphic doctrine of reincarnation which he represented as a scheme of preliminary purgation by means of triple earthly lives, preceding the final bliss. Again he described with pleasing detail the delights of the Elysian land where the final beatification was to be realized, and in the second Olympian Ode he told of the future of the wicked as well as of the pure. Another important classical witness to Orphism was Plato. Though affecting to despise the system, he was actually much influenced by it. In Cratylus, for example, he made use of the characteristic Orphic idea of the body as a prison house of the soul (soma-sema). In the Republic he described the missionary methods of the Orphics in terms that were not complimentary, yet revealed the vigor of the movement. He told of zealous propagandists who besieged the doors of the rich and persuaded them by a parade of Orphic scriptures that they could provide deliverance and purgation from sin, both for the living and the dead, by means of initiation. Plato also made reference to the idea of the transmigration of souls and to the Orphie rule of life. The dramatist Euripides included an all-important Orphic confessional in his Cretans, and in his admirable Hippolytus he drew a character sketch of a typical and consistent Orphic. Even the comedian Aristophanes bore favorable testimony to the influence of the Orphic mysteries. He had the glorified Aeschylus, the "grand old man" of Attic tragedy, commend Orpheus for teaching mystic rites to mortal men. This torch of reverence, however, did not prevent Aristophanes from giving a lively parody of Orphanic initiation in telling of old Strepsiades' visit to Socrates' "thinking shop." These four names, Aristophanes, Euripides, Plato, and Pindar, include the bulk of classical testimonia to the Orphic mysteries.

Quite as revealing as these literary refernces, however, are the so-called Orphic tablets from tombs in southern Italy and Crete. They are eight in number and are all of very thin gold. According to a consensus of scholarly opinion, they contain the mutilated fragments of a ritual hymn composed for members of the Orphic sect is early as the fifth century B.C. In their present form they may be dated roughly from the fourth century B.C. to the second century of our era. Their purpose is self-evident. Buried with the dead they were intended to give instructions concerning conduct in the next world, formularies and confessionals to be repeated, and directions as to postmortem ceremonial observances. Their ritualistic character and the tone of conviction that pervades them give them peculiar value as sources of information concerning Orphic experience and practice. These remarkable tablets, though they are few in number, constitute our most valuable source materials for the Orphic cult.

For an expansive expression of Orphic theology, however, one must turn to the corpus of so-called Orphic literature. We know that as early as the time of the Pisistratidae there were in existence at Athens various poems attributed to Orpheus. They were quoted by Plato and later writers, but their genuineness was challenged by Aristotle and Herodotus. Under the hands of the Orphics a vast literature grew up around this nucleus, but for our purpose the hymns only are of special importance. They are of late compilation and uncertain date, although Professor Dieterich would locate their original composition between 200 B.C. and the beginning of the Christian era. In their present form they represent the developed state of Orphic theology, their general tone being that of mystical monotheism. Of the eighty and more extant hymns, all but nine carry in their headings specifications concerning the particullar perfume to be burned while they were being stung. Most of them also conclude with an invocation to the deity addressed to bless the mystics in the fulfilment of their rites:

	 
		The sacred rites benevolent attend
		 And grant a blameless life, a blessed end.
		 Propitious to thy mystics' works incline
		 Rejoicing come, for holy rites are thine.
		
		 So runs the slightly varied refrain at the conclusion of almost every hymn. These formulas make it practically certain that this collection of hymns was made for liturgical use in Orphic brotherhoods.

In comparison with these major sources of information, classical writers, Orphic tablets, and Orphic hymns, other sources are distinctly of less significance. For the sake of completeness, however, there should be mentioned the "Apulian" vase paintings which depict the blessed dead in the society of the gods. These paintings are particularly significant in that they show the influence of Orphic ideas in Magna Graecia, south Italy especially, during the Hellenic era. Similarly, Greek sepulchral art and grave inscriptions of the Hellenistic and Roman periods are important. There are also casual references to Orphism in later pagan writers, Strabo, Pausanias, and Plutarch, which prove the vigorous persistence of Orphic ideas and practices through the early imperial period. Later Christian notices of Orphism are distinctly secondary to these pagan sources and are chiefly valuable in showing the later persistence of Orphism in its active competition with Christianity.

 

II

One of these Christian sources, however, deserves specific citation because it preserves in convenient mythological form a bit of fundamental Orphic theology. The passage in question is found in the "Exhortation to the Greeks" by Clement of Alexandria, and it includes a detailed narration of the myth of Dionysus Zagreus. Undoubtedly Clement's rendering of the legend was based upon a lost Orphic poem or poems--at least in the passage itself Clement made two quotations from Orphic literature. According to his version of the myth, Persephone bore to Zeus a son "who had the form of a bull." To quote "a certain mythological poet":

	 
		The bull begets a snake, the snake a bull.
		
		 This divine son was Dionysus Zagreus, or "the hunter." He was the favorite of his father, and Zeus destined him to become the ruler of the universe. Even while he was a child, the father of gods and men entrusted him with thunderbolts and allowed him to sit on his throne. But the malignant Titans, stung by jealousy and urged on by the vengeful Hera, sought the young child's life. Though he was carefully guarded by the warlike Curetes, the Titans succeeded in luring him away with childish toys, which were carefully enumerated in a quotation from "Orpheus of Thrace, the poet of the initiation." Having gained possession of the divine child, the Titans savagely tore him to pieces, and cooked and ate the pieces. Athena, however, preserved the heart of Zagreus and carried it away to Zeus who, in his anger, blasted the savage Titans with his thunderbolts. Clement omitted one item of the myth which formed an interesting connection with the Theban legend of Dionysus. Zeus, having received the heart of Zagreus from Athena, swallowed it. So when Semele bore Dionysus to Zeus the new god was but Zagreus reborn.

The Cretan provenance of the Zagreus legend was expressly stated by Diodorus. In his account of the various forms assumed by Dionysus, he said: "They allege that the god (Zagreus) was born of Zeus and Persephone in Crete, and Orpheus in the mysteries represents him as torn to pieces by the Titans." The relationship of this legend to the Cretan rite of eating raw flesh already described in connection with the Dionysus cult is obvious. It was an aetiological myth through and through. The worshippers of Dionysus were familiar with the ritual fact that a sacrificial animal, which in a sense embodied the god, was torn to pieces and eaten. They sought the sanction of antiquity and divinity for their ritual and posited the dismemberment of their god by the ancient Titans. Shocked at the thought of the brutal murder of a god, they had the bad Titans blasted by Zeus for their wickedness. Thus from the ritual fact of a feast of raw flesh, there grew up the myth of Dionysus Zagreus, the god on whom the Orphic cult was focused.

The importance of this myth lies in the fact that in Orphic thought it was connected with a peculiar theory concerning the origin and nature of man, and so ultimately with the thought of man's eternal destiny. From the ashes of the blasted Titans, the Orphic said, man was created. But these Titans had already consumed the god Dionysus, and their ashes contained the vitality of a divine being. Hence man by his very constitution was believed to be a compound of two natures, one Dionysian and immortal, the other Titanic and mortal. His soul was divine, but while in the body it was confined in a charnel house. Plato made full use of this Orphic conception, and in his Gorgias he quoted "a certain philosopher," who said, "We are dead and the body is a tomb." Pindar earlier stressed the divine origin and nature of the human soul in contradistinction to the mortality of the human body. "While the body of all men is subject to over-mastering death, an image of life remains alive, for it alone comes from the gods," he affirmed. This sharp dualism of soul and body appears again and again in the Orphic tablets, though it is not always clear that the myth of the origin of man from the ashes of the Titans was in mind. On the Petelian tablet (south Italy, third century B.C.) the soul is represented as asserting its divine nature thus:

	 
		I am a child of Earth and of Starry Heaven;
		 But my race is of Heaven.
		
		 Similarly, on three Cretan tablets the soul answers the challenge "Whence are you?" with a reiterated declaration of its dual origin, "I am son of Earth and of Starry Heaven." On the Compagno tablets found near Sybaris the soul makes a like affirmation to the "Pure Queen of Them Below . . . .," "I avow me that I am of your blessed race." The dualism thus fixed between body and soul was fundamental in Orphic theology. Though the body was an evil thing, the soul was divine and immortal.

In its first analysis, therefore, the Orphic process of salvation was a process of purification from bodily taint. The problem, however, was not such a simple one as these words would indicate. It was not merely from the evils of a single existence that the Orphic sought deliverance, but from the evils of a long series of bodily existences. The Orphic first, and the Pythagorean later, believed in the transmigration of souls from body to body. On leaving the corpse at death, the soul was normally doomed to inhabit the bodies of other men or of animals even, passing on through a chain of physical existences until finally purified. An Orphic fragment preserved by Proclus reads: "Therefore the soul of man changing in the cycles of time enters into various creatures; now it enters a horse, again it becomes a sheep . . . . or as one of the tribe of chill serpents creeps on the sacred ground." Reincarnation, like dualism, was an important item in Orphic theology.

What the Orphic did with the idea of transmigration was to moralize it into a cycle of purgations intended to free the soul from bodily taint and leave it in the end a pure heavenly essence. According to Pindar, the soul had to undergo three such periods of purification in as many different incarnations before the process would be complete. Only those who "thrice had been courageous in keeping their souls pure from all deeds of wrong" could pass by the highway of Zeus into the tower of Cronus where the ocean breezes blow around the Islands of the Blest." In Plato the series of three incarnations was magnified to three periods of a thousand years each, during which the process of purgation might be completed. At the close of each thousand-year period, the souls drew lots, thus choosing the manner of their next incarnation. One of the most striking scenes depicted in any of Plato's writings was the eschatological vision of Er, son of Armenius, recounted in the tenth book of the Republic. At the place of judgment, Er saw mortal souls allotted to a new cycle of life choosing their several destinies.

"He saw the soul which had once been Orpheus choosing the life of a swan out of enmity to the race of woman . . . . He beheld also the soul of Thamyras choosing the life of a nightingale. Birds on the other hand, like the swan and other musicians, wanting to be men . . . . After making choice and drinking of the waters of Lethe, these souls shoot away like stars, to birth."

Empedocles announced three transmigration periods of ten thousand years each ere the soul could be considered eligible for heavenly bliss.

The technical Orphic expression for the transmigration of souls and their reappearance in human bodies was "rebirth" (palingenesia). These physical rebirths, however, were what the Orphic least desired, and to escape this weary round of reincarnation was the goal of all his endeavor. According to Proclus, the salvation offered by this system was the freeing of the spirit from the wheel of physical rebirths. In his commentary on Plato's Timaeus, he said, "This is what those who are initiated by Orpheus to Dionysus and Kore pray that they may attain:

	 
		'To cease from the wheel and breathe again from ill.'"
		
		 Undoubtedly this was an Orphic formula for the salvation process. By Simplicius it was attributed to Orpheus himself. Appropriately, therefore, the purified Orphic soul was represented on the Campagno tablets as having escaped from the cycle of necessity and attained to the seats of the hallowed. Its joyful affirmation to the "Pure Queen of Them Below" was:

	 
		I have flown out of the sorrowful weary Wheel;
		 I have passed with eager feet to the Circle desired.
		
		 Thus, while the view of human existence fostered by Orphism was essentially pessimistic in its dualism and its theory of successive reincarnations, it did hold out the possibility of escape to weary mortals. It posited one great spiritual rebirth at the time of death which should put an end once for all to the series of physical rebirths that were so much dreaded. The question remains, How was this great deliverance from the cycle of physical existences to be accomplished?

 

III

The Orphic answer to this problem was, in the first instance, by participation in certain prescribed rites of initiation. Orphism came to the seekers for salvation in the Greek world not merely as a philosophy of life but as a religious cult with divinely authenticated rites which must be fulfilled, else there, could be no guaranty of deliverance. To those only who had "by happy fortune culled the fruit of the rite that releases from toil," was there assurance of salvation, the rite in this instance being initiation into the Orphic mysteries. The mendicants who, according to Plato, harassed the rich, exhibiting scriptures by Orpheus, sought to persuade people that they might obtain purification in life and release from suffering after death by the observance of their ritual. Initiation into an Orphic cult was the first step toward deliverance.

In general the prescribed Orphic ritual was a modification of the rude Bacchic rites we have already examined. The persistent representation of Orpheus in antiquity was that of a reformer of Dionysiac rites. Diodorus affirmed that "Orpheus being a man highly gifted by nature and highly trained above all others, made many modifications in the orgiastic rites; hence they call Orphic those rites that took their rise from Dionysus." From the standpoint of ritualistic observance, therefore, there was much in common between Dionysian and Orphic practices. On the very threshold to the Orphic cult stood the omophagy, or feast of raw flesh, which was so prominent a Dionysian rite. In the remaining fragment of Euripides' Cretans an initiate tells of certain ritual acts which he performed in the process of becoming a "Bacchus" and the one he stresses particularly is the eating of raw flesh.

For the Orphic this "red and bleeding feast" had two important meanings. It was, first of all, a communion service. Already he had within himself the spark of divinity which came from the ashes of the Titans. This divine life within him, however, was weak, very weak. It needed nourishment. In the sacrificial bull his god Zagreus was ritualistically incarnate; hence, in eating the raw flesh of the torn bull, be partook of a divine substance that nourished and strengthened the immortal life within himself. Just as the life of Zagreus entered the devotee physically when he partook of the flesh of the bull, so the man's soul entered more fully into the spiritual life of Zagreus by this very physical process. In a mystical sense God and man became one by the communion.

But the feast of raw flesh was also a memorial service to the Orphics. With the legend of the divine child Zagreus in mind, they looked upon their own ritual as a re-enactment of the ancient tragedy in which their god was done to death by the Titans. Just as they tore to pieces the flesh of the sacrificial bull and ate it, so the Titans of old had dismembered the child Zagreus. According to Nonnus, it was customary for Orphic initiates to daub themselves with white clay or gypsum as the Titans did in order to conceal their identity. One of the technical expressions for the ritual act of bedaubing with clay was apomattein (literally, "to smear off"). Harpocration has the following note on this word:

"Others use it in a more special sense, as for example when they speak of putting a coat of clay or pitch on those who are being initiated. In this ceremony they were mimetically enacting the myth told by some persons, in which the Titans, when they mutilated Dionysus, wore a coating of gypsum in order not to be identified."

In this comment the mimetic character of the Orphic ritual is definately asserted.

The real inwardness of this act of daubing with gypsum, however, lay in another direction. It was an act of purification--strange as it may seem. The terms perimattein and apomattein ("to besmear" and "to smear off") were used interchangeably to mean "to purify." In the Orphic rite of initiation, just as in the Sabazian rite at which Aeschines assisted, the candidates for initiation were "purified and wiped clean with mud and pitch." They were not purified from mud and pitch but rather with mud and pitch. Since it was not a physical cleansing that was sought but rather a spiritual cleansing, clay and pitch served the purpose quite as well as water. Yet Plutarch, with all his sympathy for Orphism, protested vigorously against purifications in this manner, calling them "unclean purifications, filthy cleansings and bemirings." Orphic initiation, then, in addition to the rite of communion, featured a strange ceremonial of cleansing intended to rid the candidate of the stains inherent in his physical nature.

For the Orphic, however, mere initiation with its prescribed rites, its mysticizing of crude Dionysian ritual, its communion service, and its purifications, was not sufficient as a guaranty of salvation. Initiation, while it was the beginning of a process that eventuated in complete salvation, was but the beginning. The salvation process itself continued as an arduous self-discipline and it lasted a lifetime. The initial sacraments of communion and purgation were supplemented by the austerities of the "Orphic life"--an expression that became proverbial. So the "Bacchus of the Mailed Priests" in Euripides' Cretans ends his confession thus:

	 
		Robed in pure white I have borne me clean
		 From man's vile birth and coffined clay,
		 And exiled from my lips alway
		 Touch of all meat where life has been.
		
		 In general the disciplinary prescriptions of Orphism were almost identical with those of Pythagoreanism. Herodotus characterized the Orphic way of life as at once Egyptian and Pythagorean. Diogenes Laertius, in his life of Pythagoras, has given a convenient and comprehensive statement of the main items in the Pythagorean ascesis. His list of prescriptions is as follows:

"Purification is by means of cleansings, and baths and aspersions. A man must also keep himself from funerals and marriages and every kind of physical pollution, and abstain from all food that is dead or has been killed, and from mullet, and from the fish melanurus, and from eggs, and from animals that lay eggs, and from beans, and from the other things that are forbidden for those who accomplish the holy rites of initiation."

The Orphic, like the Pythagorean, lived a life of ceremonial cleanliness and holiness. By washing and aspersions, at once symbolic and sacramental in character, he sought to purge away the taint of his bodily nature, the "ancient woe" inherited from the Titans. He kept himself rigorously from all defilement of physical contacts with human or animal bodies, from human births especially, and from dead bodies; for in a corpse the evil Titanic matter was left without any vital Dionysian element. Both in life and in death certain clothing regulations were strictly observed. In life the Orphic wore garments of pure white. In death the initiated were never buried in woolen wrappings.

Not only were rules concerning cleanliness and clothing strictly adhered to, but certain food regulations were also carefully followed. Having once partaken of the sacrament of raw flesh, the Orphic fasted forever thereafter from animal food. This was the most familiar of all the prohibitions observed by the Orphics, and Plato defined the Orphic manner of living in terms of this observance. "Orphic lives, as they are caIled," he said, "were led by those of our race who adhered to the use of all inanimate things, but abstained from every thing wherein is life." This abstinence from animal food was a main item in the discipline of the tragic Orphic Hippolytus, whose asceticism was the object of Theseus' bitter invective in Euripides' drama. In his rage the old king cried out against his own son:

	 
		Now vaunt, ay now!--set out your paltry wares
		 Of lifeless food: ....
		 .... I warn all men to shun
		 Such hypocrits as you.
		
		 These words, from the mouth of a sadly mistaken father, should not be taken as proof of priggishness on the part of the Orphics, but at least they serve to emphasize the rigor of the Orphic discipline in the matter of abstinence from animal foods. By fasting and purifications, the disciple of Orpheus sought to purge away the evil which he had inherited with his physical nature. Only after a whole lifetime of such purgation could he affirm, in the terminology of the Compagno and Caecilia Secundina tablets,

	 
		Out of the pure I come, Pure Queen of Them Below.
		
		 The question naturally suggests itself, whether or not the Orphic ideal made any moral demands on these who were initiated. Since personal purity, even though it was of a ceremonial and ritualistic character, stood at the very center of Orphism, the way was open for the development of morality. The very will to observe its rigid prescriptions was itself a moral attitude. Moreover, there is valuable testimony among ancient writers to show that Orphism did have an elevating effect on the moral life. Pindar, for example, based his Orphic eschatology on moral conditions and assumed that knowledge of the lore of Orphism would help men lead good lives. Aristophanes, who did not hesitate to poke fun at Orphism, paid a serious tribute to in The Frogs when the tragedian Aeschylus said of the poet Orpheus: "He made known to us mystic rites, and to abstain from slaughter." Certainly this last statement had reference to something more than mere abstinence from animal food. At the very least it meant that Orpbic ritual laid stress on the necessity of purification from blood, and at most it meant that Orphism came with a gospel of abstention from murder and of peace on earth. Horace doubtless had much the same thought in mind when he declared that Orpheus not only tamed fierce animals but savage men as well. The author of the speech against Aristogeiton also spoke reverentially of Orpheus "who instituted for us the most holy mysteries and declared that Justice is seated on the throne of God watching all the actions of mankind."

At one point especially the moral influence of Orphism was clear and indubitable: that was in its protest against suicide. Since the body was the soul's place of penance a man had no right to take his own life. If he did he was a fugitive prisoner trying to escape before God had released him. Here Plato found Orphic thought peculiarly congenial to his own. In the Phaedo he represented Socrates as saying, shortly before his death, "There is a doctrine whispered in secret that a man is a prisoner who has no right to open the door and run away; this is a great mystery which I do not quite understand. Yet I too believe that the gods are our guardians and that we are a possession of theirs." In view of all this array of literary evidence, certain moral obligations must be added to the ritualistic requirements which characterized the Orphic life.

But participation in rites of initiation and a life of ascetic observance, even, were not sufficient to guarantee full and final salvation for the Orphic. There were certain postmortem rules of conduct to be observed as well. The Orphic tablets bring this out most clearly. They chart the geography of the next world for the initiate, acquaint him with the divine beings who have the determination of future weal or woe, prescribe certain ritual acts to be observed, and instruct him in formularies and confessions to be repeated under certain circumstances.

The Petelia tablet told of a nameless well-spring situated at the left of the House of Hades. This the soul must avoid. Since it was contrasted specifically with the Well of Memory in the following verses, the forbidden spring was probably Lethe, or Forgetfulness. Because the Orphic had spent a lifetime in purification he had no need of forgetfulness. The well-spring of which he must drink was the one flowing from the Lake of Memory. This was the Orphic counterpart of the "well of water springing up unto everlasting life." The Petelia tablet also served to inform the soul what formula to use in asking for a drink from the Well of Memory. It was an avowal of divine origin: "I am a child of Earth and Starry Heaven." According to the tablet, this declaration would be sufficient to gain the boon desired from the guardians of the Lake of Memory.

	 
		Of themselves they will give you to drink,
		 From the holy Well-spring,
		 And thereafter among the other Heroes,
		 You shall have lordship.
		
		 The Eleuthernae tablets represented much the same situation in the lively form of a dialogue between the soul and the well itself.

On the Compagno tablets, certain additional declarations were placed in the mouth of the initiate. Here the soul came as a suppliant to the holy Persephone herself, and the prescribed words were addressed to her as the "Pure Queen of Them Below." As in the other tablets, there was the assertion of divine origin. "I avow me that I am of your blessed race." In addition, however, there was the further declaration of purity attained by the observance of Orphic practices.

	 
		Out of the pure I come . . . . .
		 I have flown out of the sorrowful weary wheel,
		 I have passed with eager feet to the circle desired.
		
		 These, affirmations on the part of the soul were an "open sesame" to immortal bliss for they brought the final assurance, "Happy and Blessed One, you shall be God instead of mortal." In this climactic fashion the postmortem ritual as recorded on the Orphic tablets was completed.

On the basis of Dionysian practice and experience, therefore, Orphism built up an elaborate theological construction with refined and extended ritualistic observances. Faced by the problem of the dual constitution of man, his soul Dionysian, divine and immortal, and his body Titanic, evil and mortal, Orphism found the solution of the antimony in two very different directions. On the one hand there was the prospect of a natural process of purification through a series of physical rebirths in animal or human form. This was a gloomy prospect, however--a remedy that was worse than the disease. On the other hand there was a way of salvation provided by the Orphic cult itself, an extended process of self-discipline ending in a spiritual regeneration that would break, once for all, the chain of successive physical births. It was a long and arduous process beginning with a rite of initiation which marked the formal entrance upon a new way of living. There were prayers to be repeated and sacrifices to be fulfilled. There were sacraments of communion and purification. Following the initiatory rites was the rigid discipline of a life-long asceticism that included purgations, fastings, and freedom from bodily contamination, as well as certain elementary moral requirements. All this, even, was not deemed sufficient. It had to be supplemented by a postmortem ritual. The Orphic imagination pictured the future, charted the next world, and prescribed the formulas and confessions to be repeated under given circumstances. Thus the final goal of ultimate assimilation to deity was to be attained. Thus the initiated, having lived a life of Orphic purity, finally became "God from man."

Admittedly Orphic practice did not offer a new birth experience as a single catastrophic event to be realized in one's lifetime, unless initiation itself is considered that event in a proleptic way. But Orphism did furnish the possibility for a long regenerative process, beginning at initiation and ending after the death of the physical body--a development that eventuated in happy immortality. As an extended process, therefore, rather than as a single event, Orphism fostered the experience of regeneration.

 

IV

It is certainly pertinent to inquire whether or not the Orphic type of religious experience had real significance in the Graeco-Roman world at the beginning of the Christian era. Of the influence of Orphism in the Greek world during classical times, we have found ample testimony by writers of the highest repute. It is more difficult to trace the influence of Orphism as a distinct religious movement during the Hellenistic and later periods. Still the discovery of the important private Orpheum in the recently excavated Villa Item at Pompeii, leads one to anticipate similar finds elsewhere that may illustrate the distinctive functioning of the Orphic cult in first-century life. If when Pompeii was overwhelmed by the eruption of Vesuvius in 79 A.D. an Orphic brotherhood was operating under private patronage in this charming villa, similar groups were certainly to be found elsewhere in the Roman world maintaining their peculiar cult practices. Aside from such independent functioning, however, Orphism continued to influence the world through systems other than its own. Like Pythagoreanism in this as in much else, it merged readily with other movements. Its ideas were adopted by popular philosophies and its practices were taken over by popular religions. Orphism became very influential at ancient Eleusis particularly, and with the influx of foreign gods and goddesses into the Greek world it captivated them also. In these secondary forms the Orphic view of life and the Orphic way of living continued to influence thought and action even where Orphic brotherhoods as such had ceased to exist.

There is plenty of direct literary evidence as to the power of Orphic ideas and practices, however institutionalized, during the Hellenistic and Graeco-Roman periods. One of the characteres of Theophrastus, for example, was a man who every month repaired to the priests of the Orphic mysteries to partake of their rites. Usually he was accompanied by his wife. But if she was too busy, his children and their nurse went along with him. Perhaps the most notable example of a prominent man who shared the Orphic hope in the first Christian century was Plutarch. Both he and his wife were initiated into an Orphic thiasus. Though he strongly criticized certain Orphic practices, and refused to be frightened by the terrors of their Hell, and depreciated the morbid type of self-examination fostered by their manner of life, yet he and his wife found the Orphic hope a real consolation to themselves in the time of trouble. Strabo and Pausanias, as well as Plutarch, made casual reference to Orphism as a feature of contemporary religion, while Lucian, in his irresponsible manner, reflected Orphic ideas here and there. The Latin poet Statius praised the widow of a certain Lucan for not deifying him as Bacchus and consecrating to him "a deceitful thiasus"--a testimony that the Orphic practice of deifying the dead was not infrequent in the Graeco-Roman world.

Of more concrete significance is the archaeological evidence furnished by sepulchral art and grave inscriptions. According to the Orphic scheme of things, the soul entered upon the status of divinity after death. Among the monuments there are a number--quite apart from royal or imperial memorials--which actually represented the dead as gods. At Guthaeum, for example, a first-century (A.D.) statue representing a youth was found near a sarcophagus. It was obviously intended to be a portrait statue; but a panther stands by the side of the youth, a grape cluster is in his hand, and a vine crown is on his head. Here is a clear memorial of the process of apotheosizing a youth after death and of representing him as the god Dionysus.

Among the grave inscriptions there are parallels to this sculptural representation of a deceased youth as a god. A priest of Thasos dedicated an inscription to his dead wife as "an incarnate goddess," and a man by the name of Lucius consecrated a monument to his child of four years with these words: "To my sweetest child and personal God who hearkens to my prayers." More clearly reminiscent of certain characteristic Orphic ideas is a second-century (A.D.) inscription found in a Sabine village. "The soul is immortal for it came from God. The body is the garment of the soul. Honor the God in me." This was good Orphic doctrine throughout.

Here and there also among grave inscriptions are to be heard the echoes of Orphic ritual. On a tombstone in Cnidus was engraved this affirmation, "I have not drunk of the water of Lethe that ends all things." Immediately one is reminded of the Petelia tablet with its description of a nameless well-spring at the left of the House of Hades with a white cypress standing near--a well-spring by all means to be avoided. There are other inscriptions which recall the cool waters of Memory flowing from the well-spring on the right, from which the parched soul may drink and find new life for itself. Two epitaphs of the third century (A.D.) found at Rome contain prayers that are reminiscent of the Orphic tablets. "May Aidoneus, the king of the dead, give you the cold water" is the petition of one, while the second inscription repeats the same request in the first person, "May he give the cold water to my thirsting soul." Most peculiar of the Orphic inscriptions is one from Abydos, dated roughly at the beginning of our era. It stood originally on the grave of a Lycian Greek buried near the reputed tomb of Osiris. The inscription expressed the conviction that since the tomb of the god was near, the soul of the dead would escape Hades: "Hermes gathers me with the sons of the gods, and I have not drunk the water of Forgetfulness." Here the Arcadian Hermes makes his appearance in the role of Psychopompos, as in classical mythology and the Hermetic literature, and the inscription as a whole memorializes the blending on Egyptian soil of Orphism, Hermetism, the Osiris cult, and local tradition.

Altogether, therefore, the grave monuments of Graeco-Roman times strongly reinforce the literary evidences that Orphic ideas were still very influential in the life of paganism when Christianity first emerged. Hence, among the new-birth experiences of paganism contemporary with early Christianity the extended Orphic process of regeneration must not be ignored.

     
Pagan Regeneration, by Harold R. Willoughby, [1929], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER V

 

THE REGENERATIVE RITES OF THE GREAT MOTHER

FROM the Oriental as well as from the Hellenic world there emanated mystery religions that made their appeal and offered their satisfactions to the individual man. Like the Greek cults just described, they operated as private religious brotherhoods, though in occasional instances they were brought under state patronage and supervision. They came to the Graeco-Roman world with all the authority of a venerable past, with a theology developed in mythological forms, with a ritual, very crude perhaps, yet capable of lofty spiritual interpretation. Their appeal was primarily an emotional one, and it was addressed specifically to the individual; for all classes and all races, Greeks as well as barbarians, slaves as well as free men, were welcomed to their membership.

 

I

Of these Oriental mystery religions the first to invade the west was the cult of the Great Mother of the Gods, which came from central Asia Minor. The divine personage in whom this cult centered was the Magna Mater Deum who was conceived as the source of all life as well as the personification of all the powers of nature. This aspect of universal motherhood was the comprehensive feature of her character most frequently emphasized in the various cult titles applied to her. She was the "Great Mother" not only "of all the gods," but "of all men" as well. She was the "Mistress of All," the "All-Nourisher," and "All-Begetter," the "Mighty Mother," and the "Mother of Zeus Himself." "The winds, the sea, the earth, and the snowy seat of Olympus are hers, and when from her mountains she ascends into the great heavens, the son of Cronus himself gives way before her, and in like manner do also the other immortal blest honor the dread goddess." At Pessinus, the strongest center of her worship in Asia Minor, she was from primitive times represented by a sacred stone, said to have fallen from heaven. Indeed, the city itself, according to one legend, was named from this very circumstance (pesein, "to fall"). Here all the vital forces of mother earth were concentrated in "a stone not large, which could be carried in a man's hand without pressure--of a dusky and black color--not smooth, but having little corners standing out." This was the stone which was later carried to Rome when the worship of the Great Mother was officially introduced to the Occident. Ensconced in a silver statue where the face ought to be, it became the center of the Roman cult of the Great Mother--the whole life of nature embodied in a small, rough stone.

The Magna Mater of all living creatures was especially the goddess of the wilder aspects of nature. She was worshipped in the depths of virgin forests and on the tops of mounntains, and her cult titles named her the "Mountain Mother," and the "Divinity of the Mountains," not to mention such local appellations as "Dindymene," or the "Idaean Mother." Even Cybele, the familiar literary designation of the Great Mother, was, according to Strabo and Diodorus, derived from a mountain or range of mountains. "A grove I had upon the mountains' crest, whither men brought me offerings," said the goddess herself in describing one of her favorite haunts, "a pine forest beloved for many years, dim with dusky firs and trunks of maple." Anacharsis the Scythian was a typical devotee of the Magna Mater, for he worshiped her in a place "full of trees." She was also the "Mistress of Wild Beasts, and lions were her constant companions in literature and in art. The author of the fourteenth Homeric Hymn addressed the Mother of the Gods as one who "is glad in the cry of wolves and fiery-eyed lions, and in echoing hills, and woodland haunts." Thus she appeared as the goddess of all natural life, particularly in its wild and untamed aspects.

With her was associated a hero-divinity called Attis who personified the life of the vegetable world particularly. The pine tree was peculiarly his own and played a prominent part in his annual ritual. His priests were tattooed with an ivy-leaf pattern. Statues represented him crowned with fruits and holding ears of corn in his hand. He was himself addressed as the "reaped green (or yellow) ear of corn" in the hymn of Hippolytus, and the myth of his sufferings was interpreted now as the harvesting of ripened grain or again as the fading of spring flowers. His devotees in their feasts, while they might eat the stalks and upper parts of plants, were forbidden to eat seeds and the roots of vegetables for in these the divine life of their god was especially manifested. Above all, the great festival of Attis, held at the time of the vernal equinox, took the form of a mystery drama which obviously represented the reviving of the vegetable world at that season of the year.

Around these two divinities, the Great Mother and the god of vegetation, there grew up a confused tangle of myths in explanation of their cult rites. Various writers, pagan and Christian, gave different versions of the Cybele-Attis myth. Pausanias recounted two very different renderings of the legend. One of these was repeated by the Christian writer Arnobius, on the authority of a certain Timotheus. In detail the final edition was much more elaborate than the earlier rendition by Pausanias. Diodorus also recounted the Cybele-Attis myth with one or two singular omissions, while Firmicus Maternus gave a markedly euhemeristic interpretation of the legend. The accounts by Ovid, bv the philosopher Sallust, and by the Emperor Julian were similar to each other at points, yet differed in important respects from the other renderings of the legend.

The specific variations in all these diverse statements do not concern us, for certain significant elements were common to all the various versions. In each instance the relationship of Cybele and Attis was essentially the same, and their experiences were much the same throughout. According to the myth, the goddess-mother loved the youthful, virgin-born shepherd Attis with a pure love. But Attis died, either slain by another or by his own hand. In the latter instance, he was unfaithful to the Great Mother and in a frenzy of regret he emasculated himself and died. The goddess-mother mourned her dead lover and finally affected his restoration. Thus, in the end, the mortal Attis became deified and immortal. These were the main elements in the developed myth which bulked largest in the mind of the devotee as he participated in the rites of the cult.

The whole myth was palpably transparent. Attis, the god of vegetation grown to youthful beauty, is loved by Mother Earth. But the flowers of springtime faded and the fruits of summer are harvested. Nature is despoiled of her vegetation. Attis dies. Then the Mother mourns her dead plant life and remains in sorrow during autumn and winter. But with returning springtime vegetation revives and the youthful god Attis is restored to life. These familiar natural phenomena, dramatized in the ritual of the Cybele-Attis cult, became the basis on which the devotees of the Magna Mater developed their personal religious experiences.

 

II

The primitive locus of this nature worship was in the uplands of Anatolia. In a general way legends agree in locating the rise of the Cybele-Attis cult in the area covered by Galatia, Phrygia, and Lydia. As M. Cumont has properly emphasized, the development of a highly emotional cult was natural in this vicinity. Here the climate went to extremes, cold and bleak in winter, hot and even scorching in summer. These climatic contrasts made themselves felt on the character of the inhabitants. Men were responsive to the varying moods of nature with the changing seasons. During the winter months they shared the sorrow of nature at the loss of her vegetation; but with the returning verdure of springtime they hailed with joy the revival of nature. Thus there developed in the uplands north of Paul's birthplace a cult distinguished for its excessive emotionalism.

Just when this religion had its inception it is impossible to state with any exactness. It is clear, however, that from the sixth century B.C. onward the worship of the Great Mother was dominant in Asia Minor. The earliest monuments of the cult, the so-called Niobe of Mount Sipylus and two reliefs from the vicinity of Prymnessus, date from the middle of the sixth century at least. Herodotus was acquainted with certain external features of this worship, and he knew the Great Mother as belonging to Sardis and enthroned on Mount Dindymon. By the beginning of the fifth century Pessinus had become a center of her cult, and a hundred years later Asia Minor generally was familiar with it. Considerably before the period of Alexander, therefore, the worship of Cybele and Attis was well established and widely spread in Asia Minor--mountains like Dindymon, Ida, and Tmolus, and cities like Cyzicus, Sardis, and Pessinus being the importaint centers of the cult.

The Great Mother early emigrated from her Asian home and traveled to Europe, first by way of the Hellesspont and liter by the Aegean Islands. Pindar knew her worship at Thebes and Aristophanes ridiculed the goddess from Athens. The chorus of Euripides' Bacchae came from Mount Tmolus and sang the praises of the Great Mother as well as of Dionysus. By the end of the fourth century, the worship of the Mother existed privately in the seaport town of the Peiraeus, while the Emperor Julian had a story to tell concerning the introduction of the Great Mother's religion at Athens. Admittedly, however, the cult of the Magna Mater was not especially popular in Greece. The demand for a highly emotional type of religious experience was already well satisfied among the Hellenes. In the orgiastic rites of Dionysus, the Greeks had religious practices of strikingly similar character which gave them the desired emotional stimulation.

The coming of the Magna Mater to Rome and the west was under the most dramatic circumstances. It was in the year 204 B.C.; Hannibal was still in Italy and Rome was thoroughly exhausted. Moreover, the people had become frightened because of frequent showers of stones and other unusual phenomena. In desperation the Sibylline Books were consulted, and it was learned that the enemy could be conquered if the Idaean Mother should be brought from Pessinus to Rome. Accordingly, a delegation was sent to King Attalus of Pergamum, who conducted them to Pessinus and gave them the sacred stone which was the Mother of the Gods. On her arrival in Italy, the goddess was officially welcomed by the "best man" of the Republic and the leading matrons of Rome. Miracles attended the event, the citizens made holiday, and an annual festival was instituted in honor of the goddess. As a result--so it seemed--the crops of that year were successful and Hannibal was driven out of Italy and conquered. So the Magna Mater came in triumph to the west in 204 B.C.

Although the worship of the Great Mother was officially welcomed to Italy, it seems to have been regarded with suspicion, treated as foreign, and subjected to state regulation during the last two centuries of the Republic. Under the Empire, however, the cult came into its own. By the first century A.D. the legal restrictions of republican days were removed and the worship of the Magna Mater easily became one of the most popular and favored religions of the time. The Archigallus, or high priest of the cult, became the Attis populi Romani. During the reign of Claudius, the annual festival was elaborated with even more impressive rites than those of its native Phrygian home and it took on its final form as one of the great festivals of the Roman Empire. The literature of the first century shows the high degree of prominence attained by the cult during this period. Livy gave an account of the coming of the Great Mother to Rome. Ovid, in the Fasti, devoted much space to an explanation of the origin and significance of her rites. Vergil told how the Great Mother had protected Aeneas, the ancestral hero of the Roman race. Horace made several references to the Great Mother's rites, and Propertius recounted the story of Claudia, who led the Roman matrons in welcoming the goddess to Italy. Even Maecenas composed a poem in honor of Cybele. The satirists, on the other hand, were unsparing in making the Galli the butt of crude jokes. Thus, during the period when Pauline Christianity was barely beginning to make itself felt as a missionary movement in the Graeco-Roman world, the cult of the Great Mother of the Gods had already won a place of prominence for itself in the life of the Roman Empire. It is important, therefore, to consider the phenomena of this gentile religion in relation to the development of early Christianity itself.

 

III

Our clearest index to the personal religious experience of the devotees of the Great Mother is found in a study of cult ritual. Because of their public character we possess the most extensive information concerning the annual spring festival of Attis, and the Taurobolium of the Magna Mater--ceremonials that had the official sanction of the Roman state. In considering the spring festival which Claudius incorporated as a part of the established religion of the Empire, it is important to bear in mind that it most it was but in elaborition of rites that had long been practiced in Asia Minor. We are specifically informed that the Roman ritual was celebrated Phrygio more. It may reasonably be assumed, therefore, that the Roman ceremonies were not essentially different from their Asian originals.

The prelude to the annual festival began on the Ides of March. On the second festival day, which was designated Arbor intrat in the calendar of Philocalus, the guild of dendrophori, or tree bearers, were in charge of the ceremonial. It was the duty of the dendrophori to cut down a pine tree in the woods and bear it with due pomp to the temple of Cybele. The perennial pine was a natural embodiment of Attis, the spirit of vegetation. According to legend, it was under a pine tree that he had mutilated himself and died. He had himself been transmuted into a pine tree and carried in this form into the cave of Cybele where the goddess mothered her dead lover; hence the pine tree borne by the dendrophori into the temple of Cybele was regarded as the corpse of Attis dead and treated with divine honors. It was swathed with fillets of wool as the body of Attis had been. Its branches were hung with garlands of violets, the flowers that sprang from his blood. From the middle of the stem was suspended an image of young man, who was doubtless Attis himself.' The ritual fact was that the dead god was brought with funeral pomp to the temple of the Magna Mater.

The following day was one of fasting when the devotees of Attis mourned their god. It was a peculiar fast, however; Jerome called it "a gluttonous abstinence, when men ate pheasants in order not to contaminate cereals." Meats, in general, were allowed, but fruits and vegetables were forbidden. This prohibition extended to wine also. The vegetable abstinence was a natural one. As the cutting down of the pine tree symbolized that the god of vegetation was dead, so the vegetable world shared in the defunct condition of the god. To partake of vegetables and cereals at such a season would be to violate the bruised and broken body of a god. This fast probably began with the fifteenth of March, and it had its influence as a physical preparation for the excessive emotionalism of the rites which marked the climax of the festival.

These rites came on the twenty-fourth of March, a day that was called, significantly enough, the "Day of Blood." At this time the Great Mother of the Gods inspired her devotees with a frenzy surpassing that which the followers of Dionysus knew. It was a madness induced not by wine, but by the din of crashing music, the dizzy whirling of the dance, and the sight of blood. The music which accompanied these rites was wild and barbaric, made by clashing cymbals and blatant horns, shrilling flutes and rolling drums. It was maddening music, noisy and savage. Lucian vividly described the wild tumult made by the Galli on Mount Ida blowing their horns, pounding their drums, and clashing their cymbals. Music of this kind--the Anatolian prototype of modern jazz--was popularly known as Phrygian music.

To the accompaniment of these barbaric strains a dance was staged. With wagging heads and streaming hair, the devotees of the Great Mother whirled their bodies round and round in a dizzy dance, shouting and singing as they gyrated. Apuleius pictured such a dance performed in a Thessalian village by the mendicant priests of the Syrian goddess.

"They went forth with their arms naked to their shoulders, bearing with them great swords .... shouting and dancing like mad persons to the sound of the pipe ..... They began to howl all out of tune and hurl themselves hither and thither, as though they were mad. They made a thousand gests with their feet and their heads; theywould bend down their necks and spin round so that their hair flew out in a circle; they would bite their own flesh; finally every one took his two-edged weapon and wounded his arms in different places."

This cruel custom of lacerating one's own flesh during the frenzied ritual was a distinctive characteristic of the Great Mother's cult. Slashing their arms with knives, or gashing their bodies, the worshipers sprinkled with their own blood the sacred tree that was Attis. When Martial was casting about for a comparison to make vivid the dangerous habits of a certain barber he could think of nothing more to the point than these bloody rites of the Great Mother. "He who desires not yet to go down to Stygian shades, let him, if he be wise, avoid barber Antiochus. White arms are mangled with knives less cruel when the frenzied throng raves to Phrygian strains," he declared. To the modern mind this sanguine rite seems cruel in the extreme. It is probable, however, that the devotees, wrought up to a very high pitch of excitement by the din of the noisy music and the frenzy of the wild dance, were largely insensible to the pain. This ghastly ritual formed a part of the mourning for the dead Attis. When the Great Mother saw the freely flowing blood of her worshipers, she could not doubt that they shared with her in her sorrow. The blood may well have been intended, also, to appease the manes of the dead Attis or to strengthen him for his resurrection. To imitate Cybele in her grief and to call Attis back to life were the purposes of this bloody rite.

But the devotees of the Great Mother did not stop with the shedding of blood merely. Keyed up to the highest pitch of religious excitement, they followed the example of Attis and emasculated themselves. With this final act of self-sacrifice and consecration, the Dies sanguinis was crowned and the devotee became one of the Galli, a eunuch-priest of the Asian goddess. This was the regular practice in Phrygia, and in Rome, even, it is probable that the custom was followed. In his account of the Syrian goddess, whose cult was strikingly like that of Cybele, Lucian gave a description of this sacerdotal initiation. It is not only a vivid depiction of the bloody scene itself but also a good piece of psychological analysis, for it shows the strange fascination of these barbaric rites and reveals their mesmeric effect upon the spectators witnessing the supreme act of consecration. In abbreviated form Lucian's account is as follows:

"During these days they are made Galli. As the Galli sing and celebrate their orgies, frenzy falls on many of them, and many who had come as mere spectators afterwards are found to have committed the great act. Any young man who has resolved on this action, strips off his clothes, and with a loud shout bursts into the midst of the crowd and picks up a sword. He takes it and emasculates himself and then runs wild through the city."

For one who had performed this irrevocable sacrifice in a moment of hot excitement a strong revulsion of feeling was later inevitable. This emotional reaction was powerfully depicted by Catullus in his famous poem bearing the name "Attis."

Undoubtedly for the devotee of Cybele the rite of self-mutilation had distinct religious values. By the very act the devotee himself became another Attis. He had done in the service of the goddess what Attis had already done. The Attis in the poem of Catullus was not the original lover of Cybele but rather one of her priests, who by the fact of priestly initiation had become identified with the god. "Methought in a dream that I had become Attis, and that the festival of the so-called Hilaria was fulfilled to me by the Great Mother," wrote Damaskios, the last of the Neoplatonists. The name Attis was actually used as a traditional title for the priesthood of the Great Mother. Just as Attis was believed to have attained the state of deity by the passion of emasculation so by the way of self-mutilation, the Gallus became a god instead of mortal.

The act that made an Attis of the votary placed him in peculiarly intimate relationship to the Mother Goddess herself. The broken instruments of his manhood were treated as an oblation to the goddess. Perhaps they were thrown into the lap of her statue, is the "Passion of St. Symphorian" suggests. In the case of a goddess of fertility, like the Magna Mater, this was a significant act. Thus the ministers of the Great Mother, who personated her divine lover, made it possible for her to exercise her beneficent function in renewing the life of nature. As a new Attis the votary assumed the role of a bridegroom to the goddess. There were "marriage chambers" in the sanctuary of the Great Mother at Lobrinon near Cyzicus. In such a chamber the newly consecrated priest, kept vigil during the night after his dedication, a bridegroom in the bridal chamber of his goddess. Indeed, a specific cult designation of the GalIus was "bridegroom." This indicates that the experiences of the Dies Sanguinus and the following night were interpreted as a process of mystical union with the Great Goddess herself, and by means of certain obscure ritual acts there was developed a sense of intimate divine communion on the part of the devotee. From another standpoint the newly consecrated priest was thought of as a male counterpart of the goddess. Hence, he was called Kubebos. By the fact of emasculation he had assimilated himself to the nature of the goddess. As an indication of this transformation he henceforth wore feminine dress and allowed his hair to grow long. At some point in the ceremony there was also a solemn enthronement and the consecrated mortal was crowned in token of his deification. Nothing less than this, in the experience of the Gallus, was the result of his act of devotion. It made him realistically and mysticilly one with his goddess.

The day following the "Day of Blood" brought a delirium of joy to replace the delirium of sorrow. Dead Attis had been buried and around his grave his devotees had mourned his death long into the night. Toward morning, however, a great light appeared in the darkness and the resurrection of the god was announced. Firmicus Maternus thus described the scene: "When they are satisfied with their fictitious grief a light is brought in, and the priest, having anointed their lips, whispers, 'Be of good cheer, you of the mystery. Your god is saved; for us also there shall be salvation from ills.'" Then joy took the place of sorrow, for the resurrection of the god brought with it the assurance of salvation for men, and this chiefly included the promise of a happy immortality. On the twenty-fifth of March, the first day when daylight exceeded darkness, the resurrection of the god was celebrated with universal license. The day's celebration was known as the Hilaria and was characterized by the general good cheer. Mourning was not permitted; but instead there were masquerades and banquets. Even the Galli were eased of their wounds in their joy because of the resurrection of Attis.

There followed a day of much needed rest, the Requiratio. Then the festival closed with the Lavatio, or washing of the goddess in the Almo, a rite that aroused the scorn and sarcasm of Arnobius. The silver statue of the goddess was placed in a wagon drawn by oxen and conducted in solemn procession to the Almo where it was washed in the water of the river. Amid rejoicing the statue was drawn back to its temple, showered with the flowers of springtime on its way. This was probably a rite of purification considered necessary because of the experience through which the goddess had passed on the Dies Sanguinis. After marriage, purification was deemed essential even for a goddess. Because the Magna Mater had been mystically united with her ministers, such postnuptial purification was necessary in her case.

In this, the annual spring festival of their god and goddess, the Galli found the beginning of a new life for themselves. It was a highly wrought emotional experience induced by fasting, wild music, frenzied dancing, and the sight of flowing blood. The sorrow thus aroused was interpreted as a sympathetic sharing with the Great Mother in her grief at the death of her lover. The orgiastic rite reached its climax in the irrevocable sacrifice of manhood, an act whereby the devotee physically assimilated himself to divinity. He himself became Attis, a god, mystically united,is a divine lover to the Great Goddess. In the resurrection of his god he felt himself personally participant and he found therein the assurance of a happy future life. The experience was a crudely physical one and realistic in the extreme. Yet it had a strange fascination because of its very realism, and it held out to the devotees who were willing to make the supreme sacrifice the promise of a divinization of human nature and an immediate communion with deity.

To this experience the figure of a new birth was not inappropriately applied. The pagan writer, Sallust the Philosopher, used this very terminology in describing the effect of the Attis festival on those who participated in it. He said that those who passed through this form of initiation were actually treated as new-born babes and dieted on milk for some time afterward. His exact expression was: hosper anagennomenon, "as of those who are being born again." Thus, at the annual spring festival the ministers of the Great Mother passed through a religious experience so fundamental that it seemed to them the beginning of a new life, essentially different from the life they had known before. It was a regeneration that transformed their beings, gave them a present communion with their god and goddess, and assured them of personal immortality.

 

IV

Another bloody rite of great importance connected with the cult of the Great Mother was the taurobolium, or sacrifice of a bull, with its variant, the criobolium, or ram sacrifice. The origin of the taurobolium and its relationship to the cult of the Magna Mater is obscure. Almost certainly, however, it was of oriental origin localized in Anatolia, and it probably had its inception in the primitive practice of washing in the blood of an animal in order to secure its vital energy. In the cult of the Great Mother, however, the primitive notions attached to the practice became transformed and spiritualized. When the rite came to prominence in Italy early in the second century A.D. two distinct motives were apparent, one official, the other personal. The taurobolium was officially performed vicariously for the safety of the emperor, the empire, or a particular community--pro salute imperatoris, pro salute imperii, pro salute urbis, etc. This was a purely official and sacerdotal celebration, with the Archigallus presiding, and during the second and third centuries this usage was especially prominent in Roman practice.

But the taurobolium might be a private ceremony also, performed by an ordinary person who bore the expense of it himself--de suo, suo sumptu, or sua pecunia. In this case the purpose was a purely personal one and the motive which actuated the celebration was the purification and regeneration of the individual. This private rite was performed on laymen as well as priests and by persons of all classes and both sexes. It was strictly an individualistic ceremony. During the third and fourth centuries, probably because of Christian competition, the private celebration of the taurobolium came forward into particular prominence. Between these two types of ceremony, however, the official and the private, there can be no doubt as to which was prior to the other. The rite in itself was essentially of a private and personal nature and its public, vicarious usage was clearly a later adaptation. The devotees of the Mother and Attis certainly experienced it for their own benefit before ever the rite was enacted for the good of the community. Centuries before the taurobolium was performed in Italy for the safety of the state, it was enacted in Asia Minor for the benefit of the individual devotee.

The ceremony itself was picturesque. In the Peristephanon by the Christian poet Prudentius there is a description of the rite which purports to be by an eyewitness. A priest is the subject of the ceremony. With a golden crown on his head and adorned with fillets, he descends into a deep trench which is covered with a platform of perforated pIanks. A large bull, gleaming with gold and garlanded with flowers, is led on to the platform. Here he is stabbed to death by the consecrated spear, and his blood flows out over the covering of the trench and rains down on the expectant devotee below.

"Through the thousand crevices in the wood the bloody dews run down into the pit. The priest receives the falling drops on his head, clothes and body. He leans backward to have his cheeks, his ears, his lips, and his nostrils wetted. He pours the liquid over his eyes and does not even spare his palate, for he moistens his tongue with blood and drinks it eagerly."

When the life of the bull is extinct, its body is removed and the neophyte emerges from the trench, drenched and dripping with blood. He rresents himself to the expectant throng of worshipers who do obeisance to him as to a god, as to one who has been born again to a divine life.

For the one who experienced the blood bath of the taurobolium this was exactly the meaning of the rite. He came up out of the trench reborn to a new kind of existence. In effect the bath of blood was believed to purify him from the sins and evils of his old life and make him a new man, or rather a divinized human. In some cases the efficacy of the rite was supposed to last for a period of twenty years, and then the grace was renewed. In other instances, the conviction was that the effect of the rite was everlasting and that the devotee was in aeternum renatus, to quote the formula of the inscriptions. There is a strong temptation at this point to question if this startling phrase and the whole conception of the new birth experience in the cult of the Magna Mater may not be due to Christian influence. There is not, however, a shred of evidence to substantiate this contention. Against it is the purely pagan character of the rite itself, its undoubted antiquity, and the fact that it naturally lent itself to the new-birth interpretation. Held as it usually was, though not invariably, at the time of the vernal equinox on the Dies Saguinis, the resurrection of vegetation and of the god of vegetation naturally suggested the regeneration of the individual. Thus the whole ritual became a sort of passion drama in and of itself, involving three parties: the god, the neophyte, and nature in a single cycle of events. The neophyte descended into the pit; Attis died; vegetation withered. The neophyte came up out of the pit; Attis arose from the dead; vegetation revived. In this way, at the spring festival of Attis, the regeneration of the individual was made to coincide with the rebirth of nature.

 

V

The Cybele-Attis cult included certain strictly private rites that are quite as important for the student of personal religion as the public ceremonies we have just examined. Julian, the Emperor, in discussing the March festival, made careful distinction between two series of rites following the cutting down of the sacred pine, one secret and mysterious, the other open to the public. It is probable, therefore, that the secret rites of the cult were more or less co-ordinated with the public ceremonials. Augustine demanded to know of these esoteric rites, "What good is to be thought of their sacred rites which are concealed in darkness, when those which are brought forth into light are so detestable?" This interrogation conveniently emphasizes the differentiation between the public and private rites of the Attis cult.

In the nature of the case the public rites were open to a more or less limited number of participants. The sacerdota] consecration of the Dies Sanguinis was a restricted type of initiation available only for men and to those only who felt impelled to make the supreme sacrifice. It was a masculine and priestly initiation. But the cult of the Great Mother welcomed women as well as men and included laymen as well as priests. Even the grace of the taurobolium was obtainable only by those who could bear the expense of the ceremony. The private rites of the cult, however, were accessible to a far larger group. They represented the type of initiation as contrasted with the priestly. Hence they are of more than usual importance from the point of view of personal religious experience.

Unfortunately, we know even less of these private ceremonials than of the secret rites in other mystery cults, and for much the same reason. Their secret has been too well guarded. Only a single formula has come down to us, in slightly variant forms, from the esotoric liturgy of the Attis cult. According to the version given by Clement of Alexandria the confessional of the initiate was:

	 
		I have eaten out of the drum:
		 I have drunk out of the cymbal:
		 I have carried the Kernos:
		 I have entered the bridal chamber.
		
		 Firmicus Maternus repeated the formula in a more brief form:

	 
		I have eaten from the drum:
		 I have drunk out of the cymbal:
		 I have become a mystic votary of Attis.
		
		 In this formula two experiential elements stand out clearly. One is union with divinity by the semblance of a mystic marriage. "I have entered the bridal chamber." The votary entering the shrine of the goddess went there as a bridegroom. In the secret chamber divinity and humanity were united in marriage, and thus the devotee attained communion with his goddess. This was the lay equivalent for the priestly experience when the Gallus, as a new Attis, became the bridegroom of Cybele.

The second important element of mystical experience emphasized in this formula was communion with the deity by the act of eating and drinking.

	 
		I have eaten from the drum:
		 I have drunk from the cymbal.
		
		 The similarity of this confessional to the Eleusinian password is incontestable. Just as the initiate at Eleusis drank of the mixed barley potion and ate sacred food from the chest, so the devotee of the Great Mother drank from the cymbal and ate from the drum. The instruments mentioned, the drum and the cymbal, were the favorite musical instruments of the Great Mother. It was natural, therefore, that they should be used as cup and plate in this ceremony. Just what was the sacred food which the devotees shared we have scarcely a hint. We know only that it consisted of a beverage and of solid food.

Much more important than to know these external details is to understand the psychological effect of this communion meal on the participants. Was it merely a common meal that gave the votaries fellowship with one another, binding them together in a brotherhood like that of a great family? It may have had this meaning incidentally, but certainly this was not the inclusive significance of the rite for the votary. It was a communion with divinity rather than a communion with one's fellow devotees. Firmicus Maternus, in denouncing this rite, contrasted it specifically with the Christian sacrament of the eucharist. His words show clearly that there was a genuine parallelism between the Christian rite and the pagan. Both were believed to communicate divine life to the devotee and assure him of salvation. Maternus concluded his invective against the pagan rite with the appeal, "It is another food that gives salvation and life. Seek the bread of Christ and the cup of Christ!" Apparently, therefore, the sacred meal in the Semele-Attis cult was a genuine sacrament that enabled the devotee to absorb the divine life in a realistic manner. In the liturgy of the cult, Attis himself was addressed as a "reaped ear of corn." It is not unlikely that a corn product, or some other vegetable food in which Attis was believed especially to dwell, formed a part of the sacred repast. In partaking of this meal, the devotee was enabled to share in a materialistic manner the life of his god. The common meal of the Great Mother's cult therefore was a means of attaining to a realistic type of mystical communion with divinity.

All these various rites in the cult of the Great Mother were crude enough. They were characterized by realism and naturalism. There was eating and drinking. There was a bath in blood. There was an orgy of self-induced sorrow and joy that had its climax in self mutilation. Yet these very rites with all their primitive crudity and cruelty became transmuted into vehicles for really deep religious experience. The act of eating and drinking became a sacrament of communion wherein the devotee partook of a divine substance and thus attained actual union with his deity. The semblance of a mystic marriage whereby the initiate as a divine lover was united to the goddess was another means of attaining the same end. The blood bath of the taurobolium brought with it the washing away of the sins and evils of an old life. It was a regenerating experience by which the neophyte was reborn for eternity. The passion drama depicting the death of natural life and its renovation in the springtime was an allegory of personal resurrection to eternal life. Even the act of self-mutilation became the means whereby the devotee, like Attis himself, effected his own deification and assimilated himself to the nature of the Great Mother. In the cult of the Mater Deum the communion of eating and drinking, the semblance of mystic marriage, the purification in the bath of blood, and the mortification of the flesh, all functioned as sacraments of spiritual regeneration.

 

VI

For the student of Christian origins a knowledge of the regenerative rites of the Great Mother is doubly important because her worship was remarkably like that in a whole group of cults with which Paul, the Christian apostle, had early familiarity and contacts that were intimate. These were the religions indigenous to the lands of Syria and Cilicia, where Paul was brought up and where he had his early missionary experience. Unfortunately, our knowledge of these gentile cults is fragmentary and chaotic. They had nothing like the solidarity of the Greek and major Oriental systems, and it would be utterly impossible to reconstruct their history or to outline their ritual in any detail. Still it is possible to distinguish among them certain common elements that show a general resemblance to the Phrygian worship of the Great Mother. Usually, the central place in the cultus was held by a mother-goddess who embodied the power of life, and a somewhat subordinate position was assigned to a youthful male deity who like Attis died and rose again.

The prototype for this diversified, yet measurably unified complex of religious systems seems to have been the Babylonian cult of Ishtar, the deified personification of motherhood. She was known to biblical writers as Ashtoreth, and to the Greeks as Astarte or Aphrodite. With her was associated a young and active deity called Tammuz, who was slain but afterward revived. As in the case of Attis, lamentations formed an important part of his worship. In Ezekiel's day this practice was adopted by Jews, even, and among the "abominations" which the prophet saw perpetrated at the very gate of the Jerusalem temple was the weeping of women for Tammuz! In Phoenicia the mother-goddess was worshiped under the name of Ashtart, and as early as the third century B.C. her cult was so pre-eminent that the kings of Sidon served her as priests. She, too, had her consort, Eshmun by name. Their houses were built together, and they were simultaneously glorified.

To the Greek world this immortal pair was familiar as Aphrodite and Adonis, the goddess of love and her impetuous young husband. "The Fourth Venus," said Cicero, "was a Syrian . . . . who is called Astarte and is said to have been married to Adonis." Greek and Latin writers delighted to retell the story of their love and of Aphrodite's loss. The tale was that of an ardent young hunter who, all too rash, was wounded to death by a boar. Thus young Adonis died; but the grief of his goddess-lover brought about his restoration to life. In the cult of these divinities, also, traditional lamentations were a conspicuous element of the ritual. Sappho more than once referred to this weeping for the god, while Bion wrote a lament for Adonis which, though a conventional literary product and not an actual cult hymn, yet gives a fairly accurate impression of the mourning songs sung at Adonis' festivals.

The annual celebrations in honor of the god were elaborated as a drama of marriage and passion. Around a ritual marriage bed the wedding of the divine pair was celebrated. There followed a lament for the dead Adonis ending in a forecast of the resurrection. Sometimes that joyous event was actually represented. At all the important centers of Adonis worship, not only in Syria and Cyprus but also in Athens and Alexandria, the festival of Adonis was one of the great events in the religious calendar. Theocritus, in one of his Idyls, described such a festival as it was conducted at the court of Ptolemy early in the Hellenistic period. The marriage song sung at this celebration began with a description of the wedding tableau and included an adequate account of the Adonis festival as a whole.

	 
		The bridal bed for Adonis spread of my own making is;
		 Cypris hath this for her wrapping, Adonis that for his.
		 Of eighteen years or nineteen, is turned the rose-limbed groom;
		 His pretty lip is smooth to sip, for it bears but flaxen bloom,
		 And now she's in her husband's arms, and so we'll say good-night;
		 But tomorrow we'll come with the dew, the dew, and take hands and bear him away
		 Where plashing wave the shore doth lave, and there with locks undight
		 And bosoms bare all shining fair will raise this shrilling lay:
		
		"O sweet Adonis, none but thee of the children of gods and men
		 'Twixt overworld and underworld doth pass and pass again:
		 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
		
		Adonis sweet, Adonis dear,
		 Be gracious for another year;
		 Thou'rt welcome to thine own alway,
		 And welcome we'll both cry today
		 And next Adonis-tide."
		
		 Another Syrian goddess who gained considerable prominence in the Roman world was Atargatis. Her consort was Hadad, with whom the belief in immortality was connected at an early period. In his ritual, as in that of Adonis, an elaborate show of grief was a characteristic factor, and the prophet Zechariah knew of the lamentations for Hadad. But it was the goddess who attracted the attention of the Roman world. In the eyes of the Greeks she was the "Syrian goddess," and among Latins this Dea Syria became popular as Iasura. During the latter days of the Republic her cult was notably propagated by the agency of slaves and under the Empire Syrian merchants became as her missionaries. She was especially popular with the lower classes, though some in high stations affected her cult. Marius was one of her devotees and Nero "held in contempt all religious rites except those of the Syrian Goddess"--though his esteem for her was not lasting one. The great slave uprising in Sicily in 134 was led by a slave who claimed to be inspired by the goddess herself--a revealing illustration of the loyalty she commanded for this class in society.

Her rites were such as would appeal to the proletariat and conserve religious values for them. They were realistic, picturesque, sensuous, and fascinating in their strangeness. Apulcius in an incidental account of the missionary operations of her traveling priests gave a memorable picture of their methods in actual practice among the rural population of Thessaly. The account was not a very complimentary one, and it was doubtless exaggerated. Certainly the itinerant priests of the Syrian goddess were generally actuated by more worthy motives than this particular group was represented to be. Still the description of their religious exercises was detailed by Apuleius with all the vividness of life itself, and it may be considered a true representation of the cult rites on festal occasions. Lucian, who was himself a Syrian and wrote as one wholly familiar with this religion, also described the rites in a way that parallels and confirms the account of Apuleius. The exercises were essentially the same as those that formed the climax of the Great Mother's festival and made eunuch priests of her male devotees. To the accompaniment of wild music men danced themselves into a frenzy and then lacerated and mutilated themselves unsparingly. Here again the central experience of the cult was ecstatic in character, with a cruel and crudely physical emotionalism. But it was not without its mystical content; for in this way the devotees sought to affiliate themselves with their pitiless goddess.

Altogether the cults of Cilicia and Syria may be grouped in the same class as the Anatolian worship of the Cybele. They were redemption religions, the deities of which were revered as the saviors of the individual man. In their propagandist efforts they aimed at universalism through individualism. They were still tainted with much of the grossness of primitive naturalism; yet this very fact was not a disadvantage with the humbler folk in society whom they captivated by the barbaric appeal of their ritual. They were religions of enthusiasm which aroused fear, pain, hope, joy, all culminating in ecstasy. By mortification, by stimulating music, by self-mutilation, and like means, these Syrian zealots strove to rise to a higher state than mere mortality and unite themselves with divinity. This was their rebirth to a new life and immortality.

     
Pagan Regeneration, by Harold R. Willoughby, [1929], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER VI

 

DEATH AND NEW BIRTH IN MITHRAISM

AMONG the most ancient and most honored gods of Roman paganism was the Persian Mithra. He came to the empire out of a more remote oriental antiquity than did the Great Mother of the Gods. In the hymns of the Vedas, as in those of the Avesta, his name appeared; in the former as Mitra, in the latter as Mithra. To be sure his character was but dimly traced in the Vedas. Only a single fragment remains that was dedicated especially to him, and other references to him were quite incidental. Still, enough traits are preserved to make clear the resemblance of the Vedic deity to the Iranian Mithra. Fundamentally, he was the god of light, invoked together with Heaven under the name of Varuna, even as in the Persian system Mithra was associated with Ahura. Certain ethical qualities of his character are also distinguishable; for he was regarded as the upholder of truth and the enemy of error, even as Mithra was revered by the Persians. These traits of resemblance are sufficiently clear to make the primitive identity of the two deities quite certain and to push the origins of Mithraism far back into the unknown period when the ancestors of the Persians and the ancestors of the Hindus were living together.

 

I

In the Avesta the character of Mithra was depicted with special clarity, one of the longest of the yashts, the tenth, or Mihir Yasht, being dedicated to him. The qualities there ascribed to Mithra remained fairly constant through the later centuries of paganism, and are important to know for an appreciation of the ethical quality of this Persian religious system. In the Mihir Yasht, as in the Vedas, Mithra was represented as the genius of heavenly light, "who first of the heavenly gods reaches over the Hara, before the undying, swift-horsed sun; who foremost in a golden array, takes hold of the beautiful summits, and from thence looks over the abode of the Arvans with a beneficent eye!" He was not himself the sun, moon, or stars; he was more than they. He was the genius of celestial light who appeared before sunrise and at nightfall went over the earth after the setting of the sun and surveyed everything that is between the earth and the heavens. As the beneficent god of light, Mithra was the dispenser of physical blessings. His light fostered life and happiness and his heat made the earth fruitful. The usual epithet applied to him was "the lord of wide pastures," and he was the one who gave to man an abundance of material possessions, good health, and a numerous progeny.

But the Avestan thought of Mithra did not remain on the material level merely. It reached high ethical altitudes. Being the "ever waking, ever watchful" god, who with his "hundred ears and hundred eyes" constantly watched the world, Mithra naturally became the guardian of truth and the preserver of good faith. Throughout the Mihir Yasht he was referred to as the "truth-speaking, undeceived god, to whom nobody must lie." Ahura Mazda himself was represented as laying this solemn injunction on Zarathustra. "Break not the contract (mithrem), O Spitama! neither the one which you have entered into with one of the unfaithful nor the one you have entered into with one of the faithful who is one of your own faith. For Mithra stands for both the faithful and the unfaithful." To those who obeyed this injunction, and otherwise honored Mithra, the god guaranteed his protection. He was the divinity "whom the poor man, who follows the good law, when wronged and deprived of his rights invokes for help with hands uplifted .... and to him with whom Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, has been satisfied, he comes with help."'

The wrath of Mithra was as terrible as his blessings were rich and full; for he was the implacable foe of all evil who, "never sleeping wakefully maintains the creation of Mazda." He was even engaged in ceaseless combat with the spirits of evil, and to wicked men he brought endless troubles. "To whom shall I in my might impart sickness and death?" he asks. "To whom shall I impart poverty and sterility? Of whom shall I at one stroke cut off the offspring?" The response is:

"Thou bringest down terror upon the bodies of men who lie to Mithra; thou takest away the strength from their arms, being angry and all powerful; thou takest the swiftness from their feet, the eyesight from their eyes, the hearing from their ears." "On whatever side there is one who has lied unto Mithra, on that side Mithra stands forth, angry and offended, and his wrath is slow to relent."

This character of militant virtue was one of the prime attributes of Mithra.

The god's championship of righteousness and opposition to evil was not confined to this life merely. It extended to the future, and became the guaranty of safety and security to the faithful ones in the world to come. Their prayer for protection was a prayer that included the future as well as the present. "Mayest thou keep us in both worlds, O Mithra, lord of wide pastures! both in this material world and in the world of the spirit, from the fiend Death, from the fiend Aeshma, from the fiendish hordes that lift up the spear of havoc and from the onsets of Aeshma." This clear conception of Mithra, the god of light and truth and the opponent of evil, was one of Persia's best gifts to the religious life of the Roman Empire.

 

II

From the time of his admission to the Zoroastrian pantheon until his last fatal battle with Christianity itself, Mithra was a conquering deity. His cult from the first became increasingly popular and powerful and his own position is the object of popular devotion, once established, remained a dominating one. It is true the price he paid for admission to the Avestan system was that of submission to Ahura Mazda. Like other ancient nature divinities, he was classified as one of the creatures of Mazda, one of the Yazatas. But he quickly became the most powerful of them all and was distinguished as the intermediary between Ahura, the god of light, and Ahriman, the god of darkness. It was here that Plutarch located him in his exposition of Persian dualism. Later, however, Mithra compIetely overshadowed with his glorious and vivid personality the vague figure of Ahura himself. Proofs might be multiplied showing what a conspicuous role Mithra played in the religion of the Persian empire. He was peculiarly the god of the "great kings," their special guardian, whom they invoked on the eve of great undertakings and by whom they swore their mighty oaths. He was the one Iranian god who made a real impression on the literature of classical Greece--an eloquent testimony to the exalted position he occupied in the religious system of Persia.

With the extension of Persian power by military conquest there followed a great accession of influence to Mithraism. It was during the days of the Achaemenides that Mithra finally acquired the character of lord of armies, which remained a predominant trait throughout the rest of his history. Where Persian arms met with success, there Mithra became known. The whole great Persian empire was missionary territory for his official clergy, the Magi. In Babylon they became superior to the indigenious priests. Yet victorious Mithraism felt the effects of its Chaldean conquest and ever thereafter bore the marks of its victory. In Chaldaea Mithraism learned astrology and after that it continued as an astronomical religion. Under the early Achaemenides the Magi penetrated Asia Minor also, and there the indigenous religions paled before Mithraism. The Magi captured Pontus and Cappadocia, where Strabo knew of their sanctuaries. They penetrated Galatia and Phrygia and remained there in considerable numbers. Lydia, apparently, received its contingent of Magi, for Pausanias, writing in the period of the Antonines, told of a Mithraic sanctuary attributed to Cyrus where the descendants of these early missionaries still chanted their hymns in a barbarian tongue. While the provinces of Asia Minor were yet under the suzerainty of the "great kings," Mithraism became firmly established there.

It might be expected that a religion so closely identified with the fortunes of the Persian empire would share in the downfall of the kingdom of Darius. Exactly the opposite occurred during the Hellenistic period. The Diadochi were quite as friendly to Mithraism as ever the satraps of the great king had been. In Pontus, Cappadocia, Armenia, and Commagene, dynasties were established which represented the Achaemenian tradition in opposition to the Hellenizing tendencies of the Greek kings of Pergamum and Antioch. These Anatolian rulers made Mithra the special object of their loyalty, and the very personal character of their devotion was attested by the frequency with which the name "Mithridates" occurred in their families. For the prosperity of Mithraism in Asia Minor during the Hellenistic period, however, royal patronage was not chiefly responsible. Rather it was the ready adaptation that Mithraism itself made to the new religious demands of the times. It threw off its official and markedly Persian character and began to operate as a private cult brotherhood rather than as a racial or nationalistic religion. Men were admitted to its membership, not by the fact of birth into a particular racial or national group, but by special initiation. Like the contemporary cults of Cybele and Demeter, it addressed its appeal to men as individuals. The downfall of the Persian empire could not check the growth of such a brotherhood, any more than the political misfortune of proud Athens could lessen the attractiveness of the Eleusinian mysteries. Apparently, too, under the stimulus of religious competition, the followers of Mithra began to engage in unusually vigorous propaganda on behalf of their cult.

It was during the Hellenistic period and in Asia Minor that Mithraism made its final modifications and took on the definitive form it maintained through the imperial period. In the uplands of central Asia Minor, the god entered into an alliance with Cybele that became famous in Roman times. Quite naturally, too, he was associated with Helius, the sun-god. An external but altogether notable result of the contact of Mithraism with Hellenism was the sudden tendency to represent the god in human form. Here in Asia Minor, toward the beginning of the second century B.C. Mithraism learned from a Pergamene sculptor to chisel that remarkably impressive group of "Mithra Tauroctonus," which thereafter stood like an altar-piece in the apse of the god's cave-sanctuaries. Thus the vague personification of oriental imagination came to assume a precise and definite form altogether appealing to occidental taste. The very fact of standardized representation had its influence in a more precise definition of the character of Mithra. All of these accretions of art and legend tended to make the Iranian religion of Mithra a Hellenized product. To adopt M. Cumont's vivid figure, above the Mazdean substratum and the thick sediment of Chaldean astrology and the rich alluvial deposits of beliefs local in Minor, there grew up a luxuriant vegetation of Hellenistic art that partly concealed the original nature of Mithraism. This Hellenistic overgrowth is a picturesque, if indirect, testimony to the popularity of Mithraism in Asia Minor during the three centuries preceding the Chistian era.

By the beginning of the Christian centuries the domain of Mithra extended from the Indus in the east to the Euxine on the north. In the plateau countries of Asia Minor, he was strongly intrenched. One of the great champions of Mithraism at this time was Mithridates Eupator (120-63 B.C.), a foeman worthy of the best generals Rome could send against him. The Magi were his supporters, and M. Cumont conjectures that if he had realized his ambitious schemes Mithraism would have become the official religion of his great Asian empire. It is probable, however, that his defeat by Pompey was not an unrelieved disaster for Mithraism since it opened the way for a further dissemination of the cult through the agency of refugees, slaves, and prisoners.

About this time Mithraism came prominently to Roman notice in another section of Asia Minor--in the land of Paul's birth--as the religion of the Cilician pirates. These bold freebooters dared dispute naval supremacy with the Romans and audaciously plundered the most venerable shrines around the eastern Mediterranean. In all this they may well have considered themselves the champions of the invincible god whose help, they were assured, would win them the victory. It was Pompey who forcibly suppressed the champions of Mithra (66 B.C.). In Paul's native land, however, the religion of Mithra still continued to be influential, and in Tarsus he was worshiped for centuries thereafter.

For Mithra these military disasters in Asia Minor signalized the beginning of his conquest of Italy and the Empire. According to Plutarch it was when the Cilician pirates were defeated that the Romans first became acquainted with the rites of Mithra. In speaking of the pirates and their religion, Plutarch affirmed, "The secret rites of Mithra continue to the present time, having been first instituted by them." It is altogether probable, then, that the defeat of the pirates resulted in bringing to Rome from Asia Minor slaves and prisoners who were devotees of Mithra. In this very humble manner the mysteries of the Persian god were first brought to the capital city of the Mediterranean world. The successful conclusion of the Mithridatic Wars undoubtedly brought about a similar immigration of slaves, captives, and traders, as well.

Later, when Rome began to consolidate her eastern conquests, the way was cleared for the establishment of more intimate relations between Italy and Anatolia. Under Tiberius, Cappadocia was incorporated as part of the empire. Western Pontus was added under Nero. Once these official administrative relations were established with the very provinces where Mithraism was popular, it was inevitable that Mithraic influences should increasingly be felt in Rome and Italy. By the middle of the first century A.D. the mysteries were so highly esteemed by the Romans that the emperor himself was initiated by the Magi who came with Tiridates to Rome. Plutarch, a little later, referred to the rites of Mithraism as a familiar religious phenomenon and spoke with approval of the Mithraic view of life. Thus, Mithraism, which during the Hellenistic period was little known outside the Orient, had, by the middle of the first century A.D., become familiar to Rome and Italy. A full century before Paul of Tarsus brought the Christian gospel to the imperial city, his fellow-countrymen of Cilicia had introduced the gospel of Mithra there; and by the time the Christian apostle came to Rome, the religion of the Iranian god was already well known in the city.

Just as Asia Minor in the last century B.C. sent out the emissaries who won Rome for Mithra, so in the next century Asia Minor sent out the missionaries who won many of the frontier provinces of the Empire as well. In this case the missionaries were soldiers recruited from the upland provinces of Asia Minor; from Pontus, Cappadocia, Commagene, and Lesser Amnenia--again the districts in which the cult of Mithra was well established. Even before these sections were annexed to the empire, while they were still in the position of client kingdoms, Rome made use of them as recruiting grounds. During the Parthian Wars under Claudius and Nero, large oriental contingents were added to the Roman armies, for the most part as auxiliaries, but also as legionaries. It has been suggested that the soldiers of the Third Legion who paid homage to the rising sun at the battle of Betriacum (A.D. 69) were devotees of Mithra. Thus already in the first century A.D. was begun that unique movement of religious propaganda in the ranks of the Roman army which was so significant for the later dissemination of the Persian religion.

For Mithraism soldiers were the best kind of missionaries. Mithra himself had been for long centuries the god of battles, and his cult was an exclusively masculine one. Soldiers, on the other hand, were pious to the point of being superstitious. The dangers to which they were constantly exposed caused them to seek the assurances of a religion that would guarantee safety for the present and salvation for the future. The oriental devotees of the militant god Mithra, who had found these assurances in his religion, were not in the least exclusive. They gladly welcomed and initiated their companions in arms as members of their cult brotherhoods. True to the camaraderie of soldier life, these neophytes in turn became missionaries for Mithra; and so the movement grew. Introduced into the Roman army early in the first century by semi-barbarian recruits from Asia Minor, Mithraism spread like an epidemic through the ranks of the legions. Henceforth it was the religion of the Roman army and its chief centers of influence were the garrison towns of the frontier provinces. In notable instances the founding of Mithraic shrines and other military dedications in northern centers like Aquincum and Carnuntum can be traced back directly to soldiers who came from first-century Anatolia. During the next two centuries Mithraism spread to the farthest limits of the Empire. Mithraic monuments were scattered from the Euxine Sea to the mountains of Scotland, and from the banks of the Rhine, to the Sahara Desert. Viewing a map showing this diffusion of the Mithraism, one is ready to credit the famous dictum of Renan that "if Christianity had been arrested in its growth by some mortal malady, the world itself would have become Mithraistic."

To one section of the Empire only did Mithra remain a stranger. That was to Greece. Within the confines of Hellas, a single late inscription has been found at the Piraeus and a solitary bas-relief at Patros. To the Greeks their old memories of Persian wars Mithraism was too oriental to make an appeal. Notwithstanding this failure in Greece, however, and quite apart from later success, it is important to remember that in the first century Mithraism was not only well established in Asia Minor, but it had also already begun a lively missionary campaign in the heart of Italy and in the ranks of the Roman army. Hence, in summarizing the religious influences which were significant in the Graeco-Roman world when Christianity had its initial development, considerable account must be taken of Mithraism.

 

III

It is therefore important to examine the practices of this cult in order to determine whether or not they were expressive of a radical type of religious experience properly characterized as a new birth, such as many other contemporary cults fostered by their initiation ceremonies. In making this search, one is much handicapped by a lack of materials with which to work. The mysteries of Mithra, like the other private cults, were strictly secret and the liturgy, which for the faithful was such an important part of their religion, has all but completely disappeared. Scarcely a trace is left of either hymn or prayer, and only scattered hints may be gathered here and there as to the character of the ceremonies included in the Mithraic rites. Most of these hints, even, come to us from prejudiced Christian sources. Mithraic monuments, however, are comparatively abundant, and from these one may derive indirect suggestions concerning the cult ritual. At least it is possible to gather from the remains of Mithraea a general impression of the effectiveness of Mithraic rites.

The sanctuaries of Mithra were eaves in the mountains or underground crypts, recalling the primeval cave in which the god performed the life-giving act of slaying the cosmic bull. These chapels were always small, and when the brotherhood grew beyond a convenient size--a hundred members at the maximum--other Mithraea were established. In small shrines such as these, the impressions made on the mind of the neophyte were bound to be very intimate and personal. It was a place, too, for mystical religious experience, where the devotee could feel himself close to divinity. In the limited nave of the chapel stood venerated images: the torch-bearers, the mysterious lion-headed Cronus, and the "Petrogenes Mithra" rising from the generative rock. In the center of the apse stood the group of "Tauroctonus Mithra," a pathetic tableau, but the central scene of a great salvation drama. Around it were grouped in small panels other scenes from the life of Mithra, from which M. Cumont has ably reconstructed various episodes in the cosmic myth of the Iranian god. The ceiling was decorated to represent the heavens, and astronomical symbols were frequent elsewhere in the decorations. The crypt as a whole was arranged like a microcosm wherein the individual neophyte had an opportunity to come close to things divine. Such were the physical surroundings amid which the candidates for initiation participated in the Mithraic sacraments. Though the sanctuaries were small, they were effectively arranged and lighted to make the initiatory rites highly impressive.

Although we know almost nothing of Mithraic initiation, one important fact is clear, it was no simple affair. There were various degrees of initiation which admitted the candidates to different grades of privilege. A text of Jerome, together with various inscriptions, preserves the number and names of the different degrees. They were seven, each one called a sacramentum, ranging from the lowest, or Raven (corax), grade to the highest grade, that of the Father (pater). Between were the degrees known as Occult (cryphius), Soldier (miles), Lion (leo), Persian (Perses), and Courier of the Sun (heliodromus). Apparently, in the process of initiation, the celebrants donned sacred masks appropriate to the particular degree conferred; the Occult wore a veil, the Persian a cap, while the Soldier, Raven, and Lion each wore disguises that can easily be imagined. Such masked figures appear now and then on Mithraic bas-reliefs. A Christian of the fourth century wrote in ridicule of these practices: "Some flap their wings like birds, imitating the cry of crows; others growl like lions; in such manner are they that are called wise basely travestied." To be understood adequately, these Mithraic disguises must be interpreted as the late survivals of very primitive religious practices. Their genesis goes back to the time when deity was conceived and represented under the form of animals typically. Then the worshiper, in order to identify himself with his god, took on the animal name and semblance of the deity; he put on the skin of his lion-god and was himself called a "Lion." So the Raven and Lion masks of Roman Mithraism were but tardy survivals of the animal skins that were donned in primitive times that the devotee might realistically charge himself with the power of his god.

Other peculiar ceremonies also were performed at each grade of initiation. For example, Tertullian told of the rite of the crown, enacted during the sacrament of the Soldier. At the sword's point a crown was offered the candidate "as though in mimicry of martyrdom," Tertullian said. But the initiate was taught to push it aside with his hand and affirm, "Mithra is my crown!" Thereafter he never wore a crown or garland, not even at banquets or at military triumphs, and whenever a crown was offered him he refused it saying, "It belongs to my god." This was taken as proof that he was a soldier of Mithra. Tertullian himself was the son of a centurion. He was quite familiar with this ceremony and spoke of it with rare appreciation. Was his father, then, a soldier of Mithra as well as of Rome?

The same author, in another passage, told of a rite of sealing which appropriately formed a part of the initiation of the Mithraic soldier. Just as the recruits to the army had a mark burned in their flesh before they were admitted to the oath, so the Mithraic initiate as a part of his sacramentum had a sign burned on his forehead. "Thus Mithra marks on the forehead his own soldiers," said Tertullian. In this way the solemn vow of the initiate as a soldier of Mithra was as indelibly impressed upon his mind is the seal was on his forehead. Of the ceremonials connected with the other grades of initiation we know almost nothing.

In addition to the rites that may be related to a particular sacramentum there were certain other ceremonials of real importance which cannot be definitely localized in the Mithraic ritual. One such group of requirements were in the nature of preliminary austerities intended to test the moral courage and physical endurance of the candidates. As early as the period of the Avesta, such preparations were prescribed for the worship of Mithra. In the Mihir Yasht it was recorded:

"Zarathustra asked him: 'O Ahura Mazda! How shall the faithfull man drink the libations cleanly prepared, which if he does and he offers them to Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, Mithra will be pleased with him and without anger?' Ahura Mazda answered: 'Let them wash their bodies three days and three nights: Let them undergo thirty strokes for the sacrifice and prayer to Mithra, the lord of wide pastures.'"

These antique prescriptions were probably the origin of the trials imposed on candidates in Roman Mithraism. Neither the number nor the precise nature of the various ordeals through which the initiates were made to pass are known, though later writers, the Christian Fathers especially, delighted to elaborate them in detail and to give their number very explicitly. Gregory of Nazianzen, for example, spoke indefinitely of "tortures" which the initiates had to endure; his commentator Nonnus, however, enlarged on the theme by telling of "eighty punishments" by water, fire, frost, hunger, thirst, and prolonged journeyings, all arranged in a series of increasing severity. According to another statement, the initiate was blindfolded, his hands were tied with the entrails of chickens, he was made to leap over a ditch filled with water and, finally, the act was brought to an end when a "liberator" appeared who cut the disgusting bonds with a sword. So far as specific detail is concerned, all this gratuitous information need not be taken seriously. Certainly the Mithraic shrines were so small and so limited in equipment that such ordeals could scarcely be more than a matter of pretence. At one point in his commentary, however, Nonnus was doubtless correct--the tests in general were intended to develop a Stoic apathy and to cultivate a steady control of the emotions.

Distinctive among the preliminary Mithraic tests was a simulated murder. Apparently, there was performed by the initiate, more likely on the initiate, the feint of a murder. The historian Lampridius in telling of the mad freaks of the emperor Commodus said that during the Mithraic ceremonies "he polluted the rites by a real murder where a certain thing was to be done for the sake of inspiring terror." Probably at the time the emperor was officiating as a Pater at one of the lower degrees of initiation, perhaps that of the Soldier, when he committed the cruel deed. Doubtless in its origin the simulated murder of Mithraism was real--if not a human sacrifice, at least a mortal combat. Later it became a less dangerous test and finally a mere liturgical fiction. The wholesale charges of murder which were made against the devotees of Mithra by late and hostile writers are as little deserving of credence as similar charges that were made against the Christians.

A simulation of death in the Mithraic mysteries, however, is perfectly intelligible. Death was the logical preliminary to a renewal of life; hence the pretence of death by the neophyte was a perfectly natural antecedent to the regenerative experiences of baptism and sacramental communion that followed in the Mithraic ritual. That this was precisely the interpretation put upon this bit of liturgical fiction is clearly suggested by a passage in Tertullian. In discussing the Mithraic rites of baptism and communion, the Christian lawyer affirmed: "Mithra there brings in the symbol of a resurrection." This striking use of the phrase imago ressurrectionis is doubly significant. It proves that a simulation of death was an integral part of Mithraic ritual, and also that it was but antecedent to an experience of regeneration.

Various ceremonies figured in the Mithraic liturgy which were calculated to induce this process of spiritual renewal. Among the most important were the ablutions which from the earliest times were prominent in the cult of Mithra. The ceremony consisted either of sprinkling as with holy water, or of complete immersion as in Isiac practice. In the grottoes of the Persian god, water was always at hand, and in certain instances, at Ostia, for example, vaults have been found which may have served the purpose of immersion. Mithraic baptism, like the later Christian rite, promised purification from guilt and the washing away of sins. Christian Fathers noted the similarity and were quick to charge the Devil with plagiarism at this point. Tertullian declared:

"The Devil, whose business is to pervert the truth, mimics the exact circumstances of the divine sacraments in the mysteries of idols. He himself baptizes some, that is to say, his believers and followers; he promises forgiveness of sins in the sacred fount, and thus initiates them into the religion of Mithra."

Again, and this time for the sake of rebuttal, the Christian lawyer stated the case for pagan baptism in the following words: "Well, but the nations, who are strangers to all understanding of spiritual powers ascribe to their idols the imbuing of waters with the self-same efficacy (as Christian baptism)." Then he countered with the argument, "But they cheat themselves with waters that are widowed. For washing is the channel through which they are initiated into the sacred rites of some notorious Isis or Mithra." From Tertullian's ex parte statement of the case, even, it is clear that the neophyte came out of the baptism of Mithra with his conscience lightened from the weight of previous guilt. The waters of baptism were believed to wash away the defilements of the old life, and to induce a spiritual renewal.

Provision was also made in the Mithraic ritual for nourishing the new spiritual life in a realistic manner. At initiation, honey was applied to the hands and tongue of the candidate. According to Porphyry, this was done in both the Lion and the Persian grades of initiation. As Porphyry said explicitly, honey was supposed to be a powerful preservative; hence it would serve to keep the initiate from the blemish of sin. In the Mithraic liturgy, however, it was believed to have a positive efficacy also, as its application to the tongue of the candidate suggests. Placed in the mouth of the neophyte, it was supposed to communicate to him some marvelous virtue. It was customary to put honey into the mouths of new-born children. So in Mithraism the spiritually new-born were fed with honey. So later, in primitive Christianity and among the Marcionites, the baptized were given a drink of milk mingled with honey. Furthermore, in Mithraic thought honey was a celestial substance produced under the influence of the moon where, according to their cosmic myth, the seed of the divine bull that Mithra slew at the beginning of time bad been gathered. By its origin, then, honey was a powerful agent for nourishing the new spiritual life of the initiate. It was charged with mystical properties. It was the food of the gods themselves, and its absorption by the initiate endowed him with divine powers.

Another means whereby the new divine life was nourished in the neophyte was by participation in a sacrament of eating and drinking. Mithraic theology traced this nourishment also back to the bull of their cosmic myth; for from the blood of the moribund victim of Mithra sprang the vine, which supplied the votaries of the god with the life-giving wine of their sacrament. Their communion included bread as well as wine. In the famous bas-relief from Konjica, Bosnia, there is a most interesting representation of a Mithraic communion. Before two reclinging communicants stands a tripod supporting tiny loaves of bread, each distinctly marked with a cross. One of the standing figures in the group, easily identified as a Persian, presents the communicants with a drinking cup. Other participants in this ceremony are clearly Mithraic initiates of different orders. This bas-relief shows in an unusually circumstantial manner that the Persian mystery religion, like the Christian, had its sacramental communion with its bread and wine.

The likenesses between the two rites did not fail to impress the Christian apologists who once more accused the demons of thievery. Justin Martyr, in speaking of the Christian Eucharist, asserted, "The wicked demons have imitated this in the mysteries of Mithra, commanding the same thing to be done. For that bread and a cup of water are placed before the initiate with certain incantations in these mysteries, you either know or can learn." The similarities between the two communions, Mithraic and Christian, are indeed striking. Both were memorial services, celebrated in remembrance of the divine hero of the cult; for Mithra at the close of his redemptive career and just before his ascension to heaven, partook of a last supper with Helius and other companions of his labors. On the back of the great pivoted bas-relief at Hedderheim this original last supper was depicted. Whenever the initiates participated in the Mithraic communion, they recalled this mythical love-feast.

But it meant more to them than this. From their communion they gained assurance for the future. Supernatural effects were expected from the assimilation of the consecrated elements. From the bread and wine they gained not only vigor of body and wisdom of mind but also the power to combat evil spirits and a divine substance that assured them of the boon of immortality. Thus the sacramental collation served to nourish the new life of the neophyte in a realistic way.

The sequence of these few ritual remains--the preliminary trials and the simulated death of the candidate, the regenerative bath of baptism, and finally the nourishing of the new life by means of honey and the consecrated elements of the Mithraic communion--serves to show that the idea of death and rebirth to a new life figured prominently in the ritual of the Persian god. If additional evidence is needed, it is found in the fragments of what was probably in its original state a Mithraic liturgy now preserved in an Egyptian magical papyrus dating from about A.D. 300 Professor Albrecht Dieterich, who published this as Eine Mithrasliturgie, is of the opinion that the liturgical parts, which consist of invocations, go back to a Mithraic ritual of the final grade of initiation in use perhaps as early is the first century. The rest of the Paris papyrus is composed of magical formulas and other occult matter. Notwithstanding all this extraneous material, it is not unlikely that the author of this religio-magical cento had access to a genuine Mithraic ritual of which he made considerable use for his own purposes. The figure of the death and rebirth of the initiate comes prominently to view at several points in this liturgical text, and it becomes quite apparent that initiation into the mysteries of Mithra was comprehensively thought of in this figurative way.

The opening prayer of the liturgy begins:

"O! first genesis of my genesis! First beginning of my beginning! First spirit of the spirit that is within me! .... May it please thee to translate me, who am trammelled by the nature which underlies me, to an immortal genesis .... that I may be born again in spirit; that I may be initiated, and the sacred Spirit may breathe on me!"

At different points in the liturgy, this spiritual genesis is specifically contrasted with natural birth. "Though I was born a mortal from a mortal mother . . . . having been sanctified by sacred ceremonies I am about to gaze with immortal eyes on the immortal aeon." Again the contrast between the natural birth and the spiritual rebirth is even more clearly brought out in the words addressed to the supreme god, "I, a man . . . . begotten in mortal womb by human seed, and today begotten again by thee, a man who has been called from so many thousands to immortality according to the plan of a god wonderful in his goodness, strives and longs to adore thee according to his human ability." The concluding words of the liturgy mark a high point of ecstatic expression and form a fitting conclusion for a Mithraic ritual. "O Lord! Having been born again, I pass away, being exalted the while. Having been exalted, I die! Coming into being by life-begetting birth and freed unto death, I go the way as thou hast ordered, as thou hast established the law and ordained the sacrament."

Few if any ancient texts contain a clearer appreciation of the radical religious experience of rebirth to immortal life than does this magical papyrus with its fragments of a Mithraic liturgy. By itself alone it is startling testimony to the prominence of the idea in gentile religious circles. Taken in conjunction with the few well attested ritual acts of Mithraism which were obviously intended to symbolize and induce an experience of spiritual rebirth, this evidence becomes quite convincing. It is certain that the devotees of Mithra viewed initiation as a rebirth to immortality.

 

IV

Finally, it is relevant to note the quality of the new life induced by the Mithraic ritual, particularly in its ethical aspects. From its very inception the cult of Mithra was characterized by soundly moral elements. If etymology counts for anything, it would seem that from early times the conception of Mithra himself was an ethical one, for his name was related to a common noun which in the Sanskrit meant "friend" or "friendship" and in Avestan "compact." As a result of Mithra's alliance with Zoroastrianism, his ethical character became strongly accentuated and he was clearly defined as the special guardian of truth. Zoroastrianism, with its apotheosis of moral dualism, gave Mithra his permanent function as the champion of right and the leader of the forces of good against the powers of evil and darkness. Obviously, it would be an unhistorical procedure to identify the ethics of first-century Mithraism with Avestan morality. On the other hand, except in the case of Armenian Mithraism, there is no evidence that the cult's remarkable career of conquest resulted in a deterioration of its ethical quality. Mithraism was heir to the high ethics of ancient Persia and it guarded this heritage well.

Still when it comes to a discussion of the moral elements of the Mithraic life, the treatment has to be general, for sheer lack of specific evidence. There were certain "commandments" that had to be carefully observed by the initiate in order to be sure of the salvation that Mithra offered, and these were obligatory on all, the high and the lowly, the senator and the slave alike. What the specific precepts were is unknown.

Nevertheless, certain characteristic features of the Mithraic ideal stand out with clarity. Primarily, it was an ideal of perfect purity. The ritual prescribed repeated ablutions and purifications and these were intended to wash away the stains of sin. The very conformity to ritual practice at this point showed a sensitiveness to moral turpitude. The Mithraic life was also one of steady self-control and of asceticism even. Rigorous fasts and abstinences were enjoined, and continence was encouraged as a special virtue. More broadly, the resistance of all sensuality was a mark of the Mithraist. Chiefly, however, the Mithraic life was characterized by militant virtue. The good of this religion dwelt in action, and a premium was placed on the energetic virtues rather than on gentler qualities. Even its mysticism was a matter of active co-operation between Mithra and his soldiers, and this kind of mysticism discouraged dependence and stimulated individual effort. So virile and aggressive was this religion that sometimes it seemed cruel and heartless in the rigor of its discipline. In the largest terms, life for the Mithraist was a prolonged struggle, a part of the great cosmic warfare of good against evil, right against wrong.

In this war the initiate was assured of victory, for he had the help of an invincible god who was hailed in Persian as nabarze, in Greek as aniketos, and in Latin as invinctus and insuperabilis. Mithra was an unfailing help to mortals in their struggles, the protector of holiness, the defender of truth, and the intrepid antagonist of all wickedness. The very presence of the god who was eternally vigilant and forever young was the assurance of success. Just as in the physical realm he gave victory in human warfare, so in the moral realm he gave his victory over evil instincts, the spirit of falsehood, and the temptations of the flesh. So far as the present was concerned, therefore, the Mithraic life was one of assured victory in the contest with evil.

As to the future, the initiate into Mithraism was guaranteed a righteous judgment and a happy immortality. He felt secure about the judgment, for Mithra, the guardian of truth, would preside at the great assize which determined his eternal destiny. According to the picture suggested by the Emperor Julian, Mithra was also the guide who assisted the soul on its heavenly journey and, finally, like a fond father, welcomed the soul to its heavenly home. The seven grades of Mithraic initiation had a very direct relation to the future fate of the soul; for the heavens themselves were divided into seven spheres, each presided over by a different planet. Through these spheres lay the journey of the soul up to the heaven of the fixed stars. According to Celsus, this was represented in the Mithraic shrines by a sort of ladder containing eight gates, one above the other, the gates being of different metals. From the different Mithraic sacraments the initiate learned the appropriate formulas which would admit him to the various spheres. As the soul passed from one sphere to another, it cast aside various earthly impurities and desires like different garments and finally, purified of all vice, it entered the empyrean, there to enjoy eternal bliss. In addition to this general hope of immortality, more or less in character, certain Mithraic circles cherished a vivid eschatology involving a return of Mithra to the earth, a bodily resurrection of the dead, the destruction of the wicked, and the rejuvenation of the universe. Whatever the particular form of the hope, the Mithraic initiate felt a calm assurance regarding the future.

This study of Mithraism has shown that the cult of the Iranian god held out to its devotees the hope of a blessed immortality and the assurance of victory in the struggle of life, on the basis of certain initiatory rites which were viewed as marking the beginning of a new kind of existence. The preliminary tests, the simulated death, the purification of baptism, the feeding of the initiate with honey, and the participation in a sacramental communion all served to stress the idea that initiation was a rebirth to a new life. Mithraic sacraments were both the symbols and the effective causes of this spiritual regeneration.

     
Pagan Regeneration, by Harold R. Willoughby, [1929], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER VII

 

ISIAC INITIATION

THE chief contribution of Egypt to the religion of the Roman Empire was the cult of Isis in the form of a Hellenized development of that ancient Egyptian religion. From very early times Isis and Osiris held a unique position in the religious thought of the Egyptian people. Herodotus noted in his day that "no other gods were worshiped in the same way by the whole of Egypt save only Isis and Osiris." The worship of other deities varied from place to place in different sections of the country. By comparison with these the related cults of Isis and Osiris were undiversified, and their hold on the religious loyalties of the Egyptian people remained more or less constant not only in different localities but in various ages as well. It is surely an impressive fact that in Graeco-Roman times the reformed and Hellenized cult of Isis functioned as vigorously as the antique Osirian religion had functioned in the times of the Pharaohs.

 

I

The various traditions gathering around the divine names of Osiris and Isis were summarized in connected form by Plutarch. In addition to Plutarch's convenient narrative, there are a number of Egyptian monuments that preserve fragments of the tragic tale. The oldest of these are a series of liturgical texts, hymns, prayers, and incantations from the walls of the pyramids of Sakhara. Quite apart from Plutarch's rendition of the story, it would be possible, from these pyramid texts, to reconstruct completely the Osirian legend. In its developed form, this tradition included many different strands. The essential elements of the tradition, however, were as follows: Osiris on earth had reigned as king over the Egyptians, "making them reform their destitute and bestial mode of living, showing them the art of cultivation, giving them laws, and teaching them how to worship the gods. Afterward he traveled over the whole earth, civilizing it." His wicked brother Set, or Typhon, plotted against him and succeeded in accomplishing his violent death. When Isis, his wife, heard of the terrible deed, she put on mourning and wandered distractedly far and wide searching for the lost body of her husband. After a long search she recovered the body and carefully embalmed it. Over the corpse she and her sister Nephtys joined in a lament that became classical--a type of the Egyptian lamentations for the deceased. With the aid of the faithful god Anubis, her son Horus, and Thoth, Isis performed certain magical rites over the body of Osiris which had the effect of revivifying the corpse and restoring her husband to life. Thereafter he was translated to the nether regions where he reigned as "Lord of the Underworld and Ruler of the Dead." Here he presided at the bar of judgment and assigned to the souls of the departed their proper reward for virtue or punishment for sin.

This brief summary of the Osirian tradition itself suggests that, in the religious thought of Egypt, Osiris was a dying and reviving god like Adonis and Attis and Dionyus, and as such a personification of the yearly vicissitudes of vegetable life in the ever recurrent struggle of life and death in nature. He was also an embodiment of the ideal Pharaoh and a personification of the righteous man who, facing the mystery of death, sought the assurances of religion regarding the future. So also Isis, like Demeter and the Magna Mater, was a mother-goddess personifying the power of life in nature and the unquenchable human hope for a final triumph in the conflict of life with death. She also embodied the beneficent influences of culture and religion; for she had taught men the arts and government and the mysteries.

Traditionally, the rites of the Osirian religion, like those of Eleusis, were established by the goddess-mother herself. Plutarch, again, was a recorder of this tradition. His account of the establishment of the Osiris calt was as follows:

"But the avenger of Osiris, his sister and wife Isis, who extinguished and put a stop to the madness and fury of Typhon, did not forget the contests and struggles she had gone through, nor yet her own wanderings, nor did she suffer oblivion and silence to envelop her many deeds of wisdom, many feats of courage, but by intermingling with the most sacred ceremonies images, hints, and representations of her sufferings of yore she consecrated at one and the same time both lessons of piety and consolation in suffering for men and women when overtaken by misfortune."

In the ancient Egyptian calendar of religious feasts, with its many celebrations in honor of a variety of gods, the rites of Osiris held a place of singular honor. When Herodotus visited Egypt, he found that next to the most important native religious festival was the one in honor of Isis held in her great temple at Busiris in the Nile delta. The Greek historian showed great reverence for these rites and was very reticent about giving any precise information concerning them. He did, however, say this much: "There, after the sacrifice, all the men and women lament in countless numbers; but it were profane for me to say who it is for whom they lament." Also in speaking of similar ceremonies at Sais, Herodotus gave but slight additional information and gave that very guardedIy.

"There is also at Sais the burial of him whose name I deem it forbidden to utter in speaking of such a matter .... and there is a lake hard by, adorned with a stone margin and wrought to a complete circle. . . . . On this lake they enact by night the story of the god's sufferings, a rite which the Egyptians call the mysteries. I could speak more exactly of these matters, for I know the truth, but I will hold my peace."

The information that Herodotus records, scanty as it is, yet is sufficient to betray the general character of these religious celebrations. They were in the nature of a passion drama and they featured lamentations in which the spectators participated. The suggestion is an obvious one that the death and resurrection of Osiris constituted the subject matter of this drama and that the lamentations were the traditional lamentations of Isis for her husband.

Herodotus' reserve about giving any detailed information concerning the Osiris festivals calls attention to a fact of some importance. Even in ancient Egypt the Osirian cult included both public rites and secret ceremonies as well. Certain things were done and certain explanations were made which were regarded as matters of great sanctity. Only privileged people were permitted to share them. Herodotus was so impressed by the sacred character of these revelations that he kept the secret conscientiously. One would hardly be justified, on this basis, in speaking of an Osirian initiation into a secret fraternity, perhaps. Nevertheless, there was a differentiation between the public and the private Osirian rites even in ancient Egypt, and this is an important distinction to keep in mind for the understanding of a significant development of Isiac ritual in Hellenistic times.

Osirian rites such as Herodotus mentioned were repeated at annual festivals at the great temples of the god in different parts of Egypt. These sacred dramas were performed for the benefit of Osiris himself, and a statue of the god formed the center of interest in the celebration. On a stela of the Twelfth Dynasty dated about 1875 B.c. a state official, Igernefert by name, recounted with some minuteness how he conducted "the ceremony of the golden chamber for the Lord of Abydos (Osiris)." Igernefert told of the preparation of various properties for the drama and of the part that he himself played in the performance. The scenes included first of all a procession of the followers of Osiris, with an attack by his enemies. The death of the god formed the second scene, to which Igernefert made allusion quite as guardedly as Herodotus. "I performed the great going-forth. I followed the god in his footsteps." Then came the resurrection and final triumph of the god. "I avenged Osiris on the day of the great battle, I overthrew his enemies upon the river of Nedit," declared Igernefert, referring to such a bloody struggle as that to which Herodotus also made allusion. Then the drama was brought to a joyful close by the return of the Lord of Abydos to his palace, i.e., the return of the image of the god to its temple.

Not only were there occasional celebritions of the Osirian drama such as this but in later times, especially, there were also daily commemorations of the passion and resurrection of the god. These were enacted in the chapels of the god and doubtless formed the secret part of the Osirian ritual. Bas-reliefs from temples and various ritual remains enable us to reconstruct the liturgical acts and recitations of these miniature passion plays. There was the search for the body of Osiris and the prolonged lament of Isis and Nephtys over the corpse. In response to their cries Horus, Anubis, and Thoth came and purified the body and prepared it for restoration to life. Next certain magical rites were performed. By means of the adze of Anubis the mouth, eyes, and ears of the corpse were opened, other members of the body were put into motion, and each organ was recalled to life separately. Then, to insure resurrection, vegetable rebirth was represented by the germination of grain, and even an animal rebirth was simulated. The priest playing the part of Anubis assumed a recumbent position under the skin of a sacrificed animal. Here he symbolized the foetus in the womb, or, more specifically, Osiris being conceived anew. Coming out from under the skin, he typified Osiris being reborn. These rites completed, Osiris was alive once more. His image was crowned and adored and offerings were made to him. In these daily rites Osiris, represented by his image, passed through a ritual rebirth.

The question at once arises, Were the benefits of these rites extended to men, as well as to the god? In the Egyptian funeral ceremonies is found the answer to this question, for the burial rites of ancient Egypt were but Osirian ceremonies repeated according to the principles of sympathetic magic. The deceased man was the dead Osiris and at his funeral the sacred drama was re-enacted. His wife and sister played the parts of Isis and Nephtys. His son was Horus and his friends were the helping gods. Professional priests assumed roles not otherwise provided for. Upon the corpse of the dead man were performed the same rites that traditionally had been enacted over the dead Osiris. His mouth, eyes, and ears were opened and the ceremonies of vegetal and animal rebirth were repeated. Just as Anubis "passed under the hide" in order to effect the rebirth of Osiris, so the presiding priest "laid himself down under the hide of a cow in the land of transformation." By the mimicking of birth when he issued from the skin it was believed that he accomplished the spiritual renaissance of the defunct. "He who renews life (after death)" was an epithet applied to the man thus favored. Such a man went to join his god on the plains of Aalu, where, if he so chose, he might himself become a god. Many a man so privileged was specifically called "Osiris" after his death. A familiar Egyptian text testifies most clearly to this future hope for one who had shared in Osirian rites; "As truly as Osiris lives," so ran the text, "he also shall live; as truly as Osiris is not dead, shall he not die; as truly as Osiris is not annihilated, shall he not be annihilated."

These Osirian funeral rites, however, were entirely in the interests of the dead, to insure them a rebirth to immortality. Was this grace ever granted to a living person, so that even before death he might be certain of the future benefits these powerful rites could assure? In the case of the Pharaoh this was done. During the Sed festival a ritual death and rebirth was enacted for the benefit of the royal personage himself. Only in later times and as a special favor were others granted this grace. Generally speaking, the advantages of ritual rebirth in Egyptian religion were conferred upon the dead and were confined to the future life.

 

II

Notwithstanding the clear suggestions of postmortem regeneration to be found in the Egyptian cult of Osiris, it is to a modification and further development of this ancient religion that one must turn to find clear examples of the spiritual rebirth of the individual during his lifetime. In the Hellenistic cult of Serapis and Isis, such experiences may be isolated. This new cult was but an adaptation of the venerable Egyptian religion to the spirit and needs of Hellenistic times. Hence it assumed that individualistic, universalistic character so typical of other contemporary religious movements. It welcomed to its membership non-Egyptians as well as Egyptians. Osirian religion had been a pure product of the Nile Valley. The new religion, itself a syncretism, did not know any geographical or racial distinctions. Other contrasts, more or less superficial, might be drawn which recorded in an external way the degree to which the old Egyptian religion was modified to meet the social needs of the Alexandrian age. The ancient system had centered in the god, Osiris; but in the reformed cult of Hellenistic times he was replaced to a considerable extent by a new divinity, Serapis, and popular interest was transferred to the more appealing personality of Isis. She dominated the Hellenistic cult quite as Demeter held supreme place in the Eleusinian mysteries, or the Magna Mater in those that emanated from Phrygia. In the ancient Osirian religion, the public ritual with its strong appeal to the masses was important. In the Hellenized worship of Isis, the significant ceremonials were those secret rites that had such deep meaning for the individual. These were only some of the ways in which the new cult showed adaptation to the very personal needs of individual religionists in the Hellenized world.

The inception of this significant reform has been concealed under an overgrowth of tradition and legend. These traditions, varying in detaill, were summarized by two prominent writers of Roman times, Plutarch and Tacitus. The general purport of their accounts was to the effect that Ptolemy Soter, the first of the Macedonian rulers of Egypt, had a dream in which he saw a huge statue of Pluto, located at Sinope in Pontus. The king was commanded to bring this colossus to the growing city of Alexandria and install it there as the center of a new religion. It was a magnificent piece of craftsmanship, composed of gems and precious metals, the work of Bryaxis, the companion of Scopas. By stealth and diplomacy Ptolemy accomplished his purpose, and the colossus was installed with due pomp as the god Serapis in a magnificent temple, or Serapeum, especially built to receive it. According to both renditions of the story, Ptolemy had recourse to the assistance of Manetho, an Egyptian priest, and Timotheus, "one of the race of the Eumolpidae, who was invited from Eleusis to preside over the mysteries." By the collaboration of an Egyptian priest and an Eleusinian priest--so legend affirmed--Ptolemy was enabled to institute his new religion.

Whatever of historical truth or of fable may have been repeated by Plutarch and Tacitus, two points stand out clearly from the traditional background. In the first place the projection of the new cult of Serapis was but a part of Ptolemy's plan to bring about a fusion of races in his Egyptian kingdom; and in the second place the cult itself was adapted to this purpose, for it was a combination of Egyptian and Hellenistic elements.

The political purpose of this new cult was ill-disguised. It was intended to serve as one more cultural bond uniting the inhabitants of Ptolemy's Egypt. We cannot be sure that Alexander cherished the scheme of uniting his great world empire by the bonds of religion as well as by commerce and culture. It is perfectly patent, however, that Ptolemy purposed this very thing and gave his official patronage to the cult of Serapis for this very reason. From the first the new cult was intended to furnish a common religious meeting ground for the Greek inhabitants of Egypt and the natives also.

For this purpose nothing was better adapted than a modification of Osirian rites. Through centuries of history the masses of Egyptian people had shown a decided preference for the worship of the god Osiris, so that other Egyptian divinities were forced to include him in their cults. Recognizing their own Osiris in the new god Serapis, the natives of Egypt, as a rule, were ready to give him their adherence. The Greeks, on the other hand, had long since identified Osiris with their own Dionysus and Isis with Demeter. In the rites of the Egyptian divinities and the myths that clustered about them, they found strange correspondences with their own myths and rituals. Osiris had been torn to pieces even as their own Dionysus had been. Isis had mourned for him as Aphrodite had bewailed Adonis or the Great Mother had lamented her Attis, and she had sought for his body even as the sorrowing Mother of Eleusis had sought for her lost daughter. In the finding and restoration of Osiris, the Egyptians rejoiced even as the Eleusinian devotees shared the joy of their goddess in the restoration of Persephone. The resemblances between the Graeco-Oriental mysteries and the Egyptian cult of Osiris were many and salient, and the Egyptian religion easily lent itself to the process of Hellenization.

Consequently, the new religion of Ptolemy became, roughly, a compound of the old religion of the Pharaohs and the mysteries of Greece and Asia Minor. Whether or not Manetho the Egyptian priest and Timothetis the Eumolpid collaborated in the institution of this Hellenized Egyptian religion, the cult of Serapis and Isis was such a composite as would have been produced by such men. On a foundation Osirian and Egyptian was erected the shrine of Serapis which in externals, at least, was decidedly Hellenistic in character.

 

III

In order to estimate the extent to which the reformed Osirian religion was influential in the Graeco-Roman world, it is necessary to trace the missionary successes of this cult during the Hellenistic and early imperial periods. It was disseminated from the Serapeum at Alexandria in somewhat the manner that the Jewish religion spread from the temple at Jerusalem. In Egypt itself the new religion of the Ptolemies was readily adopted. The Egyptians had long been familiar with the process of changing the divine government of heaven in a manner paralleling the political changes on earth. So they acceded to the Serapis of Alexandria as they had previously accepted the Amon of Thebes. Moreover, they recognized the essential identity of their beloved Osiris with the new god Serapis. In the second century A.D. there were no less thin forty-two Serapeums in the Nile Valley. Egypt, then, was an effective missionary base for the Isiacists.

Because of the political prestige of the Lagides and the extensive commerce of Alexandria, the Hellenized religion of Isis quickly spread over the eastern Mediterranean world. King Nicocreon, of Cyprus, consulted the oracle of the Serapeum and, receiving a satisfactory response, ne introduced the cult into his island. Ptolemy I (323-285 B.C.) was responsible for the establishment of the cult in Athens where a Serapeum was built beneath the Acropolis. About the same time a Serapiast brotherhood was instituted it the Piraeus. Ptolemy Euergetes (246-221 B.C.) sent a statue of Isis to Seleucus Callinicus who built a sanctuary for it in Syrian Antioch. The next two hundred years saw lsiac brotherhoods established in Asian centers, such as Smyrna, Cyzicus, and Ephesus, and on the islands of Rhodes, Delos, and Tenedos, as well as in Thessaly and Thrace. A full century before Jesus of Nazareth was born, Egyptian sailors and merchants had propagated the cult of Isis all along the coasts of Syria, Asia Minor, Greece, and among the Aegean Islands. When Paul begin his missionary work in these regions, he everywhere met with Isiac establishments that were already centuries old. Here the worship of the Alexandrian deities became so firmly rooted that even the political vicissitudes that befell the Ptolemies did not seriously affect it. Even to the last days of paganism, Isis remained a power in the eastern Mediterranean world.

In the Latin west even more than in the Greek east the Alexandrian cult proved itself genuinely popular. It was probably through the Campanian ports, Puteoli in particular, that the cult of Isis made its initial appearance in Italy. A city ordinance of Puteoli dated 105 B.C. made mention of a Serapeum in that city. It was not a new foundation, and the Isiac brotherhood itself must have been in existence there at least a half century earlier. The religion of Isis, then, antedated the arrival of Paul in Puteoli by at least two centuries. Perhaps at about the same time the first Isium of Pompeii was built. It is a safe conjecture that Isis worship came to Italy early in the second century B.C., during those stirring years of religious excitement following the arrival of the Magna Mater from Pessinus, and at the time when the dignified Roman Senate was trying to hold in check the excesses of the Dionysus cult.

About the middle of the first century B.C. the immigrant religion was subjected to fierce persecution in Italy. Five times during the years between 59 and 48 the Senate ordered the destruction of Isiac shrines. Yet so popular the worship of the Egyptian goddess that in at least one instance the consul himself had to undertake the work of destruction which he was unable to find a workman to do. Even the Christian advocate Tertullian had to admit that "the altars which the Senate had thrown down were restored by popular violence." Again, after the defeat of Antony and Cleopatra at Actium, there was a natural reaction against things Egyptian, and as a consequence Isis banished beyond the pomerium. In A.D. 19, because of a real or pretended scandal involving a priest of Isis, the devotees of the goddess experienced a bloody persecution and were banished wholesale to Sardinia along with the Jews. Yet Isiaism, like Christianity later, seemed to thrive on persecution, and at no time during this period did the devotion of the masses to the Egyptian goddess perceptibly weaken. On the contrary, there is every indication that the history of the Isiac cult in Italy was the story of a really popular religion that triumphed even in the face of official opposition.

Contemporary Latin literature is rich in allusions that show the great influence of the Alexandrian religion in Italy at the beginning of the Christian era. Conspicuous among the devotees of Isis were the mistresses of men of letters in the Augustan age. Tibullus, sick in Corcyra and despairing of his life, wrote to his fiancee Delia to seek the aid of the Egyptian goddess to whom she was so devoted. Propertius, on the other hand, complained bitterly of his Cynthia's loyalty to Isis rather than to himself and did not hesitate to heap up words of reproach against the goddess. "Once more those dismal rites have returned to plague us," he grumbled. "Now for ten nights Cynthia has sacrificed. A curse upon the rites which the daughters of Inachus sent from the warm Nile to the matrons of Italy!" Ovid, despairing of his lady's life, addressed his prayer directly to the goddess whom Corinna particularly adored: "O Isis .... by thy sistrums I pray thee .... turn hither thy countenance, and in one spare us both! For thou wilt give life to my lady and she to me." Seneca's nephew, Lucan, paid his respects to the worship of the Alexandrian divinities in his Pharsalia. So did Martial and Juvenal in their Satires, and though they had scant respect for the Egyptian religion, at least they witnessed to its immense popularity and the great loyalty of its adherents. Juvenal in particular described a touching scene that illustrates the devotion of a typical worshiper to the goddess Isis.

"In winter she will go down to the river of a morning, break the ice, and plunge three times into the Tiber, dipping her trembling head in its whirling waters, and crawling out thence naked and shivering, she will creep with bleeding knees right across the field of Tarquin the Proud. If the white Io shall so order, she will journey to the confines of Egypt, and fetch water from hot Meroe with which to sprinkle the Temple of Isis which stands hard by the ancient sheepfold. For she believes that the command was given by the voice of the goddess herself."

Citations such as these from first-century Latin literature bespeak a really great popularity for the Isis cult in the Roman world of that day.

With its place at Rome secure, the cult was in a strategic position to carry on its propaganda on an imperial scale. Lucan, who in his Pharsalia spoke of Isis and Osiris as enthroned in Roman temples, referred to them also as the deities of all the world. Plutarch, with his elaborate attempt to reinterpret the Isis-Osiris religion in philosophical terminology, is perhaps the most weighty witness to this wider influence of the Alexandrian cult; for Plutarch tried to do for the Egyptian gospel what Philo earlier attempted for Judaism, and what only a little later the author of the Fourth Gospel essayed to do for Christianity. He aimed to reinterpret the Egyptian religion in universal terms that should appeal to the philosophically minded.

Of the actual influence of the cult in Roman provincial areas even in the first century, there is plenty of evidence. Toutain is familiar with over a hundred different documents of various dates that attest the existence of Isiac communities scattered all over the Roman provinces. The extent of this Egyptian Diaspora in the mid-first century measures the advantage enjoyed by Isiaism over early Christianity in the matter of missionary propaganda. When Paul first conceived his stupendous scheme of world wide evangelization, he was chronologically far behind his Isiac competitors, and wherever he went in that gentile world he found that they had preceded him. In both the western and the eastern halves of the Mediterranean world, the Isis cult was widely known and genuinely popular before the Apostle to the Gentiles began his work.

 

IV

Among other factors that accounted for the great popularity of the Isis religion in the Graeco-Roman world was the impressiveness of its rites. In the Hellenistic development of Isiaism, as in the ancient religion of the Pharaohs, both public and private ceremonials were included in the cult. Notwithstanding their public character, the former rites were of a kind to foster a feeling of intimacy on the part of the devotee with his goddess. The public ritual included a regular daily liturgy with matins at the beginning of the day and a benediction in the afternoon. During the latter part of the forenoon and the early part of the afternoon, Isiac shrines were left open, and the images of the goddess were exposed to the silent adoration of the worshipers. Prayer, meditation, and contemplative devotion were thus encouraged. The daily liturgy was brought to a solemn but joyful close with the chanting of hymns, the dismissal of the people, and the closing of the shrine. By services such as these, regular and somewhat elaborate, the faith of the people in the Alexandrian divinities was renewed from day to day.

In addition to the daily liturgy, there were public festivals at different seasons that were conducted with an elaboration of pageantry dear alike to the south European and to the Oriental. Most solemn, most stirring, and quite the most popular of these was the November festival celebrating the passion and resurrection of Osiris. It was a festival of great antiquity, directly elaborated from the dramatic performances at Abydos and elsewhere, in which, from the Twelfth Dynasty onward, the sufferings of Osiris had been reproduced. As in the passion play at Eleusis, the worshipers themselves participated actively in the sacred drama. When Isis mourned and sought for her husband, her devotees beat their breasts and shared her sorrow with an effusive display of grief. Again when the god was found, the worshipers joined in an equally extravagant demonstration of gladness. By this alternation of extreme sorrow and joy the devotees of Isis realized a sympathetic and highly emotional communion with their deity. In this respect the psychological influence of the November passion play of Osiris was strikingly like that of the spring festival of Adonis, or of the September drama at Eleusis.

In addition to these public ceremonies, there were rites which were private in character and fostered a very individualistic type of religious experience. Membership in the Isiac community, as in the other mystery cults, was contingent upon participation in certain prescribed initiatory rites, the details of which were kept strictly secret. These private ceremonies were a direct development from the esoteric rites of ancient Egypt, where the priests of Osiris reserved certain interpretations and ceremonies, and imparted them only on promise of secrecy. This condition obtained in the worship of Isis at Abydos and elsewhere. In the Hellenization of the cult, such private rites were readily adapted to purposes of initiation and were developed along lines similar to the rites of Eleusis. Tradition implied that Timotheus the Eumolpid was in part responsible for this development.

The most valuable, and almost the only source of information concerning these important rites is Lucius Apuleius' account of his own initiation at Cenchraea. By following his narrative through it is possible to trace, step by step, the procedure in Isiac initiations. One is impressed at the outset by the genuine eagerness of Lucius for the grace of admission to the order of Isis, an eagerness tempered by a distrust of his own ability to attain it. For--to quote Lucius's own words--"I had learned by diligent inquiry that her obeisance was hard, the chastity of the priests difficult to keep, and the whole life of them . . . . to be watched and guarded very carefully." While awaiting the desired privilege, Lucius lived the life of a recluse in the cloisters of the temple, attending reverently on the regular services of worship. Such a novitiate as this was apparently expected of those who desired initiation, and rooms were provided for them in connection with the temple where they lived with the priests in a sort of monastic community. The chief priest, in a kindly manner, restrained the urgency of Lucius "as parents commonly bridle the desires of their children." He assured him that initiation was no light matter but that "the taking of such orders was like a voluntary death and a difficult recovery to health." The pontiff urged him to await a sign from the goddess herself, and at the same time gave specific directions as to the preparatory abstinences to be observed. Lucius had not long to wait. In a vision of the night time the expected sign was vouchsafed to him and Mithra, the principal priest of Isis, was assigned to him as a mystagogue.

On the following morning the formal initiation rites began. The great priest produced "out of the secret place of the temple certain books written with unknown characters .... whereby they were wholly strange and impossible to be read by profane people," and thence he interpreted to Lucius "such things as were necessary to the use and preparation of his order." At the propitious time after the impartation of this instruction, Lucius, attended by a company of initiates, was brought to the place of baptism, and there, "demanding pardon of the gods," the priest baptized him and "purified his body according to custom." Christian writers knew of this Isiac baptism and made plain that a powerful efficacy was credited to it--indeed the selfsame effect of purification from sin and spiritual regeneration that Christians attributed to their baptismal rite. In the thought of the Isiac community, the waters of baptism were identified with the life-giving waters of the sacred Nile and these in turn with the waters of the primordial ocean whence all things, even the gods, had been created. Osiris himself had been reborn, after his passion, from the waters of the Nile. So for the initiate these sacred waters had a life-giving power, and Isiac baptism was in effect regarded as a regenerative rite that meant new life to the one who experienced it.

At the afternoon benediction on the day of baptism, the chief priest imparted to Lucius certain secret instructions and commanded him to observe various abstinences for a period of ten days. The ascetic prescriptions included an abstinence from meat, wine-drinking, and other pleasures of the flesh. Strict chastity was a particular point of insistence. It was this moral requirement particularly that made Lucius hesitate to apply for admission into the Isiac order. It was this requirement of purity also that made the erotic Latin poets rail so loudly against the Egyptian goddess. Plutarch, too, stressed in particular this feature of Isiac discipline. "By means of a perpetually sober life," he affirmed, "by abstinence from many kinds of food and from sexual indulgence, Isis checks intemperance and love of pleasure, accustoming people to endure her service not enervated by luxury, but hardy and vigorous." After a ten-day period of ascetic isolation of this kind, Lucius was in an impressionable state, sensitive to the full suggestiveness of the further initiatory rites.

On the tenth day at sunset the initiation was held. After the priest had presented gifts to Lucius according to ancient custom, the laity and the uninitiated were commanded to depart. Then the great priest took the candidate by the hand and led him to "the most secret and most sacred place of the temple" where the initiation ceremony itself took place. Here the curtain falls and Lucius refrains from telling us exactly what happened. He conscientiously kept his vow of secrecy. "You would perhaps demand, studious reader, what was said and done there: truly I would tell you if it were lawful for me to tell; you would know if it were convenient for you to hear; but both your ears and my tongue should incur the like pain of rash curiosity." The curtain of secrecy, however, is but a thinly drawn veil intended to protect Apuleius and his readers from the charge of sacrilege; for he immediately proceeds to give a general impression of the ceremonies without describing a single rite or repeating a single formula. From this general characterization it is possible to get a fairly definite conception of what took place in the holy of holies of the Isiac sanctuary.

"Understand that I approached the bounds of death, I trod the threshold of Proserpine, and after that I was ravished through all the elements, I returned to my proper place; about midnight I saw the sun brightly shine; I saw likewise the gods celestial and the gods infernal, before whom I presented myself and worshiped them."

These, figurative words of Lucius, taken in conjunction with the plainer words of the priest who characterized Isiac initiations as "a voluntary death and a difficult recovery of health," make it practically certain that a ritual death and resurrection were the central features of the initiation ceremony. Since this was an Isiac initiation, the ritual could have been none other than an adaptation of the ancient Osirian rites that in Egypt from antiquity had been practiced on the living Pharaoh, on the mummies of the dead, and on the statues of the god. In remotest antiquity these rites, so the devotees believed, had been efficacious in causing the regeneration of Osiris after his passion; and now they were practiced on the initiate himself that he might realize communion with Osiris in this life and share in his immortality. In the secret of the sanctuary the initiate participated in a repetition of the ancient drama, himself the central figure, the new Osiris whom Isis, by her power, exalted to an immortal regeneration.

Back of Lucius' figurative language, it is possible to distinguish the main events in the Osirian drama. At the beginning of the ceremony, the initiate approached the bounds of death. In other words, he assumed the role of the dead Osiris over whom the vivifying funeral rites were performed. Osiris, restored to life, had not returned to his earthly kingdom, but had gone to preside over the realm of the dead. So the initiate, having been treated as the dead Osiris and restored to life, "trod the threshold of Proserpine." As Osiris he made an infernal journey and visited the realms of the departed. The admixture of solar imagery in Licius' description should not confuse us. According to contemporary cosmology, the sun each night visited the subterranean regions. In the rite of initiation, therefore, the votary as a new Osiris made both the infernal and the celestial journey like the sun. At midnight he saw the sun brightly shine in the realm of the dead, and likewise he mounted up into the heavens and saw the gods celestial as well as the gods infernal. In doing all this he was but playing the part of the dying and rising god Osiris in the salvation drama of the Isis cult.

It is superfluous to inquire just what tableaus were presented to the eyes of the initiate at this point or how the scenic effects were managed. A first-century imagination, habituated to simple stage effects, and stimulated by fasting, meditation, and special suggestion, was capable of conjuring up very vivid pictures on a comparatively simple basis. This was particularly true in the case of a pious beIiever like Lucius, with an abundance of faith and a strong predilection for mystical experience. For him the rite of initiation, however managed, had as its central significance a real death to the old mortal life, and a resurrection to a new eternal life, dramatically represented as an Osirian journey to the regions infernal and celestial.

How complete the regeneration effected by initiation was believed to be is suggested by the rites that took place on the following morning. At the conclusion of the usual morning office, Lucius was brought in "sanctified with twelve stoles." His vestments were of fine linen embroidered with flowers, and from his shoulders there hung down to the ground a precious cope, the "Olympian stole," covered with symbolical figures. In his hand a lighted torch was placed and on his head a garland of flowers "with white palm branches sprouting out on every side like rays." Thus clothed, Lucius took his stand on a pedestal in the middle of the temple before the statue of the goddess herself, and when the curtains were drawn aside and he was exposed to public view, the faithful contemplated him with the admiration and devotion due a god. This was essentially a rite of deification, and Lucius with his Olympian stole, his lighted torch, and his rayed crown was viewed as personification of the sun-god. Even without his self-identification, one could easily have guessed it from the garments and emblems he wore, the rayed crown especially. He was now treated as Osiris-Ra, and his apotheosis was a fitting climax to his experiences of the night before when "at midnight he saw the sun brightly shine and saw likewise the gods celestial and the gods infernal." Lucius was now more than man. Hitherto he had been treated as a human being. Now he was regarded as divine.

His initiation was brought to a close with a sumptuous banquet "celebrating the nativity of his holy order." The feast was a joyous one like a birthday banquet and, coming at the conclusion of the initiation ceremonies, it served to accentuate the fact that Isiac initiation was believed to effect the complete regeneration of the candidate. If we may take the initiation of Lucius as a representative lsiac initiation of the early empire--and we are certainly justified in so doing--it is clear that from start to finish the initiate was made to feel he was passing through an experience that would transform his very being and make a new man of him. At the outset the priest characterized the rites as a voluntary death and a recovery of health. He assured Lucius specifically that Isis had the power to make men new-born individuals (quodam modo renatos), and thus to set their feet in the way of salvation. The rites themselves were cast in the form of a ritual death and a resurrection culminating in a celestial journey. And finally a birthday banquet marked the conclusion of the ceremonial. Figuratively, the Isiac initiation was represented as a process of regeneration and initiates were referred to as men who had been reborn (renati). This was the regular cult formula. Actually, the rites were believed to accomplish the transformation and divinization of human nature.

 

V

What were the main characteristics of the new life induced by this ritual regeneration? In the first place, it was a life of present security lived under the protection of a kindly mother goddess. To her devotees Isis assured long life and happiness here on earth. The goddess said to Lucius in a vision:

"You shall live blessed in this world, you shall live glorious by my guide and protection. And if I perceive that you are obedient to my commandment and addicted to my religion, meriting by your constant chastity my divine grace, know that I alone may prolong your days above the time that the fates have appointed and ordained."

In order to know what assurance this sense of divine protection gave to the devotees of Isis, one needs only to read the pages of Apuleius or turn to Aristides' fervid encomium of Serapis. Lucius addressed his goddess as the "holy and perpetual preserver of the human race, always munificent in cherishing mortals." Similarly, Aelius Aristides, writing after the experience of a shipwreck from which he was saved, as he believed, through the intervention of Serapis, spoke of his god as the one who "purifies the soul with wisdom, and preserves the body by giving it health," the one who "is adored by kings and private persons, by the wise as by the foolish, by the great as by the small, and by those on whom he has bestowed happiness as well as those who possess him alone as a refuge from their trouble." The strong fervor of such devout religionists as these leaves no doubt that the experience of Isiac initiation gave real assurance to the devotees of the goddess as they faced the inevitable uncertainties of life.

For the future, initiation meant the certain hope of a happy immortality. Of Serapis the grateful Aristides declared that he was "the savior and leader of souls, leading them to the light and receiving them again . . . . . We can never escape his sway, but he will save us and even after death we shall be the objects of his providence." Apuleius, secure under the present protection of Isis, regarded the future also with equanimity. In his account of the vision which gave to Lucius promise of a happy life here on earth, the author represented Isis as saying to her devotee concerning the future, "When after your allotted space of life you descend to Hades, there you shall see me in that subterranean firmament shining (as you see me now) in the darkness of Ackeron, and reigning in the deep profundity of Styx, and you shall worship me as one who has been favorable to you."

Again and again on tombs of Isiac initiates this hope of a blessed immortality was recorded. The expression eupsuchei, "be of good courage," was so often iterated as to become almost a motto of the Isiac religion. In figurative language, the craving for immortality was represented as a thirst for the refreshment of a drink of cold water--a natural metaphor for people living in a hot climate like that of Egypt. "May Osiris give you fresh water," was a typical prayer which members of the Isis cult inscribed on the tombs of their loved ones. It is hardly necessary to multiply illustrations; for the most indubitable item of Isiac faith was this assurance of immortality. Reborn through the rite of initiation, the mystic believed himself born again to a superhuman life, the immortal life of the gods. Among the various assurances which the Alexandrian religion gave to seekers for salvation in the Roman world, this promise of immortality was most welcome.

     
Pagan Regeneration, by Harold R. Willoughby, [1929], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER VIII

 

THE NEW BIRTH EXPERIENCE IN HERMETICISM

IN HELLENISTIC and Roman times Egypt was peculiarly productive of a distinctive variety of religious temperament, notably fervid in its emotionalism, markedly ascetic in its tendencies, and supremely desirous of the culminating experience of absorption into deity. During the Alexandrian period Egyptian mystics, acting under the charm of ancient religious tradition, asked for the privilege of initiation into the cult of Isis and sought in her ascetic discipline and in the impressiveness of her liturgies the satisfaction of their aspirations. Much later, when Christian emperors were ruling in the Mediterranean world, Egyptian mystics were more than likely to turn anchorite and to seek in the solitude of the desert the experience of oneness with the divine; or perhaps they would lose themselves as members of a Christian monastic community. During the interim centuries, while pagan emperors ruled from Rome, Alexandria in Egypt was much under the spell of able and sincere religio-philosophical teachers, such as Ammonius Saccas and Plotinus and their predecessors. There flourished in the Egyptian metropolis at this period in eclectic Platonism that earlier was related to Neo-Pythagoreanism and later was developed as Neo-Platonism. During these centuries Egyptian mystics, particularly those who had intellectual interests, were likely to be found frequenting the lecture hall of some popular teacher or seeking the realization of their desires in the fellowship of a religio-philosophical brotherhood.

Of the earlier phases of this important religio-philosophical development there are few literary remains. The considerable Neo-Pythagorean literature has perished and the teachings of Ammonius Saccas, the founder of Neo-Platonism, were oral and esoteric. But there yet remains from these centuries the so-called Hermetic literature, writings in Greek and Latin attributed to Hermes Trismegistus and composed of ethical, religious, and philosophic instruction. Obviously, these writings are the remnants of what must have been a far more extensive body of religious literature. Even in the decimated state in which we know them, they give unmistakable evidence of having been produced at different times and in different communities during the early imperial period. As the scattered and scanty memoranda of a distinctive and more or less widespread religious quest in the Graeco-Roman world, these enigmatic writings are extremely interesting and valuable.

 

I

The Corpus Hermeticum proper, which is the important section of this literature, includes a collection of fourteen tractates popularly but mistakenly named "Poimandres" from the dominant first number of the series, together with three others grouped under the name of "Asclepius." These tractates comprehend a variety of literary types: dialogues, discourses, hymns, prayers, epistles, an apology, and a theophany. But with all this diversity of literary there is a certain unity about the Corpus. The writings generally profess to be revelations. On the one hand, they describe what one of the main characters, Hermes or Asclepius or Tat, has seen or learned from his divine father and teacher; on the other hand, a prophet of religion proclaims to men the revelations he has received through his experience with the deity. Viewed as a revelation literature, the Hermetic writings show more of unity than their diversity of literary form would lead one to expect.

As to the dates of this literature, the student is faced with an apparent contradiction; the Hermetic literary tradition was a very ancient one, yet the Corpus that we know is not definitely attested until comparatively late in Christian times. To Hermes, or Thoth, as the "Lord of Divine words," native priests in Egypt ascribed the inspiration and authorship of their sacred books, which Greek writers denominated "Hermetic" in accordance with this native literary tradition. Plato, Strabo, and Iamblicus vouch for this literary fiction, while Clement of Alexandria and Tertullian, among early Christian writers, are witnesses to the same tradition. It is not until the time of Lactantius (ca. A.D. 325), however, that we find references and quotations which can be verified by comparison with extant Hermetic works. His appreciative references to "Hermes" prove the existence in the early years of the fourth century of certain surviving numbers of the Corpus, together with other tractates that are now lost. The tone of contemporary references proves that in Lactantius' day the Trismegistic writings had considerable vogue. Thus, while the Hermetic literary fiction was pre-Christian and ancient, it was not until the end of the third Christian century that the tractates of our Corpus emerged into the clear light of literary history. Most of them were much older than this. Just how much older they were is the problem.

In a comparative study of religious phenomena during the earliest Christian centuries, the question of the dating of these documents is one of considerable importance. If, for example, the Hermetic Corpus was a third-century product and recorded only post-Christian developments, one would hardly be justified to give it consideration in connection with the genesis of early Christianity. Unfortunately, critical opinion concerning the dating of these documents is still in a very chaotic state. By far the most definite scheme of chronology is that outlined by Richard Reitzenstein in his Poimandres studies, where he definitely dates not only the collection as a whole but also the Poimandres as the earliest of the series.

For the dating of this tractate, Dr. Reitzenstein lays special stress on a striking literary parallelism between it and the Shepherd of Hermas. At the beginning of Poimandres the situation and sequence of events are remarkably like those of the fifth vision of Hermas. In both instances a supernatural being appears as a shepherd to the future prophet and pledges to remain with him. On being challenged as to his identity, the "shepherd" transforms himself before the prophet's eyes and shows him a vision. The parallel is an unusual one surely; and Dr. Reitzenstein argues that the transformation of the shepherd narrated by the Christian writer is meaningless unless a knowledge of the pagan Poimandres is presupposed on his part. He further notes the remarkable titular similarity between the two documents, the Poimandres (Shepherd of Men) of Hermes and the Shepherd of Hermas. On the basis of literary analogy, therefore, Dr. Reitzenstein argues for dating the first number of the Hermetic Corpus earlier than the Shepherd and at least as early as the end of the first century A.D.

Granted the parallelisms emphasized, they fall just short of proving the direct literary dependence of the Christian apocalypse on the pagan writing. Contact with oral tradition, which was even more characteristic of Hermetism than of Christianity itself, would be sufficient to explain the peculiar literary phenomena in question. Under the circumstances, literary analogy furnishes an insecure basis for the chronological placement of Poimandres.

This uncertainty as to the precise time when Hermetic literature had its beginning raises the further question as to what date may be assigned to the final assembling of these documents. In answer to this question there is something like an agreement of opinion among scholars that the collection was brought together about the end of the third century A.D. It is hardly necessary to detail the reasons for this conviction, but two main points stand out. The representation of the sun as the demiurgic orderer of all things and as a charioteer wearing a rayed crown suggests a time when the Mithraic cult was at the peak of its influence. Also, the elaborate "Encomium of Kings" presupposes a plurality of kings exercising joint authority under one supreme ruler. This corresponds with the arrangement under Diocletian and his colleagues (imp. 285-305 A.D.). On the basis of these suggestions, Dr. Reitzenstein concludes that about the time of Diocletian's triumph in A.D. 302 an Egyptian priest made a compilation of eighteen sacred documents, our Corpus Hermeticum, intended to prove to the rulers of the Empire that there was nothing in his religion deserving of official suspicion, but that its teachings were calculated to foster loyalty to the Empire and its rulers.

Whether or not the Reitzenstein chronology for the Hermetic Corpus is accepted in detail, the general period that he suggests covering the first three Christian centuries is a very reasonable one for the writing and assembling of this literature. As yet a more probable period for the composition of these documents and their collection into a specific Corpus has not been suggested. For our purpose, which concerns the religious needs and experiences of people in the Graeco-Roman world, this very general dating is sufficient. Were our problem one of documentary relationships between the Christian and Hermetic literatures, it would be necessary to be much more specific in chronology and to date the various documents quite exactly--as scholarship is not prepared to do at present. Since, however, we are concerned with the altogether more vital problem of religious needs and their satisfaction, it suffices to know that in the first century A.D. there were people who thought and felt and desired as they are represented in the Hermetic writings.

Of this we may be assured. Whatever the date of the writings, Hermetic religion itself was older. A religion is always experienced and lived before ever it is recorded. Back of every religious literature, antedating it by a longer or shorter period, is the religious living of men and women who seek for the satisfaction of vital needs and desires. This general principle aside, however, the Trismegistic literature as it stands bears on its face the marks of its composite and pre-Christian origins. Many of the component elements can be isolated and labeled and dated in a general way, and a majority of these are definitely known to have been pre-Christian. The whole synthesis gives the impression of being a development that had its beginnings in Hellenistic Egypt, some time before Christianity had its beginnings in Palestine to the north. Its mythology, its literary structure, its magic, and its naive reverence for things Egyptian point in this direction, and the combination of these with Greek and Oriental elements is such a product as would come from that religious clearing house of the Hellenistic world, the Egypt of the Ptolemies. More precisely, the combination of Stoic physics and Platonic mysticism represented by the Hermetic literature existed in Alexandria at least as early as the philosopher Antiochus, or about 100 B.C. The literature itself must undoubtedly be dated considerably later; but even in its present form it falls securely within the first three centuries A.D.

 

II

It would be both interesting and useful in this connection to know exactly the component elements and their proportions as they were represented in the conglomerate product of Hermeticism, and by such an analysis to trace the beginnings of this movement back to ultimate sources. What were the various strands of influence that went into the weaving of this many-colored web? To answer this question accurately, the student must make himself at home in some dozen different thought-worlds. One would need to be thoroughly acquainted with the traditional religions of ancient Egypt, and the syncretistic religions of the Hellenistic world; with the confused astrology of the Orient and the clear philosophies of classical Greece; and above all with the religio-philosophical aggregates that were so highly important in the Hellenistic and Graeco-Roman periods, and are all but completely ignored by the purists of today. In an age of high specialization such as ours there are few scholars who have the versatility requisite for unraveling such a tangled skein as that of Hermeticism.

It is not surprising, therefore, to find a characteristic variety of opinion concerning the blend of elements found in this religion. While there is more or less agreement as to what constituent elements were involved, the scholars violently disagree concerning the proportion of the various elements and their assignment to primary or secondary place in the combination. Dr. Reitzenstein, for example, regards the fundamental strain to be Egyptian. Zielinski, on the other hand, furnishes an antidote to this Egyptian prepossession by emphasizing the Hellenic and philosophical components of Hermeticism. M. Cumont brings to the fore as well-nigh coimportant with these ingredients, a stress on the Semitic and Oriental contributions to the complex.

The significant point emphasized by all this discussion is that the religion of Hermes was a syncretism, and as such was characteristic of the period when Christianity came into being. The early imperial era, like the Hellenistic period that preceded it, was one of syncretism in religion as in most other departments of life. The Greek cults had become orientalized and the eastern cults had been Hellenized. In philosophy eclecticism was the order of the day, and even those who were nominal adherents of a particular school freely made use of ideas borrowed from other systems. Hermeticism itself was a syncretism quite typical of this general period, and doubly so because it represented an amalgamation of various philosophies with different religions. There was a substratum of religious experience, essentially mystical in character, that sought in these writings to give itself intellectual justification. A blend of ideas, Greek, Oriental, and Egyptian, philosophical, mythical, and magical, was elaborated and erected on this basis of mystical experience, to give the effect of a system of theology. To others it may be left to differentiate and classify and evaluate the various theoretic elements that compose the superstructure; our interest is in the basic item of personal religious experience.

What the student would like to know quite exactly about this religious experience is how to classify it as to type, and how significant an item it was in the religious life of the early imperial period. Was it primarily individual experience that is mirrored in these writings--or do they record the experiences of groups of individuals? To what extent was there a definite social movement back of the Corpus? How widespread and influential was that movement? Could it be classified as a cult? What, for example, was the relation of Hermetic religion to the mystery religions so popular during this period? These are some of the interrogations that arise as one studies the literature.

Again it is Dr. Reitzenstein who has assumed the most unequivocal position on this complex of problems. He maintains that this literature presupposes a definite religious movement with clergy and cult practice and various communities, that had its beginnings in Hellenistic Egypt and lasted through the third Christian century. The first tractate of the series, according to his view, was the product of a peculiar "Pimandres" community, founded probably about the time of Jesus' birth. In the early part of the next century, its influence spread to Rome. During the third century it lost its identity among the Hermetic communities generally, and finally in the fourth century the whole movement disappeared from view.

Other scholars are inclined to take issue with Dr. Reitzenstein in his historical reconstruction. W. Kroll declares, "Least of all can I believe in communities of Poimandres, Nus, Anthropos, etc. at the time of the birth of Christ; and our writings are not to be considered liturgies of such communities; on the contrary their character is purely literary." Indeed, it must be granted that external evidence is lacking to prove the existence of a Hermetic religion with clergy or cultus. Must we then grant the further possibility thtt Hermeticism had a purely literary existence and was at best but a sporadic and individualistic expression of religious aspiration?

Internal evidence makes it clear that this was not the case. The character of the Hermetic documents themselves proves that Hermeticism was a real religion that had its social as well as its individual aspect. Public preachments as well as private instruction went into the making of the Corpus Hermeticum, and even the most intimate of the dialogues were framed to include cult remains in the form of hymns and prayers. So the "Secret Discourse on the Mountain" includes the "Hymn of Rebirth" and the Poimandres revelation ends with a triple ter-sanctus to the Father God. The prophet of Poimandres, when he had made a successful beginning of his evangelization, taught his followers how to give thanks to God at the time of the sun's setting. Hermetism, too, had its baptism and the Trismegistic prophet, like John the Baptist, summoned men to "Repent and be baptized!" These cult remains are so indigenous to this literature and are handled with such naive sincerity that the student cannot regard them as literary fictions. It is a living religion that one is dealing with here. On the basis of these practices and the general representation of the Corpus, the student is justified in thinking of Hermetism as a definite religious movement proceeding from Hellenistic Egypt with communities gathered about prophetic leaders. How extensive its influence became in the Graeco-Roman period, who can tell"

There is one addendum that should be made concerning cult practices in the religion of Hermes. While they were treated with reverence, they were allegorized and "spiritualized" and the emphasis was very little on rite and very much on personal religious experience. Trismegistic religion had its baptism, to be sure; but the important thing was not the physical rite, but the hyperphysical immersion in spirit that it entailed. In the Asclepius there is a dramatic illustration of this attitude, toward ritual. Tat and Asclepius have just been receiving instruction from the Thrice-Greatest One himself.

"Having come forth from the sanctuary, they began their prayers to God, looking towards the south; for when a man wishes to pray to God at sunset, he ought to face southward, as at sunrise he ought to face eastward. But when they had begun to pray, Asclepius whispered, 'Tell me, Tat, shall we propose to your father that should add to our prayer, as men are wont to do, an offering of incense and perfumes?' Trismegistus heard; and much disturbed, he said, 'Hush, hush, Asclepius; it is the height of impiety to think of such a thing with regard to him who alone is good. Such gifts as these are unfit for him; for he is filled with all things that exist, and lacks nothing. Let us rather adore him with thanksgiving; for words of praise are the only offering that he accepts.'"

Such was the typically inconsistent attitude of Hermetic religion toward liturgical performance. Prayers must be made in a certain way; but it were profanation to offer incense! Thus, while the external ceremonial features of Hermeticism should not be neglected, the chief concern of Trismegistic religionists was the cultivation of inward experience.

 

III

Did Hermeticism with its unusual emphasis on personal religion foster an experience of individual regeneration such was prominent in the mystery cults in connection with their initiation ceremonies? Of this there can be no doubt. One of the most important tractates of the Corpus, the "Secret Discourse on the Mountain," is specifically and exclusively devoted to palingenesia, and the entire process of Hermetic rebirth is there described and enacted before the reader's imagination. The characters of the dialogue are Hermes and his son Tat. The latter begins the colloquy reminding his father that in his general discourses he has affirmed that no one could ever be saved without regeneration. Tat had longed to learn the secret of rebirth and his father had promised to share it with him when he had become a stranger to the world. This, Tat protests, he has already done and so he does not hesitate to ask his father to fulfil the promise and communicate to him the complete tradition of rebirth. Like the Nicodemus of the Johannine dialogue, Tat puzzles in literalistic fashion as to how a man can be born again--of what seed and from what womb he comes to rebirth. Hermes replies that spiritual wisdom conceiving in silence is the womb, true good the seed, and God himself the author of the act. Thus the reborn individual becomes a son of God endowed with divine powers. Tat does not understand this and asks further explanation concerning the manner of rebirth. To this demand Hermes rejoins:

"What can I say, my son? . . . . I can tell you nothing but this; I see that by God's mercy there has come to be in me a form which is not fashioned out of matter, and I have passed out of myself, and entered into an immortal body. I am not now the man I was; I have been born again in spirit, and the bodily shape which was mine before has been put away from me. I am no longer an object colored and tangible, a thing of special dimensions; I am now alien to all this, and to all that you perceive when you gaze with bodily eyesight. To such eyes as yours, my son, I am not now visible."

As Tat listens to his father's discourse, he is seized with ecstasy and seems to lose his reason. He finds himself confused and speechless and incapable of thought even. At last he asks, with genuine anxiety, if it is impossible for him to realize this spiritual good. Without hesitation Hermes reassures him on this point. "Heaven forbid, my son. Draw it into you and it will come; will it, and it comes to be. Stop the working of your bodily senses, and then will deity be born in you. But if you would be born again, you must cleanse yourself from the irrational torments of matter."

The reference to material torments prompts Tat to question as to what they are. In reply Hermes enumerates twelve evil propensities which are bound up with man's physical nature. They are ignorance, grief, intemperance, sensuality, injustice, avarice, folly, envy, deceit, anger, rashness, and malice. In the picturesque language of Hermes, these evil propensities and many more of the same tribe creep through the prison house of man's body and, like torturers, torment the prisoner who is there confined. Hermes concludes:

"But when God has had mercy on a man, they depart from him together, one and all; and then is reason built up in him. Such is the manner of the rebirth. "And now, my son, speak not but keep solemn silence; so will the mercy come down on us from God."

In the pause that follows, the silence is broken only by the voice of Hermes calling upon the ten "Powers of God," virtues all, to come and possess Tat, driving out the evil inclinations of the flesh: knowledge of God to replace ignorance, joy instead of sorrow, self-control in place of intemperance, continence where sensuality was, righteousness in lieu of injustice, generosity to drive avarice away, truth instead of error, and the more abstract qualities of goodness, life, and light to take the place of all the other brutish torments. The invocation of Hermes is an efficacious rite whereby his disciple is enabled to realize the desired change in immediate experience.

"No longer has there come upon us any of the torments of darkness; they have flown away with rushing wings. Thus, my son, has the spiritual being been made up in us; and by its coming to be we have been made gods. Whoever, then, has by God's mercy attained to this divine birth, abandons bodily sense; he knows himself to be composed of powers of God and knowing this is glad."

True to the word, Tat's first reaction to all this is ecstatic: "Father, God has made me a new being, and I perceive things now not with bodily eyesight, but by the working of the spirit." Thus freed from the limitations of sense, Tat feels himself completely at one with the universe. "I am in heaven," he exclaims, "in earth, in water and in air. I am in beasts and plants . . . . . I am present everywhere!" Then, as his ardor cools somewhat, Tat pauses to ask about his transformed being. "Tell me, Father, will this body which is composed of divine Powers ever suffer dissolution."

To this interrogation Hermes quickly answers:

"Hush! Speak not of a thing that cannot be; it would be impious to say that. Has the eye of your spirit been blinded? The physical body which is an object of sense differs widely from that other body which is of the nature of true being. The one is dissoluble, the other is indissoluble. The one is mortal, the other is immortal. Do you not know you have become a god, and son of the One, even as I have?"

As yet Tat's eagerness is not fully satisfied and he asks to be taught the "Hymn of Rebirth" which is known only to those who have experienced regeneration. With specific directions as to how the hymn is to be uttered at the time of sunset Hermes imparts to him the secret ode. Even with this esoteric information the eager neophyte is not completely satisfied. He must sing his own song of praise, and like Epictetus he will not be restrained from doing so. This, then, is Tat's own song of regeneration:

"O thou first author of the work by which the rebirth has been wrought in me. To thee, O God, do I, Tat, bring offerings of speech. O God, thou art the father; O Lord, thou art the spirit. From me accept such praises as thou willest. For by thy will it is that all is accomplished for me."

At this point the dialogue closes with an expression of gratification on the part of Hermes that his instruction has come to deathless fruition in the regeneration of Tat. He further charges his disciples to keep the tradition of the rebirth a secret, that it may not be defiled by calumniators.

 

IV

From this ordered account of the regeneration of Tat, together with casual references in other tractates of the Corpus, it is possible to reconstruct the various steps in the process of rebirth as the disciple of the Thrice-Greatest Hermes realized them in sequence. They may be enumerated thus:

 

1. THE CALL TO REPENTANCE

This was the prophet's part in the process. It consisted of a preliminary proclamation of the Hermetic gospel and it might be either public or private. Trismegistic religion had its prophetic tradition of public preaching as well as its esoteric tradition of private instruction. It may fairly be questioned as to whether the two are consonant or represent entirely different streams of development. Nevertheless, in the Hermetic Corpus as we know it both phases are found, and some memorable examples of prophetic preaching are quoted directly.

The visionist of Poimandres after he had been shown man's destiny by the Shepherd began to preach to others the beauty of piety and gnosis. The content of his message was as follows:

"O people, men born of earth, who have given yourselves up to drunkenness and sleep in your ignorance of God; awake to soberness, cease to be sodden with strong drink and lulled in sleep devoid of reason . . . . . O men, why have you given yourselves up to death, when you have been granted power to partake of immortality? Repent, you who have journeyed with error, and joined company with ignorance; rid yourselves of darkness, and lay hold on light; partake of immortality, forsaking corruption."

Entirely similar in content, though even more vigorous and picturesque in language, is the sermon which comprises a whole tractate, the seventh in our Corpus. Here, in order to enforce his sermon the preacher makes free use of figures suggested by life in wineshops and seaports and also the contrasted pictures of the tombs of the dead and the dwellings of the living. It was in response to such a general proclamation of the Hermetic gospel as this one wherein the assertion had been made that no one could be saved without rebirth, that Tat sought to learn from his Father the secret of the process.

 

2. INTIMATE INSTRUCTION

The second step in the process, private instruction under the tutelage of a "Father," was far more characteristic of Trismegistic religion than the work of evangelization just noted. This step is represented by the greater number of Hermetic documents that remain today, most of them being dialogues between Hermes and Tat or Asclepius. In all of these there are two characters only; and even in the Asclepius, where, according to the account, Tat and Ammon were admitted to the conversation, they did not assume speaking roles, but merely listened to the dialogue. At this stage of the process the seeker became the disciple and was allowed to ask questions, but further than this he did not participate. If one judges from the recorded dialogues, the "Father's" answers were sometimes confusing rather than specifically informing, and on the whole were intended to stimulate the disciple's emotions rather than satisfy his intellect. Thus the dialogue took the place, in a general way, of the initiatory rites of the mysteries, which were designed, as Aristotle said, not to instruct but to put one in a proper frame of mind. And yet, throughout the dialogues of the Hermetic Corpus a show is made of rationalization--or one should rather say, an attempt at intellectualization especially along philosophical lines more or less familiar to the Graeco-Roman world.

 

3. THE DISCIPLE'S SELF-PREPARATION

The disciple, however, was not expected to be wholly passive and receptive in the process. There were important matters of mental and moral preparation and purification for which he alone was held responsible. On the one hand he was expected to train himself to regard the things of sense as illusory. Hermes informed Tat that he could not communicate to him the secret of rebirth until he had become an alien to the phenomenal world. So Tat made it a primary item in his personal preparation to teach his thought to be a stranger to the illusion of the world.

On the other hand an ascetic as well as a mental discipline was prescribed and the seeker was expected to purify himself from fleshly appetites and sensual passions. "Hate your body," was the Hermetic demand; and when Tat expressed to his "Father" the desire to be baptized, Hermes replied "If you do not first hate your body, my son, you cannot love yourself. But if you love yourself you will have spirit." This was the chief burden of the Hermetic prophet's message--to persuade men to cease from intoxication of sensation that ends in sensuality. This was, once more, the point of Hermes' urgency when he told his son Tat to cIeanse himself from the irrational torments of matter."

In all this, great stress was placed on the exercise of the individual's own will-power. When Tat was fearful lest he should not be able to attain the desired good, Hermes said to him, "Will it, and it comes to be. Stop the working of your bodily senses, and then will deity be born in you." An absolute choice was presented to the disciple, between the temporal and the eternal, and the choosing was left to him. Hermes said:

"It is not possible, my son, to attach yourself both to things mortal and to things divine. There are two sorts of things, the corporeal and the incorporeal; that which is mortal is of one sort, and that which is divine is the other sort; and he who wills to make his choice is left free to choose the one or the other."

From reading certain sections in Trismegistic treatises, one might get the impression that this religion regarded the human will as all powerful and that all a man had to do was to will to be reborn and he would become so. But the Hermeticist did not conceive the process thus simply. Rebirth in this religion, like that in the New Testament, was a birth from above dependent finally on God's will, not man's. He who was reborn was first begotten of God.

 

4. SILENT MEDITATION

It was a distinctive feature of Hermetic rebirth that it was usually realized in religious meditation either in solitude or at most in the company of one's "Father." The prophet of Poimandres thus described his own state when there came to him the vision that made him a prophet: "Once on a time, when I had begun to think about the things that are, and my thoughts had soared high aloft, while my bodily senses had been put under restraint by sleep,--yet not such sleep as that of men weighed down by fulness of food or by bodily weariness." While he was in this condition, the theophany occurred, followed by the vision of creation. Reviewing the experience, he wrote of it afterward, "My bodily sleep had come to be sober wakefulness of soul; and the, closing of my eyes true vision; and my silence pregnant with good; and my barrenness of speech, a brood of holy thoughts." In his case, apparently, meditation ended in downright sleep and the vision was a dream!

Silence on the part of the subject was considered essential for the realization of rebirth. "Then only will you see the vision, when you cannot speak of it," said Hermes to Tat, "for the knowledge of it is deep silence, and suppression of all the senses." There is something almost magical about the way silence figured in the Hermetic process of regeneration. It will be recalled that this was the final caution of Hermes to his son before the latter realized the experience of rebirth. "Speak not, but keep solemn silence; so will the mercy come down on us from God." Silence was a sine qua non in the Hermetic process.

 

5. ECSTASY

What was the outcome in experience of all this hushed stage setting? In a word it was ecstasy, partly self-induced, partly the reaction from the "Father's" discourse. There was real agony of spirit in Tat's incoherent speech, uttered under the stress of emotion aroused by Hermes' words:

"Father, you have driven me to raving madness . . . . . You have reduced me to speechless amazement . . . . . I must indeed have gone mad, father; I have lost the wits I had. I thought your teaching had made me wise, but when you put this thought before me, my senses are stopped up."

But in the recorded experience these disquieting emotions, due to a perfectly natural mental confusion, ended finally in an ecstasy of very different order, an exalted sense of harmony with the universe, so that Tat could exclaim that he felt himself in heaven, on earth, in water, and everywhere! This was a carefully cultivated emotionalism, to be sure; yet it was emotionalism of a refined sort. There was nothing crudely physical about it, nor did it tend to harmful excess. It was a highly attenuated mental emotionalism induced by meditation and quiet conversation.

It was typical of Hermeticism that this ecstasy, like Paul's Damascus experience, was spoken of in terms of vision and described as a glowing light. Thus Hermes, when pressed by Tat's eager questioning, characterized his own experience. He had seen a simple vision, mercifully sent to him by God himself. It was a thing that could not be taught and could not be seen with the natural eye--yet it had accomplished his spiritual birth. It was a vision, he declared in another passage, which flooded a man's mental horizon up to the limit of his ability to apprehend it, but not beyond. It did not, like the sun, blind the eyes with firelike blaze, but it did hold the mind enthralled, so that he who perceived it was conscious of nothing else. Such was the limitless vision that surprised the Poimandres prophet--a vision of light, "sweet and joyous." When he expressed a desire to know the meaning of it all, he was told by the Shepherd of Men, "That light am I, even Spirit, the first God . . . . . Now fix your thought upon the light and learn to know it." One may conclude, therefore, that a photism, conceived as a theophany, was a usual feature of Hermetic ecstasy.

 

6. THE INTERPRETATION OF THIS EXPERIENCE

It is exceedingly important to know how the followers of Trismegistic tradition interpreted this overflow of emotion. What central significance did it have for them? Nothing was more central than this. It meant a special spiritual endowment that added a new element to man's very being. In Hermetic terminology this new element was nous, the spirit of Trismegistic religion. The natural man had no share in spirit, which was a special divine gift that God had willed to set up among men as a prize. The spirit, as Hermes said plainly to Tat, was the very essence of God himself, inseparable from his being and inherent in it as light is in the sun. The figure was an inevitable one, for in certain Hermetic circles, at least, the sun itself was viewed as the reservoir of this spiritual essence, the container of its substance, whence it flowed to men in a mysterious manner. And so, in the ecstasy of a vision experience, when the human soul seemed bathed and flooded with light, it was but this ethereal light-substance flowing into man's being from its heavenly source and transforming him into divine essence. It was said of this light-substance as of the spiritual air-substance in the Fourth Gospel, "No one knows whence it comes or whither it goes."

This spiritual endowment Hermetic thought connected also with the rite of baptism. In a unique dialogue, the fourth, Hermes narrated to Tat how God had taken a huge bowl, filled it with spirit and sent it down to men, entrusting it to a messenger, who was commanded to preach thus to mankind: "Hearken, each human heart; dip yourself in this basin if you can, recognizing for what purpose you have been made, and believing that you shall ascend to him who sent the basin down." Some, according to the narration, did not heed the message and chose rather to remain in their ignorance. Others gave heed, baptized themselves in spirit, and so became initiates to Hermeticism. In this realistic fashion the disciple of Hermes, like the early Christian, came to a realization of his spiritual birth, through the, rite of baptism.

The endowment with spirit brought with it, also, a special mental equipment called "gnosis" which, according to the Hermetic scheme, was prerequisite to salvation. "And this alone, even the knowledge (gnosis) of God, is man's salvation," declared Hermes, "this is the ascent to Olympus; and by this alone can a soul become good." The very first event mentioned in Tat's regeneration was the driving out of ignorance by the gnosis of God. Such knowledge was not the result of sense-perception and reason. It stood in contrast to them. Rather it was a special mental enlightenment, the gift of God, which freed men from the illusions of sense and gave them insight into reality and the purpose of existence. In this way the Hermeticist interpreted the mental emotionalism of his religious experience: as endowment with spirit and equipment with gnosis.

 

7. THE RESULTS OF HERMETIC REGENERATION

There were two important consequences that were believed to proceed from this spiritual rebirth. One related to the present and the other chiefly to the future. One was a matter of morals and the other was a metaphysical affair.

In the first place Hermetic rebirth meant the moral purification of the individual. He was reborn ethically as well as essentially. In the account of Tat's regeneration, this was represented as the conquest of a horde of vices by an all but equal number of virtues. Elsewhere the same process was figured more positively as seeds of good, sown by God, coming to great and fair fruitage in "virtue, self-control, and piety." In the moral life of the regenerate, the spirit was given a notable role to play, as the physician of the soul. Hermes said to Tat:

"As a good physician inflicts pain on the body, burning or cutting it, when disease has taken possession of it, even so the spirit inflicts pain on the soul, ridding it of pleasure from which spring all the soul's diseases, and godlessness is a great disease of the soul; for the beliefs of the godless bring in their train all kinds of evils and nothing that is good. Clearly then, spirit, inasmuch as it counteracts this disease, confers good on the soul, just as the physician confers health on the body."

According to the Hermetic view, those who had no share in this divine endowment centered all their thoughts on the pleasures of the body and its appetites, in the belief that for its sake men came into being. They became wicked and depraved, envious and covetous, murderous and impious. To them an avenging demon was always present, ever adding torment to insatiable desire. But to the holy and good, the pure and merciful who lived piously, the spirit was ever present to help them win the Father's love by their upright lives. The disciple of Hermes said of his nous as the disciple of Paul would have said of his pneuma, "a man can escape from wickedness if he has the spirit in him."

On its metaphysical side Hermetic rebirth involved nothing less than deification. "This is the good; this is the consummation for those who have got gnosis--they enter into God," was the last word of the Shepherd of Men to his prophet before giving him his commission. Hermeticism emphatically maintained that it was perfectly possible for man, even while residing in the human body, to become deified. With this exalted thought of possibilities within human reach, the Hermetic thinker was almost inclined to respect man more highly than the gods. While none of the gods left their heavenly spheres to come down to earth, man, without leaving earth, could ascend to heaven and make himself divine--such was the power of his ecstasy. "We must not shrink from saying," Hermes concluded, "that a man on earth is a mortal god, and that a god in heaven is an immortal man."

So far as the future was concerned, divinization meant immortality also. When the transformation of man's essence was complete by the process of regeneration, then he had a body that death could not touch or harm. "The natural body can be dissolved, the spiritual body cannot be" was as much a conviction of Hermes as of Paul, and the disciple of the former confidently expected that when he should depart from his earthly body, he would "be brought into the troop of the gods and the souls that have attained bliss."

Altogether the rebirth experience of Trismegistic religion was a well-ordered process with clearly defined steps. There were certain preliminary items for which the leaders of the Hermetic movement were responsible--the, Prophet's call to repentance and the Father's personal words of instruction. There were other items of psychological self-preparation for which the seeker and he alone was responsible--a profound distrust of sense-perception, a rigorous control of physical appetites, and a willingness to wait in quiet, silent meditation for the inflow of divine grace. The rebirth experience itself was in inward ecstasy characterized by all but complete disregard of external sensations, with heed given only to the weighty words of the Father. There was mental confusion followed by a sense of exaltation, chaos ending in clarification, and not infrequently a vision experience described as a wonderful light. The interpretation of it all was that man, in this supreme moment of ecstasy, was endowed with spirit, a deific light-substance, and equipped with gnosis, a divinely given mental illumination absolutely essential to salvation. As a result of this rebirth, the individual felt himself possessed of such divine power that he could live an upright moral life, and could face the future assured of immortality--a deified mortal while yet on earth.

 

V

One further question should be raised, whether the palingenesia of Hermeticism has significance per se only, or whether it may not have special importance in relation to general religious trends among Gentiles in the first-century world. When the Hermetic movement is viewed in relation to contemporary tendencies, it is found to have been exactly in line with certain other important movements of the period. The general Weltanschauung of the Graeco-Roman world was a religio-philosophical one, and there was a distinct tendency both on the part of religions and philosophies to approach each other.

On the one hand, the religions of the time, those that survived with any vigor the successive Macedonian and Roman conquests, were seeking intellectual justification for their cult practices and were endeavoring to rationalize their emotionalism. To recall a single and notable instance already cited, Plutarch, in his treatise on Isis and Osiris, tried to harmonize his religious and his philosophical heritages and to interpret the Egyptian cult in a manner that would appeal to a Greek-thinking world. A little earlier Philo, in his Alexandrian environment, made a voluminous effort to reinterpret the intractable religion of his fathers in a way to satisfy the contemporary demand for intellectual criticism and for mystical experience--both at the same time. Long before the period represented by the Hermetic Corpus, the crude physical emotionalism of the Dionysian brotherhoods had been restrained and reformed into the asceticism of the Orphic movement with its very elaborate theology. In Hellenistic times Oriental mysticism began to coalesce into pre-Christian Gnosticism with its elaborate speculations built on a fundamentum of mystical religious experience. Indeed, from one point of view Hermeticism itself took its place as a particular type of Gnosticism, originating in Egypt. Like the popular cults of the period it encouraged the emotional type of religious experience; but it refined its emotionalism and made it mental rather than physical. Like the popular cults also it had its rites; but they were reduced to a minimum and "spiritualized" as much as possible. As a religion Hermeticism went far in the direction of a philosophy.

On the other hand the contemporary philosophical movements were making distinct approaches toward religion and were giving scope, as never before, to the exercise of emotion in the quest for truth. The religious revival of the time of Augustus had its effect in the field of philosophy, and those systems which yielded least to the popular demand for supernatural guaranties and emotional satisfactions were swept aside as unsatisfying. Epicureanism, the religion of the scientific-minded, yielded little and gained few adherents of note after Lucretius. Stoicism made greater compromise. Seneca and Epictetus clothed their moral and philosophical teachings in religious terms and gave them religious sanctions. Taught by the Syrian Posidonius, the Stoa had already become eclectic and had made place for astrology and mysticism and other characteristic features of oriental religion. In the first century A.D., probably at Alexandria, Pythagoreanism reappeared as a religious philosophy and made its way to Rome, where it enjoyed a temporary alliance with converted Stoicism. A little later Platonism, rejuvenated but transformed almost beyond recognition, was to appear under the name of Neo-Platonism and dominate the Roman world as the great mystical philosophy of the third century.

In such a thought-world as this, the religion of Hermes held its place somewhere between cult and philosophy, at the point where these two strong tides flowing in opposite directions met and became one. Its thought content was an eclectic conglomerate, but completely infused with the religious spirit, and its feeling content was of an intellectualized variety. Thus the rebirth of Hermeticism, important per se, is even more significant as an example of the type of mystical experience encouraged by the religio-philosophical movements of the Roman world.

     
Pagan Regeneration, by Harold R. Willoughby, [1929], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER IX

 

THE MYSTICISM OF PHILO

TWO religions of Egyptian origin have already been investigated: the cult of Isis and the garbled philosophy of "Hermes Trismegistus." Both were typical gentile systems, characteristic products of Hellenistic syncretism. Each cultivated its own peculiar type of individual regeneration: the Isiac a realistic, emotional experience conditioned by the proper performance of cult rites, and the Hermetic a subjective, intellectualized experience all but completely divorced from ceremonialism. At the beginning of the Christian era, there was a third Egyptian syncretism which was characterized by a mysticism peculiarly its own, yet resembling in important ways the other types of mystical experience current in Alexandria. This, strange to say, was a Jewish syncretism--the religion of Philo the philosopher, the great Jewish contemporary of Jesus and Paul.

 

I

There is no man of Paul's period more important for an understanding of the Christian Apostle or of Hellenistic Christianity than is Philo of Alexandria. Even the casual student of the times cannot but be impressed by certain outstanding similarities between the environments and experiences of Philo and Paul. Both were Jews of the Diaspora, and each was reared in one of the great centers of Graeco-Oriental civilization; for Alexandria, even more markedly than Tarsus, was a focal point for Hellenistic culture with its characteristic blend of elements oriental and occidental. Reared in similar environments each attained a certain prominence in his own racial group. For Paul it was an early attainment when, as a young rabbinical student of favored family, he "outstripped many of his own age and race in his special ardor for the traditions of his fathers," and became the zealous defender of Jewish orthodoxy against Hellenizing Messianists. As for Philo, being related to the Alabarch Alexander, he was a member of one of the "best families" in the Alexandrian Jewish community. This fact is fixed whether or not the assertion of Jerome that he was of priestly race is credited. That Philo himself, at least in his later years, rose to a position of influence on his own account is shown by the fact that when he was of advanced age he headed the Jewish embassy to the Emperor Caligula in A.D. 40. Thus Philo, like Paul, crowned his career with a journey to the imperial city, the Alexandrian as head of a delegation of protesting provincials, and the Tarsian as a propagandist on trial for his life.

Not only were Philo and Paul both Jews of the Diaspora prominent among their fellow-countrymen but they were also both thoroughly en rapport with the gentile life of the times. This their own writings certify even in matters of vocabulary and style. Paul wrote good Hellenistic Greek in a manner suggestive alike of the informal letterwriting of the period and of the fervent exhortations of popular street preachers. Philo, on the other hand, formed his diction according to that of Greek classical authors, the influence of Plato being particularly notable. He was familiar with the writings of the great Greek poets also, Homer and Euripides and the others, and on occasion he quoted from them. He was acquainted with the works of Phidias and mentioned them in no uncomplimentary manner--a remarkable thing for a Jew to do. To the varied play of contemporary gentile life he was also responsive. Like Paul he was well acquainted with the athletic festivals of the Graeco-Roman world, and had a detailed familiarity with the rules of the games and the habits of competitors. Also he possessed extensive knowledge of the ordinary curriculum of gentile education and discussed it with real insight. The art of music and the practice of medicine commanded his attention. Furthermore, he made extensive observations and pronouncements on political and social problems, thus displaying a keen interest in these important phases of the secular life. Because he, a prominent Jew of the Diaspora, was thus open to gentile influences, the study of his religious experience is especially significant in relation to the experiences of Hellenists generally.

Another reason why Philo is particularly important for a study of religious developments in first-century life is because his writings, like the Hermetic literature, represent a blend of philosophy and religion such as was characteristic of the age. Here there is contrast between Philo and Paul. The latter was consciously scornful of gentile philosophies. For the classical systems of Hellas he had little use, and it was to Stoicism chiefly that he was responsive. Philo, on the other hand, had a hearty admiration for the philosophy of the Greeks. Among gentile authors the philosophers were the ones whom he most highly esteemed. Parmenides, Empedocles, Zeno, and Cleanthes seemed to him divine men and members of a sacred company. But he showed the greatest fondness of all for Plato "the great" and "the most sacred," and probably he would have declared himself to be more indebted to Plato than to any other thinker of Greece. Certainly his own system, if we may thus characterize it, bore many of the characteristic marks of Platonism. His prejudice in favor of this classical philosophy was generally recognized in early times and gave rise to the proverb, "Either Plato philonizes or Philo platonizes."

Notwithstanding this predilection, however, Philo borrowed freely from other systems as well wherever he found elements that were useful to himself. Pythagorean tradition was particularly attractive to him. He spoke of this school with veneration and was himself characterized as a Pythagorean by Clement, of his own city. But he was at least equally indebted to Stoicism, and recent writers have tended to emphasize his affinities in this direction. On the philosophical side, Philo presents a notable example of the eclectic tendencies of the time, and one reason why it is so difficult to reduce his thinking to a definite system is because of its syncretistic character.

In spite of his appreciation of Greek philosophy, Philo yet remained at heart a religionist consciously loyal to the practices of his fathers. It was not one of the thinkers of Greece but Moses himself who was the greatest of lawgivers and philosophers, he believed. The fundamental assumption on which his whole elaborate and disparate system was based was the absolute authority of the Mosaic Law. In the Torah he found the perfect and supreme revelation of the divine wisdom. Each word in it was written by Moses at specific, divine dictation, or at least under the direct inspiration of God. While the Pentateuch stood on a solitary level above all the other sacred writings, Philo regarded the prophets also as interpreters of God, who made use of them in revealing his will to men. This Jew of the Diaspora, living at a considerable distance from the Jerusalem center of his religion, still found himself in sympathy with the teachings of the prophets and maintained an intense loyalty to the Law.

With his admiration for Greek philosophy and his loyalty to his own religion, Philo found himself in a dilemma. He was unwilling to yield either the philosophy or the religion; so he sought to reconcile them. In this attempt he was but trying to do what other thoughtful men of his own race in the same environment had endeavored to do before him. Over a century and a half earlier, Aristobulus had worked out certain analogies between his ancestral faith and the speculations of Plato, which he explained by the assumption that the Greek philosopher borrowed his ideas from Moses. Taking this as his cue, Philo proceeded to read into the Pentateuch whatever he considered worth while in the different systems of gentile philosophy. This was, of course, a difficult and violent procedure; but Philo readily accomplished it by means of the allegorical method of interpretation, an instrument borrowed from the Stoics. Thus, partly to satisfy his own mind, doubtless, and partly to make the treasures of gentile philosophy available for his fellow countrymen, but most of all to commend the Jewish religion to fair-minded Gentiles, Philo wrote his voluminous works. To philosophical speculation he sought to lend the authority of religion and to religion, on the other hand, he endeavored to give intellectual respectability by the addition of philosophical accretions. In working out this blend of philosophy and religion, he was operating in harmony with the tendencies of the times as the development of Neo-Pythagoreanism, Hermetism, Gnosticism, and the inception of Neo-Platonism indicate. For the very reason that Philo interpreted religious experience in religio-philosophical terminology, his interpretation has peculiar interest and value.

In view of Philo's earnest endeavor to combine disparate elements, Jewish and Hellenistic, religious and philosophical, it is not strange that his formulations should contain many contradictory features. From the study of his writings it is impossible to reconstruct any clear-cut, consistent system of thought. In the reading of Philo one is continually encountering contradictions and discrepancies, and it is a constant problem to know just which of two incongruous statements represents the real thought of the writer or whether either does. If, however, it is impossible to derive from the study of his writings a consistent impression of his way of thinking, it is at least possible to get a comprehensive view of his thoughts. His writings are so voluminous that they are to be reckoned among the most extensive source materials for the period. The student of Philo has at least the advantage of being able to follow the author's thought through the most varied ramifications, even though he is in danger of losing his way in the mass of conflicting opinions.

In studying the religious experiences of Philo and his contemporaries, we are concerned primarily with a single phase of religious mysticism, the experience of regeneration. Since this experience, as then conceived, involved the immediate relationship of man with the divine, the study of the Philonian formulation of this experience may properly begin with an examination of Philo's thought of God.

 

II

According to Philo's own statement, there were for him two basic problems in theology. "One is whether there is any deity at all? .... The other question is, supposing there be a God, what is he as to his essence?" With the first of these problems Philo as a good Jew had no real trouble, but the second he pronounced "not only difficult but perhaps impossible." He struggled a great deal with this problem and generally succeeded in attaining a disheartening negative conclusion--that God is essentially unknown and unknowable. This, he argued, was not due to any obscurity on the divine side, but rather to human limitations. According to his theory, man must first become God--an impossibility--before he could hope to comprehend God. Philo's ultimate position concerning the essential nature of God was simply this: We know that God is, but we cannot know what he is. This bare conviction, he said, ought to satisfy the seeker after God. "It is sufficient for human reason to attain the knowledge that there is and exists something as the cause of the universe; but to press beyond this and inquire into essence or quality is superlative folly." In theory, at least, that was the conclusion of the whole matter for this Jewish thinker.

It is well known that Philo on occasion emphatically asserted that God is completely bare of all qualities. Then having emptied the term "God" of all qualitative content, he proceeded to fill it full again. He was not, after all, satisfied with the purely negative position that God is without quality. Instead he went on to make the assertion that God is at once the summation and source of all the good qualities known to men. In his account of the embassy to the emperor, he spoke of the Uncreated and the Divine as "the first good and beautiful and blessed and happy, or if one is to speak the truth, that which is better than the good and more blessed than blessedness itself and whatever is more perfect than these." Somewhat like a refrain in the writings of Philo there echoes the thought that "the active cause is .... better than virtue and better than knowledge and better than the good itself and the beautiful itself." This Philonian God, though the summation of all excellent and admirable qualities, was by that fact superlatively exalted above his creatures instead of united with them.

Certain other characteristics of Philo's deity completely differentiated him from men. Philo ascribed to him eternal causality and this, of course, put God into a class entirely by himself. Similarly, God was immutable while every created thing, by the very circumstance of creation, was subject to change. Philo's infinite God was further removed from his creatures by being superior to the conditions of time and place. In fine, the Philonian God was a personification of absolute perfection, the only perfect being in all the universe, a being full and complete in and of himself and entirely self-sufficient. "His nature is entirely perfect, or rather God is himself the perfection and completion and boundary of happiness, sharing in nothing else by which he can be rendered better." All of these characteristics peculiar to Philo's God: his creative power, his steadfastness, his superiority to time and place, his perfection, and self-sufficiency served to differentiate him completely from his creatures. The list of distinctive characteristics might be increased by reference to many other peculiar attributes. These, however, are sufficient to show on what a transcendent plane of solitary exaltation reposed the figure of Philo's God.

It is patent that the Alexandrian's conception of deity was an unusually exalted one. In view of the transcendence of the Philonian God, one might well question whether any relations were possible between the human and the divine. Admittedly, if Philo's abstract conception of the deity were carried to its logical conclusion, all mystical experience would be impossible for men.

 

III

Although Philo's God was far removed from humanity, man himself was not so far removed from the divine. The statement, paradoxical as it sounds, is no more contradictory than Philo's own thought as he expressed it. His idea of man was dualistic and very like the conceptions of human nature entertained by Orphics and Pythagoreans. In his opinion, man was a creature of higher and lower origin with a twofold nature to correspond with his beginnings. Following the Genesis account of creation, Philo affirmed that "the body was made by the Creator, taking a lump of clay and fashioning the human form out of it; but the soul proceeds from no created thing but from the Father and Ruler of all things." In another important passage in his writings, Philo emphasized the dual origin of man in mythological terminology obviously borrowed from a gentile source. Commenting on the Genesis story of the angels of God who became enamored of the daughters of men, Philo said that these angels were souls hovering about in the air. Some of the souls, attracted by the pleasures of sense life, left their pure abode in airy space and descended into material bodies to live. Engulfed in bodies as in a river and sometimes swept away by the life of the senses, these souls yet remained on the Godward side of man with a strong tendency to strive upward and return to the place whence they came. Whether Philo cast his thought in the gentile forms suggested by Plato or the Jewish forms suggested by Genesis, his emphasis was the same in both instances, on the dual origin of man, a being of heavenly origin on the one hand, of earthly origin on the other.

Corresponding with this view of the genesis of man was Philo's opinion of the constitution of human nature. Fundamentally, he believed man was a duad, consisting of a soul and a body. So far as his body was concerned, man was but a part of the material universe. His physical being consisted of the same four elements of which the remainder of the cosmos was constituted. "For he is composed of the same materials as the world," wrote Philo, "that is of earth, and water, and air, and fire, each of the elements having contributed its appropriate part." It is curious to find in the writings of an Alexandrian Jew this echo of the physical speculations of Empedocles and the Ionians.

Since man was thus a part of the physical universe, he shared in all the imperfections of matter. Philo was conscious of the religious problem involved by the earthy constitution of the human body, and his attitude on the problem was a mingled one. Although in one passage he spoke of the body in a Pauline figure as a "sacred temple of the rational soul," his usual language was very different in tenor. Like the Neo-Pythagoreans of his own day and the Orphics of an earlier age, Philo spoke of the body as the prison-house of the soul, a clog and a hindrance to religious experience. "Away my friend, from that earthy vesture of yours, he exhorted, "escape from that accursed prison, the body, and from its pleasures and lusts, which are your jailors." It was a matter of experience that the body, which was the seat of the sense life, actually weighed down the aspirations of the spirit. For the Alexandrian Jew, as for the Tarsian Christian, the body was a fertile seed bed for evil in which natural impulses, left unrestrained, would come to full fruition in specific sins. On occasion Philo took the extreme position that man's physical nature was inherently evil in and of itself. Thus, because of his physical constitution, man was far removed from the perfect God.

This, however, was only half of the story. Man was not only body but body plus soul, and by this circumstance he was raised above the level of mere earthly existence. As a compound being of dual origin, one part heavenly and the other part earthly, man stood on the borderland between two different realms, his citizenship in both. The higher element in the human constitution Philo emphasized equally with, if not even more strongly than, the lower part of his nature. "The body has been fashioned of earth," he granted, "but the soul belongs to the ether, a fragment of the divine." By reason of this higher element in his make-up, man had inherent within himself the possibility of some sort of relationship with the deity.

Parenthetically, it should be noted that Philo's was not an unmodified dualism pure and simple. At one important point he complicated his theory by allowing for a twofold division of the higher element in man, the soul. On the one hand, Jew that he was, he viewed the soul as vital energy, the principle of life in matter, essentially irrational and possessed in common by both men and animals. On the other hand, like a Stoic, he viewed the soul as man's rational capacity, the impress of divine reason, an element linking the human with the divine. Of these two parts of the soul the latter was, or should be, the dominant and superior element.

Philo's conception of the irrational part of the soul with its troublesome sense-life need not concern us. Like the body it was a negative and deterrent factor in religious experience. Not so the rational part of the soul, the intellect. This element belonged pecullarly to man among created beings and served to differentiate him completely from other animals. Philo reiterated this point with emphasis: "Man is the noblest of animals by reason of the higher element among his component parts." This reasoning power not only differentiated man from the creatures of earth but gave him kinship in heaven and related him, in a way, to deity. God himself was the creator and archetype of the rational nature, and to this sovereign element in the human constitution he had assigned the governance of the lower elements in human nature.

Like contemporary Stoic teachers, Philo isolated in man's rational nature the all-important human factor in religious experience. In contrast to the material body and the animating principle, he viewed the intellect as a help rather than a hindrance in lifting man up to God. Instead of being an alien element, it was itself related to the divine, and was inherently capable of further fellowship with deity. Thus, while Philo's conception of God was so exalted as scarcely to admit of any interrelations between humanity and divinity, his conception of man was at once a lowly and an elevated one, humble in respect to man's body and sense life but exalted in respect to man's rational power. The latter element, Philo believed, itself closely akin to the divine, threw open to man the possibility for mystical religious experience.

 

IV

Being a creature of dual nature man was, in Philo's thought, the scene of an incessant conflict between the higher and lower elements in his constitution. The body constantly hindered the soul in its aspirations, and the soul was ever seeking deliverance from the imprisoning body. The rational element constantly strove to maintain its supremacy and the irrational desires were ever struggling to free themselves from restraint. In man's lower nature there was a continual pull away from God.

But Philo also recognized man's yearning for God, by virtue of the rational soul which was the dominant part of his constitution. Granting that the endeavor for fellowship with the divine might prove a futile one, Philo was yet convinced of the worth-whileness of the effort. "There is nothing better," he said, "than to search after the true God, even if the finding of him should escape human capacity, seeing that even eagerness of desire to understand him in itself produces unspeakable pleasures and delights." Logically, then, the next task is to chart, following the lead of Philo's thought, the various steps in this upward striving of the soul.

For the man who had neglected his God-given rational heritage, and surrendered himself to the control of his lower nature, the first step was a realization of his position, an awakening to the consciousness that in surrendering to pleasurable cravings he had violated the divinely prescribed order of things for humanity and dethroned the rational element which should be supreme. In this process Philo usually thought of man's own intellect as playing the part of conscience. He spoke of it as the real man, the better self, who in all the critical, moral, and religious issues of life deserved to have the deciding voice. Philo did not, however, view this testing and convicting function of the intellect as a pure exercise of human endeavor, by any means. Recognizing the close kinship of the human and the divine at exactly this point, be considered the human understanding as "intimately related to the divine Logos, an impress or particle or effulgence of the blessed nature," and frequently in his writings Philo represented the Logos itself as exercising the functions of conscience and arousing man to a realization of his evil ways.

Under the promptings of this agency man became conscious of his positive wrongdoings, of his limitations, and above all of his utter humility in relation to the deity. This humble attitude of self-depreciation in the divine presence was, in Philo's opinion, a precondition of progress toward fellowship with God. In a paradoxical statement Philo testified that it was only in this humble frame of mind that he himself even dared approach the divine presence. "When I perceive myself to be but 'dust and ashes' and what is even more despicable, then I have the courage to meet Thee, having become humble, cast down to the ground." The, preliminary to the soul's progress toward God was the realization, in the glaring light of conscience, of man's utter inferiority.

The next important step was the active turning away from the life of sensation and passion, desire and pleasure, which had previously ensnared the soul and caused its defection. The human intellect, in order to wing its way upward to the divine, must be freed from all trammels of the body and material entanglements. Not only must the reason be freed from the domination of the senses and restored to its governing position in the human constitution, but it must also learn to distrust itself even and have confidence only in the Uncreated. In words that have a Neo-Pythagorean ring, Philo commented on Genesis 15:5.

"The mind that is to be led forth and set at liberty must withdraw from all things, from bodily necessities, from the instruments of the senses, from sophistical reasonings, from plausible arguments, finally from itself . . . . . For it is not possible for one who dwells in the body and among mortal men to have communion with God, but only for him whom God delivers out of his prison."

Later in the same work, Philo addressed an exhortation to his own mind to withdraw from all physical connections.

"If you seek God, O my mind, go forth out of yourself, and seek for him. But if you remain in the substance of the body, or in the vain opinions of the mind, you are then without any real wish to search into divine things, even if you do put on the appearance and pretense of seeking them."

Fundamentally, therefore, a profound distrust of sensation and a complete disregard of the body was at the basis of Philo's supreme religious experience, as it was in the case of Hermeticism.

This distrust of the world of sense was but the reverse of a very necessary positive attitude of mind. The turning away from the visible world as unreal must be accompanied simultaneously by a turning toward the invisible as the only reality. At this point Philo's indebtedness to Platonism became particularly evident. These two processes, the turning away from the phenomenal world and the turning toward God, were intimately associated with each other in Philo's thought and writings. He compared the way of sensation to a slippery path on which men stumble and fall, and the way of contemplation and trust in God to a dry high road on which men make progress without hindrance.

In thus disregarding both sensation and reason, man passed beyond the limits of ordinary rational processes. It required a great perseverance of will to follow this Philonian injunction, and Philo himself recognized the, difficulties of the situation. He said:

"If you choose to make a profounder search and not merely a superficial one, you will clearly discover that it is not easy to put faith in God alone without dragging in something else . . . . . To clear away all earthly influences and to distrust the world of becoming which is of itself wholly unworthy of confidence, and to have faith in God alone, who alone is trustworthy, requires a large and Olympian understanding, one which is no longer enticed by our worldly interests."

Philo, like Paul, used the word "faith" to denominate this attitude of trust in God, and if one may judge from the frequency and the emphasis of his references to faith this personal attitude was almost as significant for the Alexandrian Jew as it was for Paul himself. He characterized the attitude as that "of the soul resting and established on the Cause of all things, who is able to do anything, but who wills to do only the best." Philonian faith, then, not only presupposed a complete distrust of self and the world but it issued in a glad confidence centered in the invisible God.

In spite of the handicap with which man started in his whimsical nature, in spite of a constant tendency to yield to irrational desires and subordinate the reason itself to the dictates of passion, the rational soul of man, according to Philo, was constantly yearning for better things. Man's own intellect, itself an emanation of the divine Logos, was ever busy playing the part of conscience, arousing man to a realization of his weaknesses and inferiority. If, in response to this stimulus, man learned to distrust himself and the world and to throw himself on the invisible God in an abandon of confidence, Philo believed he was in a condition to come in contact with the divine. The question naturally follows, Was there from the side of the immutable God any response to this change of attitude of man's part? Did Philo allow for an approach to man by God to match man's yearning for God?

 

V

A priori it would seem that any such action from the divine side would be unthinkable to Philo. Considering the fact that the Jewish philosopher conceived of God as pure being, essentially incomprehensible, devoid of all qualities, except as he was characterized by certain attributes peculiar to himself alone, it would seem improbable that Philo should admit a generally gracious attitude on God's part toward mankind as a whole, or an especially favorable attitude toward those imperfect but yearning souls who were striving for communion with the divine. Yet such was the case.

In general Philo viewed God as the source of all good for humanity. From him, as from an exhaustless fountain, there streamed an overflow of divine mercy that was the cause of everything good in human experience. One of his favorite epithets for God was "He who loves to give," and he freely expressed the conviction that the only limit to God's graciousness was man's capacity to receive.

Upon those who had abused their God-given endowments but were conscious of their mistake, the deity looked with special favor. In a pertinent passage Philo said that God graciously "makes all things easy" for those who "feel shame and exchange dissoluteness for self-control and loathe the base phantoms which they impressed upon their souls." It was not without the definite assurance of divine help, according to Philo, that the soul started out in quest for the central experience of religion. In a comment on Genesis 46:4 he elaborated God's promise "I will go with you" as follows:

"This I do because of my pity for your rational nature, so that by my guidance you may be brought up out of the Hades of passion to the Olympian abode of virtue, for to all suppliant souls I have made known the way that leads to heaven, preparing for them a thoroughfare that they might not grow weary of the journey."

Like the father in Jesus' parable of the lost son, Philo's God went out to meet the soul that was returning to him, and again like a father he was not satisfied until the soul had been liberated from its bondage to the body and conducted in safety to the freedom of its heavenly mothercity. The God of Philo, beneficent in his attitude toward men in general, was especially helpful to those who turned away the world and earnestly sought fellowship with him.

Notwithstanding Philo's recognition of God's gracious attitude of helpfulness, there yet persisted a distinct emphasis on the transcendence of God. One fundamental assumption that ever remained in the background of his thought and not infrequently came out into the foreground was the conviction that the Uncreated could not come into contact with any created being. In spite of man's aspiration and God's beneficence, there remained a huge gap between the human and the divine according to the Philonian scheme of things. To bridge this chasm the Alexandrian religionist had recourse to the idea of mediation, a conception already familiar to Jews and Egyptians and Gentiles generally, and to philosophers as well as religionists in Philo's day.

To carry on this work of mediation Philo posited three different classes of beings operating between God and man. Chief among them was the Logos, a semi-personification of God's thought or reason. In the theological constructions of Philo, the Logos held quite as important a position as it earlier held in the ethical thinking of the Stoics or the physical speculations of Heraclitus. Next in order and subordinate to the Logos were the powers, manifestations of the divine energy, who worked what was unseemly for God himself to do in the world. The gnostic affinities of Philo's thought were apparent in this connection. Finally, there were the angels who constituted a much more vague category in Philo's thinking than was usual in the case of a Jew. In their mediatorial work Philo assigned these beings an important function altogether helpful to mortals.

He drew a picture of the soul following after God and having is the companions of its journey "those rational powers who are commonly called angels" and the Logos itself. In the progress of the soul toward God, Philo considered the apprehension of the Logos as a preliminary stage to the apprehension of God himself, and he even affirmed, "God can only be grasped by means of the powers which accompany and follow him." In spite of the gap that existed in Philo's thought between the human and the divine, he made ample provision for bridging it by means of mediatorial agencies a part of whose business was to assist the soul in its quest for communion with God.

 

VI

When, however, it came to this central experience in religion, the mediating agencies were for the most part disregarded by Philo and the human soul was left alone with its God. At this point the one thing that mattered was man's real kinship with the divine by virtue of his intellect. In so far as that rational element came to self-realization, it strove for union with the, divine origin of its being; hence there was in the soul itself an inner urge that impelled it Godward. The ultimate goal of the soul's endeavor was an immediate vision of God himself. This, in Philo's estimation, was the supreme experience of the religious life. He compared it to the laurel wreath that awaited the victorious athlete. He asked:

"What lovelier or more fitting garland could be woven for the victorious soul, than the power, with clear vision to gaze on him who is? Truly splendid is the prize held out to the wrestling soul--to be equipped with eyesight so as to perceive without dimness him who is alone worthy of contemplation."

Since God was the ultimate being in all the universe, the apprehension of him was the very summation of privilege. He who had caught that vision, Philo said, might well pray to stay there without change.

Of the supreme importance of that vision for Philo there can be no doubt. However, when the modern student attempts to analyze the experience, he finds it very difficult to get a lucid idea of the thought of the Alexandrian philosopher. Nowhere does Philo himself analyze the experience in any comprehensive way, and his references to it are so confused and contradictory that it is not easy to comprehend his ideas on the subject. it is plain, however, that for Philo the basic conviction growing out of the experience was the realization that God is incomprehensible. "When the soul that loves God searches into the nature of the Existent, it enters into an invisible search, from which the chief benefit which accrues to it is to comprehend that God is incomprehensible and to see that he is invisible." The case of Moses was the classical example which Philo adduced to illustrate this point. In briefest terms, then, the Philonian vision of God meant a contemplation of the divine being eventuating in the conviction that he was incomprehensible.

With such a negative result, however, Philo himself was ill content, if we may judge from his other references to the subject. In the face of his own theory of the transcendence of God, he persistently asserted, though usually with some reservation, that the direct vision and the immediate apprehension of God were possible for humanity. Some there were who were able to overleap the bounds of the material universe and get a distinct impression of the Uncreated. Philo went farther and in terms of real enthusiasm attempted to describe such an immediate experience of God. In one passage, after prescribing certian preliminary conditions, he showed how the soul might be consecrated as a living sanctuary to God. This was the glorious possibility he pictured: "Then he may appear to you visibly, causing incorporeal rays to shine upon you, granting visions of his nature, undreamed of and ineffable, which are the overflowing sources of all other blessings. " The usual comparison that Philo employed in attempting to describe the vision was the simile of light, so familiar in the Hermetic literature. In a more extended description of the experience he said:

"A bright, incorporeal ray, purer than ether, suddenly shining upon the soul, revealed the ideal world as under guidance. But the Guide, encompassed by unstained light was hard to behold or divine, for the soul's vision was obscured by the splendor of the rays . . . . . Then the Father and Savior, seeing her genuine longing, pitied her, and imparting power to her sight, did not withhold the vision of himself, in so far as it was possible for a created and mortal nature to contain it."

The concluding qualification in this passage was typical of Philo's thinking. Within the limits of this reservation, he allowed for the immediate contact of the human and the divine and made a real effort to characterize the resultant experience. As in this instance the experience was usually described as a process of mental illumination.

Thus far we have considered primarily the intellectual aspects of Philo's vision of God. It hid for him, however, a large emotional content as well. The contemplation of the divine being eventuated in an ecstasy which Philo interpreted as a matter of divine possession. He told of rapturous moments in his own experience which especially illustrate this phase of his religious thinking. He wrote on one occasion:

"I am not ashamed to recount my own experience. At times, when I proposed to enter upon my wonted task of writing on philosophical doctrines with exact knowledge of the materials which were to be put together, I have had to leave off without any work accomplished . . . . . But at other times when I had come empty all of a sudden I was filled with thoughts showered down and sown upon me unseen from above, so that by divine possession I fell into a rapture and became ignorant of everything, the place, those present, himself and what was spoken or written. For I received . . . . the most vividly distinct view of the matter before me such as might be received through the eyes from the most luminous presentation."

This famous account from the writer's own personal experience presents an unusual case of mental illumination for a particular task; but the phenomena represented are, in the main, the same as those exhibited in accounts of mystical experiences to which Philo made impersonal reference. Here was the vacant mind, the steady contemplation of a great theme, the sudden flood of ideas, and finally the rapturous sense of possession by divine power. The last factor Philo emphasized in an address to his own soul. He urged:

"Go out from yourself filled with a divine frenzy like those possessed in the mystical rites of the Corybantes, and possessed by the deity after the manner of prophetic inspiration. For when the mind is no longer self-contained but rapt and frenzied with a heavenly passion . . . . this is your inheritance."

To state the matter very simply and perhaps over simply, as a consequence of forgetting himself in the thought of God, Philo experienced an ecstatic sense of divine possession.

One who is familiar with the Philonian vocabulary cannot doubt the importance of this emotional element in his experience or Philo's own high evaluation of it from a religious point of view. His language is unusually rich in the vocabulary of ecstasy. Some of his more familiar terms are enthousiazein, "to be divinely inspired," korubantian, "to be frenzied" (like the Corybantes), bakeuein, "to be seized with divine madness," katechesthai, "to be possessed by deity," and the noun forms ekstasis, "ecstasy," and katokoche, "divine possession," are of frequent occurrence. In describing mystical experience, particularly in its emotional aspect, Philo used the most glowing terms of enthusiasm. He characterized it as a happy intoxication. To quote his own paradoxical words, the spirit in a state of ecstasy "is kindled into a flame of thanksgiving to God and becomes drunken with that drunkenness which does not intoxicate." This comparison was a metaphor that Philo employed more than once. Commenting on the story of Hannah rebuked for drunkenness during her devotions, he said, "In the case of the God-possessed not only is the soul wont to be stirred and driven into frenzy, but to be flushed and inflamed, since the joy which wells up within and makes the spirit glow transmits the experience to the outward parts." The quotation suggests what a highly wrought emotional experience divine possession was for Philo, and that it was not without its physical accompaniments and manifestations.

It is possible, however, to exaggerate the emotional phase of Philo's mysticism. On the whole the impression one gathers from his writings is that his ecstasy, however deeply felt it may have been, was of a calm and controlled type that was experienced in the solitude of contemplation. Philo's whole emphasis was on the quiescence of the human soul, and his ecstasy was that of one who was being acted upon rather than acting. To state the differentiation in terminology that Deissmann has made classical, Philo, like Paul, was a reacting rather than an acting mystic. Primarily, he viewed the action of God as decisive in the process, and man's experience was but the reaction to this divine activity. The trance of Adam when Jahve removed a rib from his body and made woman therefrom was, to Philo's mind, the prototype of the soul's experience in ecstasy. "The going forth (ekstasis) of the spirit," Philo said, "is a deep sleep which falls upon it. It goes forth when it ceases to busy itself with the ideas which impinge upon it, and when it does not exercise activity upon them it slumbers."I With special emphasis on the solitary character of the experience, Philo affirmed, "The most secure method of contemplating the Existent is with the soul alone, apart from all utterance." In view of Philo's stress on the passivity of the human spirit in the process, one must conclude that his mysticism was of the quiescent type.

In summary it may be said that Philo's experience of communion with God involved the concentration of all man's mental processes on the contemplation of the divine being and the complete loss of self-consciousness in an exultant sense of divine possession.

 

VII

Did Philo consider this an essentially transforming experience--one that radically changed human nature and made man a new and different creature? There are clear utterances by the Alexandrian Jew on this point which make it evident that he believed the experience was a transforming one as long as it lasted. Philo's theory in this regard was radical. His interpretation of the word "ecstasy" was a very literal one and at the same time quite distinctive. To him it meant that man's rational soul not only left the body but even got outside itself. And when it departed what took its place? Philo was clear on that point also. Nothing less than the divine spirit came in and replaced the human intellect. Commenting on Genesis 15:12, he wrote:

"As long as our own reason encompasses us with brightness . . . . filling our whole soul as it were with noon-day light, we remain in ourselves and do not experience possession. But when the light of reason sets . . . . ecstasy and divine possession and frenzy fall upon us . . . . . For the reason within us leaves its abode at the arrival of the divine spirit, but when the spirit departs the reason returns to its place. For it is not fitting that mortal should dwell with immortal."

In this passage Philo cited the case of the prophet as the supreme example of the replacement of human reason by the divine spirit. It was not the prophet, he said, who spoke, but rather the divine spirit who made use of the prophet's tongue and mouth to declare God's will. In view of Philo's sharp differentiation between the human and the divine and his remarkably high estimation of the latter in contrast to the former, it is somewhat surprising to find that he does not shrink from pronouncing his prophets divine. The high point of his appreciation of the prophetic type is found in the following statement:

"The prophetic mind, when it has been initiated in things and is inspired, resembles unity . . . . . . Now he who cleaves to the nature of unity is said to have approached God with the intimacy, as it were, of a kinsman. For, abandoning all mortal types, he is transferred into the divine type so that he becomes akin to God and truly divine."

By virtue of the replacement of the human mind by the divine spirit, Philo believed that a man might be changed from a human into a divine being.

It should be stated immediately, however, that for the generality of men this transformation was not a permanent one, in Philo's estimation, but temporary and intermittent. However much the soul might desire to remain in the ecstatic state of divine possession, most men could not keep so completely concentrated on God and estranged from the world as was necessary in order to retain the divine presence. "He does remain sometimes," Philo said, "but he does not dwell always with most of us." In a passage distinguished for its literary quality as well as for its religious feeling, Philo depicted the human spirit standing as in the holy of holies of the temple, completely enraptured with the sense of the divine presence there in the sanctuary. "But when its divine passion is stilled," Philo continued, "and its ardent yearning slackens, it retraces its course from the realm of the divine and becomes man, lighting upon those human interests which lie in wait for it at the entrance of the sanctuary." Such, Philo believed, was the experience of ordinary men: a temporary impact of the divine spirit which, for the time being, operated to divinize a mere man, but which soon departed, leaving him human as he was before.

Some there were, however, a very few, with whom the divine spirit remained as a permanent possession. These were men of such steadiness of purpose that they could once for all cast aside all interest in created things and mere opinions and reach God with unrestricted and open mind. Moses was the great example of this type of men. He had entered the inmost shrine and there been initiated into the sacred mysteries. And not only had he become an initiate but a hierophant in the mystic cult, a teacher of divine things to those who had been purified. "With such a man," Philo said, "the divine spirit is ever present, showing him the way in every straight path." Philo made many references to men of this type in his writings and characterized them variously. They were the immutable ones who alone had access to the unalterable God. They were the sinless ones who were called divine. These men, he said, were "something new, surpassing description and really divine, existing not by human conception but by inspired frenzy." Much as Philo had to say about them, they were few whom he numbered in this favored class. Only Abraham and Moses and a very few others of the great heroes of his own race were thus classified. But for these exceptions, the permanently spirit-possessed man of Philo, like the wise man of the Stoics, was an ideal figure.

The direct study of Philo's writings, therefore, reveals that while in his thought God and man were so widely separated that mediators were deemed necessary to bring them together, yet as a matter of religious experience Philo did make allowance for the possibility of an immediate contact between them. On the one hand he recognized a yearning for God on man's part that expressed itself in a realization of man's utter inferiority, a complete distrust of sensation and disregard of all bodily connections, and a glad trust in God. On the other band Philo believed that his beneficent God was especially favorable to those who thus sought communion with him. In solitary meditation upon the incomprehensibility of God, Philo experienced a mental illumination that was for him the vision of God. The consequent emotional exaltation he considered to be a case of divine possession. For the time being, at least, the divine spirit replaced the human intellect, and the inspired man became a divine being. The experience, however, was not a permanent one, but intermittent so far as most men were concerned. There were only a very few men, the great Jewish heroes, whom he believed to be permanently in this divine state. For the mass of mankind, however, the transforming experience of mental illumination and divine possession was but a temporary phenomenon. Philo did believe that individual regeneration was possible. Save in exceptional instances he did not believe it permanently possible.

 

VIII

It remains to inquire concerning the genetic relationships of this peculiarly intellectualized mysticism of Philo. How did it come about that this Alexandrian Jew conceived the possibility of purifying the human soul by various subjective operations and finally having it elevated and transformed to rank as divine? Whence came the influences that convinced Philo of the possibility of such complete possession by the divine spirit as would enable the inspired man to understand the secrets of the divine nature? There are in Philo's own writings references which point the way to a solution of this problem.

The ideal of the spirit-possessed man Philo himself associated with the Stoic theory of the wise man. With obvious reference to thinkers of the Stoic school Philo asked, "Are there not even to the present day some of those persons who have attained to perfection in philosophy, who say that there is actually no such person as a wise man?" But Philo himself would not say this. For him wisdom did exist, and in the prophets and patriarchs of his own race he found the embodiment of this high Stoic ideal. Such men Philo regarded as intermediary between the human and the divine, less than God yet more than man. His conception was strikingly like that expressed in the Stoic dicta: "The wise man alone is divine, a prophet; the wise man alone knows God, is a priest, and practices the divine cult."

Granting that Philo's theory of the inspired human intelligence was a Jewish reinterpretation of the Stoic ideal of the wise man, it is important to note the type of Stoicism to which the Alexandrian Jew was indebted. It was not a philosophy pure and simple but a philosophy that had been modified in the direction of religion. Just as Stoic thinkers of the Greek world had made use of allegory to transform myth into philosophy, so in Egypt religionists had made use of allegory to transform Stoicism itself into a semi-religious system. The union in Philo's land and in Philo's era of Egyptian religious theories and Stoic philosophy is exemplified by certain of his contemporaries. There was, foremost of all, Chaeremon the Stoic, Nero's tutor in philosophy and at the same time a priest of an Egyptian sanctuary. Hecateus of Abdera, a Stoic of an earlier period, who accompanied Ptolemy Soter Soter on an expedition to Syria, showed his religious propensities by introducing spirit into the constitution of the universe as a fifth element along with the traditional four. Finally, there was Apion, Philo's great opponent and the bitter enemy of the Jews generally. Himself an Alexandrian Stoic he exhibited the application of allegory to the Egyptian God Thoth, "Lord of Divine Words." The admission of Stoic influence upon Philo's thought therefore leads directly to a consideration of the specific religious environment in Egypt which operated to transmute Stoic philosophy into a semi-religions system.

Do the writings of Philo betray a sensitiveness to religious as well as philosophical influences proceeding from his immediate Alexandrian environment? There was one group of religious influences to which Philo's works prove at rather notable indebtedness on his part. These were the stimuli coming from the mystery religions. Scattered all through Philo's productions there are a great number of references which prove beyond peradventure of a doubt Philo's familiarity with this type of religion. Of course he roundly denounced the mystery cults with their secret ceremonies enacted under the cover of night. For him either the teaching or the learning of mystic rites was "no small profanation," and he laid down the absolute rule that none of Moses' disciples might either initiate or be initiated. No loyal Jew could or would assume any other attitude than this one of outspoken denunciation. Philo, with all his mystical yearnings, could adopt the extremist position just because he as a Jew achieved the satisfaction of those desires in his own reworking of his ancestral religion.

Philo found in the scriptures of his race the sacred discourse that conveyed to him the secret truth which was the essential feature of a mystery. For the interpretation of that sacred lore he made use of the allegorical method, just as allegory was used for explanation in the sacred discourse of the mystery cults. Philo knew, too, of the various functionaries in the mystery ritual and the characters in the mystery drama who assisted the initiates to master the divine wisdom which meant their salvation. But he telescoped these functionaries and summed them all up in a singIe personage, the guide to the initiate, whom he called hierophant or mystagogue without distinction. In the heroes of his race this Jew found the personalities who served as initiators for himself. Moses was the one to whom he repeatedly referred as the great initiator. God himself had initiated Moses while in the mountain, and thereafter he was "a hierophant of the ritual and a teacher of divine things." Philo acknowledged that he had been originally initiated into the sacred mysteries by Moses. He did not shrink from speaking of himself as a hieropliant also, and he urged others to serve in a similar capacity for the uninitiated.

As was the case in the mvstery religions, he demanded the fulfilment of certain preliminary conditions before one could attain initiation into his intellectual cult. It is fairly clear that the specific requirements he had in view were of a moral character. In addition to the natural endowment of a good disposition, there must be irreproachable conduct are one could find the path of life and be initiated into the true mysteries. Philo also followed mystery practice by laying upon his disciples the charge of secrecy. Those who were adept in the lore of his cult were regarded as an esoteric group, and he addressed them with formulas that were familiar to mystery initiates. From their company all the unworthy were rigidly excluded. He reiterated the command that the initiated must not divulge the secrets of "the veritably sacred mysteries" to any of the uninitiated, lest the ignorant should misrepresent what they did not understand and in so doing expose it to the ridicule of the vulgar. Like the officials of the mystery religions, Philo insisted oil secrecy.

For Philo initiation into his intellectualized cult was the entrance into a new world, an invisible country, the intelligible world where "the purified mind could contemplate the pure and untainted nature of those things which are invisible and which are only discernible by the intellect." Hither Abraham went when he "returned to his fathers" and Enoch when "he was not." This was none other than the divine and heavenly region that was the locus of immortal life where Abraham and Isaac, having received immortality, had become the equal of the angels. Thus it was possible, through participation in the Philonian cult, to experience a foretaste of the immortal life. The significance of this fact in relation to the mystery religions of Philo's environment is that they too, in their ritual featured the passage of the soul to another world and in so doing gave a present guaranty of immortality.

Thus the cults of Philo's Egyptian environment exerted a large influence on his figures of speech and his thought-forms as well. When we inquire more particularly for the immediate religious influences that stimulated his ecstatic experience of regenerition and guided him in his rather elaborate theorizings on the subject, the natural place to look for them is in this same religious environment.

The characteristic contribution of Philo's land to the religious syncretism of the Roman Empire was the cult of Isis. We seen how this cult gave to the individual religionist the assurance of spiritual rebirth and the guaranty of immortality even while he was alive on earth. By means of certain initiatory rites of great spiritual potency, the neophyte who assumed the role of Osiris died to the old life of earth and was revived again to new life, reborn for eternity. These venerable Egyptian rites which from antiquity had been performed in the land of the Nile, for the benefit of the dead and of a privileged few among the living, were in the days of Philo practiced on ordinary folk who sought initiation into the cult.

In the ritual regeneration of this mystery religion, we undoubtedly have an important and immediate source of Philo's theory of mental regeneration. He was acquainted with the potent cult practices of the Isiacists--at least in a general way. He himself was conscious of mystical longings for contact with the unseen, fellowship with the deity, and the transformation of his ephemeral human nature into something more permanent and divine--desires which the Isis cult aimed to satisfy by its elaborate and impressive ritual. As a true Jew, even though a liberal Jew of the Diaspora, Philo could not think of participating in those rites. So he did the next best thing. He rationalized and intellectualized them and found in the experiences of his own mental and emotional life the satisfactions and guaranties that others found in cult practices.

In the rational part of man's nature he isolated a human element which he believed to be capable of exaltation and transformation and ultimate fellowship with the divine. As conditions preliminary to this process, he demanded a profound distrust of sensation, a great trust in God, and other requirements of similar character. These exercises corresponded to the physical and moral rigors prescribed for Isiac initiation. In the individual's quiet and steady contemplation of the divine perfections, a process which lifted the mind far above earthly considerations and ended in an ecstatic vision of God, he found the regenerative process in the course of which human intelligence was replaced by the divine spirit and man became a divine being. Much more realistically the devotee of Isis, in the rites of his cult, was given a vision of things divine, and, playing the part of a dying and rising god, he believed himself transformed into a divine being. A rite of deification and various other festivities left no doubt in his mind that the regenerative process was complete. For Philo also there were similar assurances. His vision of God eventuated in an emotional exaltation, a sense of being lifted far above earthly things and possessed by divine power. In this state of ecstasy Philo believed himself actually God-possessed, no longer human but divine.

For each important step in the process of Isiac regeneration, Philo had a parallel in his mystical religion. Only he was not at all dependent upon the external stimuli of cult practices. Philonian regeneration was largely self-induced and was normally experienced in solitude. It is altogether probable, therefore, that for his theory of mental regeneration Philo was directly in debt to the Isiac and other mystery religions of his immediate Egyptian environment, and that his own very private cult was a rationalization on the basis of his personal experience of mystery practices with which he was familiar.

The Egyptian origin of the Philonian theory of mental regeneration becomes all the more obvious when the writings of the Jewish thinker are compared with the Hermetic tractates. In both literatures the experience was described as an inward one, involving the phenomena of the mental and emotional life. For the disciple of Hermes, external rites had but slight meaning and for Philo, too, they had scarcely no meaning at all. The items of self-preparation for this experience were practically the same in both cases: man must train himself to consider the world as illusory, to disregard sensation, and to despise his body. In this process of self-discipline the Trismegistic prophet and the Jewish teacher alike stressed the element of human volition. "Have the will, deny the senses, purge yourself!" they commanded. Yet with all this volitional emphasis the transforming experience itself was in the last analysis conceived as a supernaturally conditioned affair. Philo and the Hermeticist as well came to a realization of this regeneration during a period of reverent silence and quiet meditation. They both described the experience in glowing terms of light as a great mental illumination in which they glinipsed a vision of God himself. The immediate result for the Jew as for the Egyptian was an ecstasy which each interpreted as divine possession. In that culminating moment the divine spirit flooded the human soul and temporarily, or permanently, transformed it into divine essence. From start to finish, therefore, Hermetic regeneration and the Philonian vision of God exhibited the most striking parallels.

It is altogether probable that the two were genetically and closely related. Although the Hermetic writings as they stand were later than those of Philo, they preserved antique elements embedded in them which date the beginnings of this religious movement far back in Hellenistic times. Hence, if these two intellectual cults were directly related to each other, Hermetism must be considered the original and Philonism the derived system. Waiving, however, the problem of direct relationship, it is certain that both came from the same Egyptian milieu and were both alike largely influenced by Hellenistic-Egyptian mystery speculation.

Thus the investigation of Philo's mysticism in relation to his immediate Alexandrian environment reveals the fact that in significant ways the thought and the experience of this Jew were influenced by the gentile religions about him. Consciously he remained intensely loyal to the religion of his forefathers. But he was a man of Hellenistic culture and broad sympathies. Hence his writings exhibited a marriage of Hebrew loyalty and Hellenistic spirit. Under the influence of gentile religions he learned to detach the individual man. He came to understand the general longing of Gentiles for personal salvation and the craving of many for mystical experience in particular. The latter desire was his own, also, and in somewhat intensified form. Taught by Egyptian mystery speculation and cult practice, he learned further to interpret his own religious experience in such a way as to allow for a mental regeneration that would bring man into direct contact with God. The Philonian literature, like the Hermetic, shows how strong and extensive was the influence of the mystery religions even among those who were not members of a mystery brotherhood. Of the two the Philonian literature has the greater significance in this particular, because it reveals the influence of gentile mystery practices on the religious thinking of a Jew.

    
Pagan Regeneration, by Harold R. Willoughby, [1929], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER X

 

THE SOCIAL SIGNIFICANCE OF MYSTERY INITIATION

ALL religious systems deserve to be evaluated by the pragmatic test of their functional significance for human society. The extent to which they meet the actual needs of individuals and groups in a given period is the measuring rod to be used in estimating their worth. Modern historical study has taught us to view the phenomena of religion in relation to the evolution of the human race and to regard all religious systems, without exception, as socially conditioned products. This applies equally to Christian and to non-Christian systems, and to religions of attainment or religions of redemption like the mysteries. Any given cult that is a going concern develops its peculiar characteristics in response to certain vital demands that are put upon it by society, and these demands, in turn, are but the more or less articulate expression of certain basic social interests that are dominant at that particular period. Hence, in order to understand the needs and desires which found satisfaction in mystery initiations, it is necessary to take a broad view of the general social situation in the Graeco-Roman world and to define, if possible, the outstanding religious interests of Mediterranean peoples in the first century of the Christian era.

 

I

Graeco-Roman society with all of its complexity was yet a closely knit social fabric unified in large and significant ways. Politically, the Mediterranean world of the Augustan age was a unit for the first time in history, welded together by three hundred years of military conquests preceding the beginning of our era. To hold this Mediterranean world together in an imperial unity, Rome had thrown over it a great network of military highways reaching to the farthest provinces and centering in Rome itself. Cultural and commercial processes operated even more effectively than military conquests and political organization to unify the peoples of the Mediterranean area. Society under the early Empire continued to be highly Hellenized as it had been during the three centuries previous. Greek continued to be the language of culture and commerce, with Latin as the lingua Franca of diplomacy. The sea, cleared of pirates, was a great channel of commerce that led to all the Roman world, and the military highways provided the necessary land routes. Because of the easy means of communication, there was a free mingling of races and classes in the centers of population. In any important Mediterranean city one met Roman officials and native workmen, Phrygian slaves and Greek students, Syrian merchants and Egyptian sailors, all engaged in a common struggle for existence within the bounds of one huge empire.

This free competition on a world scale gave the individual his opportunity. Before the days of Alexander the interests of the individual were quite submerged in comparison with those of the tribe or state. The larger social group was the end--all of existence and personal concerns were properly subordinated thereto. It was a proud thing in one of the city-states of Greece for the citizen to have the opportunity of furnishing a chorus for a civic festival or of fitting out a trireme for the protection of the state. But in the changed conditions of the imperial period all was different. Individual interests came to the fore and those of the state receded to the background. The Roman Empire meant far less to the citizen than the Greek polis had meant. It was too large and too far away to be very dependent on his support or to contribute much to his happiness. In the ruthlessness of conquest and the stress of competition, local customs were ignored, traditions were swept aside, and the unsupported individual was thrown back upon his own resources, but with a world of opporttinity before him. Happiness and well-being, if won at all, must be won by himself and for himself alone. It was tn era of extreme individualism.

In every department of life almost, the changed point of view was felt and recorded. Art featured realistic sculpture and portrait busts. Latin literature became self-conscious and personal, and politics suffered much from individuals who sought to exploit the state for personal gain.

Religion, like the other phases of Graeco-Roman life, felt the effect of these changed social conditions. For the masses of men former religious sanctions and guaranties no longer functioned. In the old, pre-imperial days the individual was well satisfied with the group guaranties that were offered by local and nationalistic religions. To be sure, his relationship to the state deity was only an indirect one--through the group to which he belonged. To be sure, the goods sought were chiefly social benefits which he shared with his fellow citizens. But so long as the gods protected the state and the state protected him he was well content. Successive conquests by foreign powers, however, rudely destroyed this complacency, and the victory of Macedonian and Roman arms wrecked the prestige of merely local and national deities. As racial barriers were broken down and the individual felt himself free to travel and trade in a wide world, he became conscious of needs and desires he had never known before. As a practical matter the time-honored customs of his fathers could not be maintained in foreign lands. New sanctions and assurances of a more personal sort were needed. Thus, in line with the general social movements of the time, there was a distinct breakdown of traditional religion, and national cults, popular in the Hellenic period, fell into abeyance.

But the masses of men did not become, irreligious by any means. Instead, they turned to religions of another type and sought satisfactions of a different variety. Their quest was no longer for a god powerful enough to save the state but rather for one who was benevolent enough to save the individual. Oracles were consulted, not so often in the interest of the community but more frequently for the guidance of the individual in his personal affairs. More than ever before the home became a temple and the daily life of the family was filled with the paraphernalia of piety. The shrines of healing gods were overcrowded, and magicians, who were considered the chief mediators of divine power, carried on a thriving business.

In particular, men turned for the satisfaction of personal desires to the mystery group of religions, which were indeed very ancient cults but had hitherto been comparatively insignificant. Most of them came to the Graeco-Roman world from the Orient, with the authority of a venerable past, with an air of deep mystery, and with rites that were most impressive. But the chief reason for their popularity at this time was the satisfactory way in which they ministered to the needs of the individual man. Completely denationalized and liberated from racial prejudices, they welcomed men of all races to their membership. They were genuinely democratic brotherhoods in which rich and poor, slave and master, Greek and barbarian met on a parity. Moreover, they touched the common life of men intimately and in a variety of ways. It is impressive when one reads the references to these cults in secular literature to note the complete faith that ordinary folk had in their mystery gods and how they sought for their divine help and guidance in matters of health and love and business and in all the other multifarious concerns of everyday life.

Chief among the personal satisfactions these cults had to offer was the privilege of a new birth for the individual. When the neophyte was initiated into the cult he became a new man--this was the gentile conviction. In earlier centuries, when the emphasis in religion was tribal or national, this was no special advantage. Then the individual felt certain of his salvation because of his birth into a particular tribe or race. The Athenian, for example, did not doubt the peculiar interest of the maiden goddess on the Acropolis both in himself and in his native city. The Jew, even throughout the prolonged tragedy of his vain struggle for a national existence, succeeded in maintaining his proud consciousness of the sufficiency of his racial birth. But the generality of men in the Roman world had not this confidence either in racial connections or in the potentiality of human nature itself. For salvation such as the first-century Gentile desired--a salvation that included the immortality of the soul as well as the present welfare of the body--an essential change of being was felt to be necessary, and this the mystery religions guaranteed by means of their initiatory rites. Among the basic religious needs met by mystery initiation, therefore, this should be mentioned as the first. It answered to the current demand for individualistic as opposed to racial guaranties in religion.

 

II

It is possible, however, to characterize more closely the type of individual religious experience which was fostered by Graeco-Oriental cults of the mystery type. Mystical experience was a common denominator of them all, and was about as conspicuous in one cult as in another. This fact cannot but impress one as being quite extraordinary because mysticism was essentially alien to the leading peoples of the Roman world. Certainly the Jewish mind was unfriendly to this very subjective type of personal religious experience. With his rigid monotheism, the Jew maintained a clear emphasis on individuality, both human and divine. Furthermore, since he thought of religion in terms of action primarily, his attention was focused on the externality of statutory observance. Latin religion, too, was characteristically as legalistic and objective as was the Jewish, though it was lacking in the minuteness of detailed application. For the typical Roman, religion was a commercial transaction between himself and his gods, and mysticism found little encouragement in such a business arrangement. To the Hellenic mind, also, mysticism had but slight attractiveness because of the balanced appreciation of the Greek for the insignificance and the dignity of man. The thinkers of classical Greece had a full and glad confidence in man's physical fitness to cope with his environment and his mental fitness to explore its mysteries.

This made the short span of man's life a glorious and zestful thing for them. Even so, the destiny of man in Hellenic thought was kept distinct from that of the gods. The reiterated theme of Greek tragedy was this: Would you be happy? Then remember your finiteness and be moderate in your desires and ambitions; else the envy of the gods will bring you disaster because of your presumptuous pride. "Know yourself" was the text of Socrates' teaching, and this was at once a warning to respect one's limitations and a promise that within the limits of human nature itself man could find full scope for the development of his powers. With its reasoned moderation Hellenism had characteristically little use for mysticism.

In spite of all this historical prejudice inherited from the earlier national period, the student finds mystical phenomena everywhere in the Graeco-Roman world. The imperial age was a time when religion was turning inward and becoming more emotional, while philosophy, converted to religion, was following the same trend. There was a cultivated antagonism between spirit and matter and the conscious endeavor to detach one from the other by means of ascetic practices. It was a period of world-weariness and other-worldliness. There was a demand for fresh emotional experience, and the culminating effort was to overleap the bounds of nature and to attain union with the divine in the occult region beyond. These were some of the currents that indicated the general direction of religious thought and feeling when the Christian era began.

They found cult expression supremely in the popular religions of redemption, in the mysteries of Eleusis and Attis and Isis and the rest. Even in the ascetic brotherhoods of Judaism these elements found practical exemplification among the Essenes of Palestine and the Therapeutae of Egypt--so far did the spirit of the times penetrate the inhospitable atmosphere of Judaism itself. More significant still was the philosophical expression of this identical interest. It came to the surface, for example, in the Hermeticism of Egypt and the revived Pythagoreanism of Italy, the latter being characterized by a curious mathematical mysticism accompanied by physical and moral austerities. Ever since the days of Plato the religio-philosophical movement named from Pythagoras had continued a concealed existence in connection with the mysteries of Dionysus and Orpheus. It almost betrayed itself in 181 B.C. by the flagrant forgery of "Numa's Book." But in the next century it appeared frankly in public view at Alexandria and Rome with a new religious literature and a sincere Roman champion in Cicero's friend, the senator Nigidius Figulus. At the time of Christianity's inception it had a more widely known exponent in the far-traveled Apollonius of Tyana. Furthermore, prominent thinkers like Philo the Jew, of Alexandria, and Plutarch the Greek, of Chaeronea, and Seneca the Spaniard, of Rome, all disclosed a high personal evaluation for this kind of religious experience. Each of these writers, in adopting a favorable attitude toward religious mysticism, belied the traditions of his own people, yet earnestly sought to bring his mystical longings into conformity with his own religious and philosophical heritage.

Modern scholars have come to recognize a common element, pronouncedly mystical, running through the writings of these philosophers and have credited this element to a single dominant personality, Posidonius of Apamea, who was born on the Orontes in Syria about 135 B.C. It would be impossible to select a single figure who more completely personified the intellectual and religious interests of that age than did Posidonius. He knew the Roman world as few others did for he had traveled even beyond the Pillars of Hercules and his curiosity ranged freely where he had not been in person. He was influential in that world--a teacher of Cicero who sent him an account of his consulship, and of Pompey who twice turned aside from his eastern campaigns to visit his master in Rhodes. In philosophy and religion Posidonius stood for popular eclecticism, mediating between the Orient and the Occident, between astrology and Stoicism. More than any other man of his era he gathered up the masses of popular beliefs and gave them effective literary expression. Child of his age in this as in all else, he felt the contemporary demand for a more inclusive life and sought to assuage it by a siderial mysticism. Hence he is chiefly remembered as the "beholder and expounder of heavens" who found in the enraptured contemplation of the starry skies an assurance of oneness with the divine. Like the astronomer Ptolemy, he could say, "Mortal that I am, I know that I am born for a day, but when I follow the serried multitude of the stars in their circular courses, my feet no longer touch the earth; I ascend to Zeus himself to feast on ambrosia, the food of the Gods." In Posidonius one finds a high peak of mystical enthusiasm; yet he was only one outstanding mystic among many others whom the pagan world knew at the time when the Roman Republic fell to pieces to be reassembled as the Roman Empire.

Just why the ever recurrent human quest for larger life should take on a mystical complexion at this time is a difficult matter to determine. There are certain general considerations, however, that have distinct bearing on the case. In the first place, the thought world of the average man had suddenly enlarged to proportions that were frightening. The horizon of a Syrian trader in Nero's time was vastly more inclusive than that of a Macedonian noble who started out with Philip for his conquest of Greece, and this new horizon included a far greater number of facts to be classified and accounted for, and a constantly enlarging group of problems and difficulties to be settled. This expanded thought-world of the middle of the first century was in a very chaotic state. The social structure of an earlier age had been completely wrecked. Greek democracy and Oriental despotism alike had been crushed by imperial power. National and racial distinctions, once considered very important, had been all but forgotten. Whole classes in society had been wiped out. Old things had passed away and what chiefly impressed the ordinary man about the new order of things imposed by Rome was not so much its orderliness as its newness. It is difficult, indeed, to imagine the confusion and perplexity which existed in the popular mind when men found themselves completely torn away from their old moorings, yet unaccustomed to the new social environment. The citizen of the Greek polis had lived in a friendly town that was his own; but the Roman citizen found himself bewildered in the crowded streets of a strange city that was everyman's world.

In the second place, the man of the early Empire felt that the ultimate control of his disordered universe was not at all in his own hands, but that it rested with supernatural powers on the outside. Although the people of the Roman Empire were really well equipped with social agencies new and old for the attainment of their desires, they did not themselves have much confidence in these securities. After all, these were merely human adjustments which governed one's relations with his fellow-men, whereas, according to the first-century point of view, the more important relationships of life were with the controlling powers in the supernatural realm. Whether these powers were friendly or unfriendly or both or either according to circumstances, there was great variety of opinion; but generally speaking there was no doubt of their power. The Epicureans, to be sure, considered this belief in the supernatural to be a blight on the joy of life and harmful to society. But the common man was not at all troubled by skepticism on this point. He was too much concerned with the business of establishing safe relations with the occult powers to debate the problematic social value of supernaturalism. One way be had of accomplishing this was the way of mysticism, whereby he either projected himself emotionally into the supernatural realm and so came into contact with deity, or else by magic and sacrament drew the god down into the human sphere and in this less exalted fashion realized the desired alliance. Not until this unio mystica was accomplished did many men feel completely secure in the face of the uncertainties of life.

To such a fearing world as this, which stood in abject awe of supernatural powers, the mystery religions came with the message of salvation through union with the lord of the cult. This was good news, indeed, for such an alliance robbed the unknown spiritual world of its terrors and gave the initiate the assurance of special privilege in relation to the potent beings who controlled the destinies of men. Practically, the lords of the mysteries were the most powerful spiritual beings that gentile religionists of the Graeco-Roman world were acquainted with. In the background of each of the mysteries hovered the vague form of the supreme power itself: the Anatolian Magita Mater Deum or the Ahura Mazda of the Persian system. In the foreground, ready for action, stood the mediator who chiefly made the divine power manifest in life and in nature: the youthful Attis or the invincible Mithra. The mystery gods and goddesses were also potent as netherworld divinities. Persephone reigned as queen of the dead and Osiris presided as judge of the souls of the departed. By means of initiation into their cults, the devotee was enabled to share vividly in the experiences of these divinities and even to attain realistic union with them. Thus, united with the gods themselves, the initiate was in touch with currents of supernatural power which not only operated to transform his very being but also rendered him immune from evil both in this life and in the next. In this way the mystery religious, by means of their initiations, answered to a second great demand of the age--the yearning for the mystical type of religious experience.

 

III

It should at once be noted that the mysticism of the cults was not of the intellectualized type that one discovers in the writings of Plutarch or Seneca, nor even of the refined, subjective sort, that is evident in the Hermetic writings and in Philo. It was rather of a more realistic, objective, ecstatic, and highly emotional variety. This emotional character of cult mysticism was not fortuitous, by any means, but answered directly to another one of the keenly felt social needs of the age. The first century was a time when the masses of people had a very inordinate appetite for emotional stimulation. This abnormal craving itself can be understood even when its pathological character is recognized. Directly or indirectly it was due, more than to anything else, to the terribly depressing experiences through which society had passed during the wars that filled the years immediately preceding the Christian era.

For four hundred years wars had been unceasing. Greece had no sooner finished her glorious Persian Wars than she started that inglorious internecine strife which ended immediately in the exhaustion of all and the final snuffing out of Greek freedom by Philip at Chaeronea. Alexander's stupendous world conquest had been followed by the petty struggles of the Diadochi and the Epigoni, and thus the eastern world was filled with conflicts which did not cease until Rome's universal conquest. The Romans themselves had gradually extended their rule over Italy by a process of long warfare. They had made the Mediterranean a Roman lake by fighting Carthage to a finish, and finally in their own civil wars they had deluged the whole world with blood. Directly all these military operations had entailed terrible suffering for all classes. Quite apart from the killing or the maiming of combatants there were pitiful consequences for the non-combatants. Breadwinners had been drafted into service. Crops over large areas had been destroyed. Conquered lands had been plunged into debt and bankruptcy, while thousands of men, women, and children, formerly free, had been sold as slaves. The Mediterranean world had known war at its worst, and this long series of conquests, civil wars, proscriptions, and insurrections had produced an untold amount of agony.

The indirect consequences of these military operations were quite as disastrous for the happiness of large numbers of people as were the direct results. One of the most deplorable effects was the practical destruction of the middle classes which had been the backbone of society. This left a bad social cleavage between the wealthy and aristocratic classes on the one hand, and the masses, including the slaves, on the other. Conditions were such that the classes had the opportunity of becoming more wealthy and prosperous, while the proletariat correspondingly became more destitute and wretched. Enormous sums of gold and silver, the accumulated wealth of the east, was disgorged on the Empire. This created a demand for luxuries, raised the standard of living, and multiplied the miseries of the poor. Throughout the period the number of slaves was constantly being augmented. This lowered wages and drove free laborers to the idleness of cities where they were altogether too willing to be enrolled among the state-fed.

With such an unequal distribution of the goods of life, it was inevitable that both extremes in Roman society should feel the need of special emotional uplift and stimulation. The aristocrat felt the need of it because he had pleasures too many, and the poor freeman because he had pleasures too few. In the literature of the time these differing points of view were both fully expressed. On the one hand there was disgust with life, taedium vitae, bred of selfindulgence and brought to birth by satiety. It was the weariness that comes when amusements cloy and the means of diversion seem exhausted. "To be ever feeding the thankless nature of the mind .... though after all we are never filled with the enjoyments of life .... this is to do what is told of the maidens who kept pouring water into a sieve," wrote Lucretius, depicting the mood of too many men whom he knew.

On the other hand there was genuine sensitiveness to suffering in this age born of a sympathetic understanding of its pain and an earnest attempt to provide alleviation. The demand for solace in time of calamity was so great that the office of consoler became almost a profession and the closing days of the Republic saw the development of a curious literary type, known as consolation literature. Crantor, who originated this literature, wrote a book for a bereaved parent which Cicero pronounced "a golden book, to be learned by heart," and the latter on the death of his daughter formulated a consolatio for himself. Plutarch wrote such a consolation to his wife, while Seneca, the prince of consolers, went far toward making the art a science by the psychological study of individual cases. Formulas of sympathy were developed for calamities of all sorts: for ill health, old age, financial disaster, confiscation of property, exile, and most of all for death itself. It was a period when all classes were sensitive to emotional needs, but chiefly the inarticulate masses who were most miserable and knew not how to express their misery.

Here was religion's opportunity. Some cults strove to meet it while others did not. Generally speaking the officials of state religion remained unresponsive, and the marble gods of Greece and Rome had no word for men in agony. Judaism, which had itself gone through a prolonged martyrdom, should have learned from suffering to minister to personal need, but it had not. Its hope was still a national one, not personal.

But the religions of redemption that came from the east furnished exactly the emotional satisfaction that the age demanded. Hence they were popular. They told men of savior-gods that were very human, who had come to earth and toiled and suffered with men, experiencing to an intensified degree the sufferings to which flesh is heir. These savior-gods had known the agony of parting from loved ones, of persecution, of mutilation, of death itself. In this hard way they had won salvation for their devotees and now they stood ready to help all men who had need. The rites of these mystery religions were impressively arranged to represent the sufferings and triumphs of the savior-gods. Thus it was possible for the initiate to feel as his god had felt, and sometimes more realistically, to repeat the archetypal experiences of his lord. His initiation was a time of great uplift that elevated him above commonplace worries and gave him an exalted sense of security. In after days the memory of that great event remained with him to buoy him up amid the hardships of his daily lot, or in such special crises as might come to him. The third great contemporary need which mystery initiation supplied was that of emotional stimulation through the mystical experience of contact with a sympathetic savior.

 

IV

The majority of gentile religionists, however, were not satisfied with a merely emotional assurance that the desired mystical union had taken place. Something more tangible and objective was required to supplement the evidence furnished by subjective experience. This was in accord with the vivid realism of contemporary thought concerning divine beings and spiritual processes. Greeks and Romans both conceived of their gods very concretely and humanly. They gave them admirable plastic representation and sought to secure their favor by rites that were correspondingly realistic. At the beginning of the imperial period when the uncertainties of life made men feel more dependent than ever on supernatural assistance, the operations whereby they strove to assure themselves of the desired aid became, if anything, more realistic than ever.

Records of the Augustan revival in religion illustrate this tendency in a hundred different ways. We read of statues whose lips, hands, and feet were worn smooth by the persistent and devout osculations of worshipers. To the naive thought of uneducated people these statues were identified with the divine beings they represented and were treated accordingly. High and low alike shared in the realistic point of view. The Emperor Galba kept a necklace of pearls and precious stones to adorn his favorite goddess Fortuna on his Tusculan estate. When be suddenly decided to give it to Venus instead, Fortuna appeared to him in a dream and threatened to withdraw her favors. In genuine fright Galba rushed off to Tusculum to make amends to Fortuna. Seneca, on a chance visit to the capital, was aroused to indignation when he saw the statues of the Roman trinity attended as if they were living persons and found women there awaiting the pleasure of Jupiter because they believed themselves loved by him. Philosophers generally had as little patience with these practices as Seneca had; but occasionally there was a Maximus of Tyre who would speak a tolerant word for these ingenuous expressions of religious devotion.

In such an age and amid people who thought in these vivid terms, the rites of religion, in order to be satisfying, had to partake of the same pictorial quality. They had to give actual and dramatic representation of the processes they were intended to typify and induce. This was what the ceremonies of the mystery cults did, and this was another reason for the great attractive power of the cults. Most of their rites had come down in traditional forms from an immemorial antiquity. Originally performed among primitive people in order to assure the revival of vegetable life in springtime, they were enacted in these later imperial days for the higher purpose of assuring the rebirth of the human spirit. Yet, among the masses at least, the efficacy of these ceremonials was as little questioned as it had been in their original setting.

The baptismal rite, in particular, whether by water or blood, was regarded as marking the crucial moment in a genuinely regenerative process. Once reborn the initiates were treated as such; their birthday was celebrated and they were nourished in a manner appropriate for infants. Childish rites they seem, yet to the uneducated and simpleminded of the first century A.D. they were fraught with spiritual significance. The semblance of mystic marriage and the partaking of consecrated foods were other realistic sacraments in which the neophyte found assurance that he was really and vitally united with his lord and endowed with the divine spirit. What gives the modern student pause when he is inclined to smile at the naivete of these practices is the sincere conviction of pagan initiates that their spiritual transformation was not only represented but was also really accomplished by these dramatic ceremonies. By means of initiatory rites of great impressiveness the mystery cults were enabled to satisfy another conspicuous demand of the age, the desire for realistic guaranties in religion.

 

V

The personal transformation which was the initial feature of cult mysticism had its ethical as well as its religious aspect, and this responded to a demand of the age for a blend of ethics and religion. It is somewhat difficult to define the ethical interests of gentile religionists in the first century, for the early imperial period was a time of great moral disorder and confusion, paralleling the stress and strain in other areas of life. This moral anarchy is comprehensible, for it grew out of the same social conditions that determined religious developments in this period. In the polis of Hellenic days, political, moral, and religious duties were all integrated, and the citizen found sufficient guidance for the performance of his obligations in community institutions, ancestral customs, and state laws. These had divine sanction for him and no other authority was needed. With the wrecking of that corporate life, however, morals were divorced from politics and the individual was left to himself without external authority to guide his conduct. The continuous social upheavals of Hellenistic and republican times, the free mingling of populations in commerce and conquest, and the enormous increase of slavery furthered the process of cutting thousands of human beings loose from moral restraints. No wonder men were groping after new norms for the conduct of life at this time!

It is ordinarily assumed that society in the middle of the first century was conspicuously lacking in ethical interests and had sunk to the lowest point of moral degradation. This impression is gained chiefly from two sources, from Jewish and Christian writers on the one hand and from Roman satirists on the other. Obviously, however, the former were prejudiced witnesses from the start, and the latter confined themselves to a one-sided view of only one class in Roman society. When the student turns aside from such biased and limited views to consider the general trend in society as a whole, he discovers that it was not only a period of moral anarchy but of ethical awakening as well. Interest was alive on moral questions. It had shifted from politics to ethics. Philosophy had come down out of its theoretical basket amid the clouds of speculation and was walking on solid earth once more. It was undertaking to do for men what religion too frequently did not do--to give guidance in problems of conduct. There were moralists in plenty who were castigating vice and holding up models of virtue for imitation.

Almost every characteristic vice in Roman society was being met with the most vigorous protests and sometimes by active measures for amelioration. Slavery was a curse to that society, cultivating a cruel spirit of indifference to human suffering. But brutal masters were in a minority, and slaves had the right to acquire property and purchase their freedom. Legal enactment assured them of protection against cruelty, and an increasingly humane public opinion prevented grosser abuses. It is true that Roman amusements were debasing. The theater was obscene and the amphitheater with its gladiatorial combats was beastly; but Cicero testifies that many regarded the amphitheater as cruel and inhuman;, while Plutarch, Seneca, and even Petronius joined in a chorus of personal condemnation of gladiatorial combats. It is true that marriage at this time was carelessly contracted and easily annulled; but inscriptions and literature both prove that marriages of love were at least as common as marriages of convenience--consider Pliny's graceful love letters to his Calpurnia and the Laudatio Turiae, which tells of forty-one years of happy married life. Moreover, there was an impressive and unanimous demand on the part of all moralists and philosophers that equal virtue should be required of men as of women. It is true that there was much infanticide in Roman society. Children were exposed and abortion was freely practiced. But Paulus, the jurist, branded these practices as assassination and "against the voice of nature and the voice of conscience." Moreover, one of the primary concerns of moralists was for the exemplary training of children. It is only too true, also, that the Romans knew of nameless sins. Yet the philosophers did not hesitate to denounce the epicenes who practiced them, and Dio Chrysostom was only the first to attack prostitution as a legalized vice. A balanced view of the whole social situation therefore shows high ideals and exceptional interest in moral problems.

There was at this time a particular demand for greater concreteness in ethical teaching. Abstract instruction was not popular, but the formulation of definite precepts was desired instead; hence the teachers of the time studied the writings of philosophers and moralists to find texts and maxims to use with their pupils. To some, ideals seemed more useful than particular precepts. So careful catalogues were made of virtues and vices, and the former were summarized in certain cardinal qualities especially to be desired. These ideals, however, proved generally too elusive, and there was a call for living examples which could be referred to as demonstrations of the practicability of ideals. This became the great teaching point of the age--the citation of examples. Each system had its own particular hero, Orpheus or Pythagoras; but Socrates, most of all, came to be regarded as a personification of the ideal for humanity. Seneca urged his friend Lucilius to keep before his mind constantly the picture of some upright man and to live always as if in his presence. The practical Roman regarded this as an excellent method in education and he had his sons taught by appeal to the examples of the past. Biographies were written with this didactic purpose in view. Notably was this the case with Varro and Plutarch in composing their parallel lives of Greeks and Romans. The first century A.D. was an age of hero worship when concrete, living examples were called for.

Stoicism, the leading philosophy of the Empire, was in a strategic position to meet the general ethical demands of the time. It had its first development in Greece just after the old landmarks of Hellenic morality had collapsed; for it was in 320 B.C. that Zeno, of Citium, arrived in Athens where he was to end his days lecturing in the Stoa Poicile. As a thoroughly Hellenized system, it appeared in Rome where it was disseminated by Panaetius through the Scipionic circle. Its Semitic earnestness accorded well with the stern severity of the old Roman character. Seneca, the Spanish prime minister, and Epictetus, the Phrygian slave, are outstanding figures showing the hold that Stoicism had on all classes in Roman society at this time. With such a cosmopolitan background, Stoicism was well furnished to supply the Roman world with new ethical norms consonant with the spirit and needs of the age.

It essayed to do so on the purely naturalistic basis furnished by human nature itself. According to Stoic teaching the chief end of existence was virtuous living, further defined as living in accordance with the dictates of reason. This brought all rational beings under a single ethical standard, at once individualistic and universal in scope. It made all men the sharers in a common world citizenship. Thus the good of every creature became the individual's good, and their hurt became his own. The call for explicit precepts of a moral character was met by Stoic manuals that are still highly valued. Its ideal of virtue was analyzed into component elements, wisdom, justice, courage, and temperance, and these in turn were extensively subdivided. There was no lack of ideals in Stoicism. It had its ideal wise man, who acted without desire and made no mistakes; but Epictetus and his contemporaries were constantly referring rather to the example of Socrates--so concrete were they in their teaching.

The Stoics, more than others, were outspoken in their denunciation of social evils. Their antidote for slavery was deliverance by right thinking and complete indifference to outward circumstances. The virtuous man only is free and the only slave is he who is in bondage to bad habits, so the Stoic taught. It was the Stoic Seneca who said plainly, in reference to a double standard of morality, "You know it is injustice to demand fidelity from your wife while you seduce another man's wife," and other Stoic utterances as pointed might be quoted in regard to gladiatorial combats, prostitution, paiderastia, and the other vices of Nero's time. The Stoic teachers, who served as moral directors for the rich and missionaries to the masses, knew better than any others of their day what the moral weaknesses of their fellow-men were.

For him who had the will to endure its rigors, the ideal of Stoicism was satisfying. But that ideal was strenuous, almost impossible, and inhumanly high. The true Stoic must always follow the pure light of reason and be guided by duty, not desire. Passions must be exterminated and emotions crushed as perturbing influences which would hinder achievement. To attain the ideal, man must depend on himself alone, for the Stoic knew of no power external to himself that could help him. In the struggle for well-being, he had to act as his own savior. The ethic of Stoicism was completely rational and naturalistic. It lacked the authority of revelation and had no other sanction than that furnished by human nature and experience. In its very strength was the fatal weakness of Stoicism; it did not deal in supernaturalism, and that was the only coinage that had general acceptance in the first-century world.

Conditions of life were such at that time that most men did not have confidence in their own unaided ability to achieve character. They had "lost nerve," to paraphrase Gilbert Murray's expression, and they looked away to the supernatural realm for the powers that controlled personal conduct as well as the more ultimate destinies of mankind. What the men of the first century wanted was not so much ideals, but the power to realize those ideals; not a code of morals, but supernatural sanctions for morality. In the last analysis, it was the divine will, and not human welfare, that was the generally accepted criterion whereby the validity of any ethical system was tested. Accordingly, the religion which could furnish supernatural guaranties along with its ethical ideals hid a preferred claim to first-century loyalty.

The stern morality of Judaism, like that of the Stoa, was not unattractive to many Gentiles; but the element that fascinated them was not the inherent excellence of Jewish rules for living but the fact that they had venerable sanctions bearing the impress of divine authority. The Law of the Jews was quoted as the ipse dixit of Yahweh himself and the scriptures were referred to as authentic documents proving the genuineness of the representation. Such confirmation was impressive to men who were seeking for divine authority to make moral conduct obligatory. The religion of the Egyptian Hermes, also, was one that offered supernatural guaranties for its ethical ideals. In the process of Hermetic rebirth, the powers of God drove out the hordes of vices and left the regenerate individual divinely empowered for right living. That was Mithraism's point of strength also and accounted not a little for the vogue it continued to enjoy some time after the beginning of the Christian era. The "commandments" of Mithraism were believed to be divinely accredited; for had not the deity himself revealed them to the ancient Magi? One of the chief reasons why the high Mithraic ideals of purity, truth, and righteousness had real attraction was because Mithra himself was the unconquerable champion of these ideals and the ready helper of men who were willing to join with him in the eternal fight of right against wrong, good against evil. Mithraism was the outstanding example of a mystery religion which gave supernatural sanctions to the demands of plain morality.

The mysticism of the mysteries came in effectively at just this point to give both realistic content and divine authorization to the ethic of the brotherhood. The ideals of the group found personification and embodiment in the divine lord or lady who was the object of cult worship. Osiris was the model righteous man who functioned in divinized state as the judge of the departed. Hence the Isiac initiate, reborn as a new Osiris, was supposed himself to exhibit the Osirian type of righteousness. So, too, in the other mystery systems, the initiate realistically united with his lord and, actually transformed by virtue of that union, had his ideal incorporated within himself as a part of his N-ery being. Thus, in the end, mystical experience became the theoretic basis and practical incitement to good conduct. In this close articulation of mysticism and morality the cults made all important and distinctive contribution to the ethical life of the age.

It has been a general habit among Christian writers in both ancient and modern times to depreciate the ethical significance of the mystery religions and to emphasize instead the ceremonialism and theurgy which characterized their cult practices. This habit developed first of all from the apologetic tendency to exalt Christianity by damning its rivals as much as possible. A fairer view of the case reveals the fact that in the first century the well-developed mystery religions like nascent Christianity were vividly responsive to the awakened conscience of the period and were reinterpreting their rites accordingly. Moral as well as spiritual cleansing was attributed to ablutions and lustrations, and ethical as well as essential regeneration was sought in the bath of the taurobolium. According to Celsus--and Origen has no word to say in contradiction--the Eleusinian herald demanded of candidates for initiation not only clean hands and intelligible speech but also purity of conscience and a good life. This is an eloquent contemporary tribute to the moral influence of the mysteries. Yet it is only one instance out of many that might be cited.

When the mystery religions are viewed in their contemporary relationships, it is possible to distinguish in each instance the peculiar contribution of each to the moral development of the Mediterranean peoples. Orphism, true to its initial character as a reform movement, moralized the process of metempsychosis and placed exaggerated emphasis on the idea of retribution in the future. Mithraism, with its ideal of aggressive, militant virtue, had great appeal for practical-minded people in the Roman world. Isiac brotherhoods, with their restrained asceticism, registered characteristic protest against the immoral practices of the period. Each cult in its own way lent the sanctions of an ancient religious system to the demands of contemporary morality and in so doing made adjustment to the ethical requirements of the age.

 

VI

The ultimate pledge that the mystery religions made to gentile religionists pertained not to the present but to the future. It was the assurance of a happy immortality. That was a matter about which there was very general and very genuine interest in the first-century world. Whatever attitude a man might adopt on the question of continued existence after death, he could not well avoid the issue. The inevitable fact of death, together with the palpable injustices of first-century life, forced it upon his attention. As a symptom of the widespread interest in this problem the great variety of opinion which existed in educated circles may be cited. Some there were who succeeded in maintaining an absolute and consistent negative on the question. Others were just as positive in affirming iinmortality. Still others wavered between the two opinions.

There were philosophic sects which definitely and finally rejected all future hope. The Peripatetics, true to the scientific spirit of their founder, refused to speculate about the existence of a soul that their reason could not conceive or define. The Skeptics, true to their name, and the Academics, now turned skeptical, either doubted the possibility of a future life altogether or else suspended judgment on the problem. But these schools were not of great impor-

tance in the early Empire. The Epicurean philosophy, however, wss still influential, and its advocates were sincere and thoroughgoing opponents of any belief in immortality. Holding consistently to the atomistic materialism of Democritus and Epicurus, they maintained that the soul came into existence at conception, that it grew with the body, and at the body's death it passed into nothingness once more, dissipated like the other bodily elements. This annihilation the Epicureans did not dread because death destroyed all sensibility. On the contrary, they warmly praised their master for liberating men from the terror of future punishment and teaching them that death was not a frightful thing but a blessing. Lucretius, in pure Epicurean vein, exulted in the opportunity of driving from men's hearts "that dread of Acheron which troubles human life to its inmost depths, and overspreads everything with the blackness of death, and permits no pleasure to be pure and unalloyed."

There were not a few both among the high and the lowly who were attracted by this article of Epicurean faith and made it their own. According to Sallust, no less exalted a personage than Julius Caesar, the pontiff of Roman religion, opposed the death penalty for the Catilinarian conspirators because, he said, "Death puts a period to all human ills and beyond the grave there is no opportunity for either anxiety or joy." The elder Pliny, a most useful and industrious citizen whose lot was a very favorable one, was vehement in his rejection of the idea of a future life. To him it was an invention of human vanity that robbed death of its virtue and doubled the pain of dying. Latin poets gave graceful and memorable expression to similar views. Carpe diem was the motto that Horace recommended. Catullus, at his brother's grave, took an everlasting farewell of him, and he anticipated that sometime night would close on his love for Lesbia also: "Suns can set and rise again, but we, when our brief light is extinguished, must sleep for an eternal night."

That Epicurean ideas were disseminated among the lower strata of society is shown by rude and simple grave inscriptions, many of which express unbelief in any future existence. "We are mortal; we are not immortal," was the terse confessional of one. This idea was reiterated in more extended form, emphasizing the thought that man returns to the same sort of non-existence from which he came: "Once I had no existence; now I have none. I am not aware of it, I care not." "We are and we were nothing. See, reader, how swiftly we mortals go back from nothingness to nothingness." In some instances the state of non-existence was contrasted with the conditions of earthly life to the disadvantage of the latter. The following is a jocose example: "What remains of man, my bones, rests sweetly here. I no longer have fear of sudden starvation; I am exempt from attacks of gout; my body is no longer pledged for rent; and I enjoy perpetual and free hospitality." In some cases, however, the contrast was in favor of this life; for the advice, "Eat, drink, be merry, come!" was many times repeated among grave inscriptions. Such epigraphs testify to a vulgar and sensuous deterioration of original Epicureanism during this period. But the really pathetic maxim among them all was one that was so often repeated it was sometimes represented by initial letters only: "I was not; I was; I am not; I do not care." This was an epigraphic formula frequently used for slaves and gladiators to whom death must have come as a blessed release. Inscriptions of this general character indicate the acceptance of the Epicurean solution by quite a number among the lower classes. Yet, even so, the proportion of such inscriptions was not large in comparison with those which expressed hope regarding the future.

There were many among the cultivated classes and more among the masses to whom the negative answer of Epicureanism was less than satisfying. Those who were philosophically inclined turned backward for the confirmation of their faith to the classical arguments of "divine Plato" who had made the first great attempt at a rationalization of the belief in immortality. Cato of Utica, who by his death became an ideal figure for later Stoicism, spent the night before his suicide in reading the Phaedo of Plato. This same book was the last consolation of many another man who was the victim of proscription or of imperial tyranny. Cicero testified to the lasting influence of Plato in his day. There were many others also who like Cicero preferred to be wrong with the Greek idealist on the question of immortality rather than right with those who criticized him.

One sect in particular, the Neo-Pythagoreans, held Plato in special reverence and granted him a place next in honor to the founder of their order. These strange sectaries substantiated the belief in immortality by the authority of a revelation in definite scriptural form, bearing the names of Pythagoras and Plato. In detail their beliefs and practices were like those of their predecessors, the Pythagoreans of south Italy and the Orphics of Greece. They believed the soul to be divine and therefore immortal. By generation the soul was imprisoned in the body, and so long as it remained there it was in danger of corruption and of successive sojourns in this evil world. The whole aim of their practice was to secure the soul's liberation from the body and from the cycle of physical rebirths. By ritual purifications, moral discipline, and the practice of piety they believed this could be accomplished; so that, when the soul was freed at death it would ascend through the heavenly spheres to dwell with the blessed gods. To the Neo-Pythagoreans, death itself was a spiritual rebirth to immortality. In one of the most familiar documents of the Augustan religious revival, the sixth book of the Aeneid, the court poet of the Roman Empire gave lasting literary expression to the revived Pythagorean hope. This pagan apocalypse is a curious medley of Orphic-Pythagorean beliefs with an admixture of Platonic and Stoic ideas and various other elements more primitive; but it does give a vivid and picturesque impression of hopes and convictions that were cherished more or less extensively by Vergil's contemporaries.

A large body of first-century thinkers, however, were not satisfied with either the fantastic beliefs of the Neo-Pythagorean sect or the nihilism of Epicurus. Many of the most earnest souls of the time wavered in doubt, inclined toward belief, and found in the varying and ill-defined positions of Stoicism a harbor of refuge. At one point the Stoics agreed with the Epicureans. They had no fear of Hell. "There is no prison house, no lake of fire or river of forgetfulness, no judgment seat, no renewal of the rule of tyrants." On one other point they were generally agreed among themselves, that the ultimate destiny of the soul after death was reabsorption into the primal divine substance whence it had originally come. In Epictetus' memorable phrase, the soul was "a fragment of God." It was "fiery spirit" (pneuma puroses), and by virtue of its very origin and constitution it could have no other end than to return to its divine source. To quote a Stoic grave inscription: "The holy spirit which you bore has escaped from your body. The body remains here and is like the earth. The spirit is naught else but God." Most Stoics were of the opinion that one day the universe would be reduced by general conflagration to its primal fiery state and a new cycle of existence would then begin. The question was, What would be the fate and condition of souls in the interim? Here most of the leaders disagreed. The older Stoics had little to say on the subject. Under the influence of Pythagoreanism and astral mysticism, however, the later Stoics became more definite. Posidonius, for example, was sure they would pass through a period of purification, and rising to heaven's height, would delight themselves by watching the stars go around. In general, then, the Stoics allowed for only a limited future existence before the soul merged once more into God.

Among the educated classes of the first century, therefore, one finds all shades of belief and unbelief, but almost universal interest in the question of the future. There were many who like Cicero, or Seneca, included within their own experience a changing series of beliefs. In the days of their happiness neither of these philosophers had much concern with the subject. But as years brought wider contacts and misfortunes of one sort or another, they both developed a more positive attitude. In 45 B.C. when Cicero was having his troubles in public affairs, he suffered a cruel blow in the loss of his only daughter Tullia. The bitterness of this personal experience persuaded him that his daughter still lived among the gods, and he resolved to erect in her memory not a tomb but a shrine. Writing to his friend Atticus from gloomy Astura on the shore of the Pomptine marshes, be confessed this determination, half apologetically:

"I wish to have a shrine built, and that wish cannot be rooted out of my heart. I am anxious to avoid any likeness to a tomb .... in order to attain as nearly as possible to a deification. This I could do if I built it at the villa itself, but I dread changes of owners. Wherever I construct it on the land I think I could secure that posterity should respect its sanctity."

In the Consolatio addressed to himself at about the same time, he dwelt upon the divine and eternal nature of the soul in words suggesting Pythagorean inclinations. Cicero, then, was a type of the educated man who was not ashamed to stand in the crowd of those who "were stretching out their hands in longing toward the farther shore.

If there were doubts among the educated on the question of the future life, the masses generally were not perturbed by them. So far as we can gather, they had much more faith in immortality than their leaders were inclined to have. Plutarch maintained in so many words that the Epicurean negation of the future hope was repugnant to the majority. In contrast with the skeptical and materialistic epitaphs already cited, there are many touching inscriptions expressing confidence in immortality and reunion. One found on the grave of a married couple represents the wife as saying: "I am waiting for my husband." Generally speaking, the more traditional Greek and Roman ideas regarding the future seem to have persisted among the common people. Take, for illustration, a simple item of popular belief, the myth of Charon, that "grim ferryman of the muddy pool" to whom every dead man must pay an obol for passage money. Lucian said of this belief: "The mass is so preoccupied with the idea that, when a man dies, his relatives hasten to put an obol in his mouth to pay the ferryman for his passage across the Styx, without first finding out what money is current in the underworld." Further arrangement was made for the future happiness of the dead by supplying them with the things they had needed or enjoyed most in this life. Hence, the belongings of the deceased were frequently cremated or buried with them, and sometimes definite provision was made for this in first-century wills. With an acceptance of the idea that the soul continued to exist after the death of the body, men longed for the assurance that this future existence was a happy, and not a miserable, one.

What religions were there in the first-century world to give men assurances in regard to the future of the individual? Not the new emperor worship, surely; that was concerned with a present salvation within the empire. Not Judaism, either, for Jews were still tenacious of their racial consciousness, and their future hope was predominantly national and Messianic.

The one group of first-century religions which did specialize in future guaranties were the mystery cults from Greece and the Orient. Originally intended to assure the miracle of reviving vegetation in the springtime, they were perfectly adapted to guarantee the miracle of the spirit's immortality after physical death. These were the cults which in the form of Dionysiac and Orphic brotherhoods had first brought the promise of a happy future life to Greece in the religious revival of the sixth century B.C. But Greeks at that time were too well satisfied with a life of present salvation to be much concerned with the future. The Orphic teachings regarding immortality, however, were taken up by the Pythagoreans and moralized by Pindar and rationalized by Plato. In Hellenistic times the Greek cults merged with similar religions from the east which offered equivalent guaranties, and in this syncretized form thev came into their own. In the early imperial period they were more popular than ever, for they gave positive and definite answer to the questioning of the common man about the future. Their answer had the authority of revelation and it included the guaranty of divine aid in the realization of that blessed after-life which they vividly depicted to their devotees. Altogether the mysteries were unusually well equipped to meet the contemporary demand for assurances regarding the future.

When consideration is given to the fundamental character of the interests represented by the mystery religions, one can well understand their popularity in the Graeco-Roman world. In an era of individualism, when men were no longer looking to religion for guaranties of a racial or national order, the mystery cults offered the boon of personal transformation through participating in rites of initiation. At a time when men were seeking a larger life through contact with supernatural powers, the mysteries guaranteed absolute union with the divine beings who controlled the universe. In an age when men were craving emotional uplift, mystery initiation gave them such encouragement as they could scarcely find elsewhere. At a period when realism characterized thought in all departments of life, the religions of redemption offered men realistic rites to guarantee the actuality of spiritual processes. When supernatural sanctions were sought to validate ethical ideals, the mystery cults provided a unique combination of mysticism and morality that was practically effective. When, as never before, people were questioning about the future fate of the individual soul, the mysteries, through initiation, gave guaranty of a happy immortality. At every one of these points the gentile religions of redemption were effectively meeting the needs of large numbers of people in Graeco-Roman society.

END


